THE Night does vanish when the Sun appears,
And from all Clouds the smiling Morning clears:
Romish Night-Ravens, fly ye filthy Fowls,
And all ye Ceremonial Bats and Owls,
And Weather-cocks, whose painted Feathers strange,
With every Wind God's Moral Law would change:
His Law is light, the Sun outshines the Torch
Which blindly Virgins led to the Church Porch.
Ye Meadows deck your selves with flowery pride,
Hear of an Holy Marriage, and a Bride
Not given by Man, but God so great aad wise,
And by him Married as in Paradise;
With Beauty bright as Fire, but chaste and cold
As Snow, he Crowned her, and not with Gold.
The Issue fair, who did not Prophecy
Sacred Religion, Justice, Liberty,
And Property, providing of the best,
Both Bread, and Wine, for every Marriage Feast.
The Moral Law
stone tablets inscribed with the ten commandments The Ceremonial Law.
depiction of an owl, a raven and a bat atop a church Marriage by the Moral
Law of God Vindicated Against all Ceremonial Laws of Popes and Bishops
destructive to Filiation Aliment and Succession and the Government of Familyes
and Kingdoms

The Lord has been a Witness between thee and the Wife of thy youth. Mal.
2.14. 1680.

Linea Recta Proefertur Transversali.

RELIGION
depiction of a female religious holding an olive branch and an open book
JUSTICE
depiction of a female figure in classical dress, blindfold and bearing her
attributes of sword and scales LIBERTY
depiction of an armed male figure in contemporary dress PROPERTY
depiction of a wreathed figure in classical dress, holding a bunch of grapes,
with a corn sheaf

TO THE READER.
THE Writers both of Nature and Policy agree, That the Original of all humane
Society, was Marriage, by which Families were first composed, consisting of
Men, their Wives and Children; and after Commonwealths composed of those
Families; when by the multiplication of Generation they were grown so numerous,
as to be no longer able to preserve their Religion, Liberty, Propriety and
Lives, against one another, without some Union of all, obnoxious to receive or
do Injuries under such Form of Government as was by the whole, or major part of
the Fathers of Families, in their General Conventions of themselves or
Representatives, Consented and Covenanted for the common Peace and Happiness of
all; to both which, no Constitution of Laws was more necessary than those which
concerned Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and Succession, whereon not only private
but public Peace and War often depended; and therefore Marriage being the
Ordinance of God, and not of Man, it was impossible to lay any secure
Foundation of the Rights of the same, except on the Moral Law of God, and no
other was long observed, either by the Jews or Gentiles, than what was as
Christ says, from the beginning, till to break in pieces the Divine Tables of
the same, the Devil and the Priest conspired together to set up the Golden Calf
of their Ceremonies, and that Gods Ordinance should be null and void without
them, and no probation should be admitted of their performance, but the
Certificate of the Bishop or High Priest; by which, as to matter of Succession
to Inheritances and Kingdoms, They bound their Kings with Chains, and their
Nobles with Fetters of Iron; God was pleased to make the Contention concerning
a Marriage, between H. 8. and the Pope, the occasion of breaking off some of
the Links, and of being a beginning of the Protestant Religion and Liberty; and
I hope he does now offer the like, or a greater occasion, of propagating both,
to the present Age and Posterity, and not only to break all the Relics of the
Chains, but to file off the Collars themselves, whereby the Bishop of Rome, and
the Provincial Bishops, have long so gauled the Necks of Princes and People
through all Christendom; to the easing of which Burdens, I should be glad, if
thou, and so many other, more fit than my self, would lend your hands; but
seeing so many seeming to sleep in the midst of so great a danger, I hope it
ought not to offend, if I hereby endeavor to awaken you, and to be therein as
I ought to be, to my Power,

Your Servant, Will. Lawrence.

THE CONTENTS Of the First Book.
BY what Law Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, ought not, and ought
to be Judged. p. 1. Not to be Judged by the Law of Moses, or Customs of the
Jews. p. 2 Not to be Judged by the Laws and Customs of Heathen Nations. p. 10
Not to be Judged by the Law Civil, Canon, or Feudal. p. 21 Not to be Judged by
the Law of Mahomet. p. 26 Not to be Judged by Ecclesiastical Laws. p. 31 All
Allegations of Coke in behalf of Ecclesiastical Laws, answered. ib. Of the
mischiefs ensue from Ecclesiastical Laws. p. 43 1. All Ecclesiastical Laws of
Marriage were invented by Demons, Pagan Priests, or Popes. ib. The History of
the Devil appearing in the shape of Christ to Dr. Dee, and tempting him and his
Seer Kelly to Community of Wives. p. 45 All prohibition of Marriage or Meat in
any Ceremony or Circumstance, not prohibited by the Moral Law of God, came from
the Devil. p. 52 2. The Final Causes of all Ecclesiastical Laws of Marriage,
variant from the Moral Law of God, were Lust, Covetousness, and Ambition of the
Priest. p. 53 3. They pester the Three Kingdoms with an unnecessary and
excessive multitude of Laws. p. 57 4. They corrupt the choicest Protestant Wits
in their Education, with Principles of Popery and Slavery. p. 59 5. They
introduce diverse weights and measures of Justice in the same People. ib. 6.
They compel the Subjects ad aliud Tribunal, than Caesar's Judgment Seat; ad
aliud Examen, than per legem terrae; ad aliud judicium, than legale judicium
Parium. ib. 7. They expose the Subjects to Circuit of Action, Subornation,
Perjury, and to be ground between two Milstones of interferring Jurisdictions,
Spiritual and Temporal. 8. Papal Laws of Marriage are inconsistent with a
Protestant Priesthood. ib. Not to be Judged by such Laws of England, Scotland
or Ireland, as are Relics of Popery, and contrary to the Law of God. Of the
Law making Marriage a Sacrament. p. 65 Of the profound Popery of the Common
Lawyers, of Transubstantiation of two Persons into one Person, and the
mischiefs thereof. p. 66 A Note taken at Kings-Bench-Bar of the miraculous
Transubstantiation of a Shoulder of Mutton betwixt a Man and his Wife. p. 71 Of
the Law of Transubstantiation of the Children of the Wife into the Children of
the Husband, if within the Four Seas; and of Intails. p. 72 A further descant
on the words of Littleton and Coke concerning the same, and of Intails on
Marriages depending thereon. p. 73, and 75 Of the barbarous Law of
Illegitimation, or making Children incapable to succeed to the Goods of their
Parents, the Reformation thereof by the Emperor Anastasius, and the Deformation
of the same again by the Strumpet Theodora, and succeeding Popes and Bishops.
p. 79 That unlawful Marriages of Parents ought not to Illegitimate their
Children. p. 80 Illegitimation of Children shows Popes and Bishops worse than
Pagans, Infidels, Beasts, Monsters, Serpents. p. 82 Intails Feminine cut off by
Adoption or Institution, by the Father, of his natural Children Heirs. ib. Of
the Law of Consensus non Concubitus facit Matrimonium. p. 83 Of the Pagan
Goddess Juno, and the Popish Mother of St. Kentigern, both got with Child
without a Man. p. 85 Of the Lady Ann of Britain Married to the bare Leg of the
Ambassador of the Emperor Maximilian. p. 86 Of the Lady Pulcheria Sister to
Theodosius the Emperor, Married to Martianus, the Lady Etheldred to two
Husbands, the Lady Amigunda to the Emperor Henry the Second, the Lady Editha to
Edward the Confessor, the Lady Ann of Cleve to Henry the Eight, all Married by
Priests, but not by their Husband. ib. Of the Custom of desertion of Virgins
after deslowring. p. 88 Of the desertion of the Lady Lucy by Edward the Fourth,
for the Lady Jane Gray, and the infelicity followed thereon, to them and their
Children. ib. Of the like desertion by a Gentleman in Ireland, after a Child
born. p. 89 Of the ancient Form of Marriage-Contracts, Se post concubitum in
vitam non deserturum, now repugnantly turned into Verba de presenti. Of the Law
giving liberty of Temptation to a Minor, Married to an Husband, after Carnal
knowledge to desert him for a Richer. p. 91 An example of the same in Scotland.
ib. Of the Law tempting Women to desert their Husbands, by giving them more
Alimony than the Interest of their Portions. p. 94 Of the Law of Divorce after
Procreation of a Child, for Precontract, or Precopulation without
Preprocreation. ib. Stat. 3 H. 8. cap. 38. against Precontracts. p. 96 Edward
the Sixth abused by Papists in his Minority, to repeal his Fathers Act against
Precontracts. p. 98 Of the Law making private Marriage or Carnal-knowledge
without public Witnesses of a verbal Contract, Fornication. p. 101 Of the Law
requiring Witnesses of Marriage and Filiation, where both are acknowledged by
the Parents, and no third Party claims the Father, Mother, or Child. p. 109 Of
the Law of Sequestration of a Woman, pendente placito, Sued by two Corrivals,
and Sentencing either Man or Woman to be restored in Specie, and not in Value.
ib. Of the Law making all prohibited Marriages Null. p. 100 Of the Custom of
Superalimentary Gifts, in consideration of Carnal knowledge between a Man and a
Woman, either before or after Marriage. p. 113 A Satyr against Mer^enary
Marriage. p. 117 Of the Law giving Jurisdiction of the secret Causes of Divorce
between Parents, and secret Uncleanness of Children in their Parents Houses, to
public Tribunals. Of the Law compelling Parties Married, though mortal
Enemies, to Cohabitation. Of the Law of Divorce, a Mensa and Thoro. Not to be
Judged by Ceremonial Laws. Of the absurd and ridiculous Ceremonies on which
Priests would have Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, to depend. p.
127 Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, ought only to be Judged by
the Moral Law of God. p. 130 Of the Final causes of Marriage, by the Law of God
and Nature. p. 135 (...)
Errata's in Verse.
LIb. 1. p. 131. line 5. for Moon read Morn, p. 135. l. 36. for lease r. cease.
p. 223. l. 28. for I see r. is with me, p. 224. l. 9. for all r. such, p. 225.
l. 8. for thanks r. there, and in the same line after, for there r. and, l. 39.
for lightnings r. lightning, p. 228. l. 5. add the word (next) before the word
(expel) p. 392. l. 11. for who burn would not? r. who burn would? Lib. 2. p.
239. l. 31. for Mariners r. Mariner, l. 36. for why r. who, Lib. 3. p. 89. l.
8. for their r. them, l. 16. for not babbling r. no babbling.

Errata's in Prose.
COntents to the First Book relating to p. 88. for in vitam r. invitam non
deserturum, Lib. 1. p. 88. l. 8. add invitam before deserturum, p. 90. l. 42.
for invitum r. invitam deserturum, p. 1. l. 11. for or any Subject r. on any
Subject, p. 4. l. 28. for Harecloth r. Hayrcloth, p. 17. l. 36. for women were
divorced r. women did divorce, p. 23. l. 21. for Affinity r. Consanguinity, p.
43. l. 11. for Canon Law r. Common Law, p. 93. l. 27. for Common Law r. Canon
Law, p. 106. l. 31. for pity relieve him r. pity to relieve him, p. 110. l.
40. for invitum fore Matrimonium r. Irritum fore Matrimonium, p. 132. l. 36.
add and shall cleave to his wife, p. 180. l. 11. for established r. abolished,
p. 180. l. 42. for Chancellors of State r. Counselors of State, p. 210. l. 20.
for Sacrament r. Sacrifice, p. 215. l. 28. for Tyrant r. Pyrat, p. 282 l. 23.
for there were Judges r. and Judges, p. 120. l. 1. leave out no, l. for Secreta
Fori r. Secreta Thori, p. 121. l. 25. for false r. and the false, p. 121. l.
43. for take off Exequenda officia Matrimonialia r. talk of Exequenda officia
Matrimonialia, p. 257. l. 30. for thinks r. think, l. 27. for that binds r.
binds, p. 265. l. 17. for Obligatio libelli r. Oblatio libelli, Lib. 3. Preface
p. 10. l. 1. for Algine r. Algive. In the Contents relating to p. 160. for
Successor or Male r. Successor Male, leaving out (or) p. 2. l. 16. for ever
that be r. Over that be, p. 13. l. 10. for wages r. ways, p. 188. l. 25. for
Basiel r. Baliel. In the Index see Bail, in line 36. for Canon Law r.
Common Law.

OF The Laws of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession.
Lib. I. Of the Two Grand Questions concerning Marriage, Filiation, Aliment,
and Succession.
IT was the saying of one, Se been dividentem velut Deum secuturum, And
Dichotomy though the most difficult to do, is without dispute if well done, the
most excellent Division and Method wherein any Discourse can proceed, or any
Subject; which made me endeavor, though not passibus aequis, to follow that
way directed by the great Methodist of Art, Aristotle, or rather the greater
director of Nature, God himself, of whom it may more truly be said, In duo
divisit quicquid in Orb suit.

The whole Question therefore naturally depending on what shall be the Law, and
who shall be the Judge, and all Parts of Argumentation, consisting either of
Premises or Conclusion, and all Premises being either Negative, or Affirmative,
I have as to Premises, stated the whole Controversy of Marriage, Filiation,
Aliment, and Succession, Negatively and Affirmatively, under these Two great
Questions following.

First, By what Law they ought not, and by what Law they ought to be judged.

Secondly, By what Judge they ought not, and by what Judge they ought to be
judged. And these two Premises being proved, he will be an absurd Logician, who
denies the Conclusions following from them.

CHAP. I. Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession not to be judged by the
Law of Moses, or Customs of the Jews.
Divorce.
Deuteronomy. 24.1. It Is said, When a man has taken a Wife, and married her, and it
come to pass that she find no favor in his Eyes, because he has found some
Uncleanness in her; then let him write a Bill of Divorcement, and give it in
her hand, and send her out of his House. And when she is departed out of his
House, she may go and be another man's Wife. Her former Husband which sent her
away, may not take her again, after that she is defiled, for that is
abomination before the Lord. Math. 5.31. It has been said, Whosoever shall put
away his Wife, let him give her a writing of Divorcement. But I say unto you,
that whosoever shall put away his Wife, saving for the cause of Fornication,
causes her to commit Adultery, and whosoever shall marry her that is Divorced,
commits Adultery. Math. 19.3. The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting
him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his Wife for every
cause? And he answered, and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which
made them at the beginning, made them Male and Female? And said, for this cause
shall a man leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife, and they
twain shall be one flesh. Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What
therefore God has joined together, let not man put asunder. They say unto him,
Why did Moses then command to give a writing of Divorcement, and to put her
away? He says unto them, Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts,
suffered you to put away your Wives, but from the beginning it was not so. Here
it is plain, Christ refers them to the Law of Nature, as the Law which was
greater then the Politic, or Positive Law of Moses. And this was only
tolerated by Moses, for the hardness of their hearts; and though it were lawful
for Moses, or any other Legislator, to tolerate a lesser Evil, which he was not
able by reason of the hardness of their hearts, to restrain, yet was it not
lawful for the People to practice it, but they should be punished for it by
God, though they were not by Moses. And hence does manifestly follow, That all
those Laws which were mala in se, and contrary to the Law of Nature, which was
from the beginning, though Tolerated by Moses, who was not able to reform them,
yet were they not properly the Law of Moses, but wicked Customs, which they
received from Egyptians, Syrians, Canaanites, and other Nations, and ought not
to have been practiced by the Jews then, nor by the Christians now. Of Laws
taken from the Customs of Idolatrous Nations, for a small taste take these that
follow. Exodus 21.2. If thou buy an Hebrew Servant, six Years he shall Serve,
and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing. Verse 4. If his Master
have given him a Wife, and she have born him Sons or Daughters; The Wife and
her Children shall be her Masters, and he shall go out by himself. Mahomet's
was more fair then this; for he being Amorous of the Wife of Zeid his Slave,
freely infranchised him, though he were not bound to do it, as the Hebrew
Master was, and besides his infranchisement, gave him Money for his Wife. And
thereupon says, God appointed him to Marry her, after she was Repudiated, to
the end that true beleivers might do the like, and not think it an Error, but
what God has appointed. Alcor. Cap. 33.260. And David did far worse then
Mahomet, as to the Wife of the Subject Vriah; his Example therefore is as unfit
a Rule to judge Marriage by, as that of Moses and Mahomet. Levit. 19.20. It is
said, And whosoever lies carnally with a Woman that is a Bond-maid, betrothed
to an Husband, and not at all Redeemed, nor Freedom given her, she shall be
scourged: they shall not be put to death, because she was not Free: And he
shall bring his Trepass-Offering unto the Lord, unto the Door of the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, even a Ram for a Trepass Offering. And the Priest shall
make an Atonement for him with a Ram of the Trepass Offering before the Lord;
for his sin which he has done shall be forgiven him. 1. This Law is unjust,
for it punishes the weaker Vessel, who is a poor Virgin, with scourging, and
only fines the rich Lecher, a Ram; so he may commit Whoredom with as many
betrothed Virgins, if not Free-women, for the price of a Ram apeice. 2. Here is
nothing provided for satisfaction of the Damage of the Master, for the abuse of
his Servant, and dishonor of his Family, nor of the Husband to whom she was
betrothed; but let him bring a Ram, his sin shall be forgiven him, toties
quoties, as it is the Custom of some old Pagan Manners, and Manours, if the
Copyhold Widow be unchaste, she shall forfeit her Copyhold, unless she bestride
a Ram, and ride to the next Court, and say these Words following, For my
Incontinence I do this Task,
Therefore to have again my Land, I ask.
Numb. 21.14, and 17. Notwithstanding the Midianitish Women had quarter given
them and were Captives, yet in cold blood Moses more barbarously then the
Heathens themselves used to do, commands the Soldiers to kill every Male
amongst the little ones, and kill every Woman that have known Man by lying with
them; but all the Women-children that have not known Man, by lying with him,
keep alive for your selves. And Deuteronomy. 21.11. The Soldiers are licensed when
they take Captive Women, after some idle Ceremonies of cutting their Hair and
paring their Nails to lie with them, and turn them off again when they pleased;
which examples, though from Moses, who was no more infallible in this, then
David in the act of Vriah's Wife, of cruelty and uncleanness, are not to be
followed, but abhorred of all Christians.

The Jews had likewise a custom of Contracting and Espousing the parties before
Marriage: of the great inconveniences of which shall be spoken after under the
proper Title.

The ways of Marriage of the Jews.
Jewish Ceremonies of marriage, not appointed by Moses Law.
Says Moses, de Cotsi was either with Money, or Instrument, or Copulation; with
Money, as when they bought one to be their Wife; with Instrument, as when done
by Contract in writing; by Copulation, as by lying with any single Woman,
though no Consensus, yet Concubitus fecit Matrimonium: Especially if Conception
followed, as appears in the case of Jacob and Leah, where there was no
Consensus on Jacob's part, but only Concubitus and Conceptio. At the Jewish
marriage a Rabbi marries them, and if the Bride be a Virgin, Wine is to be
drunk in a narrow-mouthed Glass, and if she be a Widow in a broad-mouth'd
Glass, and an Egg must not be forgot to be thrown at the Bride and broken, to
foretell an easy delivery.

The manner of the Jews Marriage is, The Bridegroom wears about his Neck an
Hare-cloth, the end of which the Rabbi puts on the Bride's head, after example
of Ruth, who desired to be covered with the skirt of Boaz; then the Rabbi takes
a glass full of Wine and gives it the Brideman and Bride that they may drink,
then he takes the Bridegroom's Gold Ring, and asks of the standers by, if it be
good and worth the money given for it; then puts it on the Bride's finger; then
he takes another glass of Wine and prays over it, and offers it to the married
Couple to taste, but the Bridegroom dashes it against the Wall in memory of the
destruction of Jerusalem, so the Bridegroom in sign of sorrow puts on a black
Cloak, and the Bride a black Hood. Mr. Addison tells of the Barbary Jews, That
they are married at the Bride's Chamber, only by putting a Ring on the Woman's
finger, and pronunciation of these words by the Rabbi, Thou art Married or
Sanctified unto this Man with this Ring according to the Law: And when married
they use a foolish Ceremony, if the Bride is a Virgin they give her Wine in a
narrow-mouthed Cup; if a Widow, in a broad mouthed Cup, and after the
Bridegroom casts a raw Egg at the Bride etc. And how the fopperies of such
Ceremonies come by God's Law to make a marriage or no marriage, or legitimate
or illegitimate the Child, no rational Man ever understood.

Plurality of Wives.
As to the determination of number of Wives by Nature, it seems to be according
to the number she her self gives. As in the East and Southern climes, the
Feminine number natural exceeding the Males many fold. And in times of great
destructions by Wars, such as are foretold Isa. 3.25. Thy men shall fall by the
sword, and thy mighty in War, and her Gates shall lament and mourn, and being
desolate, shall sit upon the ground. And in that day seven Women shall take
hold on one Man. In the Kingdom of Benym amongst the Negro's, the King has
five or six hundred Wives, and his Subjects keep 20, 30, 40, 50. 60. according
to their ability; and the poorest sort five or six, and some a Dozen.
Hierotinus an Arabian King had six hundred Children by Concubines; so it seems
excessive multiplication may be one reason against Plurality. It was a Law
amongst the Garamants, That when any Woman married, had three Children, she
should be separated from her Husband, because a multitude of Children cause Men
to have covetous hearts; and if any Woman bring forth more Children, they shall
be slain before their Eyes. Aristotle in his Politiques thinks it profitable,
That Plebeians should not have too many Children, and therefore allows Divorce
lest the Wives should bear too many. Connubia mill, non illis generis nexus,
non pignora curae, sed numero languet pietas. Claud. de Bell. Gild. Amongst the
Medes anciently Polygamy was so far from being esteemed a fault, that it was a
punishment for a common Person not to have seven Wives, and for Noble Women to
have less then five Husbands. Heylin. 814. Of the custom of the Jews to keep
one barren Wife and another to breed, One Barren and another Breeding Wife.
Seldom de Jur. nature. lib. 5. page 586. translates out of a Jewish Rabbi these
words, Sub diluvium hominum mos erat, ut pro libitu binas sibi duceret quisque
uxores, alteram prolis gratia, alteram in Concubitum; ea autem quae prolis
gratia haberetur, velut vidua quamdiu superstes esset; degebat, sed ea quae in
Concubitum adhiberetur sterilitatis, exhaurire solebat Poculum, ut sterilis
redderetur, atque juxta virum accumbere solita, velut meretricio ornabatur
habitu. And in another place ornata etiam velut nova nupta lautiores comedebat
dapes; acerbius autem and durius tractabatur socia and lugebat vidua. To which
alludes Job 24.2. as it is in the Hebrew, he fed the Barren which brings not
forth, but did no good to the Widow. Moses says, Cursed be he that lies with
his Sister, Incest.
the Daughter of his Father, or the Daughter of his Mother. Deuteronomy. 27.22. Yet
Abraham allowed it in his time, and married Sarah. And Amram took him Jochebed
his Father's Sister to Wife, and she bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of
the life of Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years. Exodus 6.20.
Aretas King of Arabia Petraea and Herod fell at strife the one with the other
for this cause, which ensues. Herod the Tetrarch had married Aretas his
Daughter, with whom he lived married a long time; afterward taking his Journey
toward Rome, he lodged with Herod his half Brother by the Father's side, for
Herod was the Son of Simon's Daughter, which Simon was the High Priest; and
there being surprised with the love of Herodias his Brother's Wife, who was
Daughter to Aristobulus their Brother, and Sister to the great Agrippa; he was
so bold as to offer her some speech of marriage, which when she had accepted,
Accords were made between them, That he should banish his Wife Aretas far from
him; who complaining to her Father the Arabian King, of the injury done her by
her Husband Herod, the same raised War between him and Herod. Josep. lib. 18.
cap. 7. de Antiq. And Aretas overt rowing Herod's Army, diverse Jews were of
opinion, That this Judgment fell upon him because he had cut off John's head,
by the instigation of Herodias ibid. But as for this opinion diverse believe
that it has been foisted into Josephus. vid. Bl^ndell. Hist. Sybill. But as to
the Point in question of Incest, it is very clear, That John justly reproved
Herod for marrying his Brother's Wife, whether there was a Judgment followed on
it or not. But it cannot be inferred that the cause why he reproved it, or why
the War followed on him was Incest; but the cause thereof is more likely to be,
because he so wrongfully Divorced his first lawful Wife, and likewise caused
his Brother's Wife to be Divorced from him, while his Brother was alive and
Tetrarch of Galilee, that he might have her from him: So here was a double
Divorce, matter enough to reprove without minding any Incest; which agreed
likewise with the Doctrine of Christ, and it is manifest, that was the only
cause of the War, and not any pretense of Incest; for Aretas would have raised
the War alike if the wrong had been done his Daughter by a strange Woman, as if
it had been by a Kinswoman: Therefore no Argument can be brought that St.
John's opinion was, this was Incest, nor that any Judgment happened for Incest,
but rather for unlawful Divorces; so the marrying the Brother's Wife to raise
up Seed to the Brother, seems a custom tolerated for hardness of their hearts,
and not to be imitated by Christians.

Trial of Virginity, more wicked then the Bill of Divorce, for this was after
the Husband had lain with her, Trial of Virginity.
and perhaps likewise he might have got her with child. Deuteronomy. 22.13. It is said
If any man take a Wife and go in unto her and hate her, and give occasion of
speech against her, and say, I took this Woman, and when I came to her, I found
her not a Maid: Then shall the Father of the Damsel, and her Mother, take and
bring forth the Tokens of the Damsel's Virginity unto the Elders of the City in
the Gate: and the Damsel's Father shall say unto the Elders, I gave my Daughter
unto this Man to Wife, and he hates her: and lo he has given occasion of
speech against her, saying, I found not thy Daughter a Maid, and yet these are
the Tokens of my Daughter's Virginity; and they shall spread the Cloth before
the Elders of the City, and the Elders of the City shall take that Man and
chastise him, and they shall amerce him an hundred Shekels of Silver, and give
them unto the Father of the Damsel, because he has brought up an evil name on
a Virgin in Israel. But if this thing be true, and the Tokens of Virginity be
not found for the Damsel, then they shall bring out the Damsel to the door of
her Father's House, and the men of the City shall stone her with stones, that
she die, because she has wrought folly in Israel, to play the Whore in her
Father's House. So shall thou put away Evil from amongst you. This Custom, as
many others, the Jews learned of the Heathen Nations, and was tolerated amongst
them for hardness of their hearts.

Leo Afer relates, amongst the Inhabitants of Fez in Africa, the same wicked
Custom to be in use, and that before the Wedding Feast, the Bridegroom ought to
deflower the Bride, and then they come and show amongst the Guests a filthy
defiled Napkin with great Exultation, and a loud Voice, Proclaiming the same in
as filthy words and behavior. But if this cannot be shown, it spoils the
Wedding, and the Woman is turned away with great disgrace. The like they do at
Zant, where the Wedding Sheets are always kept. And amongst the Persians,
where, if the Woman fail to give this Sign, they cut off her Ears, and turn her
home with great disgrace. And the like in diverse other Heathen Nations, which
Custom, both with Heathen and Jews, is (1.) very immodest and filthy. (2.) very
cruel and unjust, for as Levinus Lemnius, and other Physicians and Anatomists
hold, these Signs are extremely fallacious, and neither show who is, or who is
not a Virgin, whereby many innocent Persons may be destroyed, and many wicked
be justified, and therefore is no fit Precedent to be followed by Christians.

Trial of Jealousy.
We find likewise the Trial of Jealousy prescribed, Numb. 5.18. And the Priest
shall set the Woman before the Lord, and uncover the Woman's head, and put the
Offering of Memorial into her hands, which is the Jealousie-Offering: and the
Priest shall have in his hand the bitter water that causes the Curse. And the
Priest shall charge her by an Oath, and say unto the Woman, If no man has lain
with thee, and if thou have not gone aside to uncleanness with another instead
of thy Husband, be thou free from this bitter water that causes the Curse. But
if thou have gone aside to another, instead of thy Husband, and thou be
defiled, and some man have lien with thee beside thy Husband: Then the Priest
shall charge the Woman with an Oath of Cursing, and the Priest shall say unto
the Woman, The Lord make thee a Curse, and an Oath amongst the People, when the
Lord does make thy Thigh to rot, and thy Belly to swell: And the Woman shall
say, Amen, Amen. And the Priest shall write these Curses in a Book, and blot
them with the bitter water: And shall cause the Woman to drink the bitter
water, that causes the Curse. In Loango in Africa, if any is suspected of
Adultery, Witchcraft, Theft, or other Crimes, there is a little Tree with a
small Root, like a White Carrot, called Imbunda, on accusation, the Priest
assembles the accused Parties, and scrapes a little of the Root into water,
which makes it as bitter as Gall. One Root will serve for the Trial of an
hundred, the Priest beats it together with a Plantan stalk, and hits every one
after they have drunk, with certain words: If they can walk by till they make
Urine, they are free, but if they grow dizzy, they are knocked oth' head, and
dragged thence when dead. The Matimbas have the same Trial of Adultery and
other Crimes, with the same Root made into bitter water; the nature whereof is,
if it be given in too great a Dose, it stops the Urine, and flies up into the
head, whereby the Party becomes dizzy, which if he be, here the Execution
something differs from the former, and all the People presently fall upon them,
and cut them in pieces with Knives. At Morumbay in Africa, if any is suspected
to be guilty of Adultery, or any Crime, there is an Idol in a great Basket
called Morumbay, and they are compelled to come thither, when accused, and each
to kneel down, and say, Mean quesa Cabumba Marumba, that is, I come to make
trial of my Innocence: And if he is guilty, he falls down dead, and if he is
free, he is freed. Andrew Battle says, he saw six or seven in his time, that
were put to this Trial. Amongst the Guineans, the Priests have a Drink called
Enchion Kenow, which the Inhabitants believe has such a force and virtue from
their Fetisso or God, that if any Woman suspected of Adultery by her Husband,
and brought to drink thereof for Trial, if she be Guilty, the Fetisso will kill
her, which makes the Woman accused, if Guilty, rather compound, and assent to
be Divorced from her Husband, then run the hazard of the Fetisso on a Trial by
that drink.

The Americans for the most part, if they find not their Wives Virgins, or if
after, they commit Adultery, Divorce them, wherein they far excel these
shameless and devilish Trials of Jews and Ethnicks, and the Water-Ordeal, and
Fire-Ordeal, heretofore used by Christians, of walking over Red hot Plow-shares
bare foot, or the newer fashion of putting Women to Self-accusation, Canonical
Purgation, and Compurgation in Episcopal Courts. Likewise amongst Christians I
say, this simple plain proceeding of private Divorce, both amongst the Guineans
and Americans, by the light of Nature, far excels all the said Trials by
Jewish, Pagan, or Popish Priests. Lastly, It is clear from Christ 's
disallowing the Bill of Divorce by the Husband, except for Fornication, and his
allowing it by the Husband, when there was Adultery. He disallows the Laws of
Trial of Virginity, and Trial of Jealousy, as well as he disallowed the Bill
of Divorce, without lawful cause. For the Trial of Virginity and Jealousy is
far worse, and shows greater hardness of heart, then the Bill of Divorce, in
regard the Bill of Divorce, if the Husband find any uncleanness or dishonesty
in his Wife, only puts her away, and saves both her Honor and Life; but the
Trial of Virginity and Jealousy, permits the man first to lie with her, and
perhaps to get her with Child, and then to stone her, or with bitter water to
poison her, and her Child together, wherein the Turk is not so bad as the Jew.
For though he buy his Wife, if after he finds her not as she should be, he will
Divorce her, and though he lose his Money by it, he will neither Stone nor
Poison her, but give a Divorce, and save both her Life and Honor. The Peguians
buy their Wives of their Friends, and when he is weary of her, he may send her
home again, but he must then lose the Money he gave for her. But it she leave
him, as she may likewise do, then the Money is to be paid him back, which he
gave for her.

The Customs of the Jews allowed them to make Eunuchs, Eunuch.
as Chron. 28.1. It is said, David assembled the Eunuchs, and 2 Kings 9.32. It
is said, When Jehu called, after Jezabel had spoke to him out of the Window,
that there looked out to him, two or three Eunuchs, and 2 Kings 24.12. It is
said, And Jehoiachin, the King of Judah, went out to the King of Babylon, he
and his Mother, and his Servants, and his Eunuchs. Origin and the Sect of
Valesians gelded themselves, and held, that it was impossible for any but
Eunuchs to be saved: But later Jews allowed them not. And Josephus lib. 4. de
Antiq. says, Eunuchs are to be detested; because they deprive themselves of
Manhood, and Power of begetting Children, neither is it lawful to geld Man or
Beast; and the Civil Law punishes it with Death, Cod. lib. 4. tit. 42. De
Eunuchis. Si quis post hanc Sanctionem in orb Romano Eunuchos fecerit, Capite
puniatur, If any after this Law, shall make Eunuchs in the Roman World, let him
be punished with Death. I conclude, though there is much of the Moral Law mixed
amongst the Laws of Moses, which is immutable, and ought to be inviolably
observed; yet not on the Authority of Moses, but on the higher Authority of God
himself, who writ them both in the Internal Tables of the hearts of men, and in
the External Tables of his Works, which as to such of them as are living
Creatures, and concern Marriage, as Christ says, he made them Male and Female.
Then as to the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of Moses, they were all National,
and belonged only to the Jews, and they were generally taken by the Jews from
the Egyptians, and other Idolatrous Nations. And Moses being not able to
reform them in such a stiffnecked people, except only as to Images, (for indeed
all long Customs are hard to be broken in any People) was fain to Tolerate them
for the hardness of their hearts, and they were many of them full of
Superstition and Injustice.

CHAP. II. Marriage, Matrimony, Legitimation, or Succession not to be judged by
the Laws and Customs of Heathen Nations.
Chinaois way of Marrying.
IN China the Governor and Viceroy in each Province, appoint a certain time and
place, where those that are willing to Marry, may and do come, where Twelve
Principal Men are appointed Judges, before whom they present themselves: Six
Judges divide the Men into three parts, the rich, the indifferent, and the
poor; the other six Judges in the mean while divide the Maids into the
beautiful, the indifferent, and the unhandsome; thereupon the Judges give the
very beautiful to the rich, and they give what the Judges appoint for them, the
indifferent rich to the indifferent handsome, who pay nothing for them, and the
unhandsome to the poor with the Money the rich paid, divided into equal
Portions. Joan Gonsales Hist. de la China. P. 46. The like was done anciently
by the Babylonians.

The Indians way.
Indorum virgins quum esse nubiles c^perint in Publicum a Parentibus
producuntur, concurrente, ut assolet, multitudine, libera illis datur optio e
Juvenum turba, virum sibi seligendi, quem virtute aliqua insigniter praestantem
putent. Caelius lib. 18. cap. 31. The Samoyeds being a people bordering on
Russia, use to buy their Wives, and have no other Ceremony of Marriage, but
agreement for the Price, which commonly is dear, they being their chief Cattle,
and the Woman brought and delivered to the man that bought her by her friend,
and a Feast at his Tent there provided to entertain them, and at Night all
departing and leaving the Man and Woman together there alone till next Morning.
Gourdon. Anno 1614.

The Jews and Romans way was likewise buying and selling. The Mahumetans
likewise give Money for their Wives, which when paid, the Contract is Registered
in the Caddyes Book, which serves for the Tole-Book, they paying the Market
Fee, which is all the Formality of the Marriage. Heyl. 778. Caesar lib. 4. de
bell. Gall. says, That amongst the Germans, exchange of Wives was in use, and
the Indian Histories relate, That in Calicut the Custom of exchange is still
retained, Exchange of Wives-Lending Wives.
and Jerome taxes Cato Vtican, that he lent his Wife Martia to his Friend
Hortensius, as Appian relates, 2 Bell. Civ. Lucan lib. 2. And Plutarch in Numa,
that he did it by the Constitution of Numa. These are the Marriages, these the
Solemnities the Pontifical Laws have taught, and is there any still so stupid
as to prefer the Laws of men before the Laws of God?

At Gomera it was heretofore the only sign counted of their Hospitality, to let
their Friends lie with their Wives, and receive theirs in Testimony of mutual
kindness. Heyl. 105. For which reason there as in other places of the Indies,
the Sister's Son was usually the Heir. The Common Council or Senate of the
Canaries or Fortunate Islands, who were both Magistrates and Priests, had,
before Conquered by Christians, the first Nights Lodging with every Bride. The
Inhabitants of Zant solicit such Merchants as resort thither, to hire their
Wives and agree of the Price. At Pegu when Merchant-strangers come thither,
they are provided a House, and withal certain Maids of the City are sent to
him, out of whom he takes his choice, and agrees with her Friends at what rate
they can, which is not much, to pay a certain Sum for the use of her, and this
Maid attends during the time agreed, as a Servant and Wife, after which he may
take another, but not during the time agreed.

In Cunall, a part of Tartary, they count it a great honor to have their Wives
and Sisters at the pleasure of others whom they entertain, of which being
restrained by the great Cham, they petitioned him at three Years end to be
restored to their old Custom, affirming, They could never thrive since they
left it: on which, Liberty was again restored, and they still use it. Heyl.
857. At Tangut they think it not fit to tempt a Woman, but if she offer her
self, they think it a great sin to refuse her Courtesy, Heyl. ib. At Colchos
the Husband thinks it a Credit their Wives can please and be acceptable to
others, to whom they prostitute them, Purchase 342. The Turks are allowed four
Wives, Plurality.
which must be also of his Religion, but he is allowed Concubines, Slaves, and
of any Religion, as many as they can keep. The Persians allow as many
Concubines as they will, paying them Salary by Week, Month, or as they agree;
And at the end of the time they are free, and may leave each other without
other agreement.

The Tartars by reason of their Plurality of Wives, have a multitude of
Children. In Monomotapa they Marry as many Wives as they will, but the first is
the Principal, and her Children only to inherit. The Mogul has a Thousand, the
Turk is said to have three Thousand Women.

Amongst Barbarians mention is made of (...) a People where Women had many
Husbands, and amongst the Medes which dwelt in the Mountains, it is said, a
Woman had five Husbands at once. It is said that the Lacedaemonians had
anciently a Custom, that one Woman should have two Husbands, one to go to War,
the other to abide at home. In Malabar the Women have many Husbands, either at
once, or successively, and if at once, they send their Children to them whom
they think have most right to them. In Calicut some Women are related to have
six or seven Husbands, and they Father their Children on which of them they
please. The Anses had Women in common, and the Child was to be reputed his,
with whom the Woman chose to live. Some report that Gorgophan Daughter to
Perseus, about Anno Mundi 2630. Second Marriage.
was the first Woman who Married a Second Husband. When Myrrha fell in love
with her Father Cynara, Gentes esse feruntur, in quibus and nato genitrix and
nata parenti jungitur, and Pietas geminato crescit amore. Incest.
Ovid Metam. lib. 10.

The Babylonians allowed Marriage of Parents and Children. Justin, lib. 1.
says, That Semiramis was killed by Ninus her Son, because she would have lain
with him: but Orosius lib. 1. cap. 4. affirms, That she was Married with her
Son. Curtius lib. 8. says, In Regionem quam Naura appellant, Rex cum toto
exercitu venit: Satrapas erat Sysimithres duobus ex sua matre filiis genitis;
quippe apud illos licitum parentibus stupro coire cum liberis. Alexander came
with his whole Army into a Region called Naura, where was a Satrapas called
Sysimithres, who had two Sons whom he begat of his own Mother: For with them
it is held lawful for Children to lie with their Parents. This Sysimithres
together with her who was his Mother and Wife, being possessed of an
impregnable Rock, situate in the pass into his Country, opposed Alexander in
his entrance, and being Summoned by him to yield, he himself assented, but was
overruled by the same Incestuous Woman his Mother and Wife, who said, She
would rather die then yield; so much more valiant was she then he, but in the
end he overruled her, and yielded his Fort, and was content his two Sons
should militate under Alexander, who took them with him as a kind of a wicked
Rarity.

Plutarch says, That the Cimbri married their own Daughters, which Custom was
taken from them by Marius, who overcame them in Germany and triumphed over
them. The Quitteve or King of Sofala, has an Hundred Women, Queens and
Concubines, and many of them his Aunts, Couzins, Sisters, Daughters, all whom
he uses, saying, His Sons by them are the truest Heirs to the Kingdom, because
no mixture of blood; But none but the King on pain of death may marry Sister or
Daughter, Jo. dos Sanctus. At Cape Gonsalvetz, they have a filthy Custom that
the King when his Daughters are grown, takes and keeps them for his Wives, and
the Queens in like manner take their Sons, when they are grown up, and make use
of them as Husbands. In Egypt some of the Ptolomies married with their
Sisters, and as it seems by Seneca, such Marriages were not unusual at
Alexandria; for he says, Athenis dimidium licet, Alexandriae totum: and as
Turnelius affirms at Athens they might Marry their own Sisters by the Father,
such as Abraham, Genesis Cap. 20.12. said of Sarah, She is the Daughter of my
Father, but not the Daughter of my Mother; and she became my Wife. Whereby you
see Abraham is censured by the Doctrine of Seneca, as an Incestuous Person; but
Lycurgus permitted Sisters only to Marry by the Mother's side, but forbid to
Marry Sisters of the Father's side. And Arnobius contra Gent. says, That
Incest was allowed amongst many Nations of whom Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. genesis
dier. C. 24. has made a Catalogue. Cambyses amongst the Persians married his
Sister, so did Artaxerxes, so did Darius; and in Egypt so did Ptolomeus
Philadelphus, at Rome Claudius with Agrippina his Brother's Daughter, and
Caracalla with his Stepmother. Opian the Poet says, That Caracalla Married
Julia his own Mother. When Cambyses had a mind to Marry his Sister, he advised
with the Magi to know, whether the Laws did allow it; who answered, They knew
no Law which did allow it; But there was a Law which allowed the King of Persia
to do what he would. Yapangoi, the Father of Guagna Capa, was the first Ingua
of Peru, who married his Sister, that Ingua's might do it; and commanding his
own Children to do it, permitting the Noblemen also to Marry their Sisters by
the Father's side. Other Incest in the line ascendent or descending, and
Adulteries were punished with death. The chaste Artemisia was the Wife and
Sister of Mausolus.

-- Diique suas habuere sorores,
Vt Saturnus Opim junctam sibi sanguine junxit,
Oceanus Tethin, Junonem Rector Olympi.
Ovid Metamor. 9. In Pozo in America they marry with their Neices and Sisters.
The Chinois heed no degrees of Affinity or Consanguinity, so the Sirnames
differ, and therefore marry into the Mother's kindred be it almost never so
near. If a Tartar die, his Son may marry all his Wives, except his own Mother
and Sisters, so it is lawful for a Brother to marry the Widow of his Brother.
Polo. Pliny in an Epistle to Loratius, says, That the Athenians did use to
marry Brothers and Sisters, but yet did not permit Uncles to marry their
Neices, nor Aunts their Nephews. Aemilius Probus speaking of Cymon's Marrying
his Sister Elpinice, Habuit autem in Matrimonio sororem nomine Elpinicen, non
magis amore quam patrio more ductus: nam Atheniensibus licet eodem patre natas
uxores ducere. The Arabians had anciently a Custom that one should be Wife to
all her Brothers, whereby they become all Brethren; and the eldest should lie
with her at Night, and at Day the other. Every one as they came first, set his
Staff at her door, to give notice to the rest to forbear, whereby they were all
Brethr^n. An Adulterer was punished amongst them with death. The Britains had
Ten or Twelve Wives apeice, as Caesar says, which they held common amongst
Brothers and Parents; and Dio says, The Children thus begotten were brought up
in common amongst them. Eusebius says, That many Britains kept one Wife in
common. In Arabia the Happy, it is accounted Adultery to lie with any Woman
except of their own kindred, as Sisters, Mothers, Cousins, and the like: whom
they likewise take to be Wives. It seems Abraham's example and direction, to
choose a Wife for his Son came hence. The Banyans Sons are Heirs to their
Fathers Estates,; but as a recompense, They are bound to maintain their Mother,
and marry their Sisters, that they likewise may be provided for, out of their
Father's substance. The Goan Indians have a custom, That none must marry but in
a family using his Father's Trade: To which end the several Trades are severed
one from another, and set apart in streets by themselves. Linschotten. The
Inhabitants of Carthagena allow not marriage with the Sister, on this
Tradition, That one who married his Sister was for that offense carried, and
confined to the Moon, where he still remains the spot, or Man in the Moon.

In China many charitable people, Fornication.
as they think themselves, have given and bequeathed for the good of their
Souls, Rents and Revenues, to maintain Houses of Common women, who are to
prostitute themselves to such Poor as have no money freely, which they think a
work of great merit. Mendez. In China, adultery with a Married woman is death.
The Common women not being suffered to live within the Walls, but in the
Suburbs, where they are educated to Singing, Music, and Dancing, and
whatsoever is fit for Dalliance, and are for that end bought of their Mothers,
and prostituted for gain.

In a large street in Pequin in China dwell a great number of Curtezans, who
are all under Protection of the Tutan of the Court. At Cambalu, Harlots have a
Corporation. In the Countries of Cotam and in Pegin, the Wives may marry new
Husbands, Divorce for absence.
if the old be absent but twenty days. Purch. 427. Divorces are frequent
amongst the Muscovites, for when they have a desire to part, they accuse each
other, by suborned false Witnesses of Adultery, or want of Devotion; by which,
they are condemned without answering for themselves. The Inhabitants of Casear
have a Law, if the Husband or Wife is absent from one another twenty days, the
other is at liberty to marry again. Heyl. 856.

Diodorus Siculus says, That the Egyptians before they had any Laws, every Man
had as many Wives as they pleased, Divorce at pleasure.
and both parties were at liberty, as any other Companions, to come together,
and part when either pleased: For they said, It was impossible, if Men and
Women should be tied together, but the same must be with much trouble,
contentions, and brawles. The Tappinineers in Hercinia bestowed their Wives on
other Men, after they had had two or three Children by them. Purchase. 351.

It was esteemed a dishonor, not only amongst the Indians, but Romans and
other Nations, for Ladys who loved their Husbands, to survive them.

Porcia killing herself on news of the death of her Husband.
Conjugis audisset fatum eum Porcia Bruti,
Et subtracta sibi quaereret arma dolor:
Nondum scitis, ait, mortem non posse negari,
Credideram satis hoc vos docuisse patrem.
Dixit, and ardentes avido bibit ore favillas,
I nunc, and ferrum turba molesta nega.
Martial. When Porcia heard of her dear Brutus slain,
Weapons she sought, withdrawn from her in vain:
Death, said she, not to be denied me is,
I thought my Father's death had taught you this.
She swallowed Coals, and proudly spoke the word,
Deny me now to die by point of Sword!
The Fact of Lucretia, Beza thus censures.

Lucretia killing herself on the Rape of Tarquin.
Si fuit ille tibi, Lucretia, gratus adulter,
Immerito ex merita praemia morte petis.
Sin potius casto vis est allata pudori,
Quis furor alterius crimine velle mori?
Frustra igitur laudem captas, Lucretia; namque
Vel scelerata cadis vel furiosa ruis.
If thou Lucretia loved'st th'Adulterer,
Thy Death deserved, reward to claim does err.
If rather force did thy chaste Beauty stain,
How mad, for others Crimes to be self slain?
In vain Lucretia, praise thou seek'st for Ay,
Since Guilt or Madness then cast thee away.
Condemn not yet so great a Lady as Lucretia, without hearing her Answer.

Pectora Tarquini, virtuti ingrate, fuissent,
Hac perf^ssa manu, Foemina si potui.
Jam cruor hic noster me non violasse pudorem,
Ante homines testis, spiritus ante Deos.
Stulte, meam frustra quid tentas redere famam,
Orb volat simul, ac aethere protegitur.
On Tarquin's breast, to virtue oh ingrate!
If able, I prevented had my Fate;
My blood to Men, my Soul to Gods on high,
Now my chaste Innocence shall testify.
Fool, thou in vain carp'st at Lucretia's Fame,
Since Earth and Heaven both preserve the same.
The Epigram of Beza is neat, but the Author seems to be much of the French
woman's mind, mentioned by Montaigne; who alleged her self to be Ravished by
force, but after often rejoiced, and thank't God she had once in her life so
much pleasure without sin. Whereas Tamar, who was truly Ravished by force, 2 Samuel 13.13. says, Whither shall I cause my shame to go. And verse. 18. It is
said, She having a Garment of diverse colors upon her: for with such Robes were
Kings Daughters that were Virgins, apparelled. And verse. 19. And Tamar put
Ashes on her Head, and rent her Garment of diverse colors, and laid her hand on
her head, and went on Crying. Why does not Beza tax Tamar in the same degree,
for spoiling her fine Cloths, and blubbering her Face, as he does Lucretia, who
being a Wife, was more concerned in the double, perhaps treble honor of her
self, her Husband and Children, then a Virgin in here is, which is only single;
and therefore to clear all suspicion, thought it necessary to give so high a
Testimony of her Innocence as she did?

Cicero in the like case commends diverse noble Virgins, who killed themselves
to preserve their honor. The like did the Women of Antioch, under Dioclesian;
and other Antiochian Women under Chosroe the Persian. The like did Sophronia, a
noble Christian Matron, under Decius. Many Virgins there were in the Primitive
times, who drowned themselves in Rivers for the same cause. St. Ambrose highly
commends those Virgins, who slew themselves for the same cause; and are all
generally Recorded in the Ecclesiastical Histories for Martyrs. Yet St. Austin
and other Fathers, seem doubtful, and I dare not in a Doctrine of blood be
positive; yet I confess though I am no Idolater of Saints deceased, I cannot
pass by their Ashes without due honor to their memory, and do think even the
greatest Ethnicks among them, shall rise up in Judgment against too many of the
latter Age; who call themselves Christians, and glory in their shame, of what
those laid down their lives to avoid the dishonor: and cannot but be struck
with admiration of so Divine excellency in so weak a Sex, as made them greater
in valor than Men; in love of their Husbands, than Women; in fame, than
Angels: To whom, though Christ gives so high a degree of Chastity, as neither
to marry or give in marriage; yet could not they avoid being spotted by
slanderous Tongues, to be like the Heathen Gods, lovers of Women; whereas fame
it self, dared not belie these Heroic Ladies, who defended their Honor with
their Blood. But to draw to an end of this Section, There appear amongst the
nations many good, many indifferent, and many most wicked Laws and Customs
concerning Marriage, the height of the Examples, and the Authority both in good
and bad, being only humane. The same can be neither obligatory nor satisfactory
to the Conscience, neither ought marriage to be judged by them.

Divorce by mutual assent.
It was by the Twelve Tables allowed, That by Mutual consent, the parties might
Divorce themselves one from another, Quia unumquodque dissolvitur eodem modo,
quo confl^tum est; as may be collected from Cicero Philip. 2 l. pern. ad leg.
Jul. de Adult. li. 2. and 7. de divorcio. ex Apul. and Ambros. Epist. 65.
Notwithstanding which, there was no Divorce followed in Rome for the space of
520 years.

There have been examples of the practice of this amongst Christians, and
Christ's words prohibiting putting away, which implies force, seems not to
include a free or voluntary separation. Of examples of this amongst Christians,
an express form appears in Marculfus his Formula, lib. 2. cap. 30. Dum inter
illum and illam non charitas regnat, sed discordia placuit etc Seeing between
him and her, the Charity according to God does not reign, but Discord, so that
they cannot live peacably together, it is agreed by the consent of both, that
they separate from one another, and accordingly they have done as others. Leg.
Romans cap. 19. and Novel Instit. 117. These Canons have been made to change, and
likewise other Imperial Laws.

Divorce free for Women a well as Men.
Of Women departing from their Husbands, (...) is the word for it on the Woman's
part. Sen. de Benef. l. 3. c. 16. Numquid jam ulla repudio erubescit. And
Nobiles foeminae non consulum numero^sed maritorum annos suos computant, They
departed and married again every year. Apud Romanos and Graecos mulier quam vir
alteri potest dicere ut res suas sibi habeat, quin nomina rei illius propria
jure Attico prodita erant, ut si vir discederet ab uxore, hoc diceretur (...),
si mulier a viro (...). Jos. Scaliger. Amongst the Romans and Greeks, both the
Woman and the Man might Divorce one another. And by the Athenian Law, they had
proper Terms for both; as if the Man left his Wife, this was called a
Dismission; Dismission and Desertion.
if the Woman left her Husband, this was called a Desertion. So by the case put
by Christ of a Woman, it appears then that Women were Divorced as well as Men.

The East Indians, if they are but Jealous of their Wives, will kill them, and
bring three or four witnesses to Swear, That strange Men entered into their
Houses by night, or at unaccustomed times, who had their pleasure of their
Wives; or in another sort, as they will devise it; whereby the Husband is
straight discharged of the Crime of killing his Wife, by the Laws both of
Portugal and Spain: and there are every year many Women without number,
dispatched by their Husbands, and none think it strange, nor make wonder at it,
because of the Custom; and the Women are never the more frighted from their
Adulteries, but will say. They can die no better death then by such a Law,
Linschot. And may presently marry another Wife. The Wives likewise frequently
poison their Husbands, which, as some say, was the original of their custom not
to survive their dead Husbands, but to burn them. And the causes of Jeal^u^e
can by neither, be published to the Magistrate with safety or h^nour, either of
Wife or Husband. Were it not therefore far better for the Innocent party or
both by assent, to separate themselves privately, and marry again; then so live
in danger of their lives one of another? and more agreeable to the Law of God
and Nature, and the ends of marriage; then for them, if the Wife offends the
Husband, to have power to kill her while alive, or if not offend, to kill her
by burning with him after dead: or the Woman be tempted to prevent both by
poisoning her Husband: were it not better to be put away privately as Joseph
did his Wife, then the fault published? and Divorces would not be so frequent
if left free to the parties; for who would marry again a Man or Woman who had
Divorced themselves from their first marriage without cause?

Augustus Caesar following the vicious policy of those times, to strengthen
himself by marriage of Women, repudiates his Wife Scribonia the same day she
was delivered of Julia, and married Livia, being great with Child by Tiberius
Nero her Husband, still living, who was delivered of Drusus three Months after.
Dio. Tiberius by assent of Augustus, repudiateth the Daughter of Agrippa, being
then with Child, and marries Julia the Daughter of Augustus.

Dioclesian the Emperor married six Wives in a short space, and repudiated
them all great with Child. Oros. And having associated to him, because of many
Travels in the Empire, Maximianus; they both meet at Milan to create new
Caesar's, to whom they may commit their Forces; where they chose Constantius
Chlorus, and make him Governor of Britain, and Galerius, whom they make Caesar
likewise, to defend Eastern Europe. These new Caesar's they compel to repudiate
their former Wives, and Galerius married Valeria Daughter to Dioclesian. And
Constantius repudiated his Wife Helena, by whom he had Costantine (after called
the Great) and married Theodora, Daughter-in-law to Maximian, by whom he had
after six Children. Dioclesian assumeth Divine Honor, and he and Maximian
triumph, yet they after resign the Empire (and retire themselves) to Galerius
and Constantius: after Constantius creates his Son Constantine Caesar, and
dies. Against him was set up Maxentius, Son to Maximian, and Maximian gives
his Daughter Fausta to Constantine. Herod Antipas repudiateth his Wife Areta,
who was Daughter to the King of Arabia, and married Herodias, Wife to his
Brother Philip, and Daughter to his Brother Aristobulus. Joseph. Anno Christi
1028. Constantine the Emperor being sick, the States put Romanus Argyrus to his
choice, either to repudiate his Wife and marry the Emperor's Daughter, or to
lose his Eyes; his Wife to save him from danger, enters into a Nunnery,
Romanus Argyrus is made Emperor, and marries Zoe the Emperor's Daughter, and
banisheth Theodora, her Sister. Zon. Zoe falls in love with Michael Brother
to one of the chief Eunuchs, they strangle Romanus in a Bath, he marries Zoe,
and was much troubled with the Dropsy, and Falling Sickness; Michael
neglects the Emperess, and refraineth her Bed, shaveth her, and banisheth
her: The people enforce him to recall her, and put out his Eyes. Cedr. Zoe
marries Constantius Monomachus, who keeps a Concubine, by her assent the
Emperor is endeavored to be stoned by the people, in hatred of his Concubine;
Zoe pacifieth the people. Ib.

Impotency and Sterility is a cause of Divorce.
The Law of Solon allowed Impotency in the Man, or Sterility in the Woman, to be
a good cause of Divorce. Plutarch in Solon. vid. Aust. contra, etc. because
then old Folks might not Marry. Such was the modesty of ancient times in Rome,
that from the first foundation of the City, for the space of Five Hundred and
Twenty Years, there happened no Divorce between a Husband and Wife. Val. Max.
l. 2. cap. 1. And the first who began it was Spurius Carbillus, who put away
his Wife for Sterility, which though it seemed a tolerable cause, yet wanted
not reprehension from diverse, who thought the Conjugal Faith ought to overweigh
the desire of Children. Anno 631. Dagobert the great King of France, repudiated
his first Wife for Barrenness, and Marries Nantildis a Nun* Amandus a Bishop
reproves him, and he banisheth the Bishop, afterward having a Son, he revoketh
the Bishop to baptize him. Calais.

Anno Christ. 1263. The Queen of Bohemia being old and Barren, the King
intends a Divorce, she lays the fault on him, he makes her this offer,
That she should appoint him a Maid, and if he got her not with Child in a Year,
he would be reputed faulty, the Queen accepts it, and in Ten Months he has a
Son, and afterward diverse Daughters. She is Divorced and Marries Kum Grand
Daughter to the Duke of Muscovia. Chron. Boh.

Regner King of Denmark, Anno 820. marries Langertha a Warlike Woman of
Suevia, and had by her Fridlanus, and two Daughters, Crom. After he Repudiateth
Landgertha for the inequality of the Match, and Marries the Daughter of
Hezotus King of Suevia, by whom he had many Sons. Crom.

Anno 1354. Peter King of Spain repudiateth Blanch Daughter to the Duke of
Bourbon, and Marries Jean de Castro. Histor. Hispan. Anno 1373. The King of
Portugal refused a Match in Castile, and takes a Nobleman's Wife, and
banisheth him, his Subjects are discontented with him. Hist. Hisp.

Anno 696. Pepin King of France repudiated his Wife, and married Alpaida his
Concubine, by whom he had Charles Martell, and he killed Lambert Bishop of
Thuring for reproving his Marriage. Am. Fris. Anno 576. The Wife of Chilperic
King of France was divorced and thrust into a Monastery, for being Godmother to
her own Child. Truon. Charles the Eighth of France was Espoused to Mary the
Daughter of Maximilian, Maximilian marries Ann the Daughter and Heir of the
Duke of Britain by Deputy. The King of France repudiates the Daughter of
Maximilian, and marries the Daughter of the Duke of Britain. Luis the Twelfth
of France repudiates his Wife, and marries Ann his Predecessor's Widow. Anno
1333. The Marquess of Misnia having married Judeth the Daughter of the King of
Bohemia, the Emperor causes the Marquess to repudiateher, and marry his
Daughter. The King of Bohemia takes diverse places in Misnia, and gives Judeth
to John, Son of the French King. Dub. The Archbishop of Gnesna in Polonia,
forced Married Priests to be Divorced from their Wives. Alsted. Anno 1218.

Lewis the Seventh King of France having married Elianor Daughter and Heir of
William Duke of Guyen, and having two Daughters by her; notwithstanding
divorced himself from her, on pretense they were Couzins in the fourth degree:
She was after married to Henry the Second of England, (who had by her Five
Sons, and Three Daughters) and was she, who revenged her self on Rosamond,
though not in so high a degree injurious to her, as Adela the Daughter of the
King of France, affianced to her Son Richard, who was after King, was suspected
to be; of whom it was commonly reported, That her Husband was so far inamor'd,
that he having Committed Elianor to Prison, resolved to be divorced from her
and marry Adela. Bak* Hist. 55.59.

King John having ma^ried Avice Daughter and Heir of Robert Duke of Glouc^ster,
having no Issue by her, divorced himself from her, alleging that she was his
Couzin in the third degree.

Juan Daughter of Edward the First, (for her Beauty called the fair Maid of
Kent,) was married first to William Montacute Earl of Salisbury, and from him
divorced; but it appears not for what cause, and was after married to Sir
Thomas Holland in her right Earl of Kent, and Father of Thomas and John Holland
Duke of Surrey, and Earl of Huntingdon; and lastly, she was Wife of Edward of
Woodstock, the black Prince of Wales, and by him Mother of the unfortunate King
Richard the Second.

Henry the Eight married first Katharine Daughter of Ferdinando King of Spain,
the relict of his older Brother Arthur, and was after Twenty. Years marriage,
and the Birth of his Daughter Mary (after Queen of England) by her divorced
from her, on the opinion of some Divines, that it was not lawful for him to
marry his Brother's Wife, and having successively married two other Wives,
after their death he married his fourth Wife, Ann Sister to the Duke of Cleave,
she lived his Wife six Months, and then was likewise Divorced. Civilians,
Canonists, Divines, Lawyers, and one Pope against another, Aliment of Children.
and all by the Ears about Divorce, and unless as we ought, we wholly consult
the Moral Law of God, there is not a word of sense in the Laws of men, but they
are all for gain.

As Desertions and Divorces of Mothers without cause, have been too frequent
both amongst Gentiles, Jews, and Christians; so likewise is the Desertion, and
not giving Aliment to Children. Aristotle stained his Philosophy with the
bloody Doctrine of exposing Infants. The Chinoys, who are poor, think it
Charity to strangle their Infants, and save their Aliment. Fornicators make it
their custom to deflour Virgins, and get them with Child, and then illegitimate
and desert both Mother and Child to save the charge of Aliment: And oh horrid
amongst Christians! whole Parishes rise with Swords and Staves against one poor
Sucking Babe, to exterminate both it, and the Mother naked, and to be Vagabonds
to beg, steal, or starve, only to save so small an Alms as Aliment to one poor
Infant, not able to speak or beg for it self. It is related by Travelers, that
some Indians use, when a Child is born, if it take not to suck the Dug of the
Mother well, they carry it out of the House and hang it naked on a Tree, and
leave it there, returning themselves into the House: after a while they go out
again, and bring in the Child and offer it the Teat; if it take it not, they
carry it the second time, and let it hang twice as long, and fetch and offer it
the Teat again; if it take it not then, they hang it on the Tree the third
time, and leave it hanging till it dies. God made man righteous and writ the
Moral Law in his heart, but since the Devil has seduced him to the Ceremonial,
he is become worse then a Beast.

CHAP. III. Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, not to be judged by the
Law-Civil, Canon, or Feudall.
AS to the Author of the Civil Law, or rather the Emperor, in whose name and
time the same was compiled, he was Justinian, whom, though his own Parasites
extolled for a God, and his Lawyer Tribonian employed by him or his Wife
Theodora, to do the work, claws him with a doleful Compliment, that he was in
great fear least he should be rapt up into the Heavens, when he little thought
of it for his singular Piety to their insufferable loss. Yet Procopius makes
him a Devil, and doubts very much whether he were not a Devil incarnate more
likely, when he little thought of it, to be rapt to Hell. Bodin indeed speaks
something, Fol. 17. may clear him from being a Demon, for he says, He was a
blockish unlearned Prince, and outwitted by his Wife Theodora, when she
pleased, and caused by her to make Laws only for the advantage of the Women
against the Men; and Procopius likewise commends his Justice, and says, That
he used when he could catch them, to take Bribes of sides, and if any who had a
Suit before him presented him with a Bribe, he was sure to carry his Cause,
unless the other Party counterballanced him with another. As to the Collection
of Laws attributed to him, it cannot be denied, but there are a multitude of
excellent Laws of Nature scattered through the great Mass of them, but in such
a confusion, as is rather proper to a Chaos, then an orderly Digest. Then for
the bulk it is an Hundred times bigger then necessary, and the Evil Laws which
increase it to that greatness in number, overwhelm and in Nature destroy or
make useless the Good. As to the Religion in them it is Popery and
Superstition. The Justice is Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government, the Mercy of
them is Racks and all inhuman Tortures.

Civil Law.
The Heads of the Civil Law prohibiting to marry, are comprehended in the Verses
following.

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Aetas, Conditio, Numerus, Mona, Et Ordo, 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Optio,
Nobilitas, Sanguis, Tutela, Potestas, 11. 12. 13. 14. Fons Sacer, Affinitas,
Raptus, Repugnat Honestas, Irrita quae faciunt Connubia legibus, haec sunt.

1. The first cause making marriage void, or voidable, is Age, if the Man is
under 14, or the Woman under 12.

2. Condition, If it be servile, they were not allowed to marry Ceremonially,
but might lie with one another, and get new Slaves.

3. Number, If a Man have one Wife, he ought not to have another.

4. If either Person be Monastic, as a Monk or Nun.

5. Being within Orders, as a Priest or Clerk.

6. Adoption prohibits marriage between the Adopting and Adopted.

7. Nobility heretofore prohibited marriage with a Plebeian, and Senators and
their Children, per Legem Papiam and Juliam, with their freed Women, or others
of so mean Condition. A wicked Law, and contrary to the Law of God, for they
might lie with Plebeians, but not marry them.

8. Consanguinity, in respect of which, three sorts of Persons are considered,
the Ascendents, Descendents, and Collaterals.

9. A Guardian is prohibited to marry his Pupil.

10. A President of a Province is prohibited to marry one subjected to him, by
reason of his Jurisdiction, in which two last cases the reason is, that
marriage might be free, and not compelled by the Awe or Power of Authority.

11. Fons Sacer, the Font of Baptism, is by the Pope made to contract a
spiritual affinity or kindred between the Godfathers and Godmothers, and
Child Baptized; for whom, or their Children to marry within the fourth degree
is made without any sense, as Incestuous, as if within the degrees of Carnal
kindred.

12. Affinity, in which are the same Considerations of Prohibition to marry, as
before in Affinity.

13. Rape; for by the Civil Law the Ravished was prohibited to marry the
Ravishor.

14. Such Matters as are thought against Honesty, or are of ill report,
according to the Manners of the People.

Canon Law.
As to the Canon Law, Aquinas, Cajetan, and others, recite the Verses following,
which have left out some of these Matters relating to the Civil Law, and added
difference in Religion and other Matters withal, to the Modern Canons, in the
manner following.

Error, Conditio, Votum, Cognitio, Crimen,
Cultus, Disparitas, Vis, Ordo, Ligamen, Honestas,
Si sis affinis, si forte coire nequibis,
Haec socianda vetant, Connubia facta retractant.
Which likewise may be easily understood by Exposition before made of the
former. But they are likewise many of them wicked, and contrarg to the Law of
God,

The Civil Law is a Cento of Rescripts of Emperors, a frippery of Opinions of
Doctors, Planting the Sword for the Balance, Superstition for Religion,
Tyranny for Government, Antinomies for Laws, Torture for Judgment, Gain for
Godliness, Iniquity for Justice, Confusion for Method, Fiction for Truth, Form
for Matter, Manner for Merit, Ceremony for Substance, a Powder of Impertinents,
a Remedy worse than the Disease, a Whirl-pool of Vertigoes, a Rock for
Shipwracks, a Gulf to swallow Money, a Sea driven with contrary winds, a
Bottomless Deep of Doubts, a Chaos of Controversies, an Abyss of Darkness, a
Bulk broken with it is own weight. Canon Law.
Anno 1520. The Pope and Papists Excommunicating Luther, he appealeth to a
Council, and burns the Canon Law, and the Popes Bull at Wittenberg.

Calvin tit. Cynus writes of him thus, Cynus jurisconsultus Pistorii natus,
Dyni Maxellani auditor, Bononiae jus civil professus est, librosque de eo non
paucos ita scripsit, ut semper a Pontificiis canonibus abhorret. In
interpretatione l. quoties C. de Jud. scribit Canonicum jurisconsultum secisse
sibi jura pro libitu voluntatis suae, and leges civiles servare eas ad commodum
suum, non autem contra se, propter ambitum secularis jurisdictionis usurpandae,
and non propter aliud. Cynus a Professor of the Civil Law at Bononia, and one
wrote many Books concerning the same, yet did always very much abhor the Papal
Canons, and writes in interpretation l. quoties C. de Jud. that the Canonists
made all their Laws according to their own Arbitrary will, and observed the
Civil Law only for their profit, and not when it made against them, out of
Ambition to usurp Temporal Jurisdiction to themselves, and to no other end. The
Canon Law is deservedly likewise censured, by the Lord Bishop of Lincoln in his
late learned Book against Popery, fol. 35. where having recited many wicked
positions in it, he concludes in these words, Thus much (and may be too much)
for the Canon Law, that sink of Forgeries, Impiety, and Disloyalty; for I
scarce know any Book, wherein are more forged writings (under good name
sometimes) for bad purposes, and more impious Doctrines, and Positions owned
and authorized for Law, and that by one who pretends, though without and
against reason, to be Christ's Vicar, and Infallible; or any Book which has
more Seditious and Rebellious principles of Disloyalty. This I only say now,
but when I have what I now want, time and opportunity, I can and will ((...))
make it good, how dangerous, (and when believed and practiced) how pernicious
to Kings and Princes, the principles of that Law are. I hope all Bishops will
hereafter be of the same mind, and not own the Canon Law to be the Rule of
Marriages, and Legitimations, or Successions of Protestant Kings, and Princes,
or their Subjects; or for their Pardons and Excommunications, or fit to be any
longer the Ecclesiastical Law, for the Government in any thing of Three
Protestant Kingdoms.

As to the Feudal Law, I shall defer it till I come to speak of the wicked
obligations of some Tenures, Feudal Law.
to prostitute the Virginities of their Daughters to the Lords of the Land. It
is enough for to show the slavery of Feudal Laws, if we but remember the late
Wardships of Tenures, wherein the marriages of Men and Women were bought and
sold, as if Beasts in the Market, and the unjust Laws yet remaining in
customary Estates, prohibiting Widows to marry; and marrying young Women to old
decrepit Men, not fit for marriage, to get a Widow's Estate: whereby they are
left exposed to infinite Temptations. The wicked custom of March^ta Mulieris
belongs to the Feudal Law. March^ta mulieris dicitur Virginalis pudicitiae
prima violatio and delibatio, quae ab Eveno Rege sibi, and capitalibus dominis
fuit impie permissa de omnibus novis nuptis, prima nuptiarum nocte. sed pie a
Malcolmo 3 sublata fuit and in capite sequente certo vaccarum numero and quasi
pretio redimitur. Sken. Reg. Ma. lib. cap. 31.

1. It is to wit that conform to the Law of Scotland, the Marchet of ane Woman
noble, or Servant, or Hireling, is ane Zoung Kow, or three shillings. And the
right duty to the Sergeant three pennys. 2. And she be Dochter of an Frie-man,
and not of the Lord of the Village, her Marchet shall be one Kow, or six
shillings; and for the Sergeants duty, sax pennys. 3. Item, The Marchet of ane
Thane or Ochiern two Rye, or Twelve shillings, and the duty to the Sergeant
Twelve pennys. 4. Item, The Marchet of the Daughter of an Earl pertains to the
Queen, and is twelve Rye.
The Spaniards in the West Indies setting a Tribute to the King, and the
inferior Lords, to be paid yearly by every married person. To increase these
yearly Tributes from married persons, they every year survey by List, the
married persons of every Town: and cause their Children, Sons and Daughters to
be brought before them, to see if they be fit to be married; and if of growth
fit, they threaten the Parents for not marrying them, and raise his Tribute by
way of Fine, till he marry them. And the set time they appoint for marriage to
the Indians, is 14 to the Man, and 13 to the Woman; yea, some they compel to
marry scarce 12 or 13 years of Age, if they appear of more forward strength;
yea it is a shame to see how young they are enforced to it, page 155. So
between the King of Spain and the Pope, the poor Indians pay dear for marriage,
which God left free.

The Civil Law is said to be Jus Leoninum, The Canon Law Jus Vulpinum, The
Feudal Law Jus Asmarium, in regard of the intolerable oppression and servitude
in it: I conclude therefore Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, not fit to be
judged by any of these three Laws.

CHAP. IV. Marriage, Matrimony, Legitimtaion, or Succession, not to be judged
by the Law of Mahomet.
YOU will not offend God in speaking a word in secret to Women, that you
research in marriage, although you conceal in your minds your design to espouse
them, he understands whatever you think of them. Alch. cap. 2. page 23.

Of Persons with whom Marriage is forbidden.
Marry not the Wives of your Fathers, what is past was Incest, abomination, and
a wicked way; your Mothers are forbidden you, your Daughters, Aunts, Nieces,
Nurses, and your foster Sisters: The Mothers of your Wives, the Daughters that
your Wives have had by other Husbands. The Daughters of Women that you shall
have known are also forbidden you; if you have not known them, it will be no
sin. The Wives of your Sons are likewise prohibited, and two Sisters; for what
is past, God is Gracious and Merciful. Married Wives are likewise forbidden,
except the Women-slaves that you shall have acquired: God has so commanded
you. Except what is above forbidden, it is lawful for you to marry at your
pleasure.

Of the Time of approaching Wives.
When your Wives shall be clean, approach them, according to what God has
commanded. He loves them that repent of their Error, and are clean and
purified. Your Wives are your Tillage, go to your Tillage at your pleasure; And
do good to your Souls, you shall one day find it: fear God and preach his
Commandments to true Believers. Alchor. cap. 2. page 21.

Of forbearing to touch Wives.
God will be Gracious and Merciful to such as shall swear, not to touch their
Wives the space of four Months, if he return to them he is Gracious and
Merciful; but if they desire to repudiate them, he understands and knows
all things. Women Divorced shall tarry until their Terms be past four times, it
is not permitted them to conceal what God has created in their Wombs, if they
believe in his Divine Majesty, and the day of Judgment. Alchor. cap. 2. p. 22.

Of the propriety of the Wife in her Goods, distinct from the Husband.
Oh ye that believe in God, it is not lawful for you to inherit what is your
Wives by force. Take not violently away from them what you have given them,
unless they be surprised in manifest Adultery, see them with civility; if you
have an aversion from them, it may chance that you have a thing wherein God
has placed much Good: But if you desire to repudiate your Wives to take
others, and that you have given them any thing, take not any thing that
appertains to them. Will you take their wealth with a lie, and a manifest
sin, how shall you take it since you have approached each other with a promise,
to use each other civilly? Alchor. cap. 4. page 49.

Of giving Suck by the Mother, and Aliment to her, and her Child, and Aliment
by the Heir to his Parents.
The Women shall give Suck to their Children two years entire; if they desire
to accomplish the time appointed to suckle them, the Father shall nourish and
cloth the Wife and his Children, according to his faculties. Expend not but
according to the measure of your Goods, the Father and Mother shall not
necessitate themselves for their Children. The Heir shall perform what is above
ordained, he shall entertain his Father and Mother according to his abilities.
If the Parents would wean their Children before two years be expired, they may
do it without offending God, if they both agree to it. If you cause your
Children to be Nursed by other Women than your own Wives; God will not be
offended in giving them their Sallary according to reason and honesty. Fear God
and know that he sees whatever you do. Alchor. c. 2. p. 23.

Of Legitimation and Succession of Children.
All the Children the Mahometans have by their Wives or Slaves, are alike
Legitimate, and succeed to the Father's Goods in such manner, as did the Twelve
Sons of Jacob. And the Grand Seignior of the Turks himself esteems her,
though she be a Bondwoman, his Sultana or Empress, who brings him the first
Son, who is likewise Heir to the Empire, though never any Ceremonies of
marriage by a Priest, or in a Temple were used.

Of Succession of Children to the Goods of Parents, and of Parents to theirs,
and of Collateral Heirs.
God recommendeth to you your Children. The Son shall have as much as two
Daughters: if there be more then two Daughters, they shall have two thirds of
the Succession of the Dead; if there be but one, she shall have the moyity, and
her kindred a sixth part of what shall be left by the Dead. If there be no
Children, and the kindred be Heirs, the Mother of the dead shall have a third;
if there be Brethren, the Mother shall have a sixth after satisfaction of
Legacies contained in the Testament, and of debts. You understand to whom it is
most requisite to do good, to your Children, or to your Father and Mother give
them the Portion ordained of God; the moyity of what their Wives shall leave
belongerh to you, if they have no Children. If they have, you shall give the
fourth part of what they shall leave; after payment of the Legacies and Debts,
they shall have the fourth of your Succession, if you have no Children; if you
have, they shall have the Eighth Portion. If a Man and a Woman be Heirs of each
other, and have neither Father nor Mother, nor Children, and have a Brother or
Sister, each of them shall have a sixth part of the Succession; if they be
more, they shall share the Third after payment of Legacies and Debts without
fraud, following what God has ordained. He knows all your actions, and is
prudent in what he ordains, it is God ordained by his Divine Majesty, he that
shall obey him and his Prophet shall enter into Paradise, where many Rivers
flow, and shall dwell in Eternal felicity. He that shall disobey God and his
Prophet, shall be cast Headlong into the fire of Hell, where he shall suffer
ignominious Torments. Alchor. cap. 4. page 48, 49.

Of Succession of Brothers and Sisters.
If a Man decease without Issue, and has a Sister, she shall have a moyity of
what he shall leave, and shall Inherit it, if he has no Children. If they be
two Sisters, they shall have two Thirds of what the deceased left. If they be
many Brothers and many Sisters, the Son shall have as much as Two Daughters;
God teaches you his Commandments, depart not from the right way, he is
Omniscient. Alchor. cap. 4. p. 64.

Of Fornication.
Those that know no other Women but their own, and their slaves; These Mahomet
numbers amongst the Righteous. Alchor. cap. 70. p. 362. If you desire Women for
Money, and neither commit Concubinage nor Adultery, give them Salary, for which
you shall agree, so you shall not offend God. He that shall not be able to
espouse Women of a free condition, shall marry such Women and Maids as are
slaves. The marriage of slaves is for them that fear Whoredom. Alchor. cap. 4.

Of Desertion by Wives of their Husbands.
If Women fly from their Husbands, they shall be brought again to them, which
is a thing reasonable, they ought to honor them, and their Husbands likewise
ought to honor them; but the Husbands have a degree of advantage above them.
God is Omnipotent and most Wise in what he ordains. Alchor. cap. 2. page 22.

Of Adultery by Wives.
If your Wives commit Adultery, take four Witnesses of their fault, that be of
your Religion; if they bear witness, keep them Prisoners in your Houses until
death or until God shall otherwise ordain. If they Repent of their fault do
them no harm, God is Gracious and Merciful to them that Repent. Alchor. cap. 1.
p. 49.

Of Divorce.
When you shall repudiate your Wives, appoint them the time they must tarry
before they again marry, take them with civility and modesty, and in like
manner dismiss them; give them presents according to your ability, and take
them not to abuse or torment them. They that do thus offend their own Souls.
Alchor. cap. 2. page 22. He that has repudiated his Wife thrice, shall not
resume her until she has been married to another who has Divorced her,
Alchor. c 2. p. 22. Then they may return to each other again, and marry without
sin. ibid. If the Women Divorced be with Child, allow them what is necessary
for them till they be delivered, if they desire to Nurse their Children, you
shall give them an honest Salary; if ye like not this, ye shall cause them to
be Nursed by another, whose pains ye shall reward: if ye be not wealthy ye
shall allow according to your power. Alchor. cap. 66.

Of the time Women are to tarry before a second Marriage.
Widows shall tarry four Months and ten Nights after the death of their
Husbands, before they marry again. Alchor. cap. 2. page 23. The like time
required after Divorce.

The word Alchoran signifies a Collection of these Laws of Mahomet concerning
Marriage and Succession; which seem to be no other but a Collection of some old
Arabic customs, which he as well as the Pope, and many other Legislators (to
ensnare the consciences of the Ignorant and Superstitious) counterfeited to
come from God: in which, though each of the Persons are equally guilty of
Blasphemy, yet as to the Laws, the Mohammedan far excel the Pontificial. And
pardon me if I think our own Municipal Laws derived from so impure a Legislator
as Rome. For first here is in these Arabic customs, no Dispensation of what is
truly Incest by the Law of Nature, nor any prohibition of any within the fourth
degree, not prohibited by the Law of God or Nature. 2. Here is no prohibition
of Septuagesima, Advent, or Rogation times, to get money for Licenses to marry.
3. Here is no Banes, carrying of Women to Temples, buying of the Priests
Benedictions, nor money given for Licenses to marry without them. 4. Here is no
inslaving Women by marriage, unless slaves whom they buy in the Market for
money, or take Captive in Wars, by Robbing them of the propriety of their
Goods; nor any ridiculous and unjust punishment of the Man for the Woman, or
the Woman for the Man's offenses. 5. Here is no letting Stews, or Fornication
to Rent. 6. Here the Father has liberty to acknowledge his own Children, and
the Children their Father; and no Certificate of Bishops has power to take
that right from them. 7. Here the wantonness of Widows is forbidden, who are
for new Husbands as soon as the old is put in his Grave, whereby who are
Fathers of their Children is made uncertain. 8. Here is no false Fathering of
Children on those who are within four Seas. 9. Here is no punishing Men twice
for one offense; once by the Temporal Court, and then by the Spiritual Court:
or contrary punishments by contrary Courts; one by the Contentious Court, and
another by the Penitential Court. 10. Here is no Auricular Confession of their
Wives or Daughters by Priests in Temples or Chambers, and defiling thereby of
their Families. 11. Here is no punishing of Women for bringing forth Children,
nor the Murders of so many Infants caused thereby, as by the Papist Laws is
continually done. Yet I conclude, though the Law of the Turk is far better than
that of the Pope, and shall rise in Judgment against such as plant his Canons
in their Courts, in defiance of the Law of God and Nature; I think neither a
fit Rule to judge Marriage, Legitimation, or Succession by.

CHAP. V. Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and Succession, not to be judged by
Ecclesiastical Laws.
THE Question is, Whether Marriage, Legitimation and Succession ought to be
judged by Ecclesiastical Laws?

No English Lawyer can mention my Lord Coke without great honor; but how he
came so biased as to endeavor to set up Papal and Episcopal Laws under the
name of Regal, appears not.

Coke, lib. 5.1. part 40. in Cawdryes Case, That the Kingdom of England is an
absolute Monarchy, and if the King cannot Authorize by his Commission or Writ
Ecclesiastical, Judges to determine and judge those great and important Causes of
Matrimony, Divorce, and general Bastardy, by Certificate of the Bishop, who is
the Ecclesiastical Witness, and Judge both of Fact and Law, and by the Canon
Laws, which by use and custom are now our Ecclesiastical Laws: Then he is
disabled to be supreme Governor of this Realm in all Spiritual things, or
Causes as well as Temporal, according to the Oath of Supremacy due to him: And
that he could not then cause Justice to be administered to his Subjects in these
so great and important causes of Matrimony, Divorce, and general Bastardy, on
which depends the strength of men's Descents, and Inheritances. This I conceive,
though not in the same words, yet in sense and substance, to be the weight of
my Lord Coke's Argument, whereby he would make use of Marriage, as one means
amongst his many other, to set up an Ecclesiastical Law, and Judge over the
Temporal Freeholds and Inheritances, and other Birthrights, of the Subjects.
To which is answered, First, As to the words Absolute and Supreme, I suppose he
intended no such absolute Monarchy or Supremacy, as is not under the Law of
God, though it be not so expressed in the form of the Oath of Supremacy: For
though, Regum timendorum in proprios greges, Ecclesiastical Laws not needful to
the King's Supremacy, but hurtful.
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis; then I think he does not intend it to be
above the Law of the Land, seeing the King himself by his Oath, is pleased to
oblige himself to his People to govern according to that Law, where it is not
contrary to the Law of God. Then as to the pretended want of Power of doing
Justice, concerning causes of Freehold and Inheritance depending on marriage,
except by Ecclesiastical Laws and Judges, that is very strange; for how was
Justice done in the times of Primitive Christianity for many Hundred Years
after Christ, when neither Bishops or any other Ecclesiastical Judges, ever
pretended Jurisdiction todetermin Temporal Right or Propriety, but left the
same to be judged by the Imperial Laws. How was Justice done in the time of
Henry the Second, when the Jurisdiction of all Matrimonial causes remained in
the Temporal Courts? Richard the First, his Son, being the first, as Matthew
Paris writes, whom the Clergy got by his public Edict to give the Jurisdiction
of Power and Gifts, by reason of Marriage, and of all Matrimonial causes to the
Bishops Courts; and the same Richard likewise gave them Jurisdiction of all
breach of Faith, Promises and Oaths, whereby if much of the Power so rashly
granted, had not been by him so speedily resumed, they had hookt to themselves
the whole Jurisdiction from the King's Courts, of all Contracts and
Conveyances, Bonds and Obligations, as well as Marriages, concerning Temporal
Goods and Inheritances. And why cannot general as well as special Bastardy be
tried at Common Law? And how likewise are all Rights depending on all Marriages
made during the late Civil Wars by pretense of any Ordinance of Parliament made
by 12. Car. 2. cap. 33. to be tried by a Jury and the Common Law, and not by
Certificate of the Bishop, or any Ecclesiastical Judge, to the advancement, and
not prejudice of Justice; and a far greater expedition and advantage to the
same would it be, if by the like Act the Jurisdiction of all Marriages and
Legitimations, as it was in the time of Henry the Second, were again restored
to the Common-Law-Courts. So likewise anciently Bastardy alleged in an Action
of Trespass was triable by Jury, but now usurped by Bishops as well in personal
as real Actions. 4. Edw. 4.35.

Coke lib. 5.1. part. in the same case of Cawdry it is further alleged,
Circumspecte agatis gives no Jurisdiction of Marriage to Bishops.
That the Statutes of Circumspecte agatis made 13. Eliz. 1. of Articuli Cleri
made 9. E. 2. Anno Domini 1315. of 15. E. 3. Cap. 6. of 31. E. 3. Cap. 11. give
Jurisdiction of marriage to Bishops.

To which is answered, That in the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, there is not
a word mentioned of marriage, but only by it, Jurisdiction is given to the
Bishops of Fornication and Adultery, which is not Marriage, but rather
Anti-marriage; for Marriage is an Ordinance of God, Fornication and Adultery
are Ordinances of the Devil; and whereas before, the Jurisdiction of
Fornication and Adultery, as acknowledged by Coke, lib. 5.1 part. 488. was in
Leets under the name of Letherwit, or more properly Lecherwit, yet had Leets
never Jurisdiction of Marriage or Divorce, neither consequently could Bishops
have it from them. As for Articuli Cleri, and the other Statutes, there is not
a word in them concerning Marriage, nor so much as of Fornication and Adultery;
the Jurisdiction therefore pretended, was never given by any Statute.

Linwood likewise expounds the words of the Statute of Circumspecte agatis,
which gives Bishops Jurisdiction of all deadly Sins, as Fornication and
Adultery, and the like; Non intelligas de omni peccato mortali, sed de tali,
cujus punitio spectat mere ad forum Ecclesiasticum; nam si de ratione
cujuslibet peccati mortalis cognosceret Ecclesia, sic periret temporalis gladii
Jurisdictio, cum vix esset dare causam quin ratione peccati possit deferri ad
Ecclesiam.

Stat. Merton gives them no Jurisdiction.
It Is alleged, That it appears by the Statute of Merton, that Henry the Third
writ in his time to the Bishop to certify Marriage and Bastardy.

First, It is to be understood therefore, that in the time of Pope Alexander
the Third, Anno Dom. 1160. which was Anno 6. H. 2. (in whose time all
Matrimonial Causes beonged to the King's Courts.) This Constitution was made,
That Children born before Solemnization of Matrimony, where Matrimony followed,
should be as Legitimate to inherit to their Ancestors, as those that were born
after Matrimony.

It is likewise further to be known, that King John the Father of Henry the
Third, who made this Statute of Merton following, was by the then Pope Innocent
Excommunicated, King John Excommunicated.
as likewise at the same time was the Emperor Otho and the whole Kingdom of
England Interdicted, and so remained for the space of Six Years, Three Months,
and Fourteen Days, during all which time there was no Church open for Marriages
or Burials, but the poorer People were buried like Dogs in Ditches, and where
they married God knows. Through which, King John was driven to such distress by
his own Bishops and Barons, and the French assisting the Pope against him, that
he was forced, before he could get to be released of this Excommunication, to
pay the Pope vast Sums of Money, and to lay down his Crown, and Scepter,
Mantle, Sword and Ring, the Ensigns of his Royalty, at the feet of Pandolphus
the Pope's Legate, and submit himself to the Mercy and Judgment of the Church
Two Days, some write Six, it was before the Legate restored him to his Crown,
which he likewise received again on no better Terms then to hold the Kingdom of
England, and Lordship of Ireland, from the Sea of Rome, at the Annual Tribute
of a Thousand Marks Silver, and the Excommunication was not to be taken off,
but deferred till further and full satisfaction was made to the Clergy, which
was not done till Two Years after. The Bishops being hereby arrived at so great
an height of their Tyrannical Power over this King: The Bishops usurped the
exercise of Ecclesistical Laws by force over their Kings.
As that when the King having obtained absolution, had gathered a great Army to
have been revenged on the French King, the Archbishop of Canterbury told him
'twas against his Oath at his Absolution, and the King in a great passion
replied, He would not defer the Business for his pleasure, seeing Lay-judgment
appertained not to him; the Archbishop presumed to threaten his native
Sovereign, that unless he desisted, he would Excommunicate him. Note therefore,
That in the time of H. 3. who was the Eldest Son of King John, the Bishops
continued to assume the Power of Lay-judments, as well in Marriages, as they
did of shutting up of Churches, in which they were made from the Pope, to whom
they had enforced King John to surrender his Crown, and not from the King's
Writ as that Statute of Merton shows, rather a proud Renunciation, and scorn to
answer the King's Writ concerning Marriage, then any use permitted by them to
the King of the same, unless he would as his Father had done, lay down again
his Crown to them, and have Marriage judged according to the Law of the Pope:
for otherwise they tell him plainly, They neither will nor can answer his Writ,
as appears by the Statute it self, the words whereof follow. 20 H. 3. Cap. 9.
To the King's Writ of Bastardy, Whether one being born before Matrimony may
Inherit in like manner, as he that is born after Matrimony? All the Bishops
answered, That they would not nor could not answer to it, because it was
directly against the common Order of the Church, (that is meant the Romish
Church.) And all the Bishops instanted the Lords, that they would consent, that
all such as were born before Matrimony should be Legitimated, as well as they
who were born within Matrimony, as to the succession of Inheritance, for so
much as the Church accepts such for Legitimate. And all the Earls and Barons
answered with one voice, That they would not change the Laws of the Realm,
which hitherto have been used and approved. Coke 2 part. Inst. 97. It is said,
Though the Bishops are Spiritual Persons, yet in case of general Bastardy, when
the King writes to them to certify who is lawful Heir to any Lands or other
Inheritances, they ought to certify according to the Law and Custom of
England, and not according to the Roman Canons and Constitutions; yet if they
do make their Certificate according to the Canon Law, No remedy against Bishops
making Certificates contrary to the King's Laws. General Bastardy u^urped by
Bishops and not given them by Law.
and not the Law of the Land, there appears no Remedy unless such a one as is
worse then the Disease. Sir Galfred le Scrope Chief Justice, says, Before this
Statute of Merton the Party pleaded not general Bastardy, but that he was born
out of Espousals, and the Bishop ought to certify whether he were born before
Espousals or not, and according to that Certificate to proceed to Judgment
according to the Law of the Land. And the Prelates answered, That they could
not nor would not to this Writ answer, and therefore ever since special
Bastardy, viz. that the Defendant, etc. was born before Espousals, has been
Tried in the King's Courts, and general Bastardy in the Bishops Court: and
herewith agree out old Books, and the constant Opinion of the Judges ever
since. Coke 2 part Inst. 99.

It being before granted, That the Law of England cannot be changed but by an
Act of Parliament, and Magna Charta being before made, and being a Declaration
of the ancient Common Law,

First, That no Freeman was to be put out of his Freehold or Inheritance, but
per legale Judicium parium, and there being no cause of its own Nature more
Temporal, or more concerning Succession to Temporal Inheritance then Marriage,
It was contrary to Magna Charta and the Common Law, to judge the Fact of it by
any other Judges then Juries, and the Law of it by any other Judges then those
of Temporal Courts; and though the Pope and Bishops in those Superstitious
times forced the Kings many times, as they did King John, to yield his Crown,
and the Subjects to yield their Marriages and other Temporal Rights to their
Arbitrary and Saleable Sentence, for fear of Excommunication; yet does not this
any way prove that the Jurisdiction of Marriage was ever granted them by any
Law or Act of Parliament, or could be, without it were contrary to a known
Common Law and Act of Parliament, which expressly gave the trial of Temporal
Rights and Inheritances to a Legale Judicium parium, and not to any
Ecclesiastical Judges or Laws. Now therefore it being clear they had no
Jurisdiction but by Usurpation of so Temporal a Right as Marriage before this
Statute, let any who thinks he can see Nine Miles into a Millstone, once more
look into the Statute of Merton before recited, and try whether he can screw
out of it any word giving the Bishops either a Jurisdiction of Marriage, or
general Bastardy, or that this Statute ever forged so rude a Romish Tool as the
two edged Sword of general and special Bastardy, to divide the living Child, or
tear it in pieces between the Bishop and the Temporal Judge; or how it was then
consistent with a Legale Judicium parium, to expose a Child, no Alien, but the
King's Native Subject, to be tried for all he had, by a then Foraign
Ecclesiastical Law, and a Judge a sworn Canonical Subject to a Foraign Pope; or
that the wisdom of that Parliament intended to coin a Chimera of a Distinction,
without a difference of general and special Bastardy, which neither they
themselves understood, nor any Lawyers which write to this day, give any
sensibly Interpretation, or agree amongst themselves concerning it; or that
they who made the Statute to oppose the Bishops Jurisdiction of Marriage should
create a Notion of general Bastardy, which le Scrope says, was not in Esse
before to give them a new Jurisdiction; which was to change the Laws of
England, which they positively refuse in the Statute it self to change.

No Similitude of fetching the Laws of Athens to Rome, and bringing the Romish
Laws to England.
It is further alleged by Coke lib. 5.1 part 9. That as the Romans fetching
diverse Laws from Athens, yet being approved and allowed by the State there,
they were called Jus Civil Romanorum: And as the Normans borrowing all or most
of their Laws from England, yet baptized them by the name of the Laws and
Customs of Normandy. So albeit the Kings of England derived their
Ecclesiastical Laws from others, yet so many as were approved and allowed
hereby and with general consent, are aptly and rightly called the King's
Ecclesiastical Laws o. England.

To which is answered, That there is no similitude between making or changing
the Laws of the Athenians, which were Foraign Laws, to become the Laws of the
Romans, and the making or changing either the Foraign, Papal, or native
Provincial Canons, or Ecclesiastical Laws, into the King's Ecclesiastical Laws
of England.

For First, The Athenian Laws before they were made Denizons of Rome, were not
admitted in cumulo, but Articulated, and every Article examined one by one, by
the December viri, or Ten Men (as our usurped Ecclesiastical Laws were appointed
to have been done by the Statute of 25 Hen. 8.19. by the Two and Thirty Men;
and likewise in time of Edward the Sixth by others, but neither succeeded)
before the same was received for a Roman Law.

Secondly, Such Athenian Laws as were picked or garbled from the rest, were by
the Authority of the Legislative Power of Rome, both Senate and People, caused
to be writ in Twelve Tables, and inacted to be the Laws of Rome; but in England
there was never by Authority any Articulation, selecting or garbling of Canon
Laws effected, nor the same reduced into Tables Written, or Printed by any Act
of Parliament.

Ecclesiastical Laws in an unknown Language.
Thirdly, The selected Athenian Laws were written in the Roman Language, to be
understood by the People before they would be received as Roman Laws; but there
is no such thing in the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Holy-Church concerning
Marriage, or any thing else, but they all still remain in the Language of the
Beast, and can be neither called the Laws of the Church, which by the Scripture
are forbidden to be spoke in an unknown tongue, as appears 1 Cor. 14.19. It is
said, In the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that
by my voice I might teach others also, then ten thousand words in an unknown
tongue. It is as utterly unlawful therefore to make that a Law of the Church,
or an Ecclesiastical Law of Marriage, which is in the unknown Language of
Latin, as it had been to have made any form of Prayer taken from the Romish
Church, though the Pater Noster it self, the form of Prayer of the Church of
England, while it was in Latin; for the Minister would* then have been a
Barbarian to the English man, and the Englishman a Barbarian to him; and it is
as bad for the poor Englishman for his Law-sutes in Latin for a Wife in the
Court of Arches and other Ecclesiastical Courts, as it would be, if his Prayers
were again in Latin in the Church. For though he pay his Lawyers dear to plead
his Cause, there he cannot understand for his Money, whether they call him and
his Wife Rogue and Whore, or honest People; or whether the Judge by his Sentence
will give him his Wife, or take her from him, but by the implicit Faith of an
Interpreter, as let any one look on the Sentence of Divorce in Kennes Case,
Coke lib. 7.42. E. he may understand or not understand the same.

Ecclesiastical Laws are not the Laws of the Land.
Fourthly, The Athenian Laws were not obtruded on the Romans by Conquest of
their Bodies by the Temporal Sword, or their Souls by the Spiritual Sword of
Excommunication; but the Ecclesiastical Laws of Marriage have been obtruded on
England, ever since the Conquest by the superstitious Terrors, or actual force
of Excommunication, either Papal or Episcopal, and never by consent in
Parliament. The suffering of an oppression therefore, is no consent, nor an
abuse against Law, an Use, Custom, or Law; neither can a wicked Oppression,
Use, Custom, or Law, in name only, be turned into a Law of England; except by
consent in Parliament, or other humane Power: besides, it is by the very before
recited Statute of Merton declared, That the Laws of the Church are not the
Laws of England; for when the Bishop; quarreled, that the Law of England, as to
Marriage, was not according to the Law of the Church, and would have had them
changed into the Law of the Church; the Earls and Barons with one voice
answered, We will not change the Laws of England. Whereby it is plain the Laws
of England and Laws of the Church are opposite Laws, and not the same, and this
is confessed by Coke himself in the exposition of his Statute of Merton, 2 part
Inst. fol. 98. where he says, Here our Common Laws are aptly and properly
called the Laws of England; because they are appropriated to this Kingdom of
England, as most apt and fit for the Government thereof, and have no dependence
upon any Foraign Law whatsoever; no not on the Civil or Canon Law, other then
in Cases allowed by the Laws of England; and therefore he says, the Poet spoke
truly hereof, Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos: So as the Law of England
is proprium quarto modo to the Kingdom of England, therefore Foraign Precedents
are not to be objected against us; because we are not subject to Foraign Laws.
Again, that custom or use of Civil or Canon-Laws or Precedents, does not make
Civil or Canon Law the Law of England, appears by the use of Sentences of
Philosophers, and Poets, and Precedents of Historians, all as much used in
Courts of Records, of Courts of Judicature, as the Civil or Canon Law, yet does
not this use or custom make these Sentences of Philosophy and Poets, and the
like, to be the Law of England, or obligatory to the People of England, unless
such Sentences of Philosophers and Poets are selected from the rest, and
inacted, or confirmed by Act of Parliament to be hereafter the Laws of England.
And they are so far otherwise from being Laws of England, that Cardinal Woolsey
Mich. 21. H. 8. Coram Rege was Indicted, That he intended Antiquissimas Angliae
Leges penitus subvertere, and enervare, universumque hoc Regnum Angliae and
ejusdem Regni populum, Legibus imperialibus, vulgo dictis Legibus Civilibus,
and earundem Legum Canonibus, in perpetuum subjugare; and subducere etc Let any
show a sensible reason, why the Bishops and Ecclesiastical Judges, who actually
bring in the whole heap of Civil and Canon Laws to judge of the Marriages,
Filiation and Succession of the Subjects, and amongst them the new coined Law
at the Council of Trent, made when Foreign Jurisdiction was abolished; and
thereby actually deprive him of that invaluable liberty, to which every Native
Subject is born, and is confirmed to him by so many Acts of Parliament. And
those great Fundamental Acts, Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, to have
his Birthright tried per legale judicium parium, deserve not as high a censure
by Parliament, as Cardinal Woolsey had, who only intended to do the same: And
if any has any mind to consult (besides the Laws and Precedents against Foreign
Laws and Precedents.) Bod. lib. 1. of a Commonwealth fo. 107, 108. will give
him some satisfaction; Foreign Laws become not the Laws of this Land by being
used by Lawyers.
where he says, It was in most strong Terms judged, by a Decree in the Court
of Paris in the Case of Philip the Second the French King, That be was not
bound unto the customs of the Civil Law at such time, as they who were next
kindred would have redeemed of him the Country of Guyens; howbeit that many
both think, and write, the Prince to be bound to that Law; for that they think
that Law to be Common to all Nations, and not Common to any City. And yet than
the which Law, the Romans themselves in some Cases thought nothing more
unreasonable. But our Ancestors would not have, even our Subjects bound to the
Roman Laws; as we see in the Ancient Records, that Philip the Fair erecting the
Parliament of Paris, and Mompelier, declared, That they should not be bound
unto the Roman Laws. And in the erection of Universities, the Kings have always
declared, That their purpose was to have the Civil and Canon Laws in them
publicly professed, and taught to make use thereof at their discretion; but
not that the Subjects should be any way bound thereto, lest they should seem to
derogate from the Laws of their own Country, by advancing the Laws of
strangers. And for the same cause Alaricus King of the Goths forbad, upon pain
of death, any Man to allege the Roman Laws, contrary to his Decrees and
Ordinances, which M. Charles du Moulin (my Companion, and Ornament of all
Lawyers) mistaking, is therefore with him very angry, and in reproach calls
him therefore barbarous: howbeit that nothing was therein by Alaricus decreed
or done, but that which every wise Prince would of good right have decreed and
done: For Subjects will so long both remember, and hope for the Government of
Strangers, as they are Governed by their Laws. The like Edict there is of King
Charles the Fair, and an old Decree of the Court of Paris, whereby we are
expressly forbidden to allege the Laws of the Romans, against the Laws and
Customs of our Ancestors. Yea the King of Spain also has, upon Capital pain,
forbidden any Man to allege the Roman Laws in confirmation of their own Laws,
(as Oldrad writes.) And albeit there was nothing in the Laws and Customs of
their Country, which differed from the Roman Laws; yet such is the force of
that Edict, that all men may understand, that the Judges in deciding of the
Subjects Causes, were not bound unto the Roman Laws: And therefore much less
the Prince himself, who thought it a thing dangerous, to have his Subjects
bound unto strange Laws. And worthy he is to be accounted a Traitor, that dares
to oppose strange Laws, and strange Decrees against the Laws of his own Prince.
In which doings, when the Spaniards did too much offend, Stephen King of Spain
forbad the Roman Laws to be at all taught in Spain, as Polycrates writes:
Which was more straightly provided for by King Alphonsus the Tenth, who
commanded the Magistrates and Judges to come unto the Prince himself, and as
often as there was nothing written in the Laws of their Country concerning the
matter in Question. Wherein Baldus is mistaken, when he writes the Italians to
be bound to the Roman Laws; but the French no otherwise than so far, as they
should seem unto them to agree with Equity and Reason. For the one is as little
bound as the other; howbeit that Italy, Spain, the Countries of Province,
Savoy, Languedoc, and Lyonnois, use the Roman Laws more then other People: And
that Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor, caused the Books of the Roman Laws to
be published and taught: the greatest part whereof have yet no place in Italy,
and much less in Germany: But there is much difference betwixt a Right, and a
Law: for a Right still without command respects nothing but that which is
good and upright; but a Law imports a Commandment; for the Law is nothing
else but the Commandment of a Sovereign, using of his Sovereign Power.
Wherefore then as a Sovereign, is not bound unto the Laws of the Greeks, nor of
any other stranger, whatsoever he be, no more is he bound unto the Roman Laws,
more then that they are conformable unto the Law of Nature, which is the Law
whereunto (says Pindarus) all Kings and Princes are subject. From which we are
not to except, either the Pope or the Emperor, (as some pernicious Flaterers
do) saying That those two, viz. the Pope, and the Emperor, may of Right,
without cause, take unto themselves the Goods of their Subjects.

Foreign Laws cannot be baptized with the name of the King's Laws, without act
of Parliament.
As to what is mentioned of baptizing Foreign Ecclesiastical Laws, by the name of
the King's Ecclesiastical Laws of England, he seems still to mistake, and puts
baptizing by the name, where it should have been confirmation by the name; and
that confirmation too to be given, not by the Bishops, but the Parliament.
Besides there is not de facto that name given; for the Ecclesiastical Court is
kept in the Bishop's name, and not in the King's name. And the Bishop takes all
the profits, and not the King. Fain he would mend the matter, and says, That a
Leet is kept in the Lord's name, and he has the profits, yet it is the King's
Court. It might better been said, it was once the King's, before he gave it or
sold it to the Lord of the Leet; as are many Lands, not being Ancient
Crown Lands. The King purchases, but if he sell again such Lands for valuable
considerations, the propriety, as well as the name of such Lands is then in the
buyer, and not in the King. Therefore, though he has set out his Book as
baptized, both in Latin and English, by the name of de jure Regis
Ecclesiastico, and of the King's Ecclesiastical Laws; yet with due Reverence to
the opinion of so great a Father of the Law, it may be said there appears none,
either to baptize or confirm the name, nor any Godfather to it but himself.
Neither will the Title of the King's Temporal Laws set upon Magna Charta, which
gives that liberty to every Subject, of Trial of his Birthright per legale
judicium parium, be consistent with the Title of the King's Ecclesiastical
Laws, which take it away, and give it to a Trial by Certificate of the Bishop.

Coke alleged, and Precedents cited, That Edward the Confessor, William the
First, Henry the First, Henry the Third, Edward the First, Edward the Second;
and all English Kings have Governed and Ruled both the Kingdom, and the Holy
Church; and have given Jurisdiction to Abbots, Priors and Bishops, and have
granted prohibitions, when they transcended the bounds of their Jurisdictions,
and that Reges sacro oleo uncti, sunt spiritualis Jurisdictionis capaces, but
still this is nihil ad rhombum, nor pertinent to make good the Name or Title he
has set his Book of the King's Ecclesiastical Laws: For there is a great
difference, if he had Entitled it de jurisdictione Regis Ecclesiastica; for the
King's Jurisdiction, and the King's Laws are clean diverse things. And there is
a great difference where he grants Jurisdiction to Ecclesiastical Persons, and
where he grants them by what Laws they shall exercise that Jurisdiction; for
the King's of England have Anciently granted Jurisdiction and Commissions to
Ecclesiastical persons, as Bishops and Priests, to be Judges in the
King's Bench, Chancery, and other Courts, yet could they not grant them power
to judge by any other Laws than the Laws of England, except by Act of
Parliament. Then as to granting prohibitions, where the King had not, or could
not by Law grant them Jurisdiction, proves nothing that any King did, or could
by Law, grant them Jurisdiction of general Bastardy, without Act of Parliament;
or that there was any Law or Act of Parliament, which gave them Jurisdiction of
general Bastardy, because the King's Courts durst not grant prohibitions for
general Bastardy. For in those superstitious times, neither the King nor Judges
dared provoke their Excommunication, and therefore at the making of the Statute
of Merton, when the contest was between the Ecclesiastical and Secular Power,
which of them should give the Law to Marriage: The Temporal Judges for fear of
their Excommunication, took only, like the Jackal, what the Lion refused, and
left them, which they called special Bastardy. So, quod non capit Christus,
capit fiscus, which is intended of the false Christ; for the true Christ took
nothing from it, but paid tribute to it. Besides, if many Jurisdictions should
judge by other Laws, this would be destructive both to the King and Subject.
Though the King therefore give the Sword, he cannot change the Balance, as is
in effect confessed by Coke himself 3 pt. Inst. fol. 120. in his Exposition of
the Statute 27 E. 3. of Praemunire: where he says, The right of King and
Subjects not triable per alias Leges, or aliud Examen then the laws of the Land.
If Freehold and Inheritance, Goods or Chat^les, Debts or Duties, wherein the
King and Subjects have a right or property, should be judged per aliam legem,
which he mentioned before to be Civil or Canon Law; And other Trial which he
makes to be any Trial, except by Jury, or be drawn ad aliud examen; These three
mischiefs endeavored to be prevented in the said Statute, would necessarily
follow, viz. Disherison of the King and his Crown: the Disherison of all his
People, and the undoing of the Common Law: And fol. 121. he farther says, Some
have made a question, whether since the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was
acknowleged in the Crown, an Ecclesiastical Judge, holding Plea of a Temporal
Matter belonging to the Common Law, does incur the danger of a Praemunire?
Though hereof is no question at all, yet lest any Man might be led into an
Error in a Case so dangerous, we will clear this point by Reason, Precedent,
and Authority. The Reason holds still to draw the Matter ad aliud examen etc.
And he cites before several Precedents; and says, The reason of all these
Cases is, because it draws matters Triable at Common Law ad aliud examen, and
to be discussed per aliam legem.

Peter du Moulin that famous Protestant Divine writes, That there was a a Book
printed in the former Age, entitle The Canons of the Apostles, Antichristian.
whereby the Temporal power of the Pope is wholly taken away. And the sixth
Canon expressly forbids a Bishop to meddle in Civil affairs. And in the 84th
Canon are these words, A Bishop that meddles in War, or seeks to obtain these
two things, that is to say, the Empire of Rome, and the Sacerdotal Government,
let him be deposed; for the things of Caesar are to be given to Caesar, and the
things of God to God. And that one Arnold who Preached this Doctrine, That the
Pope had no Jurisdiction, nor any thing to do with the Temporal affairs with
great applause; was in the year 1155 made a Martyr, and most cruelly burnt at
Rome, by the order of Pope Adrian. And this agrees with the Testimony of Christ
himself, Bishops Judge.
not only as to Jurisdiction of Marriage and Legitimation, but all other
matters wherein Temporal propriety comes in question, that he refused the
Jurisdiction of it; as appears Luke 12.13. And one of the company said unto
him, Master, speak unto my Brother, that he divide the inheritance with me. And
he said unto him, Man, who made me a Judge or Divider over you? It appears
therefore, the Episcopal Jurisdiction of judging or dividing Temporal goods in
the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Courts, came not from Christ, but was usurped
by Antichrist, by force of Fire and Faggot, and is from him derived to Bishops
and Ecclesiastical Courts; to the destruction of the rights of Princes, and the
liberty and propriety of the people, who ought only to stand to Caesar's
Judgment Seat, and to be tried per legale judicium parium for the same.

According to this principle Henry the first (Pope Paschal seeking to incroach
on the liberty of the Kingdom) writes unto him in this manner, Netum habeat
sanctitas vestra, quod me vivente, auxiliante deo, dignitates and usus Regni
nostri Angliae, non imminuentur, and si ego, quod absit, in tanta me dejectione
ponerem Optimates mei and totus Angliae populus id nullo modo paterentur. Let
your Holiness know, that by God's help, while I live, the Dignities and Customs
of our Kingdom of England shall not be diminished, and though I (which God
forbid) should suffer my self to fall into so dejected a condition, my Nobles
and whole People of England will never suffer it.

H. 8. c. 19. which gives power to the King to appoint 32 persons to examine the
Canons and to continue such as they think fit, and abridge the rest: It is
provided, That such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodical
Provincials, being already made; which be not contrariant or repugnant to the
Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the
King's Prerogative Royal, shall now still be used and executed, as they were
before the making of this Act, till such time as they be viewed, searched, or
otherwise ordered and determined by the said 32 persons, or the most part of
them, which Statute is revived 1 Eliz. 1. To which is answered, That 1. what is
contrariant or repugnant to the Law of God, is made void, without this proviso;
and the assuming the Jurisdiction of marriage, and dividing Inheritances
ensuing thereby, is before proved to be Antichristian, for Spiritual persons
who allege themselves Successors of Christ; and much more therefore the
assuming the Legislative power, or giving Laws or Canons for the same. 2. It is
shown likewise before, that the same power of Legislation and Jurisdiction
concerning marriage, was usurped by Fire and Faggot, and Excommunication, and
therefore their Canons concerning marriage are not intended, or if they were,
yet this proviso cannot Lawfully preserve such usurpations so contrary to the
Law of God. 3. It is manifest that all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and Laws,
and Canons of marriage are contrariant, and repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and
Customs of this Realm, as, First the Canons then made were, That marriage
should be a Sacrament, and thereby draw to it self Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
which latter Acts of Parliament establishing the Protestant Religion, does
thereby abolish the being of marriage a Sacrament; and consequently the
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical incident to it as a Sacrament, and the Canons which
make it so, or give any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction relating to the same. 4.
All Ecclesiastical Canons of marriage are contrariant and repugnant to Magna
Charta, and draw the Subject from his liberty, propriety, and Birthright ad
alias leges, aliud examen, and aliud judicium, then legale judicium parium:
which Magna Charta of liberties to the Subject, has been confirmed by several
Kings succeeding, above thirty times.

England, and so long toleration gives it.

To which may be answered, That by the Canon Laws Malus usus abolendus: besides
there was never any use of Jurisdiction of marriage in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, otherwise then in reference to the same, as being a Sacrament; which
being now taken away, cessante causa and ratione legis, cessat and lex. So
likewise, where the thing, which a Use or Custom concerns, is but changed, the
Use and Custom vanishes: as if by custom a Rate Tith be paid for two Fulling
Mills in one House, and one of them is changed to a Corn Mill, the custom is
gone. But besides, this being malus usus, is of it self void, and were it never
so long used, can never grow to have the obligation of the Common Law, or to be
thereby the Common Law: As was well answered by a young Gentleman, when
complaint was made in Parliament, against the wrongful encroachments of the
Ecclesiastics; and they alleged for themselves, That they had used and
accustomed, time out of mind, to practice what was excepted against. He
replied, So have Thieves at Shooter's Hill used, time out of mind, to Rob
there, yet the Law allows no such prescription, nor does the forced Toleration
of their wickedness, by such people as were not able to resist their Robberies,
oblige Successors to follow their precedents.

Reasons against Ecclesiastical Laws concerning Marriage.
1. Ecclesiastical Laws of Marriage came from the Devils etc.
The first Reason against Ecclesiastical Laws is in regard of the wicked
Authors, for all the Laws by which Bishops judge Marriage, Filiation, Aliment
and Succession, were invented by Demons, Pagan Gods and Goddesses, Magicians,
Aruspices, Astrologers, South-sayers; Priests of Priapus, and Venus, Jupiter,
Juno, Cybele, Flora, Diana, common Prostitutes, Popish Saints, Popish Councils,
Popes or Papists. The Canon prohibiting and nulling all Marriage, without a
Priest in a Temple, except by the Pope's good License or Dispensation, was made
by the Pope and the Council of Trent, as appears, Ego Council. 147. pt. 5. and
Council. 197. pt. 6. as a main Pillar to support their tottering Kingdom,
against the growing strength of the then Lutheran Protestants; All marriage
Priests instituted in the Mysteries of Priapus.
and they took their pious precedents from the old Pagan Priests of Priapus and
Venus, and they had it from their Damons or Devils. That all the ancient Pagan
Priests were first initiated in the Mysteries of Priapus, before they could be
capable to execute the Priests office, cannot be denied; and is testified by
diverse Authors, and particularly by Cornelius Agrippa de van. Sci. p. 738. in
these words, Sordidissimus Priapus pro Deo habitus, hunc coluerunt primi illi
Religionum artifices Chaldaei, Aegyptii, Assyrii, Babylonii, Ar^bes, Scythae,
Aethiopes. ac perinde tota Africa, Asia and Europa: nec fas erat ullum
sacerdotem fieri, qui Priapi sacris non erat initiatus. Hic est ille Belphegor,
idolum omnium antiquissimum, quod and Chamos dictum est a Chamo filio Noe. The
filthy Priapus was esteemed a God, and was worshipped by those first founders of
Religion, the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Arabians,
Scythians, Phoenicians, Ethiopians, and even all Africa, Asia, and Europe:
neither was it lawful for any to be a Priest, unless he were first initiated in
the Rites of Priapus. This is that Belphegor of all other Idols the most
ancient, which is likewise called Chamos of Cham, the Son of Noah. Now this was
the Law of these Priests, for the wicked ends which are after mentioned.

Dispensation with Incest came from Demons.
The same, or a worse initiation had those ancient Priests called Magi of the
Persians; for they, before they could be initiated, were to lie with their
Mother, Sister, and Daughter. As to the Mother, Xanthus teaches in magicis, Vt
magus ex matre and nato nascatur, oportet. On which some passages collected by
Saidus Batricides Patriarch of Alexandria, out of the Oriental Monuments,
Language and Characters, concerning Nimrod the Giant, King of Babylon, are
translated by Seldom, de jure not. 624. viz. That when Nimrod had observed the
shape of a Crown to be in the Clouds, he caused a Crown to be made, and set it
on his Head; whence it was reported amongst the vulgar, that he received a
Crown from Heaven. And he is likewise said to be the first who worshipped the
Fire, for he saw fire in the East, ascending out of the Earth; and thereupon
drew over to discern it, and worshipped it. And then appointed a Priest to
offer in the same place Incense to it, and from that time the Priests called
Magi began to worship the fire, and the name of the first Priest, whom Nimrod
appointed for that office, was Andshan, to whom a Demon out of the mid^st of
the fire, spoke these words; No Man can be consecrated, or understand my Sacred
Rites, unless he first lie with his Mother, and Sister, and his Daughter. And
Andshan did according as the Demon taught him, and from that time, such Magi
as performed the office of Priests, used to lie with their Mothers, Sisters and
Daughters; and Andshan was the first who began the custom.

That these Priests of Priapus had their Doctrine from the Devil, appears by
the use they put it to, for these were Priests, who bringing the Women to their
Sacrifices, and Temples, drew the Israelites to Idolatry, as appears Numb.
25.1. where it is said, And the people began to commit Whoredom with the
Daughters of Moab. And they called the people unto the Sacrifices of their
Gods, and the people did eat, and bowed down to their Gods. And Israel joined
himself to Baal Peor: from the Hill Peor, where was the Temple called Beth
Pe^r, and mentioned Deuteronomy. 3.29. So what Priests and Gods they were, who first
drew Women to public Sacrifices, and Temples appears by this. It Is before
shown, that Laws tending to so much uncleanness, as drawing marriages of Women
to Temples, testify they come from unclean Spirits, and not from God, who is
Holiness it self. I shall, as to that, add only one more History of a Person
who was in as great reputation for holiness and learning, and greater than any
Pope, which is Doctor Dee; yet was he deluded by the Devil, appearing first in
the likeness of an Archangel, and then of Christ himself; and there is no
other mark to prove him the Devil, but the uncleanness of the Doctrine he
taught, though in most Angelical, yea Arch-Angelical Language. And this is
thought by all a sufficient proof; and the same argument therefore of the
Uncleanness, Covetousness, and Ambition of this Law, proves that the Popes, who
have been diverse of them as great Magicians as the Babylonish Andshan before
mentioned, Plato's Demon of Community of Women.
and other Magi had it from the Devil. The first Law of Community of Women was
given by Plato's Demon, in his private Oracle, endeavored to have been
revived by the like Demon in a private Oracle to Dr. Dee.

The History of the Devil appearing in shape of Christ to Doctor Dee, and
tempting him, and his Seer Kelly, to a Covenant of Community of Wives.
Dr. Dee's Demon of Community of Women.
Anno Dom. 1583 or thereabouts; Dr. Dee had two precious Stones, or Crystals,
which he called the seeing Stones, given him by Spirits, whom he believed to be
good Angels. And Edward Kelly had the gift of seeing all Apparitions made in
those Crystals or precious Stones, and of reading and interpreting whatsoever
seemed to be written in them. After long converse by Dr. Dee, with these
Spirits, and a multitude of Apparitions represented, and some Discourses of
secrets, and some Miracles shown with the same; The Spirit in show appoints
to translate the gift of seeing from Kelly to Arthur, the eldest Son of Dr.
Dee; of the burden of which Kelly desired to be freed, but the success followed
not to Arthur, but still continued to Kelly; and Madimi an Apparition, who
appeared to Dr. Dee himself, at the beginning of his acquaintance with Spirits,
in the shape of a Woman appeared to Kelly in the Air (being really unwilling to
translate his office to Arthur) and other Spirits with her in an unseemly
behavior, and he is therefore again desired by Dr. Dee to see again in the
same.

Ed. Kelly. There appears Madimi, she opens all her apparel and her self
all naked, and shows her shame also.


Ed. Kelly. Fie on the Devil, avoid hence with thy filthiness, etc.


Madi. In the name of God, why find you fault with me?


Dr. Dee. Because your yesterdays doings and words are provocations to sin, and
unmeet for any godly Creature to use.


Madi. What is sin?


Dr. Dee. To break the Commandments of God.


Madi. Set that down.


Madi. If the self same God give you a new Commandment, taking away the former
form of sin, which he limited by the Law, what remains then?


Dr. Dee. If the self same God that gave the Law to Moses, and gave his new
Covenant by Christ, who sealed it by his blood, and had his Witnesses very
many, and his Apostles instructed by his holy Spirit who instructed us in all
cleanness in words and works, yea and in thoughts, if by the same God those
former Laws and Doctrines be abrogated, and the sufficient proof and testimony
may be had, that it is the same God, then must the same God be obeyed.


Madi. A Privilege granted does not abrogate a Law, but confirm it, etc.


Here Arthur was smitten in a swoon, and Edward Kelly saw one in a long
White-Garment make, as if he would strike him, and he became very sick for the
time.

Madi. Whatsoever the Spirit of God teaches as from him, though it appear sin
before man, is righteousness before him. Therefore assure your selves,
whatsoever is seen and heard amongst you, is from above; and it is a sign and
testimony this day before you, for I that touched thy Son might have taken away
his breath.


After other passages, Dr. Dee desired the Seer Kelly to enquire of certain
words Madimi had spoken the day before. That they two had their Wives in such
sort, as they might use them in common; whether she intended Spiritual or
Carnal Community?

Ed. Kelly. Upon a scroll like the edg of a Carpet, I see is written De Vtroque
Loquor.


Dr. Dee. The one is expressly against the Commandment of God, neither can I by
any means assent to consent to that Doctrine, and for my help in that verity, I
call down the Power of Almighty God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, and all the
good Angels, his faithful Ministers, to assist me in the defense of the
faithful obedience to the Law of the Gospel, and of his Church. Assist me O
Christ, assist me O Jesu, assist me O Holy Spirit.


Ed. Kelly. It appears written on a White Crucifix, My Grace is greater then
the Commandment, for my Grace is such, that Madmen shall attain Blessedness.
Verily I say unto you, If I command a man to kill his Brother, and he does it
not, he is the Child of Sin and Death, etc.


Dr. Dee. Hereupon we were in great amazement, and grief of mind, that so
impure a Doctrine should proceed from such, as I, from the beginning, and
hitherto had judged, and undoubtedly esteemed good Angels, and had unto Edward
Kelly offered my Soul as a pawn to indemnifie Edward Kellys crediting of them,
as the good and faithful Ministers of Almighty God. But now my heart was sore
afflicted on many causes, and Mr. Edward Kelly had as he now thought he had, a
just cause of leaving dealing with them any more; and his Prayer to God had
been as he said of a long time, that he might have power to do it. Afterward I
made some Declaration to our Wives of this our great grief, by reason of the
Command laid upon us, to use Matrimonial Acts between us four in common, which
thing was strange to the Women, and they hoped of some more comfortable issue
of the matter, and so for that time I left off.


After Edward Kelly had been four hours in seeing new Apparitions, giving him
admonition to receive the same Doctrine, with threatening of Judgment upon us,
if we should not; and many other things told me. We departed each to Bed, where
I found my Wife awake, attending to hear some new matter of me. And we being
alone, I then told her, and said, Jane I see there is no other remedy but as
has been said, of our cross Matching, so it must needs be done. Thereupon she
fell a weeping and trembling for a quarter of an hour, and I pacified her as
well as I could, and so in the fear of God, and beleiving of his Admonishments,
did persuade her, that she showed her self prettily resolved to be content for
God's sake, and his secret purposes, to obey the Heavenly admonishment But
Edward Kelly who had diverse other Apparitions made to him in his own Chamber,
remained notwithstanding in his purpose of forsaking, and utterly discrediting
these Creatures.

A Spirit calling himself Raphael the Archangel, there speaks to them who
were not satisfied with the Testimony of Madimi.

Raphael. Dear is thy Wife, more dear is Wisdom, and most dear ought I to be
unto thee: Thou being Elected tremblest, and by doubting sinnest, all these
things are lawful unto you, I admonish you as the Children of God, to consider
your Vocation and the love of God toward you, and not to prefer your Wisdom
before the Wisdom of the Highest, whose Mercy is so great toward you.
Consider, that if he find you obstinate, the Pl^gues of heinous Sinners, and
the contemners of the gifts of God, shall fall upon you. Therefore show your
selves lovers of him that has led you and covered you with a mighty Shield, or
shortly look for the reward of those who contemn the Wisdom and Majesty of the
Highest. I Raphael counsel you to make a Covenant with the Highest, and to
esteem his Wing more then your lives. After some little discouse and conference
there, they went to Bed. April 20th. 1587.

April 21th. 1587. John Dee, Edward Kelly, Jane. Dee, and Jane Kelly, promise
to God though above their Carnal reason, in Abraham-like faith and obedience,
to subscribe a Covenant to him to have one another in common.

April 22th. 1587. Edward Kelly having on further consideration, a new
reluctance concerning this promiscuous Matrimony, makes a Declaration in
writing that he would from that forward no farther meddle therein.

April 24th. There are further Prayers made to God, desiring a further
manifestation of his pleasure concerning this new Doctrine so contrary to the
Laws formerly promulgated by him.

A great flame of Fire appears in the principal stone standing on the Table
before Edward Kelly, and behold one suddenly seems to come into the South
Window of the Chapel, right against Edward Kelly (but before that, the stone
was heaved up an handful high, and set down again well) which thing Edward
Kelly did think signified some strange matter toward. Then after, the man, who
came in at the Window, seemed to have his nether parts in a Cloud, and with
spread abroad Arms to come toward Edward Kelly, at which sight he shrunk back
somewhat, and then that Creature took up between both his hands the principal
stone and frame of Gold, and mounted up away as he came, Edward Kelly caught
at it, but could not touch it, at which thing so taken and carried away, and at
the sight thereof Edward Kelly was in great fear and trembling, but Dr. Dee was
glad and well pleased. A Fire next appears in the lesser stone, left behind on
the Table, and a man in the fire with flaxen hair hanging down on him, being
naked to the Paps, with spots of blood upon him, and in the shape of Christ.

Christ. If I had intended to have overthrown you or brought you to confusion,
or suffered you to be led into temptation beyond your strength and power, then
had the Seas long since swallowed you, yea there had not a Soul lived amongst
you. But the Law and tidings of Gladness in Mankind, are both grounded in me. I
am the beginning and the end, behold I was even my self the figure of Misery
and Death for your Sins, why therefore disdain you to be figured after me? And
as I have made you the figure of two People to come, so have I likewise
sanctified you in an holy Ordinance, giving you the first fruits of the time to
come, contrary to my self; I teach you nothing, for this Commandment is not to
be given to Mortal men, but is given to you to manifest your Faith. I I am the
first and the last, and I will be Shepherd overall, that the Kingdom of my
Father may come, and that my Spirit may be on all flesh, where there shall be
no Law, nor need of light; for I my self will be their light for ever. I am
Holy and Holiness it self, and out of me comes no unclean thing, and if there
be any of you that seeks a Miracle at my hands, and beleiveth in my words,
let him or her present themselves here next Monday, and he shall perceive that
I was the Judge of Abiram, and the God of Abraham.


May 3d. being Sunday, 1587. Stylo Novo, A Covenant with God is drawn into
form, that according to his new Commandment they will by Abraham-like-faith and
obedience, use Matrimonial Acts with one another in common, and was subscribed
by John Dee, Edward Kelly, Jane Dee, and Joan Kelly, at Trebon-Castle. The
Covenant being thus formed, written and subscribed by the parties on their
parts, it was thought necessary by them that God should make some manifestation
on his part, that he would accept it in that form of words it was written; and
to that end Dr. Dee with Edward Kelly, went to the Chapel to the South Table,
and there Dr. Dee says, he first praying to Almighty God, Creator of Heaven
and Earth, to increase his Faith, and open the eyes of his Heart. He read over
the Covenant verbatim, before the Divine Majesty and his holy Angles. After a
quarter of an hour Madimi appears.

Madi. Pepigistis?


Dr. Dee. Pepigimus.


A Voice. Ratum est, perumpite; sunt vobis omnia communia Dei non hominis,
estote promissa quae sunt, possidete vobis distinata: A ternus sum.


Edward Kelly declared formerly his opinion, That all Spirits appearing in the
shape of Women were evil Spirits, and not good, which is seems made him not
again acquiesce in his apparition of Madimi: he therefore May 20th. required
again the writing subscribed, to expunge his name from it; but having got it,
he cut it into two equal parts, and kept that part wherein were his own and his
Wives names, and returned the other to Dr. Dee and his Wife: But afterward
Madimi did with her finger drawn on the two papers make them whole again, etc.

Then an apparition is made of Christ standing in a great Globe of Fire with a
Purple Robe.

Christus. Who sits on the Cherubims, etc. As I humbled my self to Death,
wherein the Unity between my Congregation and me was before my Father
perpetually sealed, etc. So be you content to be the figures of the things that
are to come by you, that it may be a perpetual Testimony before the Heavens,
and before Men, of your perfect and sound faith. And thou, even thou, who have
tore in pieces this Morning this Covenant which thou have made with me, behold
the time shall come that thou shall be torn in pieces thy self, and I will turn
away my face from thee for a time, etc. But because thy mind was never to
forsake me, even so shall thou never be forsaken of me. Take heed of the
Tempter, thou made a Covenant with me in paper, which thou can not by
tearing the same put out, for my Register is Eternal. He that pawneth his Soul
for me, loses it not; and he that dies for me, dies to Eternal life; Behold
you shall both as Lambs be brought forth before men in your later days, and
shall be slain, and your Bodies tossed to and fro, but I will revive you again.


Dr. Dee. After which, as I and Edward Kelly walked out at the new stairs into
the new Orchard along the little River, to view the small Fish, and returning
to the fore-stairs again, Edward Kelly saw two as high as my Son Arthur,
fighting with Swords by the Riverside, and the one said to the other, Thou
have beguiled me. Then I at length said unto them, Can I take up the matter
between you? One said, Yea that you can: In what is it said I? Then said he, I
sent a thing to thy Wife by my Man, and this Fellow has taken it from him;
they fought s^re: at length, he that had it, was wounded in the Thigh, and it
seemed to bleed, afterward he that was wounded did bring a yellow square thing
out of his bosom, then I guessed it to be my stone which was carried away, as
is mentioned before; suddenly he seemed to have been out of sight, and to be
come again, he threatened the other that had wounded him, and said, He would be
even with him, he asked whether he had lain it under the right Pillow; at
length they both went one after the other into a little Willow-Tree-Body, on
the right hand next the new Stairs into the Garden, the Tree seemed to cleave
or open, and they to go in.

Hereupon we went away, and I coming to my Chamber found my Wife lying on her
Bed, where I lay yesternight, and there I lifted up the right Pillow on which
she lay, and there I found my precious stone that was before taken away by
Madimi, whereat Edward Kelly greatly wondered, and doubted the verity of the
show, but I and my Wife rejoiced, thanking God.

Saturday May 23th. Proeces ad Deum fundebam, etc. And then we requested, That
the Act of Obedience performed according to our Faith, conceived of our
Vocation from the Almighty and Eternal God of Heaven and Earth, might be
accepted, which is by Apparition and Voice accepted and blessed.


So hence none doubts to conclude, that the Spirits which here appeared and
assumed the names and shape of an Archangel and Christ were Devils
transformed, and neither good Angels nor Christ, because they tempted to
Adultery and Uncleanness.

Bishops set up Community of Women for Commutation money.
The like Community is set up by Ecclesiastical Laws and Bishops, by pardoning
for Money the deflouring and desertion of as many Virgins as you will, so you
marry them not before a Priest in a Temple; and by the Popish Clergy who have
liberty for a small rate or Taxa Camerae, to lie with as many Women-Virgins or
Wives as they will, so they marry them not before a Priest in a Temple.

So the Authors of the Bishops Certificate of Filiation, were the Demons of
Hamon Delphos, and other Oracles, Bishops Certificate of Filiation.
where it appears it was the Custom amongst the Heathens, when any Son doubted
or knew not his Father, to consult the Devils Oracle, as appears by the example
of Alexander the Great, Oedipus and others, and the Devil gave them their
Response by his Archbishop or Priest, and if they went not to him in person,
but sent by Certificate in writing, which is the same with the Certificate of
the Bshop.

So the Law of Fictions of Marriage by intention of the Mind only, without
carnal knowledge of the Body, Consensus non Concubitus.
and verba de praesenti without the Act, and Consensus non Concubitus facit
matrimonium came first from Cecrops an Idolatrous King of Athens, and was since
revived in imitation of him by Idolatrous Popes: and the same Law was confirmed
by the Pagan Goddess Juno, and the Popish Mother of St. Kentegern, both got
with Child without a Man, as after more at large mentioned, to the intent
Husbands might not be Unbelievers, if their Wives were got with Child without
them, seeing it is sufficient if they had a good intention in their Mind, and
spoke Verba de praesenti, and there was Consensus non Concubitus.

So the Law was first invented by Aruspices, South-sayers and Astrologers, of
prohibiting Times and Seasons of Marriage; for the G^eeks, Romans, Times when
Marriages go out and come in.
Chinoys, and other Heathen Nations believed their Marriages could not be
happy, unless the Birds and the Stars were consulted for a lucky day and lucky
hour, to which purpose is that of Juvenal, Veniet cum signatoribus Auspex, and
of Ovid, Mense malum Maio nubere vulgus ait; and they declared to the parties
the unlucky Ides, Kalends, and all the dismal times and days, which got the
Cheats much money from the foolish people, and to continue the same Trade the
same was revived by Popes and Councels of Laodicea, Iterda and Trent, by their
prohibitions of Marriage in times of Advent, Septuagesima and Rogation.

Pope Soter made the Law prohibiting Marriage without delivery of the Woman by
the Father, and receiving a Benediction from the Priest; Delivery by the
Father, and Benediction by the Priest.
yet Christ says, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, (and
though a Father may deny to give his Daughter so liberal a Portion if she marry
without his consent as he would give with it, yet can he not prohibit her to
marry); and when Rachel said to Jacob, Give me children, or I die: and he in
anger replied, Am I God; he thereby shows that it is not the Benediction of the
Priest, or Pilgrimages to Saints cause fertility or sterility, but Children are
the gift of God.

Marriage within the fourth degree.
Pope Calixtus made the Law prohibiting Marriage within the fourth degree,
either of Consanguinity or Affinity, and others extend the same as well to
Spiritual as Carnal kindred.

The Law prohibiting Marriage without License, was first set up by the Priests
of Priapus and Venus: License to marry.
And the Priests of Diana her self, could no more live without License-money
for Marriage, then those of Venus; which made the Virgins of Greece, before
they presumed to marry, humbly to beg the Goddess's pardon, that they left her
Nunnery, for which they brought good Fees and Offerings to the Priests. Power
of the Pope translated to the Archbishop of Canterbury.


The Law of Dispensations, Legitimations, and Confirmations of Marriages, and
Children, and the whole Papal power therein translated to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, by 25 H. 8.21. was made by Papists in a time of Popery.

The Law of Banes was invented by Popes and revived by the late long
Parliament, Banes.
and the Laws of New England, only translating the Marriage to the Magistrate
instead of the Priest.

Marriage without a Priest or Temple.
The Law prohibiting marriage without a Priest and a Temple, was invented by the
Priests of Priapus and Venus, and revived by the Pope and Council of Trent.

In all these Ecclesiastical Laws of Marriage, the two Strumpets, Theodora of
Justinian, Strumpets.
and Theodora of Pope Sergius, and that impudent Queen Marozia, and other
Strumpets of the Popes had a great hand. We are like therefore to have
excellent Laws in the Bishops Courts, and Justice for Marriage, Fillation, and
Succession, while the Laws of such Legislators continue.

All Laws prohibitory of Marriage or Meats came from the Devil.
Lastly, There needed not to those who believe the Scripture, this Recital of so
many wicked persons, to be Authors of this mentioned Ecclesiastical Laws; for
it is manifest by the Scripture it self, that all Laws prohibitory of Marriage
or Meats (they being things not indifferent, but necessary for the preservation
of Humane Nature) in the least Ceremony or Circumstance, where they are not
prohibited by the Law of God, came from the Devil, as appears, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2,
3. Now the Spirit says expressly, That in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils,
speaking lies in Hypocrisy; having their consciences seared with an hot Iron,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving. I conclude therefore, that all the
forementioned Ecclesiastical Laws, prohibiting marriage, without their Popish
Ceremonies or Circumstances not appointed by God, came from the Devil, or many
Devils.

The Final causes of the Ecclesiastical Laws concerning Marriage invented by
Demons, and the Priests of Priapus and Venus, were Lust, Covetousness and
Ambition of the Priests.
The second Reason against Ecclesiastical Laws, is the wicked ends for which
they were invented, which were no other but only to satisfy the insatiable
Lust, Covetousness, and Ambition of Priests.

As to which the Indian Histories mention, That in the Kingdom of Molabar,
neither the King or People are allowed to have a Wife, Luft, Covetousness,
Ambition, of Priests, the only ends of Ecclesiastical Laws of Marriage.
unless sanctified for him by the first nights Lodging of the holy Bramin, who
is their Priest: which is the reason that there the King's Sons succeed not to
the Kingdom, but their Sister's Sons; for they say they know not the Father,
but they know the Mother. Linschot. Little better is done in Catholic Kingdoms
often times, though not openly, yet secretly, by those unchristian Bramins, the
Cardinal Confessors; and it is common in Italy for Catholics to jeer one
another, that their Children are Fills de Prestre.

The Benyan Indians give their Priests the first fruits of their Wives, and
think the Marriage will not be blessed without it. The Southern Americans in
diverse parts, think it a great Devotion to offer their Daughters, to be first
defloured by the Priest. The Algier Mahometans, and the people of other parts
of Africa, think it a meritorious work, to prostitute their Wives to their
Morabates or holy Saints, whom they esteem their Prophets. And Leo Afer, who
was that Countryman, tells a story of one of these holy Prophets, who came to
a Town, and espying a handsome Woman, being a person of very good quality and
great esteem in the Town; yet the Prophet took her being at a Bath, and lay
with her openly in the concourse of a great multitude of people, who applauded
the Fact as a great honor to the Lady; and many of them ran to congratulate
her Husband, how happy he was to have so holy a Man partner with him in his
Wife: and when some of the better sort of people, whose discretion was a degree
above the common superstition of their Religion, went and informed the
Magistrates of the Town, of the foul and shameful act was committed by a
Vagabond Prophet, and they sent their officers to apprehend him; the people
rose upon them, and would have knocked out the Brains both of Officers and
Magistrates, had they not speedily desisted. Carpenter reports from a Monk of
Doway, That not long ago it was a custom in Biscay, a Province in Spain, that
every Man having married a Wife, sent her the first night to the Priest of the
Parish, which it seems was the Fee due to the Priest for his labor, the same
day of marrying her in his Temple, Carp. 193. So it was at the door of the
Tabernacle. Hophni and Phinehas, Sons of the Priest, lay with the Women of the
congregation. 1 Samuel 2.22. To the Temple of Marriage, the Popish Priests have
of latter times added the Chapel of Ease of Auricular Confession, Auricular
Confession.
in a more commodious Sanctuary of the Lady's Chamber, then a public Temple;
where having told her a story of the Lucrin Lake of Fire and Brimstone; and the
Avernus of Purgatory, and washed her in a Bath of Tears; she who was before
chaste and cold begins to grow warm, as the Wife in Martial did, washed in the
like water.

Casta, nec Antiquis cedens Laevina Sabinis,
Et quamvis tetrico tristior ipsa viro!
Dummodo Lucrino dum se permittit Averno
Et dum Basanis saepe fovetur aquis,
Incidit in flammas juvenemque secuta, reliclo
Conjuge, Penelope venit, abit Helene.
Martial lib. 1. p. 32. Chaste as old Sabine Wives Laevina was,
And than her own sour Man more sad alas!
'Till since in Lucrin, and Avern, she has
Been washed and fired in water of the Bath:
Her old Man left, then for a young she burned,
Penelope she went, Helen returned.
O quoties, says Cornelius Aggrippa, nova nupta redit instructior a
confessione fraterculi, quam ab amplexu mariti. And then he says, the Priest
himself is more corrupted: Quomodo enim boni, pii, simplices, casti, pacifici,
humiles esse possunt, qui continuo scelera inquirunt, flagitia examinant,
crimina cantillant, suntque asperitate, immodestia, Rabie, cunctis
intolerabiles. Oh how often, says he, does the new married Wife return, more
skilled for Venereous postures, from confession of the Priest, then from the
embraces of her Husband (and then he says, the Priests themselves grow hereby
more corrupted) for how can they be good, pious, chaste, peaceable, humble, who
always make Inquisition after wickedness, examine foul sins, and sing of filthy
Crimes; whereby they become by their rudeness, immodesty, and madness,
intolerable to all Men. Who, if he has but half his senses, will not think it
a more Lawful, Chaste, and Holy act, if two, not prohibited by any Law of God to
marry; shall marry one another privately in their Chamber, without a Witness,
or a Priest, then for a Priest who is not her Husband, to be private with her
in her Chamber, without a Witness or her Husband. The same Agrippa complains
further, that under color of confession, habent Sacerdotes, Monachi,
Fraterculi, Moniales, and quas vocant sorores, specialem lenociniorum
Praerogativam; cum illis sub Religionis praetextu liberum sit, quocunque
pervolare and quibuscunque, quantum and quoties sub specie visitationis and
consolationis and confessionis secreto, and sine testibus lequi: tam pie
personata sunt illorum lenocinia. And after, stuprant sacras Virgins and
hospitum suorum adulterantes uxores. Says he, under color of confession, the
Priests, Monks, Friars, Nuns, and whom they call Sisters, have as it were a
special Prerogative for exercising their Whoredoms: for they have under
pretext of Religion full liberty to be where they will, with whatsoever
persons, as much and as often as they will, under a show of Visitation,
Consolation, and Confession secretly, and without Witness to converse together.
So piously Personated are their Bawderies, whereby they defile the holy
Virgins, and commit Adulteries with the Wives of those who entertain them in
their Houses. So much for the Lustful designs of those, who would force all
Women to Priests, Altars, and Temples, for marriage.

2. The next to be shown is the design of Covetousness, wherein will appear by
the examples following, that they show as little shame or modesty, as in the
former.

-- Nam quae Reverentia legum?
Quis metus aut pudor est unquam properantis Avari?
Juven. Sat. 14. Prostitutions in Temples to gain the Priest's fees.
Concerning which, Herodotus writes, That Virgins were to be brought, before
they were married, to the Temple of the Babylonian Venus, and were there
placed, Crowned with Garlands, and sat separate from one another by little
strings, and never stirred from thence till some stranger came in, and giving
them money, took them out and lay with them: And till they had so done, they
could not be married. Here was the Original of carrying Virgins to the Temples
to be married, and the money they received for their prostitution of
themselves, went to their Priests Treasury in their Sanctum Sanctorum.

The Phoenicians were likewise bound to prostitute their Daughters in the
Temple of the Goddess Anethis, where Virgins, were bound to prostitute
themselves, and the gains went to the Priests.

The Temples of Bisnagar have large Revenues, which are increased by the
Devotion of Women, who prostitute themselve to gain, for their Idols, which
Gain goes to the Priests, as did the Gains of all the Whorish Idolatries.

And many other Temples there were, too many to be repeated; and scarce any
Nation, who had Temples, was free from this wicked way, of making gains by the
Priests. Thus much therefore, as a touch only, of the gains of the old
Babylonian and Pagan Priests: but as to the new Babylonish and Popish, they
make far greater; for by this Law, being the Root from which so many other
prohibitory Laws of the Pope's multiply, it being almost endless to repeat all
the Taxes, Excises, and Customs he gathers out of his Temples,
Spiritual-Courts, and* Stews; and to that end* having prohibited every little
Circumstance of marriage, which is possible to be made, he has his Gabel set
on it for License or Dispensation. As, Fourth degree in Marriage prohibited to
gain the Priest Fees.
1. Pope Calixtus prohibits all persons to Marry within the fourth degree of
carnal consanguinity or affinity: then to tenter that Law; further, it is
prohibited all spiritual affinity, as Godfathers, and Godmothers, and their
Children to marry within four degrees; Then to stretch it yet to the utmost,
it is prohibited persons under Civil Affinity: as between Guardians, Tutors and
Pupils. Pope Nicholas the first prohibited the Clergy to marry, but they are
forced to pay a yearly Tax to his Holiness for their Curtesans whether they
keep them or no. Pope Sixtus the fourth set up in Rome so many Stews of both
Sexes, as by estimation contain forty Thousand Whores and Rogues licensed, of
whom the Pope receives the yearly Tribute of forty Thousand Ducats, as says
Harding, under the name of Penance-money, or Fines, chief Rent, besides
Casualties of this Pope. Part of his Epitaph was, Sixte, jaces tandem, deflent
tua busta Cinoedi,
Scortaque lenones, alea, vina, Venus.


Benedictions of the Priests to gain Fees.
Soier, Pope of Rome made a Law, No Marriage should be without the Benediction
of the Priest that they might increase and multiply; this brings in new Fees
for Benedictions, though to seek such Benedictions of a Priest, makes him a God
and is Idolatry; if Jacob said not without cause when Rachel asked Children of
him, Genesis 30.2. Am I in God's stead? yet will the Priest be in God's stead to
give Benedictions on Marriages for money, and Maledictions too, if they give
him none. Besides the Benedictions of the Priests own person, there are Fees
laid for him at the Shrines for the Benedictions of all his Saints: Pilgrimage
for Children to gain the Priest Fees.
What rich Offerings and Presents are sent from Catholic Princes and Nobles,
to our Lady of Loretto to have Heirs? and how many Pilgrimages are made by the
meaner sort to the Temples of such and such Saints with money in their Laps to
obtain Children from the Priest or his Idols?

Times of Marriage prohibited to gain the Priests Fees.
The old Prohibitions of Marriage and newly set out in the Episcopal Almanac of
Advent, Septuagesima and Rogation, being the greatest and most convenient times
of the year to Marry, do by so much yield the greater Income for Licenses. The
Prohibition of Marriage without Banes three several Sundays or Holidays, fills
up the residue of the year with money for Licenses: The Licenses and
Dispensations from his Holiness for Papists to marry Protestants (I would he
would keep those at home) yield him greater sums of money: Fees extorted from
Protestant Ministers Sons as from Bastardy.
and besides the betraying of the Protestants Dispensations from the Arch
bishops to the Sons of Protestant Ministers on their admissions to a Benefice,
as if they remained still Bastards according to the Canon Law. I was told by a
Protestant Minister, that Ten pounds was extorted from him, on his admission to
but a small Parsonage, by the Mr. of the Faculties, because his Father was a
Minister, who was married. Commutation money.
Then there are great Fees received for absolution of impure Penitents in
Auricular Confession, for Commutation-money, in Spiritual-Courts. It would be
tedious to repeat all the several Fees which are received by the Pope, and his
Ecclesiastical Officers, in relation to the matter of Marriages, and the
offenses by him made against it. I therefore refer the Reader to the Taxa
Camerae lately Printed by Mr. Egan; but these are sufficient to show, he makes
the Land a Sea to him, perpetually bringing in new Treasure. And his Priests
the Panders General of his unclean Mysteries, and Universal Receivers of his
Coin: Yea he has hence besides, Scepters and Crowns lying at his Feet, with
infinite Sums.

The third Reason against Ecclesiastical Laws, is, They pester the Three
Kingdoms with an unnecessary and excessive multitude of Laws.
There is no greater Plague to a Nation, then the excessive multitude of Laws;
now the Ecclesiastical Laws comprehending in themselves, Ecclesiastical Laws
pester with their multitude.
besides their own Synodal Provincial Canons, and Constitutions, the whole
Civil and Canon Law; and all the rabble of Doctors opinions on the same; the
number of which is so infinite, as Swimburn in his Epistle to the Reader
expresses in these words, viz. Great and wonderful is the number of the
manifold Writers of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, and so huge is the
multitude of their sundry sorts of Books, as Lectures, Councils, Tracts,
Dicisions, Questions, Disputations, Repetitions, Cautells, Clausules, Common
Opinions, Singulars, Contradictions, Concordances, Methods, Sums, Practicks,
Tables, Repertories, and Books of other kinds, that in my conceit it is
impossible for any one Man to read over the hundredth part of their Works,
though living an hundred years, and did intend nothing else. And to the same
purpose speaks the Learned Haddon, in his Preface to the Reader, of that polite
work of his, for the Reformation of the present English Ecclesiastical Laws,
which he began first by Commission from H. 8. And after finished by like
Commission from Edward the sixth, who speaking of the Pope and Canon Law, has
these words: In quo ipso jure, neque ullum tamen modum tenet illius impudentia,
quin leges legibus, decreta decretis, ac iis in super decretalia, allis alia
atque item alia accumulat, neque ullam fere statuit cumulandi finem, donec
tandem suis Clementinis, Sextinis, intra and extravagantibus Constitutionibus,
Provincialibus, and Synodalibus Paleis, Glossulis, Sententiis, Capitulis,
Summariis, Rescriptis, Breviariis, Casibus longis and brevibus, ac infinitis
Rhapsodiis a deo orbem confercivit; ut Atlas mons, quo sustineri Caelum
dicitur, huic si imponeretur oneri, vix ferendo sufficeret. In which his
impudence holds no measure, but accumulates Laws upon Laws, Decrees upon
Decrees, and upon them Decretals, others upon others, and again others upon
them; nor does he make any end of heaping one upon another, till at length he
has with his Clementines, Sextines, Intravagants, and Extravagants,
Constitutions, Provincial and Synodal Palea's, Glosses, Sentences, Chapters,
Summaries, Rescripts, Breviates, Cases long and short, and infinite Rhapsodies
so filled the World with his Bag and Baggage, that if Mount Atlas it self,
which is said to support the Heaven, were under this burden, it would scarce be
able to bear it.

The end why he heaps together these infinite multitudes of Laws, the same
Author well further expresses, saying, Tunc nec his contentus, jus fori sui
haud prius desinit hactenus dilatare, quod totum etiam Civilem gladium cum
plena potestate in suam traduxisset possessionem; non huc spectans interim ut
morum Disciplinam in melius proveheret, quod fortassis numquam illi serio curae
fuit: Sed partim ut sedis dignitatem omnibus munitam modis, constabiliret;
partim ut opes undetunque quam maximas ad explendam ipsius Avaritiam
converteret, haud multum dissimili exemplo, quale de Dionysio Syracusano
commemorat Plutarchus; qui cum insidioso consilio quam plurimas tulisset leges,
alias super alias ingerens, tum easdem eadem astutia a populo negligi
pateretur, quo cunctos hac ratione sibi obnoxios redderet: nec aliud in
consilio fuisse huic Pontifici videtur in tot congerendis legum Centonibus,
quam ut plurimum Canonicis suis artibus ei ex Dispensationibus and
Condemnationibus accresceret, atque hanc puta catastrophen hujus choragi: nam
ut veteres olim Comoediae exibant fere in nuptias, ita Pontificis omnes fere
molitiones desinebant in pecunias. Not content with this, he never left till he
had so far dilated the Jurisdiction of his Court, that he had got likewise the
whole Civil Sword of Plenipotentiary power into his possession, not aiming that
he might thereby promote the correction of Manners, of which perhaps he never
took seriously any care, but partly to establish the pride of his See with all
manner of Muniments, partly to turn in from all hands excessive Riches to fill
his Avarice; and not much differing from the example of Dynosius the Syracusan
mentioned by Plutarch, who, when by Treacherous counsel he had published very
many Laws, one upon the neck of another, then again, with the same subtilty, he
suffered them to be neglected by the people, The multitude of Ecclesiastical
Laws is chiefly to multiply Money.
that he might have them all obnoxious in guilt to his Lash; neither does there
any thing else appear in the design of the Pope, by heaping together so many
mingle mangles of Laws, but that he might get the more into his Snares, and so
have thereby the more plentiful incomes and fines, for Dispensations and
Condemnations. And this take for the up-shot of this Dance; for as the old
Comedies used to end in Weddings, so all the enterprises of the Pope ended in
money.

Study of Ecclesiastical Laws corrupts Protestants. Diverse Weights and
Measures. Ad aliud Tribunal, aliud Exmen, alias Leges. Circuit, Subornation,
Perjury, Interfering of Courts.
4. The study of the Popish Canons corrupts the choicest Protestant Wits in
their Education with Popish principles, in which rest the whole hopes of the
gains of their profession.

5. They introduce diverse Weights, and diverse Measures of justice in the same
people.

6. They compel the Subjects ad aliud Tribunal, then Caesar's Judgment Seat, ad
aliud examen then per legem Terrae, ad aliud judicium then legale judicium
parium.

7. They cause endless Circuits of Action, Delays and Costs, Subornation and
Perjury of Witnesses, and grind the people between two Millstones of
interfering Jurisdictions, as appears in the Statute following.

The Recital of the Statute 9 H. 6.11. following, concerning the contention of
the Heirs of Edmund Earl of Kent in Parliament, relating to a Marriage without
a Priest and Temple.
ITem, Whereas by a supplication delivered in this present Parliament, by the
Commons of the same; it was declared by Margaret Duchess of Clarence, Joan
Duchess of York, Sisters, and amongst others Heirs to Edmund Earl of Kent,
Richard Duke of York, Richard Earl of Salisbury and Alice his Wife, Ralph Earl
of Westmorland, John Lord of Typtost and of Powis, and Joyce his Wife, and
Henry Gray Cousins, and other of the Heirs of the said Edmund late Earl, as in
the same supplication is supposed, That is to say, the said Duke, Son to Ann
Daughter of Eleanor, another of the Sisters of the said Edmund, the said Alice
Daughter to Eleanor, another Sister of the said Edmund; the said Ralph Son to
Elizabeth, another Sister of the said Edmund; the said Joyce Daughter to the
said Eleanor Mother of Ann; and the said Henry Gray, Son to Joan Daughter of
the same Eleanor: That whereas Eleanor Wife to James Lord Audley pretending,
calling, and affirming her self Daughter and Heir to the said Edmund late Earl
of Kent, and begotten and born in Marriage pretensed, had betwixt him and
Constance late Wife of Thomas Lord Dispenser, whereby the said supplication is
supposed, That the said Eleanor Wife to the said James is Bastard, and never
was any Marriage made, had, nor solemnized betwixt the said Edmund and
Constance, but the said Edmund ( by the Ordinance, Will, and Agreement of King
Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to our Lord the King, that now is, after great,
notable, and long Embassage had, and sent, to the Duke of Millain, for a
Marriage to be had betwixt the said Edmund and Luce, Sister to the said Duke of
Millain) did take to Wife, and openly, and solemnly Married the said Luce at
London. The said Constance then living, and being there present, not claiming
the said Edmund to be her Husband, nor any other Dower of his Lands after his
decease, which Marriage betwixt the said Edmund and Luce, so had, and
solemnized, continued without any interruption of the said Constance, or of any
other during the life of the said Edmund, as diverse Lords and other credible,
and notable persons of the said Realm do well remember. And how after the
decease of the said Edmund, the said Luce was endowed of his Lands, as his
Lawful Wife, continuing thereof her Estate peaceably all her life. Nevertheless
the said Eleanor, the Wife of James, upon great subtilty, and process imagined,
Privy-labour, and other means, and colored ways, to the intent that she ought
to be certified Mulier by some Ordinary, in case that Bastardy should be
alleged in her person, has brought (as it is said) in examination before
certain Judges in the Spiritual-Court, not informed, nor having knowledge of
the said Subtilty, Imagined Process, Privy-labour, and colored ways, certain
suborned proofs, and persons of her Assent and Covin, deposing for her, That
the said Eleanor the Wife of James, was begotten within Marriage, had, and
solemnized, betwixt the said Edmund and Constance. The said Duchess, the Duke
of York, and Earl of Salisbury, and Alice, Earl of Westmerland, John Lord of
Typtost, Joyce, and Henry, nor any of them thereof warned, nor knowing, until
long time after the deposition so made; whereof the said suppliants, do fear
them to be grieved and impeached of their Inheritance, had by the said Edmund,
by another subtilty and labor in the Temporal Law, to be practiced and
wrought, by the said Lord Audley and Eleanor his Wife. As if they will commence
any Action against any persons of their own assent and covin, or otherwise,
will cause such persons of such assent and covin, to pursue an Action against
them (as is supposed they intend to do) in which action by the covin and assent
aforesaid, Bastardy ought to be alleged in the person of the said Eleanor Wife
of James; and thereupon by the assent and covin, an Issue is to be taken, and a
Writ to be sent to some Ordinary (where it please them, not advertised of the
said subtilty, assent and covin) to certify if the said Eleanor the Wife of
James be Mulier or not, before which ordinary, the same Eleanor Wife of James,
will allege and prove her self Mulier, by the said depositions of the said
suborned Witnesses. And then the party reputed as adversary against the Lord of
Audley and Eleanor his Wife, in the said action, taken, or to be taken by
assent and covin aforesaid, will allege no proof nor matter, nor make any
defense before the Ordinary against the same Lord Audley and Eleanor his Wife,
but suffer the matter before the said Ordinary, to proceed according to the
meaning of the said Lord Audley, and Eleanor his Wife. So that it is very
likely that the same Ordinary will certify the said Eleanor, the Wife of
James, Mulier, which Certificate so had and made, ought by the Law of England
to disherit the said Duchess, Duke of York Earl of Salisbury, Earl of
Westmerland, John Lord of Typtost, Joyce, and Henry, and their Issue forever,
of the whole Inheritance aforesaid. Whereupon the premises tenderly considered,
and to Eschew such subtle disherisons, as well in the said Case, as in other
Cases like in time to come, By the Advice and Assent of all the Lords
Spiritual, and also at the special Request of the said Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, It is Ordained and Established by Authority of this
Parliament, That if the said Eleanor the Wife of James be certified Mulier in
any Court before this time, that no manner of. Certificate heretofore made for
the said Eleanor Wife of James, shall in anywise put to prejudice, indamage,
nor conclude any person or persons, but him or his Heirs that was party to the
Plea. And that from henceforth all Justices of or in the Courts, where any Plea
is or shall be depending, taken or moved, in which Pleas so depending, taken or
moved, Bastarvy shall be alleged against any person party to the same Plea,
and thereupon an Issue joined, which by the Law ought to be certified by the
ordinary, that the Judges, or one Judge of or in the Courts, where the said
Plea is or shall be depending, taken or moved before the time, that any Writ of
Certificate pass out of the same Court to the Ordinary, to certify upon the
Issue so joined or to be Joined, shall make a Remembrance under their Seals, or
his Seal, at the suit of the Demandant or Tenant, Plaintiff or Defendant in the
Plea, in which the Bastardy is or shall be alleged, reciting the Issue that is
joined in the same Plea of Bastardy, and certifying to the Chancellor of the
King of England for the time being, to the intent that thereupon Proclamation
be made in the said Chancery by three Months, once in every Month, that all
persons pretending any interest to object against the parties, which pretends
himself to be Mulier, that they sue to the ordinary, to whom the Writ of
Certificate is or shall be directed, to make their allegations and objections
against the party, which pretends him to be Mulier, as the Law of the Holy
Church requires: And the said Chancellor having notice of the said Remembrance
and Issue joined, and being required by the said Demandant or Tenant, Plaintiff
or Defendant, having the said Remembrance to make the said Proclamation as
aforesaid. The same Chancellor for the time being, shall cause to be made
Proclamation in the form aforesaid. And the Proclamation so made shall certify
in the Court, where the said Plea in which the Bastardy is alleged another
time, shall be depending. And that the Judges of or in the Court, where the
same Plea is, or shall be depending, taken or moved, before any Proclamation so
to be made in the Chancery, make one time such Proclamation openly in the same
Court, and also another time, when the Proclamat^on shall be certified by the
Chancellor of England and made in the form above rehearsed: then the said Judge
shall award the said Writ of Certificate to the Ordinary, to certify upon
Issue so joined or to be joined: and if any Writ of Certificate be made or
granted, before that all the Proclamations in the form aforesaid be made and
certified, that then the said Writ of Certificate, and the Certificate of the
Ordinary thereupon made or to be made shall be void in Law, and of none effect.
And if any Writ before this time be directed to any Ordinary to certify, if
the said Eleanor Wife of James be Bastard or not, and at this time not
certified, if it be certified hereafter by virtue of the said Writ, that the
same Certificate of the said Ordinary so made be void and of none effect. Rast.
pla. fo. 29.105.261.280.577.609.

That one Circuit of Action is too much is well known, where it is unnecessary,
as on penal Bonds sued at Common Law, the party injuried is repelled from any
Plea of Equity, either that he paid the Money and the Creditor refuses to
deliver up his Bond, or to give him an acquittance, or that he received an
acquittance, but it was since burnt by fire, or he has since by any other
casualty lost it, and forces him to a costly, tedious, and sometimes
inextricable Suit for releif in the Chancery, whereby the remedy, unless for a
very great Sum, becomes worse then the disease. All which Pleas of Equity, and
others of the like nature, might have been far better determined in the same
Court of Common Law, as is excellently well done in Scotland, by admitting
those Pleas of Equity in the same Court, and on proof of them, restricting the
Penalty of the Bond to principal Interest, Cost and Damage. But here the
Birthright of the Subject, wherein not only all his Bonds, but Lands and Goods
are concerned, is put to a tedious Circuit in the Chancery of Suite and
Proclamations, and after that again, to another Circuit of Action in the
Spiritual Court, and then again to a third Circuit to Common Law, of
Prohibitions, and then again to a fourth Circuit back to the Spiritual Court by
a Consultation; Circuits enough to tire any horse, much more any honest man,
yet shall he never come to the end of his journey at last, or if he do, he
shall be robbed with Theives: and as this Statute mentions, if true men fail,
false Witnesses shall be suborned against him, which if he had staid in one
Court and rid no Circuit at all, but the matter had been there tried by Twelve
good men and true, at a Nisi Prius in his own Country, none of these Theives or
false Witnesses would have dared to appear as they presume to do, in so great a
Forest as London, in the Chancery, Ecclesiastical Courts, Affidavits, and
Examiners, Officers there; a^terrible oppression of the Subjects, or if they
did, they would be easily taken or discovered.

There are four mischiefs appear in this Statute caused by Ecclesiastical Laws,
1. Circuit of Action. 2. Endless delay and costs. 3. Subornation and perjury of
Witnesses. 4. Interfering of Jurisdictions. One in ordine ad Spiritualia, the
other in ordine ad Temporalia, one in ordine ad naturalem Equitatem, the other
in ordine ad Legem communem; and as to the same, cert^inly a greater Calamity
cannot fall on the miserable Client, then to be made a Borderer between two
Enemies-Countries; an Hare between two Dogs, a Mouse between two Cats, and a
Corn between two Milstones.

Priesthood changed changes the Law.
It is said, Heb. 7.12. The Priesthood being changed, there is of necessity a
change also of the Law. Either therefore the Papists Preisthood is not intended
to be changed into a Protestant-Priesthood, but the whole Papal power
translated in time of Popery, by the 25. H. 8.21. from Rome to Lambeth, must so
stand for ever, or if it be intended this Papal-Priesthood shall be changed
into a Protestant, it is not the changing the Person from Italian to English, or
the place from Tyber to Thames will do it; but it is the changing of the Laws
from Papal to Protestant; for Papal Laws and a Protestant Priesthood are no
more consistent, then Fire and Water. Many more great exceptions there are
against Ecclesiastical Laws, which my great have forces me to pretermit.

CHAP. VI. Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, not to be judged by
such Laws of England, Scotland, or Ireland, as are Relics of Popery, and
contrary to the Law of God.
Of the Law making Marriage a Sacrament.

Of the profound Popery of the common Lawyers, of Transubstantiation of two
persons into one person, and the mischeifs thereof.

A Note taken at King's Bench, of the miraculous Transubstantiation of a
Shoulder of Mutton between a Man and Woman.

Of the Law of Transubstantiation of the Children of the Wife into the Children
of the Husband, if he is within the four Seas at time of their begetting, and
of no probation admitted to the contrary.

A further descant on the words of Littleton and Coke concerning
Transubstantiation of the Children of Parents within the four Seas.

A relation of a Soldier in the late Civil-Wars, who at his return home found
two of his Wives Children transubstantiated into his.

Of the Law of Intails on Marriage, and the mischeifs of them.

Of the Barbarous Law of Illegitimation, or making Children incapable to
succeed to the Goods of their own Parents, and the excellent Law of the Emperor
Anastasius abolishing the same, and the repeal of the Emperor's Law by the
Strumpet Theodora, and succeeding Popes and Bishops.

That the unlawful Marriage of Parents, ought not to illegitimate the Children
to succeed to their Goods.

A further touch on Intails.

Sacrament of Marriage.
CAlvin lib. 4. cap. 19. Speaks thus of the Popish Sacrament of Marriage, At ne
simpliciter Ecclesiam luderent quam longam Mendaciorum, fraudum, nequitiarum
seriem, vim errori attexuerunt. Vt dicas nihil aliud quam abominationum
latebram quaestisse, dum e Matrimonio Sacramentum fecerunt: ubi enim id semel
obtinuere, conjugalium causarum cognitionem ad se traxerunt; quippe res
Spiritualis non erat profanis judicibus attractanda. Tum leges sanxerunt quibus
Tyrannidem suam firmarunt, sed partim in Deum manifest impias, partim in
homines iniquissimas Quales sunt ut conjugia inter adolescentulos parentum
injussu contracta, firma rataque maneant. Ne inter cognatos ad Septimum usque
gradum matrimonia sint Legitima and quae contracta sint dissolvantur; gradus
vero ipsos contra gentium omnium jura and Mosis quoque politiam confingunt, Ne
viro qui adulteram repudiaverit, alteram inducere liceat. Ne spirituales
cognati Matrimonio copulentur. Ne a Septuagesima ad Octavas Paschae and tribus
Hebdomadis ante Natalem Johannis and ab Adventu, ad Epiphaniam, nuptia
Celebrentur, and similes innumerae, quas recensere longum fueritex: Eorum caeno
aliquando emergendum est, in quo jam diutius haesit oration quam animus ferebat;
aliquantulum tamen mihi profecisse videor, quod Leoninum pellem istis asinis
quadam ex part detraxi. They thought it too little to delude the Church
simply; but what a long chain of Deceits and Wickednesses have they knit on to
this one Error, that you may say they sought nothing else in their making
Marriage a Sacrament, Sacrament of Marriage.
but a lurking hole for their Abominations; for as soon as they got that
granted, they drew to themselves the jurisdiction of all Matrimonial Causes,
pretending forsooth that Spiritual things were not to be handled before profane
Judges. Next they fell to making of Laws to confirm their Tyranny, in part
manifestly impious toward God, and partly most injust as to Men: Such as are
these, That Contracts of Marriage between Minors (for this is to be intended of
verbal Contracts only) should be firm and valid, without assent of Parents;
That Marriages contracted between Cousins to the Seventh degree, should be
unlawful, and if any were Contracted should be dissolved, and they likewise
feigned Degrees, contrary to the Law of Nations, and Policy of Moses, That it
should not be lawful for a Man who Divorceth his Wife for Adultery to marry
another. That Spiritual Kindred should not marry. That it should not be lawful
to marry from Septuagesima to the Octaves of Easter, and three Weeks before the
Nativity of John Baptist, and from Advent to Epiphany, and innumerable others
the like, which were too long to recite; for I must at length get out of their
filthy mire, in which my Feet have stuck longer then my mind could well-brook,
yet I hope to have got to my self so much good, as that I have in some part
pulled the Lion's skin from these Asses. The making Marriage a Sacrament came
from the old Pagan Priests of Rome, who persuaded the people to draw the gains
of Sacrifice and Sacraments to themselves, that no Marriage could be happy
unless they were Contracted by the Priests, with Sacrifices to the Gods, and
Sacramenta ignis and aquae: for which reason the Priest sprinkled them with his
Holy Water of this Sacrament, and made them touch Water and Fire, provided by
the Priest to that purpose; and if any of these Ceremonies were omitted,
whereby the Priest lost his gain, then were the Marriage called nuptiae
innuptiae, or in the Pope's Canonical Language null and void. That Marriage is
a Sacrament, the Bishops and common Lawyers deny in Words, but acknowledge and
confess in their Works; for the Bishops continue still to usurp the same
Jurisdiction of Marriage, which the Popish Bishops never pretended to, but as a
Sacrament; and the Common Lawyers continue still the mystery of
Transubstantiation, which the old Popish Lawyers never did pretend to,
otherwise then as the effect of a Sacrament.

Of the profound Popery of the Common Lawyers, in Transubstantiation of two
persons into one person, and the mischeifs thereof.
I shall not need to answer any place of Scripture making the Husband and the
Wife but one Person: Transubstantiation of two persons into one person.
for there is not one word in the whole Scripture which affirms a Man and his
Wife to be one person, or if it were, it must be a figurative and not a natural
person. If it be objected, That they are called one Body, or one Flesh, I say
the same words are said of an Harlot. 1 Cor. 6.16. Know ye not that he which is
joined to an Harlot is one Body? for two (says he) shall be one flesh. Yet was
never any Divine or Lawyer, I have met with, so absurd as to infer from hence,
That the Harlot and her Mate are one person, or that they are transubstantiated
into one another, but remain two distinct Substances as they were before; much
less that the Harlot has no propriety in her Goods, and that every Customer
she has may rob her Shop, take all her Goods, and beat her, and she have no
Action or Remedy against him; or if she catch a Chouse in her snare, that she
and her Accomplices may rob, strip, sell him to the Barbado's, and he shall not
be allowed to sue her before the Magistrate; because he and she are in
Scripture called one flesh. In like manner may be said of the foppery of
Sacramental Transubstantiations of the Bread into the Body, or one Body into
another, or making many persons in Society or Communion one person, because the
Scripture calls them one Body, as it is said, 1 Cor. 10.16. The bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many are one
Bread, and one Body: for we are all partakers of that one Bread. This is
intended a figurative but not a natural Body; and it were very ridiculous to
make allusions, conclusions or similitudes, to run on four Feet, or to say,
Because all these Communicants being Men and Women are by the Scripture called
one Body, Figurative or Politic: Therefore to conclude that they are one Body
natural, and one Person natural; And as no one body natural, or one person
natural, can have a distinct propriety or a right of Action against it self, so
none of these Communicants, Men and Women, can have the same against one
another. Excellent Doctrine for the one Body made of many, and Society of the
Adamites. I shall not here dispute which is the greatest Absurdity of
Transubstantiation, of Bread into Flesh in the Mass, or of the Flesh of a Woman
into the Flesh of a Man in Marriage, or whether gains most, the Priest by the
former, or the Lawyer by the later Cheat. But this is easily shown, that the
Communicants in the later Fantastic Sacrament lose more Temporally, then in
the former, though perhaps the other may Spiritually. And in Compliment to the
weaker Sex, I shall first do them right in showing the manifold mischeifs
thereby ensue to them.

Wife made a slave incapable of propriety.
First, By the fiction of their being made the Priest one Person with the
Husband; Whatsoever they have is the Husbands, and what the Husband has is his
own, they lose all the right of Propriety in their own Goods to the Husband, as
perfectly, as if they had been bought by him for Slaves at a Market, though the
Husband has therefore on the Wedding Day transubstantiated into him a very
fine Wife, all Silk and Satin, Velvet, Cloth of Silver, Cloth of Gold, Pearl
and precious Stones: Yet after the fir^^ Month, when the Moon changes he may
sell away St. Paul's Impertinent, putting the Money in his pocket, and
transubstantiate her into a plain Petticoat and Wastcoat to last as long as she
lives, and when she dies bury her in Woollen, and this is all the poor Woman
gets by having him before Mr. Parson in his Temple, and making him to promise
with all my Worldly Goods I thee endow, which made a wary old Gentleman, as
says the Woman's Lawyer, page 121. an acquaintant of his, lest his Son-in-law,
though he did not take his Daughter down in her Wedding-shoes, should let her
after go without stockings, and break her heart to see all her old feathers
moult, and no new spring, and enforce her to take new Wings to fly to Heaven,
before he was willing to spare her, therefore he in good earnest bound his
Son-in-law in a good sound bond, to give his Daughter every year so many Gowns,
Kirtles, pairs of Silk-stockings etc.

Her Estate forfeited and consumed by her Husband's Vices.
2. If her Husband has mortgaged or fraudulently made away his Estate before
marriage, if he carelessly after marriage spend it on other Women, Drinking,
Diceing, or other viciousness, if he is Outlawed, Attainted for Felony,
Rebellion, Treason, or taken in Execution for Debt or Surety-ship, all her
Lands, Goods, and Portion shall be taken from her, during his life, which may
be longer then hers, and she may wear Rags or starve, if she can neither work
nor beg.

Robbed of her Trust in the Testator's Goods, as well as her own.
3. If she have a great Estate, as Executrix, her Husband will change the bonds
into his own name, sell the Leases, change the propriety of all the Goods, and
when he dies, leave her not a farthing of the Testator's Goods, or her own. The
Turk is not so turkish to rob his Wife, who is a Freewoman, or to
transubstantiate the propriety of her Goods into his, for so it is said, Alchor.
cap. 4. page 49. O ye that believe in God, it is not lawful for you to inherit
what is your Wives by force, (and this is not only of their own goods they
brought with them, but likewise of the gifts of the Husband's Goods, given them
by himself) for it is further said, ibid. Take not violently away what you have
given them, unless they be surprised in manifest Adultery. But amongst
Christians, Harlots are in better condition then Wives; for though the
Scripture, 1 Cor. 6.16. says in the same words of an Harlot as of a Wife,
Harlot loses no Propriety.
Know ye not that he which is joined to an Harlot, is one Body, for two, says
he, shall be one flesh; yet never was so absurd Exposition made, that the
Harlot loses the propriety of her Goods and Rights to him who lies with her.
It appears likewise by the Roman forms of Divorce, that the married Wives who
were Free-women, notwithstanding their marriage, retained their propriety; the
words of which form were, Res tuas tibi habeto, the word tuas shows propriety.

4. He may cheat her in all his Promises, or Contracts made with her before
marriage, as a Man promised a Women who knew no Quirks in Law, if she would
marry him, to leave her so much worth after his death, and she thereon marries
him, this promise is extinguished by the marriage, and she shall never have
benefit of it.

Compelled to pay her Husband's Debts.
5. He may by this Transubstantiation by many tricks in Law, eause others to
bring actions without cause against his Wife, for his own use, and Arrest,
Outlaw, and cast her in Goal at his pleasure. A. B. and D. his Wife, were
bound by obligation in forty pounds, for payment of twenty, he suffered a
Judgment by default, and after suffered his Wife to be taken in Execution, and
put in Prison by his assent, whereby the Wife was driven to procure her own
friends to pay the Condemnation for her Husband, and redeem her from her
Turkish Pateroon, otherwise she might long enough have lain in Algiers, for he
would till this was done, give no Warrant for any Writ of Error, and this was
the Case of the good Wife at the Clock in Aldersgate Street, and the Judges
pitied her but little, for as my Manuscript says, they only smiled at the
unkind and subtle device. And this was done 42 Eliz. which shows that the poor
Woman married by Priest, though they had a Queen Regnant there, had little
better justice done them than now.

Made an Outlaw, a Villain, a pagan, an Alien, a Person forfeited, etc.
6. Another mischief is by this Transubstantiation, she not only loses the right
of propriety as a slave, but the right of action as an Outlaw, disabled to sue
for any injury done her: and to express the same more full and plainly, she by
this blessed Sacrament of marriage by a Priest, is made a Villain, a Pagan, an
Alien, an Excommunicate, a Nun of Lisbon, an attainted in a Praemunire, a non
habens personam standi in judicio against her Husband, a person convicted,
forfeited, and confiscated to his own use, and what is worst of all, when he
has robbed and rifled her of all she has, he may exercise his Tartarian
Authority, and beat her because she has no more.

Is this the humble compllment, with my Body I thee worship, a Divinity as
Idolatrous as that of the rude Indians, who first worship their Cotton-Idols,
and if their Prayers succeed not, beat them? What though the Jewish Scripture
says, Genesis 3.16. Thy desire shall be to thy Husband, and he shall rule over
thee; yet is this to be intended in acts Matrimonial not Magisterial: And the
Christian Scripture makes you requital, and Ephesians. 5.28. Men are commanded to
love their Wives as their own Bodies, they must therefore first beat their own
bodies, or suffer their Wives to beat them before they beat theirs, and you are
made as great Rulers over the Husbands Bodies, as they over yours. 1 Cor. 7.4.
And likewise also, The Husband has not power over his own Body, but the Wife.
Ladies I pity you, that Scripture has been so ill translated, and ill expounded
in all your concerns of marriage; and the more, in regard you have as bad
dealing from the Expositors of the Law as the Gospel: for Brook 12 H. 8. fo. 4.
says plainly, Beaten by her Husband, has no Remedy.
That if a Man beat an Outlaw, a Traitor, a Pagan, his Villain, or his Wife,
it is dispunishable; because by the Law, these persons can have no actions. But
I wish Ladies the next Law made for you, may sort you with better company, or
farewell to England to be the Paradise of Women.

Husband suffers others to abuse and ravish her, she has no remedy.
7. The Husband may not only be cruel to his Wife himself, but command others to
beat and abuse her, and she has no remedy, yea if another Ravish her, she has
no remedy to recover damage, unless he will assent to join with her in the
action: as 8 H. 4. fo. 21. A Woman was Prisoner in the Marshalsy, and made a
suggestion to the Court, that the Marshal's man had ravished her in Prison,
Gascoigne commanded the Marshal to take his Man to his custody, and his staff
from him. And the Court told the Woman, that she alone could not bring the
Appeal Sans Sons Baron, but if her Husband would come, and they two together
prove the Rape, the Ravisher should be hanged, or otherwise not: a Woman is in
a sweet case, if her Man is a Wittal, and willing to make money of her.

Made a prey to all will seize her.
8. This encourages vile persons to rob the Noble and Rich of their Daughters,
and makes the City of London so insecure for young Ladies, that few great
fortunes escape from being betrayed to persons unworthy of them; whereas if
marriage changed not the propriety, goods, and right of the Woman to the Man,
but left the same as full in the right of the Woman, and her self in as full
ability and capacity to Purchase and Sue for her self as before, she and her
friends would be able to take some course to preserve her and her Estate, and
such Insidiators be discouraged, where they saw their hopes of making a prey
taken away.

9. This gives the Husband (if she dies and leaves Children) power on a second
Marriage, to give her Goods to a Stepmother, and cast off her Children.

10. It gains the Husband power to get as many Women with Child as he pleases,
and to maintain them and their Children with the Goods of the Lawful Wife.

Transubstantiation brings the same mischief to the Husband as to the Wife
The Man again is as bad mischiefed by this Transubstantiation as the Woman. 1.
This gives power to steal and esloigne all her Husband's Substance, and put it
into the hands of his Enemies. 2. It gains the Woman power where she is not
able her self, to hire unknown persons with her Husband's Goods, to rob beat,
disseize the Husband, and Esloigne his Goods from him. 3. This gives her power
to lay all her secret and unknown debts, both true and feigned by her
Confederates on her Husband, and to undo him. 4. Gives her power to commit as
many Trespasses, either with tongue or hand, truly, or by confederacy with her
Accomplices, making her Husband liable to pay the damage, and undo him. 5. It
Gives her power to hire Adulterers with her Husband's Goods.

Whereas it is well known Men and Women of all estates and conditions, if they
have not been before a Priest in a Temple, will live forty years together in
one House and dare not rub, beat, or injure one another; because they have
liberty to sue for damage, which benefit this sottish Sacrament of Priests, and
Lawyers, gives not persons transubstantiated. A Law would be thought very
absurd and unjust, which should Enact, That no Man or Woman should sue one
another in the Commonwealth; what horrible wickednesses and villainies would be
committed by the two Sexes, one against onother; but it is more unjust to make
such a Law in Families, and more unjust to make such a Law between Men and
their Wives, then in Families: For in the Commonwealth, such as are persecuted
in one City, can fly to another. In Families such as like not one another
company, and are unmarried, can be received and have protection in other
Families. But Men and their Wives are chained together, and cannot avoid the
injuries of one another; and have no remedy unless they have the same liberty
too for injury and propriety of their own, as all other Subjects have, and not
compelled to live as Outlaws, deprived of benefit of Law.

A Note taken at the King's Bench, of the miraculous Transubstantiation of a
Shoulder of Mutton; between a Man and his Wife.
Being a Puny, I went as others did in a morning to Westminster, to the
King's Bench to hear and see the Forms of proceeding; Transubstantiation of a
shoulder of Murton.
where amongst others, a Counselor moved at the Bar in arrest of Judgment, and
for Cause, alleged, That the Plaintiff in his Declaration complained against
A. and B. his Wife, that amongst other Goods they had taken Armum ovillum,
Anglice a shoulder of Mutton from him, and converted the same to the use of the
said A. and B. his Wife; the ground of the exception against that part of the
Declaration, was, because though the Wife eat her share of the Mutton with the
Husband, yet the same ought not to be said to be converted to the use of the
Wife, but only of the Husband: the ratio rationis was, because the Wife is one
person with the Husband, that is to say, transubstantiated into him, and she
being transubstantiated, the shoulder of Mutton which she eat, must be likewise
transubstantiated into him; and so the shoulder of Mutton was converted wholly
to his use, and not to the use of the Wife: And so some Precedents were cited
for it, and others contrary; which profound piece of Popish Transubstantiation
did so puzzle the Court, that they would give no resolution then, but would
consider of it, and settle a course in it; which made me, being not arrived
beyond natural simplicity, to think them all mad, who would not cause the poor
Man to be paid for his shoulder of Mutton without all that ado, but I after
understood, that were not the Forms mixed with so many such absurdities, there
would be little work for them at the Bar.

Of the Law of Transubstantiation of the Children of the Wife into the Children
of the Husband, if he is within the four Seas at the time of their begetting,
and no probation admitted to the contrary. And of Intails on Marriages.
Husband within the four Seas, no probation admitted, that the Children were
not his. Fiction and Falsity allowed against Truth.
That no probation is admitted to the contrary, appears 18. E. 4.30. where
Littleton says, That if a Man marries a Woman great with Child by another Man
(whether he knows it, or not knows it) and within three days after she is
delivered of the Child, this Child is legitimate, and the true Son of the Man
that married her. And this by a Fiction in Law, and with this agrees Coke, Com.
244.

So here is a Father made, not by god, but by the Father of lies, and a false
Child made Legitimate, and the true Child of a Father who never begot him, and
the true Child if he begot any, before he was married without a Priest and
Temple, made illegitimate, and a false, yea no Child to him who begot him, and
all this held very good and sound Divinity. If marriage of the great bellied
Woman be in facie Ecclesiae, a brazen facies Ecclesiae, it must be where the
Devil gives God the Fiction, the truth, the lie. And Coke and Littleton hold it
too for good Law, I wonder whose Law they mean, and so stiff they are in it,
that Coke Com. 244. says, No proof shall be admitted to the contrary; so here
it is not stabitur praesumptione donec probetur in contrarium, but it is the sin
of Presumption, from which the two Fathers of the Law do not pray, as the
Patriarch David did, Psalm. 19.13. Keep thy Servant also from presumptuous Sins,
let them not have Dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression. One of them at least, defends the sin of
Presumption so high, that he says, It Is presumption, Juris and de jure, and
non admittitur probatio in contrarium, and in fictione juris semper est
equitas, a mere repugnancy and contradiction, which never came from the Law of
God, nor is consistent with it, as appears, Psalm. 96.13. For he comes to judge
the Earth: he shall Judge the World with righteousness, and the People with his
truth: And not with fictions, and much less with lies, so punctually forbidden,
James 3.14. Lie not against the truth, and so severely threatened, Revel. 21.8.
All liars shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone: And Revel. 19.20. The false Prophet is to be cast in amongst them,
who though he seems to be the greatest lier in the World, yet in none greater
then in this his lie of Legitimation, against which must be admitted no proof
to the contrary.

The Law of Legitimation is further, That if a Woman Elope or run from her
Husband with an Adulterer, and live in Adultery with him, and have a Child by
the Adulterer, if her Husband be within the four Seas when 'twas begot, this
Child shall be Legitimate, and shall be adjudged the Husband's Child, and no
probation shall be admitted to the contrary, as appears 43. E. 3.19.7. H. 4
9.44. E. 3.10. 1. H. 6.7.19. H. 6.17. Coke Com. 244.

A further descant on the words of Littleton and Coke, concerning the
transubstantiation of Children of Parents within the four Seas. And of the Law
of Intails.
When a Common Lawyer has for his Fees in a Deed of Jointure very formally
settled Lands, Messuages, Houses, Tenements and Hereditaments, etc. To have and
to hold the said Messuages, Houses, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with
their and every their Appurtenances unto the said A. B. and C. D. and to the
Heirs of their two Bodies lawfully begotten, and the Priest on Banes or License
as formally, per verba de praesenti, contracted the said A. B. and C. D. which
he calls Marriage. You shall next hear what Heirs the Priest and Lawyer
confederated, to do their Faeminine Client a good turn (by their Fictions,
whereat they are both good,) one will expound by the Gospel, and the other
interpret by the Law, to be lawfully begotten of the Body of this Woman
aforesaid. First, Littleton 18. E. Fol. 30. has said, If a Man marry a Woman
great with Child by another Man, and within three days after she is delivered
of the Child, this Child he says is a Mulier, that is to say Legitimate, that
is to say lawfully begotten of the Body of the said Woman, by the said Man that
married her. Yet he says, In putting the case he was begot by another man, and
makes a very great Fiction in the premises, and contradiction in the conclusion
of his Case; but let it be what it will, Coke Com. 244. seconds him, and thinks
Littleton has spoken over conscionably, or wastes time, to allow three days;
for cannot a Woman of full and lawful Age, though she sup a Virgin, if she lie
with the Law by her side, that Night as well have a Child next Day by dinner,
as if she stayed three whole days; he therefore takes off two of the
unnnecessary days, and says plainly, reserving to the Case of Littleton on the
Margent, That if the Issue is born a Month or a Day after Marriage between
Parties of full lawful Age, the Child is Legitimate, that is as aforesaid,
lawfully begot. And the reason he gives is Quia filiatio non potest probari:
from which Premises he makes three Conclusions.

First, Ergo probatio non admittitur in contrarium.

Secondly, Ergo if a Man marry a Woman got with Child by another Man, and he is
born but one day after the Marriage, this Child is lawfully begot by the
married Man.

Thirdly, Ergo if a man is on or within the four Seas, that is, within the
Jurisdiction of the King of England, and a Child in his absence is begot by
another Man on the Body of his Mirmaid he left at home, this was lawfully begot
by the Man on the four Seas.

Let any Logician if he dare deny the Sequel, for here are two Aristostles for
the Law, but he has but one for his Logic: And there is a greater Aristotle
too for the Gospel, the Bishop himself to second my Lord Coke, Bishop's
Certificate Form.
has given his Certificate in his Book of Entries, Fol. 181. And the foresaid
Bishop by his Letters Patents and Close has certified to the Justices here,
That he by virtue of the foresaid Writ to him directed, Convocating before him
such as of right are to be Convocated, has diligently enquired and certified
the truth of the matter, that in the Chapel of B. in the County of G. in the
Dioccss of L. the Sixth day of August, Anno Dom. 1606 Matrimony true, pure, and
lawful, Per verba de praesenti, according to the form and rites of the Book of
Common Prayer of the Church of England, between the said A. B. and C. D. was
Solemnized by one Mr. A. V. Clerk, in the presence of J. J. W. B. W. W. R. M.
Witnesses in this part, by the said Bishop examined and sworn, and of other
Witnesses then present, the said Parties A. B. and C. D. his Wife being of
lawful Age, and from all other Matrimonial Contracts free, clear, and clean, as
the Witnesses so sworn and examined, believe.

This is the Form of Certificate, which carries the best Circumstances and Face
of a Marriage which can be put on any. But the Bishop will give his Certificate
as full, of a true pure and lawful Matrimony to Coke's Woman with the
Adulterous great Belly, who lays it down the next day, though no Witness will
compurgate from other Contracts, and transubstantiate as well the Child
Adulterous as lawfully begot, to be Child of the Husband, yet is not this
Certificate neither free from fiction and falsity contrary to the Law of God;
for it is already shown, That it is impossible to make a verbal Contract, per
verba de praesenti, praeterito or futuro matrimonio, and that Matrimony cannot
be before a Mother, nor a Mother before Conception of a Child, and that it is
impossible to make a Ceremonial Law of Marriage, either of the Church of
England or Rome, to be the Moral Law of Marriage instituted by God: and besides
if there were a lawful Marriage, there can be no Sequel, or Ergo inferred, That
the Adulterous Child of the Woman is lawfully begot, because the Marriage was
lawful, or ought to be Successor to the Husband's Goods, because born of the
Wife; for there can be properly no Adultery nor Adulterous Issue born, but
within lawful Marriage. But Logician beware the Bishop's Certificate, and a Law
of Transubstantiation, alter the case, if thy profane Reason will dispute
Faith, or Episcopal Infallibility, in Marriage, Filiation and Succession, thou will be Excommunicated.

The good Woman has the same advantage, whether she go from her Husband's
House or stay there; for if the good man leave her at home, and march abroad
himself a Soldiering or Merchandising, if still it be within the four Seas, and
his Stock increase and multiply at home the while, more then abroad, he must
not be so ill natured as not to bear the charg of his better Factress then
himself. During the late Civil Wars, A Soldier finding his Wives Children
transubstantiated into his.
I was credibly informed of a Soldier who left his Wife at home with one Child,
and was for diverse Years so long out in Service, that before he returned home
again, his Wife had two more to increase his number, at length he returned home
to the Town where he dwelt, and the Neighbors as soon as they understood it,
went in show to welcome him home, but withal to see how he would like the
increase of his Children in his absence, where after they had sat a while, he
appeared very kind to his Wife, and very fond of his Child, which he had left
at home at his departure, supposing the other to have been some Children of the
Neighbors who were come in to play with his, 'till a while after seeing those
Children by his Fireside to draw closer to his Wife then strangers use to do,
he asked Whose the Children were, the Wife and answered him, Thine, whereat he
was much amazed, and demanded how that could be, seeing he had not been at home
so many Years. The Wife replied, thou might have stayed at home then, and
got them thy self, if thou would; so there being no other Answer to be got,
the poor man was glad to take up this new Bag and Baggage, when he thought to
have rested. For the fiction of Legitimation dared give the Truth of the
Soldier the Lie to his face; yet he knew not whom to send a Challenge or a Duel
to. In no better case had he been, had he in the Service of his King and
Country, lost his life in a fight at Sea, if within the four Seas what he had
got with his own Blood, must have gone to an Adulterous Blood, at the pleasure
of his Wife, and the Certificate of the Bishop.

Of the Law of Intails on Marriage, and the mischiefs ensuing by them.
Law of Intails causes Adulteries, and disinherits true Heirs.
It is before shown how mischievously the true Heirs are dis-inherited, and
destroyed by Intails to two Bodies, and by Littleton, Coke, and the Bishops
fictions on the same, who in despite of Truth, Religion, Sense and Reason, God
and Nature, will have the Adulterous issue of the Woman preferred before the
true and lawful Children of the Man, in Succession to the Man's inheritance. I
shall likewise here touch some other few, but fatal mischiefs, which the Chains
and Fetters of Estates by Intails to two Bodies on Marriages, whether these
Intails are made by the Pontificial or Temporal Laws, do cause: for it is to be
noted, that the Laws of Theodora and the Popes, which Enact, That no Children
shall be capable of Succession to the Father, but where the Father and Mother
were contracted by a Priest in a Temple, is an Intailing of the Inheritance of
the Man to the Heirs of the Body of the Woman, and an excluding of the Heirs of
the Man, if she prove adulterous. So there cannot properly be said to be any
Fee-simple in England; No Fee-simple in England.
for Fee-simple it self, is by the Popish Law Intailed to the Heirs of the Body
of the Woman begotten, beget them who will; and the Priest who would not
therefore be married himself to a Wife (lest she should put a cheat on him, and
bring forth a y^ung Layman) but take a Curtezan, put cunningly the Fee-simple
cheat on the simple Layman, and his Fills de prestre too, by making a Law, That
none should be his Heirs, unless begotten on the Body of such Woman as he
should give him in a Temple: Littleton deceived in Fee-simple.
So Littleton in his Chapter of Fee-simple, and his Commentator on him,
understood not the words, his Heirs; for every Fee-simple where a Woman is
married by a Priest in a Temple, is to go to her Heirs of her Body begotten,
and not to his, and let her have as many Heirs as she will, begotten by the
Adulterer, the Husband's Land shall go to her Heirs, but let the Husband, who
is perhaps turned off by the Wife, get as many as he will by another Woman,
none of those shall be his Heirs. For which reason, in favor of the true and
natural Children, and that the Father might have power by Act executed in his
Lifetime to provide for his own, especially where he found his Wives
Adulterous, as Britton fol. 122. says, That the Forms of Deeds of Feoffment,
The word Assigns gave power to cut off Fee-simple Intails.
were afterward made to him, his Heirs and Assigns; and the word Assigns added
in favor of the true and natural Children; which word Assigns, gave the
Laymen power of cutting off the Fee-simple Intails, being the cheat imposed on
them by the Popish Priest, and to Assign, Dispose, and Alien the same, as well
Extra familiam as Intra, which it seems before, without the word Assigns they
could not do. But it was not long after, when the subtle Popish Priest, who
knew he could Reign not but by the Woman, got a Latin Statute to be made,
Westminster 2 cap. 1. whereby he struck out the word Assigns, and took clean
away the power of Men to Assign, Alien, and Dispose of their own Lands; and
whereas the Intail of Fee-simple was only implicit, he then by express words
Intails it to Heirs begotten of the Body of the Woman, whereby the adulterous
might succeed as well as, and before the Lawful, if they came first; which
Intails likewise were after carried into Scotland; for so says Craig. Feud. fo.
70. Ab Anglis ad nos defluxisse puto And fo. 59. he says, Neque enim tale
Feudum ad collaterales extenditur, in^o quod majus est, si Maevio and
Semproniae conjugibus concedatur Feudum, and baredibus inter ipsos procreandis,
and nulli ex eo matrimonio supersint; Et Maevius ex alia conjuge liberos
susceperit, hi in feudo non succedant. Intails a Skreen to Adulteries.
This digression has been made, to show that the Original of Intails to more
Bodies than one on marriage, came from the old Pagan Priests, and now revived
by Popes, to be a skreen to Adulteries and Adulterous Successions, and thereby
their power over the Women, without which no Sacerdotal Empire can subsist. I
shall now proceed to show the other mischiefs ensuing from Intails, besides the
Patronage of Adulteries.

Intails destroy Patriarchy, and introduce Hierarchy, Gynarchy, Paedarchy.
First therefore, Intails on Marriages destroy Patriarchy, and introduce into
Families Hierarchy, Gynarchy, and Paedarchy. That Patriarchy was the first form
of Government instituted in Families by God and Nature, I think none will
contend; the Ancient Writers and Poets are full of it, especially in their
Celebrations of the Primaevous happiness of the Golden Age, and old Homer
begins, Nec fora consiliis fervent, nec judice; tantum
Antra colunt umbrosa altis in montibus Aedes,
Quisque suas regit uxorem Natosque --
Courts grew not hot with Judge or Lawyer then,
But each Man without strife,
In Mountain high ruled, or in shady Den,
His Children, House, and Wife.


Here Patriarchy was in its Throne, and the Moon and Stars all bowed to the
Sun, till the Priests of Priapus and Venus, as before touched; and for the
forementioned ends of satisfying their own Lust, Covetousness, and Ambition
first prohibited all Marriage except by a Priest in a Temple, then Intailing
all Estates to the Heirs, Lawfully begotten of the Body of the Woman married by
the Priest, and the Priest to be Judge both of the marriage, and the Lawful
begetting; by this the Priest introduced Hierarchy, and got a greater Dominion
over the Woman and the Children, than the Husband or Father, for he was not to
be judge whether the Wife or Children were his, but the Priest: and now the
Bishop by his Certificate, and likewise hereby the Priest became Judge of the
Alimony and Maintenance, and gave what he pleased to the Wife and her Children,
in regard the Father had no power of Alienation, by reason of the Pontificial
Intail to the Heirs of the Woman; and thereby the Hierarchy of the Priest, the
Gynarchy of the Wife, and Paedarchy of the Sons, necessarily arising from such
principles, turned the poor Patriarch out of Doors, and took his Goods, when,
and as they pleased.

Intails d^^fraud civil and natural Debts.
2. The Intail deprives the Father of power to provide for his younger Children,
but after his death the Sons are thereby left desperate, and betake themselves
to the Highway, and the Daughters to be prostitutes, to the dishonor and
destruction of themselves and Families.

3. Intails as they defraud the Children of the natural debts of Aliment due
from their Parents, so they defraud Creditors of the valuable debts due to them
from their Debtors.

4. They put the Subjects to infinite trouble, vexations, and charges, for
Fines, Recoveries, Licenses of Alienation, to cut them off Bills of
Discoveries, and hazard and danger, they being many times erroneous, and the
Intails secret, and thereby not only all the cost and labor lost, but likewise
the whole Purchase-money disbursed bona fide, by a Lawful Purchasor.

Intails cause the abuse of private Acts of Parliament
5. They are the chief occasions pretended of private Acts of Parliament,
whereby, contrary to all justice, the Lawful rights of Persons and Families are
taken from them, and they undone, without Summons, or Hearing, or notice to
make their claims; whereas by the just and honorable practice of the Kingdom
of Scotland, they use to make Subsequent Acts of Salvo jure cujuslibet, whereby
the rights of all Persons are preserved and restored, Acts of Salvo jure
cujuslibet in Scotland.
against all private Acts precedent, as appears by the Acts of Parliament Car.
1. p. 1. Act 31. and p. 2. Act 70. and p. 3. Act 42. and Car. 2. p. 2. Act 29.
and 2 Sess. Car. 2. p. 2. Act 52. and Sess. 3. Car. 2. Act 30. etc.

6. To mention a word more, how much the taking away of the Father's power of
free disposing, and Alienation of their Estates, by Intails, or any other
irrevocable settlements on Children, brings into Families the unexperienced
Pride of Paedarchy, whereby Children undo both their Parents and themselves (by
depriving of their Parents of the means of their Education in the true
Religion, and in Lawful Callings and Professions, the Parents having no other
Bridle on them, to restrain them from vicious courses, but to give them hopes
and fears of increasing or lessening their Portions, according to their
demerits) may appear, Bodin 25. where he says, It was obtained of Constantine,
that the propriety of the Mother's Inheritance should be in the Children, and
the Father should have only the usu-fruct. This was fair, that the Inheritance
which came by the Mother, the Father should not have power to Alien from her
Children. But after it was obtained of Theodosius the younger, That the
propriety of all manner of Goods in general, however they came by them, should
be to the Sons, the use only to the Fathers; so that they could not anywise
Alienate the propriety, Children command Parents by Intails.
nor dispose thereof, though for the benefit of their Children, yea with us, he
says, not so much as the bare use of such Goods is left to the Father, which
has so puffed up the hearts of Children, as that they oftentimes command their
Parents, by necessity constrained to obey them, or to dye for hunger.

Of the Barbarous Law of Illegitimation, or making Children incapable of
Succession to the Goods of their own Parents: And of the most excellent Law of
the Emperor Anastasius, decreeing all natural Children to be Legitimate, and
the repeal of the same, caused by the Strumpet Theodora, and the succeeding
Popes and Bishops.
The power of Sale of Legitimations of natural Children, was first in Pagan
Rome, usurped there by their Pagan Bishops and Priests, and has since in
imitation of them, been usurped by Christian Bishops in name, but indeed
Antichristian for the same filthy lucre; amongst whom, the Bishop of Rome and
the Archbishop of Canterbury have been the Primates: But after the Emperors
of Rome perceiving the vast Sums, as it were ex lotio, the Prerogative-Office,
and the Office of Faculties heaped together, they swept them all into their own
Exchequer, and suffered no Legitimation to be granted, unless they bought them
of the Emperors, who received great gain thereby, till the Empire came into
the hands of the virtuous Anastasius, who seeing the great oppressions on his
Subjects, by taking from them that Birthright, which the Law of God and Nature
gave, not only to them, but every Creature born into the World, to be provided
for by those who begot them, and this to be continued only for the profit of
his Exchequer; he disdained such sordid and impious gain, and made a most
pious, holy, and honorable Decree, That all natural Children should be
Legitimate, whereby all Intails to the Bodies of Women of the Husbands Estates
were cut off, and the mischiefs of bringing Fictitious, Adulterous,
Supposititious, and false Heirs into Families prevented. But after Theodora,
who was a common Prostitute, Theodora a common Prostitute, the Author of the
Ecclesiastical Laws of marriage.
came to be married to the Emp. Justinian; and another Theodora as bad as she,
and her Daughter Marozia, and other such Creatures came to be Strumpets to Pope
Sergius, and other Popes, and had the chief hand in making all the
Ecclesiastical Laws of Marriage, by which the Bishops to this day judge; Do any
expect that these Whores of Babylon, would ever bring any good Laws out of the
Stews into the Church? Certainly if any judicious and indifferent person will
take the pains to take a full view of the Canons, he will easily find, there is
not one which is not either a Gin to take their Prey, or a Bait to cover it;
and that if all the Theodoras, Marozias, Laisses, Thaisses, Phrynes and Floras
were to be alive again, and sit in a Conclave of Women, they nor all their
Chaplain Priests, could not invent better Laws for the advancement of their
Trade, or ways to destroy Religion, Justice, Virtue, Modesty, and Chastity,
then the Imperial, Papal, and Provincial Ganons are, under the name of
Ecclesiastical Laws: And that notwithstanding Bishops amongst Protestants
should be so long tolerated to judge arbitraties, or according to them, not only
of Patrimonies and Matrimonies, Filiations and Successions of the Subjects, but
of Kings and Kingdoms themselves, is horrible.

But to return now to Theodora, as Bodin Fol. 17. says, and appears by diverse
Civil Laws compared, after she had got the the Mastery of Justinian the Emperor
her Husband, a blockish and unlearned Prince, when she had made all the Laws
she could for the advantage of Women against their Husbands, she got him to
enact, That it should be death for a man to lie with any Woman but his Wife,
but if the Wife lay with other Men besides her Husband, she should only be
infamous, that is to say, she should have no punishment at all: for what honor
can Infamy take from her, who by Adultery has already lost her honor, and is
totally defamed? I forbear for brevity, to recite other of her Laws, but
amongst them all, there being not one good, except for her Trade, there cannot
be a more wicked then the next: For she having the command of her choused
Husband, caused him to repeal the excellent Law of the Emperor Anastasius,
which made, as before mentioned, all natural Children Legitimate, that is to
say, where their Filiation was acknowledged by the Father by Adoption, or other
sufficient Declaration by him of the same, whereby the old Ignoramus abrogated
a better Law then ever he made, or was in the whole heap raked together in his
name by Theodora and Tribonian, and they set up again the old Pontifical
Intails of Husband's Lands to the Heirs of the Body of the Woman, married
before a Priest in a Temple.

That unlawful Marriages of Parents ought not to illegitimate the Children.
Child not to be punished for the Father's sin. Desertion of Virgins after
deflouring caused by Illegitimation,
First, This is contrary to the Law of God, to punish the sins of the Parents on
the Children.

Secondly, This incourages Fathers to deflour Virgins, and when got with Child,
to desert both the Mother and the Child, as a far cheaper way, then by carrying
her first to a Priest and Temple to draw a charge on himself of her and her
Child as long as he lives; this incourages likewise such Fathers to get
Children by Incest, and Adultery, and Fornication, and any other way which is
not lawful, rather then according to the lawful Ordinance of God; because he
can cast off all these Women and Children by only saying, they are
illegitimate, and take an hundred more, and serve them the like, and they shall
thereby be defrauded of Succession to his Goods, and so much as Aliment from
the same: whereas if according to the Law of God, and the excellent Law of
Anastasius derived from the same, all natural Children were to be adjudged
Legitimate, the Children would be provided for, by being by Law made Successors
to their Fathers Estate, as far as the same will reach, and Fathers would be
discouraged to get Children unlawfully, when they saw they could not thereby
wickedly desert and make them illegitimate, or evade the Obligation laid on
them by the Law of God and Nature, to provide for their own.

A wicked Father ought not to have a greater privilege then a good. A Father
not to take advantage of his own wrong.
Thirdly, It Is very unjust, That a wicked Father should have greater privilege
then a good; and he who does his Child injury, then he who is his Benefactor;
for a Father who gets a Child unlawfully, does a double injury to the Child,
and rather ought to make double satisfaction to him, then if he got him
lawfully; for he dishonors the Child; and it is a rule in Law, None shall take
advantage of his own wrong; if the Child is unlawfully begot, who did the wrong
but the Father, who is therefore, if proved, to be punished for the wrong, and
not to take advantage of it against his injured Child to illegitimate and
disinherit him: nor much less ought the Law to do it, for no other reason, but
because the Father has done him one wrong to do him another, but in justice to
be the readier to make the Father who injured him to make satisfaction, by
adjudging him right of Aliment and Succession to his Estate, for as it is
inconsistent with Mercy, and the highest Cruelty, Afflictionem addere afflicto;
so is it with Justice, because the Coat is taken from an innocent to take his
Cloak also, or to make one injury done, the warrant to do another.

No such word as illegitimation, nor no such deed in the whole Scripture.
Fourthly, Because there is no foundation for this unnatural Cruelty of
illegitimation, or indeed worse then beastly exposing Children to be destroyed,
in the whole Scripture, neither is there such a word as Bastard in the whole
Original, Old Testament or New, Hebrew Text, or Septuagint, but the same is
falsely Translated by Papists and Bishops, to deceive the World, as shall be
more fully shown when I after come to the point of false-translation of all
words concerning Marriage.

Fifthly, All the examples of Scripture of unlawful Marriages yet Legitimate,
and make the Children Successors to their Fathers in such unlawful Marriages;
as Lot begot Moab and Ammon by Incest on his own Daughters, yet were Moab and
Ammon Legitimate Successors to their incestuous Father. Judah begot Pharez by
Incest on his Daughter in Law, yet was he Legitimate Successor to his
incestuous Father; David got Solomon on an Adulteress, with whom he had
committed Adultery in her Husband's life time, and killed her Husband to
obtain, yet did not this illegitimate Solomon, but he Succeeded to his Father.
And according to the Law of Anastasius, and the Law of God and Nature, whether
the marriage were lawful or unlawful, yet the Law was amongst the whole Nation
of the Israelites and Jews, That all natural Children were Legitimate,
Illegitimation of Children shows Fathers worse then Pagans Insidels,
wild-beasts, Monsters, Serpents.
and Succeeded to their Fathers; and the same Law was amongst the Egyptians,
Athenians, Phoenicians, Persians, Turks, Tartars, and Mahometans, who though
Infidels have been better then such counterfeit Christians, who make Laws to
illegitimate, and not provide for their own Children. O ye Jews, Turks,
Heathens, Pagans, Infidels! O ye wild Beasts in your Dens! O you Serpents in
the Deserts! Oh ye Monsters in the Sea, arise and witness against Popes and
Bishops, that your Dens, Deserts, and raging Seas, are not such Hells as the
Limbus puerorum of illegitimation; Did you ever illegitimate your little Ones?
did ye not labor to provide for your own? will you not with invincible Piety
hazard your own lives in defense of your young? Rise up in Judgment against
these Romish wild Beasts, Serpents, and Monsters, far more Cruel, Poisonous,
and Monstrous then your selves, who for gain teach to illegitimate, starve and
Murder their own self-begotten Babes before they can speak, deploring their
miserable Fate with weeping and wailing, to be the Issue of so unnatural and
cruel Parents.

Sixthly, I shall only add a word concerning the Original cause which produced
this wicked effect of illegitimation of Children, which the cursed invention of
Intails by the Priest, of the Lands of the Husband, to the Heirs of the Body of
whatsoever Woman he married, or certified married to the man; whereby as is
before mentioned, the Priest by Certificate, and the Woman by Secrecy, had
power to make Successors what Adulterous Heirs they pleased, and most commonly
begotten by the Priest himself to the Husbands Inheritance, to cut off these
Adulterous Intails, the most ancient whereof we read, were set up by Cecrops
for the Owls of Athens; and King Aegeus the natural Father of the famous
Theseus, was the first who invented Adoption to cut them off, and accordingly
Adopted his natural Son Theseus, who thereby became his Successor to his
Kingdom of Athens, whereby the Certificate of the Bishop was abolished, and the
Supremacy of the Kingdom taken from the Priest to the King, and the free
disposing left to Fathers of their Estates, to such Children as they
acknowledged, according to the deserving or undeserving of the Children. After
this Solon who is thought, though not as wise, yet to have been as great a
lover of women as Solomon, and to have been drawn by them into as great
Idolatry; for Solon as a principal piece of his Government, intended to be set
up by his Laws (as shall be after further touched) Consecrated and Founded
Priests, and a Temple to the Goddess Venus, and endowed the same with great
Revenues and Privileges, and Consecrated a multitude of Curtesans to exercise
their Trade, and pray for the prosperity of Greece in the same. And did what he
could to restrain the free liberty of Adoption by Husbands, whereby the Ladies
were prejudiced in their power of instituting Heirs to their Husbands Estates,
in as free a manner as their Goddess Venus gave them leave. But the more
Masculine Princes both of Greece and Rome, vindicated their own Power of
Adoption both against the Priests and the Ladies. And Anastasius without any
Formality of Adoption, cut off at a stroke all Feminine Intails, by making all
natural Children as they ought to be, Legitimate, which continued till (as
before mentioned) the Strumpet Theodora and her Bishops got the Law of
Anastasius repealed, and Adulterous Intails again set up. And the like Law was
in England, Fathers gave what they were bound by the Law of Nature to give to
their natural Children, for provision for them, and they Succeeded to the same,
'till the Bishops for the same ends as the Pagan and Theodoran Bishops did set
up. Here likewise by the Statute of Westmin. 2. Cap. 2. those Feminine and
Adulterous Intails have been since endeavored to be cut off by Fines and
Recoveries. But the many Inconveniences of those ways make the Remedy almost as
bad as the Disease.

No remedy but abolishing Intails, and restoring the Law of Anastasius.
To conclude therefore, there is no way to prevent the exposing and desertion of
Children by Fathers, the Adulteries of Mothers, and the murders of so many
Infants, occasioned by this Diabolical Pontifical invention of Illegitimation,
as the abolishing all Intails to more Bodies then one; and the restoring of
that most excellent Law of Anastasius, That all natural Children shall be
Legitimate, and the Innocent Babes be no longer punished and destroyed for the
sins of the Parents.

Of the Law of Consensus non Concubitus facit Matrimonium.
Of the Pagan Goddess Juno, and the Popish Mother of St. Kentigern, both got
with Child without a Man.

Of the Lady Ann of Britain, married to the bare Leg of the Ambassador of the
Emperor Maximilian.

Of the Lady Pulcheria Sister to Theodosius, the Emperor married to Martianus;
the Lady Etheldred to two Husbands; the Lady Amigunda to the Emperor Henry the
Second; the Lady Editha to Edward the Confessor; and the Lady Ann of Cleve to
Henry the Eighth, all married by Priests, but not by their Husbands.

Intention of the mind.
The Authors of this Law were the Athenian Owl, and the Romish Buzzard, making
intention of the mind, and publication of the Priest to be a Marriage, and not
carnal knowledge. And these two pieces of Nonsense have by their Canon Enacted,
That Consensus non Coneubitus facit Matrimonium, consent not carnal knowledge
makes Matrimony, if before a Priest in a Temple.

Owls were plenty in Athens, and Cecrops was the first King there, who made
this Law; and the Pope, the King of Rome, who do excellently well agree in
their Laws; for Cecrops was the first amongst the Greeks, who invented Marriage
should be made, by the intention of the mind, and publication of the Priest;
and Images should be made, and Altars set up, and the Sacrifice offered. So is
the Pope the first who has made Laws amongst the Romanists, That the intention
of the mind, and publication by the Priest should be marriage; and that Images
should be made, and high Altars set up, and the Sacrifice of the Mass offered.
Cecrops Reigned a little after Moses, and the Pope Reigned a little after
Christ, but neither of them had their Laws of Marriage, or their other Laws
from Moses or Christ, but from the old Pagan Egyptian Priests; and as they did,
they made their Laws not by that Law of God, which was more Ancient then the
Egyptian, but made their filthy Laws for filthy lucre; whereby it is easy to
see in these Birds the Owl and the Buzzard, as well as Men: how well good Wits
jump for their Gain, and pretend that Gain is Godliness!

Verba de praesenti.
This kind of Matrimony Gratian makes much ado about, and disputes the question
pro and con, whether sponsion by words de praesenti make Matrimony? which
question is composed of perfect Nonsense, and a lie and impossibility; For,

1. All promises are of things future, and not of present or past; and it is as
impossible by their Sacrament of Marriage, to transubstantiate time future into
that which is present, as it is time present into that which is past.

2. It is a mere lie for any Man to say to a Woman, I do make you a Mother, or
get you with Child, when he does only promise to do the same, and it is as
impossible for the Priests to transubstantiate the verbal contract or words,
into the real contract of carnal knowledge in facie Ecclesiae, unless as in the
Temple of Venus, he will have it actually done in his presence, that he may be
able the better to give his Certificate thereof, on a Trial of ne unques
accouple in loyal Matrimony. But I think it a mean condescension for any
Philosopher to dispute with the Pedantic Sophistry of Gratian about Matrimony,
as it is for a Divine to wast many Arguments against Ttransubstantiation of
Mass: I shall only therefore turn him off to the Women, amongst whom he will
not find the most simple Good-wife, who will not be able to tell him, that an
ounce of Mother-wit is better then a pound of Clergy; and that Matrimony cannot
be without a Mother, nor a Mother without Conception, nor Conception without
knowing a Man, unless by Miracle: And though he Preach never so impudently,
That consent and not carnal knowledge make Matrimony, yet that is clean
contrary to the Text, Luke 1.31. where Mary replies to the message of the Angel
(Thou shall conceive in thy Womb and bring forth a Son) How shall this be
seeing I know not a Man? And might have been witnessed by the Angel himself, of
whom Christ says, They neither marry, nor give in Marriage, which they might
do, if verba de praesenti will do it. But the next two stories will show whence
the Popish Canonists have this Doctrine. And the next after, will show by the
Testimony of great and virtuous Ladies, how impossible it is, and much better
they deserve to have implicit Faith given them, than to the Doctors.

Of the Pagan Goddess Juno, and the Popish Mother of Saint Kentigern, both got
with Child without a Man.
Juno and the Mother of Kentigern both got with Child without a Man.
Juno being displeased that Jupiter should bring out Minerva, the Goddess of
Wisdom, only by striking his head without a Woman. She also consulted the
Goddess Flora, as good a one as her self, how she might bring out a Son without
a Man, she meant without her Husband: Flora bid her touch a Flower which was in
the field of Olenius, which being done, she conceived, and was her own Midwife
too as well as Jupiter, and brought forth Mars, who being a Son of discontent,
was made the God of War and Discord.

In like manner the Mother of St. Kentigern, being in great distress and
fervent desire of a Son, she earnestly prayed, and begged of Jesus that she
might imitate his Virgin Mother in conception, and birth of a Child without a
Man, and accordingly within a little she finds her self with Child, and often
protested she never knew Man; but by the Law of that Country where she lived,
she must, because she was thought to be very light, be cast headlong from the
top of a high Mountain: she weeps and prays, but the Executioner does his
work, and on trial found her far lighter then she was thought, for she fell
down, and was neither killed, bruised, nor hurt, but was then carried on
Shipboard many Leagues into the Sea, and there turned out into a small Boat of
Leather, destitute of all human help, yet with great speed and safety she
arriveth at a far distant Port; and Landing, she is delivered of a Son, that
famous Saint St. Kentigern, who no doubt, if his Mother had but prayed, that
this Son might have been born without a Mother too, as he was without Father,
and been left on the Sea shore at the same place she brought him forth, and the
S^epheards might find him there, no doubt he had then been the second
Miraculous Adam, or Melchisedeck without Father or Mother in this latter Age of
the World.

Of the Lady Ann of Britain, married to the bare leg of the Ambassador of the
Emperor Maximilian.
Ann of Britain.
Charles the Eighth the French King, having Ann the Daughter and Heir of
Francis Duke of Britain in his custody, she being Inheritrix to that Duchy, to
Unite Britain to France, intending to marry the said Ann, one obstacle amongst
others alleged was, That she was pre-contracted and married to Maximilian, by
the usual Ceremony of his Ambassador putting his bare Leg into Bed to her for
his Master.

1. For the Contract he held it invalid, because she was his Homager or Ward,
and her Marriage by the Tenure belonged to him.

2. His Divines told him that the Ceremony of marrying by Proxy, by putting the
bare Leg into her Bed, was only an invention of Men, and was no consummation by
the Law of the Church; and on the same reason it might as well be said, that
Banes, Publication and Contracting of Marriage in facie Ecclesie, and
Promulgation of the same by the Priest, are inventions of Men, and but
Ceremonies as well as the other, Heyl. 196. This was a Contract, but no
Matrimony.

Of Pulcheria Sister to Theodosius the Emperor, married to Martianus. Of the
Lady Etheldred married to two Husbands. The Lady Amigunda married to the
Emperor Henry the Second. The Lady Editha to Edward the Confessor. The Lady
Ann of Cleve to Henry the Eighth, all married by the Priest, but not by their
Husbands.
Zonaras reports, That the Empire being in great danger by reason of Wars with
the Goths, Pulcheria.
on consideration that there was necessary to be chosen some able person to be
Emperor against them; Theod^sius being dead without any Son and Martianus, an
old experienced Captain, being taken to be the fittest for that purpose, he was
chosen Emperor by the order of Pulcheria the Sister of Theodosius: and to give
him the greater Authority, Pulcheria assented to marry him, on security given
by him, that they should both live Chaste, and he suffer her to continue in
Virginity, on which they were married, and they both faithfully observed their
agreement of Chastity. This Lady made a very repugnant Vow to live a Nun, yet
to marry therefore, I think her Vow doubly unlawful; first as to her self, if
young, open to a necessary temptation, and then as to her Husband, though an
old Soldier, to a probable one. Mr. Ricaut Turk. Hist. p. 72. Says, Ghear Han
Sultan.
That Ghear Han Sultan, Daughter to Sultan Ibrahim, has had already five
Husbands, yet continues a Virgin.

Etheldred.
Etheldred was the Daughter of Anna King of the East Angles, she was married to
two Husbands, one after another, yet continued still a Virgin, and at last
became a Nun, and was Canonized a Saint, under the name of St. Audry.

Amigunda.
Henry the Second, Emperor, having married Amigunda the Daughter of the Count
Palatine of Rhine, they lived most Chastely, both of them observing voluntary
Virginity, without having any carnal knowledge one with the other. It is
reported, that being accused of Adultery, she purged her self by going
barefoot upon plates of fiery hot Iron, and that the Emperor was Penitent,
for exposing her to such danger, being so Chaste and Virtuous a Woman: she was
very much beholding to him, to deny to Husband her himself, yet quarrel so far
as to suspect her of another.

Edward the Confessor married Editha the beautiful, and indeed virtuous
Daughter of Earl Godwin, Editha.
and because he had taken displeasure against the Father, he would show no
kindness to the Daughter, he made her his Wife, but conversed not with her as a
Wife, but only at Board and not at Bed, or if at Bed, no otherwise than David
with Abishag; and yet was content to hear her accused of incontinency, whereof
if she were guilty, he could not be innocent: and he not only entertained such
thoughts of his Wife, but the like accusation against his own Mother Queen
Emma, of unchaste familiarity with Alwin Bishop of Winchester, and suffered her
to be put to her purgation of fire Ordeal, by passing over Nine red hot
Plow-shares barefoot, which she all escaped, to the astonishment of the
beholders, and thereupon was adjudged Innocent, though there might be much
juggling in those Trials; but whether there were so or not, it became not a Son
to divulge the shame of his Mother. It seems he was Chaste, but without
discretion, and not without injury to his Wife, and impiety to his Mother, Bak.
Hist. 18.

Ann of Cleve.
The same dealing had the Lady Ann of Cleve, who was married to Henry the
Eighth, who lay by her six Months, yet left her a Virgin: And when her Ladies
who attended her, said they looked now every day to hear of her being with
Child; to whom she replied, They might look long enough, unless saying, How
do thou sweetheart? Good Morrow sweetheart, and such like words could make
a great belly: for, said she, more then this never passed between the King and
me, Bak. Hist. 288.

I hope therefore none of our Protestant Ladies will believe this wicked
Doctrine of Pope or Turk, That Consensus non Concubitus facit Matrimonium, if
they do, we shall have no young Soldiers to fight against either.

Of the Custom of desertion of Virgins after deflouring.
Of the desertion of the Lady Lucy by Edward the Fourth, for the Lady Elizabeth
Gray, and the infelicity followed thereon to them, and their Children.

Of the like desertion by a Gentleman in Ireland, after the birth of a Child.

Of the ancient Form of Marriage-Contracts, Se post concubitum non deserturum,
now repugnantly turned into verba de praesenti.

Of Seditions and Civil Wars raised for the said Crime of Desertion.

Of the Law giving liberty of Temptation of a Minor married to an Husband, of
desertion of her Husband after carnal knowledge, and to take a richer.

A relation of the same practiced in Scotland.

Of the Law tempting Women to desert their Husbands, by giving more Alimony
then the Portion.

Desertion of the Lady Lucy by Edward the Fourth.
There being a Marriage in Treaty between Edward the Fourth King of England, and
the Lady Bona Sister to Carlot the French Queen; the King happened to fall in
love with the Lady Elizabeth Gray the Widow of John Gray, who in the Civil War
between the House of Lancaster and York was his Enemy, and died in Battle at
St. Albans against him: the old Duchess of York his Mother was very eager for
the French Match, but however desired, if that did not please him (and he would
needs marry one of his own Subjects) he should rather marry the Lady Elizabeth
Lucy, whom he had a little before enticed to his Bed, which was a Marriage
before God, and better then the Lady Elizabeth Gray, who was the relict of
another Man, and his Enemy too; and thereupon she instigated the Lady Elizabeth
Lucy to claim a Praecontract of him, which Lady though set on by the King's
Mother, and others, yet when she was solemnly sworn to speak the truth, she
confessed to this effect, That he never in direct express words made any
Promise or Contract to her of Marriage, but he spoke so loving words unto her,
that she verily hoped he would have married her, and that if it had not been
for such kind words, she would never have assented he should have lain with
her, on which pretense the flattering Bishops, as though all Impediments were
removed, by the not proving any express or formal words of Contract, though the
real Contract of lying with her was apparent, to please the King gave him their
allowance, That he should please his second Fancy, and not to be tied to his
first: And he accordingly married Elizabeth Gray according to the
Ecclesiastical Law, Consensus non Concubitus facit matrimonium. Which
Repudiation of the Lady Lucy was certainly as much against the Law of God, as
the Bill of Divorce by the Law of Moses was against the Doctrine of Christ, for
ab initio non fuit sic, that a verbal Contract of words should pretend above
the real Contract of carnal knowledge: And the Lady Gray, though it does not
appear but that she was otherwise a very virtuous Lady, yet if she knew the
truth of what is before mentioned concerning the Lady Lucy, she cannot be
excused in taking that Husband to her self, who had already given the first
pledge, and made the chief and real Contract of Marriage with another Woman; and
far happier might she have been if she had ascended a meaner but more lawful
Bed; for the Earl of Warwick at his return home from France, finding by this
Marriage his Emb^ssage frustrated, the Lady Bona deluded, the French King
abused, and himself made a stale, and the disgraceful Instrument of all this;
deeply resented, and waiting his time, raised an Army, and by surprise took the
King Prisoner, and presently conveyed him to Middleton-Castle in Yorkshire, to
remain there in safe custody with the Bishop of York, where if he had not by
fair words and Money gotten his Keepers to permit him the recreation of
Hunting, and thereby means to escape, he had lain at Mercy. And after he was
escaped, and had gathered sufficient Forces, whereby he made the Earl of
Warwick fly to the French King, where he was honorably received, yet the Earl
returned again so Potent, with the French, joined with the great party he had
in England, that the King was fain to fly to Burgundy, and the new advanced
Queen to take Sanctuary at Westminster: And though her Husband again returned,
and by a hazardous Battle, wherein Warwick himself, and many other Lords were
slain, he recovered again his Kingdom, yet he had so little quiet, and less
security, that what enjoyment she obtained of him, was always in fear and
danger of the Field, and other Competitors of the Bed, after a man guilty, so
more unhappy then her self; and when she lost him by death, she lived to see
those Remains of him he had left her, two hopeful Sons most cruelly Murdered,
and for the conclusion of all, her self confined to the Monastery of Bermondsie
in Southwark, and all her Goods confiscate by her own Son in Law Henry the
Seventh, yet no just cause appearing against her. In which Monastery in great
pensiveness within few Years she died.

There is a Case reported by Sir Jo. Davies, and likewise mentioned by the
learned Dr. Godolphin in his Repertorium Canonicum 488. to have happened in
Ireland, which was this, G. B. Esquire had Issue C. B. on the Body of J.D. whom he
had never carried to Priest or Temple; but his Son C. B. Desertion of a Woman
after a Child, for a richer in Ireland.
was begot by natural marriage without any Pontifical Ceremony. About Sixteen
Years after G. B. having found a Lady who was richer, and of a greater Estate
and Reputation then his first Woman, by whom he had his eldest Son C. B.
Marries her with assent of her Friends, by whom he had Issue E. B. and died;
after the death of G. B. the said C. B. his reputed Son, and his Mother being
both left alive, continued silent by the space of nine Years, 'till they
happened to have one of their Kindred Bishop of K. by whom they then were
encouraged by new hope to obtain their Right; who it seems not experienced in
the Forms of Judicial Proceedings without any Libel exhibited, and not
Convocatis Convocandis, proceeded to take the Depositions of many Witnesses, to
prove that the said G. B. Twenty-nine Years before, had lawfully married and
took to Wife the said J. D. Mother of the said C. B. And the said C. B. was the
Legitimate and lawful Son and Heir of the said G. B. And these Depositions so
taken, the said Bishop caused to be engrossed and reduced into the Form of a
solemn Act, and having put his Signiture and Seal to that Instrument, delivered
the same to C. B. who published it, and thereupon alleged himself Son and Heir
to the said G. B. Hereupon an information is put into the Castle-Chamber in
Ireland, against the Bishop, suggesting a Conspiracy to Legitimate C. B. Son,
and illegitimate E. B. the Daughter of the said G. B. And for this Practice the
said Bishop and others were Censured. This Case and the forementioned Case of
Kenne, are both contrary one to another, and both contrary to the Law of God:
In Kennes Case the wrong Heir is Legitimated by the nullifying of a lawful
Marriage consummate by carnal knowledge, and birth of the right Heir, by
Sentence of the Spiritual Jurisdiction, and there the Common Law will not
relieve the right. Such Faith, they say they are bound to give to the Spiritual
Sentence, whether right or wrong, whether with cause or without cause, until
the Spiritual Judge revoke his own Sentence himself; but here where a right Heir
is made Legitimate by Sentence Declaratory, of a lawful Marriage between the
Father and Mother, of the right Heir, in the Castle-Chamber, the Common Law
will Legitimate the wrong Heir, and will give no faith to the Sentence of the
Spiritual Judge, if that they think it wrong; so it seems the Common Law in
Westminster Hall, and the Common Law in the Castle-Chamber, are very contrary
one to another as to the point of giving faith concerning Marriage and
Legitimation to Spiritual Jurisdiction, yet both contrary to right, and
destructive to the lawful Heir according to the Law of God, and both give faith
to Common and Canon Law, above the Supreme Law and Legislator.

Amongst the Greeks the manner of the Contract of Marriage was, The Parties
going to the Temple before the Priest, the Man swore* in the presence of
Witnesses, Se sponsam post concubitum invitum non deserturum, That he would
not, after he should have lain with the Woman, forsake her without her consent.
Arch. At. 156. The like form of words in the Marriage-Contracts was used by
the ancient Romans, who shall rise up in Judgment against the Popes, who unless
Parties mumble the aforementioned Nonsense of Verba de praesenti, give License
for Money to deceive and desert a Thousand, though they have never so many
Children by them, and to make all Women common, and to their own Priests to
give example, being interdicted all verbal Marriage, that they may have the
more liberty to abuse the real, and to take and leave all they please, and as
often as they please. The like do the Guiny Priests who converse with the Devil,
and their form of Contract of Marriage is no doubt according as he will have
it. For the Woman is there sworn to the Man, that she will not desert; but the
man swears not to her, nor will oblige himself by any verbal Contract, but is
to be left as free as any Popish Priest whatsoever.

Desertion after deflouring has caused Seditions and Civil Wars.
This deflouring and desertion was a while in fashion amongst the Roman Nobles
and Patricians, who used to deflour the fairest Plebeian Virgins, yet by their
Law would allow this to be no Marriage, nor suffer a Patrician to marry a
Plebeian; but only to abuse them, till the Plebeians rose against them and beat
the Patricians into better manners. The like raised a Rebellion in Persia: and
Mutius lib. 22. Chron. Ger. relates, That a Rebellion arose amongst the Suisse
Vri, and under- Waldensians, because their Nobles and Governors abused to
their Lust all their handsome Virgins at pleasure, and then cast them off. If
the greatest Peer get a Beggar with Child, the Marriage is indissoluble.
Whereas by the unquestionable Law of God, if the greatest Peer lie with a
Beggar, whom he may lawfully marry, and get her with Child, he thereby makes
her his Wife; and though before the birth of the Child she expressly Contract,
She will take hire, and the same shall not be a Marriage, or after she give a
release; yet the Marriage is indissoluble; for the Act of God of giving a
Child, does confirm and establish it, and whom the Act of God has joined, the
Act of the Parties or of all human Powers can never lawfully put asunder. So,
as is said, one cause of the late Rebellion of the Moors under Gayland was, the
abusing and desertion of their Virgins by their Courtiers.

Of the Law giving liberty of Temptation to a Minor married to an Husband,
after carnal knowledge to desert her Husband, and take a richer.
In Scotland while it was my fortune to be put to sit there, as one of the
Commissioners for Administration of Justice, it happened the Earl of B.
deceased, having left two Daughters Inheritrixes of one of the greatest Estates
in that Kingdom, both infra Annos nubiles, and by Will left their custody and
disposing to diverse Guardians, the Countess of B. his Relict, married the Earl
of W. And after they two, the Earl being the Father in Law, and the Countess
the Mother, disposed of the eldest Daughter, being under the Age of Twelve, in
Marriage with the Son of G. S. as I remember the Sheriff of T. being about the
Age of Fourteen, being a Gentleman of a very good Family, and of the same name
of the Family of the Earl of B. deceased, who was the Father of the Daughters,
but not of equal Estate. This Marriage was Consummated by the usual public
Ceremonies, and by carnal knowledge. The Guardians hearing their Pupil married
without their consent, being very much troubled, applied themselves to us, (who
had then de facto all the Power Ecclesiastical and Civil, both of Bishops and
Judges, which the Sword could put on us,) to null the Marriage, they alleging
their Pupil to be infra Annos nubiles, and likewise the Marriage to be made
without consent of the Guardians appointed by the Father, whereupon Summons
were sent to all Parties concerned, to appear and answer the matter before us
in the Court at Edinburgh. At the day appointed, there appeared the new married
Lady all in Silver, the Earl of W. the Countess, and other Nobles with their
Train, and as near as I can remember, so long since, what was spoken between
the Parties and the Court, were to this effect.

Earl of W. to the President of the Court, My Lord, we give appearance to your
Summons, though I know no reason we should be troubled hither. Your Power is
unlimited, and you do what you please, but I hope you will not part Man and
Wife.


Presi. Complaint has been made to us, and we shall only examine the truth of
the matter, and do nothing but Justice therein, as we find the same to be, and
as we ought to do.


Thereupon the Earl and Countess and all other Parties, except the new Married
Lady, were Ordered to withdraw out of the Room, and as the fashion there is,
on any Consultation by the Court, the Doors to be close shut. The young Lady
seeing her Mother and all her Friends shut out of doors from her, and her self
detained Prisoner alone within the Bar to be examined by the Court, began to be
something appal'd, but the President comforting and encouraging her, she
addressed her self to answer what should be demanded.

Presi. Are you married to the young Gentleman mentioned by your Guardians?


Lady. Yes.


Presi. Is it by your free consent, or were you compelled or deceived to do it?


Lady. It is my free consent, and I was not compelled or deceived.


Presi. Were there any other Matches proposed to you besides this, and did you
see the Men?


Lady. There were others proposed, and I saw them, but I liked this best.


Presi. Why would you disparage your self to marry one so much beneath you, in
Degree and Estate?


Lady. It was my Father's will, he having no Son, that I should marry one of
the name of his Family, of which name this Gentleman, I have married, is; and I
married him that I might preserve the name of my Father's Family, according to
his will.


Presi. Why would you, being so sickly and and weakly as you appear to be,
marry under the Age of Marriage, it is enough to destroy your health, and
endanger your life?


Lady. I am more healthy then I was before.


Presi. You are young, and your mind may change, you shall have other Noble
young Persons, and fit for your Marriage presented to you, and you shall take
your choice of them.


To which the virtuous young Lady deservedly incensed, though under the Age of
Twelve, replied pretty tartly, That she should be then a Whore, if she should
change her Husband for another Man.

Thereupon the Lady was Ordered to with draw, and the Court on Consultation
Ordered, That she should be delivered to the custody of a Governess in her own
House at D. who should admit any other Noble Persons to present themselves unto
her, as likewise the Husband she had already married, but no otherwise then
openly, in the presence and sight of the Governess; and if the Lady liked to
make choice before she came to the Age of Twelve, of any other to be Husband,
she should have free liberty to do the same, if not then, her present choice
should stand.

This Sentence was right, if you admit the Common Law, that great Popish Idol,
which is worshipped through the three Kingdoms, to be the Law of God, but
otherwise 'twas an unlawful thing, to put a new married Wife who had lain with
her Husband, and for ought the Court knew might be with Child by him, to put
her on the Temptation of changing her Husband, to take a richer, and thereby
leave it to the wicked Canon Law, which would have nulled her Marriage, to have
illegitimated her Child, only for that desertion of her Husband, to which that
wicked Law tempted her, but she was more Noble then to entertain such vile
thoughts, and continued constant to her Husband till her death.

Of the Law tempting Women to desert their Husbands, by giving more Alimony
then the Interest of the Portion.
Another great mischief is in the Ecclesiastical Laws, and those Laws which
follow them, they will on Divorce under the name of Alimony, give the Woman
more then the Interest of her Portion amounts to, which incourages all Women to
seek Divorces, whereas the form of Divorce amongst the Romans was, Res tuas
tibi habeto, and she was not to have more then she brought with her, and the
same is the Law of the Jews, and all other Nations, except such as live under
Popish Ecclesiastical Laws. And the injustice of our Ecclesiastical Laws to the
contrary, is not one of the least causes, why Divorce and Separations are of
late grown so frequent, because Women know they shall gain by the Divorce, and
rob their Husbands of more then ever they brought them.

Of the Law of Divorcing after Procreation of a Child, for precontract, or pre
copulation without pre procreation. Of the Law prohibiting liberty of private
Marriage without public Witnesses. Of the Law giving the Jurisdiction of the
secret causes of Divorce between Parents, and secret uncleanness of Children in
their Parents Houses, to public Tribunals. Of the Law compelling persons
married, though mortal Enemies, to Co-habitation. Of the Law of Divorce a Mensa
and Thoro. Of the Canon compelling the parties on Divorce for Adultery, to give
Bonds and Sureties, not to marry again during each others life. Of the custom
of Protestants marrying with Papists.
Edward the Fourth was, as is alleged, first verbally contracted to Eleanor
Daughter to john Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, married after to Sir Thomas Butler
Baron of Sudley; after this verbal contract, he married Elizabeth the Widow of
Sir John Gray, she lived his Wife Eighteen Years and Eleven Months, and he had
issue by her Three Sons and Seven Daughters: Elizabeth his eldest Daughter was
first promised in marriage to Charles Dauphin of France, but married after to
King Henry the Seventh; Edward the Fourth being dead, leaving his two Sons
young, in the custody of his Brother Richard the Third; they were after
murdered by him, to make his own way to the Crown: but first in preparation
thereto, Dr. Shaw in a Sermon by him Preached at Paul's-Cross, took for his
Text, Spuria vitulamina non agent altas radices: And to make short work, they
were after by Act of Parliament Proclaimed Bastards, and not inheritable to the
Crown, on no other Allegation made but the pre-contracts before mentioned with
Eleanor Butler, as is recorded in the Parliament Roll.

Husband divorces the Wife for cause of precopulation committed by himself.
Buchanan rerum Scoticarum lib. 11.652. relates, That Earl Bothwel aspiring to
obtain the marriage of Mary Queen of Scots, compelled his Wife to accuse him of
pre-copulation with another Woman, before he married his Wife. Gordonia
Bothuelii uxor cogitur in duplici foro litem de Divortio intendere; apud
judices Regios accusat uxor maritum adulterii, quae una justa apud eos erat
divortii causa, apud judices Papanos lege vetitos, tamen ab Archiepiscopo fani
Andreae ad hanc litem cognoscendam, litem dare accusatur idem ante Matrimonium,
cum propinqua uxoris stupri consuetudinem habuisse, nulla in Divortio faciendo
nec in testibus nec in judicibus fit mora; intra enim decimum diem lis
suscepta, disceptata and dijudicata est. After, he says, one thing thought
necessary was, ut consuetae servarentur Ceremoniae, ut videlicet public in
conventu civium tribus diebus Dominicis nuptiae futurae inter Jacobum Heburnum,
and Mariam Stuartam denuntiarentur, ut si quis quid vitii ant impedimenti
sciret quo minus legitime coirent, rem ad Ecclesiam deferrent. And after, he
says, Cum de nuptiis in Ecclesia denunciandis ageretur, and lector, cujus id
munus erat constanter recusare, collecti Diaconi, and seniores cum reluctari
non auderent, jubent Ecclesiastem nuptias futuras, de more edicere and is
quidem hactenus paruit, ut se vitium quidem scire profiteretur, ac paratum seu
Reginae seu Bothuelio cum vellent judicare, is cum in arcem accersitus,
venisset. Regina eum ad Bothuelium remisit, qui quanquam nec blanditiis, nec
minis Ecclesiastem de proposito deduceret, nec rem disputationi committere
auderet, tamen nuptias apparat: unus Orcadum Episcopus est inventus, qui
gratiam aulicam veritati praeferret, caeteris reclamantibus, causasque
proferentibus, cur Legitimae non essent nuptiae cum eo, qui duas uxores ad huc
vivas haberet, tertiam, ipse suum nuper fassus adulterium, demisisset: ita
indignantibus omnibus bonis, vulgo etiam execrante, propinquis per literas
improbantibus, inchoatus, and publicis Ceremoniis simulatis etiam factas
detestantibus, tamen Matrimonium celebratur. Which forementioned pre-contract
alleged against Edward the Fourth, was no more just cause to Illegitimate his
Children, then it was to Murder them, nor was his pre-copulation with another
Woman, confessed by Earl Bothwel, any more just cause to Divorce his Wife, then
it was to aspire to the Kingdom. 32 H. 8. cap. 38. takes notice of the great
mischiefs ensuing by dissolving by pre-contract Marriage, consummate by bodily
knowledge, and fruit of Children or Child, which Statute follows in these words.

WHereas heretofore the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, 32 H. 8. cap. 38.
Of precontract.
has always entangled and troubled the mere Jurisdiction, and regal power of
this Realm of England, and also unquieted much the Subjects of the same, by his
usurped power in them, as by making that unlawful which by God's Word is
Lawful, both in Marriage and other things, as hereafter shall appear more at
length; and till now of late in our Sovereign Lord's time, which is otherwise
by learning taught, than his predecessors in time past long time have been,
has so continued the same, whereof yet some sparks be left, which hereafter
might kindle a greater fire, and so remaining, his power not to seem utterly
extinct. Therefore it is thought most convenient to the King's Highness, his
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with the Commons of this Realm, assembled in this
present Parliament, that two things, especially for this time, be with
diligence provided for, whereby many inconvemences have ensued, and many more
might ensue and follow: As where heretofore diverse and many Persons, after
long continuance together in Matrimony, without any allegation of either of the
parties, or any other at their Marriage, why the same Matrimony should not be
good, just, and lawful, and after the same Matrimony Solemuized, and Consummate
by carnal knowledge, and also sometimes fruit of Children ensued of the same
Marriage, upon pretense of former Contract made, and not Consummate by carnal
Copulation (for proof whereof, two Witnesses by that Law were only required)
been divorced and separate, contrary to God's Law, and so the true Matrimony
both so Solemnized in the face of the Church, and Consummate with bodily
knowledge, and confirmed also with fruit of Children had between them, clearly
frustrate and dissolved: Further also, by reason of other Prohibitions then
God's Law admits, for their lucre by that Court invented; the dispensation
whereof, they always reserved to themselves, as in kindred or affinity between
Cousingermans, and so to the fourth degree, carnal knowledge of any of the same
kin, or affinity before in such outward degrees, which else were lawful, and be
not prohibited by God's-Law, and because they would get money by it, keep a
reputation of their usurped Jurisdiction; whereby not only much discord between
lawful married persons, has (contrary to God's ordinance) arisen much debate
and suits at Law, with wrongful vexation, and great damage of the Innocent
party has been procured, and many just Marriages brought in doubt, and danger
of undoing, and also many times undone, and lawful Heirs disherited; whereof
there had never else, but for his vainglorious usurpation, been moved any such
question, since freedom in them was given us by God's Law, which ought to be
most sure and certain. But that notwithstanding marriages have been brought
into such an uncertainty thereby, that no marriage could be surely knit and
bounden, but it should lie in either of the parties power, and arbiter, casting
away the fear of God, by means and compasses to prove a pre-contract, a
kindred, and alliance, or a carnal knowledge to defeat the same, and so under
the pretense of these allegations before rehearsed, to live all the days of
their lives in detestable adultery, to the utter destruction of their own
Souls, and provocation of the terrible wrath of God, upon the places where such
abominations were used and suffered.

Be it therefore Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That from the first day of the Month July next coming,
in the year of our Lord God 1540. All and every such Marriages, as within this
Church of England shall be Contracted between lawful Persons (as by this Act we
declare all Persons to be lawful, that be not prohibited by God's Law to marry)
such Marriages being Contract and Solemnized in the face of the Church, and
Consummate with Bodily knowledge, or fruit of Children, or Child, being had
therein, between the parties so married, shall be by Authority of this present
Parliament aforesaid, Deemed, Judged, and taken to be Lawful, Good, Just, and
Indissolvable, notwithstanding any pre-contract, or pre-contracts of Matrimony,
not Consummate with Bodily knowledge, which either of the parties so married,
or both shall have made with any other person or persons, before the time of
Contracting that Marriage which is Solemnized and Consummate, or whereof such
fruit is ensued or may ensue as before; and notwithstanding any Dispensation,
Prescription, Law, or other thing granted or confirmed by Act or otherwise. And
that no reservation, or prohibition (God's Law except) shall trouble or impeach
any Marriage without the Levitical degrees. And that no person of what estate,
degree, or condition soever he or she be, shall after the first day of the
Month of July aforesaid, be admitted to any of the Spiritual Courts within this
the King's Realm, or any his Graces other Lands and Dominions, to any Process,
or Plea, or Allegation contrary to this aforesaid Act.

1. Here it appears what a necessary stroke this Act gave, against the usurped
power of Ecclesiastical Laws, and Jurisdiction, in this and other points of
Marriage, forbidding any Spiritual Courts within this Realm, or any his other
Lands and Dominions, to admit any Process, Plea, or Allegation, contrary to
this Act. And although hereby, one of the heads of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
was, as is said of the Beasts, Rev. 13.3. as it were wounded to death; yet so
great was the subtilty of the Serpent, that the Ecclesiastics soon after, by
abusing the minority of that most pious, though young King, Edward the Sixth,
got all what the wisdom and courage of his Father had Enacted against them,
repealed by the Son, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 23. Edward the Sixth abused by Papists
in his Minority, to repeal his Father's Act of Precontracts.
And thinking themselves therein not sufficiently secure, they again procured
the same to be repealed by 1 Eliz. 1. In which repeals, I can see nothing but a
Papist Plot against them both, to revive those Ecclesiastical Laws by their own
Authority against themselves, which might have yielded most dangerous pretenses
against their own Legitimations and Marriages, and Issue, if they had happened
to have had any: For certainly no Marriage or Issue can be secure or certain,
if any fraudulent person may secretly pre-contract, or pre-copulate with any
vile person, and take Bonds of him, or her, to release the same upon request,
and then marry another person, Ignorant and Innocent, and have Children
procreate between them, and then cause the party who had the pre-contract or
pre-copulation, to sue and obtain a Divorce against the Innocent person to be
Divorced, and Children Bastardized, and Disinherited; and then to give a
release to the party conspiring in the fraud. How is it possible to avoid this
wickedness, if pre-contract or pre-copulation, should be allowed a sufficient
cause to dissolve Marriage, Consummate by the Birth of a Child? And how is it
possible propriety to be, if a distinction be not kept between it and contract,
and between obligation and possession, according to the old Rule of Law, Rem
Domino vel non Domino vendente duobus, in jure est potior, traditione prior?
And the Rule of the Civil Law, and fundamental of all Nations, who have
propriety, Obligatio non impedit translationem Dominii, sed translatio Dominii
praecedens impedit obligationem. l. si quidem. 1. C. de donat. inter virum.
Notwithstanding all which Reasons preceding, and likewise those in the
mentioned Act of H. 8. The Ecclesiastics, though straining their Wits, and
Eloquence to the highest, in the Act of repeal by Ed. 6. yet cannot allege the
least reason, except only this, That if pre-contract should not dissolve
Marriage, the parties might part from one another at the Church door, and then
the Wedding Dinner would be spoiled; which surely may be sufficiently and over
satisfied by recompense in value, were it a Half-Crown Ordinary: But a lost
Virginity to an Innocent Woman, who was married bona fide, and knew nothing of
this pre-contract; and her Child can never be repaired, if the Marriage be
dissolved.

-- Nulla reparabilis Art
Laesa pudicitia est, deperit illa semel.
Propert. The Act of Repeal of the said most excellent Law of Henry the Eighth
against pre-contracts follows. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 23.

2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 23.
WHereas in the 32 year of the Reign of the late King of famous memory, King
Henry the Eighth, Because that many inconveniences had chanced in this Realm,
by breaking and dissolving of good and lawful Marriages, yea whereupon also
sometimes Issue and Children had followed, under the color and pretense of a
former Contract made with another, the which Contract diverse times was but very
slenderly proved, and often but surmised, by the malice of the party, who
desired to be dissolved from the Marriage which they liked not, and to be
coupled with another. There was an Act made, That all, and every such Marriages
as within the Church of England should be Contracted and Solemnized in the face
of the Church, and Consummate with Bodily knowledge, or fruit of Children or
Child, being had between the parties so married, should be by Authority of the
said Parliament, Deemed, Judged, and taken to be Lawful, Good, Just, and
Indissolvable, notwithstanding any pre-contract, or pre-contracts of Matrimony,
not Consummate with Bodily knowledge, which either of the Persons so married,
or both, had made with any other Person or Persons, before the time of
Contracting of that Marriage, which is Solemnized or Consummated, or whereof
such fruit is ensued, or may ensue, as by the same Act more plainly may appear.
Since the time of which Act. although the same was Godly meant, the unruliness
of Men has ungodlily abused the same, and diverse inconveniences (intolerable
in manner to Christian Ears and Eyes) followed thereupon, Women and Men
breaking their own promises, and faiths, made by the one unto the other; so set
upon sensuality and pleasure, that if after the Contract of Matrimony, they
might have whom they more favored and desired, they could be contented by
lightness of their nature, to over-turn all that they had done before, and not
afraid in manner, even from the very Church-door, and Marriage Feast, the Man
to take another Spouse, and the Spouse to take another Husband, more for Bodily
lust and carnal knowledge, then for surety of faith and truth, or having God in
their good remembrance, contemning many times also the Commandment of the
Ecclesiastical Judge, forbidding the parties, having made the Contract, to
attempt or do any thing in prejudice of the same. Be it therefore Enacted by
the King's Highness, The Lords Spiritual, Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, That as concerning pre-contracts, the said former
Statute shall from the first day of May next coming, cease, be repealed, and of
no force or effect, and be reduced to the estate and order of the King's
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, which immediately before the making of the
said Statute, in this case were used in this Realm: So that from the said first
day of May, when any cause or contract of Marriage is pretended to have been
made; it shall be lawful to the King's Ecclesiastical Judge of that place, to
hear and examine the said Cause: And (having the said Contract sufficiently and
lawfully proved before him) to give sentence for Matrimony, commanding
Solemnization, Co-habitation, Consummation, and Tractation, as it becomes Man
and Wife to have, with inflicting all such pains upon the disobedients, and
disturbers thereof, as in times past before the said Statute, the King's
Ecclesiastical Judges, by the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws ought, and might have
done, if the said Statute had never been made: Any Clause, Article, or Sentence
in the said Statute to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Of the Law making private Marriage or carnal knowledge between persons not
prohibited by the Law of God to marry, Fornication.
Private Marriage, or carnal knowledge is of two sorts, the one without public
Witness, the other without any Witness at all, and both by the Popish Laws
(because if permitted, they would spoil their gains) are prohibited, and called
clandestine Marriages. The public Witnesses are the Priest or Magistrate;
private Witnesses are any other, Marriage without Witness nor clandestine.
not appointed by Law. The Law of England makes all private Marriage, and
carnal knowledge, without public Witness, Fornication. The Law of Scotland in
some cases relieves, though there be a defect and no public Witness of the
Marriage by the Priest, as appears in the before cited Author Craig. Feud. 269.
If there appear private Witnesses of Men or Instruments; but in all cases
likewise, where there are neither public or private Witnesses, they leave it
to be Fornication. That which I here affirm against both, is:

Marriage without Witness not Fornication.
1. That carnal knowledge between parties not prohibited by the Law of God to
marry, is not Fornication, nor any other Crime, though in the highest secrecy,
and without any Testimony of Men, or Instruments whatsoever.

2. That privacy of Marriage being not prohibited, nor publication commanded by
God; all parties ought to have liberty of Conscience, to use the one or the
other, according as suits best with their occasions.

As to the first, there are these reasons. That private Marriage without
Witness is not Fornication, nor any other Crime.

1. There is no Law of God prohibiting private Marriage without Witness: Where
there is therefore no Law, there is no transgression. Romans 4.15.

2. It is before shown, That for any human Law to prohibit Marriage or Meat,
where not prohibited by the Law of God, the same came from the Devil. 1 Timothy
cap. 4. v. 1, 2, 3. And that therefore the Law of the Pope, and Council of
Trent, which nulls all Marriages, except made before a Priest in a Temple, and
two Witnesses; came from the Devil and the Priests of Priapus and Venus, for
filthy lucre to the Priests.

3. Isa. 45.7. It is said, I create evil. And Isa 5.20. It is said, Woe unto
them that call good evil, and evil good; That put darkness for light, and light
for darkness: Here is therefore a curse pronounced against those, who, if God
created not marriage without Witnesses, evil, of their own heads call it evil;
and where God created it to be in darkness, and natural modesty, of their own
heads will have it by Torch-light, and the whole Parish of Witnesses.

4. All Fornication is Polyandry and Confusio seminum, whereby the Child cannot
know the Father, nor the Father the Child, but here is no such thing; it is
impossible therefore to be Fornication.

Liberty Conscience to marry with or without Witnesses.
As to the second Point which I am to maintain, That privacy of Marriage without
Witnesses, being not prohibited by the Law of God, nor publication commanded by
the same; no human power ought to presume to prohibit what Marriage God has
not prohibited, but all persons ought to be left liberty of Conscience, to
marry publicly or privately, with or without Witnesses, as it suits best with
their conveniences and occasions, as is the use and practice in all other civil
Contracts, which men do with or without Witnesses, as they think best, and were
never accused of sin, if they had no Witnesses whereon to bring their Action;
only that Party is justly charged with sin, who wilfully breaks his Contracts,
because there are no Witnesses but God to prove it against him.

Against these Positions I shall first answer the Objections, and then show
further Reasons to confirm the same.

That without the public Testimony of the Marriage by the Priest and Bishop,
the Woman is in danger of desertion by the Man after he has devirginated, and
got her with Child, whereas she having the said public Testimony of the
Bishop, if the Man take another Woman to Church and marry her, by the Law he
shall be hanged.

Theodora got her Husband Justinian to make, That it should be death for the
Husband to lie with any other Woman but his Wife, might perhaps have something
restrained the Man, yet this Law that the Husband shall marry no other Woman in
Church, signifies nothing of restraining him from lying with an hundred
elsewhere.

That the Wife, if there were no public Witnesses, might desert her Husband
for another Man; whereas now if she go to Church with another man, and is
married to him, while her Husband is alive, she shall be hanged.

Moses, Levit. 20.10. which makes Adultery in a Wife Death, might perhaps
something have restrained the Woman, the present Law restrains her no more then
it does the man.

If Banes and Marriage were not in the presence of public Witnesses, none who
had right to a Woman could know when or how to make his claim.



Secondly, If he has a pre-promise or pre-contract, he ought not to recover
the Woman in Specie against her will, but only damage for breach of promise, as
to which the Banes make it neither better nor worse.

Thirdly, Admit the man who is the Claymant of the Woman, has not only had
pre-promise, pre-contract, but pre-copulation of the Woman before the other
man, who is publicly band with her, yet to what purpose is a claim made of a
Woman, who is now became an Adulteress by banning her self with another man,
and ought not by the Law of God to be claimed by the first man; for by retaking
an Adulteress the Husband becomes a Pandor to the Wife, a destroyer of the
Adultererous Child, by depriving him of the natural Father, and a destroyer of
his own Children, by bringing in Adulterous Heirs amongst them, which is so far
abhorred by the Scripture, that in case of Divorce, though the Woman is
innocent, yet it is said Deuteronomy. 24.1, 2, 3, 4. according to the Original, When a
man has taken a Woman, and been a Man unto her, and it come to pass that she
find no favor in his eyes, because he has found some uncleanness in her: then
let him write her a Bill of Divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her
out of his House. And when she is departed out of his House, she may go and be
another man's Woman. And if the latter man hate her, and write her a Bill of
Divorcement, and give it in her hand, and sends her out of his House: or if
the latter man die, which took her to be his Woman, her former man which sent
her away, may not take her again to be his Woman, after she is defiled: for
that is abomination before the Lord, and thou shall not cause the Land to sin,
which the Lord thy God, gives thee for an inheritance. If therefore a Woman
innocent put away, is not to be received again, much less is a Woman guilty of
running. away with another man to be claimed again in Specie, but there is a
more just remedy, if the Party is thereby damaged, to Sue the Woman for breach
of her Contract, and the Adulterer for taking her away, for Damages.

That without Witnesses of the Marriage, if the right of Successions to Goods
or Lands come in question, the Bishop can make no Certificate of Filiation of
the Child who is to Succeed, nor can the Common Law, Judges or Juries judge of
the matter.

Marriage what.
As to carnal knowledge, that which makes Marriage the same, may be defined to be
a Seminal Conjunction of Man and Woman in the natural Act of Generation,
mentioned Levit. 15.18. Cum vir concubuerit, cum ea Semine concubitus, which if
between Persons prohibited, is an unlawful, if not prohibited, is a lawful
Marriage. The Jews had three sorts of Conjunctions between Man and Woman, which
they called Marriages. 1. Coemptione. 2. Copulatione. 3. Instrumentis. That
which was Copulatione, was by their filthy Custom to be done before two
Witnesses; Witnesses of Marriage, any impossible, but the parties.
but the Witnesses here in question, are not of the Copulation, but of matters
impertinent and evidence, which tends not to the issue, and they are only to
Testify that A. and B. went to Church together, and there said words de
praesenti, and the Priest pronounced them Man and Wife, as though the Child was
straight begot by the Tongues of the Parties, and the Priest in the Sacrament
of Marriage, as it is in that of the transubstantiation, and thereon the Bishop
gives his Non sequitur Sentence, that here was a Marriage, which includes
carnal knowledge, though it is not so much Testified, nor known by the Witnesses
or Bishop, whether the Parties were a Man and a Woman, or two Women, they never
having been eyewitnesses of the same, nor any Ventre inspiciendo appointed for
that purpose.

Secondly, Admit there had been a couple of beastly Jewish Witnesses, who would
see 'twas a Man and a Woman lay together, yet it being an undeniable exception
against all Witnesses of any matter of Fact, that unless they show Causam
Scientiae to be one or more of their five Senses, their Testimony is worth
nothing, and such Witnesses having no Sense but their Sight to Testify
Copulation, it is impossible, though their eyes saw the external Copulation,
that they should see the internal to be Semine Concubitus, without which the
external Testimony signifies nothing to make a Marriage.

Thirdly, Admit it were possible these Witnesses saw the man lie with the
Woman, yet it is impossible, and Perjury for them to swear that they saw the
man get the Child, or that it was not got by another man before or after.

It was an usual saying of Cato that he wondered how one Aruspex could forbear
laughing when he met another, they both knowing how each gulled the people: If
he were now alive, he would much more wonder, how one Bishop, who is a Father
finder, could hold his gravity when he meets another, especially when they come
to discourse of their rare Art of Divinity, in finding Birds Nests, and filling
them with young Cuckows, making the People believe they are Sparrows: So here
appears an impossibility, if the^^ were a Thousand Witnesses, for any of them
to Testify Marriage or Filiation, but the Parents; and it is before shown, God
has not prohibited Marriage without Witnesses, nor made it Fornication; and it
is likewise shown, That the Law prohibiting Marriage without Witnesses came
from the Devil, only for the filthy lucre of the Priests; and no inconvenience
can be objected against Private Marriage and Carnal knowledge, without
Witnesses; or if there could, yet allegare inconveniens non est solvere
argumentum, so positively deduced from the Law of God, I conclude as before;

First, That here is nothing objected which can make private carnal knowledge
(between Persons not prohibited by the Law of God to Marry) Fornication.

Mischiefs of public Marriage.
Secondly, That therefore liberty of Conscience ought to be permitted to
Dissentients from the Popish Law, to marry publicly or privately with or
without Witnesses, as suits best with their desires and conveniences.

Rivalry.
First, Because compulsion to public Marriage or Wooing causes Rivalry both in
Men and Beasts, and public Wars and Calamities amongst Men have insued from
Rivals to one Woman, and Nature it self has instructed the Beasts, which are
not able to defend themselves, to retire into Woods and secret places, in
Pairs, to secure themselves from Rivals.

Polyandry.
Secondly, This causes Polyandry when one Woman is Courted by two, or many
Rivals, she lies under the Temptation of tasting them all, and not till
necessitated, to fix on one; this likewise Nature teaches Beasts, by secret
retirements of their Females, to avoid promiscuous Sires of their young.

Rape.
Thirdly, It exposes Brides to Rapes; thus did the Lapithae lay their plot, to
fight for a Bride at a public Wedding, which if the Marriage had been secret,
without Witnesses, had been prevented: So had the wicked Laws of King Evenus,
the Moors, and Indian Bramyns, that Courtiers and Priests should have the first
Nights Lodging, which were Rapes on the Brides, and might have been prevented;
and those filthy Laws would have been to no purpose, if the secret Marriages of
Nature, without public or private Witnesses, had been observed.

Fourthly, As publication of Marriages, Fraud.
or intention of Marriage before Witnesses may cause Rape and Violence, so it
may cause Fraud and Deceit, which a secret Marriage only known to the Parties
would prevent, as appears Genesis 29.21. And Jacob said unto Laban give me my
Wife, (for my days are fulfilled) that I may go in unto her. And Laban gathered
together all the men of the place, (here are public Witnesses enough) and made
a Feast. And it came to pass in the Evening, that he took Leah his Daughter,
and brought her to him, and he went in unto her. And Laban gave unto his
Daughter Leah, Zilpah his maid for a handmaid. And it came to pass, that in the
Morning, behold, it was Leah: and he said unto Laban, What is this thou have
done unto me? did I not serve thee for Rachel? wherefore then have thou
beguiled me? Now if all the men of the place had not been called together, but
Jacob had gone in unto Rachel secretly, he had prevented so great a Fraud of
Laban put upon him.

I happening to be in Scotland, had the honor of acquaintance with a Gentleman
there, and I thank him of receiving a noble entertainment at his House,
concerning whose Marriage I was given this relation, There were two young
Ladies Sisters of great Beauty, drawn by the Pencel of Nature, and not of Art,
and not in her vulgar manner, as expressed by the Love-Poet.

-- Facies non omnibus una est,
Nec diversa tamen qualem decet esse Sororum.
But so like one another, that they could not easily be distinguished, each was
-- Gratusque parentibus error. often beguiling their Parents with that pleasant
deceit. One of these Ladies was married by this Gentleman, and as I remember, I
was likewise informed that the Scots Custom was to make themselves merry at
their Weddings, that the next day after the Brideall night, when Dinner was
ended, and a Voider brought in, the Bridegroom was to stand with a Creile or
Basket on his Back, and the Company used as they pleased to throw into the same
as into a Voider, so long till the Bride in goodnature took it off from him
with her own hand, which the fooner she did, the better Wife they judged she
would be; the Bridegroom being put to this task of the Creile, many loaded upon
him so long, and the Bride showing no pity relieve him, he looked back very
wistly on her, as he thought, saying, Sweetheart will you not help me? She
Answered, No, I am a Maid, whereat the company fell a laughing which much
amused the Bridegroom, at last after they had made sufficient sport with him
about it, the true Bride was brought down the stairs, who took off his Burden;
the other who refused, being her Sister dressed in her Clothes. Here might far
easier have been a deceit imposed, then by Leah, had there not been greater
honor and virtue in the Parties, then in Laban, yet neither here could it have
been done, if the Marriage had been secret.

Against natural Modesty.
Fourthly, Compulsion to marry before public Witnesses, and denial of liberty
of private marriage without Witnesses, is destructive to the modesty of Nature,
(appointed by God, to distinguish Men from Beasts) which in all chaste and
virtuous Persons, desires the Vail of Secrecy. Adam and Eve made them Aprons of
Fig Leaves, though they were Man and Wife, and none saw them but themselves;
and the wild Africans and Americans with Skins and Feathers cover their shame.
Boaz, Ruth 3.14. though he intended to marry Ruth, yet to keep s^cret her lying
at his Feet amongst the Sheaves, that Night he makes her rise in the dark,
before one could know one another, and bids her not let it be known that a
Woman came into the floor. And Prove. 30.19. Agar says, There are three things
too wonderful for me; yea four, which I know not: The way of an Eagle in the
Air, The way of a Serpent upon a Rock, The way of a Ship in in the midst of the
Sea, And the way of a Man with a Maid. Neither would they ever admit amongst
the Hebrews any such idle thing as Banes or publication of Marriage, but a
Virgin amongst them was called Almah, that is hidden, or a recluse from the
sight of men, taking that custom from the Eastern Countries, in diverse of
which, the custom of keeping Virgins in their Parents Houses, unseen of men, is
so rigorously observed, that their very Wooers are not suffered to see them,
till married and brought to their Beds, but marry them on good report, as
Princes use to do.

Dishonours the Parties.
Fifthly, Public Wooing causes dishonor to each Party, and if any Man address
himself publicly to a Lady as a Suitor, and after sight likes her not, but
deserts her, this will disparage her, the thoughts of the next that is wished
are that she has been blown on, and refused; the like will it be to the Man,
if the Lady refuse him.

Causes Fornication, Adultery, Stews, and Brothels.
Sixthly, Denial of liberty of private Marriage, and punishing the same, as
Fornication, compells men to what is true Fornication and Adultery; for if men
cannot be allowed secret Marriage, and secret Wives, without Witnesses they
will take secret Fornication and Adultery, and secret Whores and Adulteresses
without Witnesses, which is a Thousand times worse. So what St. Austin says,
Deem lupanaria and turbabis omnia libidinibus, is not true, nor is Toleration
of Stews the Remedy appointed by God to cure Lust; but private Marriage is the
Remedy appointed by God to cure the Stews; for it is said by Paul, To avoid
Fornication, let every Man have his own Woman, and every Woman her own Man,
which if denied to such Persons, with whose Conveniences or Conscience it
stands not, to take a Woman or a Man publicly before Witnesses, and a Priest
in a Temple, is to deny them to take any Man or Woman at all. Whereas if
liberty were given of private Marriage without Witnesses, to such Persons as
are not by the Law of God prohibited to marry, this would destroy all Stews and
Brothel-Houses: for what Man or Woman who have liberty to choose whom they like
best, and to enjoy them privately to themselves, would be so mad to hazard
themselves in common Stews, to be infected with those miserable and deadly
Diseases, to be robbed, stripped, have their Throats cut, or at least, spirited
to a Ship, sold to Barbado's or Barbary? or if they escape those greater
dangers, to be all their Lives persued by Constables, Parators, Bedels, hooted
at by Boys, Carted, Whipped, Pumpt, and to come to Bridewell, and Beggary at last.

Seventhly, Public Marriages are too costly for the Poor, therefore to
prohibit them private Marriage, Too costly for the poor.
is to prohibit them all Marriage, except such as will undo them; the Grand
Seignior himself, dares not venture on that is public, or the cost of it,
which is one reason he is never married publicly by a Priest in a Temple.

One Man may have reason to marry privately and another not, and one to marry
public and another not.
Eighthly, There may be many reasons likewise both for Rich and Poor to marry
secretly, and one man may have a Reason, which another has not; and it may be
not only inconvenient, but dangerous to one, and not to another; therefore it
is fit every man (seeing it is not prohibited by God) should have liberty to
marry public or private, with or without Witnesses, as it suits best with his
conveniences.

Henry the Eighth married Ann Bulloigne, the Mother of Queen Elizabeth on the
14 of November. and kept the same so secret, that it was not known till Easter
after, when she appeared great with Child. And Archbishop Cranmer was married,
and kept it so secret, that it was not known, till discovered by the King. No
doubt the King and Archbishop both had very good reasons for what they did,
though they thought not fit to divulge them, either before or after. So Abraham
and Isaac both endeavored to keep their Marriages secret, by telling lies:
they had very good reason for their Secrecy, though not for their Lies.

From what has been said, appears therefore to be proved,

First, That private marriage, or carnal knowledge without Witnesses, between
Persons not prohibited by the Law of God to marry, is not Fornication, or any
other Crime.

Secondly, That it is a remedy provided by God to prevent Fornication, and that
the same if not forbidden by Papal, Episcopal, Pontifical, or other Diabolical
Laws, would overthrow all Stews, Brothels, and common Whores, and the whole
Mystery of Iniquity of the Romish Antichrist, which fills his Coffers, and
supports his Power by these filthy gains, and far worse then those Ex lotio
collected by the covetous Emperor Vespasian.

Thirdly, That it is a great sin to forbid to marry: And that those forbid to
marry, who forbid either public or private marriage where not prohibited by
God, or take away the free liberty of either, or compel to either dissentients
in Conscience, or differents in Convenience, and thereby become accessaries to
all the Fornications, Adulteries, and other wickedness which ensue thereby.

Of the Law requiring Witnesses of Marriage and Filiation, where both are
acknowledged by the Parents, and no third party claims the Father, Mother or
Child.
This irrational Law is put in practice, where a Man and Woman not prohibited
to marry by the Law of God, cohabit or keep private company; and the pretense
is, That every Man should have his own Wife, and every Woman her own Husband,
by the testimony of Witnesses, which is as frivolous, when the parties
themselves acknowledge (though as is before proved they are not bound to
acknowledge it, neither is it a sin) and none else pretends claim to the Man or
Woman, as it is to require Witnesses of every one possessed of Lands or Goods,
or to force him to answer to a Bill of discovery of his Title, where none other
claims or pretends a Title better than his possession: The like is it where
a Man and Woman acknowledge a Child to be theirs, they ought not to be examined,
nor forced to produce Witnesses, whose the Child is, unless another, as the
Harlot did before Solomon, claim or pretend right to the Child, for where there
is no Controversy or Crime proved, there needs no Witness or Judge; In like
manner, where a Child is acknowledged by Parents in their life time, the
Inheritance ought to be suffered to continue to him, as left without proof of
Witness or Enquiry, where no other pretends to be a Child to the same Parents,
or a better right then Filiation; for where there is no Controversy between
some parties, nor Crime proved, nor Suspicion, there needs neither Inquisition,
nor Witness, nor Judge.

Of the Law when claim is made by Corrivals of one Woman, of Sequestration of
her pendente placito, and Sentencing either Man or Woman to be restored in
Specie, and not in Value.
That where there is a Breach of promise, or Contract of Marriage between a Man
or Woman, they ought to have liberty to repair themselves in damage, is
granted; but that a Woman is to be Sequestered pendente placito, or that either
Man or Woman is to be adjudged to be restored in specie, is denied.

Sequestration of a Woman unlawful.
1. As to the Sequestration of the Woman, this is contrary to Magna Charta, and
the Petition of right, to imprison a free Person before Judgment.

2. None ought to be taken in Pledge, Distrained, or Sequestered, which cannot
be returned in as good Condition, as when Taken, Distrained, or Sequestered,
which a Woman cannot be.

3. As to return in specie and not in value, I say, to deliver a Woman to a Man
to be lain with against her will, is a Rape on the Woman; and the like is it of
a Man, to compel him to lie with a Woman, who claims him against his will.

4. This indangers the lives of Man and Woman, who are mortal Enemies, by
Poison, Sword, or other wicked ways, when compelled to Co-habitation against
their will.

5. To sentence either Man or Woman to be taken in specie, and not in Value,
according to the practice of the Ecclesiastical Law, bring in the great
absurdity and wickedness mentioned by Fortescue p. 75, Fortescue.
76. where speaking of Trial by Witnesses in the Bishop's Court, he says, If a
Man and a Woman make a private contract of Marriage without Witnesses, One man
Sentenced to lie with two Women, and punished for lying with each.
and after the Man and another Woman make a contract of Marriage before
Witnesses, shall he not in the Contentious Court be compelled to marry her, and
also after that in the Penitential Court be adjudged to lie with the first, if
he be duly required, and to do penance as often as by by his own motion and
procurement he lies with the second, though in both Courts the Judge be one
and the self same person. In this case, as it is written in Job 40.17, Are not
the sinews of the stones of Behemoth wrapped together, or perplexed: Fie for
shame, they are perplexed indeed, for this Man can carnally company with
neither of these two Women, nor with any other without punishment of the
Contentious Court, or Penitential Court; but such a mischief, inconvenience, or
danger can never happen by the way of proceeding in the Law of England, yea
though Behemoth himself does labor to procure the same.

Of the Law making all prohibited Marriages Null.
Marriage without Witnesses or Ceremony, not void, though prohibited.
The Law of the Pope, and Council of Trent, not only prohibited all Marriages
except contracted before two Witnesses, and a Priest in a Temple, but makes
them null and void. The Law of England prohibits them, but does not make them
null and void, though the common practice of the Bishop's Court and
Certificates, contrary to Law, follows the Canon of the Council of Trent, and
though it was made after all Foreign Jurisdiction, was by Act of Parliament
abolished. But to speak now according to the Law of God, and of the Land, I
shall first cite the opinion of Grotius and other Authors upon it: As to the
Law of God, Grot. de jur. Bell. and Pac. page 142. says; Si lex humana
conjugia inter certas personas contrahi prohibeat; non ideo sequetur invitum
fore Matrimonium, si re ipsa contrahatur; sunt enim diversa, quid prohibere,
and quid irritum facere; nam prohibitio exerceri potest per poenam vel
expressam vel arbitrariam, and hoc genus leges imperfectas vocat Ulpianus, quae
fieri quid vetant, sed facium non rescindunt. And after he says, Indecentia
est major in Actu quam effectu; saepe etiam incommoda quae rescissionem
sequuntur, majora quam ipsa indecentia aut incommodum Actus ipsius. If any
human Law prohibit Marriage between certain persons, it does not therefore
follow, that it makes such Marriage void, if it be actually contracted; for to
prohibit a thing, and make a thing void are two different things, for a
prohibition may exercise its power sufficiently by a penalty, either Express or
Arbitrary, and this kind Vlpian calls imperfect Laws, which forbid a thing to
be done, but if done rescind it not. After he says, For often times the
indecency is greater in the act, then the effect; and often times the mischiefs
are greater which follow a rescission, then the act it self. With this agrees
the expression of Thamar to her Brother Ammon, attempting to force her. Thamar
and Ammon.
2 Samuel 13.12. And she answered him, nay Brother do not force me, for no such
thing ought to be done in Israel, do not thou this folly: And I; whither shall
I cause my shame to go? And as for thee, thou shall be as one of the Fools in
Israel: Now therefore I pray thee speak unto the King, for he will not withhold
me from thee. Howbeit he would not hearken to her voice, but being stronger
then she, forced her, and lay with her. Then Ammon hated her exceedingly, so
that the hate wherewith he hated her, was greater then the love wherewith he
had loved her: And Ammon said, arise, begone. And she said, There is no cause:
This evil in sending me away is greater then the other that thou did unto me,
but he would not hearken unto her. For the same reason King Alcinous advises,
Medea.
That Medea should be returned to her Father, if she were not defloured, but if
she were, the reason will be otherwise, as is remembered by Apolonius in his
Argonaut. So likewise the Sabin Virgins being taken by the Soldiers of
Romulus, Sabin Virgins.
their Parents raising Arms again to resoue them home; when the two Hostile
Armies in Battalia drew near one another, the Romans sent their Foeminine
Prizes to mediate a Peace, who using this argument to their friends and
kindred, as they stood ready to fight, That it would be a greater injury. to
their own honor, and their friends, to take them from their Ravishers, who
were now their Husbands, then their first Rape, and thereby obtained it.

Luther to this purpose, relates a story of a young Man he knew at Erfort,
Luther.
who tempting his Mother's Maid, the Maid acquainted his Mother with it; she
with a pretense to School her Son into a better Lesson, lays her self in her
Maid's Bed, her Son gets her with Child of a Daughter, which being concealed,
and the Daughter sent abroad to Nurse and School, and after being grown up and
brought home, the young Man knowing not of it, married her; so that she became
thereby his Daughter, Sister, and Wife. After the same being discovered, the
University was consulted about it, who thereupon advised the Mother to repent
of her wickedness, but seeing the married Couple were ignorant thereof, and
knew nothing, they advised, to avoid greater offense, that they should continue
together; Quod fieri non debet, factum valet. Here was a Marriage prohibited by
the Law of God and Man, yet when made, it appears the opinion of the University
was, it ought not to be rescinded.

Law of England does not null a marriage not according to the
Common Prayer Book, though it prohibits it.
I am next to speak concerning the Law of the Land, which, though it prohibit,
yet does not null a Marriage, not made according to the form of the
Common Prayer Book.

The first Reason is, It does not null the Marriage of a Papist, which is not
according to the Book of Common Prayer; a fortiori, therefore it does dot null
a Protestant's, which is not made according to that Form.

That it does not null a Papist's Marriage, appears by the Act 3 Jac. 5. where
a Papist is prohibited to be Married otherwise then in some open Church or
Chapel, by a Minister Lawfully authorized, upon pain that the Man shall lose
to be Tenant by the courtesy, and the Woman her Dower, Widows estate, and Frank
Bank; or if the Woman has no Land, whereof the Man may be Tenant by the
courtesy, then the Man is to lose a hundred pounds: So in case of a Papist,
nothing ought to be exacted for Nonconformity in Marriage, but the express
penalties; nor can the Marriage of a Papist, though not according to the Act,
be made null, or the Children thereby illegitimate, why then should a
Protestant's?

2. Because the Council of Trent, which made the Canon, That all Marriages
should be null and void, except contracted before two Witnesses, and a Priest
in a Temple, is a Foreign Jurisdiction, and the Canon was made after the
abolishing all Foreign Jurisdiction; the same ought not therefore be admitted to
null any Marriage in England, or illegitimate any Child.

3. This is confessed by a Learned Civilian and Canonist of our own, belonging
to the Ecclesiastaical Court. Swimburn.
Swimburn of Wills and Test. 1 part 34. Who there says, That an unsolemn
Marriage, or not having Canonical Ceremonies, is not therefore no Marriage,
because it is unsolemn, the Banes perhaps not being asked or the Marriage not
Celebrated in the face of the Church, but privately in a Chamber or some other
Rite or Ceremony omitted, but is nevertheless a true Marriage: And in the
Margent he adds to this effect, Insolemnitas autem est defectus juris civilis
non juris naturae; nam illa requisita de quibus in C. cumin hibitio de Cland.
despon. sext. non esse deforma and substantia matrimonii, and Legitimationis
prolis, sed de solennitate tantum, and ipsius decore introducta, Post Theolog.
and Canonistas prodidit Granis Consul. Civil. 168. and hanc op. communi calculo
receptam, dicit Jo. Lub. and Mascard de probat verb. filius conclu. 798. n. 8.
and licet hodie per Council. Tridentin. hujusmodi matrimonia fiunt irrita. Nos
tamen sequimur antiquum jus commune tanquam non mutatum. Insolemnity is a
defect in the Civil Law, and not of the Law of Nature; for those requisites of
1 C. inhibitio de clan. despon. Granis Council. Civil. 168. has delivered,
after many Divines and Canonists, the same not to be of the substance of
Matrimony, and Legitimation of Children; but only introduced for their greater
Ornament. And Jo. Lub. and Mascard de Probat. verb. Filius 798. say likewise,
The same opinion to be received by general approbation; and though of late the
Council of Trent has made such Marriages void, yet they follow the ancient
Common Law, as not changed: Whereby it appears that the Canon of the Council of
Trent to make Marriages not according to the Romish Ceremonies, is rejected in
many other places, and much more in England; where all Foreign Jurisdiction is
abolished, and there is no other Law of England, if that of the Council of
Trent is excluded, which makes any Marriage of Protestant or Papist void, or
illegitimates the Children: If the Marriage is not therefore void, it is valid,
and has all the rights of a valid Marriage, and the Children all the rights of
Legitimate Children.

4. It is already in part, and will hereafter be further shown, That carnal
knowledge and not Ceremonies are Marriage, and that the same, and the birth of
a Child, and not Ceremonies make Matrimony; and that both Marriage, and
Filiation are impossible to be proved by any Witnesses, except the Parents
admit: Therefore if the Canon of Trent were confirmed by Act of Parliament, or
a thousand Acts of Parliament, yet can they not make that Matrimony and
Filiation, by a Ceremonial Law of Man, void, which is established by the Moral
Law of God, as will be further shown under the Title of Ceremonial Law, and
Law of God.

Of the Custom of Super-alimentary gifts in consideration of carnal knowledge,
between a Man and Woman, both before and after Marriage.
Portions of Daughters.
Nuptial love is like the gift of God, impossible to be bought for money. Cant.
8.7. If a Man would give all the substance of his House for Love, it would
utterly be contemned. Solon the Athenian Law giver ordained, That Wives should
not bring their Husbands above three Gowns, and some other movables of small
value. Lycurgus instituted, That Virgins should be married without Portions. 1.
That none might remain unmarried for their poverty. 2. That none should be
taken for their riches, but their virtues. Plut. In Poland, Fathers give no
more with their Daughters then their Wedding Clothes. And the truth is, as to
Fahers, it comes all to one, whether they give Portions with Daughters, or
none, if there were such a Law; for if A. and B. have each of them three Sons
and three Daughters, and A give Portions with his Daughters, to the Sons of B,
and B give back again those Portions with his Daughters to the Sons of A, there
is nothing got on either side, but the trouble and hazard of tumbiing in and
out the money, and the vexation of Lawyers with their foul Fines, and crabbed
Concords, to do and undo all again like Juglers knots. The Venetians had a Law
none should give above fifteen hundred Crowns, others say sixteen hundred
Ducats with a Daughter, yet are they very rich. Bodin cries out against high
Portions, and says, That by the Ancient custom of Marseilles, it was not
lawful to give above an hundred Crowns with a Daughter, and five Crowns in
Apparel. And a Law was made by Charles the Ninth, forbidding to give a Daughter
above a thousand pounds sterling: And yet the Ordinance of Charles the fifth
does give no more unto the Daughters of the House of France; and though
Elizabeth of France, Daughter to Philip the Fair, was married to the King of
England, yet had she but Twelve hundred pounds sterling to her Dowry. Some will
say it was very much, considering the scarcity of Gold and Silver in those
days, but the difference is likewise very great betwixt a thousand pounds, and
four hundred thousand Crowns: It is true, she was the goodliest Princess of her
Age, and of the greatest House that was at that day. Henry the Eighth gave for
Portions to his Daughters, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, but Ten thousand
pounds a piece. And if we will seek higher, we shall find that in the Law of
God, the Marriage of a Daughter was taxed but a fifty Skekells, which makes at
most but four pounds sterling of our money.

Gifts by Men to Women.
Amongst the Jews there appeared almost no other distinction in the Scripture
between a Wife and a Whore, but one took hire, and the other none; and indeed
if there were no hire or gifts, there would be no Whore. Deutr. 23.18. It is
said, Thou shall not bring the Hire of a Whore, nor the price of a Dog into the
House of the Lord. And it is said Ezekiel. 16.31. And have not been as an Harlot,
in that thou scornest Hire; but as a Wife that commits Adultery, that takes
strangers instead of her Husband. They give gifts to all Whores, but thou
give gifts to all thy Lovers, that they may come unto thee on every side for
thy Whoredom. Mich. 1.7. It is said, They shall return to the Hire of an
Harlot. And amongst the Greeks (...) and (...), which may be Englished a Rogue
and a Whore, came both from (...), vendo to sell, which were the Lady of
Pleasure and the Gallant, which let themselves to hire for money.

Gifts in Law from Women to Men, and Men to Women.
Besides these gifts by acts of parties, there are worse, and more mercenary
gifts and hire given by acts of Law Super-alimentary, to hire Men and Women to
lie together: To the Man, if he can deceive such a Woman he shall have all her
Goods and Chattels, as is before shown, by Transubstantiation by force, while
she is alive; and after her death, all her Lands and Tenements by courtesy as
long as he can live: And the Woman, if she will lie with such a Man, shall
steal and beg all she can from him while alive, and when he is dead she shall
have Dower and Thirds besides: which gifts in Law on both sides, are for no
other end, then ob turpem causam Copulationis. As to Aliment, it is granted the
Husband ought to provide for the Wife, and the Wife for the Husband; but
Super-alimentary gifts are the matters here questioned.

The mischiefs of gifts Super-alimentary on Marriages, either by act of the
Parties or of Law, are,

Mischless of Gifts Super-alimentary in Marriage.
First, In regard of Public Government, Religion is thereby depraved,
Protestant Men are enticed to marry Papist Wives for great Portions and Tenancy
by Courtesy; and Protestant Women to marry Papist Husbands for great
Jointures, Dowers, and Thirds.

2. By these gifts Super-alimentary, the Wealth of many Families is accumulated
in one, especially by Daughters Heiresses. A great So^oecisin in the Policy
both of Monarchies and States; for it is apparent by the Coats and Titles, that
many Families quarter; the Subjects grow more Rich and Potent than the Prince.
This was prevented by Moses's Law, by raising up Seed to the Brother, and by
marrying of Inheritrixes to the next Kinsman; as likewise did the Athenians. It
was prevented in Persi^, Armenia, Africa, and almost through all the East, by
limiting the Succession of Inheritances, by a kind of Salique Law, only to the
Males, and giving only the Movables to the Daughters; till Theodora, to set up
her Foeminine Militia, got her Blunderbus Justinian to repeal that Ancient Law.
Now though a Family Salique is of excellent use to preserve the equality of
private Families: yet in Royal Families it is contrary to all sound Policy,
hindering the Union of Kingdoms by Marriage; for private Families may be too
Potent, but Kingdoms cannot. In other Nations equality of private Families are
preserved by Gavelkind amongst the Sons, and Parcenary amongst the Daughters;
and amongst the Jews, by limiting Primogeniture to no more than a double
Portion.

3. Another Mischief to the Public of marrying Daughters with great Protions,
is, it foments Seditions, and hinders the Union between Patricians and
Plebeians, and between Poor and Rich; as we see in Rome, where they married for
great Portions, they would take the handsomest Daughters of the Plebeians, and
abuse, but not marry them; because though they had Beauty to answer their Lust,
they had no money to answer their Covetousness. But amongst the great Eastern
Princes, where they buy and receive no Portion from their Wives, they marry the
Poor equally with the Rich, which is no question a great obligation on their
Subjects, by becoming, as it were, the same flesh and blood with them; who
seeing the Daughter of a Mason, Queen in the great Kingdom of China; and the
Daughter of an Herb-Woman, Sultana to the Grand Seignior, and their Princes
born of these; they think themselves highly honored to be of equal blood with
their Princes. In like manner the Ancient Custom of the Babylonians and Indians
of selling the fairest Virgins to the Rich for Money, and giving that Money to
the unhandsom to be Wives for the Poor, united the Poor and Rich by Marriages.

4. Another great Inconvenience is, The Father gives so great a Jointure to the
Mother, that when he dies, she marries another Husband, and starves her first
Husband's Children; and the Father he gets so great a Portion, and Courtesy of
the whole Estate of the Mother, that he marries when she dies, another Wife,
and brings in a Stepmother over his first Wive's Children: whose good quality
the Poet expresses: Lurida terribiles miscent Aconitoe Novercae.
Step-Mothers terrible poisoned in spite
Sons of first Mothers with blue Aconite.


5. To marry for Money, shackles Young Men to Old Women, and Young Women to Old
Men, and persons loathed one to another; whereby they become miserable both
Body and Soul, and fall into Adultery and Fornication, and often to poison or
otherwise destroy one another: Whereas were there not the Temptation of great
Portions, Tenancies by Courtesy, Jointures, Dowers, Thirds, every one would
marry where they best liked, and might thereby live virtuously and happily all
their days.

This has been endeavored to be remedied by the Civil Law, in the Title De
Donationibus inter virum and uxorem, by making all Gifts void between a Man and
his Wife; and the same Law gives another Reason of it, Ne nimio amore
spolientur, lest the party who loved least should rob most, and the worst
Nature make a prey of the best. The Common Law pretended likewise, in imitation
of the Civil Law, to make all Gifts void between Baron and Feme; but it
dissembled: for it forbid such Gifts to be made directly, but encouraged them
to be done indirectly by Chancery trusts, which is ten times worse.

In Scotland, to prevent the taking away the Estate of one Family by another by
these Marriage-Gifts, or Covenants, they have an Excellent Law and of great
Equity, which makes them void, as appears by Craig. Feud. 307. but it is only in
one Case, which is, when two persons have Marriage-Covenants for Portion and
Jointure, agreed and signed, and they are accordingly married thereon: If
either the Man or Woman die within the Year after Marriage, without any Issue
between them; the Writings of the Portion and Marriage shall be all void, and
the right of the Portion return to the Father of the Woman, and the Jointure to
the Father of the Man, and both Families be in Statu quo they were before the
Marriage.

The Arabians, Brittons, and other Nations, to the intent that one Family might
not by Marriage Gifts rob another, always married in the same Family, and
Brothers and Sisters married, making that Religion to marry in the Family,
which others made Incest; and that Incest to marry out of the Family, which
others made Religion: Portions and Jointures both to be limited.
This indeed secured all within the Family, but there are many more Lawful ways
before mentioned, and amongst the rest, the making all such Gifts, forasmuch as
is Super-alimentary, void, or at least to limit them by a Law, That all
Portions, and Tenancies by Courtesy above the value of 0000 shall be void, and
all Jointures, Dowers, and Thirds above the value of 0000 shall be void.

A Satyr against Mercenary Marriage.
CVrsed the Female was, or Male,
Who first did Beauty set to Sale:
For Love did then loose both his Eyes,
When Gifts and Gold did blind the wise;
And Venus, which did shine on high,
From Heaven fell into a Stie.
Priapus then, the God unclean,
Thereon his Temple built obscene;
And set the Steeple up and Spire,
That he might share both Whores and Hire.
And Sextons set to keep the Keys,
That none might enter without Fees:
And Crier next to Curse and Ban,
Unless well paid Woman and Man;
And Paritor about to ride
With Bag for Money by his side,
All Women unto Court to bring,
Who did not Wed with a Gold-Ring.
Then Fathers left their Babes forlorn,
Who had no License to be born,
And Mothers fled, Oh heavy Doom!
Because they were not called home.
Then Priests to make them greater Whores,
Fettered Fifteens to Fourscores,
And married dead to those alive,
M^zentius Torment to revive;
Mouths bound to Mouths were Eyes to Eyes;
With Breasts to Breasts, and Thighs to Thighs.
When Pralats in fine Linen jetting,
Of Reverend Fathers own begetting,
Their Babes of Grace, oh pretty things!
Made often Heirs to Peers and Kings.
This Palls and Miters first made shine,
And Missions to be Divine:
Thus Love and Hate together Yoak't,
The Hangman Priest together choked;
And for the Murders clayms a Fee
To his unholy holy See.
The Ambidextrous Lawyer enters,
And takes a share with his Indentures;
Lawyer nor Priest, nor Book nor Bell
Would have, did they not Women Sell.
If Money her or me must buy,
Loves Pedlars I you all defy.
Money did Solomon beguile, 1 King. 11.5.

His first black Wife to setch from Nile:
And her, because he loved not best,
With Thousand Wives to be oppressed.
This was beginning of the Trick,
The wise turned after Lunatic
The Goddess Astaroth to please, Astaroth was the Moon. Milcom was Priapus.

Who Ruled the Sidonian Seas;
And Milcom, he the foul delight,
Adored of the Ammonite.
This, Protestants made Papists Wed,
And fight and scratch in the same Bed.
Faith and Religion both Divine,
Lie Victims at Pecunia 's Shrine.
Of the Law giving Jurisdiction of the secret Causes of Divorce between
Parents, and secret Uncleanness of Children in their Parents Houses to public
Tribunals, contrary to the Law of God.
It will be Objected, How should those Sins of Carnal Uncleanness be punished,
if not brought before a public Judge?

It Is Answered, Far better than by him.

First, It not denied, but public Fornication and Adultery, where there are
Witnesses, belong to public Justice to punish, as where Diogenes lay with a
Woman in midst of the Market; or as Leo Afer mentions, where a Mahumetan
Prophet lay with another man's Wife at a public Bath in sight of a multitude
of Bystanders. It is not denied likewise, but Bawds, Panders, Stews,
Brothel-Houses, where are Witnesses, are and ought to be severely punished by
the public Magistrate. But the Question is, of such Fornication and Adultery
which are generally so secret, as none but the Parties themselves can witness
against themselves: these appear expressly by the Scripture it self, that they
belong neither to Priest nor Magistrate, to judge or punish, but only to God:
for it is said, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but
those things which are revealed, belong unto us and our Children. And Heb.
13.4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled: but Whoremongers
and Adulterers God shall judge. It is not said man shall judge of secret sins,
but God. And Deuteronomy. 17.6. It is said, At the mouth of two Witnesses, or three
Witnesses, shall he that is worthy of death, be put to death, but at the mouth
of one Witness, he shall not be put to death. And 19.15. One Witness shall not
rise up against a man for any Iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he
sins: at the mouth of two Witnesses, or at the mouth of three Witnesses,
shall the matter be established. And 1 Timothy 5.19. Against an Elder receive not
an Accusation, but before two or three Witnesses. And there is very great
reason that man should not presume to usurp on the Jurisdiction of God, in
things secret, especially in these and other offenses of uncleanness. For

First, This many times indangers the lives of innocent Parties, how many
Joseph's, how many Athanasiusse's, how many Susanna's, have been falsely
accused. How far from the Law of God or Justice, Justices of Peace ought not to
receive accusations of Fornication, on the single Testimony of a lewd Woman.
is therefore the proceedings of Ecclesiastical Courts, and many Justices of
Peace, who without any other Witness, then so incompetent a one as a lewd Woman
who is the Party, and gains by it, charge and punish men for Bastardy and
Fornication, and contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and all the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, made for preservation of the Liberty and
Propriety of the People, the one by causing Excommunicatos Capiendo's, the
other by Warrants, send whom they will to Goal, and Imprison them at their
pleasure? And how far again from the Law of God or Justice is the compelling
men for these Crimes to self-accusation, when they can get no Witnesses as they
ought to have.

Secondly, Public Inquisitions and Punishments of these Crimes of uncleanness,
do more corrupt then reform both Judge and People. For the Judge, example may be
taken from Auricular Confessors, who under pretense of injoining Penance to
others, learn to be above all others the most debauched themselves: and as to
the People, it is either a licencing or encouragement to all such as are rich,
who for a little Commutation-Money buy the Pope's Pardon, or what is
equivalent, the Bishops, or the Kirks; or if they will not suffer them to
Commute, the People when they see the Nobles in the Stools of Repentance, will
think it an honor to follow them, and besides, for People to hear or see the
public Examinations and Stories of uncleanness in public Courts, they
oftentimes do but learn more wickedness then ever they knew or thought of
before, and are less corrupted at a Playhouse then such a Scene of Justice.
All this is far better punished in every private Family between the Parents, if
there be just cause, by Divorce one of another without publishing the cause,
and if there be no cause amongst the Children, by taking away as much of their
Portions as the offense deserves, and giving the same to the innocent Children,
and by good instruction, reproofs, and virtuous example of the Parents, which
will prevent more offenses in Children, then Tribunals can ever reform, though
they have Witnesses.

So Lycurgus by commanding in his Laws, That all Captains of Armies, and
Priests of Temples, should marry, and that Husbands themselves should come to
their Wives, Furtim and verecunde; and the Children be modestly Educated, left
Sparta so clean from unchaste demeanor, that when Geradas, an old Spartan, was
asked by a stranger, What was the Punishment of Adultery in Sparta, for he
could find no Law made by Lycurgus concerning that Crime; Oh Friend says he,
There is no Adulterer with us, When he replied, But what if there should be
any? Geradas told him, He should pay a Bull so big as should be able to stretch
his Neck over Taygetus, and Drink of Eurotas, when the other laughing, said,
There is not such a Bull to be found; Neither, quoth Geradas, Is an Adulterer
to be found in Sparta, where Riches, Luxury, and wantoness of Apparel are
counted a disgrace; and Modesty and Obedience to Magistrates an Honor. Where
the Seminaries of Vices are not permitted, how can Vices grow?

First, Therefore as to Man and Wife, as Bodin lib. 1. cap. 3. says, Nothing
seems more pernicious, then to compel the cause of Divorce to be shown before a
Judge: for in so doing, the honor of one or both Parties is hazarded, which
would not be, if neither of them were compelled to prove the same before a Judge;
as Plutarch in Alcib. relates, That when the Wife of Alcibiades went to
complain of him before the Judge, he came after her into the Court, and took her
by force, and carried her away home on his Shoulders, Ne Secreta Fori Panderet,
whereat the Judge only smiled. The Hebrews likewise used to make their Bills of
Divorce without a cause; neither is it prohibited by Christ, if there were a
true cause, to put her away by private Bill, without public Tribunal or Judge;
for such were all the Bills of Moses, and no public Judge required to judge of
the Cause, but only the Conscience of the Party. And Joseph having a just cause
of suspicion against Mary his Wife, did not bring her before a Judge; and is
commended for so doing, to be a just man; as Matthew. 1.19. is said, Then Joseph
her Husband being a just man, and not willing to make her a public Example,
was minded to put her away privily. So does Plutarch in Aemil. relate of Paulus
Aemilius, Who according to the Custom of the Romans, showed no cause of putting
away his Wife, but affirmed her very honest, wife, and nobly descended, and by
whom he had also many fair Children; but when he was pressed by her Friends to
show the cause why he would then Divorce, he showed them his Shoo, which was
very handsomely and well made, and yet says he, None of you know, but my self
feels where it wrings my Foot. By which doing the Woman is not dishonored,
but may marry with another suitable to her quality; and the same liberty had
the Wives to divorce themselves from their Husbands, without proving or showing
any cause before a public Judge. This likewise preserves the repute of the
Children, who though innocent, will likewise perpetually bear the reproach, if
the dishonor either of their Father or Mother be published before a Judge. And
further, as to drawing the secret offenses of uncleanness of Children,
especially of Daughters, before, a Judge, who are under the Family Jurisdiction,
either of Father or Mother, or Husband, the same is an undoing to those who
offend: for though they never so much repent and amend, yet there can be no
repairing of their shame, or name when published; and the innocent, who are the
Father, and Mother, and Husband, and the other Children, the dishonor can
never be taken again from them. Seneca therefore who in all other things was a
great honourer of the virtue of Augustus, yet blames, as a great oversight in
that wise Emperor, that he punished the Adulteries of his Daughter Julia,
publicly by Banishment. Quae potius, says he, Principi tacenda quam
vindicanda sunt.

Secondly, It makes every petty difference between Man and Wife irreconcilable,
and heightens Contention from a small spark, by blowing it abroad to so great a
flame, that it is at last unquenchable; for the publishing of many things,
neither criminous nor sinful, may affect some modest Natures with as deep a
sense of disgrace, as those that are false, as much as those that are true, and
when once published, cannot by repentance be again revoked, but may cause such
hatred between the Parties, as will never again admit them to live together.

Thirdly, Where offenses are not published, they often times may with honor be
forgiven, and the Parties reconciled, which if published cannot. So Antonius
Pius forgave the Adultery of Faustina, and would not draw it to public
Judgment, to prevent his own shame. And Ael. Spart. writes, That the Emperor
Adrian did the like to his Empress, who though he suspected, yet put not away,
but only removed such Courtiers from his Court as he suspected.

Of the Law compelling Persons Married though mortal Enemies, to Cohabitation.
Another great mischief is in the Ecclesiastical Laws, they compel Cohabitation
of Men and Women, when they are mortal Enemies, and take off Exequenda
Matrimonialia Officia, and due benevolence, when one insidiates for the life of
the other, of which take Bodin further, Fol. 19. but says he, If the Cause seem
not sufficient to the Judge, (which he intends the Cause alleged of Divorce to
an Ecclesiastical Judge,) or be not well proved, it is therefore meet to enforce
the Parties to live together in that Society, which is of all other the
straightest Test, having always the one and the other the object of their
grief* still before their Eyes. Truly (says he) I am not of that opinion, for
seeing themselves brought into extreme servitude, fear, and perpetual discord;
hereof ensue Adulteries, and oftentimes Murders, and Poisonings, for the most
part to men unknown. And for this cause, free Divorce to both Parties* and
non-Cohabitation was permitted by the Roman Laws not out of wantonness, but out
of the greatest necessity and Piety, for preservation of those ends for which
Marriage was instituted: with the least danger and dishonor that might be to
either Party, wherein they must of necessity suffer, if either free Divorce be
tolerated, or the examination of the causes of the same drawn to public
Tribunals. One cause Cato the Censor complains of, for which the freedom of
Divorce, and non-Cohabitation ought to be permitted, was, because he used to
say, That all Adulteresses were Poisoners, and this likewise appears by Valor.
Max. lib. 2. p. 8. where it is thus related, Veneficii question and moribus and
Legibus Romany ignota, quam plurium matronarum patefacto scelere orta est,
quae cum viros suos clandestinis insidiis veneno perimerent, unius Ancillae
indicio protractae, pars capitali judicio damnata centum Septuaginta numerum
compleverunt: An Inquisition was made concerning Poisoning, being an offense
not known to our Manners or Laws, and the wickedness of many Matrons being
disclosed, who by secret Treachery had killed their Husbands by Poison, they
being drawn forth by discovery of a Maid that part of them who were condemned
to death, amounted to the number of One Hundred and Seventy: A great number for
one City at one time, and was no doubt not one of the smallest causes why
Divorces grew so frequent in aftertimes, not as is vainly pretended, out of
wantonness, but of necessity. Whereas if this private way of Justice and
defense should not be tolerated to Families without public litis
contestations, neither the honor or safety of any Family or Persons therein
could be preserved; and such as had a mind to separate, if they could not do it
but by public Judgment, would likewise, either as the Muscovites are said to
do, Hire* some false Witnesses or Knights of the Post, to defame one another,
or oftentimes, if that will not do, to destroy the lives of one another, or
before the Party can make public proof, Poison, or otherwise kill him, whereby
after it will be too late, as it was in these 170 Husbands, for any complaint
to be made to the public; and the Wives are likewise in as great danger, if
they have not the same liberty of providing for them themselves on the first
discovery of danger. Had it not been better for all these murdered Husbands
and Wives to have parted on either side, then to have acted such a Tragedy
together. So Aegisteus corrupting Clytemnestra to Adultery, thereby got her
concurrence to the death of her Husband Agamemnon. And Sejanus having received
an affront from Drusus, plotted no other way to destroy him, but by corrupting
his Wife, as says Tacit. Annal. lib. 4. Cuncta tentanti promptissimum visum ad
uxorem ejus Liviam convertere, hanc ut amore incensus Adulterio pellexit, ad
conjugii spem, consortium Regni and necem mariti impulit. So the Brother of
Lewis the First, King of Hungary, was strangled by his Wife, and she married a
new Husband; Lewis the King goes into Italy to revenge his Brother's death;
she and the new Husband fly to the Pope, who protects them. Here neither the
corruption of Clytemnestra, nor the Wife of Drusus, nor the Hungarian
Hang-woman could have been discovered before a public Judge, till it had been
too late. What are therefore such Elccesiastical Laws and Judges, who compel
such secret and deadly Enemies to Co-habitation in one House, but accessory to
their Murders, and who forbid them to marry others, but accessory to the great
sins of their Fornications, and Adulteries?

Divorce by consent.
Authent. Col. 23.140. The Title of the Law is, Vt consensu Matrimonium solvi
potest. And the Law it self ends with this Reason; Eos siquidem qui violento
affectu odioque correpti fuerunt, perquam difficile est recon^iliare; contingit
enim ut ex his nonnulli ad mutuas insidias procederent, venenisque and aliis
quibusdam, quae lethalia essent, uterentur in tantum, ut saepe liberi qui ipsis
communiter nati essent eas in unam candemque voluntatem conjungere non
potuerint.

Of the Law of Divorce a Mensa and Thoro.
Haddon, in the new draught appointed in the times of Henry the Eighth, and
Edward the Sixth, for Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws expressly abolisheth
Divorce, a Mensa and Thoro, in these words, Mensae societas and Thori solebat
incertis Criminibus adimi Conjugibus, salvo tamen inter illos reliquo
Matrimonii jure; quae constitutio cum a Sacris literis aliena sit, and maximam
perversitatem habeat, and malorum sentinam in Matrimonium comportaverit, illud
Authoritate nostra totum aboliri placet.

To prohibit Divorce a vinculo matrimoni for adultery or other Lawful cause,
and to prohibit the same to be done privately between the parties themselves,
without drawing the cause to public Tribunals, is to contradict Christ
himself, who speaks of a private Divorce by a Bill both from the Husband and
the Wife, according to Moses's Law, and not a public Sentence of any Judge;
and by the exception of uncleanness, allowed the Innocent party to marry
another: but the Pope's Law, which prohibits it, does it to no other end then
to get the gains to his Courts, by the Jurisdiction of Divorces, and to compel
the parties, either to make use of his Stews, whence he gathers his common
Rents, or to pay him a private Taxa Camerae for such Women as he will allow,
when he has tied him from his Wife by the Divorce; Neither does Christ take
the private Jurisdiction from the Husband or Wife of Divorce given by Moses,
but only prohibits to use it without a Lawful cause. In the same manner did the
Laws of the Romans allow the same Jurisdiction, both to the Husband and the
Wife, as appears by many examples. By the Law of Scotland Divorce for Adultery
is allowed a vinculo matrimonii, and the parties may marry again: But by the
Laws of England, the parties can neither be Divorced a vinculo matrimonii, nor
marry again; which is touched by Craig. Feud. 269. Apud Anglos Matrimonium ob
Adulterium non dirimatur, sed tantum separatio a Thoro and Tabula permittitur;
which is certainly clean contrary to the Law of God, and the Doctrine of
Christ. Notwithstanding which, our Episcopal Canons rather follow the Pope then
Christ; and are so outragiously oppressive on Innocent parties, Can. 4.7. that
in all such Divorces, they order Bond and Sureties to be given, not to marry
again during each other's life, which is as before shown a Doctrine of Devils,
forbidding to marry where God has not forbidden.

Of the Custom of Protestants marrying with Papists.
There is no Religion in the World established by any wife Legislator, which he
desires to perpetuate; but the chief means he takes care of to effect the same,
is by his Law to prohibit his followers, to marry with Women of another
Religion, for they both seduce the Fathers and the Children. And while even in
their Nursing, and before they have learnt their Mother Tongue, they will with
their Milk be so far seasoned with Old-wives Fables, as the greatest Doctors of
truth will not oftentimes be able all their life after to get out again. Moses
as to this is very strict and positive. Deuteronomy. 7.3. Where speaking of the
Idolatrous Nations of the Land, says, Neither shall thou make Marriages with
them; thy Daughter thou shall not give unto his Son, nor his Daughter shall
thou take unto thy Son: for they will turn away thy Son from following me, that
they may serve other gods, so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against
thee, and destroy thee suddenly. And Nehem. 13.23. It is said, In those days
also I saw Jews that had married Wives of Ashdod of Ammon, and of Moab, and
their Children spoke half the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews
Language, but according to the Language of each people; and I contended with
them, and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their Hair,
and made them swear by God, saying, ye shall not give your Daughters unto their
Sons, nor take their Daughters unto your Sons, or for your selves, did not
Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? So does Mahomet command his
followers to marry only those of his Religion, whom he calls True Believers,
and says, It is better to marry Slaves, who are True Believers, than great
Princesses who are Unbelievers. So do the Popish Laws and Canons forbid Papists
to marry Protestants, under the name of Heretics, except with the Pope's
Dispensation or License, which is only used where he sees a fit opportunity, to
put such a snare about the Neck of a Protestant, as the Philistines did with
their Dalilah about Sampson, to betray and destroy him. So it appears, both
Jew, Pope, and Turk, are wiser in their generation then the Children of Light.
The Papists make Laws, and prohibit Marriage with Protestants, and illegitimate
their Children, to make them incapable to succeed to a Papists Inheritance. The
Protestant sleeps, and never makes so much as one Law to prohibit Marriage with
Papists, or to make Papist Children incapable to succeed to a Protestant
Inheritance.

CHAP. VII. Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession ought not to be judged
by Ceremonial Laws.
BY the Law of the Patriarchs or Moses, there were no Ceremonies instituted of
Marriage; and the Marriage of Abraham to Sarah his first Wife, was no more then
of Adam to Eve, Genesis 4.1. And Adam knew Eve his Wife, and she conceived and
bare Cain, and said, I have gotten a Man from the Lord. And this appears Genesis
20.2. where it is said, And Abraham said of Sarah his Wife, she is my Sister:
And Abimelech King of Gerar sent and took Sarah: But God came to Abimelech in a
Dream by Night, and said to him, as Mr. Seldom de jur. Not. and Gent. 573.
translates the Hebrew Text, Ecce tu morieris propter mulierem quam accepisti;
nam concubuit cum ea maritus. Behold thou shall dye, for the Woman which thou
have taken for her Male has lain with her. God does not say he has carried
her to Church and shook her by the hand before a Priest, or took her per verba
de praesenti, or that Consensus non Concubitus facit Matrimonium, but the
contrary, that he had married her, because he had lain with her. And the very
same Marriage, without any Ceremony, does Abraham likewise make with his second
Wife Hagar. Genesis 16.3. And Sarah Abraham's Wife took Hagar her Maid, the
Egyptian, after Abraham had dwelt ten years in the Land, and gave her to her
Husband Abraham, to be his Wife: And he went in unto Hagar and she conceived.
Here Hagar is made Abraham's Wife, by no other Ceremony but going in unto her,
and her conception thereupon. And besides going in unto her, there is no
Ceremony appointed for Marriage in the whole Law of Moses; nor had the Jews any
custom of carrying the Woman to Church, before a Priest, but the contrary. When
they married it was in the open Air (and thought it not Lawful in any House)
whence they might behold the Heavens, in memory of God's promise to Abraham.
Genesis 15.5. And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward Heaven,
and tell the Stars if thou be able to number them; and he said unto him, so
shall thy Seed be. But admit Moses had made as many Ceremonial Laws for
Marriage, as he did for Sacrifices; admit the Jews had superstitiously observed
as many more by their Customs and Traditions; yet were it to no purpose; for
both Ceremonial Laws and Traditions are all now abolished by Christ. Col. 2.14.
Blotting out the Handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. And Math.
15.1. Where the Scribes and Pharisees asked Christ, Why do thy Disciples
transgress the Traditions of the Elders v. 3. He answered and said unto them,
Why do you also transgress the Commandment of God by your Tradition: For God
commands, saying, Honor thy Father and Mother: but ye say, Whosoever shall
say to his Father and Mother, It is a gift by whatsoever thou might be
profited by me, and honor not his Father and his Mother, he shall be free:
Thus have ye made the Commandment of God of none effect by your Tradition. And
verse. 9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men. Here is the very same thing done by Bishops, which was
done by the Scribes and Pharisees; for they on a Ceremonial Form of words used
by Children, gave them liberty not to honor their Father: And the Bishops on a
Ceremonial Form of words used by the reputed Father, per verba de praesenti,
presently make the Child honor him who is not his Father, nor begat him; and
if such Ceremonial Form of words be not used, and a Certificate of the Bishop
thereof, then they command the Child not to honor the Father who begat him;
and command the true Father to illegitimate and abdicate his Child, which was
truly begotten: And this they do either by the Ceremonial Law and Canons, or
Traditions of Popes. But if both Ceremonial Laws and Traditions of Moses and
Jews are abolished by Christ, and by the Moral Law of God, of honoring the
Father, much more are the Ceremonial Laws and Traditions of Popes and Bishops
abolished by the same Moral Law. I shall only mention a word more of the
abolishing of the Ceremonials, by the Testimony of the Popish Writers
themselves, who though in their works they keep alive all the Ceremonials of
Moses's Law, whence they can male profit, yet in words and Doctrine they so far
confess them abolished, that they say it were a deadly sin to use them. Aquinas
therefore on the Question concludes; Ceremonialia adeo sunt evacuata, ut non
solum sunt mortua, sed mortifera; Judicialia sunt quidem mortua; quia non
habent vim obligandi, non tamen sunt mortifera; quia siquis Princeps in regno
suo ordinaret illa judicialia observari, non peccaret, nisi forte hoc modo
observarentur, vel observari mandarentur, tanquam habentia vim obligandi ex
veteris legis institutione; talis enim intentio observandi esset mortifera. The
Ceremonial Laws are so utterly void, that they are not only dead, but deadly;
and the Judicials are dead but not deadly; because if any Prince in his Kingdom
will command those judicials to be observed, he does not sin, unless perhaps
they are observed, or commanded to be observed as obligatory, by virtue of that
old Antique Law: for such an intention to observe them were a deadly sin. So
agrees Lippoman and others. The difference between a Ceremony and a
Circumstance shall be shown after.

Of the absurd and ridiculous Ceremonies, on which Priests would have Marriage,
Filiation, Aliment, and Succession to depend.
The chief Pagan Ceremony of Marriage in old time with the Greeks, was to carry
the Woman to the Temple with Torches.

Ac nec nupta quidem, taedaque accepta jugali
Cur nisi ne caperes Regna paterna nothus.
And this came first from the Priests of Priapus and Venus, who as is before
shown in the Title of Ecclesiastical Laws, were the first inventors of all
Ceremonies of Marriage, that for their own gain they might, by pretense of a
Ceremonial Law, instituted by their false Gods and Goddesses, overthrow the
Moral Law of the true God of Marriage. But to them who know the true God, and
his Law, from the false, what does a Torch more make a Marriage then an end of
a Candle to go to bed with, or to have the validity or invalidity of the same,
or the Filiation and Succession of Children to depend on?

Amongst the Romans they were married by the Priest, and a Gold Ring put on the
Woman's finger; the like is now in use amongst the Popist Romans. In the
Persian Marriages instead of a Ring, the Priest incircles them with a Cord,
conjoynes their hands, takes a Reciprocal oath, and calls Mahomet to witness;
then the Caddi registers their Names. The Assyrians never see the Woman until
they are married to her, (so neither do Princes but by Picture) and marry on a
good report; and go first and agree with her Parents, then a^an appointed time
they are to meet in a Church, in a part of it designed for that use; where
there is a Partition with an hole in it, on one side the Bridegroom and his
friends stand, on the other the Bride and her friends: The Priest bids the
Bridegroom put his hand through the hole, and take his Bride by the hand; which
no sooner done, but her Mother and one other of her friends, being prepared
with a sharp Instrument, pricks his hand all over, and if he does not pull away
his hand when he is so pained, but still holds her fast, they hold it a sign he
will love her, if not they judge the contrary. Amongst the Macua's on the River
Quizungo, when a Maid is to be married, she goes into the Wilderness a whole
Moon every day, to bewail her Virginity, visited of her friends, and returning
home every Night, and every Morning early returning to her wild Task again; as
soon as the new Moon appears, a great Feast is made, and the next day she is
delivered to her Husband, without any more Ceremony. Dos Sanctos. The
Lapponians hold, That no Marriage which is not consecrated by the Fire and
Flint is Lawful, therefore they strike a Flint on the Steel, to show, That as
the hidden sparks fly out by that Union, so Children are propagated by the
conjunction of Male and Female. Nuptiae olim celebrantur accipiendo Aquam, and
Ignem. L. per and ib. Gl. pen. de Donat. inter virum. The Incutan Priest makes
a Marriage by joining the little fingers of the Man and Woman together, near a
fire. The Brasilians without any Ceremony, yet Adultery is with them death.
Amongst the Memesses, the Man and his Bride are set a stride on a Horse, both
blinded, and so led into a Grove, there taken down and married by their Rites;
then set up again blinded as before, and conveyed with their company, and
Music, and Singing to their House, there taken down and had to Bed, still
blinded till the next morrow; in the mean while the company continue drinking.
Barclay. In Muscovy they ride to Church, they use a Ring and joining of Hands,
she knocks her Head against his Shoe, and he throws the lap of his Garment over
her. In Peru, the Man marries the Woman by putting an Ottoga or Shoe on her
Foot, if she were a Maid the Shoo was of Wool, if a Widow of Reeds. The Mexican
Prlests married the parties by tying a corner of the Man's Gown and the Woman's
Vail together, and so lead them to the Man's House; where there was a fire
ready kindled and made, the married couple walk seven times about the fire, and
so they become married. In the old Greek Marriages, when the Bride came to her
Husband's House, they used to throw Figs on her Head, and the company to
scramble for them: The Woman as Lactan. touches, was likewise to be set in the
lap of Priap. The old Roman custom, was by eating a piece of Barley-Cake before
the Priest, and other Ceremonies. The Cimbri had a custom, That such as would
marry, after the Marriage agreed on, they each of them pared their Nails of
Fingers and Toes, and sent the parings one to another, which, when they had
mutually received; this was esteemed a holy and firm Marriage, and they became
Man and Wife. The Teutonians rounded one another Hair. The Elamites pricked
one another finger. The Numidians anointed one another with spittle and clay.
In Rome, the Bridegroom and Bride married not by their own proper names, but by
the name of Cajus and Caja; they used to call themselves by the name of Jupiter
and Juno; so the Poet though never so poor a fellow, he says, Eja, mi Juno, non
decet te tam tristem esse tuo Jovi. And in Muscovy the Bridegroom and Bride are
called the Duke and the Duchess.

The Armenians amongst other Ceremonies meet at the high Altar, and lean
Forehead to Forehead; then comes the Priest, and turning his back to the
Altar, lays his Bible on their Heads instead of a Desk, a weight sufficiently
heavy, being a thick ponderous Folio; there he lets it lie till he reads the
Form of Matrimony. The Scythians first touch one another Feet, then they set
together their Knees, then their Hands, then their Buttocks, then their Heads,
then they embrace one another, and then it is a Marriage. If the Ceremonies or
words of the Priest make Marriage, then Nero was, when he was married to one
Pythagoras an Eunuch dressed like a Woman. And when another time he married
Sporus an Eunuch in Greece, these must be Marriages: One said it had been good
for the World, Nero's Father had been so married.

At Banaras, and amongst other Indians, when a Man and a Woman is to be
Married, they and a Bramayne or Priest, and a Cow with a Calf are brought
together to the Rivers side. The Woman having a Brass-Pot in her hand full of
Water; the Priest receives a White Cloth of four Yards, and a Basket cross
bound with diverse things in it; the Cloth he lays on the back of the Cow, and
then he takes the Cow by the end of the Tail, and then he says certain words,
and the Man does hold his hand by the Priest's hand, and the Woman's hand by her
Husband's hand, and all have the Cow by the Tail, and then they pour Water out
of the Pot on the Cows Tail, and it runs through all their hands, and they
lave up Water with their hands, then the Priest ties them together by the
Cloths, which done, they go round about the Cow and Calf, give some Money to
the Poor, and their Idol; and lest the man should think himself married to the
Cow and Calf, he gives the Cow and Calf to the Priest, which is more then they
give to the Poor, and so they are Man and Wife; and whom the Cows Tail has
joined, let no Man put asunder, which if they do, 'twere fit the Priest lost
his Cow and Calf. In Cambaia, as Texera reports, They have so great esteem of
their Cows, that a Merchant Banyan spent 10 or 12 Thousand Dukets in the
Ceremony of a Nuptial Feast, of marrying his Cow to his Friend's Bull, for the
greater publication of it, not suffering it to be private in the Woods; and
what were the Cow or Calf the better for all this, or who could the sooner know
whether the Calf were the legitimate Issue of the married Bull, or some other
in the Woods.

CHAP. VIII. Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, ought only to be
judged by the Moral Law of God.
THE debate of the lawfulness of the Marriage of Henry the Eighth with Queen
Katherine, having been his Brother's Wife, being in Agitation; it happened that
Cranmer, (who was after Archbishop, and in time of Queen Mary Martyred,) and
Dr. Stephens, and Dr. Fox met at Waltham one day at Dinner, where falling in
discourse about the case, the other Doctors thought the Marriage might be
proved unlawful by the Civil-Law, but said Cranmer, It may better be proved
unlawful by the Law of God: And so it may be said here, Marriage, Filiation,
and Succession, may be better proved, as it is in truth, lawful or unlawful, by
the Moral-Law of God, then by Laws of Moses, of Nations, of Emperors, of
Popes, of Bishops, of Mahomet, of England, Scotland, Ireland, or any human Laws
in the whole World.

First, Because the Moral Law, is the Law of Nature.

Secondly, Because the Law of Nature is the unquestionable Law of God.

Thirdly, Because it is a perfect Law, and comprehends in it all the
innumerable Cases, which are impossible to be contained in any human writing.

Fourthly, Because it is a Law universally given, as well to Gentil, as to Jew;
and no Nation in the World exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Moral-Law.

Fifthly, Because it is a Law immutable, and endures for ever, and neither
Jew, Pope, Turk, nor any Power in Heaven or Earth, except the Legislator
himself, is able to change it.

The Jews have an old Tradition, That God when he Created the World left a
great hole in Heaven, that if any other God arrogated the glory of the
Creation, the true Creator might bid him stop that hole first.
When a Jew shall stop the hole
Left in Heaven near the Pole.
When the Sun is in a Sack,
And the Stars turn spots of black.
When the Moon 's in Mah'met 's sleive,
And a Priest shall Nature shrieve;
And her Palace turn a Grange,
Jew, Pope, and Turk, her Law shall change.
When the Moon her head shall dress
In the Western Wilderness.
When in Heaven for a Sign,
Charles his Wain shall cross the Line.
When the Earth and Water shall
Make two Globes, and not one Ball.
Then, Oh then! what is more strange,
Nature 's God her Law shall change.
Changed may Second-Nature be,
But no Eye shall ever see
Highest Nature change from Good,
Though by us not understood,
Yea, though none him see or know,
He Eternal Good will do,
Through all Forms though Nature range,
Nature 's God will never change.
It will be ask't perhaps by some, In what Tables God has writ the Law of
Nature, concerning Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, and how it may
be read? To which I Answer, That the Tables are of two kinds, the External, and
Internal; and the Readers and Witnesses are of two kinds, the External, and
Internal; the External Tables of Marriage are expressed by Christ, Matthew. 19.4.
when the Pharisees question of Divorce, whether lawful for a man to put away
his Wife for every cause? He Answered, and said unto them, have ye not read,
that he which made them at the beginning, made them Male and Female? The Male
and Female are therefore the External and visible Tables, wherein God has
written in living Hieroglyphics, or Figurations of the Sexes, his Law of
Marriage. As to External Tables, of Filiation, Christ expresses likewise the
same, Matthew. 18.2. And Jesus called a little Child unto him, and set him in the
midst of them, and said, Verily, I sayunto you, Except ye be converted, and
become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little Child, the same is
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. And whosoever shall receive one such little
Child in my name, receives me. But whosoever shall offend one of these little
ones, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and
that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. As to the External Tables of
Aliment, they are expressed in his own Mother. Luke 11.27. Blessed is the Womb
that bare thee, and the Paps that thou have sucked. The Paps therefore
wonderfully prepared to overflow with Milk, just against the time the Child is
to be born, are External Tables, wherein God has written to Innocents, in
letters as white as Snow; that the Mother ought to aliment them with the Milks
of her Breasts; And when he has made the Teeth to break through the Coral
Gums, he writes in those Ivory Tables, That the Father ought to provide
stronger meat for the Child. The Internal Tables are expressed by Paul, 2 Cor.
3.3. Written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in Tables
of Stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the Heart. The External Readers and
Witnesses are all Creatures, as appears, Job 12.7. But ask now the Beasts, and
they shall teach thee, and the Fowls of the Air, and they shall tell thee; or
speak to the Earth, and it shall teach thee, and the Fishes of the Sea and they
shall declare unto thee. Go then and ask the Fowls of the Air concerning
Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and Succession, they will show thee their Mateing,
their Pairing, keeping true Wedlock, their private retirement to secret places,
their holes, their Caves, their Nests they build for their young, their Males
and Females who procreated them, and not the Bishops to be Judges to which they
belong; their Grandmother Earth their dry-Nurse, the Sea, their wet-Nurse,
Provision for them, all their feeding, their sucking their young, their
teaching them when able, go to their Grandmother and take their Diet with her,
and such of them as have Propriety in Goods and Chattels, Tenements and
Haereditaments, as Bees, Ants, and Squirrels, leaving as they die their Hives
and Honey-Hills, and Corn-Holes, and Nuts, to their Descendents, to be their
Successors. The Internal Readers and Witnesses in Man, are the Divine faculties
of the Soul, Sense, and Reason, one does Testify the Fact, the other the Law.
The Internal Judge of the Probation of both, is the Conscience. The Laws which
they read and testify are written in the Internal Tables of the Heart, Christ
expresses the first, concerning Marriage, in the foresighted Text, Matthew.
19.5. For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, and they two shall be
one flesh. Concerning Filiation, the Law of natural affection, which is writ in
the heart of the Father, is mentioned, Psalm. 103.13. As the Father pittieth his
Children: so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. And the Law of natural
affection writ in the heart of the Mother, is mentioned, Isa. 49.15. Can a
Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son
of her Womb? As to the Law of Aliment written in the heart of the Father, it is
mentioned, Luke 11.11. If a Son shall ask bread of any of you that is a Father,
will he give him a stone? or if he ask a Fish, will he give him a Serpent? or
if he shall ask an Egg, will he offer him a Scorpion. Lastly, as to the Law of
Succession written in the heart of the Father, whereby all natural Sons
succeeded, either to the right of Primogeniture, or Filial Portions; the same
runs through all the examples of Jews in Scripture, and of Gentiles in
Histories.

This great Law of Nature is acknowledged to be written in the Tables of the
Heart, by the Scripture it self. Romans 2.14. The Gentiles who have not the Law,
do by Nature the things contained in the Law: these having not the Law are a
Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their Hearts;
their Conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts, mean while, accusing
or excusing one another. So Romans 1.26. Paul says, Women did sin against
Nature: Yet was there no Law of Moses, nor any Law written by God or Man, in
Paper and Ink, which particularly prohibited them, but only that of Nature. And
that this Law of Nature can neither be changed, nor abolished, or dispensed
with by any humane power, is agreed by Philosophers, Poets, Divines, Common and
Civil Lawyers, and all others, except Popes, who exalt themselves above God,
Christ, and Nature, and all that is called God. Lex Naturae, neo tolli, neo
abrogari potest, says Tul. de leg. 205.

Dionysius, when his Mother being an old Woman, desired of him he would get her
to be married to a young Man: He answered, Kings might overthrow Civil Laws,
but could not the Laws of Nature. Lex humana derivari debet a lege Dei, sed eam
perfect persequi non Potest. Aquin. Augustine, In humanis Legibus nihil est
justum nisi ab aeterna lege dirivatur. Honesta and turpia natura judicanda
sunt. Tul. de leg. 169.6. Hobart's Reports. 120. It is acknowledged, that all
customs and Acts of Parliament against the Laws of Nature, are void; for Lex
naturae est lex legum, the Law of Nature is the Law of God, and positive Law,
if contrary or variant from it, is the Law of Man.

Yelverion, Justice, said, When a new Case comes, for which there is no
positive Law before; we do as the Sophonisis and Civilians, resort to the Law
of Nature, which is the reason and ground of all Laws, and of that which is
most beneficial for the Commonwealth make a Law, quod non negatur. 8 E. 4. fo.
12. Claudius justly reprehends Tribonian, That in compiling the Institutes of
the Civil Law, he omitted the Law of Nature. de Ferraiis. 552. But the
flattering Courtier had he done so, knew he must have prefixed another
imperatoriam Majestatem; and laid other manner of principles then placitum
Principis to be the original of right: he could not have then divided Title and
Jurisdiction with his Master. And Jupiter Proclaiming that Deus est imperator
in Coelis, and Imperator est Deus in Terris. It Is well he claims only the
Earth, for now the Pope claims, not only plenitudinem Terrae, but Heaven too,
to sell to his Customers. Yet the Civil Law acknowledges the Law of Nature
immutable: And this point of Marriage and Succession, says, Lege duodecim
tabularum been humano generi prospectum est, quae unam consonantiam tam in
maribus quam in foeminis Legitimis, and in eorum successionibus, necnon in
liberis observandam esse existimavit, nullo discrimine in successionibus
habito, cum natura utrumque corpus ediderit, ut maneat suis vicibus immortale
and alterum alterius auxilio egeat, ut uno semoto and alterum corrumpatur; sed
posteritas dum inimica utitur subtilitate, non piam induxit differentiam etc.
Cod. lib. 6. tit. 47. l. lege. By the Law of the Twelve Tables, it is well
provided for Mankind, that there should be the same rule of Successions for
Males, and Females, and in Children, and no difference to be made in their
Successions; seeing Nature has brought forth the Bodies of both, that they
might continue in their course immortal, and one need help of another, and one
taken away, the other might be destroyed. But later Ages, while they use so
much subtilty, have made an impious difference, etc. Which is intended between
Males and Females in Succession, when Lands are Intailed to Heirs Males. By
which appears what opinion the Civil Law has of Successions to such Intails to
be impious, because contrary to the Law of Nature. The Civil Law likewise
acknowledges, that Jura Sanguinis nullo jure Civili dirimi possunt; and again
it follows the Law of Nature in Legitimation, Si mulier quinquagenaria partum
ediderit, an, debet hujusmodi soboles suo patri succedere, and haereditatem
^jus nancisci a Caesariano advocato interrogati sumus, and sancimus, Licet
mirabilis hujusmodi partus inveniatur, and raro contingat; nihil tamen eorum
quae probabiliter a natura nascuntur esse producta respui; sed omne jus quod ex
quacunque Lege liberis praestitum est, hoc merum atque immutilatum hujusmodi
filiis vel filiabus servari in omnibus succ^ssionibus sive ex testamento, sive
ab intestata. Et summatim non absimiles aliis fiant in quos similes natura
efficit. Cod. lib. 6. tit. 47. si major. A question is proposed us by the
Advocate of Caesar, if a Woman above fifty bring forth a Child, whether such
Issue shall be Successor to the Father in the whole inheritance? And we Decree,
though it be an admirable Case, and rarely happens, yet we ought not to reject
any thing, known to be probably produced by Nature; but all the right which by
any Law is given to Children, the same ought to be wholly and entirely
performed to such Sons and Daughters in all Successions, whether to a Testament
or an Intestate. And in short, that they ought not to be made unlike other
Children in Successions, whom Nature has made like. Hence it appears, that the
Civil Law wills the Succession of Children shall be according to the Law of
Nature, and not according to any Canon Law, or Law made by the Priest. Natura
duce errare nullo modo potest. Tul. 1. de leg. Cum vero parentibus rediti,
deinde Magistris traditi sumus tum ita variis imbuimur erroribus, ut vanitati
veritas, and opinioni confirmatae natura ipsa cedit. 3. Tusc. Where nature is
our Guide, it is impossible to err, but when we fall into the hands of Parents,
and are delivered to Shool-Masters; we are then infected with so many Errors,
that all truth gives place to vanity, and Nature it self yields to opinion
accustomed. To fight against Nature, is like Giants to fight against God, Cato
major.

Of the Final Causes of Marriage by the Law of God and Nature.
The Final causes of Marriage, which is the Ordinance of God, and not of Man,
are not to fill Priests pockets with money, or to satisfy their insatiable
Covetousness, and Ambition; to set their Foot on the Necks of Emperors and
Kings, in their Legitimations, and Successions; and thereby to dispose of the
Kingdoms of Princes, and the Liberty, Propriety, and Goods of the Subjects, at
their Arbitrary will and pleasure. But the Final causes of Marriage by the Law
of God and Nature, are three. 1. Procreation of Children. 2. That Man might
have an Help-meet for him, there being many necessities, especially in time of
sickness, wherein Man cannot be without the help of a Woman. 3. To make his
life more pleasant and delightful, Tristis sine conjuge lectus. As for the
first part, which is the greatest and chiefest end of Marriage, namely
procreation of Children; without which the World cannot be continued. To be the
shorter I shall only mention one Poet as follows.

Providei ille maximus mundi-Parens,
Cum tam rapaces cerneret fati minas,
Vt damna semper sobole repararet nova,
Excedat, agedum, rebus humanis Venus,
Quae supplet ac restituit exhaustum genus
Orbis jacebit squalido turpis situ,
Vacuum sine ullis classibus stabit mare,
Alesque Coelo deerit, and silvis fera,
Solis and Aer pervius ventis erit.
Sen. in Hippol. Fates cruel Threats, when the great Parent saw,
Against his Creatures, by as great a Law
He then Inacted all those, whom it slew,
Sold by new Births perpetually renew.
Should Venus lease, and should not still restore
With fresh Supplies Natures exhausted store,
On squalid Earth no Beauty would remain,
No gallant Fleets would dance upon the Main,
No Deer in Woods, no Birds would be in Sky:
Winds only through sad Air would sighing fly.
There could be neither King, nor Parliament, nor People, nor Governors, nor
Governed; neither could the Protestant Religion defend it self against Pope or
Turk, without Marriage; for though it be Apocrypha, it is truly said, Esdras
4.15. Women have born the King, and all the People that bear rule by Sea or
Land.

The End of the First Book.
THE CONTENTS Of the Second Book.
BY what Judge Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, ought not, and
ought to be Judged. Of the Five Competitors, to be Judges of Marriage,
Filiation, Aliment, and Succession; (1.) The Bishop. (2) The Magistrate. (3.)
The Soldier. (4) The Parents. (5.) The King and Parliament. 137
Exceptions against Bishops being Judges, in reference to the Legislative. ib.
Except. 1. They assume to be Judges, Jure Divino, without a Sign of Mission
from God, which overthrows the Legislative Power of the King and Parliament.
ib. Of the Sign of Mission required by the Grand Seignior, from Sabatai Sevi, a
counterfeit Jewish Messiah. 139 2. They have falsely translated the Scripture,
in all words relating to Marriage. 142 They have falsely translated Ish, Isha,
Zona, Kadesh, Philiegesh, (...), Husband, Wife, Harlot, Concubine, etc. 142 No
such as word as Concubine in the whole Original Scripture. ib. They have
falsely translated the Seventh Commandment Lo Tinaph, to be Adultery. 145 They
have falsely translated (...) to be Fornication. ib. They have falsely
translated the Tenth Commandment, in the words Wife, Manservant, Maidservant.
146 They have falsely translated Mamzer in the Old, and Nothus in the New
Testament, Bastard. Wherein are noted the Errors of Coke, Skene, and Grotius,
in following Episcopal and other Popish translations. ib. Of the absurdity of
Common and Ecclesiastical Lawyers, who make the Child born, without the
Ceremonies of a Priest and Temple, no Sib, Kin, or of Blood, to the Father who
begot, or the Mother who bare him. 154, 155 Further Reasons shown, that they
have falsely translated Mamzer in the Old, and Nothus in the New Testament,
Bastard. 156 No such word or thing as Bastard in the whole Original Scripture,
or amongst the Hebrews, Greeks, or Romans. 3. They have corrupted the Press,
both as to Scripture; and Acts of Parliament, and interdict Protestants to
Print against, or answer Papists. 162 A Counterfeit Act of Parliament Printed
by Bishops against Protestants, and the true suppressed. 163 Mischiefs which
follow the Interdiction of the Press to Protestants. 164, 165 4. By pretense of
giving the King the name of Supremacy, they have taken the thing to themselves.
167 5. By pretense of giving the King Supremacy by the Ceremonies of the
Coronation; they take it from him to themselves. 169 David Anointed and Crowned
by his Parliament, and not by the Priest. 173 6. They assume in all matters
concerning Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, to be above Appeal to
the Kings Courts 175 Of the abominable Judgment passed by the Common Law
Judges in Kennes Case, Coke lib. 7.42. whereby they gave away the Supremacy of
the King's Courts to Bishops, and made them in all causes Matrimonial, subject
to no Appeal. ib. Exceptions against Bishops being Judges, in reference to the
Judicial Power. 180 1. They are prohibited by the example of Christ, to Judge
Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, or Succession. ib. 2. They are totally ignorant
of the Fact, and were never Educated in the Laws by which they pretend to Judge
Marriage. 181 3. They Judge by a Chancellor, and not in Person. 4. They have
Plurality of Offices, and more than they are able to serve, yet will be Judges
of Marriage besides. ib. 5. They are ambidextrous and amphibious Judges. 182 6.
They Judge Marriage by pretended Canons and Laws made by Bishops, without assent
of Parliament. ib. and 183 7. They take to themselves Fines and Penalties of
their own Judgments. 184 8. They License, Dispense, and Pardon all Crimes
within their pretended Jurisdiction for Money. 9. They cannot be known whether
Protestants or Papists, if Bishops. 185 10. They Judge by Fictions and not by
Truth. 11. They Judge by Ceremonies and not by Circumstances. Of the manifold
mischiefs from the Judgment of Marriage by the Ceremonies of a Priest and a
Temple. 192 1. It compels to enter into an indissoluble Obligation, before the
Parties can know each other, whether they are sit for Marriage or no. 193 2. It
give the Bishop the Monopoly of all Women and their Goods. 196 3. It gives him
the Monopoly of Successions, both in private Families and Kingdoms. 197 4. It
gives him power to Judge of Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, by Fictions.
ib. 5. It causes in the Rich Excess and Vanity of Apparel, Tilting,
Turneaments, Masking, Gluttony, Riot and Drunkenness. 198 6. It undoeth the
Poor in their Marriages. 199 7. It causes Immodesty in Brides, wanton Songs
and Ceremonies, promiscuous Dancing, and corruption of Youth. 200 8. It
exposes to public view what God has commanded to be secret. 201 9. It
causes Community of Women, Community of Children, Fornication, Adultery,
Stews, Brothels, and the dissemination of most contegious and deadly Diseases
amongst the people. ib. 10. It has caused Prostitution of Brides to Priests,
Lords, Guests, and others. 205 11. It has caused Consecration of Incest,
Whores, Sodomites, to attend the Service of the Priests, and the Temples. ib.
12. It has caused the Consecration and Adoration of Priapus, Baal Peor, Venus,
Adonis, Flora, and the first defiling of the Virgin World with Whoredom and
Idolatry. 207 13. It first destroyed in the World the Omnipresential Worship of
God. 208 Prayers in Temples and Synagogues, except amongst persons agreed,
prohibited by Christ, and why. A Poem on the Omnipresential Worship of God, and
therein of Marriages in Temples. 223 15. It caused the bloody Sacrifices of
Virgins, Children, and Indian Wives. 229 16. It lays punishments on lawful
Child births, and destroys Millions of Infants. 234 17. It caused the Parisian
Massacre, wherein were an Hundred Thousand Protestants slain. 240 Why the
Ottoman Emperors Marry not by a Priest, or in a Temple, and of the bloody
Murders ensued of the Sons of Solomon the Magnificent, by his breaking the
Custom, and his being drawn by Roxolana to Marry her by a Priest. 245 12.
Bishops proceed to Judgment in the unknown Language of Law Latin. 254 13. They
Judge for Fees, where of the inconveniences following maintenance of Judges, and
Officers by Fees, and not by Satary. Exceptions against Bishops being Judges,
in reference to the Executive Power. 1. They begin the Suit with Execution. 263
2. They Pledge before Summons, Summon before Copy, Copy before Oath, Punish
before Contumacy, Judge before Hearing, and Arrest before Judgment, all which
preposteration begins with Execution. 268 Of the Inconveniences ensue by
Quorums, or more Judges than one in a Court. 276 A Satyr against the cruel
Preposterations above mentioned, both in Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts. Of
Summons to answer before a Copy given, of what is required to be answered. 286
Of giving a Copy before an Oath of no Calumny. 288 Of the multitude of Fictions
and Falsities ensue in Chancery and Common Law, by neglecting the Oath of no
Calumny. ib. ad 305 Of Judgment before Hearing. Part of a Satyr translated out
of Seneca, p. 685. on the settish Emperor Claudius, who used to Sentence before
Hearing. 305 An enumeration of diverse. Forms of Judicial Proceeding, wherein
People are Condemned before Hearing. 1. By repelling men from the Truth, and
merit of the Cause, and compelling them to make their allegations in
Formalities and Fictions. 306 A Dispute between two famous Judges, Fitzherbert,
and Brook, 14 H. 8.25. concerning Truth and Good Sentence, and Formality and
Fiction, in Judicial Proceeding. 306 2. By compelling to Original Writs at
Common Law, and not serving the Party with a Copy of the Declaration without
them. 312 Mischiefs of Original Writs. 313 3. By compelling to the Writ of
Subpoena in Chancery, and not serving the Party with a Copy of the Bill without
it. Mischiefs of Writs of Subpoena. 4 By the Capias ut lagatum, and
Excommunicato capiendo. A Satyr on a Papist and a Protestant, Imprisoned, one
on an Outlawry, the other on an Excommunication, against Imprisonment before
Hearing and Judgment. 329 A Digression concerning the danger of the Three
Kingdoms, Condemning one another without Hearing, by reason of the Non-Union of
their three Parliaments in one House. Of the Fatal Dangers attending a
Non-Union, and the inestimable Benefits of the contrary. 335 Of matters
requisite to perfect an Union. An Elegy on the ill effects of Excommunication
of Protestants by Protestants, causing a Disunion in the late unhappy Civil
Wars. 343 5. By Excommunication it self. The Form of the Jewish
Excommunication. 345 The Form of the Greek Excommunication against Thieves. 347
The Form of the Popes Excommunication against Queen Elizabeth. All Forms of
Excommunication wicked and Antichristian. 348 Of the strange Cheats and
Superstition in Excommunications. 352 Of the damnable mischiefs arise to
Christian Princes and States, by tollerating Popes or Prelates to
Excommunicate, without a Sign of Mission from God. 362 All Excommunication,
Curses, and Deliveries to Satan, by Bishops or Priests, without a Sign of
Mission from God, if Malefice follow, ought to be punished as Witchcraft, if
not as a Cheat. 381 A Satyr in defiance of all Excommunication without a Sign
of Mission from God. 388 An Epode on Protestants Excommunicated by Papists.
Considerations concerning a True and False Test between Papist and Protestant.
6. By Bishops condemning Protestants of Heresy by the Four first General
Councils.
The other Exceptions against Judicial Forms, and what was intended concerning
the other Competitor-Judges, I am enforced to break off abruptly by
Disturbances at the Press.

Lib. II. Of the Judge of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession.
CHAP. I. Of the Five Competitors to be Judges of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment,
and Succession. (1.) The Bishop. (2.) The Magistrate. (3.) The Soldiers. (4.)
The Parents. (5.) The King and Parliament.
HAving before shown unanswerable exceptions against the Ecclesiastical Laws,
by which Bishops pretend to judge; I shall now propose exceptions Declinatory,
of the Authority and Jurisdiction usurped by them, and likewise of their
Personal disabilities and incapacities, to be Judges of the matters in
question, all which are (1.) In reference to the Legislative. (2.) The
Judicial. (3.) The Executive or Military Power all usurped or abused by them.

Exceptions against Bishops being Judges, in reference to the Legislative.
They assume to be Judges, Jure Divino, without a Sign of Mission from God,
which overthrows the Legislative Power of King and Parliament.

For they assume to be Angels and Messengers of God, Ambassadors of Christ, and
Successors by his last Will and Testament, of the whole Power of Judgment given
to the Son; yet do they show no sign of Mission from God, no letters of
Credence from Christ, nor any letters of Probat, that they were nominated
either Executors or Legatees in any such Testament, or in the Testament of any
Executor or Apostle of Christ; or in the Testament of any Executor of such
Executors. But they follow therein the old Cheat of all the old Pagan
Legislators. Thus did the old Egyptian Priests call themselves Angels of God,
and were so called by the People; and Menes, their most ancient Lawgiver,
recorded in the World, alleged his Laws received from Mercury the Pagan
Michael or the Archangel of the Messages of the gods. Minos the Legislator of
Creet, to soar a pitch above the Authority of the Laws of Menes, attributed his
to Jupiter himself, and alleged to the People, That the great God was his
Guest in his House for the space of Nine Years together, and Dined and Supped
with him every day, till he had indicted to him those Divine Laws, and he was
able to write them for Publication. Thus did the Pope overtop that Law which
was given by the disposition of Angels, by pretense of Inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, whom he sent to the Council of Trent in a Cloak-bag. And Mahomet to
outdo the Pope, made himself the Holy Ghost, affirming himself to be the
Comforter promised by Christ. John 14.25, 26. These things have I spoken unto
you, being yet present with you: but the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Now the
Bishops pretend to a greater Power from Christ then Mahomet, he only in this
claims Power to Teach, but the Bishops claim Power Jure Divino from Christ, to
Judge the World: yet whether they show any better Commission or Mission then he,
Jure Divino, let any judge. The gift of Prophecy, Priests and Prophets at mortal
Feud.
if true, goes not by Descent; those who therefore pretend to be Successors,
and call themselves Priests, are fain to counterfeit either a Law or Gift from
the Predecessor's Prophet, whereby the Priesthood was made Hereditary or
Successive in that manner by which they take it, yet both the old Prophet, and
the new Priest, a newer Prophet pretending a newer Revelation or Mission, again
over-reaches and deceives the deceivers, which is the reason that Priests
pretending to be Hereditary or Successive, are always at mortal Feud with new
Prophets, true or false; the former who have no pretense but Possession or a
Descent cast, and a Possessary Action dreading to be Evicted by a Writ of right
Patent under the Great Seal of Mission, either of a true or counter^eit
Miracle. But such patches of Ecclesiastical Policy are now worn so threadbare
and full of holes, that since Grammar-Schools, Boys themselves, peep thorough
and laugh to spy the Devil hid under the Pall of pretended Jure Divino,
without a Sign of Mission. Episcopacy must now therefore change the Scene, and
show a Sign on the open Theater, if they pretend from God, and their Letters of
Credence, if they pretend from Christ; and the Probat of the Will and
Testament, (hic in curia probat,) if they pretend to be Successors
Testamentary, or they are likely to find none but Papists or Noncomposses to
give them implicit Faith, for the Turk himself is not now so gross witted, as
to admit either Priest or Prophet, Jure Divino, without a Sign of Mission, as
is well known to all versed in those Histories, and may appear in the example
following.

Of the Sign of Mission required by the Grand Seignior of Sabatai Sevi a
counterfeit Jewish Messiah.
Sabatai Sevi, had his Design speeded, would have been Competitor with the
Grand Signior and all the Emperors and Kings of the Nations, for their
Dominions, on the Title of a Messiah, who is Jure Divino above all Earthly
Princes; and they should have felt the effect of a Jewish Excommunication to
have been deposed from their Thrones, could he but have shown a Divine Patent
for the doing, as his deluded followers firmly believed he would do.

He was the Son of Mordecai Sevi an inhabitant of Smyrna, who gained his living
by being a Broker to an English Merchant in that place; but his Son being
addicted to study, became to be a notable proficient in the Hebrew Tongue,
Divinity, and Metaphysics; and vented such new Doctrine in the Law of the Jews,
under the notion of being their Messiah, so long expected; as made the Jews
forsake their Trades, and Negotiations whereby they lived; and to venture all
on the hopes of their purchases in the new Kingdom of their Messiah: Yet
notwithstanding his Disciples were so numerous, as to be almost innumerable,
there was one Samuel Penya a Jew in Smyrna of good Estate and Reputation, so
much opposed him by arguments that he showed not the signs of Mission of the
Messiah, according to Scripture and the Doctrine of the Rabbi's; that he raised
such a Tumult against him, as drove him out of the Synagogue with danger of his
life. Yet being seconded by the Devil, this could not crush his Ambitious
design: for within a while after, his Enemy Penya's Family were possessed, and
his Daughter Prophesied, and fell into strange ecstasies: And this was not done
only in his House, but four hundred Men and Women more, likewise Prophesied of
the growing Kingdom of Sabatai; and young Infants who could scarce stammer out
a syllable to their Mothers, repeat and pronounce plainly the name of Sabatai
the Messiah, and Son of God; and voices were heard to sound from their Stomach
and Entrails; and those of riper years fell into Trances, foamed at Mouth, and
by inspiration from the Devil, recounted the future Prosperity and deliverance
of the Israelites; their Visions of the Lion of Judah, and the Triumph of
Sabatai; which made Penya Recant and turn Convert, and Preach more for him then
ever he Preached against him. The noise of which Conversion of this persecuting
Saul to the faith, hugely increased the conflux of multitudes to increase the
Power of the Messiah, and nothing wanted now but that Sabatai should show some
Miracle for a Sign of his Mission to so great a multitude of strangers, who had
not yet seen or heard any, besides the Inspirations which horribly puzzled
Sabatai, though the imagination of the People was so vitiated, that any
Leigerdemane-Trick would have passed with them for an high Miracle. There
happened an occasion wherein Sabatai was to appear in behalf of his Subjects
before the Cadi or Judge of the City, to demand ease and releif against some
oppressions which greived them, it was thought necessary the Miracle should
appear now or never, when Sabatai appearing with a formal and Pharisaical
Gravity which he had starcht on, some on the sudden avouched to see a Pillar of
Fire between him and the Cadi, which report presently run through the whole
Room, and some who strongly fancied, vowed and swore they saw it; the alarm of
the Miracle ran likewise as speedily through those in the outer-yard, and was
likewise received at home by Wives and Children in a moment, and the then Faith
of this Miracle was so far rooted, that all those who questioned or believed it
not, were called Kophrim, Infidels or Heritics, liable to the censure of
Excommunication, with whom it was not lawful, as much as to eat; having thus
settled the opinion of his Sign of Mission, he designs for the Jews in
Constantinople, and privately ships himself in a Turkish Saick in the Month of
January, 1666. and the Wind being Northerly, he was detained Thirty-Nine Days
in his Voyage, so little command had the Messiah over the Sea and Wind, at
length he gets sight of Constantinople, the Great Vizier being then there, and
not yet departed on his expedition for Candia, who having heard some rumors of
this man, sent two Boats, whilst the Saick was detained by contrary Winds, with
command to bring him Prisoner to the Port; where being brought, he was
immediately clapped into the worst Dungeon in the Town, where having remained two
Months, when the Vizier being designed for Candia, and seeing the mighty
conflux of People to him notwithstanding in his Dungeon, and that the Jews at
Constantinople were grown as mad to set up his Dominion, as all the rest,
thought it not safe to leave him in the Imperial City, whilst the Grand
Seignior and himself should be both absent, he causes him therefore to be
removed to the Castle of Abydos, being of Europe side of the Hellespont,
opposite to Sestos. After he had been there a considerable time, the noise of
him flies louder to the ears of the Grand Seignior, and he sends a Chiaux or
Messenger to bring speedily Sabatai to Adrianople, where he then was, whither
he was brought accordingly; and being demanded several questions in Turkish by
the Grand Seignior, he desired a Doctor of Physic, who had from a. Jew turned
Turk, to be his Interpreter, which was granted him, but not without some
reflection of the standers-by, That had he been the Messiah or Son of God he
would not have wanted Languages. Being therefore come to make Answer for
himself in that way he could, the Grand Seignior demanded a sign of his Mission
to be shown by him of his Messiah-ship, and would admit no other but a Miracle
of his own choice, which was, That Sabatai should be stripped naked, and set as a
mark to his Archers, if the Arrows passed not through his Body, but his skin
was Armor of Proof, then would he believe him to be the Messiah. Here the
Devil forsook Sabatai as he uses to do Witches, when brought before the
Magistrate, who bears the Sword; for the power of the Sword being a sign of
Mission to it self, in regard the Powers that are, are ordained by God, and
lesser Powers are commanded to be subject to the greater. The Power of the
Magistrate may be greater then such petty Demons, as can only do such
Ape-tricks as Inspirations or Witchcraft; or if it is the roaring Lion himself,
he may perhaps be afraid to adventure on so many Troops of Hunters as the
Magistrate can command; and the Evil Spirit may not be in so high a degree
Incorporeal, as not to be liable to Corporeal-Force: but whether he be or be
not, it is certain his Instruments, Sabatais, Magicians and Witches are; and
they are therefore by the Magistrate to be compelled to show a sign of Mission,
as Elisha did, to call Fire from Heaven, which can protect them; or the like
against the Sword given by God to the Magistrate, or else it is the duty of the
Magistrate to execute Justice upon them. Sabatai therefore knowing he had no
Spirit of God to protect him against the Sword of God, in the hand of a Power,
to the dreadful demand of such a sign of Mission, disclaimed all his Titles to
Kingdoms and Governments, and humbly alleged, that he was a poor Cocham and a
Jew as others were, and had nothing of Privilege or Virtue above the rest: The
Grand Seignior notwithstanding not wholly satisfied with this plain confession,
declared, That having given public Scandal to the Professors of the Mohammedan
Religion, and done Dishonor to his Sovereign Authority, by pretending to
draw-such a considerable portion from him under the pretense of the Kingdom of
a Messiah, as Palaestin; his Treason and Crime was not to be expiated by any
other means, then by a Conversion to the Mohammedan Faith, which if he refused
to do, the Stake was ready at the Gate of the Seraglio to Impale him. Sabatai
with much feigned cheerfulness replied, That he was contented to turn Turk, and
that he did it not of force, but of choice; and having been a long time
desirous of so glorious a Profession, he esteemed himself much honored that he
had the opportunity to on^ it in the Presence of the Grand Seignior. Hist.
Three Impost. 48. The Messiah in whom the Jews had placed their Faith so high,
appearing not able to show a sign of Mission, and what was worse, turning Turk,
they were extremely confounded with shame, which they might have prevented, had
they as they ought to have done, demanded the sign effectually first. And if
Mahomet, who was the Mussul-men's Messiah, or the Popes, who are the Catholics
Messiahs, had in their beginnings but been put by Princes to show such signs of
Mission as Sabatai was by the Grand Seignior, neither Mahometans, nor Popes,
nor Bishops, nor so many Superstitious Sects and Schisms could ever have
plagued the World, as they now have done: for all these have still been raised
by pretenses of Missions from God, of which they never showed a Sign.

They have falsely Translated and Expounded the Scriptures in all words
relating to Marriage.
The falsity of the Translation appears in the particulars following.

First, Ish. Isha. (...).
The word Ish, which in the Hebrew Text signifies amongst mankind a Male, and
amongst Beasts the same, and the word (...), which in the Septuagint signifies
the same, and the word Isha, which in the Hebrew signifies a Female, and in the
Septuagint (...), in Latin Foemina, in French Feme, and in English Woman,
which all signify amongst Mankind a Female, Male, Female.
which words Male and Female, are used by Christ in their natural, certain, and
general signification. These have they translated into the Artificial,
Ambiguous, and Arbitrary signification of their Vocabula Artis of Man and Wife,
as 1 Cor. 7.2. The Original Greek is, Let every Male have his own Female, and
every Female her own Male, which they have translated, Let every Man have his
own Wife, and every Woman her own Husband; that is to say, such a Woman as the
Bishop will please Arbitrarily true or false for Money to certify to be his
Wife, and such Man as he will in like manner certify to be her Husband, and
not such as Christ says, as God has joined and made Man and Wife, which is a
false translation. 1. Because it translates words general, into words special.
2. Because it translates words of a natural signification, into Vocabula Artis,
of an artificial signification. 3. Because the natural signification was the
voice of God, and the artificial is only the voice of Man. 4. Because the
natural was true, and the artificial is false and fictitious. Husband and Wife
words ambiguous.
5. Because the natural was fixed, and certain, the artificial is ambiguous and
mutable, ad placitum imponentis, to signify what he will, as serves most for
his profit. The Bishops have therefore falsely translated the word of God into
words of their own, that none may be called Husband and Wife but such as give
them Fees to call them so.

Zona, Kadesh, Pillegesh, (...) false translated.
Secondly, They have falsely translated the Words Zona, Kadesh, Pillegesh, and
(...) to be Harlot and Concubine, which word Zona in the Hebrew Text signifies
no more then a common Hostess or Caupona, one that sells Victuals, or keeps an
House of Entertainment, the Chaldee renders it, Foeminam fallacem, vagam, non
sub eodem tecto habitantem, and the Latin translation have rendered her worse,
that is plain Whore; for the Romish Lady will be sure to call Whore first, and
therefore translates Jos. 2.1. concerning the Spies sent to Jericho, Venerant
in demum cujusdam meretricis Cauponae, cujus nomen erat Rachab ut cubarent ibi,
but the English is translated, And they went and came to an Harlot's House
named Rachab, and lodged there; Harlot.
now that she ought not to have been rendered Foeminam fallacem, appears by her
works, for it is not only the interest of all Hostesses to be faithful to their
Guest, though they do not lie with them; but she was in a more special manner
faithful to these, and hazarded her life for them, if she had been discovered
both for her hiding and letting them over the Town-wall. And as to the word
Zona, seeing it has most naturally a good signification of an Hostess or
seller of Victuals, and Verba sunt accipienda in mitiori sensu, there is no
warrant, were the word ambiguous, (which does not appear neither) to translate
it in the worst sense, and indeed when they have rackt Zona all they can, they
cannot so much as make it ambiguous, or squeeze more out of it then Caupona or
an Hostess.

Thirdly, As to the word Kadesh in the Hebrew, Kadesh.
it signifies a Woman Consecrated, which is an Holy-Woman, or an Holy-Nun, or
Votaress; now these holy Nuns or Votaresses, who are Consecrated to the service
of Venus, and those who are Consecrated in like manner to the service of the
Virgin Mary, do often play the Harlots, yet to translate either of those named
Holy-Nuns Harlots, is a false translation, for a Translator ought to be of
Words, and not of Deeds.

Fourthly, Judge. 11. is translated, Harlot.
Now Jeptha the Gileadite was a mighty man of valor, and he was the Son of an
Harlot: and Gilead begat Jepthah. Which is a translation repugnant to it self,
for if she had been a common Harlot, or Hostess, or other, how could it be
known that Gilead begat Jepthah, and how was not Jepthah Filius populi, rather
then the Son of Gilead? If she were not a common Harlot, what difference
between her and a Wife, in a Nation who allowed Plurality of Wives, and
Succession in Filial Portions to the Sons of them all.

Fifthly, As to the word Pillegesh, they derive it from Palag, Pillegesh.
divisit and Isha Foemina, which in the Hebrew Text signifies no more then a
divided or several, or another Woman or Wife, where there was Plurality
allowed, and the word (...) used in the Septuagint, (...)
signifies in the natural signification no more then Juvencula, or a young
Woman, and both these they forsooth have translated Concubine, a Vocabulum
Artis of their own Forging, which they will have to signify a Woman who has
not had both Banes and Benediction of one of Priapus Priests in a Temple; yet
is there ^ot in the Original of the whole Scripture, either Old or New
Testament, such a word as Concubine, neither is there any where Isha, No such
word as Concubine in the whole Original Scripture.
made more lawful then Pillegesh, or (...) then (...). So Genesis 1.2, 3. Sarah
and Hagar are both translated Abraham's Wives. And Genesis 25.1. Keturah is
translated Abraham's Wife, yet 1 Chronicles. 1.32. she is translated Concubine,
whereas the words of the Septuagint are (...), and signify only the Sons of
Keturah Abraham's young Woman, and there is no ground at all to translate her
Concubine; for Abraham married her not till Sarah was dead, and the Marriage of
Keturah therefore being lawful and unblameable, she ought not to be touched with
the ignominious and fictitious name of Concubine.

So Ruth 4.12. they translated her young Woman, who was fitter to be translated
Concubine, then Keturah, for she stole to Bed to Boaz at night amongst the
Sheaves without his leave or calling, and like the Antipodes, the Woman wooed
the Man, which Keturah was more modest for ought we find, then to do to
Abraham, but with them kissing goes by favor.

The like falsity is likewise used in translating 1 Kings 11.3. where it is
said of Solomon in the Septuagint, (...), Which is translated in Latin, Adeo
ut essent ei Foemina Principes Septingentae and Concubinae trecentae,
quapropter inclinarant Foeminae ejus animum ejus, etc. but in English the
translation is, He had Seven Hundred Wives Princesses, and Three Hundred
Concubines, and his Wives turned away his heart, which ought to have been
translated, He had Seven Hundred Women Princesses, and Three Hundred young
Women, and his Women turned away his heart; for if Plurality of Women make
Concubines, then ought the Seven Hundred to have been translated Concubines,
rather then the Three Hundred; if it be said Riches and Portions make Wives,
and Poverty Concubines, or Jointures and Dowers make Wives, and none make
Concubines, this is contrary to what Christ says of Marriage, That it is of
such as God has joined in one flesh, and not whom Scriveners and Lawyers have
joined in one Indenture. Then as to Poverty, none will deny a poor Wife to be
as true a Wife as a rich: and many think her in goodness, far superior, for
intolerabilius nihil est quam Foemina dives, she that brings a Portion to hire
the Man, and the Man who gives Jointures to hire the Wife, such a Woman so
hired, may indeed be rather said a Concubine then a Wife; and such a Man so
hired, be rather said a Stallion then a Husband, and such a Mercenary
Conjunction be rather called a Market then a Marriage.

To return again to the Translation, it is translated, That his Wives drew away
his heart, but it is more likely the young Women, who are translated Concubines
drew away his heart, then old Wives; whereas if it had been translated as it
ought to be, his Women drew away his heart, which word includes both Wives and
Concubines, it had been more true according to the Original, and more probable
according to the effect.

They have falsely translated the Seventh Commandment Lo Tinaph to be Adultery.
Lo Tinaph, Latin'd Non Moechaberis, does only signify Carnal uncleanness in
general, but they to make all sins equal, Lo Tinaph false translated.
and that they might take as high Commutation-Money for the meanest, as the
greatest Crime, have translated it Adultery, which is Species famosior, they
say pro Toto Genere, as is usual in Tropes and Figures; but though, if they
turn Poets they may Feign, if Songsters Descant, if Commentators Paraphrase, if
Orators turn in Tropes and Figures, yet if Translators of a Law of God, it is
wickedness for them to use any of these. He who is a Translator of any Law,
especially of one that is Penal, is chained ad idem and non ad simile and
verbum verbo curabit reddere fidus interpres, every word is to be rendered in
no greater or lesser signification in the Language to which it is translated,
then it was in the Original; for where the Legislator prohibits all uncleanness
in general, and expresses no special Penalty, but only on pain of his
displeasure, here he has Power to punish the smaller offenses with few
stripes, and the greater with many, according to Justice and Equity; but if he
prohibit specially Adultery, and makes no other Law, then he gives liberty to
all uncleanness beside what is not specially prohibited; for where there is no
Law there is no Transgression. As Levit. 20.10. It is said, The Adulterer and
Adulteress shall surely be put to death, which being a Penal Law of death,
never was, nor ought to be extended to any lesser uncleanness then Adultery.
For it is a Rule in all Justice, that no Penal Law ought to be extended by
Equity; the translation is therefore false, which extends all uncleanness to
Adultery, or Adultery to all uncleanness.

They have falsely translated (...) to be Fornication.
(...) falsely translated Fornication.
(...) signifies Carnal uncleanness only in general, but they on the same
account of raising their Commutation-Money, have translated it the special
crime of Fornication, which is for the reasons given before of Adultery,
falsely translated, and the same mischiefs ensue thereby.

They have falsely translated (...) in the Tenth Commandment, to be the Man
Servant, and Maidservant.
(...), falsely translated.
Exodus 20.17. They have translated the Tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet
thy Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant. Whereas the
Septuagint clean varies both in Words and Order, and makes the Commandment
thus, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbor's Woman, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbor's House, nor his Field, nor his young Man, nor his young Woman, the
Greek words are (...). So Amos 2.7. It is said, A Man and his Father will go
into the samo Young Woman, (...).

They have falfely translated Mamzer and Nothos Bastard, wherein are noted the
great Errors of Coke, Skene, and Grotius, by following the Bishops translation,
and other Popish Writers.
Having recited many of the other false translations relating to Marriage, we
are now come to the sowlest of them all, relating not only to Marriage, but all
the dependencies of the same, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession. And whom have
we the ill fortune first to meet by the blind leaders of the blind fallen into
this common Ditch, but the two famous Fathers of the Law of England and
Scotland, Coke, and Skene, who giving implicit Faith herein to Bishops
Translations, Certificats, and other Popish Writers, became so far by them
deceived, as to leave behind them in their writings as follows.

First, Coke Com. Fol. 243, and 244. says; Bastardus dicitur a Graeco verbo
Bassaris, id est Meretrix, quia procreatur a Meretrice and then he says, Aerd
signifies Nature, and Bastard signifies base natural. Then because Reason is
very scarce with him, he gets an old Rhyme, and says,

Manseribus scortum notho Moechus dedit ortum,
Vt seges and spica, sic spurius est ab amica.
But Skene ingeniously confesses that Bastardus is a barbarous word; and that
there can be no reason given for it; and certainly he so far speaks most true,
or else was never a barbarous word, if this is not, which punishes the
innocent Child before it can speak, for the sin of the Parents, yet he after
falls into the like mistake with Coke, which will best appear in his own words
as you may find them. Skene de verb.signific. tit. Bastardus. Where he says
Bastardus, in French Bastard, ane Barn, unlauchfully gotten out with the band
of Marriage, quhilk word is barbarous, and as I suppose, na reason can be given
quhairfore it is so called, bot Gabriell Palaeotus in his buik de Nothis
spuriisque filiis, cap. 18. alleadgis it to come fra (...), quhilk signifies an
Huire or common Woman: be reason that Bastards are commonly got and procreat
with sick Weemen. In Greek he is called Nothus; for (...), signifies that part
of the Fathers guids and gear quhilk be the Law of the Athenians leasumly
micht be given be the Father to his Bastard Son, extending to the Son of Mill
Drachmae, and therefore (...) was called all that was not true or lauchful, as
writis Budaeus in Pandectas, and swa (...) cummis fra (...) privativa particula
and (...) h. 1. Divinum, test Suida; because he wantis that quhilk is godly
and lauchful, that is, ane honest or lawful Birth or Parentage, and swa (...)
dicitur qui non sit legitimus, to the quhilk there is na proper Latin word
carespondent, as Quintilianus testify, lib. 3. cap. 6. nevertheless he is
commonly called Spurius fo. in lib. 1. ff. de posses. contr. Tabul. Spurii
dicuntur, (...) h. e. statione vel seminatione, eaque vaga and promiscua, ubi
doctiores, (...) legunt quasisparsim concepti, like as they are called vulgo
concepti! in adoptivis 14. de ritu nuptiarum. Likewise Spurius was the the
proper name of ane man amangis the Romans, as Titus or Caius, and was written
with two letters S.P. and likewise they quha had na certain Father was designed
with the said two letters S. P. and swa by commoun use, and consuetude, Spurii
dicebantur sine Patre, as writes Plutarchus in problematibus, because their
Father and Mother notcht being lauchfully married, they have na certain Father,
quia Pater dicitur, quem legitimae nuptiae demonstrant. l. 5. ff. de in jus
vocand. and it is alike to have na Father, and to have uncertain Father as we
say, He quha will have money Gods, he is na God. Postremo Blundus lib. 8. Romae
triumphantis is inquit qui illegitime natus esset, ex Concubina vel scorto
contumeliae causa, Spurius dicitur, co quod Sabini muliebre pudendum Sporon
appellarunt haec ille in bonesto originis genere in lucem editos, infami and
inhonesta appellatione not are voluerunt Veteres. And that part of Weemens
Claiths sick as of their Gown and Petticoat quhilk under the Belt, and before
is open, commonly is called the Spare. As concerning the Succession of Bastard,
these short rules are to be observed, conform to the Law and Practice of this
Realm. First, That na Bastard, nor na Person, notch procreat and gotten in
lawful Marriage may any ways be lauchful Air or Successor to any of our
Sovereign Lordis Leiges, lib. 2. c. in Custodiis 50. for be the Law of God,
Ismael being Bastard gotten upon ane bound Woman, Agar micht not be Air to
Abraham, with Isaac, Genesis 21.10. Because all right of Succession is by reason
of bluid and Consanguinity of the Fathers side, quhilk is called Jus
Agnationis, and theirfar ane Bastard quhais Father is uncertain be the Law, Kin.
is understand be reason of bluid, to be sib to na man, and nane to him.

I have done both Coke and Skene right, and presented what they say, to the
full; now I hope I may have liberty to do the Truth right against them; and if
I answer but these two, I need trouble the Reader with no more; for I shall
answer all the Law of the highest repute in Great Britain, and with the same
stroke overthrow all the Bastard-Law of Lawyers, and Bastard-Divinity of
Bishops, in the three Kingdoms.

The Question is, Whether Mamzer in the Old Testament, and (...) in the New,
are falsely translated Bastard?
Coke and Skene whether retained by the Bishops or free, appears not, but their
best endeavors appear as far as they can, to defend the charge of falsity of
the translation, and to prove the same true, which they try to do by the ways
following. (1.) By Etymologies. (2.) By Authority. (3.) By Rhyme. (4.) By
Reason. As to Etymologies, they derive Bastard from Bassaris, which they say
signifies Meretrix. (1.) What is this to the purpose to prove Nothus a Bastard?
(2.) It is denied that Bassaris signifies Meretrix, for Eustathius will have
Bassara to signify Nutrix Bacchi, or a Drunken Mad Woman, and Bassaris to
signify Vulpecula.

First, They derive Etymologies from Spurius, from Aerd, from (...) privativa
particula and (...), from Sporadene, from Sporan, from the Spare, but what
agreement have these in sound or sense with Mamzer or Nothus, or what Sequel as
to the Question can be deduced from them; had it not been as pertinent for them
to have recited those ridiculous Etymologies which derive Lepus from Levipes,
and Lapis from Laedipes, and Beer from Be here, and Money from My honey: and
concluded Ergo the Bishops have not falsely translated Mamzer and Nothus; for
there is no reason why Meretrix may not come from an Hare as well as a Fox,
loquendum cum Vulgo, they call her a light Woman. And Solomon Prove. 7.11.
says, Her Feet abide not in the House: Now she is without, now in the streets,
which she ws she is a Levipes. And did not Fabius Maximus show his shoe to one
who asked him why he put away his Wife, and say, Is it not a fair shoe, yet none
knows besides my self where it wrings my Foot, which shows she is a Laedipes;
then may she not be as well Drunk and Mad with Beer as with Wine, which shows
such Women may be derived from the one as well as the other; and may she not
better be called Meretrix from Money, then from Wine; for Meretrix dicitur a
Merendo, from letting her self to hire for Money or Reward, and this as well
agrees with My honey, as Money; for Solomon says, Prove. 5.3. The lips of a
strange Woman drop as an honeycomb; and do not the Poets say, That a Be which
makes honey, stung Cupid by the Finger, while he was stealing it, whereof he
complained to his Mother; and does not this as well prove that Venus came from
Bassaris, and that Cupid is in Hebrew Mamzer, and in Greek Nothus, and that
therefore Mamzer and Nothus do signify Bastard, which is to infer quodlibet ex
quolibet, and conclusions from non sequitur's. Behold the fantastic
Fundamentals of a Matrimonial Divinity, and Law built on Etymologies of sounds
and air, inveloped in the darkness and Clouds of strange Languages, of Hebrew,
Chaldee, Syriack, Greek, and Latin, the like to which if done in English,
would be derided by the very Boys!

Secondly, The next Argument to make good their Bastard-Law, is Authority: Coke
to begin, fetches an Author out of Goal without an Habeas Corpus, to give him
Authority to bring him to any Court he calls him. Fleet. lib. 1. cap. 5. Next
he makes bold with Bracton, and the Book of Assizes. E. 3. H. 4. H. 6. E. 4.
Skene musters up as before mentioned, old King Malcomb the Second, Paloeotus
Budaeus the Pandects, all having the unhappiness to be born, bred, buried, and
made in the times of the highest Popery and Superstition, and though Plutarchus
writ excellently against Superstition, and was no Papist, he was a Pagan Priest
of Apollo, who was a Devil, and his Priest partial in whatsoever tended to
Daemonalatry, or the great gains accruing thereby to the Diabolical Priesthood.

Grotius, whom I shall after cite as to his Gigantomachia, in making all Giants
Bastards, in his learned Piece de Jure Bell. and Pacis. wheresoever he comes to
touch on Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, instead of the immutable
Law of Nature, collects together the old Superstitious Laws, Customs, and
Ceremonies of the Pagans, Greeks, and Romans, and on that sandy Foundation
builds Marriage, Filiation, and Successions on private Pacts and Covenants of
Parties, or on the public Pacts or Precepts of human Laws, and the Mercenary
considerations of Portions, Dowries, Jointures, Morgengabicas Ta^ls, contrary
to the Divine ends instituted by God of Marriage.

All which Authorities, or were there numberless more of private Persons, or
public States, or of Nations, Angels, Demons, or Men, are already shown, to
signify nothing against the least Commandment in the Moral-Law of God.

Thirdly, As to the Rhyming Verses, if so great Laws and Nations are no
Authority, a Poet can be none. Pictoribus atque Poetis quidlibet audendi semper
fuit aequa Potestas. And it shall be further shown after, That if Coke allow
but this his own Poet to be Authenteck, three words of his two Verses confute
him unanswerably.

Fourthly, As to Arguments of Reason, Coke has none at all, except Quia
Filiatio non potest probari, which has been answered before, in the Law of the
Husband's Fathering the Wive's Children, if within the four Seas; neither does
he give more reason why he would have a Child called a Base-natural, or his
Fictions in Law believed above the truth of the Fact, then he does, why a
Man-child ought to be called Mulier.

Fifthly, As little reason does Grotius give, why a Giant should be translated
Bastard, according to a certain Latin Translation of the Bible (of which there
are a multitude, all variant one from another) 1 Samuel 17.4. which is thus, Et
egressus est quidem spurius e Castris Pelischthoeorum, Goliath nomine, Giant
falsely translated Bastard.
Gatho oriundus, cujus altitudo erat sex Cubitorum cum spithama; which is in
English, And there went out of the Tents of the Philistines a certain Bastard,
by name Goliath, whose height was six Cubits and a span; so because he was a
Giant, this Latin Translation has translated him a Bastard. And Grotius,
though he were as great a Giant of learning, as Goliath was of Body, endeavors
to give a reason which is not so tall as a Dwarf; for he says, The Hebrews
called Giants Bastards, because they lived without Matrimony; which he intends
to be the Ceremony of coupling Male and Female together, used by a Priest in a
Temple. Which cannot be; for of all Nations in the World, the Hebrews were most
free from having so vile a word, or a thing as Bastard amongst them; and for
Marriage in a Temple, they never had any at all, but always contracted in the
open Air, and not under any Roof. And both they, and all other Nations, have
had so honorable opinions of Giants, and esteemed their descent to be so far
from being ignoble, as they derived them from their gods themselves. So
Hercules they would have begot by Jupiter: And Ajax boasts of himself, Sic a
Jove tertius Ajax. And both Jews and Christians affirm them to be begotten by
the Sons of God: As Genesis 6.4. it is said, There were Giants in the Earth in
those days: and also after that, when the Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men,
and they bare Children unto them, the same became mighty Men, which were of
old, Men of renown. Angels beget not Giants.
Some expound these Sons of God to be Angels; but that is contrary to Christ,
who says, Angels neither marry, nor are given in Marriage. But though Giants
and such Hero's were not begotten by Angels, they all agree to father them on
more honorable Titles of the Sons of God; and therefore never intend^d they
should be translated, or called Bastards, or base Naturals.

As low a reason does Grotius likewise give, why he should be called Nothus and
not be inheritable, whose Mother at her Marriage had not a Torch carried before
her.

Ac nec nupta quidem Taedaque accepta jugali,
Cur nisi ne caperes regna paterna Nothus.
Grot. de jur. Bell. and Pac. p. 168. 1. This authority of Ovid which he cites,
That the not vouchsafing to have a Torch, or other Ceremonies Nuptial at the
Marriage, ought to make the Child a Nothus, or Illegitimate, as to Succession,
proves against him; and that it ought not, but is an injury and injustice if it
should: For this is written by Phaedra a later Wife of Theseus, to Hippolitus
his Son, by Hippolita the Amazon, a former Wife deceased; with whom she, being
his Stepmother, fell in love; and to tempt him to her, and not to forbear out
of reverence to his Father's bed, who had been so injurious to him, as not to
marry his Mother with due Rites and Ceremonies, that he might have a pretense
to dis-inherit, and put him by the Succession of the Kingdom. She to make her
argument the stronger, and the more inciting, joins her self with him to be as
highly injured as himself, that he might the more assuredly trust to find her
ready to join with him in revenge, as well as love; for so she says, having
first repeated her own wrongs she had suffered.

Sola nec haec nobis injuria venit ab illo,
In magnis laesi rebus uterque sumus.
And after, she says of the Marriage of his Mother:

Ac nec nupta quidem taedaque accepta jugali,
Cur nisi ne caperes regna paterna Nothus.
And then she says,

I nunc, I meriti lectum reverere parentis,
Quem fugit and factis abdicat ille suis.
But the most virtuous and valiant Hippolitus remaining invincible in Chastity,
as to his Stepmother, and in Loyalty as to his Father; she, as Potiphar's Wife
did Joseph, to her Husband falsely accused him of attempting to force her; which
he over-credulous to believe, sought to kill his Son. And he flying his
Father's jealousy, and causless anger, had by his frighted Horses, his Chariot
overthrown, and himself torn to pieces amongst the Rocks. So unfortunate was
innocence in all things, except his Fame, which has lasted through so many
Ages. His Father on Phaedra's confession, understanding the Innocence of his
Son, and falseness of her calumny, she first killing her self, after the just
Funeral Rites performed, and Lamentation answerable made, is swallowed up with
grief, for the loss of a Son so dearly by him beloved. Here therefore appears,
That had it not been for the false calumnies of his Stepmother, Hippolitus had
succeeded to his Father Theseus's Kingdom; notwithstanding his Mother Hippolita
had not a Torch carried before her, nor was ever married by the Ceremonies of a
Priest in a Temple: wherein though Grotius need no other answer to his
Ceremonial Marriage, then what in this example he thought to vouch for them,
and his principal Goliah-argument being fallen, there need no trouble of
encountering the petty accessory Reasons: Yet I shall likewise pursue them in
their flight, at least to discover what they are.

His first reason is, he says, Where the Father does not vouchsafe the Woman
the Lawful Ceremonies of Marriage, he makes the Child contemptible to be his
Successor.

To which is answered, That we need look no further then his own example,
whether Hippolitus was a person contemptible, or not, meriting in all respects
to succeed to his Father's Kingdom after his Death.

2. It is further answered, That these Ceremonies whereon he founds his Doctrine
of Ceremonial Marriage, and the compulsion to the same, are before shown to
come from the Devil, and the Priests of Priapus and Venus, and in imitation of
them from Popery. Therefore in such Kingdoms as are Protestant, and not Pagan
or Popish, though there may be a toleration given to such as desire to marry
with a Torch, or any other public Ceremonies suiting with their Conscience and
Convenience; yet ought not there to be compulsion of Dissentients, either in
Conscience or Convenience; nor so impious a punishment as Illegitimation laid
on the innocent Child, for such Toys as Ceremonies neglected or dissented to by
the Parents.

3. There is greater authority in point, then either Latin or Greek Poets, That
the Father though he contemn, yea hate the Mother, ought not to illegitimate
the Child, as to Succession, as appears, Deuteronomy. 21.15. If a Man have two Wives,
one beloved, and the other hated, and they have born him Children, both the
beloved and the hated; and the firstborn Son be hers that was hated: Then it
shall be when he makes his Sons to inherit that which he has, that he may not
make the Son of the beloved firstborn, before the Son of the hated, who is
indeed the firstborn; but he shall acknowledge the Son of the hated for the
firstborn, in giving him a double Portion of all be has; for he is the
beginning of his strength, and the right of the firstborn is his.

The Reasons given by Skene, why Nothus should signify a Bastard, are:

1. Because he says, Bastards are commonly got and procreat of Common Women,
who are in Greek called Bassaris. As to the Etymology, it is answered before, as
to the matter of the Children of Common Women, it is denied that they have
commonly any Children at all; for either they make themselves barren by some
wicked Arts of Sterility according to the Poet.

Et jacet aurato jam rara puerpera lecto,
Tantum hujus Arts, tantum Medicamina possunt.
According to which, we do not hear of Lais, Thais, Phryne, Flora, or others,
who are famous or rather infamous at the Trade, to have had any Children at
all; which was one cause that Flora made the Commonwealth her Heir. And we see
by experience, that the Children born, as they call it, out of Wedlock, are,
for the greatest part, of such as have kept themselves chaste to one Man; yea
more chaste then many Wives, who have been coupled to the Husbands by a Priest
in a Temple, or a Justice of Peace in his Hall. And further in Nature, the too
thick sowing of the field, and the too soon plowing after sowing destroys the
Harvest: So in greatest probability, such a Woman as has a Child, ought to be
presumed she has not been common, and the Child cannot be here filius populi;
but his Father is better known then of the Children of a Woman married by the
Priest in a Temple, though the Husband has been always within the four Seas.

2. He says, Nothia signifies by the Athenian Law a Portion given to a Child
not born within Wedlock, which was not to exceed Mill Drachmae; ergo Nothos
signifies a Bastard. Negatur sequela; For the Child which he himself makes a
Bastard, he says, cannot be Heir or Successor to any; which is, he cannot be
Successor Testamentory or otherwise to any filial Portion at all; which the
Athenian Law did suffer him to be, so it exceeded not the value of Mill
Drachmae. And further Reg. Majest. cited by him, says, a Bastard can neither
be Heir, or succed to the Lands or Goods of the Parents, nor the Parents to
him: A most inhuman Law, and subverting the course of Nature, which the
Athenian was not. And what was the end of this Episcopal cruelty, of taking
away the inheritance of the Parents from the Child, and of the Child from the
Parents; but that they themselves might be Successors to his movables, and if
he bought not of them for money his Legitimation, then they might forfeit all
was left to the King; not out of any good will they bore to the King, but to
force the parties, Parents and Children, to pay them what they pleased, or quod
non capit Christus, capiat fiscus, a kind of Antichristian Blasphemy against
Christ, and Treason against their Princes; to f^ill their Treasuries with the
spoils and curses of miserable Children, and Parents, under pretense of the
names of God and the King, to make them thought Patrons and Accessaries to
their Rapines.

3. He says, Ismael was a Bastard, and succeeded not to the inheritance, but
had a Portion. As to Ismael's being a Bastard, it is false, and contrary to the
Text of Scripture, Genesis 16.3. which expressly says, Agar his Mother was Abraham
's Wife. If his Mother therefore we Abraham's Wife, he could not be Abraham's
Bastard, for he himself affirms before, that a Bastard is got of a Common Woman.

4. Abraham's giving him a filial Portion, and the Sons of Keturah likewise
their filial Portions, is an acknowledgment and not a dis-acknowledgment of
them to be his Sons: Therefore though he excluded them from the inheritance, he
does not intend thereby to make them Bastards, for it was the Patria potestas
of every Father, then, to dispose of his own Estate how he pleased, and to
those who pleased him best, and might give the inheritance from the eldest if
he thought fit; till after restrained by the Law of Primogeniture, to give him
a double Portion.

5. The Arabians, who descended from Ismael, and Turks to this day, affirm
Ismael to be the right Heir, and not Isaac; and on no other Title possess the
Land of Palestine, but on the Primogeniture of Ismael. It Is therefore very
unadvised to call Ismael Bastard, against a Succession so long derived from him
by the Sword, without better reasons, or a better Sword to argue it against the
possessors.

6. Other reasons have been made likewise, in behalf of the Primogeniture and
Legitimation of Ismael, which show him to have been no Bastard: as first, That
the Marriage between Abraham and Sarah, being Brother and Sister, was
Incestuous, and therefore the Marriage with Agar more Lawful then hers. Next,
that uncertainty of Filiation was more in Isacc then in Ismael, and Ismael had
better probation of himself to be the Son of Abraham then Isaac had, for Agar
was kept in perpetual custody of her Husband, from the time of his begetting,
to her bringing forth Ismael, whereas Sarah was let loose to the custody of
Abimelech and his Courtiers.

7. He says for a Reason, That a Child born out of Matrimony is not Sib or Kin,
or of Consanguinity to any, nor any to him: which is contrary to the express
Text of Scripture, Levit. 21.2. There shall none be defiled for the dead
amongst the people, except for his Kin that is near to him, that is, for his
Mother, and for his Father, and for his Son; yet here was no Father or Son made
by the Ceremony of a Priest in a Temple. Not much unlike to this was the
whimsey, which lasted a while, of our Episcopal Courts, and Common Lawyers,
that a Mother was not kin to her Son, as appears, Swimburn 7. part 119. The
Case was in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth: Charles Duke of Suffolk having
issue, a Son by one Venture, and a Daughter by another, made his last Will,
wherein he devised Goods to his Son, after whose death the Son also died
intestate, without Wife, and without issue; his Mother and his Sister by the
Father's side (for she was born of the former Venture) being then living, the
Mother took the Administration of her Son's Goods, by the Stat. 21 H. 8.5.
whereby it is Enacted, That in case any person die intestate, the
Administration of his Goods shall be committed to the next of Kin, etc. The
Administration being thus granted to the Mother; the Sister by th Father's side
does commence Suit before the Ecclesiastical Judge, pretending her self to be
next of kin, and the Mother not to be kin at all to the party Deceased; and
therefore desires the Administration, formerly granted the Mother, to be
revoked, and committed to her, as next kin to the Deceased, by force of the
said Statute. Hereupon the most Learned, as well in the Laws of the Realm as in
the Civil Law, were consulted; and both Common Lawyers and Civilians,
unanimously declared it to be an Article of their Faith, contrary to Scripture
and common sense, that a Mother was not kin to her Son; so Judgment was passed
against the Mother, whereby she lost her Son and her money too, perhaps some
that she gave him. And in those days this precedent did so much prevail, that
many other Judgments passed accordingly against the Mothers. Then in Rama was
there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel
weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted, because they were not,
yea weeping it over again.

Qualis populea maerens Philomela sub umbra
Amissos queritur faetus, quos durus arator
Observans, nido implumes detraxit, at illa
Flet noctes, ramoque sedens, miserabile carmen
Integrat, and maestis late loca questibus implet.
Yea our Rachel had twice more cause to weep then Philomel, for Philomel wept
only because her Children were not, but Rachel wept both because hers were not,
and because she must not be kin to them neither: And surely her mourning had
continued for ever, had not in process of time, the Tears of Women and the
Beauty of Truth (for what is stronger then Truth and women against Popery)
prevailed in England, but could not in Scotland, because Skene put it on the
Father, The Child not the Child of the Mother. Natural affection no
consideration to raise an Use to a natural Son, but good to an Adulterate Son.
who is not so apt to weep as the Mother, that he should be no Sib or Kin to
his Son. But will you not wonder? My Lord Coke will present you with a couple
of rarer absurdities, if possible, then this; for he says, lib. 10. in Leonard
Loveis his Case, fol. 83. That if a Woman have a Bastard (which he intends a
Child not born of a Ceremonial Marriage) that this Child is not in truth, but
only in reputation her Child. And therewith agrees Dyer M. 17. and 18. Eliz.
fo. 345. and 12 Eliz. 290. And then he in his Commentaries; and the Judges in
Plowden's Commentaries agree in Sharington and Pledal's Case, That if a Man in
consideration of natural affection, covenant to stand seized of such a piece of
Land, to the use of his Son; this natural affection is a sufficient
consideration to raise an Use, as they call it, and to vest the Estate in the
Son, though he were the Son of an Adulterer, and not the Son of his reputed
Father, if his Mother were married by a Priest in a Temple, and his reputed
Father within the four Seas. But if the Son be his true natural Son, begotten
by himself, then the consideration of natural affection to his true Son, is no
consideration to raise an Use, nor to pass the Land to him, but the same is
void and null. In the first Case, where there is no ground for natural
affection, they talk all of nature, extolling her above all considerations, and
cry out Naturae vis maxima, and Natura bis maxima; and give away the Estate
from the true natural Child, to the false Child of the Adulterer. Then in the
latter Case, where there is a just and righteous cause of natural affection,
commanded by God to Men, and instincted by him to Beasts to provide for their
own. There they are void of natural affection, their blind Eye of the Law, must
see the Infernal darkness of Fictions in the Law, and be shut against the Sun
of Truth: They pretend the Law of Nature in their words, but in their works
omnia naturae contraria legibus ibunt. Nothus made the true Son, and the true
Son made Nothus.
They will not allow natural affection of the true Father, to his true natural
Child to be a consideration to raise an Use, in so much as one Acre of Land;
where they will allow it to the true Nothus, and Fictitious Child of an
Adulterer, against whom probatio non admittitur in contrarium, sufficient to
invest him in the thousands of Acres of Seigniories and Baronies. It Is strange
that Men who profess Law and Justice, should not be ashamed of so gross and
repugnant absurdities, and contrary, not only to all Law and Justice, but
common sense and reason.

Reasons showing further, that Mamzer in the Old Testament, and Nothus in the
New, are falsely translated Bastard.
Mamzer, Alienigena.
1. The word Mamzer is by the best Critics, affirmed to signify naturally and
properly Alienigena, seu de alienae gentis foemina natus. And that Deuteronomy. 23.2.
ought to be translated Alienigena non introibit, and not Spurius non introibit,
or in English, a Bastard shall not enter; but the Translation ought to be in
English, An Alien born shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, even
to his tenth generation shall be not enter. So as the Law here (as the Laws of
most other Nations do) does put a distinction in privilege between Alien and
Denizen born, and not between unlawful and lawful born; for an Alien is as
lawfully born as a Denizen, but has not the same privilege either, as to
Religion of entering into the Congregation, or of acquiring propriety in the
Land, either by Purchase or Succession; for if that should be permitted, there
would ensue the derision or corruption of all natural Religions, by contrary
Nations, and the buying of one Nation out of their Land by another Enemy
Nation, who were richer in money then they. And that the intention as well as
the words of the Law, was only against Aliens born, as appears manifestly by
the next Verse in the same Chapter; where it is said, An Ammonite or a Moabite
shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord: which, as the verse before
spoke of Aliens in general, speaks next of Aliens in special, Ammonites and
Moabites; who being of kindred to the Israelites, might have been doubted,
whether intended to be excluded under the general word Aliens, which this
naming them specially clears, and likewise clears that it is intended the
National, and not the getting or birth of Children in private Families. And
this is manifest by the constant practice of the whole Israelitish Nation, who
had no such thing as Illegitimation of the Children of any Ebrew Woman; but
whether the Wives were one or many, the Children all Succeeded alike to their
natural Parents; if the Father did not for any special reason, or otherwise
expressly dispose of his Estate, which was a Patria potestas, without which
propriety of Fathers in their own Goods, could not consist, nor Adulteries of
Wives, and Rebellions of Children be prevented. And to the potestas Patria,
Intails to Children of Adulterers and not of the Husband.
and potestas Dominii, potestas instituendi haeredis, as to Children; and
alienandi as to strangers, was amongst all Nations incident, till the Tyranny
of Pontifical, Imperial, and Feudal Laws set up Intails, and made the Priests
Judges, who should be Lawful married, and who should be Lawful begotten Heirs
of their Bodies, to be their Successors, whether they would or no, and whether
the Children were the Children of Adulterers, or the Husband's.

Nothus a counterfeit (...).
Secondly, (...) is by Hesychius and other Authors of approved skill in the
Greek-Tongue affirmed, to signify Fictus, which is, what is feigned or
counterfeit, and the word (...) which in the plural Number is put in the Text
Heb. 12.8. signifies Filius genitus, natus, or naturalis, and (...) signifies
Filiatio in the true and natural sense, but in the fictitious sense, which is
made ad placitum imponentis, it is made to signify Adoption, which is a
feigned or counterfeit Filiation. Many ways of counterfeiting Sons have been
used, (1.) When the Wife being Barren, to please her Husband feigns a great
Belly and a Delivery, and presents him with a suppositious Child instead of her
own; so is it related of Algive the Wife of Canutus, that she brought him such
a Child, whom he called Sweyne, and afterward made him King of Norway; and many
other examples have been of the like. (2.) When the Person who would make
himself Son deceives the Father; so Isaac being blind, Jacob putting on
Kids-skin-Gloves, the hair left on deceived the old man to believe him his true
eldest Son who was but a counterfeit. And I my self knew a Woman in time of the
Wars, who having two Sons, the Elder was Twenty Years before sent beyond Sea,
and died there, whereby the younger had the Land of his Father settled upon
him, but at length the Soldiers in their marches passing the Country, one
amongst them of the like Age and Feature as was the Eldest Son of the Woman,
who Twenty Years before died beyond Sea, Quartered in the Parish where the
Woman lived, and being informed by some of the House where he Quartered, how
like he was to that Person, and thereupon enquiring out as many particular
passages as he could, which had passed between the Woman and her Son, and
others, and what particular marks the Eldest Son had, the Soldier went to the
Woman's House enquiring for his Father and Mother, whose blessing he asked, and
they being thereat much surprised, he told them he was their Eldest Son, and
what Fortunes Providence had carried him thorough to bring him home again: at
which the doubtful Parents examined him, and asked him many questions to try
whether he were their very Son Esau or not, and took more time, and the Woman
likewise examined him in private by her self, but he at last so persuaded the
Woman, that she believed, and affectionately received him for her Eldest Son
who had been thought so long dead, till at length the younger Brother who
feared to be again disinherited of what was settled on him, with much ado
discovered the counterfeit. (3.) When the Mother is Delivered of a true Son,
and a changling is brought home by the Nurse or other Artifice instead of the
true. (4.) When the Father having no natural Son, adopts a Son begotten by
another Father; so did Claudius adopt Nero, and many other of the Roman
Emperors, and many Persons of private Families, having no Son of their own,
convey and settle their Names, Titles, Arms, and Lands, to the Son of a
stranger; now these Adopted Sons are all Counterfeit Sons, and neither Emperor,
nor Pope, nor Bishop, nor Act of Parliament, nor Legitimation, nor
Dispensation, can make these true, or natural, or lawful begotten Sons, whom
God has not made so. (5.) When Sons who are not natural, are testified to be
natural Sons by false Witnesses, which is often practiced in the Biships
Courts, such are counterfeit Sons. (6.) When such as are not natural Sons, are
testified Sons by the Bishops Certificate, such are false and counterfeit Sons,
and this way of Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, by the Bishops Certificate
is of all other the most wicked and abominable. Quia Probatio non admittitur in
contrarium. Whence it is concluded, That neither the word (...) nor (...)
seeing they have both a true and natural signification, ought not to be
translated to words of a counterfeit signification. The said Text of Scripture
therefore, Heb. 12. 8. Ye are Bastards, and not Sons, are falsely translated,
and ought to have been translated, Ye are Counterfeits, and not natural Sons;
for as to the word (...) it is manifest to signify a Counterfeit, and
therefore ought to be so translated, and the word (...) it is manifest it
signifies not a Son in general; for that comprehends both true and counterfeit
Sons; but a natural Son in special, which only signifies a true Son as it is
opposite to a counterfeit: where therefore the Genus is translated for the
Species, or the Species for the Genus, this is grossly false Translation, Genus
translated for the Species Species translated for the Genus.
as has been shown likewise before.

Secondly, A word of general signification ought not to be translated into a
word of special signification, and this shows the Latin Translation, which is
Supposititit estis and non filii, is false translated, though not so wickedly
as the English, because a Supposititious Son is but a Species of Nothus the
Genus, as Virgil says, Suppositos de matre nothos furata creavit.

A certain word into an ambiguous.
Thirdly, A word that is certain ought to be translated into a word of
uncertain, ambiguous significations. Now the word Nothus in the time it was
writ by Paul, which was before Justinian's and Pope's Heads were hot with their
Civil or Canon-Laws, the word therefore ought to be translated in the certain
significat wherein Paul writ it, which is a counterfeit, and not in the
signification of what it is made since of a new invented Vocabulum Artis, by
the Civil, Canon, or Common Law; for then it must have been understood, all the
writers time by way of Prophecy, how Tribonian, Gratian, Coke, Skene, and
Grotius, would expound it, and how the Bishops would translate it to be a
Bastard, and him a Bastard whose Mother would not give them Money for their
License to Marry, which was a thing impossible for the Christians of those
times to understand, or how to reconcile the variant and contradictory
expositions, would in the later days be for gain made on the same. Some make
Nothi and Flii naturales all one, as Nov. 99. de Nothis makes Nothus the
natural Son and illegitimate, as Insulanus Naturalis Filius a vulgo barbarorum
dicitur, qui sit ex illegitimo toro suscitatus; sed parum apt, est enim Filius
naturalis qui sanguine and natura est tuus, non adoptione factus. A natural Son
is he who is by Blood and Nature thine, and not made so by Adoption. Cato says
there is no such word in Latin as Nothus, nor any of the like signification,
but that which comes nearest it is Spurius; and Plutarch says it was a name
amongst the Romans, as Sextus, and Decimus, and Caius were, and as other names
were, was written short with two of the first Letters S P. but whether it was a
name of honor or dishonor is not known, as appears by Hartm. Pistor. lib. 1.
q. juris. q. 30. only it is said of them, that they were (...) fatherless,
which is less suspicious of dishonor then before, for they called their god
Vulcan (...) fatherless, and their god Mars was brought out by Juno without a
Father, as they would have us believe, and the word (...), or fatherless, did
signify only an Orphan, whom misfortune had deprived of his Father. And it was
therefore true what Cato before said, Romans had no such word or thing as
Nothus.
That the Latins had no word amongst them which agreed in signification with
Nothus in Greek, and having no such word, they must have no such thing; for if
they had had such a thing they would questionless have had a word to express
it. So as Antichristian Christian Rome against the fatherless is worse then
Pagan Rome, and neither Papal nor Episcopal Religion is pure, but unclean; for
it is declared Jam. 1.27. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God and the
Father, is this, to visit the fatherless; but it seems they think they have a
better Scripture of Coke and Littleton of non habet ipsum patrem, to defend
them, as if it were a sufficient cause to rob a Child of what is dearer then
his life, his good name, and lay Ignominy on him because he is fatherless: but
let them remember though the fatherless has no Reverend Father in God to own
him, he has a greater, even God himself; for so he is called, Psalm. 68.5.
Father of the fatherless, and though he is forsaken as David, by his natural
Father and Mother, yet may he say as he says, Psalm. 27.10. When my Father and
Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. And as there was no Nothus
amongst the Pagan Romans, so there was no illegitimation amongst them or the
Greeks, but all natural Children were legitimate, and Probation of Filiation
was a Probation of Legitimation, Legitimation or Illegitimation of a natural
Child impossible.
for there was no such word or thing as Legitimation, or making Children
legitimate who were not born so; it being impossible to make a Child or a Son
of such a man who was not born so, or to make any not to be the Child or Son of
such a man if he were born so, till the Bishops made Marriage a Sacrament, and
made infatuated People believe such absurdities as were impossible to be
believed of any but a mente captis, as of transubstantiation of two Persons
into one Person, of transubstantiation of the Children of the Wife into
Children of the Husband, of making the Child of the man not to be his Child,
nor of his Blood, nor of his Sib or Kin, and making the Child born of the
Mother not to be her Child, nor she of kin to it, and the like unheard of
Fopperies in former Ages: and accordingly Connan. lib. 2. cap. 16. number. 5.
says, That amongst the ancient Lawyers there is no such word to be found as
Legitimation, and if not of Legitimation, there could be none of
Illegitimation, or Bastardy. To translate therefore the word Nothus into a word
of so many ambiguous significations as are so many Authors variant and
contradictory on the same, and into a word which was not, nor the thing it is
made signify in Rerum natura at the time of writing. Nothus is a false and a
foul translation.

Fourthly, A word in Scripture which is modest, ought not to be translated into
a word of Scurrility, but Nothus or a Counterfeit is a word modest, it is
therefore filthily and falsely translated into inhonestum and infame vocabulum,
which they would derive a Sporo Pudendo Muliebri.

Fifthly, The word Nothus does not revile the innocent Child with the Crime of
the Malefactor, but Coke, though it be said, 1 Cor. 6.10. No Revilers shall
inherit the Kingdom of God, reviles God's Eldest Daughter, Nature, to be a
Whore, and her Children to be Bastards; for he says Aerd signifies Nature, and
Base signifies Base, and a Bastard is a Base-natural, or one born of base
Nature; if therefore he makes the Child a Bastard, he must make the Mother a
Whore, and by making her Children Base, he makes none Noble but the Children of
the Whore of Babylon, of whom she is delivered by the Man-Midwifry of a Priest
in a Temple. There being therefore no such word in the whole Original
Scripture, Old. Testament or New, which signifies a Bastard or illegitimate
Child, nor any such thing amongst the Hebrews or Barbarous Nations themselves
as illegitimation of natural Children, nor in Rerum Natura amongst the wild
Beasts, Monsters, and Serpents, as illigitimation of their Young till that more
and monstrous old Serpent and Romish Dragon appeared, described, Rev. 12.3.
Having Seven Heads, and Ten Horns, and Seven Crowns upon his Heads. And his
Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them to the
Earth: and the Dragon stood before the Woman which was ready to be delivered,
for to devour his Child as soon as it was born. And Verse 16. And the Earth
helped the Woman, and the Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the Flood
which the Dragon cast out of his mouth. And the Dragon was wroth with the
Woman, and went to make War with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

Now though none here undertake to unfold Mysteries, or expound Prophecies, yet
it will be a more proper Exposition then the Episcopal translation of Mamzer
and Nothus, and their Expositions on the same. If any should say allusively,
though not prophetically, and expound Prelacy to be the Dragon with many Heads
and Horns, Womankind to be the Woman; the multitude of Provincial and
Ecclesiastical Laws of Marriage, to be the Flood of Waters cast out of the
Dragons mouth, against the Woman; the illegitimation of all Children not born
of a Marriage made by a Priest in a Temple, to be the standing of the Dragon
before the Woman ready to be delivered for to devour her Child as soon as it is
born: The People who are Terrae Filii, to be the Earth helping the Woman,
Prelacy, being wroth, and going to make War with Dissentient Protestants, to be
the Dragons being wroth with the Woman, and going to make War with the Remnant
of her Seed which keep the Commandments of God, Old Teslament false translated
by Bishops in 848 places.
and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. And that these are not the only false
translations which Bishops make of the Scripture, appears by the great Linguist
Broughton, who in his Advertisements of Corruptions, affirms to the then
Bishops of England, That their public translations of Scriptures is such, as
that it perverts the Text of the Old Testament in no less then Eight Hundred
Forty Eight places, and causes Millions to reject the New Testament, and to
run into Eternal Flames.

Sixthly, To show that Coke needs no other to confute him in the signification
of Nothus, not to be a Child born out of Wedlock, but a plece of his own Rhyme,
I shall recite it, which is by him set down, Manseribus scortum notho Moechus
dedit ortum, and is a false Verse; for No in Notho is short, which might happen
by some Error of his Scribe, but the true Verse is in Calv. Lex. (whence I
suppose he might have it,) Sed Moecha Nothis dedit ortum; which Moecha
signifies an Adulteress, which she cannot be unless she is a Married Woman:
therefore it is plain, the Rhyme it self confutes him, that Nothus is not a
Child born out of Wedlock, but in Wedlock, which is unanswerable as to him;
because ex ore suo, though not as to others, who are on better reasons
unanswerably answered before.

They corrupt the Press, both as to Scripture and Law, and interdict
Protestants to write against Papists, or answer them.
Act of Parliament against Lollards counterfeit by Bishops.
Coke 3. part 40. says, There was a Statute supposed to be made, 5. R. 2. That
Commissions should be by the Lord Chancellor made, and directed to Sheriffs and
others, to Arrest such as should be Certified into the Chancery by the Bishops
and Prelates, Masters of Divinity, to be Preachers of Heresies, and notorious
Errors, their Fautors, Maintainers, and Abetters, and to hold them in strong
Prison, until they will justify themselves to the Law of the Holy Church. By
color of this supposed Act certain Persons that held Images were not to be
worshipped, etc. were holden in strong Prison, until they (to redeem their
vexation) miserably yielded before these Masters of Divinity to take an Oath,
and did swear to worship Images, which was against the Moral and Eternal Law of
Almighty God. We have said (by color of the supposed Statute, etc.) not only
in respect of the said Opinion, but in respect also, that the said supposed
Act, was in truth never any Act of Parliament, though it was Entered in the
Rolls of Parliament; for that the Commons never gave their consent thereunto.
And therefore in the next Parliament, the Commons preferred a Bill reciting the
said supposed Act, and constantly affirmed that they never assented thereto,
and therefore desired that the supposed Statute might be aniented, and declared
void. For they protested, that it was never their intent to be justified, and
to bind themselves and their Successors to Prelates, more then their Ancestors
had done in times past: And hereunto the King gave his Royal Assent in these
words, Ypleist au Roy. And mark well the manner of the penning the Act: for
seeing the Commons did not assent thereunto, the words of the Act are, It is
Ordained and Assented in this present Parliament, That, etc. And so it was,
being but by the King and the Lords.

It is to be known, that of ancient time, when any Acts of Parliament were
made, to the end the same might be published, and understood, especially before
the use of Printing came into England, the Acts of Parliament were engrossed
into Parchment, and bundled up together with a Writ in the King's name, under
the great Seal, to the Sheriff of every County, sometime in Latin, and
sometime in French, to command the Sheriff to proclaim the said Statutes within
his Bailwick, as well within Liberties, as without. And this was the course of
Parliamentary Proceedings, before Printing came in use in England, and yet it
continued after we had the Print, till the Reign of H. 7.

Now at the Parliament holden in 5. R. 2. John Braibrook Bishop of London being
Lord Chancellor of England, caused the said Ordinance of the King and Lords to
be inserted into the Parliamentary Writ of Proclamation to be proclaimed
amongst the Acts of Parliament: which Writ I have seen, the purclose of which
Writ, after the recital of the Acts directed to the Sheriff of N. in these
words, Nos volentes dictas concordias, sive ordinationes in omnibus and
singulis suis Articulis inviolabiter observari, tibi praecipimus quod
praedictas concordias, sive ordinationes in locis infra Balivam tuam, ubi
melius expedire volueris, tam infra libertates, quam extra, Public Proclamari,
and teneri facias juxta formam Praenotatam. Test Rege apud Westminster. 26. Maij.
Anno Regni Regis R. 2.5. But in the Parliamentary Proclamation of the Acts
passed in Anno 6. R. 2. the said Act of the 6. R. 2. whereby the said supposed
Act of 5. R. 2. was declared to be void, is omitted: and afterward the said
supposed Act of 5. R. 2. was continually Printed, and the said Act of 6. R. 2.
has been by the Prelates ever from time to time kept from the Print. A
Counterfeit Act Printed by Bishops against Protestants.
What English Protestant can read this without horror? what? does he not
observe it? why it is that Counterfeit Act of Parliament. 5. R. 2.1382. whereby
Bishops usurp to be Judges of the Souls and Consciences of Protestants, and to
put them in strong Prison till they conform and submit to the will of the
Bishop; it is that Counterfeit Act whereby they usurp to be Judges of Heresy,
and to make Protestants Heretics when they please; it is that Counterfeit Act
whereby they have compelled the Subjects to swear to worship their Idols; it is
that Counterfeit Act whereby they have dragged so many Pious Martyrs to the
Stake, and burnt them, filling the whole Land with fiery Furnaces; it is that
Counterfeit Act by which the Bishops have usurped Power to destroy Religion,
Liberty, Propriety, and Lives of all Protestant Subjects at their pleasure;
it is that Counterfeit Act which was never assented to, but disclaimed,
detested, abrogated, and declared null and void by the House of Commons. 6. R.
2. Anno 1383. and has been yet most presumptuously caused to be printed as a
valid Act by the Bishops being Masters of the Press; and the true Act of
Abrogation 6. R. 2. Whereon all the Subject has depends, most wickedly
suppressed, and never Printed.

Coke 2. Part. Fol. 584. says, And here is to be observed how the Statute of
35. E. 1. has been dealt with since the 17th. of E. 3. for in an Act that
Year, a branch of the Statute of 35. E. 1. was recited, That forbad any thing
should be attempted or brought into the Realm, which should tend to blemish the
King's Prerogative, or in prejudice of his Lords and Commons, which is now
wholly omitted; and Fol. 585. he says, Note in the Roll of Parliament of the
Statute of 38. E. 3. Cap. 1. of Provisors, there are more sharp and biting
words against the Pope then in Print, a Mystery often in use, but not to be
known of all men; from which examples it is manifest, that this came by the
Fraud of the Bishops, who before Printing, were Masters of the Authentic
Copies of the Laws appointed for promulgation; and since Printing, are Masters
of the Press, to interdict and publish what they will.

Accipe nunc horum insidias and Crimine ab uno,
Disce omnes.
These few Frauds are discovered in Print against the Interdictors of Printers,
which discovery they would likewise have interdicted if they had been able, for
these latter Books of my Lord Coke were prohibited to be Printed, and got out
in the late time of Troubles: but by these it is clear, which were only spoken
obiter, and without any inquisition after them, that all they are guilty of are
not discovered, and that to give either Spiritual or Temporal Judges Power to
interdict the Press, is to give them Power to have what Law, what Gospel, what
Text, what Translation, what Canonical, what Apocryphal, what Scripture, what
Act of Parliament, what Common Law, what Statute, what Religion, what Justice,
what Liberty, and what Slavery they please.

Besides which Power of Fraud and Forgery destructive to all Truth, these
further mischeifs follow all interdictions of the Press, but I shall first
answer such Objections as are made against the Liberty of it.

If Liberty of the Press should be permitted, Enemies would have it equal with
Friends, Papists with Protestants, Heretics with Orthodox. Secondly, They
would Print Blasphemy, Idolatry, Treason, Rebellion, Uncleanness, Calumny,
Reviling, Derision, and all manner of Heresy.

England. (2.) Admit they could be excluded, yet in prudence they ought not,
but are more necessary to be admitted then Friends; for those whom we use to
call Friends, are pessimum inimicorum genus Adulantes, the worst kind of
Enemies, Flatterers, who flatter and sooth us up in our Vices, and destroy us,
but any truth of our Faults we shall never hear but from Enemies. Plutarch
therefore calls an Enemy, a Schoolmaster which costs us nothing.

2. As to the matters of Blasphemy, Idolatry, or Uncleanness; neither Enemy or
Friend will so far dishonor themselves, or their Cause, as to Print them
openly, for it is against their interest; As to Treason or Rebellion, who that
has an Enemy, does not desire to know beforehand, wherein the strength of his
Cause, as well as of his Forces lies; and to have the War Proclaimed in Print
before it begin, that he may the better provide against. Besides, if there were
but a Law made, that nothing shall be printed, without the names of the Author
and Printer, with their Additions and Designations: And that all Crimes against
the public, committed by Printing, should be punished by Indictment according
to Law; and all injuries to private persons, should be reparable by the parties
injured, on their Actions according to Damage: Who would dare make himself
guilty of a public Crime, or private Injury in Print, to which he had set his
name?

3. As to matters of Heresy, such as by accident become dangerous to public
safety, the prudence of the Legislators, may, where they find cause, prohibit
them, both Press and Pulpit; but not in the Thoughts and Consciences of Men: As
in the end of the Wars of Germany, between the Lutherans and Catholics it was
Enacted, mutually on both sides on pain of death, That no Catholic should
Preach against the Lutheran Doctrine, or Lutheran against the Catholic; but
both should enjoy the liberty of their own Consciences to themselves. This
agreement was here made, otherwise those bloody Wars would never have ended,
without a total destruction of one of the Parties.

And likewise such a Law were here much more necessary, between dissentient
Protestants, who were Brethren, then it was between the Lutherans and
Catholics, who were mortal Enemies; That no dissentient Protestant should
Print or Preach publicly, on any point of Ceremonial dissentiency, or other
matter not necessary to Salvation, except in such matters as are particularly
allowed by Supreme Authority, to exclude Popery; there being Field-room enough
in the Moral Law of God, to exercise gifts in Preaching; and matters which have
the promise of this life, and of that to come; and no cause for any to
complain, who have liberty likewise of Conscience to use what Protestant
Ceremonies, and Form of Worship they will to themselves, though they have not
power to compel the Consciences of others, who are dissentients. But if
Protestants are tolerated to Print or Preach against one another, this is the
thing the Papist would have, and knows will in the end make them. both a prey
to himself.

But though Protestants ought not to preach one against another, yet the
juncture of Affairs being not at present in great Britain, as before mentioned
in Germany, and an appearance of War Plotted by the Papist, rather to begin
than end with the Protestant, the Bishops ought not to be suffered to interdict
either Press or Pulpit to the Protestants against them.

To come at length to the further mischiefs ensuing the Interdiction of the
Press; any Interdiction of the Press (except in Cases before mentioned) either
to Friend or Enemy, is a dishonor to the Protestant Religion, as if it dared
not suffer it self to be disputed, or to meet an Enemy in the open field;
whereas in truth, it is not Protestancy but Episcopacy. It Is not the Moral Law
which is the Protestant Law, but the Ceremonial which is the Popish Law, which
dares not encounter the shock of an Enemy: And it is Fiction and not Truth, Vice
and not Virtue, which fears either Press or Pasquil.

2. The Foreign Presses being impossible to be interdicted to the Papist, if
the English are interdicted to the Protestant, he is thereby silenced, and
prohibited to answer the Papist, let him preach what he pleases.

3. By Interdiction, the profit of the English Protestant Print-houses will be
transported to Foreign Papists; which will be a great discouragement to so
necessary a Trade in England, and prejudice to the Protestant Religion, and
Policy.

4. The Interdiction of the Press will multiply the greater evil of Libels and
Lampoons.

It increases unlearned Sects and Heresies, who if drawn to Print would either
not be able to form their Doctrine in Principles or Positions; or if they were,
they would appear so absurd as would be fit to employ boys to laugh at, rather
than Doctors to confute: Such were Mahomet's, whose Alchoran is not therefore
suffered to be Printed, or Translated.

5. It causes the more dangerous way of spreading Heresies, both learned and
unlearned, to be neglected how to prevent, which is the secret creeping into
private Houses, leading Captive silly Women, with whom they walk like the
Pestilence in the dark; whereas if they appeared in Print or public Preaching,
they might be known where they are, and opposed.

6. It stops the truth of all intelligence, which is so invaluable a Treasure,
and difficult to be got into the Gates of Princes.

7. A free Press is the pulse of the Body politic, from which is impossible for
the wisest State-Physician to discern, or prevent the public Distempers, unless
it is suffered to beat free without a Ligature.

8. It stops all just causes of complaint, and appeal of the Subject to the
King and Parliament, against Judges and great Officers, both Spiritual and
Temporal. It was my own ill fortune to be pricked Sheriff of a County, which
enforced me to draw a Petition to be presented to the King and Parliament;
desiring some remedy against the old Popish Oath, continued to be imposed on
Sheriffs; wherein they swear to destroy the Protestant Religion, under the name
of Lollary; and likewise to be relieved against the extortions of Officers of
the Exchequer, on Sheriffs: which not knowing how otherwise conveniently to
Address, I appointed the Messenger to get a License to Print; which he tried to
do, but though there was nothing in it but Humility and Truth; as who dare
present otherwise to the Legislative Power? The Licenser Swore He would not
License it for Five Hundred Guinneys, whereby it could not be done.

9. It stops all presentiments by the People to the King and Parliament of
public grievances, in regard the extent of the Three Kingdoms is great, and
remote; and therefore neither fit nor possible, multitudes should come so far
to present Petitions in person; and if not done in person, there are so many
Papists, and Foreign Agents, and their favorers in the way, as may, and do
often intercept from the King's knowledge, the humble applications of his
Protestant Subjects, as is easy to do, when perhaps comprised only in one
sheet of Paper. To avoid therefore the stifling of all just complaints of the
Subjects, and the ill consequences which have been too often occasioned
thereby, of presenting Petitions by Tumults and Armies: It is far more safe and
equal, that the Press should be open to the People in all public Addresses to
Supreme Authority; it being many times a sufficient satisfaction to them, if
they understand that the King and Parliament do but vouchsafe to hear their
complaints and desires, though they think it not fit to grant them: And a Child
will often times awe his Enemies from harming him, if he do but threaten them
he will tell his Father, where they know he has that liberty given him.

10. It appears by experience, That the Liberty of the Press in Holland, and
other Foreign States, where permitted, not only bring no inconveniences, but
very great benefits and advantages to the People.

By pretense of giving the King the name of Supremacy, they have taken the
Thing to themselves.
The word Supremacy, is of so infinite Extent, as it can properly be attributed
to none but the Divine Power of God; and the words, Jurisdiction and
Government, with which it is joined in the Stat. 1. Eliz. 1. which gives the
Form of the Oath of Supremacy, are of that Vast Latitude, that in their large
literal Sense they include all Legislative, Judicial and Executive Power
amongst men, and the Subject matters over which it is exercised, are all Divine
and Human Rights; yea what is more, all things Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as
well as Temporal, circumscribed in nothing to difference it from the Papal
Supremacy pretended over Heaven, Earth and Hell, but the Bounds of her
Majesty's Dominions, within which no wise man ever believed Heaven and H^ll to
be contained, though the Bishops under pretense of the same Supremacy given her
Majesty which the Pope had, have in the Royal name exercised the same, not only
in matters of Marriage, Filiation and Succession, concerning which I intend
here only to contend with them; but in all other matters of Oppression of the
Consciences, and Rights of the Subjects both as to Religion, Liberty and
Propriety, as high as ever the Pope did; though never any such Supremacy was
intended either by the Statute, or Oath to make Canons Judge or Execute, but
what has before been, or lawfully may be exercised or used, (so the word
lawfully, refers to time past, as well as future,) and that neither Pope nor
Bishops had ever any lawful Supremacy or Power to make or use Canons, or
Ecclesiastical Laws concerning Marriage, Filiation or Succession, but did the
same by Usurpation in this Realm, is sufficiently proved before against my Lord
Coke's Ecclesiastical Law, P. 31. and the Form of the Oath makes the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy no higher than the Temporal Supremacy, which every one
knows in all Acts of Legislation, is jointly in the King and Parliament, and
not singly in either Estate. And therefore Bishops can claim to exercise no
Supremacy from one, unless they have it from both; nor of any matter which is
not within the Kings Dominions, or of any other human Power, but only belongs
to the Kingdom of God. And that Pious Queen her Self, who began her Reign with
the Statute and Oath of Supremacy, soon found the words so general, and thereby
obscure, and the letter wrested to such extremity by Episcopal Expositions,
that she endeavored by a Subsequent Declaration published, to have explained
and limited, according to the true intention; but the same not being done by
Act of Parliament, became not of that Force was desired, and left the Bishops
more liberty to exercise more Supremacy in the Royal Name by pretense, then was
in truth intended in the Act or Oath. And the subtlety wherewith they glossed
their designs, appears in the Act it self, of which they were the chiefest
contrivers. For first, they begin with a Nolo Episcopare, alas; as if they
intended never to Episcopate or seek for Ecclesiastical Supremacy again^; for
they utterly abolish all Foreign Power which was the Popes, and all usurped
Power which was their own, and annex all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to the Crown, which includes the Jurisdiction of Marriage,
Filiation and Succession, and many other matters: for they knew, if any part of
the Supremacy had been left at Rome, they could never have got it to
Canterbury; and though the one eased the Burden of the Subject no more than the
other, but rather by the nearness of the Taskmasters increased it to blind the
people, they pretend all to be for the Queen; and as if neither Pope nor
Prelate should have to do with it, they incited the Queen, like the Eagle of
Divinity, to Soar to the height of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Supremacy, to
no other intention, than when she had taken the Quarry, they might take it from
her and exercise it themselves to their own profit, and not hers: for the next
Clause in the Act is, That the Queen may assign Commissioners to exercise all
manner of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which they knew would be
to Bishops; but they abusing this Power they had got in the High Commission
Court, and other Commissions, this Clause or Branch of Assigning Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction by Commission, is repealed 17. Car. 1. Cap. 11. and 13. Car. 2.
Cap. 12. but the annexation to the Crown and Oath of Supremacy still
continuing, they continue still in the King's Name to exercise all Acts of
Supremacy, both of Legislation by continuing and making Canons, and of Judgment
and Execution above all Appeal, in all matters concerning Marriage, Filiation,
and Succession, or more than they were given Power by any Commissions to do
while they continued, which makes them who exercise Acts of Supremacy,
incapable of being Judges Delegate.

By pretense of giving the King Supremacy by the Ceremonies of Coronation and
Unction, they take it from him to themselves.
Coronation is the Investiture of a King in his Kingdom, by the Ceremony of
Tradition of a Crown, or setting it on his Head; so is the Investiture of a
Bishop, by Tradition, of a Ring and Staff or Crosyer; and of a Soldier in
Feudal Tenures, by Tradition of a Ring, Sword, or Spear.

The Persons who have used to make Traditions of Crowns, have been in Kingdoms
where the Priest has the Supremacy of the King; as in Pagan Kingdoms by the
High Priest, and in Christian Kingdoms by the Pope or Bishop; and in Germany by
both; for the King of the Romans is used to receive three Crowns, one of Iron,
another of Silver, and another of Gold. That of Iron he receives of the Bishop
of Coleyn in Aquisgrave; that of Silver of the Archbishop of Millayne in
Italy, in the same City, and in the Church of St. Ambrose. That of Gold, of the
Bishop of Rome, in the Church of St. Peter, at the Altar of St. Maurice. Where
Note, That Gold may be bought too dear, and that three Magpies have got by the
Bargain Supremacy over the Roman Eagle.

But in such Kingdoms where the Supremacy has been in the King above the
Priest, the Tradition of the Crown has been by the People or their
Representative, which we call here a Parliament, or one appointed by them, in
regard a multitude cannot all do it in person.

It is likewise to be observed, That there is a difference between assuming a
Kingdom by Conquest, and by Contract; for he that comes in by Conquest, takes
the Crown without Tradition from Clergy or Lay, whether they will or no, or
exercises the Power of the Sword to govern at his Will without a Crown, as did
the old Roman, and now do the Ottoman Emperors, who are never Crowned, but wear
Turbans, whereby no Foreign Caliphs, nor their own Mufti's can usurp
Ecclesiastical Supremacy: for whosoever accepts Tradition of a Crown, or any
other Symbol or token of Investiture, lays aside all Titles by Conquest, and
receives a Kingdom by Contract with the people, and takes an Oath to Govern
according to the Laws Contracted; which Contract if made with Bishops, and they
have the Power of Tradition of the Crown, (if we will believe Henry the Second)
they will impose their own Terms of Supremacy and every thing else which
concerns their profit; and how Imperious they have been in arrogating to
themselves only the Right of Tradition of the Crown, I shall only mention one
Example in the Reign of Henry the First, who after the death of his first Queen
Matild, married a second called Adelira; and when she was to Be Crowned, Ralf,
Archbishop of Canterbury, who was to do the Office, came to King Henry sitting
in his Chair of State, asking who had set the Crown on his Head? The King
answering, I have now forgotten, it was so long since. Well, says the
Archbishop, who ever did it, he did me wrong, to whom it belonged, and as long
as you hold it thus, I will do no Office at this Coronation Then said the King,
The insolency of an Archbishop.
Do what you think good. Whereupon the Archbishop took the Crown off the
King's Head, and after, at the entreaty of the people, set it on again, and
then proceeded to Crown the Queen. Here appears a great difference between the
Tradition of the Crown by a Bishop, and by the People; for the Bishop arrogates
the Right, as the Pope by his Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and
compels the Prince implicity to acknowledge the same, by either receiving the
Original Tradition, or Confirmation of his Crown from him, as one that h^th
power Jure Divino to give it; but where it is received from the People or
Parliament, neither Superiority nor Supremacy is implied, nor comes in
question, but only the form of the Contract; for Superiors, and Inferiors, and
Equals, may all Contract alike, and bind themselves alike, whether Superior or
Inferior, without any regard or consideration of the one or the other.

Then for the Supremacy Spiritual given by Unction by a Bishop, they are ever
citing their old Popish rule, Reges sacro oleo uncti Spiritualis Jurisdictionis
sunt capaces, Kings anointed with holy Oil, are capable of Spiritual
Jurisdiction, whereby they make an Appearance, as if by their Oil they gave
Supreme Spiritual Jurisdiction; whereas in truth they thereby circumvent
Princes, and make them implicitly acknowledge the Bishop who anoints, to be a
greater Supreme than the Anointed: for the Bishop assuming without Miracle or
sign of Mission to Consecrate the Oil, he thereby pr^tends he has Power Jure
Divino to Consecrate and Anoint as some Prophets had by Miracle amongst the
Jews; and then from Christ's Argument, Matthew. 23.17, 19. Anointing safer for
Princes by a Layhand, and with common Oil, than with Oil Consecrate.
Whether is greater, the Gold, or the Temple, which Sanctifies the Gold? the
Gift, or the Altar which Sanctifies the Gift? infers, whether is greater, the
Temple, or Bishop who Cons^crates the Temple? the Oil, or Bishop who
Consecrates the Oil? and whether is a greater Supreme, the Person Anointed, or
the Bishop who Anoints and Consecrates the An^inted? So it was by pretense of
Consecration of Crowns and Oils, by which the Pope first, and since the Bishop,
has usurped Supremacy over Princes, and secretly steal the Supremacy of that
Spiritual Jurisdiction to themselves, which they pretend to give them. But
where the Tradition of the Crown or Unction is by the People or their
Representative the Parliament, according to Contract between them and the
Prince, they never pretend any such thing as Consecration in either, but a
civil Contract obliged by mutual Oaths.

To show some farther Authority, therefore, that never any Pope of Rome, or
Ralf of Canterbury, or other Bishop, had any Authority from Christ in the New,
or the Prophets or Priests in the Old Testament, to make Tradition of a Crown
to any Temporal Prince, but the same belonged to the People or their
Representative, who were to be Subjects: It is evident, (1.) as to Christ, John
18.36. His Kingdom is not of this World. (2.) He never had any Crown but that
of Thorns, Matthew. 27.29. Nor any Robes but the seamless Coat, John 19.23. As to
the Prophets and Priests in the Old Testament, they never made Tradition of any
Crown to any King of Israel or Judah, but they received them from the People,
(such as wore them) and not from any Prophet or Priest; for though Nunrod, as
is already mentioned, alleged or feigned before his Usurpation of the first
Monarchy, that God showed him miraculously a Crown in the Clouds, and
Constantine likewise alleged or feigned, that God showed him miraculously a
Cross in the Clouds, yet never any material Crown or Cross dropped from the
Clouds, neither does it appear in Scripture, or any History, that any material
Crown was ever by Miracle made by God, or sent by any Prophet or Priest, who
should have Authority to make Tradition thereof, and thereby give Investiture
of a Kingdom, nor Robes; for though, Genesis 3.21. God made Coats of Skins and
clothed Adam; and Matthew. 6.30. clothed the Lillies, yet it is before said,
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these: Which shows, though
God made the Lillies, he made not Solomon's Robes. And the Prophet Ahijah, 1
Kings 11.30. though he prophesied the Kingdom to Jeroboam, gave him neither
Crown nor Robes, but rather disrobed him; for he caught his new Garment he bad
on, and rent it in twelve pieces, and gave him ten of them. And they were the
People only that gave him the Investiture by Crown and Robes, if those
Ceremonies were at all used; for it is said, Cap. 12.20. The People sent and
called him unto the Congregation, and made him King over all Israel: there was
none that followed the House of David, but the House of Judah only. And Verse
24. It appears, that this was from God; yet were not the Priests hand in it to
Crown him, for they would not forsake the Sacrifice at Jerusalem; which, Verse
27. made Jeroboam to fear, that if the people should go thither to sacrifice,
they would again return to Rehoboam, and caused him, for prevention, to set up
the two Golden Calves at Dan and Bethel. As to the Coronation of Saul and
David, we find Saul had a Crown, for, the Amalekite 2 Samuel 1.10. who tells
David he slew him, says, I took the Crown that was upon his Head, and the
Bracelet that was on his Arm, and have brought them hither unto my Lord.
Coronation of Saul, not by the Priest, but People.
(1.) It appears not that Samuel gave him this Crown, neither is it probable;
for as has been said before, it appears not in any History, that God ever sent
a material Crown by any Prophet; and as to the Jewish Priests Custom they could
have none, Saul being the first King in that Kingdom; and Law they could have
none for the Priest to make Tradition of the Crown to the King, for Moses
mentions no such thing: therefore it was done by the People, who were of
necessity to show their assent and acknowledgment, by some external Ceremony of
acknowledgment of their Governor, which after the manner of the Nations, after
whose example they desired to have a King, was by Tradition of a Crown, and
bringing him Presents; which Presents appear, 1 Samuel 10.27. to be made by the
People, and not the Priest; for it is there said, The Children of Belial said,
How shall this man save us? and they despised him, and brought him no Presents.

Coronation of David, on a Conquest, by himself.
As to the Coronation of David, it was in a Kingdom he obtained by Conquest,
made by himself, by taking the Crown from the Conquered King's Head, and
setting it on his own head without Prophet, or Priest, or Contract with the
People. 2 Samuel 12.26. And Joab fought against Rabbah of the Children of Ammon,
and took the Royal City, And Joab sent Messengers to David, and said, I have
fought against Rabbah, and have taken the City of Waters. Now therefore gather
the rest of the People together, and encamp against the City, and take it, lest
I take the City, and it be be called after my name. And David gathered all the
People together, and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it. And he
took their Kings Crown from off his Head, (the weight whereof was a Talent of
Gold, with the Precious Stones,) and it was set on David's Head: Thus appears
Coronation to be over a Conquered People; Coronation of David on a Contract, by
the People.
but when David has to do with a free People of Judah and Israel, it appears,
he neither assumed the Crown himself with his own hand, nor received Tradition
or Investiture of any Prophet or Priest of the same, but from the People, on
Contracts mutually agreed. Yea not only the Crown, but the Anointing it self;
which signified the Kingdoms, was given by the People; or, which is all one, by
their Representative in Parliament, and not by the Priest, as will appear from
the Texts following, viz. 1 Samuel 16, 13. where it is said concerning David,
when he was brought before Samuel, Then Samuel took the Horn of Oil, and
anointed him in the midst of his Brethren: and the Spirit of the Lord came on
David from that day forward. 2 Samuel 2.4. The men of Judah came, and there they
anointed David King over the House of Judah. And 2 Samuel 5.1. Then came all the
Tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron: And Verse 3. So all the Elders of Israel
came to the King to Hebron, and King David made a League with them in Hebron
before the Lord: and they anointed David King over Israel. And 1 Chronicles. 1.1.
Then all Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron: And Verse 3.
Therefore came all the Elders of Israel to the King to Hebron, and David made a
Covenant with them in Hebron before the Lord, and they anointed David King over
Israel, according to the word of the Lord by Samuel.

By which appears first, that the anointing by Samuel of David, gave him no
Investiture of the Kingdom; for Saul was then alive, but only he prophesied by
this he should be King, and Successor after Readiness death, and by Miracle
prepared and made him capable and fit to execute the Office, by giving him from
that time the Spirit of God; which Miracle likewise followed the anointing of
his Predecessor Saul, 1 Samuel 10.1, to the 12th. Verse. But there is no such
Miracle ensues from Episcopal Unction or Consecration, neither do they show any
sign of Mission, to Anoint as Samuel did; but every man that is born has a
sign of Mission from God to Contract with that Prince, under the protection of
whose Sword he happens to be born, to yield him Subjection for Protection, and
to concur with the whole Body of the other Subjects, to present him with a
Symbol or sign of the same, with a Crown or Oil, as here the men of Israel and
Judah do to David.

2. David anointed by his Parliament.
That the Anointing which gave David the Investiture of the Kingdoms, was made
by the Representative of the People in Parliament, and not by the Priest; for
it is said, That all the Tribes, and all Israel, and all the Elders, which were
a Senate or Parliament, to treat for the People, and make a League and Covenant
with the King; for it was impossible for him otherwise to treat with so great a
multitude as all Israel, had they not agreed to Elect a fit Representative for
them; therefore it is said, The Elders anointed David, and no mention made of
the Priest; neither had the Priest any Law of Moses to anoint Kings.

3. That as there was no Crown sent David from Heaven for his Coronation,
whereby Pontifical men might pretend to have the disposing, so there was no Oil
sent thence for ^is Anointing, but he received both from the People. And surely
the Mission of the Oil of Rhemes thence is as great a Fable, as of the Crown of
Nimrod, or of the Image which fell from Jupiter; neither did there need any
Consecration of either, for by the Customs of most Nations, Crowns and Unctions
were but civil Ceremonies of Honor given to the Parties which received them,
not only in Elections of Kings, but almost in all other Solemnities, as
Military Triumphs, Olympic and other Games, yea even in their ordinary Feasts,
both of Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans.

Habent Vnctae mollia serta Comae.
Ovid. Which shows both Crowning and Anointing of their Guests, with Garlands
or Crowns of Flowers, and Unction with Oil of the Olive, both which materials,
though more properly made by God, than Crowns of Gold and Oils confected and
Consecrated, yet were esteemed but as civil Ceremonies, and were a ministered by
Lay-hands without a Priest. And of this civil Festival Honor of Anointing used
amongst the Jews, as well as other Nations, Christ is pleased to take notice,
Luke 7.36. My Head with Oil thou did not anoint, but this Woman has anointed
my Feet with Ointment. And though both Coronation and Unction were but civil
Ceremonies, and of humane Institution, where no Miracle testified a Divine, yet
is David called God's Anointed, more truly than if he had been anointed by the
Priest, seeing God gave the Priest no Mission, but yet himself turned the
Hearts of the People by the civil signs of Coronation and Unction, to
acknowledge David for their Sovereign; for which he himself gives thanks and
says, Psalm. 18.47. God subdueth the People under me.

4. That David does not make a League and Covenant with the High Priest, but
with his Parliament, who were the Convention of Elders who anointed him.

5. That though there had been long Civil Wars between Judah who followed
David, and Israel who followed Isbosheth the Son of Saul, and Abner his General
was dead, and Isbosheth was dead, and there remained with him Victorious and
Veteran Armies; yet neither Judah nor Israel anointed him, till he had first
made with them a League and Covenant.

6. From hence may be discovered the great Mystery of Iniquity, whereby Popes
have terrified Emperors and Kings as their Vassals, to receive Crowns and
Unctions from them, which has been only by persuading. That none but Bishops
could Crown or Anoint them; the manifold mischiefs of which to Princes and
People, are too long here to be recited; only whosoever will consider them,
will find it clear, That Bishops who have pretended, or may pretend to so
dangerous a T^nent, as, That none but they have Right to make Coronations and
Unctions, are no fit Judges of Successions to Crowns.

They assume in the Judgment of all matters concerning Marririage, Filiation,
Aliment, and Succession, to be above Appeal to the Kings Courts.
It has been already shown, that Bishops by assuming a Power Jure Divino,
without showing a sign of Mission, and by false translating Scripture, and by
corrupting and interdicting the Press, exercise a Power superior or equal to
the Legislative; from which does follow, That such as are Legislators, or
assume or exercise such Power, ought not to be Judges Delegate. (1.) Because
Legislation Supreme, and Judgment Delegate, are two distinct Offices, and ought
not to be confounded. (2.) Because it is Repugnant, that a Legislator should be
a Delegate to himself; for in Presentia Majoris cessat potestas Minoris, the
lesser Power is lost in the greater. (3.) If wrong Judgment happen to be given,
there can be no appeal but to those who did the Wrong; whereby they become
Judges and Parties, and Judge in their own Case. (4) A Power Delegate to Judge
without Appeal, ceases to be a Delegate Power, and is greater than the
Legislative, which Power that it is assumed by the Bishops in all Matrimonial
Causes, is the thing next to be shown.

Of the abominable Judgment passed by the Common Law Judges in Kennes Case,
Coke lib. 7.42. whereby they gave away the Supremacy of the King's Courts to
the Bishop, and made them in all Causes Matrimonial, subject to no Appeal.
Mich. 4. Jac. In the Court of Wards between Thomas Robertson, and Elizabeth
his Wife, Plaintiff; and Florence Lady Stallenge, Defendant; The Case was, This
Christopher Kenne Esquire was seized of the Manor of Kenne in the County of
Sommerset, holden by Knights Service in Capite, and 37. H. 8. de facto married
Elizabeth Stowell, and had Issue Martha the Mother of Elizabeth one of the now
Plaintiffs; and after, 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. in the Court of Audience, between
the said Christopher Kenne, Plaintiff; and Elizabeth Stewell, Defendant; the
Judge there gave a Sentence in these words, Pretens' tractat' contract'
sponsalia and Matrimonium quin verius Effigiem matrimonij inter Christopherum
Kenne and Elizabeth Stowell in Minore and sua impubertatis aetate eorundem aut
eorum alterius de fact' habit' contract' and celebrat' fuisse and esse
eosdemque Christopherum and Eliz. tam tempore contractus and Solemnizationis
dict' pretens' matrimonij quam etiam continuo postea idem matrimonio pretens'
and Solemnizationi ejusdem dissensisse contravenisse Reclamasse and Reluctasse
ac eo praetextu hujusmodi Pretens' tractat' sponsalia and matrimonium de jure
nullum and nulla irritum and irrita cassum and cassa invalidum and invalida and
minus efficax and inefficacia fuisse and esse viribusque juris caruisse carere
and carere debere Nec non Antedictos Christopherum Kenne and Eliz Stowell
quatenus de factor fuerunt ad invicem matrimonio ut predicitur copulat' ab
invicem Separand' and divorciand' fore debere pronunciamus decernimus and
declaramus Eosque Separamus and Divorciamus eisdemque Christopher' and Eliz.
licentiam and Libertatem ad alia vota convolanda concedimus tribuimus and
impertimur per hanc Sententiam nostram definitivam sive hoc finale nostrum
decretum quam sive quod ferimus and promulgamus in hiis Scriptis etc.

And after the Divorce, the said Christopher Kenne Espoused and took to Wife
Elizabeth Beckwith: And after, Anno 5th. Eliz. before certain Commissioners
Ecclesiastical, the said Elizabeth Beckwith Libelled against the said
Christopher Kenne, That before the Marriage between them contracted, he had
Married with Elizabeth Stowell; on which process was awarded against Elizabeth
Stowell pro interesse. And upon due examination of the Cause, it was Sentenced,
That the Marriage between the said Christopher Kenne, and Elizabeth Beckwith,
was lawful, and Sentenced them ad Exequenda Conjugalta obsequia, etc. And that
the said Christopher Kenne was never lawfully Espoused unto the said Elizabeth
Stowell; and after the said Elizabeth Beckwith died, after whose death the said
Christopher took to Wife the said Florence, by whom he had Issue one Daughter,
and called Elizabeth, and died. And Anno 36th. Eliz. it was found by Office in
the County of Sommerset, by Force of a Mandamus, after the death of the said
Christopher Kenne, that the said Elizabeth Kenne was his Daughter and Heir, who
was within Age, Viz. of the Age of Ten Months. The Queen granted her Wardship
to Sir Nicholas Stallenge and the said Florence then his Wife, on which the
said Martha alleged her self to be Daughter and Heir to the said Christopher
Kenne, and with her Husband Silvester Williams, Exhibited their Bill in the
Court of Wards against the said Sir Nicholas, and Florence, alleging, That the
said Martha was Daughter and Heir of the Body of the said Elizabeth Stowell his
lawful Wife, and that they the said Christopher and Elizabeth Stowell at the
time of their Marriage in Anno 37. H. 8. were both of them above the Age of
Consent, and that they Cohabited together Nine or Ten Years before the said
supposed Divorce; during which Cohabitation the said Martha was procreate
between them, and therefore pray they may have License to Traverse the said
Office. To which Bill the said Nicholas and Florence put in their answer, and
the Plaintiff examined diverse Witnesses, and before Publication, Sir Nicholas
dies; and thereupon the said Silvester and Martha exhibited a Bill of Reviver
against the said Florence; and after, Martha having Issue Elizabeth the Wife of
the now Pl. died, after whose death the said Thomas Robertson and Elizabeth his
Wife, bring a new Bill of Reviver to revive the first Suit, in which the
Witnesses were examined; and this Case was referred to Fleming and Coke, Chief
Justices, and Tanfeild Chief Baron, and Selverton and Williams Justices, and
Sing and Altham Barons of the Exchequer.

If it be asked, for what reason was such a Sentence given? my Lord Coke nor
the rest will neither tie the Bishop nor themselves to show any; for he says,
The lawfulness of Marriage belonging originally to be tried in the
Ecclesiastical Court, if the Ecclesiastical Judge (that is, the Bishop) Sentence
a Marriage Null, We (that is, the Judges of the King's Courts) ought to give
Faith (that is, implicit Faith) to their Sentence, as they do to our Judgment,
whether true or false, right or wrong, reason or no reason; and so he says,
Where the original cause of Suit concerning Marriage belongs to the Common Law
Courts, the Ecclesiastical Judge is to give like Faith to them; as 22. E. 4. in
Corbets Case, which was this, Sir Robert Corbet had by Elizabeth his Wife two
Sons, Robert the Elder, and Roger the Younger, and dies; Robert the Elder being
under the Age of Fourteen, takes to Wife one Matilda, and they dwell together
t^ll full Age, Et habuerunt carnalem copulam, and cogniti and reputati pro viro
and uxore palam. And after the said Robert put off the said Matilda, having no
Issue by her, and Married one Lettice in the life of the said Matilda, and has
Issue by her Robert, and dies; Lettice Preached openly, that she was the lawful
Wife of Robert, and her Son a mulier, Roger the Son of Sir Robert Corbet, sues
in the Spiritual Court to Reverse these Espousals between Robert his Brother,
and Lettice; for which Lettice sues a Prohibition. In which Case it was
Resolved, (1.) That if Robert and Matilda had had Issue, and had been unjustly
Divorced, and after Robert had Married Lettice, and had Issue and died, that as
long as the unjust Divorce had continued, the Issue of Matilda could have had
no remedy at Common Law, the same gives so great Faith to the Sentence of the
Bishop. (2.) That here Roger might sue at Common Law, notwithstanding the
second Marriage, in regard the same was void, being made while the first Wife
lived. On which may be noted, the injustice of the Bishops, being above Appeal
in Judgment in these particulars, (1.) Here is a lawful Matirmony Consummate by
the Birth of a Child, and two Persons thereby indissolubly joined together, by
the Act and Law of God, put asunder by the Bishop and his Papal Law. Here is a
Dispute from Generation to Generation concerning the Validity of a Marriage,
and Succession to an Inheritance: Against the Marriage is alleged, That the
same was declared void by a Sentence of Divorce, or rather of Nullity given by
the Bishop. Against it is answered by Elizabeth a Descendent of the said
Marriage, and the right Heir to the Inheritance, that the cause of the said
Sentence was false. And she offered to prove, that the said Christopher Kenne
and Elizabeth Stowell were both above the Age of Consent to Marriage, in Anno
37. H. 8. and were then lawfully Married and Cohabited together Nine or Ten
Years, and the said Martha was lawfully Procreate between them before the
pretended Divorce was made. Was there ever Probation more Relevant tendered?
was there ever better Reason alleged by a poor Lady to defend her Inheritance?
On this, Hoskins, Bacon, Dodridge, and other Council Argued so long from Term
to Term, as was enough to spend a good Portion before it was got. But, alas, to
no purpose; for had this Elizabeth, been Queen Elizabeth her self, these Judges
will give no Relief or Hearing against a Bishops Sentence, unless his Lordship
will please to Revoke it himself. And notwithstanding all Arguments to the
contrary, it was accordingly resolved by all the Justices and Barons, That she
must go without her Inheritance, and her Mother Martha remain a Bastard, till
the Bishop who made her so, should again unmake her, which was in plain
English, to adjudg there should be no Appeal in any case of Marriage,
Filiation, Aliment, or Succession from the Bishops to the Kings Courts.

2. He rests not there, but says, Iisdem licentiam ad alia vota convolanda
concedimus. So that here not only License may be had for Money to Marry, but
for the same to leave the old, and make a new choice as often as they please.
And my Lord Coke will have the Common Law to give such Faith, that they ought
not to question these doings, true or false, right or wrong; which sets all
Women and Men to Sale for Money, and gave the occasion to Cornelius Agrippa, to
call all Ecclesiastics Panders General for their Profit.

3. The Common Law Judges give the Bishop the same Supremacy of Power in
Matrimonial Causes, since the Protestant Religion has made Marriage no
Sacrament, as they had in the time of highest Popery, and made it a Sacrament,
though Sublata causa tollitur effectus. The same ceasing to be a Sacrament, and
becoming a mear Temporal Contract, the old superstitious Faith of a Sacrament
ought not to be given those who are no Judges of Temporal matters.

4. It is worth a smile in this Case, were it not so wicked, to see how hot the
Common Lawyers were a while in the scuffle for Supremacy of Marriage. But no
sooner had the Bishops turned the muzzles of the Romish Canons against them,
and discharged their piece of Conjuring in a strange Language, instead of a
Sentence, but our Worthies of the Law fell flat on their faces, and yielded the
Royal Fort of the Prerogative and all the Protestant Subjects Laws and
Liberties, eya Magna Charta it self, to the Mercy of the Enemy, by so
abominable a Judgment, that no Appeal lay to the Kings Courts against the
Sentence of a Bishop, touching Marriage, Filiation, or Succession, true or
false, right or wrong, with cause or without cause, a Resolve deserving to be
marked with a Note of perpetual Infamy, and Razed out of all Records. On which
and other Reasons, though in most parts of Christendom the Clergy generally
composed one Estate of the Country, yet since the Reformation they were
excluded from being any part of the Estates, and of Holland, neither were they
allowed any Vote in their Assembly: and far less Reason have they in England
(seeing they have equal Privilege here with the Gentry, and all other
Lay-free-holders in Election of Knights of the Shire) to assume any other Power
in the Legislative, Temporal or Spiritual, either in Person or by any other
Representative. The like Practice is likewise in Venice, though they are
Catholics, where before the Council sits, the Crier with a loud Voice commands
all Priests out of Doors, lest they should discover the State secrets to the
Pope, and likewise assume the Supremacy of Judgment from the Temporalty to the
Spiritualty; to produce which effects they are a dangerous ingredient to be
mixed, in how small a quantity soever, in any Supreme Council, and a little
Leven of so active a Fermentation, Leveneth the whole Lump. A Reason is given
by Aeneas Silvius, why it was held by more, That the Pope was above a Council,
than a Council above a Pope, because Popes gave Bishoprics and
Arch-Bishopricks, but Councils gave none. Which does not only hold in mere
Spiritual Councils, but in such Spiritual Councils as are mixed with the
Temporalty, in which the Spiritualty are always Bribed and Pension'd by the
gift of their Offices: And this is apparent, and needs no further proof. And if
any of the Temporalty receive the like Bribes and Pensions, upon lawful proof
thereof made, it cannot be denied, that neither of them are equal or fit
Legislators, and much less Judges of the Holy Laws of God, of Marriage,
Filiation, and Succession of Subjects, and least of all of Kings.

Exceptions against Bishops being Judges, in reference to the Judicial Power.
1. They are prohibited by the example of Christ to Judge Marriage, Filiation,
Aliment, or Succession.

We Read, Christ was at a Marriage Feast, but it was so poor a one, they wanted
Wine, and it is likely he would have helped them to none, had the man been rich;
for he might have bought enough for his Money without Miracle. But Christ
showed his Bounty to the Poor, and the Rich he sent empty away. We read
likewise, he taught the Doctrine of Marriage: but it was according to the Moral
Law of God, and all Ceremonial Laws he Established; neither did he or his
Apostles ever join any hands by the Ceremonies of a Priest or Temple, nor ever
spoke of any other joining Man and Woman together; but by God only, as it was
from the beginning. And as to the point of being a Judge of Marriage, Filiation,
Aliment, and Succession, he utterly refused it, though he knew the Fact and the
Right far above any Bishop, as appears, Luke 12.14. And one of the company said
unto him, Master, Speak to my Brother, that he divide the Inheritance with me.
And he said unto him, Man, Who made me a Judge or a Divider over you? To give
Judgment in this Case, according to Episcopal Doctrine, Christ must first have
enquired with what Ceremonies the Father and Mother were Married, whereby the
Marriage must have been first Judged. Then, Whether these two Brothers were
begot before the Ceremonies, or after, and whether there were Witnesses at the
begetting, which concerns Filiation. Then, Whether the Inheritance, which,
according to the Romish Law, then Imperial in Judaea, included both Lands and
moveable Goods, were left by a Testate, or an Intestate; which would have
concerned the Aliment and Succession, but Christ in a word refused to Judge any
of these. And those who alledg themselves his Successors, ought to follow his
Example, who if he sent them, sent them to teach, and not to Judge. For he
says* Go teach all Nations; but there is not a word of Judging any Nation.

2. They are totally ignorant in the Fact, and were never Educated in the Laws
by which they pretend to Judge Marriage.

That it is impossible for them to know the Facts of Marriage or Filiation, or
to receive any Testimony of the same, is already shown and proved, P. 104, 105.
and indeed the Cook with his white Sleeves who dressed the Wedding-Dinner, and
the Tailor who made the Wedding-Cloaths, and the Midwife and Gossips who eat
the Pie, and drunk the Bowl, (if any Certificate or Judgment were at all
necessary as to the Fact of Marriage and Filiation, besides that of the
Parents) were far more credible and fit, than the Bishop's who was an Hundred
Miles off at the time of getting the Child, and of all these doings besides.

And as to the Law, it is known they were never Educated either in the Civil,
Canon, Common or Statute Laws; the knowledge of all which they themselves cannot
but acknowledge are necessary to make up an Ecclesiastical Lawyer: by which is
manifest, they are as ignorant of the Law of Marriage and Filiation, as they
are before proved to be of the Fact. With what Face or Conscience can they
undertake to be Judges of what they are totally Ignorant, except only to take
account of the Money and Gains?

3. They Judge by a Chancellor and Commissaries, and not in Person.

The Causes are, First, Ignorance, whereof they are before proved Guilty. The
Second, Pride, that they may be equal to Kings who pream Judge or Legislative
Power can delegate Judgment. A Bishop must therefore be a Judge Supreme, or
Delegate; if he Arrogate to be Supreme, he ought not to be suffered; if a
Delegate, Delegatus non potest Delegare. The Third, is Sloth, to take the Gains
and not the Pains of doing Justice. The Fourth, is Covetousnes, that they may
have Plurality of Offices, and let them to Farm to Deputies; all which are most
sad Ingredients to compound a Judge of Marriage, Filiation, and Succession: and
it is clean contrary to the known Laws, for any Judge Delegate to Act by Deputy,
and not in Person; for the Office of a Judge, is an Office of Trust, and cannot
be granted over; and neither ought nor can be executed by any Assign, Deputy,
Commissaries, or Chancellor, but ought to be served in Person; besides, they
Excommunicate by Lay-deputies, contrary to their own Pretenses, that the Power
of the Keys belongs only to Persons in pretended Holy Orders.

4. They have Pluralities of Offices, and more than they are able to serve; yet
will be Judges besides.

One good thing is remembered of Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, who though he
was a Traitor to King Henry the Second, yet being first by him made Chancellor
of England, and after made Archbishop of Canterbury, before he would take upon
him the Office of Archbishop, he, of his own accord, first surrendered his
Office of Chancellor, not thinking it fit for one man to have two such great
Offices at once; but they now make St. Peter's Net of so small a Mash; that
great or small, all is Fish that comes to it. And first they begin with the
Coronation. Office, already mentioned; then the Offices of Legislation in
Parliaments; of Legislation in Assemblies; of Legislation in Synods; of
Chancellors of State; of Negotiators, of Intelligencers; of Soldiers; of
Treasurers; of Almoners; of Temporal Barons; of Masters of the Ceremonies; of
Worship, of Visitors, of Inquisitors, of Confessors, of Penancers, of
Excommunicators, of Pardoners, of Absolvers, of Dispencers of Faculties, of
Interdictors of Marriages, of Li^ncers of Marriage, of Interdictors of the
Press, of Licencers of the Press, of makers of Ministers, of Licencers of
Preachers, Curates, Lecturers, Schoolmasters, Physicians, of Consecrators of
Churches, of Consecrators of Churchyards, of Interdictors of Burial, of
Interdictors to cast out the Devil by Fasting and Prayers, of Licencers to cast
out the Devil, and many others; out of each of which they reap gains, yet are
not able to serve the least part of them (but let them to Farm to their
Spunges, whom they squeeze into their own See) whereas they cannot so much as
pretend any Mission from Christ for more than One Office, which is of Teaching
in Season, and out of Season; and would they follow that as they ought, the
same would be sufficient to take up the whole man, and leave them little
leisure of being Judges of Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, or to execute
any other Temporal Office.

5. They are Ambidexter and Amphibious Judges in Spirituals and Temporals.

They cannot deny, that Marriage, since it was purified by the Protestant
Religion from the defilement of being a Romish Sacrament, and Filiation,
Aliment, and Succession incident to the same, became mere Temporal matters, and
nothing can be more Temporal in it self, or wherein the higest Temporal Rights
of Princes and People, of Liberty, of Person and Propriety of Goods, Freehold
and Inheritance, are more concerned, than in them: and it being likewise
confessed both by Common and Ecclesiastical Lawyers, That the mere Spiritual
Judge, ought not to judge of Temporal matters; neither was there any such
Jurisdiction ever pretended to Marriage by the Pope himself; but as to a
Spiritual Sacrament, and in Ordine ad Spiritualia, he by it deposed Kings, and
disposed of the Succession of Kingdoms at his Will and Pleasure. Unless
therefore a Bishop will affirm, That Marriage continues still a Romish
Sacrament, or that he may, like the Pope, judge of any Temporal matters in
Ordine ad Spiritualia, he has no pretense or color of Right to be a Judge of
Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, or Succession; but let the Right be what it will,
de Facto, he has got a Spiritual Lord and a Temporal Baron into one Doublet,
and produced from thence a monstrous Ambidextrous Jurisdiction with the
Spiritual Sword in one hand, and the Temporal in the other, neither Divine nor
Humane, nor Fish nor Flesh, but like the Amphibious Crocodile, partly with
Tears, partly with Terror, Raving both by Land and Water, and Destroying in
both the Elements of Spirituals and Temporals.

6. They Judge Marriage by pretended Canons and Laws made by Bishops and Synods;
which are no Laws but are utterly void; they not having had in their making the
Assent of the Parliament.

No Englishman can deny, That to make a Law, are required the joint Assent
both of King and Parliament; and if either is wanting, there can be no Law
decreed and enacted by any other Convention Ecclesiastical or Lay, whether
Council or Synod: And this is so great a Birthright of the People; That if any
House of Commons, who are Elected by the People, and entrusted by them to be
their Delegates to treat with his Majesty or his Successors, to enact Laws of
Marriage, and other Laws concerning the same, should consent and agree, That an
Act of Parliament should be made, that the Bishops and a Synod should, instead
of the House of Commons, have full Power and Authority, on their Convention by
the Kings Writ, to treat with the King, and by his Royal Assent to make and
enact Canons and Laws concerning Marriage, Filiation, Succession, Religion,
Liberty and Propriety of the People; and such Canons and Laws so made, should
have the force of Acts of Parliaments, and the Commons should declare, That to
ease themselves of the trouble of so often being summoned from their remote
Habitations in the Country, and so long Journies to the City, and their not
being verst in the difficulties of Legislation, or any other probable matter of
Excuse, that they desired to refer the whole care of the Public Affairs to
Bishops and Synods, who are Learned men, and they should from time to time, as
often as they saw necessary on Summons, make wholesome Canons and Laws for the
People; and that the House of Commons desired to be excused from the burden of
sitting any more, and accordingly such an Act should be passed, and thereon a
Synod be Summoned, and they should make a Book of Canons concerning Marriage,
Filiation, and Succession, by the Royal Consent, and these should be proclaimed
to be Laws, and to have the force of Acts of Parliament; yet would such Book of
Canons be utterly void and of none effect, because in their making there was no
Consent of an House of Commons; and the House of Commons being but Delegates
themselves, can not Delegate the Peoples Interest in the Legislative to others;
for, Delegatus non p^test delegare, it was an Office of Personal Trust reposed
in the Persons El^cted to be Members of Parliament, to treat with the King, and
assent to equal Laws in behalf of the People, they could not grant over
therefore this Office of Trust to Bishops, or a Synod, or a Council, to treat
with the King, and assent to Laws for the People; but every Member of
Parliament ought either to refuse to accept of the Election; or if he accept,
to serve in Person, All Books of Canons made by Bishops without consent of
Parliament, void.
and not by Proxy assign or subdelegate in so great a Trust, as to join in
making Laws for the Public Safety and Peace.

Hence will follow therefore, That all Ecclesiastical Canons and Laws of Synods
and Councils, prohibiting Marriage, without Public Bans or Episcopal Licenses,
and all Canons prohibiting Marriage in time of Advent, Septuagesima, and
Rogation, and all Canons prohibiting Marriage within degrees of Consanguinity
and Affinity, not prohibited by the Moral Law of God; and all Canons
prohibiting Marriage not made by the Ceremonies of a Priest and Temple; and all
Canons of the Council of Trent making null and void all Marriages not made
before a Priest and two Witnesses, are all in themselves utterly void; for the
House of Commons never assented to their making; and all Laws prohibitory of
Marriage, being before shown to be contrary to the Moral Law of God, and to
come from the Devil, P. 52. and it being here shown that they have no consent
of Parliament; such Books of Canons must in both respects be of necessity null
and void, as being neither the Laws of God nor Man in England, but of the
Devil; according to which Books of Canons, Bishops therefore Judging of
Marriage contrary to the Moral Law of God, and without any positive Law of Man,
their Judgment must likewise be void, being according to the Law of the Devil;
and such Persons are no fit Judges, who judge according to such Laws.

7. They take to themselves the Fines and Penalties of their own Judgments.

That the Sole and Final Cause why Bishops so eagerly contest for the
Jurisdiction of Marriage, is Filthy Lucre, is shown before, P. 52, 53. etc. and
the same is so great a Pillar of the Kingdom of Antichrist, that, Pope ruined
where Episcopal Jurisdiction of Marriage is taken away.
take but away Episcopal Jurisdiction of Ma^riage, the Papal Power is
immediately ruined in those Provinces wheresoever it is done. (1.) In regard of
the infinite Treasure he heaps hereby, which appears before, P. 52, 53. (2.) In
regard of the Power he gains hereby over Kings and Princes, in assuming to
himself the Judgment of Filiations and Successions to Kingdoms. (3.) By
enticing Princes to unlawful Marriages, contrary to the Moral Law of God, and
procuring them to take his Dispensations; for thereby such Prince and his
Successors will be in great danger as to his Title, unless he expose his
Interest and Religion to obtain assistance from the Sea of Rome: which made
Philip the Second, King of Spain, who Married Queen Mary, so furious to support
the Catholic Religion in the Low Countries by Fire and Sword, and to make a
Law, That none should succeed him in the Government of those Provinces, unless
he took an Oath to maintain the Catholic Religion there, and maintain the
Authority of the Church of Rome. And this made Queen Mary so cruelly furious
against Protestants in England, the Title of her Mothers Marriage, and her
Succession, depending on the Popes protection. And wheresoever any Prince is
promoted by the Popes Canon Laws, contrary to the Right of Succession
instituted by the Moral Law of God, such Prince, to defend his Title against
the right Heir by the Moral Law of God, and his Successors, become assured
Vassals to the Religion and See of Rome. (4.) The Pope by procuring and
dispensing Marriages of Catholic Ladies with Protestant Princes, gains a
numerous increase of Catholics in those Dominions, and many times turns the
whole Tide to carry Tribute to Tyber. But to return to the lesser Rivers, the
Bishops; it is no small stream of gain flows in to them too by such an unjust
Power of Bribing themselves to Injustice, by exercising so Arbitrary a
Proceeding, as to Fine and Commute what they please, and putting it in their
own Purses, which should go to the Public Treasury.

8. They License, Dispense and Pardon all Offenses against the Law, for Money.

It is to no purpose to make Penal Laws, if the Judge has liberty to License,
Dispense and Pardon Offenses against them; and nothing better enables him to do
it, than to allow a Judge to Fine or Commute, and to put the Fine or Commutation
Money in his own Purse; now the Power of Licensing, Dispensing and Pardoning
Offenses against the Laws of Marriage, or any other Law, must of necessity so
corrupt the Judge, as he will protect and increase the Vice he pretends to
suppress. Hence the Popes Taxa Camerae, and the Bishops Courts, increase more
Fornication and Adultery, than a^l the loose Women in the Country. They are
therefore no fit Judges of Marriage.

9. They cannot be known whether they are Protestants or Papists, if Bishops.

The Laws of Marriage have a very great influence on all Religions, and in all
Nations, but more specially God has been pleased in England to make the same
the chief means and occasion in the time of H. 8. of planting the Protestant;
it is therefore of very great concern for the Preservation of the same, that
the Judges of Marriage be Protestants; and it cannot be known whether they are
so or no, if Bishops. (1.) Because the excess of Riches, which the Jurisdiction
of Marriage, Filtation, and Succession, especially to Kingdoms, carries with
it; and all other Profits of a Bishopric joined therewith, are so great, as
may be too much a Temptation to any, unless a Saint by Miracle, to be of any
Religion to obtain them; and Christ himself, Matthew. 19 24. makes this
Temptation so difficult to be resisted, that he says, It is easier for a Camel
to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; yea he makes a Miracle necessary, for any to obtain Riches
and Heaven together; for he says, Verse 26. With men this is impossible, but
with God all things are possible. And Austin, in imitation of this confesses
in effect the same, difficile, imo impossible est praesentibus and futucis
bonis frui. It is difficult, yea impossible, to enjoy the good things of this
World, and of that to come. Damasus Bishop of Rome, ende^vour'd to convert
Praetextatus, a great Heathen Ph^losopher, to Christianity; he answered him,
Make me Bishop of Rome, and I will turn Christian. And there are too many who
say, make me a Bishop and I will be a Protestant. So did the Bishop of Spalato,
in late memory, leave Italy, while Paul the Fifth was Pope, because his
Ambition was not so high preferred as he desired, and fled to England, and
professed himself as Protestant, and Preached against the Pope; but when the
old Pope was dead, and his Kinsman got into the Chair, being not made a Bishop
here, he returned back again to Rome, and turned Catholic again in hope of
great preferment there from his Kinsman: but in stead of the same, they took
him and burnt him for an Apostate. There want not likewise in the present time,
Examples of those who professed themselves Protestants, till not finding there
Ambitious expectations satisfied with Bishoprics and other great places, have
turned Papists, in hope to find the same amongst Them. (2.) If Frame err not,
too many have been promoted to their Bishoprics by the Moyne and
Recommendations of Great Catholics, whose Creatures they were; and how unfit
Judges of Marriage, Filiation, and Succession to Protestant Kingdoms, such
Bishops must be, is left to all true Protestants to consider.

10. They Judge by Fictions, and not by Truth.

Grant a Judge but liberty to judge by Fictions, he will make what Religion, what
Law, what Equity, what Justice he pleases; he will be the only God to be
adored, and Judge to be feared. He will be like the Pope, the only Proprietor of
the World, and justify his Title to the Sale of Heaven, Earth, and Hell. The
Fictions by which Bishops judge Marriage, and the mischiefs which ensue by them,
have been most touched before: As, that Intention of minds, and not conjunction
of Bodies, makes Marriage, P. 83. (2.) That Sponsa before a Priest in a Temple,
is Vxor. ib. and 86. (3.) That Verba de Praesenti, are Facta de Praeterito and
Futuro. P. 84. (4.) That Children begot by Adulterers, were begot by the
Husband, if he was within the Four Seas. P. 72, 73. (5.) That two Persons are
Transubstantiated into one, by the words of the Priest pronouncing them Man and
Wife. P. 66, 67. etc. That a Child is not Sib or Kin, or of Consanguinity, nor
a Child to the Father who begot him, or the Mother who bare him. P. 14, 15.
(6.) There is another Fiction by which they judge, not mentioned before, which
is Benediction of the Priest, for it was an old Superstition nursed in the
People by the old Pagan Priests, That their Wives should be Barren, unless they
were blessed by the Priest. Hence the old Arabians were wont to Swear by God
and the Bellies of their Wives; and Mahomet himself, Alchor. Cap. 4. P. 47.
teaches the same as a most Sacred Oath; and Sterility, the greatest Curse to
be feared. And though Jacob teach, That the blessing of Children ought only to
be asked and expected from God, and not from Man; and certainly it were in
truth the greatest Idolatry to desire or expect that Blessing from the Priest,
and were to make him God, as appears, Benediction of the Priest on Marriage a
Fiction.
Genesis 30.1. And when Rachel saw she bare Jacob no Children, Rachel envied her
Sister, and said unto Jacob, give me Children, or else I die. And Jacob 's
anger was kindled against Rachel, and said, Am I in Gods stead? who has
withheld from thee the fruit of the Womb? But to infuse the like Superstition
into the Hearts of Christians, for the increase of his gain, Soter Pope of
Rome, decreed, No Marriage should be lawful, without the Parties receiving the
Benediction of the Priest. Plat. Func. And by a Decree in France, all Children
born in Marriages, not blessed by a Romish Priest, are made incapable to
succeed to any Goods of Father and Mother. Everard. 24. The multitude of
Pilgrimages to Saints and Idols, that is to say, to the Priests who keep them,
and take the gifts of all they can delude, to ask of them the Benediction of
Children, are known, Mr. Stopford, Paganopap. 111. of this Superstition or
Idolatry mentions a noted Example.

Henry the Third King of France, sent a Princely Gift to the Virgin of Loretto,
viz. a worthy Cup, to obtain Issue Male by her Intercession; a Gift, for
substance and work, most excellent; for the Cup it self is of Hollowed Gem, at
this day called the Azure Stone: It Is also very big, and intermingled with
Golden Veins, the Cover whereof is of turned Crystal set in Gold, and adorned
with many excellent Jewels; in the top of the Cover an Angel of Gold does hold
in his hand a Lilly of Diamonds, the Arms of the Kingdom of France; which Lilly
does consist of three Diamonds joined together in Gold with admirable Art, the
Foot of the Cup being Emerald, is bound about and supported with Gold, and
beautified with Precious Stones and rich Orient Pearls; in the bottom of the
Foot, the Giver, and the Cause of the Gift, is engraven in manner following:

O Queen, who by thy worthy Son
Did joyful Blessing bring
To all the World; Bless with a Son
The Kingdom and the King.
Henry III. King of France and Polonia,
in the Year of our Salvation, MDLXXXIV.
Certificate of a Bishop false.
St. Germyn, lib. 2.69. raises a Question, Whether if the true Heir is certified
by the Bishop a Bastard, as Ten to One if there happen a Contest between two
Heirs, but he is; whether he that is of Council with the Adverse Party, may,
with good Conscience advise his Client to make Use of this false Certificate of
the Bishop, in which, without any Conscience (which he so much pretends) he
says he may; for these Reasons, First, because it is a Maxim in the Law, That
a private mischief shall be suffered before a public Inconvenience; and the
public inconvenience would be, that if the Certificate of the Bishop should
not be final, then in this Case if another Writ should be after sent to another
Bishop in another Action, to certify whether he were a Bastard or not,
peradventure that Bishop would certify that he were a Mulier; that is to say,
lawfully begot; and then he should recover as Heir, and so he should in one
self-Court be taken for Mulier and Bastard; for avoiding which contrariety, the
Law will suffer no more Writs to go forth in that Case, and suffers all men to
take advantage of the Certificate, rather than suffer such a Contradiction,
which in Law is called an Inconvenience. The Second Reason he gives, is,
because the Certificate of the Bishop is the higest kind of Trial that is in
the Law in this behalf.

But with due respect to so grave an Author, whose failings are rather to be
imputed to the time of Popery wherein he was born, and writ, than to his
Person. In answer to his Reasons alleged, I say, first, to the Maxim, That
it is better to suffer a private mischief, than a public Inconvenience, or,
which is much like it, is better one man perish than the whole People, is to be
intended only where the Case is reduced to that necessity, that either one or
other must be; but in this there is no necessity Trial should be by Certificate
of a Bishop at all; and though uno absurdo dato mill sequuntur, were there a
Thousand inconveniences followed, if the Certificate of a Bishop should be
questioned for falsity, it being first granted, it belongs to him to make
Certificates; yet there is no necessity that absurdity should be first granted,
that it should belong to him to make Certificates. for there are ways enough
(wherein no Inconveniences follow) of Trial of Truth, without Certificates of
Bishops. (2.) The supposition is repugnant and impossible, that any Case should
happen or be shown in the World, wherein Fiction or Falsity ought to be
suffered in Judicial proceeding; or where Probation ought not by the Law of God
to be admitted against such Fiction and Falsity, (notwithstanding the corrupt
practice of Courts to the contrary) and such suffering of a private mischief of
that kind to a private Person, is so far from preventing a public
Inconvenience, that it will bring both a private and public mischief, and
destroy both; for it is as impossible to separate Truth from Justice, as the
Light from the Sun. (3.) That which is alleged for an inconvenience to the
public, That one Bishop would make a Certificate contrary to another, this is
no more public inconvenience, than if Thieves should fall out, and true men
come by their Goods. (4.) As to what is said, That the Certificate of the
Bishop is in this Case the highest Trial in the Law, we must distinguish the
Law; for it was then the Law of Popery was Predominant, which gave Supremacy in
Causes of Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, to the Bishops above Kings, and
to the Sentences in Bishops Courts, and made them above Appeal to the Kings
Courts, and the Foundation of that their Supremacy was, That then by that Law
Marriage was a Sacrament, and Penance was a Sacrament; but the Law being now
changed from Popish to Protestant, and the Supremacy being now given by the
Protestant Law to the King, above the Bishop, as well in Causes Matrimonial, as
in all other Ecclesiastical Causes, and the Protestant Religion, taking away
the two Popish Sacraments of Marriage and Penance, which were the only Roots
whence the Episcopal Jurisdiction of Marriage, and the incidents to the same
pretended to sprout, Cessante Causa, and ratione legis cessat and Lex, the
pretended Causes of the Jurisdiction ceasing, the Jurisdiction it self ceases,
whereby now the Certificate of the Bishop is so far from being the highest
Trial, that it ought to be no Trial at all; for the Sacraments ceasing, the
Jurisdiction cease; and the Jurisdiction ceasing, the Power of Trial ought
likewise to cease. (5.) For Council to advise his Client to maintain a false
Certificate of the Bishops, knowing it to be false, is as wicked, as for the
Bishop to make a false Certificate, knowing it to be false; or which is
impossible for him to know to be true, as all relating to Filiation are, it
being their own Rule, Filiatio non potest probari, except by the Parents;
wherefore, ex Ore Suo, they condemn themselves of false Judgment, and are not
therefore fit to be Judges.

11. They Judge by Ceremonies, and not by Circumstances.

As to the word, Ceremonia, some will have it derived a Cerere, because they
used diverse Formalities in the Worship of the Goddess Ceres: But this is not
proper, seeing all the Heathen Gods and Goddesses had as many Formalities in
their Worship as she; others derive it from Cerete, a Latin Town, whither (as
says Valerius Maximus) the Flamen Quirinalis and the Vestal Virgins fled with
their Trinkets, while the Gauls besieged Rome, others derive it a Cereis, from
Torches and Tapers lighted made of Wax, which amongst the old Pagans was a
great Ceremony used in the Temples of their Gods, and at their Marriages; but
this is likewise improper and only figurative, to take species famosior pro
toto genere, and not natural; so it appears, the Etymology of it is either
unknown, or it is it self an Original, not derived from any.

Rites, which is a word usually joined with Ceremonies, and much of the same
Signification, some will have derived a Ritualibus; now the Rituales were old
Magical and Superstitious Books of the Hetruscan Priests, by help of which,
they either conjured their Gods, or made the People believe so; and they had
all the Formalities written in them which were to be used at making Marriages,
at laying the Foundations of a City, and how Altars, Temples, and Houses were
to be Consecrated, and how their Courts of Justice, and Counties, and Hundreds,
were to be divided; for in all these the old Pagans used to Consult their
Augurs, Aruspices, Bishops and Priests, and were like our Books of
Ecclesiastical Canons: But it seems rather these ritual Books had their names
derived from the Rites, whereof they were made a written Collection, and not
the Rites from the Rituals; and so Rites, as well as Ceremonies, may be words
which none knows whence they came, or whether they will.

But to come from the Etymology of the word Ceremony, to the thing usually
signified by it, and the difference between a Ceremony and a Circumstance; it
seems, A Ceremony is an Act accessory joined to a Principal, not affecting the
Principal Act with Good or Evil by the Law of God.

A Circumstance, is an Act accessory joined with a Principal, affecting the
same Principal Act with Good or Evil by the Law of God.

Ceremonies are infinite, but Circumstances are usually drawn to Seven Heads.

(1.) The Cause of doing the Act; which is divided into four kinds, The
Efficient, Final, Material, Formal; and these again subdivided into others.
(2.) The Person by, or with whom the Act was done. (3.) The Place where it was
done. (4.) The Time when it was done. (5.) The Quantity continued, or discrete.
(6.) The Quality, which is manifold. (7.) The Seventh and last Circumstance, is
the Event of the Act; the Civilians expound very improperly, and instance,
whether the Act is done by Fear, Force, Error, Deceit, Fault, Chance, or the
like; for how can these which are precedent Causes of the Act, and therefore
ought to be referred to the Cirstumstance of the Causes, be said to be the Event
of an Act, which is always subsequent, and not precedent to the Principal Act,
and in that sense is always used by the best Latinists, as Cicero in Rhetor.
Things are often judged from the Event; than which there is nothing more
unjust: and the Poets agree in the same.
-- Careat Successibus opto,
Quisquis ab Eventu facta notanda putat.
Eventus Belli incertus, wherein it is used for the Fortune and Success
following the Battle, and not the Fortune or Chance which began or occasioned
it. So the Common Law in punishing the Event, as the death of any Man within a
Day or Year after his being wounded or beaten, punishes only the Event of an
unlawful Act of wounding or beating, not of lawful; which Event is subsequent,
and not preceding to the Act. So likewise the Scripture uses the word Event,
for what follows, and not for what precedes, as Eccles. 2.14. One Event
happens to them all. And Eccles. 9.2. There is one Event to the Righteous and
to the Wicked. And Verse 11. Ireturned and saw under the Sun, that the Race is
not to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, neither yet Bread to the Wise,
nor Riches to men of Understanding, nor yet Favor to men of Skill; but Time
and Chance happens to them all. Man purposes, but God disposes. Events are
only in the Power of God.

Ceremonies and Circumstances in this agree.
(1.) That they are both accessory, and not the Principal Acts.

(2.) That when single, they may be neither good nor evil; but when joined with
another Act, they may become either good or evil.

(3.) They may be in some junctures each the Principal, and in other, the
accessory Act.

(4.) In some junctures each may be good, in other evil, and in a third neither
good nor evil; that is, neither be Ceremonies, nor Circumstances.

(5.) In this Ceremonies and Circumstances agree, that they have been used and
abused in all Affairs and Acts, both Civil, Military, and Religious; but I
shall here only insist on such Ceremonies as have been abused and compelled by
Pagan and Episcopal Canons in relation to Marriage.

Ceremonies and Circumstances in this differ.
(1.) Ceremonies and Circumstances differ, That Marriage and other Acts, are
impossible to be done without Circumstances, but the same is possible to be
done without Ceremonies.

(2.) Ceremonies are always Acts external, and made the objects of the external
Senses of Witnesses, and are of no Use in Marriage (but the gains of the
Priest) where Witnesses are unlawful, as in Carnal knowledge; or impossible, as
in Filiation, as is already proved, P. 104, 105. But Circumstances of Marriage
may be both external, or internal and invisible. External, as Youth, Age,
Sexes, Health, Sickness, Plurality, Unity. Internal and Invisible, as Religion,
Conscience, Virtue, Vice, Love, Hatred, and the like. Ceremonies make Acts
gaudy, which they call decent, or deformed before men; but Circumstances only
make them so before God.

(3.) All Ceremonials are Artificial, and not Natural; but Circumstances may be
both Artificial and Natural.

(4.) No Ceremonies in Marriage, are Commanded or Prohibited in the Moral Law
of God; but many Circumstances are Commanded, and many Prohibited in the same
Moral Law.

(5.) God is the Author of all Natural and Moral Circumstances, which make
Marriage lawful or unlawful; but the Devil is the Author of Ceremonies where is
no Miracle or sign of Mission from God. And it has been before shown, the
compulsion to Ceremonies of Marriage came from Demons and Priests of Priapus
and Venus; and such as judge Marriage by such Ceremonies come not from God.

(6.) Ceremony, is a matter of Formality in Judgment, but Circumstance, if any,
is the matter of Substance. To conclude, it is a thing so absurd to judge by
Ceremonies above Circumstances, and by Formalities above Substance, that never
any Lawyer was so shameless to maintain in writing, or lay any such Principle
in judicial Proce^dings to be equal, though by the Corruption of Practice, not
only in Marriage, but in all things else. The Truth and Substance of Religion
and Justice has been utterly lost and destroyed in an heap of Ceremonies and
Formalities, invented only for the gains of such Judges as would for that end
with such Empty-nothings pretend to w^igh Right and Wrong. For the Law of man
can not make any Ceremony or other matter to be Substance, which the Law of God
and Nature has made an Accident; or make that Moral, which God has made to be
only Ceremonial; or make that Act Good or Evil in it self, or to affect another
Act with Good or Evil; for to make Moral Good or Evil, or a Law for it, belongs
only to Supreme Power. Isa. 45 7. I form the Light, and create Darkness; I make
Peace, and create Evil. Otherwise he were not Legislator of the World.

Of the manifold Mischiefs which ensue by Compulsion to Marry by the particular
Ceremonies of a Priest or a Temple.
It is not here affirmed, That it is unlawful to Marry by a Priest, or in a
Temple; but it is only affirmed, That it is unlawful to compel any so to do, by
Penalties; and especially by so unjust Penalties, as is done by the Popish and
Epls^opal Canons of making Marriages Null, or illegitimating the Children; and
that it is unlawful for Bishops to judge Marriages Null, or make Certificates of
Ne unques accouple in Loyal Matrimony concerning the Parents, or of
illegitimation of the Child, for no other cause than the omission or defect of
so frivolous a Ceremony as a Priest or a Temple; and that such affirmance is
not without cause, may appear from the manifold mischiefs which follow
Compulsion of the same.

(1.) It compels to enter into an indissoluble Obligation, before, the Parties
can know each other, whether they are fit for Marriage or no.
Mischiefs of Verbal Espousals, before Real Knowledge.
Proh Deum a^que hominum fidem! quae haec contumelia est? uxorem decrevit sese
dar^ mihi hodie; nonne opor^et prascisse me ante? nonne Communicatam oportui^
Ter. And. 1. Act. Scen. 5. Oh the Faith of Gods and Men! what a scorn is this?
He has Decreed to put a Wife upon me to Day; should I not first know her?
should I not first talk with her? This Custom of Verbal Precontracts, was in
ancient time much used amongst the Jews, and Marriage delayed a long time
after, as Jacob's was with Rachel, for Seven Years. But the later Rabbles
finding many great inconveniences in the same, injoined, if it were at all, the
same should be a very little while before the Marriage. In like manner the
Armenians who are of the Greek Church, Contract and Espouse together their
Children at two or three Years old, yea often times the Mothers agree a
Marriage between their Children, if one happen to be a Male, and the other a
Female, while they are in their Bellies. Tavernier.

Woman deluded.
This Custom of Precontracts and Espousals, is likewise used, though not between
Children so young, as with the Armenians, by the Canon Law, and most wickedly
allowed to be a sufficient Cause of Nulling a Marriage Consummate by Carnal
knowledge and Birth of a Child, and illegitimation of the same Child of an
innocent Person altogether ignorant of such Precontracts. Vid. plus of
Precontract before, P. 88, 94, 95, etc.

1. The inconveniences of Precontracts and Espousals is, that when Contracted,
the one, especially the Man, delays and deludes the other so long, that one
chief end of Marriage, which is prevention of Fornication, is defeated, and
many times Women are kept along with Promises all their life time, and the Man
in secret finds other Company, and never takes himself the Woman Contracted at
the last, nor will suffer others to take her by pretenses of Precontracts, and
if he release them at last, others will often refrain those so blown on,
supposing them repudiated for some secret fault.

Impotent diseased Persons Contracted.
2. By Precontracts published by the Priest in facie Ecclesiae, which they call
Marriage, before the real and true Marriage, which is Carnal knowledge, Parties
are joined together who are impotent, diseased, unpleasant, or otherwise
incapable of answering the great ends of Marriage, of Procreation of Children,
and prevention of Fornication; and then by the Canon Law they are bound to Fast
and Pray Three Years together, before by the Spiritual Court they can be
untouched again; with such obscene or at least disgraceful Trials and
Publications, as the Repudiations of either, is a Dishonor to both; yea many
Examples there have been of modest and virtuous Ladies, who expecting to be
Mothers by Marriage, have continued Virgins, to their great inward grief all
their Husbands life time, rather than they would make any outward complaint as
long as they lived; then, though no impotence or unfitness in Body, yet in Mind
and Affection, which is as bad, the Man is Frigidus, and he Woman is Calida, as
appears in the forementioned Example, especially of H. 8. and the Lady Ann of
Cleve.

A young Woman in man's apparel Married to an old, Robs her.
3. In Contracts before Carnal knowledge, Parties cannot know of what Sex each
other is, or whether they are both Men or both Women. Concerning which, I have
been credibly informed, That a certain old Woman being left very Rich in Money
by her Husband which was dead, a young lusty Wench plotting how to get her
Money from her, apparel'd her self like a Man and wooed the old Chrone, and
easily got her good Will to Marry her, and the Marriage was solemnly Celebrated
by the Priest in the Temple, and the Female young Husband brought to Bed to the
old Wife, and so ordered the business, that she stole her Bags of Money from
her, and was therefore Criminally pursued and Executed.

Woman with-Child Contracted, unknown.
4. The Husband often times finds the Woman with-Child beforehand, when it is
insipientis dicere non Putaram, too late to repent of his Match, and the Priest
has fettered them together for better for worse, and no Probation to be
admitted to the contrary that it is not his Child; of which there are too many
Examples not fit to be publicly related. Whereas if no Verbal Contract or
Espousal Private in the House, or Public in the Church, were allowed to be
obligatory before the real Contract of Carnal knowledge Consummate privately
between the Parties, no Woman could hope to impose such a Deceit, or would dare
to expose her self to such a Dishonorable Repudiation at the Will of the Man.
The ancient and true Form of Espousal was only on the Man's part to the Woman,
Se post concubitum invitam non deserturum; and the Duth-man is still so wary,
that he gives not his Woman her Morgengabica, which is a kind of Dower, or
Munus Nuptiale, until the next morning when he has had the first Nights trial
of her, which from the Dutch Word, Morgengab, is called the Morning Gift. Skene
de verb. Sig. tit Dos. It is likewise known, that the Jew, if he found not his
Woman a Virgin, might Divorce her. So may the Turk, the Persian, the Tartar,
the Ethiopian, and all Nations not blinded with Popery, do openly, or put her
away secretly, as Joseph did.

Notice of the Wedding day prostitutes the Bride.
5. In Precontracts when the same are known, and the Wedding Day agreed and
appointed, then the Woman gives away on a sudden to another what she should
have reserved a Week longer for her Husband. There were certain Oxford
Scholars, (who might have been better employed in their Studies) got some
Market-Maids to the Tavern, where having made them merry with Wine, they taught
them what belonged to Venus, as well as Bacchus; and one of the Scholars was so
good natured, as to tell his Mistiess he had singled, after he had performed
his Service to her, That if she proved to be with-Child, and would send him
notice, he would take care to provide for it. Oh, Sir, said she, never trouble
your self for that, for I am appointed to be Married within these three days.

Makes Marriage, when made, Mercenary.
6. This makes Marriage often times turn from Conjugal Love to be only a
Smith-field Bargain, for a Woman to buy a Stallion, or a Man to hire a Whore.
There was a certain Rich Widow who Married a Young Man, having first, to secure
her Money, bound him in great Bonds to her Trustees, not to meddle with any
thing of hers without their Assent In writing under their hands: The Marriage
being solemnized, and both a deductio in Templum, and in Thalamum performed,
she found notwithstanding her Bedfellow to lie more quietly than she would
have had him, for diverse Nights together; till at last being deceived in her
expectation, she began to chide him for his sleepiness. To whom he replied, Do
you think I will undo my self, and forfeit my Bonds with meddling with what is
yours, without Assent of your Trustees in writing under their hands? Whereupon
the Widow arose, and fetching the Bonds to him, they were forthwith Canceled
and cast into Fire. The like is more often done by the Woman, who, like another
Lais, will not sell her self but at an high Rate and dearer to her Husband, by
how much the better he loves her; and when she has him under an indissoluble
Obligation, then any else will give for her. Which was the Reason that both
Civil and Canon Law made Donationes inter virum and uxorem void, ne nimio amore
spolientur, I st they should rob one another with too much fondness; and void
they ought still to be, and would be, were not the deceitful ways of Trustees
too much tolerated in frandem legis, to set up again the old Mercenary Trade of
hiring Whores under the name of Marriage.

7. These Inconveniences produced the shameless Sect of Adamites, Adamites.
and the almost as bad remedy proposed by Sir Thomas More in his Vtopia; and
what is mentioned by Sir Francis Bacon in his new Atlantis of Adam and Eves
Pool, where he would have those who inted to Marry, Adam and Eves Pool.
first to have a naked interview. And that of Sforza, Sforza is refused to have
a Lady seen naked before Marriage.
who when he would have Espoused Dorothy the Daughter of Lodowick Duke of
Mantua, to his Son, he demanded that certain Physicians, whom he should
appoint, might first see his Daughter naked; which Duke Lodowick refused, as
appears, Tiracq. lib. 4. de Connub. Contr. Philip. dec. and Francis Aret.
Consil. 142. who held, That the demand of Sforza was just, and the denial of
Lodowick, injurious: a fit opinion for Aretine, but for no modest Lawyer or
Physician. Surely God never commanded these Precontracts, nor these Adamite
Interviews; Marriage to be private and unknown, except to the Parties
themselves. Con-Thalamation before Con-Templation.
for after Adam and Eve were Married, as soon as they understood themselves
they got Fig Leaves to cover their Nakedness, and Nox and amor, Night-shades
and secret places by Nature joined them, rather than the sight of the Sun. It
is more warrantable therefore as to Precontracts, to follow God, who never
commanded them, but Popes and Priests who keep them up for their filthy Lucre,
and far more modest is it to make Marriage-Contracts in Thalamo, than in
Templo. Conscius omnis abest, nutu signisque Loquuntur. and the same Poet gives
as good further Council to either, Si piget in primo limine, siste pedem. the
Woman may rise up illaesa Virginitate; and illaeso pudore; and as Boaz bid
Ruth, Cap. 3.14. Let it not be known that a Woman came into the floor. But Si
in hoc Convenimus ambo; and they agree so well, that Conception follows, and a
Child is born, were there neither Priest nor Temple within an Hundred Miles,
yet it appears God was there who gave Birth to the Child; therefore as they
will answer it before him, this Marriage is indissoluble by Pope or Caesar, or
any humane Power. I conclude therefore, Marriage ought by the Law of God to be
Private and not Public, and Conthalamation ought to be before Contemplation,
if the Parties have any Contemplation at all.

(2.) It gives the Bishop the Monopoly of all Women, and their Goods.
For he claiming to be Judge of Marriage and Divorce above Appeal, the greatest
part of the Year and fittest for Marriage, they cannot Marry without his
License, for which they must pay Money: and when Married, they lie at his Mercy
whether he will part them again or no; for what he does, there is thence no
Appeal; if he do admit them to live together and death part them, yet no
Jointure, no Divorce, no Thirds, no Aliment, unless he will vouchsafe his
Certificate, for which they must pay Money; and this they get if they obey his
Canons, and are Married by a Ceremony of a Priest in a Temple; if they come not
to yoke themselves by his Ceremonies, then he calls them Whores, and exacts
from them Money by Penance, seeing they would give none for Fees, and sets what
Rates and Taxes by Fees or Penance as he pleases; so by his Power of
Compulsion to this Ceremony, he Levieth his Rents on Obedients and
Disobedients, and sheers both his Sheep and his Goats by having the Power of
Compulsion of them to this Fold of his Temple; and without it, the same could
not be done.

(3.) It gives him the Monopoly of Successions both in Private Families and
Kingdoms.
For he claiming to be Judge of Children as well as Parents, above Appeal, they
all lie at the mercy of his Judgment, no Right of Primogeniture, no Filial
Portion, no Rationali part, no Hotch-pot, no Collatio bonorum, no Aliment can
be had although they starve, unless he vouchsafe his Certificate of what he
knows no more than the man in the Moon: Yet could he not exercise this Power
over the Children, had he not Power to compel the Parents to this Ceremony of
their Marriages of a Priest in a Temple.

(4.) It gives him Power to Judge of Marriage, Filiation, and Successions, by
Fictions.
How great and how wicked the Power of Judging by Fictions is, has been before
mentioned; and the Primary Fictions enumerated, (1.) That intention of mind,
and not Conjunctions of Bodies, makes Marriage, P. 83. (2.) That Sponsa before
a Priest in a Temple, is Vxor, ib. and 86. (3.) That Verba de praesenti, are
Facta de Praeterito and Futuro, P. 84.

The Secondary Fictions and damnable Mischiefs which ensue out of these
Primary; for as uno absurdo dato mill sequuntur; So uno Falso dato mill
sequuntur, have been likewise before mentioned and shown at large. (1.) That if
a Man deflower a Virgin with whom he may lawfully Marry and get her with Child,
or has many Children by her, that he may notwithstanding desert her and Marry
another by a Priest in a Temple, deflower'd or begot with Child by another Man;
and the latter, and not the first, is his Wife and Child. P. 88, 89. (2.) That
a Child is not Sib or Kin, or of Consanguinity, or the Child of the Father who
begot, or the Mother who bare him, or they of him, P. 154, 155. (3.) That by
the pronunciation of the words by the Priest, that the Man and Woman are Man
and Wife, the Man is transubstantiated into the Woman, and the Woman into the
Man, and two Persons into one Person; and the multitude of mischiefs incident
to this Fiction of Transubstantiation are shown at large before. P. 66, 67,
etc. But it is Compulsion to the Ceremony of Marriage by a Priest, and in a
Temple, is the Causa sine qua non; neither the said Primary or Secundary
Fictions could be made, nor could any of those manifold mischiefs before
mentioned, ensue from them; and if dissentients in Conscience, and differents
in Convenience, had but that liberty permitted, which by the Moral and
immutable Law of God they ought to have, to Marry without the Ceremony of a
Priest in a Temple, the Bishop could not inslave themselves and their
Posterity, their Religion, Liberty, and Propriety, to his worse than Arbitrary
Judgment, to a False Judgment, a Lying Judgment, a Judgment by Fictions, had he
not the Power to compel them to this Ceremony of a Priest and a Temple. So that
were there nothing else to be said against this Compulsion, but that it causes
so great a mischief as Judgments by Fictions, it were enough to make it abhorred
by God and all good men: For grant but one Fiction in Religion, it will Spawn a
Thousand Heresies; and grant but one Fiction in Judicial Proceeding, it will
Spawn a Thousand Oppressions; and let the old Serpent but get in his Head, he
will draw in his whole Body; a Vero non declinabit Justus, Justice comes from
the God of Truth, and not from the Devil who is the Father of Lies.

(5.) It causes in the Rich Excess, and Vanity of Apparel, Tilting,
Turneaments, Masking, Gluttony, Riot, and Drunkenness.
When there is a Marriage intended by a Priest in a Temple, the Bride is dressed
like a Bartholomew-Baby, or one of the Popish Saints, to be the Idol of the
Place, then no Text shall be Preached on, but her Clothing is of wrought Gold;
though far better Doctrine and more proper for such an occasion does offer it
self. Isa. 3.16. And 1 Pet. 3.3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward
adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of
Apparel. The Turk in his Frugality may rise in Judgment against Christians; for
one Christians Wife costs him more than Ten Wives of a Turk; which kind of
Luxury first corrupts the mind, Nil non permittit mulier sibi, turpe putat nil
Cum virides gemmas collo circumdedit, and cum
Auribus extensis magnos suspendit elenchos.
and corrupts and effeminates the State, by exhausting the Treasury in
Faeminine, which is necessary to be bestowed in Military Ornaments and
maintenance. Seneca says, That Women would wear too rich Inheritances at their
Ears. And it is related of the Daughter of a Proconsul, That she wore at one
time in Apparel and Jewels the value of Three Millions of Crowns. This Vanity
is by many attributed to be one of the chief causes of the decay and ruin of
the Roman Empire. I should but trespass on the Readers patience to recite the
excessive Costs particularly, and the profuseness of Princes and great Persons,
in Masking, Tilting, Tuneaments at public Weddings, in one whereof a French
King Tilting in Person was killed by the casual running of a Splinter of the
staff of the Lance into his Eye; as likewise to describe the Gluttony, Riot and
Drunkenness accompanying Marriage-Feasts, they being all notorious.

(6.) It undoeth the Poor in their Marriages.
The chief times of the Year seasonable for Marriage of Advent, Septuagesima,
and Rogation, it deprives the Poor of the use of Gods Ordinance; for they are
neither able to lose their days labor to travel to the Court, nor to expend
the Money necessary to pay for a License to Marry; and when Married publicly
by a Priest in a Temple, the expense of new Cloths for Man and Woman, the
Wedding Dinner, the Barrel of Beer, the Bridale-Night, the Baptizing of the
Child, the Godfathers and Godmothers, the Gossips, and Churching the Woman
Falling all within the compass of the Year, most commonly bring the Poor man so
far in Debt, that he never recovers out of it as long as he lives.

I was informed of a certain Poor Man, who intending to be Married, agreed the
day with the Minister and Clerk, and accordingly on a Prayer day, he and the
Woman came to the Church intending to be Married, and came up to the appointed
place in the Body of the Church, where the Minister reading first the Form
prescribed of the Institution and Ends of Marriage, before he joined their
hands to Contract them, the man to be Married laid his Money on the Ministers
Book, that he might proceed to Marry him; which the Minister refused to do,
unless he would give him more Money than there was; the man answered There was
all he had, and prayed him to accept thereof; the Minister peremptorily refused
(unless he made up the Price) to Marry him; the Poor man seeing no remedy, took
up his Money again, and he and his Woman returned to his House without any
joining or Benediction of the Priest; and whether he had a Malediction I cannot
tell, but at Night the Couple that were thus Churched and not Married the
Ceremonial way, went to Bed and Married themselves the Real way; which though
contrary to Episcop^l Canons, yet no Bishops can show to be contrary to the
Moral Law of God; but every one can show that Laws of compulsion of a Poor man
to marry by the Ceremony of a Priest, and giving liberty to the Priest to
refuse to Marry him, unless he pay him more than he has, are contrary to the
Moral Law of God; for this is prohibiting to Marry, and a depriving of the Poor
of the Use of Gods Ordinance, which is already proved to be the Doctrine of
Devils.

(7.) It causes immadesty in Brides, wanton Songs and Ceremonies, premiscuary
Dancing, and corruption of Youth.
How modest Nature is in the State of Innocence, appears well in the expression
of a Virtuous young Lady, a Virgin, who said, She wondered how any Woman could
have the face to go openly to Church with a Man; and the Custom of most Nations
not to suffer any Woman to appear in Public without a Veil, manifests the
same: Yea, Mahomet himself forbids Women to expose themselves to public view,
for thus, Alch. Cap. 33. P. 262. he represents God speaking to him; Oh Prophet,
speak to thy Wives and thy Daughters, and the Wives of True Believers, that
they cover themselves with Veils. And Cap. 24. Speak unto the true believing
Women, that they retain their Sight, and that they be Chaste, that they suffer
nothing of their Beau^y to be seen but what ought to be seen; and that they
cover their Bosom and their Visage, that they permit them not to be seen but
by their Husbands, their Children, the Children of their Husbands, their
Brothers, their Nephews, their Sisters, their Women, their Daughters,
Maidservants, and Slaves, their Domestics that are not capable of Marriage,
and Children that regard not the Beauty of Women. And this public exposing of
Virgins in their Marriages to be the Gazing-stocks of the multitude in a
Congregation, seems likewise against the precept in Scripture, 1 Cor. 11.10.
For this cause ought a Woman to have Power on her Head, because of the Angels;
which is interpreted, covering on her head; and is likewise prohibited by
Christ, Matthew. 5.28. Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, has
committed Adultery with her already in his Heart. If it be therefore Adultery
to look on a Woman to lust after her, then is it a Temptation to Adultery to
expose her who is to be another man's Wife to the public view of the whole
Congregation in all the dress of Temptation whereof Beauty can be capable.

Qui videt is peccat, qui non te viderit ergo
Non cupiet, Facti crimina lumen habet.
Propert. lib. 3. Eleg. Who sees thee Sins; who not, does neither hate
Nor love thee. Light has all the Crimes of Fate.
Why it is not more modest therefore for Virgins to Marry in Thalamo, than in
Templo; appears not.

I shall recite not here the particular wanton Songs and Ceremonies which are
used with us and in other Nations, by reason of this pompous Ceremony of
leading the Bride to the Priest and Temple amongst a Rout of Boys, for whom
between her Banning and her Churching it is asufficient sport a Week after;
lest the same should cause, what I endeavor to avoid, the Corruption of Youth;
and shall only here mention the grave Admonition of a Poet concerning the same.

Nil dictu foedum visuque haec limina tangat,
Intra quae Puer est, procul hine procul inde Puellae.
Lenonum and Cantus pernoctantis Parasiti,
Maxima debetur puero reverentia siquid
Turpe paras, nec tu pueri contempseris Annos.
Juvenal. (8.) It exposes to public view, what God has commanded to be
secret; and ridiculously appoints ocular Witnesses of what is invisible, and
neither lawful nor pussible to be seen.
Of this, Vid. P. 101, 104. before.

(9.) It causes Community of Women, Community of Children, Fornication,
Adultery, Stews, Brothels, and the dissemination of most contagious and deadly
Diseases amongst the People.
As to Community of Women, it is manifest, that the Canon of the Council of
Trent, which nulls all Marriages except before a Priest in a Temple, and the
Certificates of Bishops and Penance, gives a general License for Money, either
the Taxa Camerae of the Pope, or the Commutation Money of the Bishops, to have
all Women common: for by decreeing no Marriages shall be of Validity, except
with a Woman brought before a Priest and a Temple, they null and dissolve all
Marriages made by the Moral Law of God, and the Obligations of them; whereby if
any man lie with an Hundred Women, and get them with Child, if he has been so
cunning as not to lead any of them to a Priest in a Temple, there is no
obligation on him to own any of these for Wife or Child, in regard the Moral
Law of God is abolished by the Papal and Episcopal Canons, and made of no
effect by their Traditions and wicked Customs; and the Party is left free to
lie with as many more, and to have common amongst them Sans nombre, if he will
but give them Money for their Hire, and the Bishop Commutation Money; and what
is this but to have Women common to the Rich, and to exclude the Poor who have
not Money, from having any? But this would be prevented, if the Bishops would,
as they ought to do, compel the man who gets a Virgin with-Child, to marry her
according to the Moral Law of God, and the express Precept of Scripture, Exodus
22.16. If a man entice a Maid who is not betrothed, he shall surely endow her
to be his Wife. Which enticement is as well intended by Money, as Wantonness,
and the Law the same, as well in case of Force or Rape, as enticement, but more
Penal. Deuteronomy. 22.28. If a man find a Damsel that is a Virgin which is not
betrothed, and lay hold on her and lie with her, and they be found, then the
man that lay with her shall give the Virgins Father Fifty Sheckels of Silver,
and she shall be his Wife, because he has humbled her, he may not put her away
all his days. This is the clear Moral Law of God, and the clear Texts of
Scripture, and there is by them laid an indissoluble obligation on the man
according to the old Form of Espousal, Se post Concubitum invitam non
deserturum; and if there is a Child born, by reason of the further Obligation
of Parents laid on them by the manifest Act of God, it is not in the Power of
these Virgins who are now become Mothers, will they, nill they, nor of any
human Power, to dissolve that which the Divine Power by giving birth to a Child
has once established. But Popes and Bishops are so far from compelling these
deflowrers of Virgins, to Marry then and these begetters of Children to
acknowledge them according to this most clear and just Law of God, and according
to the Obligations both Ex Contractu Reali, which are the lying with them and
getting them with-Child, and Ex Malesicio Reali, which are the same, that they
like the Giants who would storm Heaven, (Oh Hellish presumption!) Level all the
Canons they have, against the Divine Laws of God himself, and with them tear in
pieces all Obligations laid by them of Husbands to Wives, and Fathers to
Children, that Women may be in common, and Children in common, Nullius Filii
Populi Filii; confounding Heaven and Earth, and all Divine and Human Rights,
and subverting the course of Nature as far as they are able, to obtain to
themselves the inexhaustible Treasure and invincible Power over Princes and
People, over Emperors and Kings, incident to the Jurisdiction of Marriage,
Filiation, and Succession.

But how easily are these Giants quelled, and all the mischiefs ensue, by their
letting the World loose to Community of Women, and Community of Children. (1.)
It Is but to give liberty to those who Marry, to Marry according to the Moral
Law of God, and to free them from compulsion to the Ceremonial Law of a Priest
in a Temple. (2.) It Is but to give Power to the Temporal Judges and Magistrates
to compel such as have had Children by Virgins, and desert them, to acknowledge
those Virgins, according to the clear Texts of Scripture, to be their Wives,
and not to leave them and their Children in common; which ought to be their
enclosed Propriety.

Whence would ensue, that if any man saw, that whatsoever Virgin he did first
touch, he should be compelled to take, he would follow the Poets Counsel. --
Multis e millibus unam
Elige, cui dicas tu mihi sola places.
Ovid. He would certainly choose, unless corrupted by Money, one whom he liked
above all others; and having so fair a Garden enclosed of his own choice, he
would be the more unlikely to run to graze in a Common; or if be should, he
might find his expectation much deceived: for the same Justice having been done
by the Magistrate on all others as well as himself, he would find no Common to
run in, but every Quillet enclosed; nor should a single Woman be let, would she
take him where another had Right, to claim him. As to Fornication, Adultery,
Stews, Brothels, how great a cause the compulsion of Public Appearance in
Marriage before a Priest in a Temple by prohibition of Private Marriage, is,
the same is shown already before, P. 107, and as to the dissemination, by
Fornication, Adultery, Stews and Brothels, not only of that miserabile
scortorum flagellum, the Lues Venerea, the inseparable concomitant of those
Vices and Places, but likewise of all other Epidemical contagious and deadly
Diseases amongst the People, the same is notorious, but Episcopal Courts get as
much by the Dead as the Living, and more by the Vicious than Virtuous. It is
their Interest therefore to continue it so long as they can.

It will be objected against the giving Power to Temporal Magistrates, to
compel every Man who has a Child or Children by a Virgin, to acknowledge her
for his Wife, and her Children his, on Probation made of the Fact, that it is
impossible if Marriages are tolerated without a Priest in a Temple, or a
Justice of Peace in his Hall or Banns, at the Church or Market-Cross, to have
Witnesses or any other Testimony or Evidence of the Fact, unless the Magistrate
should give Sentence, as the Bishop does, without Probation.

To which is answered, First, That Toleration of Private Marriage without
Public Witness of Priest or Magistrate, is no denial of liberty to those who
desire Public Witness of their Contracts of Marriage; no more than the
Toleration of passing Lands by Livery and Seisin in Pays, is a denial to pass
them by Fines and Recoveries, or other matter of Record, which is public
Testimony; but Parties may use one or the other, or both, as they desire and
think suits best with their Conveniences; but that which is here pressed, is,
that no Man's Christian Liberty be infringed, nor he be compelled to make
public Witnesses either of Priest or Magistrate, but be left free, where God
has not prohibited him, to do as best suits with his own Conscience and
Convenience, without unjust Penalties laid on himself, his Wife or his
Children, for omission of a Ceremony never instituted by God, but full of great
danger and mischief to many, though not to all, whose Consciences and
Conveniences are not alike, but of different States, as is already before
shown, P. 108. especially between Poor and Rich; for the Poor need neither
Writing nor Witnesses for Portions or Jointures, as perhaps the Rich think
themselves to need.

Secondly, Parties that desire Witnesses, may, no question, have better
Witnesses at their own Home in Private, and with less inconvenience, as well
for Contract of Marriage, as they have for all other Civil Contracts; than a
Priest in a Temple, or Justice of Peace in his Hall, or Bishop in his
Cathedral, or any other Public Officer whatsoever; and one of the Jews ways,
which was never questioned, but lawful and convenient was, to Marry by written
Instruments of Contract without Priest or Temple.

Thirdly, Though Parties that Marry have neither Witness Public or Private,
yet they have Power, if they can Write, to give a Note in Writing one to
another; or if they cannot, to give such secret Tokens or Pledges, as without
Witnesses, will be sufficient to evidence their secret Congresses when their
happens any necessity, as Judah when he went in to Tamar his Daughter in Law,
Genesis 38.18. He said, What Pledge shall I give thee? and she said, Thy Signet and
thy Bracelers, and thy Staff that is in thy hand; and he gave it her, and came
in unto her, and she Conceived by him; and after, being accused of Whoredom,
Verse 25. When she was brought forth she sent to her Father in Law, saying, by
the Man whose these are, am I with-Child; and she said, discern, I pray thee,
whose these are, the Signet, and Bracelets, and Staff: and Judah acknowledged
them.

Fourthly, If the Law were made, as it ought to be, That Private Marriage
without Witness, and Procreation of a Child, between two Persons not prohibited
by the Law of God to Marry, should be a Civil Act Sine poena aut infamia, and
not a Criminal, as it is unjustly made in the Bishops Courts; if done without
their Ceremonies of a Priest in a Temple, the Proceeding of a Temporal Judge
would be then Legal, and according to the ordinary course of Justice, (if a
Woman came before him and first took her Oath, that such a man had her
Virginity, and that the Child she has is his Child) to put the man to his Oath
concerning the same; for this is then no Oath Ex Officio, nor Self-accusation
of a Crime, when the Fact is made no Crime, and is no other than like an Oath
of discovery of a Civil Contract in Chancery, or Wager of Law, of No Debt, or
Non-Summons at Common Law, and only gives the Woman and her Child the Civil
Benefit to be in as good a State and Condition, as if she had been Married by
the Ceremony of a Priest in a Temple, and no farther; and this without Penalty
to the Father, who being put to his Oath, if he deny not what is alleged
against him, nothing is more just than that he should be compelled (if he
refuse) to acknowledge the Woman to be his Wife, and the Child his Child.

Fifthly, when once it were known that the Magistrate had a Legal Power to
perform this, he would be rarely troubled concerning any secret Marriage; but
every man concerned in the same will be careful so much the more to perform the
duty both of an Husband and Father in a Secret than a Public Marriage, by how
much the more he desires to keep it secret.

(10.) It causes Prostitutions of Brides to Priests, Lords, Guests, and others.
Examples of this in Priests are before shown, P. 53, 54. of Lords, P. 24, 25.
Sabellicus reports of the like Custom amongst the old Carthaginians; the like
was amongst the ancient Scots, Persians, Vri Swiss, under-Waldensians, Moors,
and others; all which wicked Customs had been easily prevented and avoided, had
not the People been compelled to Marry by the Public Ceremony of a Priest and
a Temple.

(11.) It caused the Consecration of Incest, Whores and Sodomites, to attend
the Service of the Priests and Temples.
The way of Consecration of the Persian Magi, by lying with their Mothers,
Sisters, and Daughters, is before touched, P. 44. and the way Pope Alexander
obtained his Holiness, seems not much to differ from the Magi, by the Epitaph
of his Saint, Hoc jacet in tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri Filia, Sponsa, nurus.
The Consecration of Whores and Sodomites, whom, the Priests let to hire in the
Temples and Groves for their gain, was so common amongst the old Pagan Nations,
that the Jews made Use of the word signifying a Person Consecrated, to signify
a Whore and a Sodomite, as the Hebrew word Kadash, Jos. 2.1. is translated in
English, Harlot, and Rahab is so called; and 1 Kings 14.24. the same is
translated Sodomite; yea at this day the Devil, under the name of Holiness, so
much possesses the American Priests of Pegu, that they keep in the Temples
Consecrated Sodomites, to make gains of them to the Priest, who are esteemed by
the People most Sacred. Oh to what height of wickedness does the Devil draw
people, where he makes the Priest his Instrument to counterfeit Holiness with
their Ceremonious Fopperies of Consecration, and bring the same into a Temple
with the Name and Doctrine of being Sacred. The same was done amongst the
Greeks, a wise Nation, and by a wise Legislator of theirs, even Solon himself;
yet did the Devil and Priest delude him under the name of Holiness; for he
caused by his Laws, as a Fundamental of Government, to begin his Magna Charta
with the Privileges of the Holy Church, and to that end he appoints a Temple to
be Dedicated to Venus, and Priests to be Consecrated, and Sacrifices
instituted; and to be well governed by the Priests, he stocked the Temple with
a multitude of Consecrated Whores, to be let to hire to increase the Priests
Profit and Pleasure; and this Holy Church he endowed with great Revenues and
Privileges. There were the like Holy Churches filled with the like Holy Sisters
at Ephesus, at Corinth, and Abydos, and so great veneration they were in
amongst the People, no doubt, by the many pious Sermons of the Priests, what
Miracles these Female Angels could do, that they attributed the whole overthrow
of Xerxes, with his almost innumerable Army, to the Holy Prayers of these
Consecrated Whores, in their Temples or Stews, to their Goddess Venus. Here
Whoredom for the gains of the Priests and Temples is Consecrated, and believed
not only by the grosser sort of People, but by the chief Princes and Governor,
to be a Thing most Sacred.

And is not Adultery with us, more wickedly than Fornication amongst the
Heathen, Consecrated by compulsion to the Ceremony of a Priest in a Temple? It
is; for if A. get B. with-Child, and deserts her, and C. get D. with-Child,
Adultery Consecrated under the name of Marriage.
and deserts her, and A. gets the good will of D, and C gets the good will of
B, and the two Women being both with-Child, and both deserted, grow more
politic to prevent after desertions, and tell their new Courtiers
peremptorily, that they shall expect no farther favor from them until they
lead them before a Priest in a Temple, and Marry them there; now the only
lawful way had been for these two Women to relieve themselves against their
unjust Desertors, that a Magistrate had a Legal Power on complaint of the Women
injured, to compel each Desertor to acknowledge his proper Wife and Child; but
they take here a course to leap out of the Pan into the Fire, and to cure or
cover a lesser Evil, by committing a greater, and go to Church to commit
Cross-Adultery, and Cross-Marry, one the Man who had got the other with-Child,
and the other the Man who had got the first with-Child; and the Priest
accordingly joins them, and contracts and pronounces each Couple Man and Wife,
and gives his Benediction; is not here Adultery Consecrated under the name of
Marriage, and false Wives given to false Husbands, and false Children to false
Fathers? and this Consecration of Adultery makes it so indissoluble, that no
Probation shall be admitted to the contrary, either for Husband or Wife, or
Father or Child. Certainly this is far worse than any Consecration of
Fornication amongst the Pagan Priests of Priapus or Venus. Well does Arnob.
contra gent. therefore say, Where are Whoredoms more committed than by Priests
in the Temples, and by the Altars? where are Uncleanness more practiced, and
Adulteries more meditated? Lastly, burning Lust is more frequently discharged
in Chancels, than in Brothels. I shall only add a word from a Poet concerning
the Romish Clergy,

-- Nulla hic Arcana revelo,
Non ignota loquor, liceat vulgata refer;
Sic urbes populique ferunt, ea fama per omnem
Jam vetus Europam mores extirpat honestos
Sanctus ager Scurris, venerabilis Ara Cynoedis
Servit, honorandis divum Ganymedibus aedes.
I had not defiled Paper with so much of their Filthiness, had not this Romish
Ceremony of a Priest and a Temple so far besotted the Senses of many ignorant
People, as they imagine Marriage made by a Ceremony of so unclean an Original,
and causing so great and abominable Uncleanness, should make a Marriage more
Holy, than one made without it according to Gods own Holy Ordinance in his
Moral Law.

(12.) It caused the Consecration and Adoration of Priapus, Baal-Peor, Venus,
Adonis, and Flora, for Gods and Goddesses, and was the first which defiled the
Virgin-World with Whoredom and Idolatry.
The World in its Primitive Innocence kept all Wives secured under the Custody
of their Husbands, and all Daughters under the Custody of their Parents; the
strictness of which appears to this day in many Southern and Eastern Nations,
till the Priests of Priapus and Venus, for they were the most ancient of which
any Histories speak; and as Cornelius Agrippa mentions, none were to be
admitted Priests who were not first initiated in the Mysteries of Priapus.
These therefore could not pretend to be Priests, unless they had a God or
Goddess to whom they might pretend to Sacrifice and Serve, and become mediators
to present the Prayers of the People; a God they could not have, unless they
made an Idol; and an Idol they could not have, without a Temple to secure it,
and their rich Offerings, against the Spoil either of Thieves or Weather: So
the Building of Temples was the first means of setting up Idols, and the
setting up Idols the first means of Consecration and Adoration of them, for
Gods and Goddesses; and to draw a Conflux of Worshippers, there was no better
way of Temptation of the Men, than by the Women; and of the Women, than by the
Men, and of both them, by Feasting with Sacrifice, Music, Dancing, Dalliance
and Whoredom; whence so frequently Idolatry in Scripture is called going a
Whoreing after Idols: for indeed the Priests became thereby the
Pandars-General, as Cornelius Agrippa calls them, by drawing Women to their
Temples both for Marriages and Whoredoms, and first made them offer their
Virginities for Sacrifices to their Idols and Priests, before this Spiritual
Court of theirs would give them Licenses to Marry; for which, as now, they
compelled them to pay their Fees; and to color this Uncleaness the better,
they Consecrated those impure Gods and Goddesses, Priapus, Baal-Peor, Milcom,
Adonis, (whose Worshippers were the same the Scripture calls the Mourners for
Tamuz) Venus and Flora, and instituted to them Sacrifices and Adorations, as
the most Sacred and Potent Deities; and though the Feminine part of the World
remained then in the strictest Custody, whether Wives or Daughters, which in
the first is allowed and commended even by the wanton Love-Poet himself,

Nupta virum timeat, rata sit Custodia nuptae;
Hoc decet, hoc leges, jusque pudorque jubent.
Wife fear thy Husband. Let thy Wardship stand,
It Is fair; this Laws, Right, modesty command.
Neither had it been possible to have undermined in the Worlds Infancy those
strong Fortifications of the Modesty of Wives, and Chastity of Daughters, had
not the Magical Priest and Devil both conspired to have charmed them out of the
holes of their Rocks with the Songs, Music, Dancing and Festivals of
Sacrifices, under the pretense of the command and service of these Sacred and
potent Gods before mentioned, to the Public places of Sacrifice and Temples;
where when they once had them, they did with them what they pleased, sometimes
in their Mattens and Vespers by day, and sometimes in their Vigils by night,
and by degrees brought them first by Inticements, and at last by Compulsion,
not to Marry without a Priest in a Temple.

(13.) It first destroyed in the World the Omnipresential Worship of God.
In all the times before Moses, except amongst Idolaters, there was no Public
Temple built for the Worship of God, nor Tabernacles; nor do we find any
public Conventions of Worship, except as aforesaid; yet were those Times full
of men Famous for Piety, Abraham himself, Genesis 21. planted a Grove to call upon
the name of the Lord, which was for Privacy, and not to be Public, the
dwelling in Tents not affording that convenience of Secrecy which Christ
commands of Prayer in the Closet, and he went to an Hill alone to Sacrifice
Isaac, and would not so much as suffer one Servant to go with him, Genesis 22.5.
And in old time they called every high Hill which afforded the benefit of
Privacy of Prayer, the Hill of God. And Christ himself, Matthew. 14.23. When he
had sent the multitude away, he went up into a Mountain apart to Pray, which
was for Privacy, and he compelled not the multitude to Pray with him, nor so
much as any Disciple; for it is said, when the Evening was come he was there
alone; but both Groves and High Places, which were by Priests Consecrated for
public Conventions of Men and Women to Worship Publicly, are commanded in
Scripture to be destroyed, Levit. 26.30. Hos. 10.8. Amos 7.9.

The first who built Temples were the old Egyptian Priests, which they
Dedicated to Priapus, and drawing Women thither by Consecrated Whoredom,
thereby instituted the same the places of Public Worship as well as of
Marriage. The next was Cecrops King of Athens, who first in Greece instituted
Marriage by a Priest in a Temple, and with the same brought in the Public
Worship of Idols and Altars, and Sacrifice for them; whereby People were drawn
from the Private and Omnipresential Worship of God, to Marry and Worship Idols
in Temples, for the Gains of the Priests: yet even amongst these Idolaters, the
wiser sort, though Heathens, understood these Pontifical Impostures, but durst
not speak against them; as neither did Plato nor Aristotle, Heathens believed
the Omnipresence.
being warned by the Fate of Socrates, though they many times expressed
themselves, that they believed the Omnipresence of God. One desiring Demonax to
go into the Temple of Esculapius to pray for the health of his Son, Is he so
deaf, said he, that he can hear no where but in a Temple? Eras. lib. 8. Apopth.
And Eratus the Greek Poet, whom Paul cites, speaks thus of Gods Omnipresence,
Plena sunt Jovis omnes Plateae, Omnium etiam hominum Fora; plenum est and mare,
Pleni sunt and Portus; ubique Jove fruimur; omnes Hujus enim genus sumus. So
the great Latin Poet, Virgil Eclog. 3.

-- Jovis omnia plena,
Ille colit terras illi, mea Carmina curae.
Jove keeps the Earth, all things full of him are,
And he even of my Verses takes care.
Cato after the overthrow given by Caesar to Pompey, of whose Party he was,
being advised to consult with the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon what course he were
best take; Answers thus,

Estne Dei seeds nisi Terra and Pontus, and Aer,
Et coelum and virtus? superos quid'quaeritis ultra?
Jupiter est quocunque vides, quocunque moveris.
Lucan. Is Gods Seat other than Earth, Sea, and Air,
And Heaven and Virtue? why do you despair,
And seek beyond? who wheresoever in these
You go or see, there to be found does please.
It is not here affirmed, (as is already said) That it is unlawful for any to
Marry or Worship by a Priest in a Temple, or in a Public Convention; but it
seems unlawful to compel any whose Conscience is dissentient or doubtful; and
that the Scriptures and Christ are so far from Compulsion, that where Parties
are not agreed, they forbid so much as two or three to convene, as Amos 3.3.
Can two walk together, except they agree? and though they do agree, yet single
Prayer in private seems to be preferred, as appears by what follows.

Prayer in Temples and Synagogues forbid by Christ, and a distinction of the
Place of Prayer and Preaching Commanded.
There is as little encouragement given by the Prophets in the Old Testament
for Sacrifices, Altars and Temples, as there is by Christ in the New, for
Prayer and Sacrament in Synagogues and Temples Jer. 7.4. Trust ye not in lying
words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord these are. Hos. 8.14. Israel has forgotten his Maker, and builds
Temples. Revel. 21.22. There was no Temple in the New Jerusalem, nor was there
any Temple in the Earthly Paradise more than in the Heavenly, yet was Marriage
instituted by God. But hear next what he, who says, Matthew. 12.6. here is one
greater than the Temple, will say of Prayer in Synagogues which were the Jews
Parochial Churches, and Temples which were the Cathedrals. John 4.21. Jesus
talking with the Samaritan Woman, says unto her, Believe me, the hour comes
when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor in Jerusalem Worship the Father.
And Verse 23. The hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall
Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks such to
Worship him. And they that Worship him, must Worship him in Spirit, and Truth
It Is granted, the Jews set up a Local Worship in Synagogues and Temples, but
this Judaisme Christ expressly says, the hour was then come that it must be
abolished, and all Jewish Ceremonial Law, and the Temple it self he foretold,
in the future there should not be left one stone upon another. That he forbids
a Prayer to be made in Synagogues, Temples, or any other public Place, and
commands the same to be made privately in the Closet, appears, Matthew. 6.5. When
thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are: for they love to pray
standing in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the Streets, that they may be
seen of Men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But when thou
prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy
Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward
thee openly. The Jewish Synagogues were their Churches or Temples, having a
lesser or Parochial Jurisdiction; and the Cathedral Church or great Temple
having the National Jurisdiction; but Prayer in both is abolished by Christ. It
is granted that in both the lesser and the greater Christ used to Teach, as it
is said, Matthew. 4.23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their
Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all manner of
sickness, and all manner of Diseases amongst the People. And Mar. 14.49. he
says of himself, I was daily teaching in the Temple. And the avoiding of
public Prayer he taught not only by his Precept but Example, for we never find
that he so much as Convened the Twelve, who were his own Family, to pray with
him, but Mark 1.35. He went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there
prayed. And Matthew. 14.23. He went up into a Mountain apart to pray: and when
the Evening was come, he was there alone. And Matthew. 26.36. Then comes Jesus
with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and says unto the Disciples; Sit ye
here, while I go and pray yonder. Whereby it is clear, that Christ both by
Precept and Example taught, there ought a distinction to be made between the
place of Preaching and Prayer; the one to be public, the other to be private,
the one to be in conventions, the other to be single and alone; and if he
prohibited the contrary to any who were free, he much more prohibited any
should be compelled.

Then as to Non-Communicants, it is manifest Christ never instituted the
Sacrament in a Church, or Temple, nor appointed the same to be after Celebrated
there; for he instituted it in a private House, and no company with him, but
his own private Family with him, as Matthew. 26.17. It is said, Now the first day
of the Feast of unlevened bread, the Disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him,
where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the Passover? And he said, Go
into the City to such a man, and say unto him, The Master says, My time is at
hand, I will keep the Passover at thy House with my Disciples. The reasons why
Christ prohibited public and commanded private Prayers, may be diverse. (1.)
The first is expressed to avoid vain glory, and suspicion of Hypocrisy. (2.)
To avoid the dangers incident to Conventions in Temples, or public Places,
whereby he foresaw his Church might be destroyed; and how many of the Primitive
Christians, and since, have by this means of the Conventions in Churches and
Temples, suffered; some have had the Churches fired about them and themselves
burnt in them, others have been in them Massacred with the Sword, others
carried away and destroyed by Torments, which had never happened to them, if
they had followed Christ's Precept, of not casting their Pearl before Swine; or
when they were persecuted in one City, to fly to another, or kept themselves
in their Closets to pray. (3.) The impossibility of a Convention of People to
agree what they would have prayed for, were it but when they would have Rain
and Dry-weather. (4) The impossibility of worshipping God in Spirit and Truth,
unless he is worshipped as Omnipresent; for as he that worships God in an Image,
or toward an Image, commits Idolatry, because he confines his Omnipresence to
the petty Prison of an Idol: so, who in his Imagination comprehends him who is
Incomprehensible, in the walls of a Temple, is as guilty of Idolatry as the
other, only one worships him in a greater Idol, and the other in a lesser. And
as to Marriage in a Temple, or by a Priest, it is manifest the Jews never
Married in a Temple, nor did Christ ever Marry any Man or Woman, nor any of the
Apostles Marry any, nor had any Precept to do it; and all the Primitive
Christians for 300 Years after Christ, so far observed the Precept and Example
of Christ, and abhorred Marriage, or Worship in Temples and Altars; that Celsus
does reproach them with it, that they had no Sacred places of public Worship;
and Origin in Answer, confesses that they were not instituted by Christ, but
crept in afterward.

Notwithstanding all which, the Divinity of the later Times has been so far
from following the Precept and Example of Christ, that it has destroyed the
Omnipresential Worship of God, commanded by him in Spirit and Truth, with a
gaudy Ceremonial Worship by Priests and Temples; for to discover the Truth of
this great Mystery of Iniquity, of Popish Priests, it concerns them in the
highest points of their Profit, to abolish as much as they can possible, all
thoughts of Gods Omnipresence, for if this is once understood, it will appear
there is no need for the People to pray by a Priest, whereby they will lose
their gainful Offices of Masters of Requests; for where the Prince is in
presence, there needs no such Officer. (2.) This will lose their gainful Office
of Confession of Sins, for where God is in Presence, it is better to confess to
him than the Priest. (3.) It will lose them their Pardon-Office, which brings
them in Millions; for who is so mad to beg Pardon of a Priest, if God is in
presence, and he may beg it of him? (4.) It will lose him his great Office of
Benediction of all those who are Married in his Temple; for if God is in
presence at ^ome, of whom the Party may crave a Benediction, who is so mad to
think he need go beg a Benediction of a Priest in a Temple? (5.) It will lose
him his Office of Excommunication, and casting out of his Synagogue and out of
the Presence of God: for if God is Omnipresent, then can none cast out of his
presence: for these good Reasons are all the Clamorous School men silent, and
have writ nothing Material concerning that great Attribute of God his
Omnipresence: nor have the in numerable Heaps of Theologists enclosed any thing
considerable of this point: nor have the Bishops so much as once named it in
the 39. Articles; but, like Lapwings, drawing the Readers as far as they can
from their nest, diverting his Fancy when they speak of God, to matters
unintelligible, and not necessary to Salvation, and fitting the rest with
matters totally Tending to their gain.

I cannot pass the Contemplation of the Omnipresence of God, without some
further Remarques; for without this he could not be Omnipotent, he could not be
Omniscient, he could not be a God, he could not be distinguished or known from
an Angel or Demon, or any inferior Spirit, or Invisible Power: But that these
are Circumscribed in their Vagrant Ubi's, or Chained to their fixed Localities,
to dwell in such a Temple, to haunt such a Grove, to give their Response from
the hollow of such a Dodonaean Oak, Such a Delphick Den, from the belly of such
a Sibyll, the Breast of such a Prophet, the Brayns of such a Dreamer of Dreams;
These show their Miracles only at such an Image, such an Idol, such a Tomb,
such a Sepulcher, such a Fountain, such a River, such a Pool of Bethesda; But
are not able to show them every where, nor to be present every where. Seeing
therefore to believe in God only, is the Fundamental of all Religion, and we
cannot believe in Him unless we know Him, and so cannot know Him unless we can
distinguish Him from an Angel or Demon or other Invisible Power, nor Worship
in Spirit and Truth, unless we can distinguish Theolatry from Angelolatry and
Daemonolatry, and Theology from Magic; nor when we are in distress can we know
where to Pray to Him for deliverance, if we know not where to find him; and he
being Invisible is impossible to be found unless he is Omnipresent; and if we
Run to Temples, Tombs, Images, Idols, Oracles, we fall into the Power of
Darkness, Demons, Magicians or Deceivers; And even the forementioned Demonax
and Cato, and many other Heathen, themselves will rise up in Judgment against
us. And seeing the whole Language of Theology is grown Anthorpomorphite, to
describe the Infinite Power in human shape, in human Apparition, or (what is
worse) in Brutish, of Lamb or Dove, and confine him to a small Throne in the
Coelum Empyraeum; from whence these mischiefs would follow, That Saturn would
make his Orb the Round Table of eating Children; Jupiter his, the Seraglio for
his Rapes; Mars his, a Spoliary; Sol his, a Throne to assume Supreme Worship to
himself; Venus hers, a Stews; Mercury his, a Den of Theives; Luna hers, a
Nunnery for secret Endymions; The Prince of the Air, his a Forge of Cyclopses
to fire the World, and in the Bottom of all these the Pope his, an Infallible
Chair, In Hell and Purgatory to Rule the Roast; Then would be no Government of
these Variant and Contrariant Orbs; Then would the Doctrine of Christ be in
vain, Matthew. 10.29. Are not two Sparrows sold for a Farthing? and one of them
shall not fall on the ground without your Father. Yea the Child himself, who is
of more value than many Sparrows, And in the midst of all these Enemies, how
shall he cry for help to his Father, who is so many Millions of Miles, as is
the New Jerusalem, absent from him? How does his Body live so long? how shall
his Soul after Death break through so many Regions and Legions, as stand in
Battalia against her ascent to so unimaginable an Height, (before she can reach
her Fathers House) as a Millstone cast thence with impetuous swiftness would
not fall on Earth, or into the Sea, in Thousands of years; unless it be
intended every Soul which goes to Heaven must borrow. Mahomet's Elborach? and
that would not serve neither, if true what he Relates, That after he had Rid
like a Witch by night through the Air, and was come to his last Stage, within
Threescore Miles of Gods Palace where he dwelt, all the way was so Impassible
with huge heaps of Frost and Snow, that had he not been an hot Bodyed and hot
Headed man, he had been utterly lost and frozen to death before he had got
through, and being got at length to the Presence Chamber, God living in the
midst of all that Snow put a cold Complement on him, for he clapped him on the
shoulder (but it was not to Knight him) with his hand so cold, That it pierced
him to the very Reins of his back, and cast him all over into a Terrible
shivering; and surely if it were possible for a Soul to pass so long a Journey,
through so many Thousand Legions of Devils as are in the way to intercept her,
and she should at length Recover faint and weary to the beginning of the
Threescore Northern Miles of these Mountains of Frost and Snow, being so naked
as Souls use to be when they come in and go out of the World, and not
Turbanted, Coated, Shooed as the Body of Mahomet: It is doubted by many, before
she gets ha^f way through, she must turn up her Heels if she have any, much
sooner without Feathers, than a Robin does with them in Winter. The Priests
have brought their Soul to a fair pass, and left her between fire and frost,
the Pope to burn one half, and the Turk to freez the other; neither do they
show a Remedy, nor, if the Soul is after death sensible of Good or Evil (as
doubtless it is, or a^l Religion were in vain,) do they show in all the Piles
of their Theology, how so much as one Sparrow shall be secure from falling on
the ground, or one Soul shall Enjoy the Protection of Providence in the Center
of so many Enemies as she is incircled with, both in Life and after Death, who
seek to take all the Good from her, and lay all the Evil on her they can. Alas
Poor Soul! And why do they conceal from thee thy greatest and only present and
Eternal comfort, the Omnipresence of God? Which if granted, none of this Evil
can ever happen to thee. Thou art ever in his Embraces, he hears thee, he sees
thee, he is with thee, and as is said, Romans 8 38. Neither death nor life, nor
Angels nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present nor to come, nor
height nor depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate Us from the
Love of God; though as Job says, 9.11. Lo he goes by me and I see him not, be
passes on also but I perceive him not. This neither Pope nor Turk dare deny,
yet seek to bury in Oblivion and hide in Clouds of Darkness; forbidding all
Disputes of the Premises, least the truth of Conclusions, which must necessary
follow, shake the Fundamentals of all their false Religions, and the vast gains
accrue to them by the same.

Some of the gainful Practices, arising from suppressing the knowledge of the
Omnipresence of God, I have touched before, and some Others I have added, as
follows: (1.) If the Light of the Omnipresence should shine through the
World, they could not pretend and deceive with Magic in the name of Theology,
with Necromancy under the name of Prayer at the Tombs of Saints, and to their
bones and Relics; they could not deceive with Witchcraft and Malice under the
Name of Converse with God and Good Angels; nor could they pretend to be
Inspirators without Miracle, if God is Omnipresent in every Soul alike. Diverse
Popes have been by Histories N^ted to pretend Inspiration, who have been great
Magicians; and the Acting or Counterfeiting many Miracles by the Romish Saints,
both beneficial and maleficial, are common in their Legends: and the Turks have
as many as they; And seldom a Tyrant goes to Sea, but he will (if he can) have
a Witch; so will they in their Land-Enterprizes have their prophets, which are
the same. The Tartar, Chinese, and American Priests are generally Magicians,
and are Consulted in all their Wars; so were the Magi of the Persians, and
Brachmans of the Indians, The Druids of the Gauls and Brittons, and many other
Nations all Witches, who sometimes by the help of the Devil foretold truly, and
sometimes falsely, success of Wars, and shared with the Soldiers in the spoil.
Now though amongst the Heathens they were not ashamed to worship Devils, whom
they called gods, and it was the Professed Divinity of Polytheist to Worship
and Consult Inferior Spirits, as well as the Supreme; yet amongst Christians,
the Profession being only to Worship the Supreme, if they Publish the Supreme
to be Omnipresent, they cannot pretend these Magical spirits to be God, or Good
Angels, who confine themselves only to some Persons or Places, and do Malefices
either to Nations or private Persons; seeing if they Pray to God
Omnipresentially, they may be sure to be heard for all Lawful and necessary
Prayers, and the unlawful and Maleficious never to be granted by him; whereby
the Priest will loose all his Customers; for he that believes God Omnipresent
will Pray alone, and not Employ another to Pray for him, to avoid the
forementioned Dangers: First because, for ought he knows, the Priest who Prays
for him may be a Magician. Secondly, He will not Pray to a Saint or Angel, nor
bring offerings as the Priest would have him, because, for ought he knows, this
Saint or Angel may be a Demon Transformed into an Angel of Light, whereby he
himself should become a Magician, and incite this Demon to do Malefice.

(2) Such as believe the Omnipres^nce will not only avoid Praying by a Priest,
or to an Angel or Saint, by whom he pretends to have Power to obtain unlawful
Prayers, and to do Malefice; but likewise to obtain Lawful Prayers and to
Receive Benefits; because the Granting of a Payer both by God or an Angel, or
any Invisible Power, is a Miracle, and the Priest takes Money for every Miracle
or benefit succeeds by his Prayers of benefit to the Party for whom he Prays;
whereby it will be manifest, that the success of this Prayer is neither granted
by God, nor a Good Angel; for God never sells his Mercies for Money. And this
was the Theology of Simon Magus a Magician, to think the Holy Ghost might be
bought with Money; to which was made a Tart Answer, Act. 8.20. Peter said unto
him, Thy money perish with thee, because thou have thought that the Gift of God
may be purchased with money. And Christ gives express Command to his Disciples,
Missionated by him with Power of Signs and Miracles, to do good to the People,
Matthew. 10.7. Go Preach, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Heal the
sick; cleanse the Lepers; raise the dead; cast out Devils: freely ye have
received, freely give. So Elijah, when he had cured Naaman of the Leprosy, took
no Money of him, but punished Gehazi for doing the same, 2 Kings 5.20. And
Moses, when he did provide the Miracle of Manna, he did not ask any Money, or
sell it to those who needed; for that had been to have deprived God of thanks
for his own Gift. And Petrus Quinqueranus Relates, That when some Neopolitan
Kings had enclosed a place with a Wall, which was of great Resort of Poor, for
the gathering of Manna there, that they might be Excluded from gathering,
unless they paid a Tribute or Impost for the same, The Manna suddenly ceased,
and fell no more; and when as the Doors were again set open, it fell as before.
The Place was again the Second, Third and many times shut up, for Trial; and
still when it was shut, the Manna fell not at all; but when open, as at first,
it Continued to fall Plentifully. Camerar. Centur. 2. cap. 160. p. 401, 402,
403. It is not here affirmed, That if such as are Preachers or Teachers of the
Truth of God, receive necessary maintenance, for their study and pains in
Executing the same (unless they pretend to Preach by Inspiration) That their
Doctrine is from Demons, and not from God; for the Labourer is worthy of his
Hire, and these have not Received their Gift freely, but by long study and
Pains: but only this is affirmed, That if they pretend to any Extraordinary
and Miraculous Gift from God, or Angels, as to be Mediators for Prayers, or to
keep God under Lock and Key in a Temple, and Receive money for Executing the
same, it is a Manifest sign, they have neither their Gift from God, nor Good
Angels, but from Demons. Some that have Writ of Witchcraft, say, That such as
Pray, though to God, for unlawful things, if they succeed and have Their
Prayers granted, It is a Sign That they have made a Covenant with the Devil;
for God never grants unlawful Prayers; therefore it must be the Devil, or
Fortune. And that a Man may be a Witch, yet not know it. There being therefore
two great Dangers to Pray by a Priest who takes money for his Prayers; first,
That he Prays to Demons under the Name of God. Secondly, That he will make
unlawful Prayers. Quid non mortalia pectora cogit Auri sacra fames? Flectere si
nequeat superos, Acheronta Movebit. Should the Doctrine of the Omnipresence
spread, men would rather Pray to God as Christ Commands, in secret, and
Omnipresentially, to whom they may Pray and He Exacts no money of them, nor
Compels their Consciences to Pray in unlawful Forms, or for unlawful Matters,
rather than Employ so Chargeable and Dangerous a Mediator, who if God is in
Person Omnipresent, is not only useless, but hurtful; whereby he will lose all
his Money and Hire for his Prayers, and the Silver-Smiths of Diana, have their
Trade utterly spoiled.

(3) Men would be induced to worship in secret, and Omnipresentially, to avoid
another Danger incident to Prayer by a Priest; for the Prayer by a Priest would
be in Public, in a Synagogue or Temple, which is liable to a double danger,
one of Demons, the other of Men; to neither of which any Modest or Prudent
Petitioner desires to have his Prayers known; not to Demons, because he may
have Errors and Imperfections in his Prayers, which if discovered only to God,
He is ready to prevent those Dangers he would draw on his own head, by his Rash
Petitions, and, like a Father in pity to his Child, to forgive them; whereas if
Discovered to Demons, they, if not by God restrained, would be ready to grant
him success in all the Noxious things he asks, to Ensnare and Ruin him. Not to
Men; first, because for any to confess his private Sins, or Enumerate his
private Wants, or Desires in Public, would but afford matter of Derision to
the Heathens. Secondly, The malice of Men would be apt to wrest all the Words,
though innocently intended, of his Prayers; sometimes to Herefie sometimes to
Sedition, sometimes to Treason it self; and the same would kindle the hatred,
and sometimes provoke the Rage of all Dissentients against him; As at Vassy in
France, Fifteen hundred Protestants being ass^mbled in a Church on a Sabbath
day, to Pray, and hear the Word of God, the Duke of Guise suddenly Compassed
the Church with Armed Soldiers, himself standing in the Door with a drawn
Sword, and Cruelly sent his Soldiers, who killed all without Distinction of
Age, or Sex. Acts and Mon.

(4) Granting the Omnipresence, Bishops could not pretend Power to N^ll and
Dissolve private Marriage, Consummated by Birth of a Child; nor separate those
at whose Matrimonial Acts God was present as a Witness and Party, and thereby
joined them, not to be put assunder by Man.

(5) Granting God to be Omnipresent, and present in the Internal S^irit and
heart of Man, and sees and knows thereby all of his thoughts, all External
Ceremonies of Worship are useless; yea the Compulsion to them is the highest
Denial of his Internal presence, and all the Difference and Distinction taken
away how to know the Worship of God, from the worship of Men, and the
Counterfeit Worship from the True; for though to the worship of Men External
Ceremonies are necessary, and the Internal thoughts of the Heart cannot be
Expressed to Men, but by External acts of the Body, yet to God it is otherwise;
for he being present in the Heart it self; it were as Impertinent that the
Heart should be Compelled to Pray, or Express it is Intentions by External
Ceremonies without the Body, as to Compel a Vassal, when his Prince is in the
midst of the House with him, to throw his Peti^ion out of the Window to be sent
to him many Miles off, by the Priest who is in the outer Court. And as
Compulsion to Worship by the outward Ceremonies of a Priest, or a Temp^e, is
unnecessary, so is it the way to Compel an Hypocritical and Counterfeit
Worship, contrary to the Command of Christ. Joh. 4.21. Where he, talking with
the Woman Concerning to the Two Places of Worship, the Temple of Samaria, and
the Temple of Jerusalem, Says, Woman, believe me, the hour comes when ye
shall neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem worship the Father. And verse.
23. The hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and Truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is
a Spirit, and those that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth. To
worship therefore in Spirit and Truth, is the Internal Worship of the heart,
and not the External Ceremonies, which may be Compelled and Counterfeit, and if
mixed with the Worship of God, are not directly to Worship God, but the Idol or
the Priest; as for example, I shall instance the usual Ceremonies of uncovering
the Head, Bowing, and Kneeling, to which men are compelled in Temples,
Compulsion to external Ceremonies, is to Worship the Idol and the Priest, and
not God.
as both Ancient and Modern Pagan Idolaters pretend the same distinction of
Worship to and toward the Image, where those or other Ceremonies are used, as
do the Papists; and if the same should be allowed, there could be no Idolatry
committed in the World, and the Second Commandment were useless, and deservedly
by the Papist turned out of the Decalogue; for all Nations in the World,
whether Civil or Barbarous, which use Idols or Images, yea the Tartars,
Africans, Indians, and very Americans say, They Worship not the Idol, but their
God in the Idol. But if once the Omnipresence is believed, this Faith destroys
all Ceremonies of Worship, both toward and to, and in, and shows the Worship
of Spirit and Truth to be every way, and every where, and that Idols ought not
to be brought into the Place, or mixed with the Divine Worship, they manifestly
drawing the Honor of Bowing, Falling down, Kneeling, or the like, toward, or
before them, pretended to God to be given themselves; for which reason (it
seems) Josephus lib. 8. cap. 2. de Antiq. Jud. says, Solomon sinned and broke
the Law in making Similitudes in the Temple, of Beasts of Brass, to underprop
the Brazen Sea, and Lions to set unto his Throne, which are apt to be Converted
to Idolatrous Uses; and of the Act of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18.4. to take away
those External Ceremonies of Worship then in fashion; for it is said, He
removed the high Places, and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves, and
brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent which Moses had made: for unto those days
the Children of Israel did burn Incense to it; and he called it Nehushtan. Yet
here might it have been said by the Idolatrous Priests, who made great gains of
these Ceremonies of Bowing, Kneeling, and Falling down to those Images, that
they were very Ancient and Decent Ceremonies, and great Ornaments of the
Worship of God; and they did not Bow, Kneel, Fall down, or offer Incense to the
High Places, but God in them; yet here in the Judgment of Hezekiah, these
external Ceremonies gave the Honor pretended to be given to God, to these
Idols; and he therefore Abolished them.

In the like manner do the Priests, now the Images are removed, yet Surrogate
in their stead what Idols they can of Temples and Altars, abolished by Christ,
and under pretense of the Ornament and Decency of Worshipping God, by
Compulsion to those External Ceremonies of the Body, to which it is impossible
to compel the worship of the Spirit and Soul, draw to themselves wholly that
Divine Honor which they feign is given through these to God, as is easy to be
seen, in every common Church or Temple, the People walk, talk, and place
themselves in what posture they please, till the Priest appears and is heard in
the Pew; then, as if the Apparition of a Deity spoke, there is such shuffling
away of Hats, and falling on knees, to receive an Absolution, which none but
God can give, of their Sins; and as as soon as the Morning Service is ended, and
the Priest got out of the Church all the Hats are again on, and not a man to be
seen on his knees till the Priest again return in the Afternoon; then are they
all again on their knees to pray, according to the forementioned distinction,
toward him, but not (as they said) to him, and receive his Benediction, which
none is able to give but God; and these Ceremonies of falling on their knees
toward the Priest, in those many Postures of Confessions of Sins, Penance,
Absolution, and Benedictions were so scandalous to the Heathen, that when a
Christian reproved one of them that he fell down before a dead Idol and
worshipped it, he would answer, That the Christian fell on his knees before a
worse living Idol, Et quod Pontificis coleret Genitalia. In the like manner was
a Jesuit Recriminated, who reproved an Indian King of Candecan, that he fell
down and worshipped his Paw-God, and answered, That He fell down and worshipped
his Crucifix. To the same purpose have some Episcopal Protestants been
Recriminated, who reproved Papists that they bowed and fell on their knees to
the Host in the Mass, and answered, that they bowed and fell on their knees to
the High Altar and the Bread received from it. So neither side can justify,
but Recriminate, which how weak Argumentation it is concerning the worship of
God in Spirit and Truth, is easily understood. But to return to the first
consideration; That the Priest is worshipped, and not God, by the Ceremonies of
the Temple, appears, in regard if they taught that the People must put off
their Hats or fall on their knees in token of Reverence to God, as being in the
Temple Consecrated by the Bishop more than in another place, then must they
teach them that they ought to perform the same Ceremonies when both Bishop and
Priest are out, as well as in; and must be perpetually, as long as they are in
the Church, seeing God is perpetually in it, and both Bishop and Priest must be
perpetually uncovered when there, as well as the People, and as well before
Service as after, and as well without the People as with them; but they neither
teach nor practice any such matter, but only command uncovering, and kneeling
to be toward themselves when present, therefore they give the whole Honor of
these External Ceremonies to themselves, and not to God. So the Popes
Missionary Priests breed up the poor Americans, in such Superstition and
Slavery, as they worship the Priests for Gods; and if a Priest do but ride on a
Journey through the street, they all as he passes fall on their knees, with
their hands Elevated toward him, praying him to forgive their Sins, and give
them their Benediction; which the Priest very gravely does, making many
Mumpsimusses with his Mouth, and Crosses in the Air with his finger toward
them, and they for the same bring him plenty of Provision and Oblations to his
Lodging, where he Inns, The Archbishop of Moscho, reputed the Greek Pope or
chief Patriarch, when he Consecrates the River there for Baptism, which is once
a Year, he Rides in great State, in most Rich and Gorgeous Robes, carrying the
Sacrament in his Lap, the Emperor himself leading his Horse by the Bridle, and
many persons casting before him on the ground most Rich Garments, to be
trampled on by the proad Palfrey, and when he has passed over a parcel still
fetching those who are left behind, and throwing them again before, lest the
feet of his Holy Horse should touch the Earth, whose Master commands the
Heaven. Some have thought by these Ceremonies the Horse is more honored than
the Emperor, the Lap than the Horse, the Sacrament than God, and the Bishop
than all. The Latin Pope has had a Crotchet to wear the Cross on his Pantofle
when he admits to the Honor of kissing his Toe, yet none doubts but he aims
more at the Honor of his Toe, though a crabbed one, than of the Cross. To the
Emperor who p^rformed this Servile Homage, saying in Extenuation of his
Dishonor, Non tibi sed Petro, the Pope replied, Et mihi and Petro. Not only
the Babylonian Priests of Bell, but of all Nations in the World (who could
obtrude on the People the Ceremonies of Sacrifie) have under pretense of
feeding the Noses or the Mouths of their Gods, fed their own Bellies, and not
their Gods. But the Doctrine of the Omnipresence destroys all these Ceremonies
of Sacrifices, Incense, Burnt-offerings, Images, Hosts, Masses, High-Altars,
Temples, and Oblations by Priests; for if God is present in the House, and at
the Table of the owner, were it possible he could be hungry, or desire Meat and
Drink, he could, as many great Princes have done from their meanest subject,
more conveniently take a Meal from a Thousand Tables wheresoever he likes best,
than the Priest to gather it for him in his Alms-basket at the Temple; and
there to eat it himself; and say to the Priest as is said, Psalm. 50.12. If I
were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the World is mine, and the fullness
thereof. Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of Goats? Offer unto
God thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most High. And call upon me in the
day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Were God
likewise tolerated to be worshipped as Christ commands, Omnipresentially, in
Spirit and Truth, Forms of Prayer Compulsive, are Ceremonies, but not Directive.
then could there be no compulsion to the Ceremonies of Forms of Prayer, Forms
of Vestments, Forms of Songs, Forms of Music; for Forms of Prayer and other
Forms of Worship in things indifferent, if made compulsive by Penalty, became
Ceremonies, and destructive to the Worship of God in Spirit and Truth; and
compulsive they cannot be made unless the Ceremony of the place of Worship be
made compulsive. But if they are only Directive and without Penalties, as the
Form of the Lords Prayer, left by Christ, who made it not Penal to miss a word,
or syllable, or a letter in the Use of the same, then are they no Ceremonies,
nor Ceremonial Laws, but Favors and Adminicles to help and direct, and not to
punish the Weak who need them; if Popes and Bishops therefore should not
smother the knowledge of Gods Omnipresence, then must they allow that God is
present in the heart of every one who Prays, as well as in every other place,
and being there, as Job says, 42.2. I know thou can do every thing, and that
no thought can be withholden from thee. And it is said, Psalm. 7.9. The
Righteous God tries the Hearts and Reins. And Psalm. 94.11. The Lord knows
the thoughts of man. And if so, they need neither carry nor send their Prayers
to a Pope, Bishop, or Priest to offer them to God, in a Temple or at the Altar;
but he may present them to God himself, and in a way more pleasing to him, on
his own Altar of a broken heart, which way of Worship in the heart would
utterly destroy their great Office they usurp, of being Masters of the External
Ceremonies of Divine Worship, which brings them in infinite Riches, and
likewise an Idolatrous Worship and Honor to Exalt themselves above all that is
called God.

(6.) If Prayers might be made to God in the heart of man, or as Christ directs
in the Closet, as Omnipresent, then would the Priest lose his great gains of
the Post Office to Heaven, for sending Prayers though not by Letter or Writing,
yet (which is as good) by word of Mouth, or better, if the Letters should
chance to be lost, or Spies for Intelligence break them open by the way. When
Prayers are brought to the Priest, to be sent so high and so far for the
Petitioner, he will send them by some Angel, who is the swifter, or some Saint
who is the slower and surer to carry them the first Stage, then He delivers the
Message to our Lady of Loretto (if she be not below at her Chapel) to carry
them another Stage, and to deliver them to her Son, who is to make the next
deliverance of them to God, which way of Posting Prayers so far is very costly,
and dangerous, and many times Petitioners get no Returns as long as they live,
unless when intercepted by the Prince of the Air, and he grants their wicked
Petitions with a Vengeance; all which cost and mischief had been prevented, if
the Petitioner in person had, as Christ bids him, offered his Prayer to God in
person in his Closet.

(7.) The Priests could not put God into a Wafer or piece of Bread, and set him
on an Altar, or carry him about in a Box; they could not lock him up in a
Temple, and carry the Keys at their: Gi^dle; by which they would lose excessive
gains.

(8.) There would be no more Pilgrimages to Mecha, or Jerusalem, Rome, Loretto,
Compostella, and a multitude of other Places, which would lose them vast gains.

(9.) They would lose the gains of Praying to Saints and Angels; for they who
believe God only to be Omnipresent, and the Vbi's of Saints and Angels to be
unknown, and uncertain when, and whether in Temples or no; would rather pray to
God only, than such as they knew not where or when to find, and might therefore
be mocked, as Elijah, 1 Kings 18.27. mocked Baals Prophets, and said, Cry
aloud, for he is a God, either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a
Journey, or peradventure he sleeps, and must be awaked.

(10.) They would lose the gains of all Sanctuaries, Asylums, and Horns of the
Altar; for if God is every where, why should Malefactors have more privilege
there than every where? whereby neither Cain by Land, nor Jonah by Sea, could
fly the Presence of the Lord, and the same is no Protection, but a Punishment
to the Wicked.

(11.) There would be no more buying or hireing places of Burial in Chancels,
Churches, Churchyards, or other Consecrated ground, by such as believed God
Omnipresent; whereby a great Revenue would likewise be lost to Popish
Ecclesiastics.

All which recited matters, and the forementioned Mediator, Confessor, Penance,
and Pardon, Offices, and diverse others, conduce infinitely to the gain of Papal
and Episcopal Priests, and the Pride and Power of the Kingdom of Antichrist;
which must be inevitably ruined, if the Doctrine of the Omnipresence were but
duly Preached and Taught, which indeed is the Depth of all Philosophy, and the
Height of all Divinity, and the most possible way of understanding the Divine
Precepts of Christ, of worshipping God in Spirit and Truth.

A Poem on the Omnipresential Worship of God.
NO other God I Love or Fear;
But who I see is every where:
If on the Hills I feed my Sheep,
Their Pasture there he Green does keep:
If in the Dale my Cows I milk,
He makes their Teats as soft as Silk;
And is he not there where I Plow?
Who more Returns then I did Sow.
If on the Wall I Prune a Vine,
He must be there who gives Wine.
I drink the Wine of Ten Years old,
He makes me then his Poet bold.
In Eden's Fruit (what joy is this!)
I taste a Thousand times he is:
I sip the Nectar of the Be,
And find none there is sweet but he:
Of Strawberries I dress a Bed,
He Is there, none else could make them Red.
Yon Brook (hark!) tells with purling sound,
From Sea who brings it under ground.
A little Seed on Earth I spring,
He there does Heavenly Flowers bring:
His Works in Beauty all appear,
I Am sick with Love of him who is there:
In Rosy Bower with Lute I sit,
His Voice does Ravish me from it.
The hour I ask, and Dial view,
He must be there who tells me true:
If to my Study I then pass,
He brings me light there through the glass:
If to a lawful War I go,
He Is there to fight against the Foe:
I watch in Frost, and Moonshine cold;
From killing me he does it hold:
If to the fire I turn to warm,
He Is there, such Fury else would harm.
To Woods I walk with wandering Eyes,
He Is there who mounts them to the Skies:
At Sea the Tide learns me to know
It Is he there makes the Ebb and Flow:
Bright Cynthia shows next who her guids,
Where she in Silver Chariot Rides:
In Darkness, Sounds do make me hear
He is in them, who made the Ear:
I look up to the Stars above,
And see he is there, who does them move:
I take a Wife, and go to Bed,
He Marries us who bids us Wed:
A Child is born, he gave it Life,
And not the Husband or the Wife:
In sweetest Sleep my Rest I take,
Eternal, did he not me wake:
I die, his Mercy is so near,
And he himself, I cannot fear.
Then Shepherds all upon the Rocks
Pray, and Praise him amongst your Flocks,
And let your Pipes on every Hill
The Organs be the Air to fill:
You who Carouse, in pleasant Bowers,
Ambrosian Milk that is made of Flowers,
There when you hear the Cows to Low,
Unto the God who fed you bow.
Let Husbandmen who Plow the Field,
Thanks for a fruitful Crop there yield;
And for the Seed they cast away,
Another Resurrection Pray.
You who behold the Rubie Wine
In curious Crystal Glasses shine,
And drink your fill, there crowned with Bays,
Indite high Hymns unto his Praise:
Ye Poets, why sit you so sad?
In holy Furies turn ye mad,
He Will mount your Souls in Ecstasies,
Unto the Joys above the Skies:
Fruits of so many Tastes and Hues,
Delicious Whites, Reds, Yellows, Blues.
Who Banquet on, in the same Place
Return for every one a Grace:
Thou who have found the Honeycomb
In Wilderness, though far from home;
Go suck Him there in such a Feast,
As Child does Mother from the Breast.
The little Berries on a Bent,
Who file before they shall be spent,
You as in Golden Age then may
Number no other Beads to pray.
The Crystal Springs and Running Rills,
Along the Banks of Daffadils,
And Silver-shallows which do creep,
Shows he them brings from Mercies deep:
Who Flowers gather in the Meads,
Praise him with Garlands on your Heads,
Who gives such Flowers unto the Clown,
As Caesar has not in his Crown.
If Lightnings shot from Beauties Eye,
Melt thine to Tears, and make thee sigh.
Adore the Beauty none do see,
Thou no Idolater shall be:
Who hear the Birds, with Thousand Notes,
Praise him from pretty Bills and Throats:
There let your Voices join in Quire
With Instruments of Wind and Wire.
On Dial look, and there him praise,
Who shows to number out thy Days;
Who light and shade so true makes run,
Is on the Dial and the Sun:
No longer in thy Study look,
To search for God Chapter or Book;
For wheresoever thou do pass,
He writes himself on every grass:
Ye Valors in defense of Right,
Who for the King and Country fight,
Your Souls to Heaven, where ever you die,
Shall without Church or Steeple fly:
How Water turns to Gems of Ice,
And they to water, who so wife
To show? But he is there we find,
Whose Power alone can loose and bind,
You who sit by the Fire side,
To Pray, you need not Run or Ride,
For who dwells in Eternal Light,
Is likewise in the Fire bright.
Go Pray in yonder Wood or Grove,
For there appears the God of Love,
Except the same is Consecrate
Unto some Goddess or her Mate:
Soldiers at Sea, who does it tame
In Floating Castles, praise his name;
Let Trumpets sound it to the shore,
And with them let your Canon Rore;
If Phoebe Fair shall on you peep,
When she steals water from the Deep;
Though such a Beauty never was seen,
Say she is his Handmaid, not his Queen:
You who in Nights Black shades do stray,
In fear there to him humbly Pray,
In Darkness which does Cloud the Sky,
He Dreadful is in Majesty.
The Stars that Rolled are in their Round,
By him above, and under ground,
Show he is there in Might and Power
Who will not let them Rest an hour.
Bride-grooms and Brides so Fresh and Trim,
Each other Worship not, but him
Who joins you both in such a Fate,
As none but he can separate.
Mothers Praise him, who are Devout,
Who heard you when you Cried out,
And made forget before the Morn
Your Sorrows, when a Son was born:
He Is in thy Bed, though thou do sleep,
True time thy Pulses who makes keep.
All the whole Day then seek a Theme
To Praise him there, though in a Dream.
When Death the Body turns to Fame,
And Soul to Essence whence it came*
Oh happy Soul! thou can not miss
Thy God, for every where he is.
Ye Idol-Priests who have begun
Your Temple build, shall hold the Sun;
And you great Neptune who adore,
Build one shall hold both Sea and Shore;
To Aeolus who make your Prayer
Another build, shall hold the Air;
At Venus shrine then you who cry,
Build one holds Venus in the Sky;
And then with Millions of your hands
Build one holds him who these commands:
The God who cannot be confined,
The God of Love, who is not blind;
When this you do, and none derides,
We Will to your Altars bring our Brides,
But first before we enter in,
Your Temple you shall clear from sin,
The Canons of so many Popes,
And of the Mitres and the Copes,
Contrary to the Law of God
Whip thence, as Christ did with a Rod;
Then overturn the Tables next
Of Money Changers, which have vexed
Loves Liberty, who was born free,
With Bonds, and Bills, and Usurie;
Then cast out Pride which does bewitch,
And Poor Divorceth from the Rich:
Virtue and Beauty are the Gems,
Excelling those of Diadems.
Then Covetousness expel,
The Idol foul which came from Hell;
Portions and Jointures we will have none,
But every one shall keep his own,
Nor Courtesy shall be so small,
Of Lands and Money to take all,
And Rob the Woman of her Goods,
Leaving her scarce for Scarfs and Hoods;
When it is too late, she sees and grieves,
The Temple is a Den of Thieves,
None there shall take another Brats
By Bishops false Certificates,
No Bramyn of an Indian King
Shall there Pollute the Royal Spring,
Cardinal Confessor there none
Shall shrieve a Queen upon a Throne,
No, nor shall their Intails defiled
Make Faithless Wife, or Rebel Child;
We Will run no more to Romish Sees,
But we will Marry without Fees:
Why do you then Gods Ordinance
After your Pipes to Church make Dance,
To buy for Money what is Divine,
And God enclose in Silver-shrine?
Why do you then so slily steal
A Sacrifice of Blood and Meal,
And thither drive, on pain of Curse
Your foolish Guests to pick their Purse,
And your Bread-God on Altar lay,
And him enclose with Walls to Pray?
Know, who is the Almighty one,
Altar or Temple he has none.
(15.) It caused the bloody Sacrifices of Virgins, Children, and Indian Wives.
If Iphigenia had not been got to the Altar on pretense to be Married, she
could not have been Murdered.

Relligo peperit Scelerosa atque impia facta:
Aulide quo pacto Triviai Virginis a^am,
Iphianassai turparunt Sanguine foede,
Ductores Danaum delecti prima virorum:
Cui simul infula virgineos Circumdata Compius;
Ex utraque pari malarum part profusa est;
Et maestum simul ante aras adstare parentem
Sensit, and hunc propter ferrum Coelare ministros;
Adspectuque suo lacrymas effundere cives;
Muta metu, terram genibus Summissa petebat.
Nec miserae prodesse in-tali tempore quibat,
Quod patrio princeps-Donarat nomine Regem:
Nam sublata virum manibus, tremebundaque ad aras
Deducta est, non ut solemni more sacrorum
Perfecto, posset claro Comitari bymenaeo;
Sed casta incesto nubendi tempore in ipso
Hostia Coincideret mactatu moesta Parentis:
Exitus ut Classi felix faustusque daretur.
Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum.
Religion hatched has damned Impieties:
This the Greek Chiefs at Aulis made Surprise
Poor Iphigenia, by a wicked wile,
And Trivia's Altar with her Blood defile.
The Fillet which did bind her Virgin Head,
Upon each Cheek hung down dishevelled,
Her Father then sad to stand by she Eyed,
And Priests from her their Bloody Knives to hide,
Upon her Knees she fell down mute with Fears,
And saw the People round her shedding Tears,
Nor with the King did help her thus appalled,
That she a Princess first him Father called;
For, took by force of Men, she is trembling brought
Unto the Fiery Altar, not as ought
To have been done, a ^^^e to Consecrate,
But to Pollute her with a Bloody Fa^e,
Then her fell Father in her lovely Prime
When he of Hymen's Joys promiss'd the time,
Kills her in Sacrifice, to get a Wind,
And a good Passage for his Shipping find.
Thus Blind Religion which does nothing know,
Yet so much Evil could persuade to do.
The wickedness of the same Fact, Horace likewise describes. lib. Sermon. 2. Sat.
3. In a Dialogue, between a Rustic and Agamemnon.

R. Nequis humasse velit Ajacem Atrida, vetas cur?


A. Rex sum.


R. Nil ultra quaero plebeius.


A. Et aequam
Rem imperito: ac si cui videor non justus, inulto
Dicere quae sentit permitto.

R. Maxim Regum
Dii tibi dent capta classem reducere Troja
Ergo consulere, and mox respondere licebit?

A. Consule.


R. Cur Ajax heroes, ab Achille secundus,
Putrescit, toties servatis clarus Achivis?
Gaudeat ut populus Priami, Priamusque inhumato
Per quem tot juvenes patrio caruere sepulchro?

A. Mill ovium insanus morti dedit, inclytum Vlyssem,
Et Menelaum una mecum se occidere clamans.

R. Tu cum pro vitula statuis dulcem Aulide natam
Ante aras, spargisque mola caput improbe salsa,
Rectum animi servas?

A. Quorsum?


R. Insanus quid enim Ajax
Fecit, cum stravit ferro pecus? abstinuit vim
Vxore and nato, mala multa precatus Atridis,
Non ille aut Teuerum, aut ipsum violavit Vlyssem.

A. Verum ego ut harentes adverso littore naves
Eriperem, prudens placavi sanguine Divos.

R. Nempe tuo furiose.

A. Meo, sed non furiosus.


R. Qui species alias very, scelerisque tumultu
Permistas caplet, commotus habebitus: atque
Stultitiane erret nihilum distabit, an ira.
Ajax immeritos dum occidit desipit agnos:
Quum prudens scelus obtitulos admittis inanes
Stas animo? and purum est vitio tibi cum tumidam est cor?
Siquis lectica nitidum gestate ame^ agn^^n,
Huic vestem ut gna^^^, paret anc^llas, paret a^rum;
Rufam ant pusillam appelle^: fortique marito
Destinet uxorem, interdicto huic omne adimit jus
Praetor, and ad sanos abeat tu^^^ propinquos.
Quid? fiquis gnatum pro muta devovet Agna
Integer est animi? ne dixeris. Ergo ubi prava
Stultitia, hic summa est insania.

Rusticus, Agamemnon.

R. Atrides, Why is it forbid by thee
To bury Ajax?

A. I am King.


R. So be.
I a Plebeian dare no more enquire.

A. But just I am, and if thou do desire
To show thou think not so, speak out thy mind,
I give thee leave.

R. Great King, so mai'st thou find
The gods propitious, from Conquered Troy,
Thy gallant Fleet to return home with joy
May I then ask, and unto what thou say
Reply again, with thy good favor?

A. may.


R. Why does the Hero Ajax, the Renownd
Achille's Second rot then above Ground,
Who saved so many Greeks? Is it, to make
Pryam and Pryam's People joy to take,
That he by whom their own so many have
Lost Sepulchers, himself should lose a Grave?

A. The Mad man killed a Thousand Sheep, and cry
He did, each Menelaus was, or I,
Or brave Ulysses.

R. Wicked Man, do thou,
Thine own sweet Daughter to the Altars vow?
And did thou Butcher her in the Calf's stead,
At Aulis; crumbling Salt Cake on her Head?
And think thy self more in thy Wits than he?

A. Why not?


R. be pleased but to hear and see;
For what did Ajax, while he was so mad,
To kill the Sheep (as thou did) half so b^d?
He did both from his Wife, and Son abstain,
And only the Atridae cursed in vain;
He neither Tencer, nor Ulysses slew.

A. But, that I was both wise and godly, show
I will to thee; for, to get off my Fleet
Which stuck upon the Sands, I thought it meet,
Their safe return to speed through the rough Seas,
The angry gods with blood thus to appease.

R. 'Twas with thine own blood Mad man.


A. true, 'twas so,
But that I was not Mad, this lets thee know.

R. Whose thoughts Tumultuous made by Wickedness,
Takes False for True; is mad, and he no less
Who does by Folly err, as who by Rage.
Was Ajax Mad who did in Fight engage
To kill Poor Lambs; and thou Godly and Wise,
Who Iphigenia kill'st in Sacrifice?
And those Fair Titles from a Crime so black
As thy Poor Daughter 'twas to kill, do take?
Should one in Coach a Lamb have with him ride,
And for it Clothes, Money and Maids provide,
And think it his Daughter, Miss and Madam too
Call it, and Husband stout bring it, to woe.
Would not the Praetor grant him for a Fool?
And what if one his Daughters at the Schole,
Should think a Lamb in Fold by like mistake,
And her Devoutly to the Altars take,
And think by Faith he that mute Creatures note
Hears, when he cuts his Shrieking Daughters throat?
Is he in his right mind? the other is
A Petty Folly; wicked Madness this.
Who think their God a Lamb, or that His Will
Was, they himself should on his Altar kill,
And offer to Himself; how Mad are they,
Let some New Poet in a Satyr say.

Godw. Jew. Ant. 141. Conceives Moloch, to whom Children were Sacrificed, to
be the same I^ol with Baal then, P. 152. He Conceives Baal Peor, so called
from Peor the Hill on which his Temple stood, to be the same Idol with Priapus:
so does Cornelius Agrippa, call Priapus, Baal Phegor; It is before shown, That
Priapus was the first who got Women and Men to be joined together by a Priest
in his Temple; if Priapus therefore was Baal, and Baal Moloch to whom Children
were Sacrificed: then ('it is more than probable) the same Idol, who Married in
Temples; as he by this got the Jurisdiction of Marriage, so by the Jurisdiction
of Marriage, he got into his Fiery hands the Jurisdiction of the Fruits of
Marriage young Children; and like a true unclean Devil, Defiled his Temple and
Altar, not only with Lust, but with Blood; and so this Custom of Marrying by
Priests in Temples in as many Nations (which were the greatest part) of the
World, which it past through; carried likewise, the Barbarous Cruelty of
Sacrificing, such Children of such Marriages, as the Priest requi^^d what
Children he pleased; to be Sacrificed, and as the Scripture Expresses, to
Devils; I shall for brevity, only Cite one Poet concerning this wicked Custom.

Mos fuit in Populis quos condidit advena Dido,
Poscere caede Deos veniam, ac flagrantibus aris
(Infandum dictu.) parvos imponere natos.
Silius. The People who by Dido founded were,
Did Pray to Gods with Blood, without a Tear;
And horribly on Flaming Altars burn,
Their little Babes, yet for them never mourn.
Ille suis Divis mos Sacrificare puellos,
Ennius. The Cruel Custom of the Indian Wives, burning themselves with their
Husbands, grew from the Jurisdiction the Priest gained over them by such
Priabeian Maraiage by a Priest in a Temple, and by the profit he made by the
same Burning or wicked Sacrifice of themselves. Which Custom Propertius thus
Describes:

Jamque ubi mortifero Jacta est fax ultima Lecto,
Vxorum fusis stat pia turba comis,
Et certamen habent Lethi quae prima sequatur,
Conjugium Pudor est non licuisse mori.
Ardent victrices, and flamae pectora praebent,
Imponuntque suis or^ perusta viris.
Proper. l. 3. Eleg. 12. When the last Brand does light Deaths bed of Flames,
With Hair dissheveld stand the Pious Dames,
And strive who first shall with her Husband lie;
Oh, shame they think if hindered then to dye.
Victorious they with Breasts and Mouths on fire,
Kiss their old Loves burning with new Desire.
The Indian Priests, from whom this Fiery zeal, Superstition and Mischief came,
usually attend the Woman at this Fatal Solemnity of her new marriage to her
Husband in another World, with which he Deludes her assuredly to believe
follows of course, if she burns her self, and goes with him. But first she must
go to the River and be Baptized with Water, for the washing away of her Sins,
and then be Baptized in this last fire, where he promises her their Holy
Spirit and god Ram will appear to her in a Vision in the midst of the Flames,
and be her Comforter: you cannot think a Priest will take all this pain to
Murder his whole Parish of Women if he can, without a Fee, though without a
Tear; for, besides his Ordinary fees, who should the Poor Deluded Martyress or
Martyresses (for many times the Indians, their Laws allowing Plurality of
Wives, have Ten or a Dozen, or if a Prince they may amount to a hundred) the
Husband being dead, make Executor and Overseer of all their Goods they leave
behind, to bestow them according to his direction, pur le Aline de defunct, for
the Benefit of the Souls of them he Murdered, But the Priest who so kindly
helped to dispatch them? Besides, he has for a further small gratuity for his
Pains, all the Bracelets, Pendants, Rings, and Jewels of Gold or Silver, which
the Women ware, who came thus to Sacrifice themselves; for they are Adorned
most Richly, as they were on their Wedding Day; And besides, other good Women
throw into their Laps some Letters, some Presents, some Money, and Desire her
to Deliver them to their Mother, or Brother, or other Kinsman or Friend, gone
before them into the other World, all which are burnt with her; and when that
is done, the Priest Rakes the Ashes, where, what a Batch has he of all that is
Incombustible of Rings, Bracelets, Gold, Silver, Jewels, Copper, Brass!
Especially where there are many Wives who burn together, and belonging to great
Persons: these so Sacred Relics of these Saints belong only to the Priest, to
his great gain. Taverenr. 2. Part. 170. and Lynschotten.

(16.) It lays Punishment on Lawful Childbirths, and destroys Millions of
Infants.
The Punishment of which, is Imposed on the Childbirths of every Woman, who
has not first been before a Priest in a Temple, and told all the Boys in the
Parish, That she has a mind to lie with a Man, is to be Exposed to Poblick
shame in a White Sheet, in the same Temple; and the Boys aforesaid, The cause
of Penance in a White Sheet is only for the gains of the Bishop.
to make Mops and Mowes at her, though they might better be Employed in saying
their Prayers after the Priest; the Persons on whom this shame is to be
Imposed, is Principally the Mother of the Child, but reflected by p^rticipation
on her Parents, Family, Kindred, and her Innocent Child it self. The Fi^al
Cause why this Shame is Imposed, is, that the Bishop may enforce her to give
him what Commutation Money he pleases to Demand, for his Remission of this
Penance, and Pardon of her Sins, and that he may have Power to set what Taxes
he pleases on Gods Ordinance of Marriage, and all Acts incident to the same,
which ought to be free, and thereby set to Hire and Sale, all Women Lawful and
Unlawful; and the Successions not only to all private Patrimonies, but
Kingdoms, and thereby fill his Chests with Gold and Silver.

The Sin or Offense, for which the Punishment is Imposed, is Childbearing and
nothing else, whatever is pretended; which is proved by these Reasons:

(1.) If he say, That he punishes the Mother for disobedience to his
Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons, in not Publishing her Intention to Marry, to
the Priest in the Temple, and the Boys in the Parish, and, what is the bottom
of the Business, not paying him his Fees for Publication according to the
Canons. This is easily Answered, by asking who made him a Legislator, and
Canon-Maker, over a Free People and their Children? This already is before
proved, That neither Ecclesiastical nor Temporal Law can be made, nor Tax
imposed on Marriage, or any thing else, without the Assent of the House of
Commons, and that was never given to any Papal or Episcopal Laws or Canons; as
has been already proved. And as has likewise been proved, All Ecclesiastical
Laws and Canons, made by any Popes or Bishops, Councils or Synods, from the
beginning of the World to these presents; in regard they never had the Assent
of the House of Commons in Parliament, are utterly Void and Null, to bind the
People or their Posterity. No Law in England for standing in a White Sheet.
So there being not so much as a Law of Man in England Prohibiting Marriage,
without a Priest and Temple, under the Penalty of standing in a White Sheet;
and there being no Law, there can be no Offense Besides, if there were such a
Law, it is already before shown that all Laws Prohibiting Marriage (Except by a
Priest in a Temple) are the Doctrine of Demons, and came Originally from
Demons and the Priests of Priapus and Venus, and Contrary to the Moral Law of
God and Nature; the Bishop has therefore no pretense to Punish the Woman for
that.

(2.) There are no other Offenses in Bearing a Child which a Woman can commit,
but breach of Contract, Incest, Fornication or Adultery. As to breach of
Contract and Incest, the Bishop punishes Persons Free, and not Prohibited by
any Law of God to Marry: As to Fornication and Adultery, the first Offense
cannot (as has already been shown) be Committed without Polyandry in the
Woman, and the second without Polygynecy in the Man; But the Bishop punishes
her who bears a Child, though the Father and Mother were no way Prohibited to
Marry by any Law of God or Man, and they were at the time of Begetting the
Child both Virgins, and neither Guilty of Polyandry or Polygynecy, and so still
continue Chaste and Constant one to another: The Bishop therefore punishing such
a Woman, does punish her for Childbearing, or for nothing.

(3.) There is no Probation, by two or more Witnesses, of any Offense but Child
bearing; and Probation by Compulsion of the Woman to self-Accusation, or by
Compulsion of Canonical Purgation are unlawful. The Bishop therefore punishing
such a Woman, if he punish her not for Childbearing only, he punishes her for
Facts whereof he has no Lawful Probation.

It being therefore proved, That the Bishop punishes Lawful Childbearing: It
appears further, That he punishes the Lawful more than the Unlawful; for such
Women as are common in Stews or Brothels seldom bear a Child, as has been
shown before, and such Women as are Married to Husbands (and therefore can
only be Guilty of Adultery) if the Husband be within the Four Seas of the time
of Begeting the Children on their Wives by Adulterers, it has been shown
already, That Littleton and Coke, will by Fiction have it be believed that
these Adulterous Children were got by the absent Husband, And that Probatio non
admittitur in Contrarium, whereby Marriage by a Priest in a Temple is made a
Sanctuary for Adulteresses, and for Adulterous Childbearing they are Exempt
from punishment, but the Poor Lawful Childbearing Woman, against whom there is
neither Fact nor Probation of any Crime to be shown, is the Chief Subject of
the Bishops punishment: a Fact so Barbarous, as not to be paralleled in the
Example of Turks, Tartars, Americans, or any Ethniek Nation; Except
Gaeramantes, who have a wicked Custom, that if any Married Woman Procreate more
than three Children, she shall be Divorced from her Husband, because a
Multitude of Children caused Men to have Covetous hearts; and besides the
Divorce of the Mother, such Supernumerary Children were to be slain before the
Parents eyes. But Bishops are worse than the Garamantes, for they punish though
but one Childbearing, whereas the other punished not till after. Three, and
exercise those Inhumanities for their Gain against Childbearing Women, which
the Scripture Prohibits to be Exercised to the very Brutes, Deuter. 22.6. If a
Birds nest chance to be before thee in the way in any Tree, or on the Ground,
whether they be young ones, or Eggs, and the Dam sitting upon the Young, or
upon the Eggs, thou shall not take the Dam with the Young. But thou shall in
any wise let the Dam go, and take the Young to thee, that it may be well with
thee, and that thou may prolong thy days. The Bird is not any wise to be
punished for this Natural Piety to her Young, but to be set at Liberty and let
go, and that they may Defile their Marriages by the Example of the Garamantes
with Blood, as they do by Example of Priapus and Venus with uncleanness, they
most Cruelly, to that Misery Nature has Imposed on the Mother in Sorrow to
bring forth, (though of it self of pains Equal with Death, and often ti^^es
brings Death) add their Punishment of Exposing the Mother to Public Reproach
and Shame, which to the Modest is worse than Death. And by how much the more
Modest the Mother is, by so much the more easily is she tempted by the Devil,
with a Praestat Emori quam per dedecus vivere, to destroy her Infant to cover
her own shame and his. Pope Gregory intending to Fish in a Deep Pond in Rome
near a Nunnery, the Water being let out, found therein above Six Thousand
Sculls of Infants: 6000 Infants Skuls found in a Fish Pond.
so the punishing of Childbearing Women, and Prohibiting Marriage (Except by a
Priest in a Temple) under this Infamous Punishment, contrary to the Law of God,
and according to the Law of Devil, who was a Murderer from the beginning,
caused the Destroying of these Six Thousand Infants; and were all the like
Instances recited, which for Brevity are here to be omitted, it would appear,
That this punishing of Child-births because the Mother went not first to a
Priest in a Temple, has Murderd Millions of Babes, and is the true Popish
Limbus Puerorum Translated into the Romish Church from Hell, according to the
Poet,

Continuo auditae voces vagitus and Ingens
Infantumque animae flentes in Limine primo
Quos Dulcis vitae Exortes and ab ubere raptos
Abstulit atra dies and funere mersit acerbo.
Virg. Aen.l. 6. And these Papal and Episcopal Destroyers, make the
Childbearing Woman justly take up the complaint of her Described; Jer. 4.31. I
have heard a voice of a Woman in travel, and the anguish as of her who brings
forth her first Child, that bewaileth her self, that spreads her hands,
saying, woe is me now, for my Soul is wearyed because of Murderers. Surely these
Bloody Legislatours must have a Dreadful account, who make Laws, for their
gains, to destroy the most Innocent of all Creatures, little Children, Luke
17.1.2. Then said be unto his Disciples, it is impossible but offenses will
come; but woe unto him through whom they come: It were better for him that a
Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the Sea, than that he
should offend one of these little ones. O how far, in this, is the Practice of
such as call themselves Christians different from the Doctrine of Christ?
Matthew. 18.2. And Jesus called a little Child unto him, and set him in the midst
of them, and said, verily I say unto you, except ye be Converted, and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And verse. 6.
Whosoever receives one such little Child in my Name, receives me. But alas / how
does this corrupted age receive such a little one? They receive him indeed as
He Himself was received, Matthew. 26.55. In that same hour said Jesus to the
multitude, Are you come out as against a Theif, with swords and with staves for
to take me? But this was not the Receiving he intended, of a little one; though
now, amongst those who profess his name, no sooner does God send a Child to be
born in a Parish, unless the Mother bought a License of the Bishop to bear him,
and bought (which none but God can give, more than the Child) the Benediction
of a Priest in the Temple, but the whole Multitude presently rise with swords
and staves, and are all in Arms against a poor naked Infant, weeping and
wailing as the first taste of his misery, to be born into so wicked a World, and
against the more miserable Mother, like the Dam sitting on her Young, whom they
throw into some Dung-Cart, or other filthy Carriage, to draw her and her Child
out of their bounds; and unless she is Rich enough to hire a House of Ten
Pounds per annum value, they will not suffer her to come into it. Oh Prodigious
Oppression! Oh Antichristian Cruelty! What benefit now have the Poor, who have
not Ten Pounds per annum of the Gospels? the whole Land is in Hostility against
them, they will neither suffer them to enter into their Parishes, nor their
Churches; what benefit have these hundreds of thousands (who have not ten
Pounds per annum) of Magna Charta? What of the Petition of Right? The Foxes
have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests, but the Woman with Child, like
her pursu^d with the Dragon, Rev. 12.2. Cried, travailing in birth, and pained
to be delivered. (Quis talia fando temperet a Lachrymis?) has not where to lay
her Young, her Child unborn, by reason of Papal and Episcopal Laws, which are
the flood of Waters cast out of the mouth of the true Romish Dragon, heu
miserande puer! damnatus antequam natus. Hospitals to prevent the Murder of
Children not born under Popish Matrimony.
There are Hospitals in Italy and Spain, and many other places of large
Revenues, to which Mothers who have Children without the Popish Ceremonial
Marriage of a Priest in a Temple, may by night secretly bring or send their
Babes, who shall be their Received, Alimented, and Educated without knowledge or
enquiry by Bishops Citations, or Justice of Peace's Warrants; and there is now
one in Paris by the name of l' Hostle pur les Enfantes troves, or the Hospital
of Infant Fondlings, wherein there are now no less than four Thousand. But in
Great Britain there is not the least Relic of any such Charity, but on the
Contrary most cruel Laws made, to punish Mothers for bringing forth Children,
the most part of them lawfully joined to men according to the Moral Law of God,
only on pretense of prohibition by Papal and Episcopal Laws, and their Doctrine
of Devils, contrary to the Law of God, whereby they may get Money, the wicked
Price of Blood, and of the Blood of those who are of all other the most
Innocent, the blood of Infants; and are so far from providing Hospitals for
Babes when they are born, that they will not in England suffer their Mothers to
bring them (as is already said) to an House of their own, if not of the Value
of above Ten Pounds per Annum; and so far from being Fathers to the Fatherless,
that by their inhuman prosecution of the Punishments of those Cruel Laws,
against Babes born of Parents not licensed by the Bishop, and benedicted by a
Priest in a Temple, they make the Child, for whom God had provided Parents, (by
compelling them to fly from him for fear of their own punishment,) both
Fatherless and Motherless, or (what is more horrible) to be Murdered by them
who would have otherwise as affectionately preserved him, as all other Natural
Parents and Creatures, both Human and Brutish, do their Young. Oh is it not a
sufficient misery for an Infant to be born, unless he is likewise pursued to be
destroyed by the Cruelty of Ecclesiastical Monsters, and hurried from the Womb
to the Tomb of their Coemeterial Aceldamas, before he knows any thing of Life
but Misery? if Bishops pity him not, let Lucretius do it, to their shame,
though an Atheist.

Tum porro Puer ut Saevis projectus ab undis
Navita Nudus humi jacet Infans indigus omni
Vitali Auxilio, cum primum in Luminis oras
Nixibus ex alveo Matris Natura profundit
Vagituque locum Lugubri complet ut aequum est
Cui tantum in Vita restat transire malorum.
Like Shipwrackt Mariners, the Child at Birth
Cast from Rough Seas, lies Naked on the Earth,
Wanting all Vital help, when first from throws
Of Mothers Womb Nature does him disclose:
He Weeps and Wails, not without cause alas,
Why so much Evil in this Life must pass.
All Marriages lawful, not prohibited by the Moral Law of God.
All these Murders of Children would cease, better than by a Thousand Hospitals,
if only this wicked Ceremonial Law invented by him who was a Murderer from the
beginning, forbidding to Marry without a Priest in a Temple were abolished, and
all Marriage Public or Private not prohibited by the Moral Law of God, and
Consummate by the birth of a Child, Established to be Sine poena aut Infamia,
as they ought in Truth and Right to be.

(17.) It caused the Parisian Massacre of an Hundred Thousand Protestants.
Why Protestants should Idolize this Ceremonial Snare of Compulsion to Marry by
a Priest in a Temple, whereby the Papists with their Female Elephants hunt the
Males to their destruction, in the same manner as the Priests of Baal-peor did
the Isaelites, is strange. Numb. 25.1. And Israel abode in Shittim, and the
People began to commit Whoredom with the Daughters of Moab. And they called the
People unto the Sacrifices of their gods: and the People did eat, and bowed
down to their gods. And Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor: and the anger of
the Lord was kindled against Israel. And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the
People, and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun, that the fierce anger
of the Lord may be turned away from Israel. And Moses said unto the Judges of
Israel, Slay ye every one his men, that were joined unto Baal-peor. And besides
those who were Slain by the Sword, Verse 9. Those that died of the Plague were
Twenty and Four Thousand. I am here to speak against the mischiefs of
Compulsion of Protestants to two Popish Sacraments, to both of which this
Priapeian Ceremony of Marriage by a Priest in a Temple, is a Causa sine qua
non, which two Sacraments, one of the Host, and the other of Marriage, are the
two fatal Banquets to which the Catholic Lady uses to invite the imprudent
Protestant, who has learnt only the Innocence of the Dove, but not the Wisdom
of the Serpent. Their first Sacrament which is of Bread, they have
transubstantiated into Poison; their second Sacrament, which is of Marriage,
they have transubstantiated into Blood; of the first, these Examples follow.

The Emperor Henry the Seventh was Poisoned in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, Popish Sacrament of Bread Tan^^bstantiared into Poison.
by a Friar of the Order of St. Dominick, and thereof died the same day.
Perhaps one Reason why the Papist Priest Administers not the Wine to the Laity,
but only the Bread, may be, because if the Priest should Poison the Wine, he
drinking thereof first, might Poison himself as well as his Guests, and his
Friends as well as his Enemies; but he may divide the Bread in Wafers or
Morsels, such as are Poisoned, to the Parties he designs them, and such as he
appoints for bits of a Passover to the rest. But it is certain the Priest may
do what he will, and whether he Poisons Bread or Wine, neither Prince or
Subjects have their Tasters of either; and it is very hard therefore either
should be compelled to receive it of any Priest, except of their own Election,
as to Person and Place, though but once a Year; and very improper and dangerous
it is for a Test between Papist and Protestant, seeing it cannot be known
whether the Priest who gives it be a Papist or no, for if he be, he will not
spare Poison, if he can thereby reach his designs, on his own Religion, as
appears in the Examples following, much less on a Protestant.

Lavaterus tells of a Friar at Berna, who was endeavored to be deceived by his
Companions, who made counterfeit Apparitions of the Virgin Mary to him in the
Night, that he might become an Instrument by divulging his Visions, and the
Revelations in them, to confirm their Superstition amongst the People, but it
seems they were but Novices in the Art of Counterfeiting, and were so ill
attired, or Acted so ill upon their new Stage, that though the Friar was but a
Block-head, he perceived by the voice it was the Sub-prior in Woman's apparel,
who personated to him the Virgin Mary; they being therefore fearful he should
detect their Knavery, attempted three times to poison him in the Host or
Sacrament, and the third time he swallowed it, and vomitted it up again, hardly
escaping with life, which made the Bernoyes begin not to think the Sacrament
the Body of Christ, which was so often turned to Poison.

Prince Visnorisky who was a Protestant of the Greek Church, about the Year
1616. having prepared at Christmas to receive the Communion after their manner,
the Priest who had usually served him in that Devotion being corrupted with
Money by his Enemies, poisoned the Bread, which the Prince having received, he
suddenly fell sick, and his Torments were so violent, as he died the next day;
this bred a suspicion that he had been poisoned, whereupon the Priest was
apprehended, who presently confessed he was guilty, and had been procured by
his Enemies; whereupon the Priest was Executed, being bound in a Chair of
Copper Wire, and Roasted to Death, Turk. Hist. 1350. These few are discovered
to Men; but who can Imagine but a greater multitude of these Wickednesses are
committed by such as are so studied in the Art of Poisoning, which remain in
secret and undiscovered, and are therefore reserved to the just Judgment of the
All-knowing God?

Popish Sacrament of Marriage transubstantiated into blood.
Of the Second, which is the Popish Sacrament of Marriage transubstantiated into
the Blood, take the Example following of the Infamous, Perfidious, Cowardly,
Traitorous, Diabolical, and worse than Barbarous and Pagan Parisian Massacre of
an Hundred Thousand Protestants, under Faith and Oath given of safe Conduct and
Peace, and on Solemn Covenants of Marriage, Anno Dom. 1572. This base Practice
of the French Papists, who found themselves too weak in the Field to injure the
Protestant, of Circumventing him by Perjury, and breach of Faith and Covenant,
the most Sacred Obligations of all humane Society, is very well, and more at
large displayed in a Relation but lately Printed, 1678. out of Mezeray Thuanus,
and other approved Authors, of which, with what Brevity I can, I shall only
touch Heads.

Pa^isian Massacre of Protestants intrapped by a Marriage.
The French King after Ten Years Civil War, was advised to set on foot a Treaty
of Peace, not so much out of any design to quiet matters, as to ensnare the
Protestants in some fatal Trap, in which they might be safely and easily
destroyed; the first Bait to be offered was, the Marriage of the Lady Margaret
the Kings Sister, to Henry King of Navar, and if that succeeded not, they were
to invent still a new Plot, till they found that which would do the Business, a
Peace was therefore concluded with the Protestants, by which the free Exercise
of their Religion was granted them, some Cautionary Towns were also put into
their hands to be kept by them two Years, till there were a full settlement
made of the Edicts, and the other things agreed to for their Security: the next
Progress in the Treacherous Design was, when a Confidence was begotten on the
Faith and Covenants of this Peace in the Protestants, then to draw the chief
Heads of the Party to the Court, and they being so flattered into their
compass, they had the Power whenever they thought fit, to surprise and
destroy them as they pleased; the Protestant Admiral Coligni, was the first
whom the King with a Counterfeit Countenance and Promises, and great Donatives,
drew to Court; the Queen of Navarr^ was next drawn thither, but soon after
died, as was generally believed of Poison, that was given her in some perfumed
Gloves; to conceal which, the Chirugions that opened her, would not touch her
head, pretending that she died of an Imposthume in her side; the Cardinal
Castilion was also at that time poisoned, which though after confessed by him
that had done it, yet was not then so much as suspected; the King of Navarre
and Prince of Conde were then drawn to Court, and received with all the signs
of Friendship could be invented; a Dispensation was obtained from the Pope for
the Marriage, and the chief Heads of the Protestants were all drawn to Paris,
on pretense to assist at the Solemnities of the Marriage; on the Seventeenth of
August the King of Navarre was Married, and four Days were spent in all the
Bravery of Diversions that are usual on such occasions, but were now performed
with more than ordinary Magnificence and Joy, there was but one part of the
Kings deportment which could give any ground of Jealousy, which were the
horrid and Blasphemous Oaths and Imprecations, which he made Use of on all
occasions, to persuade them of the Reality of his Professions, which always
raise suspicions in sober and wary Persons; these the King used so frequently,
that the Writers of that time say, he seldom spoke three words without some
Terrible Oath, or Blasphemous Expression; but it was now high time to Execute
his Design, not valuing his Oaths, the Duke of Guise was therefore put upon it
to get the Protestant Admiral Assassinated, who employed therein one Maurenell
who had formerly Assassinated another Person for him; this Rogue he placed in
the House of one who had been his Tutor, near St. German of Auxerre, where the
Admiral used to pass, as he went or came from the Louvre; therefore on the
Twenty Second of August about Noon, as the Admiral was going home from the
Court reading a Paper that he had in his hand, the Assassinate that was laid
for him shot him, from the House where the Duke of Guise had placed him; his
Fury was charged with three Bullets that were believed to be poisoned, one of
these carried away part of the Forefinger, the other struck in his left Arm,
the third missed: The King was in the Tennis-Court when the news was brought
him, and Personated a deep Resentment, and said in a Tone seeming full of
Affliction, and with a Terrible Oath, Shall I never have quiet? and so threw
away his Racquet, and went out in a Rage. The Duke of Guise did also
counterfeit some Surprise. The King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde came to
the King to complain, and desired his leave to go out of Town, seeing men were
not safe so near the Court; the King seemed more to Resent it than they, and
with the most horrible Oaths that he could think of, Swore, he would Execute
such Revenge on all that were found guilty, as should never be forgotten, and
desired them to stay, and be witnesses of it, and visited the Admiral who lay
sick of his Wounds, with great show of condoleing his misfortune; but in short,
after all these, and many other counterfeit Shows, a Council is called by The
Most Christian, most Perjured King, wherein it was Resolved, That not only the
Persons of Quality of the Religion should be killed, but every one of what
condition soever of that Profession, should be Massacred; and amongst them
violently was moved that the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde should run the
common Fate of the rest, till with much ado moderated, by another Party, that
they should be only enforced to change their Religion, and the Conduct of the
whole Business was committed to the Duke of Guise, to destroy all the
Protestant Heretics through the Kingdom, who first ordered a strong Guard to
be set about the places where the Admiral and his Friends Lodged, that none
might escape, and to have a multitude of Torches and Flambeaux ready, only to
light out of their Windows; and a multitude of Soldiers, whose Sign should be a
White Linen Sleeve on the left Arm, and a White Cross in their Caps, and the
pretense was, that these should show the King a Divertisement in the Night; in
the Counterfeit Assaulting of a Fort, and the time appointed for the Execution
was at Tolling of the Great Bell of the Palace, which should be done near the
break of Day, and then they were to light their Torches and March, the Signal
was given the Morning of the 24th. of August, St. Bartholomew's Day, being
Sunday, part of the Soldiers are sent to the Lodgings of the Wounded Admiral,
to go through with the Murder begun, and Seven breaking into his Chamber all
Armed, there killed him, and the Duke of Guise being below the Court, bid them
to throw him out of the Window, which was done, and either the Duke, or the
Count of Angoulesme (for it is differently reported) wiped his face, for it was
disfigured with Blood, to know if it was be indeed, and perceiving it was,
trampled on his Belly, and went away; an Italian cut off his head, and carried
it to the Queen Mother, and then embalmed it, and sent it to the Pope; then all
the Ignominy and Barbarity possible was exercised on the Dead Carcass, his
Fingers and Hands were cut off, his Body dragged about the Streets, thrown into
the Seine, and hanged up in Chains his Feet uppermost, and a Fire was set under
to burn, which only Roasted, and consumed it not; here the horrible Massacre
began, and ended not till it had run through the whole City, and Country, with
all the most Hellish Butcheries could be devised, one would cut off the Nose,
another the Ear, a third the Hands, a fourth the Arms of the same Party, before
they would be so merciful as to kill him. No Degrees, Age, or Sex spared, Young
or Old, Infant or Suckling, and a single Death satisfied not, till they made
them die many Deaths, and till, as is Estimated, there were destroyed an
Hundred Thousand Innocent Protestants. The Cruelty of which, was so abhorred by
the Soldiers themselves, that many of them endeavored to save many of the
Protestants; for sure of all Men the most Valiant are the most Merciful; but
the more than Feminine Cruelty of the Babylonish Bishops, which they derived
from the Woman who sat on the Beast, so set on the Multitude, as made them
worse than all the wild Beasts in the World, which justly gives cause of
Abhorrence against Episcopal Compulsion to Marry by a Priest in a Temple, the
same being the means without which this Perfidious and Bloody Massacre could
not have been Effected.

Why the Ottoman Emperors Marry not by a Priest, or in a Temple; and of the
Bloody Murders ensued of the Sons of Solomon the Magnificent by breaking the
Custom, and being drawn by the Deceit of Roxolana to Marry her by a Priest.
The Reasons why the Grand Seigniors Marry not themselves by a Priest, or in a
Temple, or by a Magistrate, or with any other Public Solemnity, but only make
Use of Private Natural Marriage, are, (1.) It prevents the great Charge of a
Dower or Jointure, which Turkish Emperors are bound to give their Queens who
are Married by a Priest; for as Withers Relates, amongst the Grand Seigniors
Seraglio of Women, Marriage made by the first birth of a Child, and not by
words of a Priest.
she is esteemed Empress who brings him the first Son, and they were formerly
Married before the Mufti, or Archpriest, which was only to give one another
their Assent before him, and he to make an Hodget or Note in Writing of it, and
of the Dower the Emperor was to give her; which, except as to the Dower, was no
other than as our Certificate of the Bishop, touching which Selymus being
Uxorious, and having given in his Marriage Five Hundred Thousand Chequins a
Year to his Queen, made a Law, no Successor, if they Married, should give less
than he had done to their Queens; whereupon the Emperors succeeding forebore,
and it grew out of fashion to Marry by the Priest, to save their Dower and
other excessive Expenses incident to Public Marriages of Princes, and had
thereby likewise their Queens far more obsequious than before, they thereby
depending wholly on the Love of their Husbands to give them what they pleased,
according to their merit. (2.) By not Marrying by a Priest he is clear from all
Burden of Allyances of his Sultana, Poor or Rich. (3.) The Grand Seignior
thereby regained into his own hands the Patria Potestas belonging to every
Father, of being Judge who were his own Children, which had been by his
Superstitious Predecessors unwarily Alien'd to his Arch-Mufti or Archbishop;
for by giving him Power by his Hodget or Certificate to declare the Marriage,
there followed as incident thereto the Archbishop's Legitimation of his
Children, and Declaration of his Heir Apparent and Successor. Then further, the
Mohammedan Law allowing Plurality, if Married by the Priest they could not be
Married altogether, but one after another; or if they were, a Child of a Woman
Married after might come sooner, which Priority of Marriage by the Mother would
have destroyed the Custom of Primogeniture of the Son first born of any Wife,
whether the beloved or hated, or first Married, or after Married, so (4.) he
kept the Right of Primogeniture and Peace in his own Family, which if he having
an Elder Son by a first Wife, not Married by a Priest, should have a Younger
Son by a Second Wife Married by a Priest, this pretense might cause Murder or
Civil Wars between his Elder and Younger Sons, one standing on his Right of
Primogeniture, and the other on the Hodget or Certificate of the Archbishop,
of Prior Marriage of the Later Mother by the Priest; as happened in the Example
of Solomon the Magnificent, and Roxolana, Turk, Hist. 758. where it appears
that Solomon the Magnificent begot of his first Empress, (a Circassian
Bondwoman, not Married by a Priest) Mustapha his Eldest Son, who proved a
Prince of great Excellency, and most dearly beloved by the Army and People;
after, Solomon according to their Custom of Plurality of Wives grows wanton,
and begets four Sons more of Roxolana, another of his Bond-women, namely
Mahomet, Selymus, Bajazet, and Tzithanger, and one Daughter called Chameria,
Married to Rustan the Great Basha; Roxolana being her self a great Beauty, and
having so fair an Issue, and a Potent Son in Law to assist her, and no obstacle
but the Primogeniture of Mustapha to make her own Son the Heir apparent of the
Greatest Empire in the World, discovered her self to be more adorned with Gold
and Pearls than Virtue, yet counterfeits Religion to bring her Designs to pass,
but first take the Epigram by Knolles subscribed to her Picture.

Fronti nulla fides, nulla est fiducia formae,
Pectore dum savo dira venena Latent.
Philtra viro Miscet fallax, miserumque coegit
Sanguine natorum Commaculare manus.
No Trust there is to Face or Beauty, when
The Breast of Poisoned Serpents is the Den.
Her wretched Husband her Love-Cups untrue,
Made in his own Sons blood his hands imbrue.
This Woman, to begin her intended Tragedy under color of Goodwill and Love,
had procured Mustapha the Young Prince, and his Mother, to be sent (as she
pretended for their greater Honor and Estate) with a Princely Train and
Revenue to Caram^nia, to Govern that Great Country; and having thus cunningly
Rid the Court of the two Competitors both of her Love and the Empire, rested
not so, but began straight way to plot in her malicious head the Destruction of
him to whom all others wished Happiness; and though she had removed him far
absent in his Person, yet the continually increasing Fame of his Valor Virtues
and Perfections, seemed to be still before her Eyes, and in her Ears, the great
and only disturbance of her Desires, and Clouds which kept the Sun from shining
on them; and doubting of any sufficient Assistants or Instruments amongst the
Military Forces, in regard all the Soldiers were at the Devotion of the Prince,
and not of Rustan her Son in Law, whom they hated, though she had got him to be
Chief Commission-Officer over them; she therefore fixes the other part of her
hopes on the Priest, and Resolves to try what could be supplied by the Gown,
which was defective in the Sword; and to prepare the way the better, she on a
sudden Counterfeits her self to be very Religious, and having grown by the
favor of Solomon exceeding Rich, pretended, (as if it had been on a devout
Zeal) for the health of her Soul, after the manner of their Turkish
Superstition to build an Abbey, with an Hospital and a Church; which so Godly a
purpose she imparted to the Mufti, or Chief Mohammedan Priest, demanding of him
if such works of Charity were not acceptable to God, and available to her Souls
health? to which the Mufti answered, That those Works were no doubt gracious in
the sight of God, but nothing at all meritorious for her Souls health, being a
Bondwoman, yet very profitable for the Soul of the Great Emperor Solomon,
unto whom, as unto her Lord, both she and all that she had appertained; at
which answer of the great Priest she seemed to be exceedingly troubled, and
thereupon became wonderful pensive and Melancholic; her Cheerful Countenance
was Replete with Sadness, and her fair Eyes flowed with Tears; her Mirth was
Mourning, and her Joy Heaviness; which thing Solomon perceiving, and sorry to
see his Love upon Conceit so to languish, sent her word to be of good cheer,
and to comfort her self, promising in short time to take such a Course as
should ease her of all her Griefs, of which she had made some discovery to him;
which he did, solemnly Manumising her from her Bond Estate. So great a favor
obtained, Roxolana with great cheerfulness began those Meritorious Works by her
before intended, as if she had thought of nothing but Heaven, whereas indeed
her thoughts were in the depth of Hell. While she had thus a good while busied
her self in paving her way to heaven, as was thought, Solomon, not able any
longer to forbear the company of her in whom his Soul lived, after his wonted
manner sent for her by one of his Eunuchs, who should have brought her to his
Bedchamber; to whom she with Eyes cast up to Heaven demurely answered, That
her Life and whatsoever she had was at her Dread Sovereign's Command, but again
to yield her Body to his Appetite, she might not do, without great offense to
the High God, and manifest breach of his Laws, which permitted her not now
voluntarily to yield him that, being a Freewoman, which he before might
without offense command of his Bondwoman. And because she would not seem to
use this as an Excuse, she referred her self in all things to the Grave
Judgment of the Learned and Revern'd Mufti, with whom she before had at full
conferred. This she did, presuming of the Sovereignty she had over the great
Monarch, whom she well knew she had so fast bound, in pleasing Fetters of his
Affection toward her, as that she was sure enough of him without a keeper.
Solomon Ravished with her Love, and the more for her denial, sent for the
Mufti, requiring his Judgment in the matter; who before instructed in all
points, agreed with what Roxolana had said, aggravating the Heinousness of the
Fact, if he should proceed to enforce her as his Slave, who being now Free he
might not without great offense touch unmarried; whereupon Solomon more and
more burning in his Desires, became a fresh Suitor to her for Marriage, whom he
had so often before Commanded without it; which his Suite easily obtained (as
the mark at which she aimed) he with all speed, to the great admiration of all
men, and contrary to the manner of the Mohammedan Emperors, solemnly Married her
by a Priest, which like the P^pist's Subsequens Matrimonium tollit Peccatum
Precedens, Legitimates the Issue born before, for which the Ambodexter Priest
had (no doubt) a good Fee, both of the Emperor and Roxolana, and he gave
Roxolana a Dowry of the Yearly Sum of Five Thousand Sultanies per Annum;
besides which Fees and Dowry, and his Patria Potestas, of Legitimating his own
Issue, and Peace of their Families, his wiser Predecessors had saved by
Marrying themselves privately, without a Priest or Temple; but all these he
lost by it; for Roxolana grew now more busy than ever, to seek means to
destroy the Prince; and to that end Ruftan gives the Intelligence to the
Governors of Syria, That the old Emperor highly suspected the Prince his Son of
aspiring to the Empire, bearing them in hand that the more suspitiously they
writ concerning the Prince, the less suspicious the Emperor would be of his
Governors; whereupon these Governors writing of the Princely Disposition,
Wisdom, Valor, and Bounty of the Prince, whereby he courted and won the hearts
of the Soldiers and People, and that it was probable he would at length thereby
attain the Empire, Rustan not daring to bring any matter on these Letters to
Solomon himself, brought them always to Roxolana, and left the rest to be
managed by her cunning and malicious head, who taking fit opportunity when
Mustapha was talked of, with Tears trickling down her Cheeks (which she could
well Command) with aggravating these Letters, and other matters invented, told
the Emperor in what Danger he stood, recounting amongst other things how
Selymus his Father had by such means deprived Bajazet his Grandfather, both of
his Life and Empire together, and therefore most instantly besought him, as
though this had proceeded from her tender love, by that example to provide for
himself. But these light matters seemed to Solomon of no sufficient weight to
ground so dangerous a suspicion on, so that she little prevailed thereby, which
she well perceiving and grieved at, she converted her Cruel mind to other
mischievious devices, and sought by all means how to Poison the Innocent
Prince, neither wanted there wicked Men for Reward ready to have performed all
that she desired, had not Gods Providence withstood so horrible a Practice; for
whereas certain Rich Apparel was by her sent to him in his Fathers name; he
fearing the worst, would not touch it before he had caused it to be wore by one
of his Servants, by which curious wariness (as was thought) he at that time
prevented the Treason of his wicked Step-dame, and discovered her malicious
Practice. Yet rested she not so, but was still Plotting new devices, and at
last got from the Bassa who attended the Prince, certain Letters, wherein was
contained that there was a Speech of a Marriage between the Prince and the King
of Persia's Daughter, which thing he thought good to give knowledge of to the
Counsel, that if any harm should ensue thereof he might be out of Suspicion;
with these Letters Roxolana and Rustan go both together to Solomon, aggravating
the danger of the Ambition of Mustapha, who under hand sought Alliance with the
Persian, the old Enemy of the Ottoman Emperors, and that he might by the
strength of Persia, and the Sanzacks and Janissaries, whom he had by large Gifts
won to his service, deprive him in short time both of Life and Empire; and
these Accusations they prosecuted with such continued Importunity, that they
never suffered the Old Emperor to live quiet till he resolved to secure his
own safety by the death of his Son, in this manner, Anno 1552. He caused an
Army to be Levied by Rustan, in pretense against Persia, but indeed to surprise
Mustapha, and bring him bound to Constantinople, and if he could not, by any
other means to make him out of the way. And in the year. 1553. Solomon himself
in Person marches with the Army against his Son, but the Design could not be
carried so private, but Mustapha had some intelligence of his Fathers Mortal,
though undeserved hatred against him. Solomon lying Encamped at Aleppo, by
Message commanded his Son Mustapha to come unto him there. This cast Mustapha
into great perplexity of mind what to do, either to hazard his life by putting
himself into his Father Power, or by flight or some other way to provide for
himself; yet trusting to his own Innocence, though wonderfully troubled in
mind, he Resolved, though with the extremest danger of his life, to obey his
Fathers command; thinking it more honorable to incur danger of death, than
living to fall into foul suspicion of disloyalty. In so great a perplexity of
mind, after he had with himself much discoursed too and fro, what course he
were best to take, at length he boldly and resolutely asked the Doctor, whom
(as we have before said) he had always with him in his Court, whether the
Empire of the World, or a Blessed life after it were more to be desired? To
whom the Doctor frankly Answered, That the Empire of the World, to him that
would enter into the due consideration thereof, brought with it no Felicity,
more than a vain Show and outward appearance of Good, nothing being more frail
and uncertain than Worldly Honor, bringing with it fear, vexation of mind,
tribulation, suspicion, murder, wrong, wickedness, spoil, ruin and captivity,
with infinite mischiefs of like nature, not to be desired of him that would
attain to true Felicity, by which means the Blessed life was to be lost and not
gained: But they unto whom God had given the Grace rightly to Consider and
Weigh the Fragility and shortness of this our Estate, (which the Common Sort
deemeth to be the only life) and to strive against the Vanities of this World,
and to Embrace and Follow an upright kind of life; had undoubtedly a place
Assigned for them in Heaven, and prepared by the great God, where they should
at length enjoy Life and Bliss Eternal. This Answer of the great Doctor,
wonderfully satisfied the troubled mind of the young Prince, foreseeing as it
were the approach of his own end: and so staying not any longer Discourse,
forthwith set forward toward his Father, and making great have, came at length
to his Fathers Camp, and not far off pitched his Tents in the open field, but
this his so hasty march the more increased the suspicion, in the mind of his
wicked Father: neither spared Rustan in the mean time with his crafty and
subtle devices to Augment the same; for by a sign given he caused the
Janissaries and chief Men in the Army to go, as if it had been for Honors sake,
to meet Mustapha; which they all without delay presently did at his Command,
and so altogether set forward: in the mean time he the most crafty Varlet, with
troubled Countenance (for he could notably dissemble) as a Man half dismayed,
came in have into Solymans Pavillion, and falsely told him, That the Janissaries
and almost all the best Soldiers of the Army were of themselves without leave
gone to meet Mustapha, and that he feared what would ensue thereof. Which news
so troubled the old Tyrant, that he became pale for fear, and going out of his
Tent, and finding them gone, easily believed all to be true that the false
Bassa had told him. Neither wanted Mustapha strange warning of his end so near
at hand, for the third day before his setting forwards toward his Father,
falling a sleep in the Evening, he thought he saw Mahomet his Prophet in Bright
Apparel, to take him by the hand, and lead him into a most pleasant place,
beautified with most stately and glorious Palaces, and most Delicate and
pleasant Gardens; and pointing to every thing with his Finger, to say thus unto
him, Here rest they for ever, which in this World have led an upright and Godly
life, following virtue, and detesting vice. And after that turning his face to
the other side, to have showed him two great and swift Rivers, whereof the one
boiled with Water blacker than Pitch, and in them appeared (as he thought)
numbers of Men wallowing and tumbling, some up, some down, crying horribly for
Mercy; and there (said he) are Punished all such as in this frail life have
been the malicious workers of Iniquity: The chief of whom (as he said) were
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and other great Men of the World. Mustapha awaking,
and troubled with this melancholic Dream, called unto him his Doctor: and
having told him all the matter, asked him, what the same might signify?
standing a great while in a muse (for the Mahometans are exceeding
Superstitious, Attributing much to Dreams) full of Sorrow and Grief at length
Answered, That this Vision (for so it pleased him to term it) was undoubtedly
to be feared, as presaging unto him the Extreme Peril of his life; and
therefore Requested him, to have great care both of his Life and Honor. But
Mustapha, as he was of a notable Spirit and Courage, regarding nothing that
Answer, stoutly Replied, What, shall I suffer my self to be terrified and
overcome with Childish and Vain fear? Why rather have I not Courageously and
Resolutely to my Father? and so much the more boldly, because I know assuredly
I have always (as Reason was) Reverenced his Majesty, that against his will I
never turned mine Eyes or Foot against his most Royal Seat, much less affected
his Empire, except the most high God had called him to a better life, neither
then without the General good likeing and choice of the whole Army, that so at
length I might without Murder, without Blood, without Tyranny well and Justly
Reign, and in Love and Peace inviolate live with my Brethren: for I have set
down with my self and chosen, if it be my Fathers pleasure so, rather to die in
his obedience, than Reigning many years, to be reputed of all Men, especially
my Competitours, a Rebel or Traitor. Having thus said, he came unto his Fathers
Camp, and pitching his, (as we have before said) suited himself all in White, in
token of his Innocence, and Writing certain Letters (which the Turks when they
are about to go to any place of Danger use to Write, and always to carry with
them (for they are wonderful Foolish in their Superstition) and putting them in
his Bosom, attended upon with a few of his most Trusty followers, came with
great Reverence toward the Tent of his Father, fully resolving to have kissed
his hand, as their usual manner is. But when he was come to the Entrance of the
Tent, remembering that he had yet his Dagger girt to him, he entered not, till
he had put it off; because he would not come into his Fathers sight with any
Weapon, if happily so he might clear himself of his Fathers needless suspicion;
so when he was come into the more inward Rooms of the Tent, he was with such
Honor as belonged to his Estate cheerfully Received by his Fathers Eunuchs,
but seeing nothing else provided but one Seat whereon to sit himself alone, he
perplexed in mind, stood still a while Musing, at length asked where the
Emperor his Father was? Whereunto they Answered, That he should by and by see
him: and with that casting his Eye aside, he saw Seven Mutes (these are strong
Men bereft of their Speech, whom the Turkish Tyrants have always in readiness
the more secretly to Execute their Bloody Butcheries) coming from the other
side of the Tent toward him, at whose sight stricken with a sudden Terror,
said no more, but lo my Death; and with that arising, was about to have fled:
but in vain, for he was caught hold on by the Eunuchs and Mutes, and by force
drawn to the place appointed for his Death, where without further stay the
Mutes cast a Bow-string about his Neck, he Poor Wretch still striving, and
requesting that he might but speak two words to his Father before he died. All
which the Murderer (for no addition is sufficient Significantly to express his
unnatural Villainy) both heard and saw by a Travers from the other side of the
Tent: But was so far from being moved with Compassion, that thinking it long
till he were dispatched, with a most Terrible and cruel Voice he rated the
Villains enured to Blood, saying, will you never dispatch that I bid you? Will
you never make an end of this Traitor, for whom I have not Rested one night
these ten years in quiet? which horrible commanding Speeches yet thundering in
their Ears, those Butchering Mutes threw the Poor Innocent Prince upon the
Ground and with the help of the Eunuchs forcibly drawing the knitted Bow-string
both ways by the Commandment of a most wicked Father, strangled him. With like
Barbarous Cruelty, he shortly after caused Mahomet his Nephew ( Mustapha his
Son) to be strangled also. This unnatural and strange Murder committed, he
presently Commanded the Bassa of Amasia, Mustapha's Lieutenant to be
apprehended, and his head in his own presence to be struck off; which done, he
sent for Trihanger, yet Ignorant of all that was happened, and in sporting
wise, as if he had done a thing worth Commendations, bid him go meet his
Brother Mustapha: which thing Trihanger with a merry and cheerful Countenance
hasted to do, as one glad of his Brother's Coming. But as soon as he came unto
the place where he saw his Brother lying dead upon the Ground strangled, it is
not to be spoken how he was in mind tormented. He was scarcely come to the
place where this Detestable Murder was Committed, when his Father sent unto
certain of his Servants to offer unto him all Mustapha's Treasure, Horses,
Servants, Jewels, Tents, and withal the Government of the Province Amasia: But
Trihanger filled with extreme heaviness for the unmerciful Death of his well
beloved Brother, spoke unto them in this sort, Ah Wicked and Ungodly Cain,
Traitor (I may not say Father) take thou now the Treasure, Horses, the
Servants, the Jewels, and the Province of Mustapha. How come it into thy
Wicked, Cruel, and Savage Breast, so ungratiously and contrary to all Humanity,
I will not say the Reverence of thy own Blood, to kill thy Worthy, Warlike and
Noble Son, the Mirror of Courtesy, and Prince of Greatest hope, the like of
whom, the Othoman Family never yet had, nor never shall? I will therefore my
self provide that thou, nor none for thee, shall never hereafter in such sort
shamefully Triumph over such a Poor Wretch as I am. And having thus much said,
Stabbed himself with his own Dagger in the Body, whereof he in short time dyed:
which so soon as it came to the Old Tigers Ears, it is hard to say how much he
grieved. His dead Body was by his Fathers Commandment carried from Aleppo in
Syria, to Constantinople, and afterward Honorably buried on the other side of
the Haven at Pera.

Hence appear the two great benefis the Ottoman Emperors receive from not
meddling at all with the Priest, either in Coronations or Marriages, but as to
the first, rather wear no Crown at all, and are content with a Turbant, than
receive it from them or their Unctions; and for their Marriages, take what Wife
they like in Private, without them, or their Solemnities. For first the sparing
a Coronation and likewise the Solemnity of any Marriage (which cannot avoid, if
public by a Priest, the forementioned Excesses of Apparel, Tilting,
Turneaments, Masking, Gluttony, Riot, Drunkenness, Dowers and Gifts, on the
Coronations and Marriages of so great Princes) saves him a Vast some of Money
to his Private Treasure; and what is a greater benefit than the other, secures
his Supremacy against the Ecclesiastical Mufties and Caliphs, who can make no
pretense to depose him, or take from him or his Successors that Government,
which they never gave him, nor he would receive from them, or his Sons from
their Unctions or Certificates.

(12.) They proceed to Judgment in the unknown language of Law-Latine.
That the Romish Bishops and Priests were the first who brought Latin into
Churches, and compelled the People to Pray to God in any Language they
understand not, I suppose none will doubt: and I cannot think any will oppose,
but grant, these likewise were the first who brought the same Barbarous Latin,
both into the Spiritual and Temporal Courts, they themselves being at first the
chief Judges and Clerks of both. It will not likewise be denied that William
the Norman was the first who brought in his Barbarous French to this Nation,
and if we consider no further than that the Authors of these two Languages were
Foreign Enemies and Papists, I see no Reason any Protestant Divines or Lawyers
have (except filthy Lucre) to be so fond of them as to continue such Exotic
Gibberish, to be not the least corruptions of our Religion and Justice, and
snares of Liberty and Propriety, and sometimes of Life it self.

The final causes therefore which induce these uncouth and crabbed Languages and
Characters, both of Court and Chancery hands, have been and are very wicked.
(1.) One cause for which the Roman, and likewise the Norman (who was the others
Ape) put the Forms of Judicial proceeding into unknown Languages, was, to
entrap the People. Bak. Hist. 27. (2.) It has been continued by Judges and
Officers of Courts, to Monopolize the Trade of Law. (3.) That Ignoramus and
Dulman, who had not been at Shool long enough to learn true Latin, might write
half Words and Dashes, which the Country Men might not be able to understand,
and laugh at Scribe cum Dasho and been est. (4.) That motions at Bar and
demurrers and arguments in Law may multiply and cut out the more Work for
Counsel; for often times many a Term is spent in Babbling about the pedigree of
a false Latin word, Coined by Dulman, to derive it as high as a Radix, which
grew in Babel, and when they have done that, as great a Task they have to make
it agree with his Anglice, whereby all the Cost, and many a good Cause is lost,
because the Clerk could neither Latin nor English right. (5.) But when there
is a Mis-prision or Mis-pleader by reason of a Language the Clerk understands
not, what a World of money will it cost his poor Client, to get an Amendment
for him of one, or Repleader of the other? The best Counsel in the Town must be
Retained, and they must spend at least a twelve month from Term to Term, before
they can be all heard, Pro and Con, to repeat over all the Acts of Parliament
since Magna Charta, and all the Rotulo's in such a Hillary and such a
Michaelmas Term. And all the Bundles in Ragman-Bag, and all the Records in the
Tower, to the amazement of the Poor Countryman, who keeps Twitching them by the
Sleeves, and Crying out like him in Martial,

Non de vi neque caede, nec veneno
Sed lis est mihi de tribus capellis;
Vicini queror has abesse furto,
Hoc Judex sibi postulat probari.
Tu Cannas Mithridaticumque bellum
Et perjuria Punici furoris
Et Sullos, Mariosque, Mutiosque,
Magna voce sonas, manuque tota.
Jam dic Posthume de tribus Capellis.
For Poison, Force or Slaughter I not sue,
But for three Sheep taken by Trespass new;
My Neighbor took them, and does make denial,
The Judge demands to have it brought to Trial.
You talk how Scots did on the Bishops fire,
And Presbyters relieved by Cromwell dire;
And how they Perjured broke the Covenant,
And Independents thereupon did rant.
With tongue and hand why such a Coil do you keep?
Pray Sir please now to speak of my three Sheep.
(6.) That they may conceal in a Cloud the Fictions, Falsities, Formalities,
Unnecessariness, Absurdities, Repugnancies, Confusion and Injustice of their
Proceedings; which if Intelligible to the People they could neither avoid the
Shame nor the Reformation.

Francis the first for a sum of Money Commanded the French Laws, Pleadings, and
Proceeedings should be in the French Language, which were before in Latin; and
this so pleased the People, that they said the same was the first year wherein
the Kingdom was out of Wardship. But here note the Covetousness of the French
King, who would not ease his Subjects of that Wardship which laid much misery
on them, but yielded not him a Penny profit, without a great sum of Money; for
he had never learned Nulli vendemus Justitiam, but put them to buy at highest
every bit of Justice, which would have cost him no more than a word of his
Mouth, to have given freely. Our Noble King Edward the Third 36. E. 3. cap. 15.
intended freely to have Infranchised his subjects from the slavery of a strange
Language, but he not being acquainted with the Terms of Judicial Proceedings
(as what Prince can be when kept in an uncouth unknown Tongue?) the Bishops and
Clerks deceived him, as they have done in most Acts of Parliament wherein they
found themselves Concerned, and set a Fair Title on the Act, and only changed
French into Latin for their own profit, and not for the Peoples Benefit. Three
sorts of Letters and Characters there are Illegible. (1.) Such as are
Antiquated in the same Nation; As the Letters and Characters of the Germans,
Gauls, Spaniards, and of other Nations perished by Introducing the Roman
Letters and Characters; and their Tongues become Mixed and Corrupted, and no
longer than between the First and Second Punick War, tree Roman Language was so
changed, that the best Antiquaries in Rome could not understand the Articles of
Peace made between the Romans and Carthaginians, at the conclusion of the first
War. So Horace, though a Learned Poet in his own Countrey-Language, confesses
he understood not Carmen Saliare made in Numa Pompilius his Reign. (2) When
they are the Letters or Language of a Foreign Nation. (3.) When they are
Letters nor Language of any Nation, but made by Confederacy between some Party
or Sect of Men in the same; such are Private Ciphers of Intelligences, and
Lawyers Latin, Terms of Metaphysics, Schoolmen, Physicians, and Others, who
seek to obscure their Trade for their Gain. Fortescue P. 112. makes the reason
why the Laws of England were not taught in the Universities, to be, because the
Judicial proceedings were in French, and Lawyers Latin, and Court hand, and
Chancery, which the University-Men did not understand; and yet (what is more
strange) there were none then but Clerks or Clergy who had the chief ordering
of those Courts of Equity; which does not appear for what Reason it was, unless
it was in Revenge by the Layety against the Clergy, As they sent them to Hell
by forcing them to Prayer in Latin they understood not, so they would send
them to Hell too by forcing them to do Justice in Latin they understood not.

It appears by the Statute of 3. R. 2. Cap. 3. Of Praemunire, That the Pope used
to place Foreign Priests in Benefices of a Foreign and strange Language, with
whom the People could not Converse, but as long as the Prayers were in Latin
it was no matter whether People or Priest understood them, Latin Pleading
worse than Latin Prayer.
or one another. And the Truth is, Latin Pleading is worse than Latin Prayer;
for none can be hindered from Praying to God in English, but from Pleading he
may to a Judge. So to keep Latin in Courts, keeps all in readiness to bring it
again into Churches, and to turn out the English and Foreigners into both. This
is very mischievous in many respects, for, first, when a Writ comes to a Bishop
himself he understands it not, and may sooner forswear himself than perform his
Duty in it. (2.) When a Writ comes to the Sheriff he can neither read nor
understand it, nor many times his Undersheriff, and they likewise may both
sooner forswear themselves than perform their Duty. Then it may sometimes
happen to be sent to the Coroners, where the Sheriff is a Party, and they are
in no better condition than those before. Then if a Subpaena or other Order or
Declaration in Latin be served on the Poor Defendant, he runs in a great
affright to one Neighbor, and the other Neighbor, and then at length to the
Minister himself of the Parish, who all cannot read or understand one line of
the matter: then must he run away to an Attorney, and give him his Fee, and then
to a Council; and then all the matters are found to be as false in the Fact, as
they are in the Latin, and only done for vexation of the poor Man; and this he
might have known in his own Parish, if it had been English, without being put
to what is to him a great cost and trouble: Then, if it happen the matter to be
true, and it come to Trial at the Nisi Prius, the Issue is in Latin and
Court-hand, so are the Pleas and Declaration, there is not a man in the Jury
can read a word of it, the Jury goes by Implicit Faith to whatever the Council
for Hire inform them, and are in as great danger of Perjury, as the Sheriff and
his Undersheriff were before. Then turn over to the Crown side, the Bills of
Indictment are all in Latin, the Witnesses bound over to prosecute can neither
Read nor Write, much less understand Latin, the malicious prosecutor puts what
he will in the Bill, the Witnesses Swear to the Latin, and are Perjured for
the poor Country men if it be Latin, and the Justice of Peace that binds them
over, thinks they ought to Swear to the Bill of Indictment, let it be what it
will, or they shall forfeit their Recognizance; and seeing they can neither
read nor understand it, thinks they must Swear by Implicit Faith. And many
times even some of the Grand Jury may not be so well skilled in Law- Latin,
but were it not by Implicit Faith only to their fellows Billa Vera, they
would, if the Bill were in English, find an Ignoramus. So likewise
Churchwardens commonly think it lawful to forswear themselves, if it be done
in a word of Latin. I knew one who used when he had been cited to make
Presentment according to the Charge in the Book of Articles, to the Bishops
Court, he used always at his Return from Court, to boast that he had presented
omine been, and thought his Conscience well discharged, whether all was ill or
well, as long as he presented something in his kind of Latin which he
understood not. The Evils are likewise considerable enough, in keeping up still
this old Popish Language in the written. Instruments of Bonds, Charters and
Patents; you shall not have a Bond in Latin written by an ordinary Clerk or
Scribe in the Country, but he is apt to mistake; sometimes he will write
Wiginti for Viginty, Quadraginta for Quadringenti, Quinquaginta for Quinginti,
or the like; or mistake in the Dashes, for if those too be not More Clericorum,
it is as bad as false Latin; yea, to put in true Latin, where they use to
write it false, may be dangerous; for you run a hazard, either to lose your
Money, or to fall into the misery of a Common Law Demurrer, or a Chancery
Suite, which costs many times more than the Principal is worth, to recover, it.
Then further, if the Obligor or Obligee understand not Latin, nor can examine
the Writing to be Sealed, the Scrivener or Clerk may take Money of one part,
and Cheat the other as he pleases.

Then as for Latin in Charters and Patents, they are Penned in such obsolete,
uncouth, and Barbarous Terms, that the King is many times abused and deceived
in his Grant, and the Grauntees likewise; and fall often into tedious and
wastful Suites about a word, which if they had been in English would never have
been nor happened. As bad mischiefs likewise often fall out by the Physician's
using this Popish Language in his Bills, as by the Lawyers; for the
Apothecaries Boys, though they have been at School, know not all the words in
the Dictionary, nor can they find there the Barbarous Words and Terms of Latin
or Greek Physic, nor their Antic and unnecessary Notes or Characters of
Weights and Measures: So that oftentimes by mistake, either of the Ingredient
or Dose, many a Patient is thereby Poisoned and killed, and be he Protestant or
Papist, they find alike, that their Implicit Faith in the Doctors Latin did
not save, but destroy them; though they come not to complain after they are
dead.

Again, to keep Laws and Judgment in Latin, shows that Bishops are not (as
they falsely pretend) Successors to Christ, nor to the Apostles; for those who
had mission from them, had the gift of Tongues, purposely that they might
Preach to every Nation in their own Language; as appears Acts 2.7. And they
were all amazed, and marvelled, saying one to another, Are not all these which
speak Galileans? And how bear we every Man in our own Tongue, wherein we were
born? Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and
in Jud^ea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in
Egypt, and in the parts of Libya, about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews
and Proselytes, Cretes, and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our Tongues the
wonderful works of God. And 1 Cor. 14.18. I thank my God, I speak with Tongues
more than you all. Yet in the Church, I had rather speak five words with my
Understanding, than Ten Thousand words in an unknown Tongue. To Judge a Nation
therefore in an unknown Tongue, is Antichristian, and Anti-Apostolick. Though
the Turk prohibites Translation of his Alcoran out of the Arabic Tongue into
the Turkish Language, yet he permits the People to have matters of Justice
administered to them in their own Tongue. In old Rome the Forms of Actions and
Judicial Proceedings, were for many Ages kept hid by the Priests in secret,
amongst the pretended Sacred Rites and Ceremonies of their gods; which matters
of Religion and Justice were by most of the Ancient Priests kept in a Language
unknown to the People, under the name of a Sacred Language, and only understood
by the Priests; one of these Books of Forms Cneius Flavius, a Clerk to one of
the Priests, Copied or Translated; and Published one, to the great Indignation
of his Master, and of all the rest of the College of Priests. But so grateful
was the doing the same to the People, that they advanced him to great Honors,
and made him a Curule Aedile, only for doing the same. In the Councils of
Venice, the Nobles are bound to use the Venetian Language, and when any has
begun to speak Latin, they have him in great Dislike, clapping their hands and
crying out hold, hold. Govern. Ven. 26.

In China though the Languages of the Provinces differ, yet have they one
General Court-Language, called Quonhoa, for their Courts and Writings, which is
common through all China, by means whereof the Magistrate need not in every
Province to learn a new Language. Though the Persian Empire was very great, and
contained an Hundred and Twenty Provinces, and every Province had a Satrapa or
Sheriff to Govern it, yet, Esther 1.22. Ahasuerus sent his Writs unto all these
Sheriffs into every Province, according to the writing thereof, and unto every
People after their own Language. The Greeks and Romans had their Proceedings in
their own Language. And in Germany all Law-Suites are in the German Language,
as says Clapmarius de Arcan. Dom. P. 119. Constitutio imperii est, ne in
Camera lites alia Lingua intendantur nisi Germanica. Jerem. 5.15. Threatens, as
the greatest Plague, I will bring a Nation upon you from far, (and after he
says) a Nation whose Language thou know not, neither understandest what
they say. Their Quiver is an open Sepulcher, they are all mighty men, and they
shall eat up thy Harvest, and thy Bread, which thy Sons and thy Daughters
should eat, they shall eat up thy Flocks and thy Herds; they shall eat up thy
Vines and thy Fig Trees; they shall impoverish thy Feneed Cities wherein thou
trustedst, with the Sword. And what do Bishops with their Latin, and false
Latin, and the whole Language of the Beast, but the same? This is a great
Evil; yet would be Remedied with a word, and would make his Majesty's Name
Renowned to future Generations, that he was the first King of England who
vouchsafed to send his Commands to his Subjects, in the same Royal Language
which he spoke himself.

They Judge for Fees, and not for Salary.
Bajazet's fury against Judges taking Bribes.
In the time of Bajazet the Fourth, the Turkish Kingdom growing in Greatness,
grew likewise in Corruption, but especially in the Men of Law and Judges of his
Courts, who made all Justice saleable for Bribes; whereat Bajazet grievously
enraged, commanded diverse of the same Judges to be apprehended, determining to
the Terror of others to have executed them, whose dangerous Estate was much
pitied by Alis Bassa and other Courtiers, they perhas selling their Places to
them, and thereby forceing them to sell Justice to others; yet none of them
durst adventure, seeing Bajezet was of a furious Nature, and in his Anger
dangerous to be spoken with, to mediate in their behalf; no not Alis Bassa,
Charadin Bassa's Son, whom of all men he favored most.

There was at that time in the Court an Ethiopian Jester, who under some
Covert pleasant Jest, would often times bolt out to the King in his greatest
heat, what his gravest Counselors durst not speak to him in secret. This
Jester Alis Bassa requested to devise some means to entreat the angry King in
behalf of these Judges, promising to give him what he would desire, if he could
appease the Kings displeasure. The Ethiopian without fear undertook the
matter, and presently put on his Head a rich Hat, all wrought over with Gold,
and, accoutred in all other his Cloths suitably, presented himself before the
King with a great counterfeit Gravity; whereat Bajazet marveling, asked him the
cause why he was so Gay. I have a Request unto your Majesty; said he, and wish
to find favor in your sight. Bajazet more desirous than before to know the
matter, asked what his Request was. If it stand with your pleasure said the
Ethiopian, I would fain go as your Ambassador to the Empeperor of
Constantinople, in hope whereof I have put my self in this readiness. To what
purpose would thou go? said Bajazet. To crave of the Emperor some Forty or
Fifty of his old grave Monks and Friars to bring with me hither to the Court.
And what should they do here? said Bajazet. I would have them placed, said the
Jester, in the rooms of the old doteing Judges, whom you intend as I hear to
put to death. Why, said Bajazet, I can place others of my own People who are
better, in their rooms. True, said the Ethiopian, for Gravity of Look and
Countenance; and so would the old Monks and Friars serve as well, but not so
learned in the Laws and Customs of your Kingdom as are those in your
displeasure. If they are Learned, why do they then (contrary to their Learning)
pervert Justice, and take Bribes? There is a good reason for that too, said the
Jester. What reason? said the King. That can he that there stands by, tell
better than I, said the Jester, pointing to Alis Bassa, who, forthwith
commanded by Bajazet to give the reason, with great Reverence first done,
showed that those Judges so in displeasure were not conveniently provided for,
and were therefore enforced many times for their necessary maintenance to take
Rewards where they could get them, to the staying of the due course of Justice;
which Bajazet understanding to be true, commanded Alis Bassa to appoint them
convenient stipends for their maintenance, and forthwith granted their Pardon.
Whereupon the Bassa set down Order, That of every matter in Suit exceeding One
Thousand Aspers, the Judges should have Twenty Aspers; which Fees they yet take
to this day. Whence may be Observed,

(1.) That to place Judges in Courts to undergo the incessant labors of
hearing multitudes of Causes, and not to allow them honorable maintenance, is
the ready way to make men of ordinary Principles Freebooters, and to take the
Prey for themselves. So the meanness of the Salary in Russia being but an
Hundred Marks per Annum, makes the Judges extreme Extortious on the People.

(2.) That those who buy either Judicial or Ministerial places in Judicatories,
must sell again; and the sale of either is contrary to the Law of God, and of
infinite Damage to the Public, turning the weights of Justice to the false
weights of Merchandise, as says the Poet, Ergo Judicium nihil est nisi publica
Merces,
Quid faciunt leges ubi sola Pecunia Regnat?


(3.) That the Basha when he was appointed to provide the Judges maintenance by
stipend, providing the same by Fees made them worse then before, and gave them
a pretense to take Bribes of the People under the name of Fees, and there are
none more corrupt Judges for Bribery, than the Turks to this day; and well they
may if they take Fees.

Neither Judge nor Minister to take Fees but Salary.
It was the Ancient Law of England, that none having any Office concerning the
Administration of Justice, should take any Fee or Reward of any Subject for the
doing of his Office. Coke 2. part 176. and by the Statute Westminster. 1. cap. 25.
neither Judicial nor Ministerial Officer, as Sheriff, Escheator, Coroner,
Bailiff, Jailer, Clerk of the Market, Aulnager, nor other inferior Minister or
Officer of the King, whose Offices do any way concern the Administration or
Execution of Justice, or the common good of the Subject, or the Kings Service,
but shall be paid of what they receive from the King, on pain the Offender
against this Act shall pay double Damages of the Plaintiff, and shall be
otherwise punished at the Will of the King.

Marrying for Fees contrary to the Laws of God and of the Land.
By which appears that the Episcopal Judging of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment and
Succession for Fees, and the granting of Licenses of Marriage by Bishops, and
taking of Fees by a Priest for Banns, or Marriage of any Persons in a Temple or
elsewhere, is wicked, abominable, and contrary to the Laws of God, and
Fundamental Laws of the Land, and they ought to be punished for doing the same;
and had not Bishops corrupted the true Doctrine of Gods Ordinance of Marriage,
to obtain Fees and other covetous and ambitious Ends, Men had at this day
Married according to the Moral Law of God, and not the Ceremonial Laws of
Priapus and Venus.

The Inconveniences which ensue Judges and Ministers taking Fees, are
(1.) As Coke says, 2 part, 210. When neither Judges or Ministers had any
Fees, then had they no color to exact any thing of the Subject, who knew they
ought to take nothing at all of them, they being maintained by Salary from the
King: but when some Acts of Parliament, changing the Rules of the Common Law,
gave to the Ministers of the King Fees, in some particular Cases, to be taken
of the Subject; whereas before, all their Office was done without taking, now
no Office at all is done without taking, and a gap being once opened, there was
after no bounds to the breach; so it causes Oppression.

(2.) It causes corruption of Justice, for if a Judge take Fees it is from the
Plaintiff and Defendant, and he will sell Justice to him who gives him the
greatest; but if he take a Salary he takes it from the Public, and will be for
the Public good, and not partial to the Parties.

(3.) The Public, by giving the Salary and receiving the Fees, increases the
Public Treasury; for the vast Income of Fees far exceeding the Merits of the
Judges and Officers, it is just the overplus should be applied to discharge
Public Burdens, and not to fill private Pockets; and what was unequally shared
amongst Officers ignorant and idle by way of Fees, The English in Scotland
turned all the Fees of Courts into a Public Treasury.
might be more equally divided by way of Salary, according to the proportion of
Skill and Pains.

The English Judges therefore sent into^ Scotland, put the forementioned
Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 25. to experiment there, and turned all Fees into a
Public Treasury, to manage which we allowed our Treasurer out of the same Two
Hundred Pound per Annum, and allowed Salaries to our selves as the State
appointed us, and to all our Clerks and Officers necessary, proportionable to
Skill and Pains; which Treasury of Fees not only satisfied all the English and
Scottish Judges and all the Officers of Justice, without any charge or trouble
to the State, but likewise many Military Officers of the Army; and we found by
experiment, that far more exact Justice was done by Salary, than ever any was
done by Fees. And if the same were practiced here in England, it cannot be, but
the like effect must follow as to Justice, but vastly greater as to the
increase of the Public Treasury, especially if the number of Judges were
reduced to Three, who, as is after shown, are sufficient to dispatch all
matters of Judicature, Civil, Ecclesiastical, and Criminal of the Kingdom.

Exceptions against Bishops being Judges, in reference to the Executive Power.
They begin the Suit with Execution.

No Writer of the Forms of Judicial Proceeding, except the Bishop, was ever so
Absurd as to Tolerate, much less to Ordain, any Lawsuit to be begun with
Execution; and this is that which makes the Spanish and Romish Inquisitions,
Romish Inquisition begins with Execution on the Person.
and the Barbarous Inquisition by Torture of the Civil Law, to be so Abhorred
and Abominable, that they begin with Execution upon the Person, and Arrest him
before Judgment.

Now, that not only Arrest before Judgment, but Districtio Pignorum, or taking
of Pledges by distress is likewise Execution, appears clearly, both by Civil
and Common Law. As to the first, which is Districtio Pignorum, or taking
Pledges by Distress, it is express in the Civil Law C. de Execut. rei Jud. that
on a Sentence for Debt or Damage, the Judge may order Execution to be done by
Distress, or taking the Goods moveable of the Defendant, as Pledges; and if he
satisfy not the Plaintiff within the space of Two Months after the Distress is
made, then the Officer was to sell them and satisfy the Plaintiff.

As to the Common Law; it appears 4. H. 6.17. and 22. Ass. pl. 72. That the
Execution after Judgment is in the County Court only by Distress, Distress on
the Goods is Execution.
and keeping the same in Pound 'till Judgment be satisfied; for they cannot
sell the Distress; which shows that the Common Law esteemed Distress an
Execution after Judgment, though it had not the Power to sell the Distress, as
the Civil Law had. That it is an Execution therefore after Judgment, both by
Civil and Common Law is clear. It will be next by some perhaps enquired, from
whom the Original of this most Antichristian Custom came, of beginning Suits
with Distress, and Attachments (which differ from Distress in that the one
forfeits the Distress, 9. H. 7.9. for Nonappearance, the other not) Capiasses,
Latitats, exaction of Bail, Mainprize, Outlawries in Civil Actions and
Excommunicato Capiendo's, in all which the Goods of the Defendant being of
greater value than the Debt or Trespass, are either seized or detained, or what
is worse, Forfeited and Confiscated, or the Person Arrested, Imprisoned, and
sometimes Starved, sometimes Poisoned, and sometimes Tortured before there is a
Copy given him of any Complaint made against him, and before the Plaintiff has
so much as taken an Oath of Calumny, that he believes his Complaint True and
Just, and before Hearing, Probation of Witnesses, and Judgment? That this most
inhuman and more than Barbarous Proceeding came not from the old Romans, though
Pagans, appears by what Alciat says, that not so much as the word Districtus or
Districtio (which is to be intended before Judgment) is to be found amongst any
of the Ancient Lawyers; and likewise that no such thing as Distress or taking
Pledges, or exacting Bail, caution judicio Sisti, and Judicatum Solvi, or
Arrest before Judgment, is to be found amongst those which are left of the Laws
of the Twelve Tables: Yet in them these are expressed after Judgment, as
appears by the Relics of the same, which follow in these words:

L. 25. Si in jus vocet, atque eat.

L. 28. Si vis vocationi fuat testamini; igitur em capito.

L. 31. Si vindiciam falsam tulit rei, si velit is arbitros tres, dato forum
Arbitriis fructus, duplione Damna Deciditor.

L. 33. Aeris confessi, rebusque jure judicatis, triginta dies justi Sunto:
postidea muus endoiectio esto: in jus ducito nei Judicatum facit, aut quips
endo jure em vindicit, secum ducito, vincito aut nervo aut compedibus quin
Decim pondo, ne minore; aut si volet majore vincito. Si volet suo vivito in suo
vivit qui em vinctum habebit, libras farris endo dies dato, si volet plus dato.

Wherein though many words are so Antiquated and obscure as no Interpreter can
expound them, yet so much may be understood from them, (1.) That their Editio
and Oblatio Libelli, by giving the Defendant a Copy of the Libel, Bill of
Complaint, or Declaration, preceded their vocatio in Jus, Citation and Summons;
for in the Law, Si in jus vocet, atque eat, the word Atque signifies Statim,
presently, in which sense it is taken in Leg. filia 20. C. de inof. Testam. and
in Virgil. -- Atque illum prono rapit alveus amni. Now it had been to no
purpose when the Defendant had been called to appear before the Judge in Person
Statim, presently, to answer, unless the Plaintiff before he had called him had
made him Oblatio Libelli, and given him a Copy of his Bill of Complaint against
him, and allowed him his dies justi, a fit time for him to deliberate and
provide for the same, Vt veniat paratus ad respondendum, Oblatio Libelli
precedes Summons.
when he shall be again called to appear in Person before the Judge; and without
this, if the Judge caused him to appear, and cast him into Prison, as now Judges
do, on lying Latitats and false Suggestions; all the Poor of the Land who are
not able to give Bail, and on Forged Outlawries both Poor and Rich, without
Bail, and forced him to answer to Copies of Declarations not delivered, 'till
he had been first cast into close Prison an Hundred Miles from his home, where
he had neither Meat nor Drink, nor Money nor Friends, nor Council nor Writings,
nor Witnesses; he had made it impossible for such a Prisoner in Dures to
answer, otherwise than to grant whatsoever the false Suggesting Plaintiff will
Demand of him. And that the Obligatio Libelli preceded in jus vocatio agrees
Cujac. Lib. 10. Obs. 10. and 11. Duaren. lib. 1. Disp. c. 1. Hermann. vult lib.
1. discep. c. 1. Goed. ad. l. 9. n. 1.6.7. ff. de verb. sign.

(2.) By the Law si vis vocationi fuat testamini: igitur em capito, appears,
that after the Defendant had a Copy of the Declaration delivered, no Capias
before Judgment was to issue against him, without a Fugam fecit, or at least an
hiding himself; and the word Testamini shows there must be Productio testium,
Probation by witnesses of the flight or absconding, and not a Latitat granted
on a mere false Suggestion and Lie, or on the Forgery of an Outlawry, to
destroy that inestimable Right of Liberty, from wrongful Imprisonment, and more
valuable than Life it self.

(3.) By the Law si vindiciam falsam tulit, rei si velit is Arbitros tres dato
forum Arbitriis fructus duplione damnum deciditor, appears, That the Plaintiffs
were Fined pro falso elamore double the value, on a Writ of Enquiry of Damage
to a Jury of Three, which (like Commissioners for examination of Witnesses)
being equally chosen by the Parties were more able and equal than a numerous
Jury of Twelve, all chosen by the Sheriff.

(4.) This being granted, that by the Ancient Roman and Athenian Laws, Oblatio
Libelli preceded vocatio in jus, and vocatio in jus preceded Contumacy, and
Probation by Witnesses preceded Sentence of the same, and that Plaintiffs were
punished for false Suggestions; it follows, there was neither taking of
Pledges, Distress, Attachment, Satisdation, Exaction of Bail, or Arrest in
their Original Process, nor before Judgment, except on Contumacy proved by
Witnesses; which shows that neither Romans nor Athenians were Authors of
beginning Lawsuits with Execution.

(5.) It appears by the Law Aeris confessi, rebusque jure judicatis, etc. That
the Pagan Execution it self, after Judgment, was more Just and Merciful, than
the Papal and Episcopal is now with us before Judgment; for first they were so
far from Arresting before Demand, and before Judgment, that they could not
Arrest the Defendant on Hearing, and Trial, and Judgment passed against him,
without giving him Monition of the Judgment, and till Thirty Days Justi dies to
provide the Money were expired: but now, on a bare Bond before Judgment, and
before so much as a Demand made, they cast into the Goal the Husbandman from
his Plow, the Tradesman from his Shop, and the Merchant from the Exchange,
without giving the least notice, Thirty or so much as Three Days to provide the
Money, whereby they and their Families, their Reputation and Trade are
oftentimes destroyed, not only to the ruin of themselves, but great damage of
the Public; for the greatest bulk of Trade of the Nation being driven on Money
borrowed on Interest, if it be intended what is borrowed should be applied to
Trade, it is impossible that they can pay interest for it to the Creditor, if
they must keep it at their Chambers for the Creditors to call it in again on an
hour's warning, or as they now do without any warning at all; and employ it at
their Trade they cannot, unless they may have at least warning for so small a
pittance of Time as Thirty Days, which the very Heathen allowed their Debtors
to be free from Arrest, though Judgment was past against them. This abominable
Cruelty of beginning Suits with Execution, came not therefore from the Heathen,
but from the pretended Christian Romish Bishops and Clerks, All Attachments,
Distresses, Exactions of Pledges, Bail, and Arrests before Judgment, are
Executions before Judgment, and come from Romish Bishops.
against whom the Heathen shall rise in Judgment. Now that beginning of Suits
with Executing by exacting of Pledges before Oblatio Libelli, Bail before
Flight, Judgment before Hearing, Distress, Attachment, and Arrest before
Judgment, was brought into Great Britain by the Romish Bishops, appears by
these Reasons: (1.) Because the Register of Writs (that old Romish Idol; to
which more innocent Causes and Persons have been Sacrificed and Destroyed,
according to the proportion of the Territory it Commands, than to the Turkish
Alcoran) is in Latin, which is the Romish Language; in which Register all the
Original Process of Summons, Attachment; and Distringas are composed, for
Exacting of Pledges and Bail, Distress, imposing Penalties and Forfeitures,
Arrest and Imprisonment in Personal Actions, and Grand-capes and Petty-capes in
real, before Oath of Calumny, Oblatio Libelli, Hearing, Probation or Judgment,
and in Indictments by Inquisition. (2.) Because all old Formalities of Entries
and Pleadings, of Instruments, and Contracts Public and Private were
Originally in Latin, which shows they were formed by Romish Bishops or their
Clerks in their own Language, conform to their Romish Idol the Register,
beginning with Execution, as particularly appears; in all Instruments
concerning Feudal Jurisdiction are Clauses and Conventions of Distress,
Reentry, Penalties and Forfeitures, horrible unjust, before Oath of Calumny,
Ohlatio Libelli, dies justi, Hearing, Probation, Judgment, or Judge, but the
Lord himself in his own Case, over his Vassal. (3.) Because anciently the
Romish Bishops have been Chancellors in that Court which is Officina Brevium,
the Shop of Writs, where they are forged; and have been likewise chief Judges
in the other Courts of the King, keeping all their Proceedings in Latin,
Court-hand, and Chancery-hand, secret from the understanding of King and
People, whereby they exercised what Tyranny and Oppression they pleased. (4.)
Because they and other Ecclesiastical Persons, as Abbots, Priors, and the like,
have Possessed the Third part of all the Baronies, Honors, and Manors in the
Land, and, had they not been stopped by the Statutes of Mortmain, might by this
time have got all; this way therefore of taking Distress, Penalties, and
Forfeitures before Judgment, advanced their Interest in Tyranny, and made them
Arbitrary and absolute Judges in their own Case. (5) Because anciently the
Romish Bishops have been, Outlawries and Excommunicato Capiendos, and Judgment
of Heresies, the Romish Inquisition in Disguise.
and to the shame of Protestants still claim to be, in their Ecclesiastical
Courts Judges of Heresy; whereby, as the Common Law Judges by their
Outlawries, which are Temporal Excommunicato Capiendos, they by their
Excommunicato Capiendos, which are Spiritual Outlawries, have brought in the
Romish Inquisition, to begin all Suits with Execution before Judgment. (6.)
Because the Greek Bishops first destroyed the Equal Law of the Twelve Tables,
Si in jus vocet a^que eat, which is before interpreted Statim eat, and made it
in jus vocati statim eant, aut satisdent; which Satisdation included all the
Rabble of Distresses, Pledges, Bail, Mainprize, Arrests and Imprisoments,
before Oblatio Libelli, Hearing, Probation, or Judgment, which Greek Bishops
were the Instruments of that wicked Empress Theodora, who foisted into the Laws
of Justinian what they pleased, concerning Judicial Proceeding touching
Marriage, Filiation, and Succession, and all other matters; and the Romish
Bishops followed them in their wickedness, in whatsoever was for their gain,
and brought the same, with themselves and the Language of the Beast into Great
Britain and Ireland, to infect with the same Plague all Judicatures of these
Noble Kingdoms. vid. How Satisdation before Judgment came, in the Authorities
cited, Calv. Lex. tit vocare.

They Pledge before Summons, Summon before Copy, Copy before Oath, Punish before
Contumacy, Judge before Hearing or Probation, and Arrest before Judgment.
It cannot be here objected, That I proceed partially against Ecclesiastical
Judges, seeing the Temporal are here equally Taxed with the same Errors, and I
contend with the Vices and not with the Persons of either. Yet so much I may
affirm for Truth, and shall after prove against Ecclesiastical Judges, that the
Papal and Episcopal Forms of Preposteration of Execution before Judgment, by
beginning the Original Process with Attachments, Distresses, Exactions of
Pledges, Bail, Mainprize, Penalties, Forfeitures, Confiscations, Arrests and
Imprisonments, before a Copy of the Declaration given, and before Oath of
Calumny, Hearing, Probation or Judgment, and Outlawries, and Excommunicato
Capiendos both before and after Judgment, were Originally brought both in the
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts of the Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
by Romish Bishops, and Priests, and Parliaments, in time of Popery, have been
so far deceived by them to confirm their Superstitious Formularies in the
Temporal Courts in so high a degree, as now the Temporal Judges are not able to
Reform, without the Assistance of an Act of Parliament. But I shall first
prove, that the said Forms are contrary to the Scriptures, and Antichristian.
The Texts of Scripture follow.

Job 24.3. They drive away the Ass of the Fatherless, and take the Widows Ox
for a Pledge.

Verse 9. They pluck the Fatherless* from the breast, and take a. Pledge of the
Poor.

Ezekiel. 18.7. And has not Oppressed any, but Restored to the Debtour his Pledge.

Ezekiel. 33.15. If the Wicked restore the Pledge, give again that be had Robbed,

Amos 2.8. And they lay themselves down upon Clothes laid to Pledge.

Psalm. 37.21. The Wicked borrows, and pays not again.

Matthew. 5.25. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, while thou art in the may
with him; lest at any time the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison. Verily I say unto
thee, Thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the uttermost
Farthing.

Matthew. 18.15. If thy Brother tresp^ss against thee, go and tell him his fault
between thee and him alone; if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
Brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two, that in
the Mouth of two or three Witnesses, every word may be established. And if he
shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church: but if he neglect to hear
the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen man and a Publican. After the
Servant who had been forgiven by his Lord Ten Thousand Talents, Verse 28: Went
out, and found one of his fellow servants which ought him an Hundred Pence: and
he laid hands on him, and took him by the Throat, saying, Pay me that thou
owe. And his fellow servants fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying,
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. And he would not: but went and
cast him into Prison, till be should pay the Debt. Verse 32. Then his Lord,
after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked Servant, I forgave
thee all that Debt, because thou desiredst me: Should not thou also have had
compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee? And his Lord was
wroth, and delivered him to the Tormenters, till he should pay all that was due
unto him.

As to Criminal Proceeding the Texts are,

1 Timothy 5.19. Against an Elder receive not an Accusation, unless under two or
three Witnesses.

Numb. 35.30. Whosoever kills any Person, the Murderer shall be put to death, by
the mouth of Witnesses: but one Witness shall not Testisie against any Person
to cause him to die. Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
Murderer, which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death.

Deuter. 17.8. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in Judgment, between
Blood and Blood, between Plea and Plea, and between Stroke and Stroke, being
matters of Controversy within thy Gates: then shall thou arise, and get thee
up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose; And thou shall come unto
the Priests the Levites, and unto the Judge that shall be in those days, and
enquire, and they shall show thee the Sentence of Judgment.

From all which may be inferred,

(1.) That no man ought to be Summoned before a Judge, till a Copy of the
Plaintiffs Declaration be first given him.

For Christ says, If thy Brother Trespass against thee, go and tell him his
Fault between thee and him alone; which is fully performed by giving him a Copy
of the Declaration or Bill of Complaint, and without it the same cannot be
done, nor the full State of the Case be Represented to him, nor he take time of
deliberation for an Answer. And from this Precept of Christ will follow, first,
the Ordaining of Editio and vocatio in jus simul ex continenti, by the Popish
Theodor an Bishops; in the Civil Law is a corruption and destroying of the
Excellent Law of the Twelve Tables, Si in jus voces atque eat, which is already
proved to have implied a Preceding Oblatio Libelli, and was the clear Law of
Nature, and immutable in all Civil Actions.

(2.) That the Law of Scotland, of including the Libel in the Summons, though
it far excel our Summons by Writs, yet it is not so perfect as the Precepts of
Christ, to make the Oblatio Libelli, or to give the Copy of the Declaration to
the Defendant before Summons; for first, he must be forced to send many times
Hundreds of Miles to a Judge to get a Summons, before the Return of which, all
the business if there is no Contumacy, may be far better agreed and ended
between him and his Brother at home. Secondly, If there is no Contumacy (as
there can be none, before a Copy of the Declaration delivered, by which the
Demand is made) it is unjust to lay such a Punishment on a Defendant, to run
Hundreds of Miles to his great Cost and Trouble in England, to appear before a
Judge at Westminster, and when he comes there, no Bill in Chancery, nor any
Declaration at Common Law, is put against him. And in Scotland to appear at
Edinburgh at a longer day, when he was ready and tendered to satisfy his
Brother at home in a shorter, and he refused, only to put him to Charge and
Vexation. Thirdly, It is unreasonable and unjust, that the Plaintiff should be
compelled to send so far for such a Trivial Formality as the hand of a Judge to
his Libelled Summons, or to expect no Judicial assistance from it, if he gratis
make Oblatio Libelli, as Christ Commands; for if, as is the Modern practice in
Scotland, the Lords of the Session never read a word of the Libelled Summons,
and they may be Blasphemy or Treason for ought they know, yet they set their
hands to them as fast as they can be brought, and I have my self set my hand to
Hundreds of them; and that course of Summoning being by Act of Parliament made
in time of Popery, which we had no power to alter, I thought that kind of
Justice better than none at all: though before Oblatio Libelli it serves to no
more Use than our Latitat and Subpoena Offices, and others, to have a pretense
of gathering Money for the People for doing nothing, and perhaps (if all Truth
were spoken) for doing Mischief. Fourthly, If, as the ancient Practice was of
Sir Thomas More when he was Chancellor of England, who used to read over,
himself in Person, every Bill was preferred in Chancery, and consider whether it
were just or no, before he would grant a Summons of Subpoena; and of Skene in
Scotland, who, as I have been informed there, would likewise read the Bills
himself before a Summons was granted, and if he found them not fit, would tear
them in pieces, and throw them over the Bar. It has been therefore to no
purpose for the Plaintiff to have sent to Judges for Summons, who might see
that Injustice in his Bill which the Defendant perhaps might not see, or might
be willing to pass by, if it had been first shown to him at home. Fifthly, It
is unjust for the Plaintiff to make his Oblatio Libelli first to the Judge, and
to get a Summons thereon before he does it to the Defendant, for the Defendant
may, perhaps, if shown him, show the Plaintiff so just exceptions against the
Bill, as may satisfy the Plaintiff himself, and save both Parties the Trouble
and Cost of going further to Law; or he may amend his Bill on such exceptions,
and if he think it just after amended, insist on the same further; to show his
bill first, therefore, to the Defendant, though his Enemy, if he will except
against it, is more profitable to the Plaintiff for amendment, than if he
showed it his own Council; for a Friend may never show the Party his Faults as
an Enemy will: As it is more Just, so it is therefore more safe, first to make
the Oblatio Libelli to the Defendant, before it be done to the Judge. Sixthly,
The Justi dies, or time of Returning an Answer, cannot be agreed without great
Trouble and Cost, unless there be first an Emparlance between the Parties,
without troubling the Judge. Against offend the taking out of Execution on
Judgment acknowledged by assent, and on Recognizances, and Statutes in England,
and on Registered Bonds in Scotland without Summons, or Oblatio Libelli, or
Warning, or Demand. Seventhly, Because Judges use to take Caution, or Plegii de
prosequendo of the Plaintiff, and the like Pledges of the Defendant, purposely
to hinder Agreement according to Christ, and to set them by the Ears to get in
Fees to the Court.

(2.) That no man ought to be Summoned before a Judge, until a Productio Testium
first made to him.
For Christ says, If he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two
more, that in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every word may be
Established, whence will follow, that the Mock-Probation still falsely
mentioned in the end of every Declaration, Et inde Producit Sectam, and Summons
on Motions and Rules of Courts, founded on the Infamous Credit of
Affidavit-men, are abominable Relics of Popery, and Antichristian. (1.)
Because they are not produced to the Defendant where he dwells, that he may
except against their Persons, if he has cause, and if he has none, he may see
them Sworn, and if they Swear false, he may have his lawful Remedy against
them. (2.) Because the Affidavit-men are single Witnesses, whereas Christ
Commands two or three Witnesses. (3.) They are both such as live in London and
Westminster, and such as come out of those Parts, altogether unknown to the
Judges and Masters who take their Oaths; if therefore they will proceed on the
Testimony of single Witnesses, seeing by the Precept of Christ, Actor Sequitur
forum rei, and the Plaintiff is to carry his Witnesses to the Defendant; it is
far more Just and Equal that the Affidavit be either taken by Commission in the
Parish where the Defendant lives, or every Minister be Authorized to take the
Oath, on notice given to his Parishioner to be present, if he please, at the
Taking. (4.) Because generally the Affidavit-men are Knights of the Post, and
common Swearers for Hire, who will Swear any thing for a Dinner. (5.) Because
Probatio non admittitur in contrarium, whereby Courts overflow with Perjury.
And as is said, Jer. 23.10. Because of Swearing the Land mourns.

(3.) That a Defendant can be guilty of no Contumacy till an Oblatio Libelli,
and a Productio Testium first made to him.
For Christ says, The Plaintiff is not to tell the Church, till two Refusals
made by the Defendant, one to hear him single, the other when he ha^h produced
his Witnesses.

(4.) That no Pledges or Distress ought to be taken till Judgment.
For Ezekiel. 18.7. says, The Debtour ought to be restored his Pledge. And Christ
Commands on Contumacy shown by two Refusals, immediately to tell the Church; so
he is to do nothing further till the Sentence of the Church is passed, and very
just; for thus far none has Judged whether his Cause is just, and his Brother
Contumacious, but himself, and he ought not to be Judge in his own Case, and
much less be his own Carver of Execution by Pledges and Distresses, on his own
Authority, without the Sentence of a Judge. Secondly, Otherwise the Ass of the
Fatherless, the Ox of the Widow, and the Pledge of the Poor, would be taken from
them without Hearing of their Cause, and the Creditor, Landlord, and every
other Person would be Judges in their own Case, and Carve Execution for
themselves. Thirdly, Though the Poor may be able to give Convenotinal Pledges,
yet they are not able to give besides Judicial Pledges, when they are enforced
to sue for their Conventional, unjustly seized and detained from them; nor
though they are able to Mortgage the Right of their little Living, to be seized
when they fail paying Interest for the Debt, yet are they not able to leave
Possession by which they must live, if the Creditor unjustly enter before a
Judgment Declaratory, and a true Account made by him, and a Return of the
overplus, whereto the Mortgage amounted above the Debt. So though a Poor man
is able, to grant a Rentcharge and a Clause of Distress, if he be in Arere on
paying Interest for the Debt, yet if the Creditor wrongfully or excessively
Distrain, he is not able on a Replevin to give Pledges de Prosequendo, and de
Returno habendo to take a Conventional Distress therefore, or to make a
Conventional Seizure, Entry or Re-entry of, or into Goods or Lands, Pledged for
Debt or Rent, or made liable by any Covenant or Clause Irritant, to forfeiture
for non payment of the same, before a Judgment Declaratory of the non payment,
and of the value of the Goods to be Distrained; and Lands Seized for
satisfaction of the same, is as unjust and wicked as to take a Judicial
Distress, Pledge or Forfeiture, before such Judgment passed.

The Lord of Sauchi Sued one of his Tenants to make him remove from his Tack
or Lease, the Defendant excepted, That he had a Tack, it was replied, That the
Tack was null and void, because there was a Clause Irritant contained in it,
that if the Duty reserved were not paid, the Tack should be null and void, and
that the Duty was not paid; to which was duplied by the Defendant, that this
failure of payment was not yet declared by any Declaratory Sentence of a Judge.
The Lords found that there ought to be a Declaratory Sentence of a Judge first,
Declaratory Sentence of Scotland.
before any removal of a Tenant ought to be, though the Clause Irritant had
been, that the Tack should be null without any Declaratory Sentence, 4th, July,
1628.

(5.) That no Bail ought to be Exacted before Contumacy or Judgment.
First, If to Distrain dead Goods and Pledges of Cattle is prohibited before
Judgment, a Fortiori to Exact for Pledges or Sureties the living Bodies of men,
is prohibited. Secondly, It is manifest Christ intended to relieve the
oppression of the Poor against the Rich, and that none but the Rich are able to
give Bail to Tolerate, therefore the Rich, because they can give Bail on every
unjust Suit of theirs, to Exact Bail of Poor men before Judgment, who are not
able to give it, fills Prisons, and destroys innumerable Innocent Poor, and
leaves their Blood to cry against those who Tolerate so great an Oppression, as
to make Necessity Contumacy, and Punish the Poor for his Poverty. No less
abominable is the Practice of Attorneys and Clerks with their Writs of
Privilege, who will command what Bail they please, though the Poor man owe them
not a farthing, and he being once Arrested, and not able to give Bail, he must
therefore Rot or Starve in Gaol, or pay whatever the other will ask, right or
wrong. The Chancery Clerks and Officers go a degree beyond these, and will take
no Bail but four Subsidy men, and if they can but Arrest the pretended Debtor,
will keep him in hold too, till he pleads Instanter what they will have, to
Ruin him. These are the Prodigious Relics of Popish Tyranny left in
Protestant Courts of Law and Conscience, and translated from Romish
Ecclesiastical-Clerks to English Lay-Clerks: It were more just these Privileged
men had a Privilege granted to Rob on the Highway, for there honest men would
be able to defend themselves against them, but with these two Privileges of
theirs, one that they will take whomsoever they please Prisoners, and the other
that they will be Sued no where but in their own Court, makes it as difficult
to deal with them, as Turkey Pirates, who will be Tried by none but their
Fellows, nor Sued any where but in Algier. How little necessity there is of
this horrible Oppression of Exaction of Pledges, No Pledges, Bail, Outlawries,
required in Chancery.
Distresses, Bail, Penalties, Forfeitures, and Outlawries, before Judgment,
does easily appear from this, that in the Chancery there is none of all these
required, and though the Defendants are Richer, and the Causes of far greater
value than those in Common Law Courts, yet do the numerous Plaintiffs rather
shun the Common Law Courts, and throng thither, choosing to Sue there, than in
the other; and certainly if it be truly considered, these Exactions of Bail and
Outlawries, and Suprizes of Debtors before warning, do but necessitate them to
fly from their Creditors, and deceive them of what they would be ready to pay
on a fair Demand or warning, and liberty given to come to a just account with
Security. This cruel dealing therefore of the Creditor with his Debtor before
Judgment, tends not to his Profit, but very much to his Loss, as well as it
does of the Defendant, and many times undoes them both.

(6.) That no Arrest ought to be made before a Judgment, though there is
Contumacy.
This follows from what has already been proved, That a Plaintiff ought not to
be Witness, Judge, or Executioner thereon in his own Case, and therefore not of
the Contumacy of his Brother; Contumacy.
but if he is Contumacious, the Plaintiff ought by his Witnesses to make
Probation of those matters which are necessary to show a Contumacy, as (1.)
Oblatio Libelli. (2.) Productio Testium. (3.) His Refusal to answer and
satisfy, and thereon obtain a Sentence Declaratory of the Contumacy of the
Defendant, and a Capias to Arrest him. All Arrests therefore before Judgment,
Pursuivants. Tipstaves.
by Pursuivants, Messengers of Arms, Tipstaves, Maces, Sheriffs, or any other,
are Relics of Popery, and contrary to the Law of God, and of the Land, and
indeed are so far from having Right to Arrest before Judgment, that they ought
not so much as to Summon before an Oblatio Libelli, and a Productio Testium.

(7.) That though there is a Judgment, yet Christ allows no Imprisonment of a
Debtor not able to pay; for Disability is no Contumacy; and Poverty may more
often fall on the Righteous than the Wicked.
The Scripture makes our Demeanor to the Poor in Prison in this Life, of great
concernment to our well or evil Being after Death, as is said, Matthew. 25.34.
Then shall the King say unto them on his Right hand, Come ye Blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World:
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink:
I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and
ye visited me: I was in Prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the Righteous
answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or
thirsty, and gave thee drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or
naked, and clothed thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in Prison, and came unto
thee? And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, In
as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these ^y Brethren, ye have
done it unto me. Then shall he say unto them on the Left hand, Depart from me,
ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For I
was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:
I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick,
and in Prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also answer him, saying,
Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or
sick, or in Prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them,
saying, Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least
of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment: but the Righteous into Life Eternal. It may be much doubted, what
account these inferior Judicial Proceedings, of Exactions of Pledges, and Bail
before Summons, Outlawries, Excommunicato Capiendo's, Penalties, Forfeitures,
Confiscations, Arrests, and Imprisonment before Judgment, will be able to give
at the Supreme Judgment, they being all point Blank contrary to the Judicial
Precepts of Christ. And this Humanity and Mercy to Prisoners that are Poor and
unable to pay, has so far prevailed amongst most Nations, and with the Civil
Law, and with the Law of Scotland, that in all these, Cessio Bonorum.
if a Prisoner in Execution for Debt makes a Cessio Bonorum, that is, assigns
his whole Estate he has left, by Inventary on Oath to the Creditor, he ought
to be set at liberty; and certainly, the Arresting of Debtors without giving
warning, or time necessary, and who are not able to pay before Judgment, or
detaining them in Prison after Judgment, is not only, as has been already
said, hurtful to the Creditor himself; but to the Public, the same being
destructive to Trade, and likewise to the Peace; for Civil Wars and Seditions
have been caused both in the Grecian, Roman, and many other Commonwealths, by
the Cruel Prosecution and Imprisonments by Creditors of their Debtors; and I
remember we received often advertisement from our Army in Scotland, to desire
us to restrain our Letters of Caption from Arrests of Debtors, and that we
filled the opposite Army who were then in Hostility against us, with greater
Recruits of Debtors, who fled from Arrests, than they had been ever able of
their Power to have done, and of Debtors so Potent (for the Privilege of Peers
to be free from Arrest, was then taken away) as drew multitudes with them to
the Hills, who would, if secured from Arrest, have all stayed quiet Neuters at
home.

(8.) That in case of Contumacy of the Debtors, Christ allows both to take
Pledges, Arrest and Imprison him after Judgment.

(9.) That he allows not, though after Judgment, to detain the Debtor in Prison
for Penalties and Forfeitures, above the value of the Debt and Damage.

One single Judge.
(10.) That he allows on lawful Probation and Judgment, Imprisonment to be by
one single Judge.
For he says in the Singular Number, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer,
and thou be cast into Prison, Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means
come out thence, till thou have paid the utmost farthing. And at that time the
Roman Judges both at Rome, and in Judaea, sat on single Tribunals in Courts by
themselves, and not with associates: Judices delegati a principe fuerunt 12. in
Civitate Romana, Octo Erant Minores, and Quatuor Majores, and quilibet sedebat
in suo Praetorio in Basilica, gl^in Rub. and in. Rebus in Authent. de Judicibus
in Collat. 6. In the City of Rome there were Twelve Judges Delegates made by
the Emperor, Eight Lesser, and Four Greater, and every one of them sat in his
several Court in the Palace Hall. This Christ seems to allude to Matthew. 19.28.
When the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit
upon Twelve Thrones, Judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel. In the like manner
they placed single Judges in the Provinces; as, Herod, Felix, Festus, and
others, were all single Judges within their several Territories of Judaea. And
these single Judges were not only, (1.) Judges of Temporals, but Spirituals,
till the Superstition of the Emperors divided the Supreme Jurisdiction into
Episcopal and Imperi^l, giving the Supremacy to the Episcopal; for before the
Emperors, the Roman Law was Rex Sacrorum Praeses esto, as appears by the Laws
of Romu^us and Numa, of whom, one was an Augur and King, which was then their
highest kind of Prophet, and above a Priest, and the other a Sacrificer and a
King. The Senate after the Expolsion of Tarquin, took upon themselves to be
Praesides Sacrorum, and the Emperors after they had overtopt the Senate, made
themselves Highpriests and Emperors, so did Julius Caesar, so did Augustus and
their Successors, till as is before said, Superstition again divided the
Imperial Jurisdiction. But likewise (2.) the same Judge was of Civils and
Criminals, and (3.) the same one Judge was of Fact, Law, and Equity, and there
was not amongst, nor in any Empire in the World, that unnecessary and unjust
distinction of Chancery, Common Law, and Juries.

It is not here objected against the Bishops, that they place more Judges than
one in their Spiritual Courts, or any Court where they can get Jurisdiction, we
know the contrary; and too Ambitious and Subtle they were to draw any such
Inconvenience on themselves, but they rather studied to lay that Clog of
unnecessary Number on the Layity in the Common Law Courts, they themselves
having usually been sole Judges in the Spiritual Courts, concerning Marriage,
Testaments, and Tiths, under the name of Judge Spiritual or Ecclesiastical; and
in the Chancery, concerning other Temporal matters, under the name of the Judge
of Conscience and Equity, and in their Inquisitions Criminal, concerning
matters of Life and Death, under the name of the Judge of Heresy, have made
themselves absolute Monarchs over the Religion, Just^ce, Estates and Lives of
the People, and Clogged them with numerous Judges and Juries, that they might
not be able to lift an hand, or move a Tongue against them, in the same manner
as the Senate did deceive the People of Rome, by multiplying their Tribunes
under pretense of favor to them, to no other intent, but that the Defensors of
their Liberty might be more easily divided against themselves, and weaker to
oppose the Senate. I shall only give a touch of the Reasons, why more Judges
than one ought not to be admitted in any one Court, except in a Court of
Appeal, or in Judges equally Elected by the Parties, as Arbitrators, and
Commissioners for Examination of Witnesses use to be.

(1.) Because as to Election of the Judges, it is easier to find one Man of
Ability and Integrity fit to be a Judge, than Twelve.

Reasons why more Judges than one ought not to be admitted in one Court.
(2.) The hearing of a multitude of Causes is extreme tedious and toilsome,
where there is therefore a numerous Court, they are apt to shift their Collar
from the labor, and leave all to the President, while they either talk with
one another more pleasant discourse, or let their Wits run a wool-gathering, or
plainly, nod and sleep upon the Bench.

(3.) Admit they do attend the Cause (which they very rarely do except for a
Friend, or against an Enemy) they may vary in their Votes, whereby no Judgment
can be given as in a Ceux que Droit Case, where are many Competitors for the
same thing, A. B. C. D. the first Judge may be for A. the second for B. the
third for C. the fourth for D. whereby no Judgment can be given.

(4.) In a General Issue, or Special Issue, some Jurors may be of the
Gonscience that such Witnesses are not above Exception, nor to be credited,
others that they are; others, that such Evidence does not conduce to the Issue;
others, that it does; whereby no Verdict could be given, were they not
compelled by that unconscionable way of starving them, to agree against their
Consciences.

(5.) If we come from Judges of the Fact, to Judges of the Law, who allow
themselves better Quarters than the other, and will not be kept without Meat,
Drink, Fire, or Candlelight, till they pass their Sentence; yet the Courts in
Westminster consisting of the equal number of Four Judges, are often divided,
two against two, and what if the Vote of the Chief Justice hear it against the
other, yet one man's opinion being as good as another, yea the Puisne Justice
being oftentimes of greater Age and Ability than the Chief, his Sentence will
not carry the Reputation of Justice, neither may it be thought worth the Labor
and Cost to have an Associate joined with him, if his Vote must be nulled by
the others, he had been better at first sat and Sentenced alone; and of more
esteem his Sentence would have been, had it never been opposed by a contrary
Sentence of greater esteem than that, to help which, there has been sometime
added a Fifth Judge in England, and in Scotland, where the number of the Lords
of the Session or Judges was Fifteen, with a Numero Deus Impare gandet, but in
neither of these is this happy Imparity so much to be found, as in one who
cannot be divided in the least proportion against himself, whereas Four may be
divided, Two against Two; and Fifteen, Eight against Seven; which will leave a
Sentence very Instable and Suspicious, for many times the Minor Party are the
Melior.

(6.) In a numerous Court they may all vary in the state of the Question to be
Voted, if the President should have Power to put what Question to the Vote he
pleases, if he propose either a General Issue or State of the Question, the
Residue may each raise his Special Question, which will need a Decision before
the General can be Voted, as a Jury often do in a Special Verdict: if the
President propose a Special I^sue or State of the Question, the Residue again
may every one raise his particular or Individual State of the Question, and
think the Special cannot be Voted till the particular be decided, whereby they
will be able no more to agree in the Special than the General, unless used as a
Jury; none of which Inconveniences can fall out in a single Judge, but he easily
gives his Sentence in the Roman manner, either Absolvo, or Condemno, or Non
liquet; in England they use to send two Judges in every Circuit, because one
sits on Civil Causes in the Nisi prius side by himself, and the other on
Criminals, in the Crown side of the Town Hall where they come, by himself,
which fashion being imitated in Scotland, and two English Judges usually in
every one of those Circuits, being sent to sit both together in one Criminal
Court, (for there are no Nisi Priuses or Trials of Civil Actions in the
Circuits of Scotland) proved inconvenient, and though but two, they often
differing one with another, left Business not done, or at least much delayed;
whereas the Custom of Scotland before was much better, who used to send but one
Judge at a time in their Circuits, or Justice Eir, whom they call the Justice
General.

(7.) Where Justice is appointed to be done by a Quorum, it is extreme
difficult, and many times impossible to get them together; that this Clog upon
Civil Proceedings was brought in by the Romish Bishops to the same intention
which is before mentioned, to weaken the Roman Tribunes, appears from the very
name, that it is Latin, Restraining Justices of Peace to Quorums, destroys
Justice.
and the effect of it destructive to Justice, for wheresoever a Justice of
Peace is limited to Act single without a Quorum, he is as good as (to that
matter) disabled to Act at all, especially for the Poor, who have most need of
them, and are not able to draw Quorums together, as the Rich may. In no less
danger is the Public safety of his Majesty and his Protestant Subjects, by
Restraining or at least making doubtful the Authority of the Sheriff (who is
his Majesty's Lieutenant Sworn, and Vice Consul of his Province or County) to
oppose a Rebellion or Invasion without a Quorum of Deputy Lieutenants, or
Justices of Peace, who though Persons of great Honor, Ability, and Valor, to
serve their King and Country, yet if Fettered together in Quorums, like
Plurality of Generals in an Army, by how much of higher Courage and Conduct
they are, by so much the more are they apt by Ambitious Emulation to cross one
another, To restrain Sheriffs by a Quorum, dangerous to Public safety.
and bring the Army in confusion whom to follow. An Example of which happened
in the Alarm in Dorset, December. 9th. 1678. of a Foreign Enemy landed on that
Coast, which I have the more Reason to remember, happening to have been pricked
Sheriff, but not Sworn for that County; when as soon as the noise was spread,
some ran to the Sheriff, some to one Deputy Lieutenant, some to another, some
to one Justice of Peace, some to another, some gathered together East, some
Wist, some North, with great Courage and Resolution to Fight the Enemy wherever
they found him; but in such a Confusion, they knew not who was to Command, or
who to Obey, and pity 'twas to see so many stout men so unarmed, undisciplined,
and unprovided as they were; and certainly, if they are suffered so to continue
in that and other Countries, it is impossible for the Protestant not be
Surprised by whatsoever Rebellion the Native, or Invasion the Foreign Papist
(unless God as he has hitherto done, discover their Plots by Miracle) Design
and Attempt; neither does appear any more ordinary way of Remedy, than freeing
the Militia from Quorums, who without their default may have Popish Spies
unknown crept in amongst them, (which is impossible for any but a single Person
to prevent) to discover their Councels, and cross all their Actings, and will
be utterly disabled either to Arm, Train, or Discipline a Militia, as were
necessary; all which would be easily done by a Sheriff who is a single Person,
if his Ancient Legal Authority were, as is most fit, restored to him to Act
singly for the preservation of his Country without a Quorum, and his Honor and
Interest would oblige him, had he undisputable Authority to Muster, Arm, Train
and Discipline those Men to the height, whom he himself, if an Enemy appears in
his Year, is to lead in Person against him.

(8.) The greater the number of Judges, the greater the delay in the
Proceedings.

(9.) The greater number of Judges, the more difficult to obtain Remedy against
those of them who Judge wrong, for they conceal their names, as the Lords of the
Session of Scotland, being Fifteen, and sometimes Eighteen, compel the
President to sign their Sentence in his name, A. B. I. P. C. that is, in
praesentia Curiae, though it be contrary to his Vote, whereby it is as
impossible to discover who gave the wrong Sentence, as it is in a Jury who gave
the wrong Verdict delivered by the Mouth of their Foreman. So in Athens, the
Court of the Areopagites were in number Twelve, and they gave their Sentence
into a Balloting Box, by Black Beans, and White Beans, whereby it was
impossible to know who gave the unjust S^ntence, on which Plutarch mentions a
passage of Alcibiades, who being sent for home out of Sicily to Athens to be
questioned for his Life, Fugam fecit; and being asked by one, saying, Will thou
not trust thy own Country who begat thee, to be thy Judge? No, quoth he, nor
her who brought me forth, lest she being Ignorant, and not conceiving the
Truth, mistake a Black Bean for a White. Amongst others was the Custom to do it
with Black and White Stones, as Ovid, Mos erat Antiquis niveis atrisque
lapillis,
His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa.
They Sentenced with Stones of Black and White,
That know thou might not who Judged Wrong or Right.


(10.) The Appeal must be to double the number, as from a Jury of Twelve, to a
Jury of Four and Twenty, which makes double the danger amongst so many, they
all concealing their Names in giving their Verdict, as well as the first Jury.

(11.) When a Jurisdiction is divided to two Judges, which might have been
exercised by one, by the Interfereing of the divided Jurisdictions a man is
pulled to pieces, to pay Tribute for the same Cause to both; as between the
Chancery and the Common Law Courts, between the King's Bench, and Common Pleas,
one on Indictment of Trespass, the other for Action of Trespass, for the same
offense; so between the Common Law Courts, and the Episcopal Courts, a man is
not only put to double Costs, but is twice punished for the same offense, and
all Jurisdictions in the hands of several Judges will interfere, except such as
are divided by Territory, and no other respect, as the Jurisdiction of one
County Court is divided from another by Territory, the County Pala^ines from
the Westminster Courts by the Territory bounding them, the Admiralty from the
Common Law Courts by the Territory covered with the Sea.

(12.) Where one Judge is sufficient to perform the Office of many, with greater
Expedition and Justice, a multitude of Judges must be then a vast Charge to the
Public, and a Prejudice; as, if to Justice the Romans had appointed Twelve
Judges for every Province, where one alone discharged the same, it had been
enough to have exhausted the Treasure of an Empire; it is manifest, that but
three Judges, only i^ Westminster, one in the King's Bench, the other in the
Common Pleas, and the third in the Exchequer, let them have but the
Jurisdiction of Fact, Law and Equity, as they ought to have, may with as exact
Justice and greater Expedition than now is done, discharge all the Offices of
the Twelve Judges of the King's Bench, Common Pleas, and Exchequer, save the
labor of the Prerogative Court of Arches, Court of Audience, Court of
Faculties, Court of Peculiars, Consistory Courts, Court of the Archdeacon, or
his Commissary, the Court of Delegates, and all Episcopal Courts and Offices,
and likewise save the Labor and Charge of a distinct Chancery, and of all
original Writs, and of all Commissions of Rebellion, and of all Outlawries, of
all the intolerable Slavery of Sheriffs in making Pannels, and of Freeholders
serving in Juries, and of Nisi Priuses, and of Councels speaking to matters of
Fact before Juries. And that three Judges are sufficient to do this, and many
matters more, I speak by experience; for there were but four English Judges
sent into Scotland, and sometimes there were but three, and sometimes but two,
there the other serving in Parliaments, as they fell out, and occasion
required, and we discharged all the Offices of Lords of the Session, Lords of
the Exchequer, and of the Justitiar General in his Justice-Eir, and in his
particular Justice-Courts, which did answer all the Offices and Power of the
Judges in Westminster, of the Chancery, King's Bench, Common Pleas, and
Exchequer, and of the Justices of Jail-deliver in their Circuit, and besides
these, we Discharged the Commission for Plantation of Kirks through all
Scotland, and were Visitors of the Universities; there were Judges likewise of
the Seisures of all Ships except English, Importing any Goods of the Production
of Asia, Africa, America, or Europe, contrary to an Act made 1651. Cap. 22. for
Increase of Shipping, and encouragement of Navigation; we likewise Discharged a
Commission of Claims, and a Commission for moderating the Fines laid on Persons
who had been in Hostility, to a Third part; we likewise Discharged a Commission
to Elect all Chief Officers in the Boroughs, and made all the Sheriffs of
Scotland; yet had we not above Six Hundred Pound per Annum for all this, and
about Two Hundred Pounds to bear the Charge of a Circuit, which was no profit
to us, but spent in entertainments for the Public Honor; neither did we take
any Present, Treat; or Entertainment from the Sheriffs, though of our own
making, and much less any Bribe, or so much as Esculenta, or Poculenta from
them, or any other; now that which made it possible to us to Discharge so many
Courts, Offices and Commissions, was, that we were saved the labor of having
Causes tossed and tumbled from Chancery to Common Law, the Chancery and Common
Law being there united, and Pleas of Equity admitted in the same Court, and
there being no Juries in Civil Actions, the same Persons were Judges of Fact,
Law and Equity; another cause was, that there were no Original Writs, but the
more compendious and just way of Summons used, by serving the Defendant with a
Copy of the Declaration; another cause was, that Council could not speak to
matter of Fact in Civil Actions before Juries or at Nisi Priuses, there being
none, nor was so much as one of them suffered to speak or appear at the Bar
when the Depositions of Witnesses are Advising or Reading, as they do with us
at Chancery-Hearings, to the intolerable charge of Suitors, and destruction of
Justice and Equity; another cause was, that the Council first excepted to the
Law, which we call a Demurrer, and after that to the Fact, which we call a
Plea, and had that liberty given, both to demur and plead, which kept the way
so clear before them, that they had never any Delays by Jeofails, Repleaders,
Arrests of Judgment, or Writs of Error; another cause was, that both Parties
and Advocates took the Oath of Calumny, that they believed their Allegiance
just and true, Illud juretur quod lis sibi justa videtur, which Oath keeps
their Allegiances clean from falsity, that I never found so much as one Fiction
in all their judicial Proceedings; and if the same Oath were but taken here as
there, I believe there would not one Bill in Chancery, or Declaration at Common
Law come in for Twenty, which now are thrust in by heaps; many other causes
there are, which lessen the labor of a Judge, and of the Suitors, which for
Brevity I omit; all which show the Prudence of that Noble Kingdom, where the
People enjoy so great Justice with so little Cost and Contention; Lastly, we
could have done more Business than we did, had we been set to Act as the Roman
Judges, every one single, without Associates in a Court by himself; and how
great an Addition to the Public Treasury, as well as advantage to Justice, the
lessening the number of Judges, and turning Fees to Salary will cause, is
already mentioned.

A Satyr against the Cruel Preposteration of Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts
in Judicial Proceedings, contrary to the Precept of Christ, Matthew. 18.15.
AND will you never learn the skill,
Which first Subpoena is, or Bill,
Or foremost know with all your wit
If Declaration is, or writ,
Or which precede should in your Tale,
The Capias or Original?
You which is best, who make a pause,
To Sentence first, or hear the Cause,
With Execution who begin
Before a Judgment, or a Sin,
Who grind and eat the Poor distressed
With Tongue and Teeth of Romish Beast?
For Grace, in Anglice's who curse;
The Rent was bad, the Patch is worse:
Who have no Summons but Surprise,
Who have no Laws but Treacheries:
Do you not know there is a Cry
Gone up against your Cruelty?
The Prince himself of Righteousness,
So foul Oppressions to suppress,
Descended has on Earthly Globe
And glorious Died his Scarlet Robe
In his own blood, to keep the Peace,
And from your Dungeons to release.
Twelve Trumpets hear, 12 Apostles.
whose Silver sound
Does from the East to West rebound,
Proclaimed the Sacred Edict have,
And Penalty, whence none can save;
Which lest to you should be in vain,
Ye Adders deaf, hear it again.
If Thee, thy Brother, or thy Friend,
Or Enemy, hap to offend;
See thou to warn him do not grudg
Twice at the least without a Judge,
And the last time, see thou no less
Show him than thy two Witnesses,
Or three, to make the Fact appear,
If he shall doubt, to him more clear.
Nor shall thou him for any thing
Unto the Seat of Judgment bring,
Until he Litis Contestate,
Or show a Contumacious hate;
That, if thou can, thou may him prove,
Thus first at home to win by Love.
Let every Plaintiff thus his Suit
Begin, or be for ever mute,
No form of Strife shall be but this,
Our express will and pleasure is
The Nations Bow, and struck with Awe.
Adore the Justice of the Law,
And to the dread Tribunal run,
High as the Clouds, bright as the Sun,
With loud Appeals, and further will
Upon this Statute draw their Bill,
Both of Indictment and Complaint,
And of these Crimes you thus attaint:
That against this Divinest Act,
More Fees and greater to exact
The furious Plaintiff false or true,
While hot you bind him to pursue,
The slow Defendant wrong or right,
You Bail or Goal to make him fight,
And Fines on Concords heavy lay,
To make them your unhappy prey;
The Debtor travailing to find
The Creditor with honest mind,
Your Outlawries ambush the way,
And will not suffer him to pay,
But in your Tolls you take him there,
And bind him like a filly Dear,
Or (what does make him as forlorn)
To death you hunt him with the Horn,
To make his Skin and Carcass yours,
You cheat both him and Creditors,
And while his Plaint each sadly tells,
You take the Fish and leave the Shells.
Thus Innocents you lay in Chains,
Before they know who it is complains,
Or what it is for; nor shall they see it,
Till all Extortion's paid by Sheet.
You lay Imbargues, and Prizes take,
Before the War proclaimed you make,
And Right by Battle try, and Wounds
Mortal, before the Trumpet sounds;
Your Hell Hounds hunt without a noise,
Your Snake not rattles, but destroys;
There Is nothing true, and nothing Sworn,
Till Justice is to pieces torn,
And you who cite not, but infest us
With your Excessus Manifestus,
And us torment with great unfitness, Dr. Cousins writes in defense of
suppressing the names of Witnesses, Accusers. Excommunication ipso facto
without Citation.

Because you will not name the Witness,
Your Ipso Facto's make us wonder,
At Thunderbolts without a Thunder,
And Bodies Judge in Hell to cast
Before the Judgment day is past,
And deathless Souls make pale and wan,
Because you Curse before you Ban.
No Plea deceives the Judge on high,
What will you do, stand mute or fly?
All rather, or, who most repents,
Burn Popish Forms and Presidents;
Is it not better then to turn
To Flames, than you your selves to burn?
Some way with speed appease his Ire,
Your pain proclaimed is, Hell and Fire.
Of Summons to answer before a Copy given of what is required to be answered.
This is in Scotland provided for by Act of Parliament, and no man is troubled
to appear before any Judge to answer, before by their Libelled Summons a Copy is
delivered to the Person, or affixed at the Door of his dwelling House,
containing all the matters at large to which his answer is required; and though
the People of England are not yet so happy as to enjoy so great a Privilege, on
which those invaluable Treasures of their Liberty and Propriety depend, yet
every Attorney and Clerk of a Court has it, and is free from giving appearance
before a Judge, or being Arrested, till a Copy of the Declaration first
delivered him, and Judgment passed against him, Attor. Ac. 28. The reason why
these Lay-Clerks, who are Successors in Courts to the old Romish Spiritual
Clerk, Monopolize this from the whole People only to themselves, is Filthy
Lucre: For first, if the Plaintiff were compelled, as he ought to be, to make
Oblatio Libelli to the Defendant, by giving or sending a Copy of his Bill in
Chancery, or of his Declaration at Common Law, to the Defendant at his dwelling
House, and so likewise the Defendant bound to return his Answer Sealed up,
directed to be left for the Plaintiff in such Court, having Jurisdiction of the
Cause, as the Plaintiff desired, within Fifteen Days after the Service of the
Copy at the dwelling House, to be by the Officer of the Court delivered Sealed
to the Attorney of the Plaintiff when he demands the same, and the like done on
Reply, Duply, Triply and Quadruply, and all Exceptions of Fact or Law,
Postulations and Motions of either Party, both on matters principal and
incident, till there be a Contumacy to return Answer, or a Litiscontestation
made, and a Commission desired to examine Witnesses and the Parties for
Probation, this would cause all those little Shreds of Sheeps-skins which so
unnecessarily torment the Country, and the dead Pots to be laid aside, as the
Popish Agnusses Dei, or rather Agnusses Diaboli were, and so the Successors to
the Popish Clerks would lose their Fees in the one as well as the other, to the
great joy of all the Protestants. (2.) What is worse, they would lose their
Eight pence per Sheet for but Eight words in a Line, and Fifteen Lines in a
Sheet in Chancery; and for Six half words in a Line with a Dash, and Twelve
Lines in a Sheet at Common Law, all which a Boy would far better transcribe for
a Penny per Sheet; for want of which Oblatio Libelli, by the Plaintiff, a Rich
man will of purpose draw his Bill in Chancery, and stuff it with nothing but
Falsi i^s so long to multiply the Sheets against a Poor man, that it will cost
him many times Three or Four Pounds for a Transcript, for which he must send an
Hundred Miles besides, before he shall know what he must Answer. So that the
Rich need do nothing else to undo the Poor but suggest and throw him into the
Lions Dens of Chancery, Common Law and Checquer-Clerks, for Copies of those
Legends of Lies they themselves invented; whereas, if these rich and vexatious
Plaintiffs were compelled to serve Defendants by sending them from their
Palaces, but a Copy to their poor dwelling Houses or Cottages, what their
wills and pleasures are to have right or wrong, they would pay as far as they
were able, rather than if they told them they should first go so far to Clerks
to buy Copies of their Will and Pleasure before they would vouchsafe to reveal
the same, and after be less able to pay than before. (3.) They would lose all
the Gains of those unnecessary and hurtful Entries and Inrollments of the
Bills, Declarations and Pleas of the Parties, in those huge heaps of Moldy
Rolls, wherein it is easy for them to forge what they please; for no Averment
is allowed against Clerks and their Records, which should be far better and
more Authentic, were the Copies delivered Signed by the Parties themselves,
and only filed orderly as received from the Parties, and not Entered nor
Enrolled by the Clerks, but kept by Filazers. (4.) They would lose all the
Gains de Temere Litigantibus, which is more than they have from ^uitors which
Sue of necessity and for just Cause, and would not have one Suit in Ten which
they now have before them; for the Countreyman* where the Writ is served before
the Bill or Declaration, think they shall Conquer presently their Adversary, if
they but Arrest, Outlaw, or have a Commission of Rebellion against him; whereby
they are encouraged by Attorneys to rush blindly into unwarrantable Suits,
which many times undo them: Whereas if the Law were, as it ought to be, by the
Precept of Christ, That every Plaintiff should first send a Copy of his Bill to
the Defendant, and heir his Exceptions against it, or sind his Contumacy,
before he Summoned him before a Judge, he would, before he would rashly en angle
himself in Lawsuits, consult Council, and have his Bill or Declaration drawn
by them, and hear the Exceptions of his Adver^ary against it, after which,
there would not one of Twenty dare run headlong on a wrong Suit, except P^^sons
extremely Litigious and shameless: Whereas now on Summons and Arrests tolerated
before a Copy of the Bill, or Declaration given the Defendant, vexations
Contentions both in Chancery and Common Law are infinite and endless.

Of giving a Copy before an Oath of Calumny, That he who gives it, believes the
same true and just.
The Oath of Calumny may by the Civil Law be required, not only of the Parties
Litigant, but of their Advocates and Procurators, who are in our Language their
Counselors and Attorneys, and the same is appointed by an Act of Parliament of
Scotland, the Practice of the Courts there, and the same is done not only to
the Bill, but to all parts of Process alleged either by Plaintiff or
Defendant, and is of excellent Use to clear those Contagious Plagues and Pests
of Judicial Proceedings, Fictions and Falsities, and to restore Truth, which is
impossible to be kept alive in Religion or Justice, without abolishing the
other.

The Causes which introduce Fictions and Falsities into Judicial Proceeding are
Four: One, the not using the Oath of Calumny: The Second, the not admitting
Averment or Probation to the contrary: The Third, the not giving the Adverse
Party notice of the time and place the Swearer is appointed to be Sworn, and
liberty to be there present himself, or by his Commissioners to except against
him if he have cause. The Fourth is denial of Travers, and Contrary Probation
to all that is doubted to be false. In the Civil Law there was but one Fiction,
which was Fictio Postliminii; the occasion whereof was, the Romans, to incite
their Soldiers to Conquer or Die, which is to take no Quarter, touched by
Virgil, Jaciat si quem fati sors dura peremit, and Horace, p. 75. Si non perit
immiserabilis captiva pubes; If Captive Youth should not be suffered to perish
without Pity and Redemption, it would, says he, be a pernicious Example to
Posterity, had this Cruel Law or Custom, That who was a Captive, lost the
Rights of a Citizen; and who died a Captive in the Power of the Enemy, his
Estate should be confiscated to the Public Treasury, and he should have no
Heir to succeed him. ff. de Captiv. and postlimin. To abate the rigor and
severity of this Law, the Judges helped the Captive by a Fiction, feigning,
that he was never taken Captive, but always remained in the City; and the
Legislative, in imitation of the Judges, that they might the less be taken
notice of to derogate from their Military Discipline, stretched the former
Fiction a little further, and enacted by their Lex Cornelia, in favor of the
Heir whose Father happened to die Captive to the Enemy, (a Charitable Fiction,
not to punish the Child for the Fathers offense) that the Father died the next
hour before he was supposed to have been taken Captive; L. Si is qui pro
Emptore in addit. marg. de Vsucapio. And like that of the Midwives of Egypt,
to preserve young Children from Destruction, seems excusable, if it was not
possible to do it any way else: but these Episcopal Fictions, That Marriage is
of Souls, not Bodies; of Spouses, not Wives; begetting of Children is by
Husbands absent within the four Seas, not by Adulterers within the Spouses Bed:
That Sons are not of the blood or kin to the Father who begot them, but of him
of whom the Bishop will please to certify them: these are not Mendacia
Officiosa, but Pernitiosa, not to preserve Children, but to destroy them; and
not only those of Subjects, but of their Prince, though not captived in War,
yet exiled by War, No Digression to father on Bishops the Fictions and
Preposterations of Common Law, as well as Spiritual Judges.
by which it was impossible to use the Episcopal Ceremonies of Common
Prayer-Books in Marriage, or without danger of his Life to Marry otherwise than
by the Moral Law of God.

And let it not seem here a Digression, that I am enforced to Father on Romish
Bishops not only all the pernicious Fictions and Preposterations in Judicial
Proceedings of Spiritual, but likewise of Temporal Courts, and to make it part
of the Exception against them, That they are not fit Judges of Marriage,
Filiation, Aliment and Succession. (1.) Because Romish Bishops, as is already
shown, were the Formers of all the Common Law Writs in the Register, and Forms
of Judicial Proceedings in the Book of Entries, and the Compile of the Common
Laws was trusted to Britton a Bishop, as well as the Forms of the Citations,
Libells, Litiscontestations, Compurgations, Excommunications, and Provincial
Laws and Canons were to other Bishops, and the Bishops have been the chief
Judges in the Common Law Courts of Westminster, and Chancellors in the
Chancery, and have rid the Circuit with the Earls in the Countries, and after
them with the Sheriffs; which Earls and other Lay-Judges in time of Popery were
only Assessors or Executioners of the Sentence of the Bishop, and he only the
pretended infallible Oracle both of Law and Gospel to Judge how he pleased. (2.)
Because what is a good exception against a Common Law Judge, is a good exception
against a Spiritual Judge; and what Fiction is a good exception against
Succession by the Verdict of the Jury, is a good exception against Succession
by the Certificate of a Bishop. (3.) Because by a kind of Conspiracy between
the Spiritual and Common Law Courts in time of Popery, their Preposterations,
Fictions and Formalities are so complex'd and entangled one with another, that
it is impossible to divide them, or carry on a perfect Discourse of one without
the other, or of Preposteration without Fiction and Formality; the one being
commonly cause of the other. (4.) It is necessary to prevent any Excuse the
Spiritual Judge may pretend; if he should say, The Common Law Judge is suffered
to Summon and Arrest before Copy, to Copy before Oath of Calumny, and to use
Hundreds of Fictions and Falsities in his Judicial Proceedings, and why should
not the Spiritual Judge be allowed as well as he? but where they are both
censured, they can neither recriminate. And how guilty they both are of nursing
that viperous brood of the old Serpent, who have eaten through the Bowels of
Justice, may appear by the particulars following: The Subpoena in Chancery is a
Writ or Summons formed by the Bishops themselves when Chancellors, wherein
notwithstanding the Holy Catholic Fathers formed as many Lies as Lines. (1.)
It begins, as West has it, Proceeding in Chancery, p. 183. Jacobus Dei gratia
Angliae Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei Defensor, Fictions and
Falsities fomented in all Forms of Judicial Proceedings. Subpana's full of
Fictions.
etc. A. C. salutem Quibusdam certis de causis coram nobis in Cancel' nostra
propositis. This is not true, for though here, and in other Nations anciently,
Princes sat in their Courts of Judicature in Person, it is not so now; neither
are any Causes proposed coram nobis, before the King in Person, unless, as some
presume, they will attribute the incomprehensible Attribute of Omnipresence to
Humanity; neither is it sufficient to reply, that he is present there by his
Delegate; for a Delegate is only where the Prince is absent, or will not
himself receive the Complaint, which is signified by the words of Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.3. See thy matters are good and right: for there is no man deputed of
the King to hear thee. Intimating, if there had been a Judge Deputed he needed
not fear the Kings presence to have his matters so severely weighed, as if he
had Judged in Person. And we see, to avoid the Fiction of Human Omnipresence,
in an Action of Debt returnable in the Common Pleas, where the King sat not in
Person, but Judged by Delegates, the Sheriff is commanded Sum' per bonos Sum'
praedictum A quod sit coram Justitiariis nostris apud Westmonasterium; and if
it had been Coram Nobis, it would have been a Fiction; but that which makes the
Certis de Causis coram nobis in Cancel' nostra propositis, not only a Fiction,
but a gross Falsity, is, that the Complainant has taken out his Subpoena
before he has any Bill presented either to the King in Person, or the
Chancellor, or the meanest Clerk in the Court. It goes on and say, Tibi
praecipimus firmiter injungentes quod omnibus aliis praetermissis and
excusatione quacunque cessante. Yet ought the Defendant to be admitted to offer
a lawful cause of Excuse or Essoin. Next it says, In propria persona tua, yet
may the Defendant be admitted to appear by Attorney. Next, Sis coram nobis in
dicta Canc' nostra a die Paschae proxim' futu^' in unum Mensem. Yet to appear
Quarto die post the Return-day, is sufficient; then, ubicunque tunc fuerit ad
respond' super his quae objicientur, an Objection cannot be, unless there is
some allegation first put in by the Defendant, any more, than an Answer can
before some Bill put in by the Plaintiff: here is therefore a double Falsity,
and the Poor Country man is fooled, to ride up an Hundred Miles, when he never
put in a Bill himself to be objected against; nor, when he with much labor is
got to Town weary, quarto die post, is there any Bill put in against him by the
Complainant for him to Answer. Then it is further said, Et ad faciend' ulterius
and recipiend' quod Curia nostra consideraverit in hac part, yet had neither
Party, Plaintiff or Defendant, a Bill or Answer in Court; how can it then be
said In hac part, where there is no Party. Et hoc Sub poena Centum librarum
nullatenus omittatis. This is likewise a Menacing Fiction, the Chancellor
having no Power to impose any Fine or Forfeiture on any Subject, of a Farthing.
Et habeas ibi hoc breve. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, when the King is a
Hundred Miles off Westminster, 12 die Febr. Anno Regui Domini, etc. George, etc.

But if the Defendant is a Nobleman, then no Subpoena is awarded, but a Letter
by the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, thus,

A Note of the Fictions of the Episcopal Form of the Letter in Chancery,
usually sent to a Nobleman, instead of a Subpoena, to Answer.
The Superscription is, which first comes to be read, and is directed thus, To
my very good Lord, I. L. D. These.

This Title of very good, if it had been put in Latin, might have been more
Complementally expressed Optimo, had it not been a Danger lest Maximo would
have been added: whether the Title of very good given to man, is always as
great a Fiction as the Titles of Sanctus Clemens, and Pius, given to Popes, may
be always doubtful, in regard Christ himself in Humility refused the Attribute
of Good, which is a degree under very good; Luke 18.19. And Jesus said unto
him, Why call thou me good? None is good but One, that is, God; but this
Title very good, is sometimes certain, and not doubtful to be a Fiction, when
it is attributed to the Leudest Person known, the Letter begins, After my very
hearty commendations to your Lordship; (This, when there is a Mortal Feud
between the Chancellor and the Lord, must be a Fiction) Whereas there has been
of late a Bill of Complaint exhibited into the Court of Chancery against you,
by H. O. Gent. I have thought good to give you notice thereof rather by these
my private Letters, than by awarding his Majesty's Ordinary Process. This, if
no Bill is come in, is as great a Fiction and Falsity in a Private Letter, as
in a Subpoena; and it were far fairer dealing with any Nobleman, as well as a
Poor man, if J. O. first took his Oath of Calumny to his Bill, and then made
him, according to the Precept of Christ, an Oblatio Libelli, and sent him a
Copy of his Bill by his own Letter, before he troubled him with a Chancellors
Subpoena or Letter, and made Use of them only on Probation and declaratory
Sentence of Contumacy first obtained; and after that obtained, far fairer
dealing it were with J. O. or any Poor man to grant the same Process of
Contumacy that a Nobleman shall have against a Poor man, and not put him to
the extraordinary cost and incertainty of a Chancellors Private Letter to a
Nobleman, seeing by Law he ought not to receive any Private Letter from him;
and such Nobleman ought to be punished by the Civil Law de Ambitu, and by the
Common Law for Maintenance, if he send any; and this Justice would prevent
Fictions both of Poor and Rich, and bring forth Righteousness and Truth.) The
Letter goes on, and says, Wherefore these are to pray your Lordships to give
order for the taking out of the Copy of a Bill, and for the putting in of your
Answer thereunto, according to the usual course in such Cases accustomed, at or
before Octab. Hill. next ensuing. By this Prayer here is a Fiction, that the
old Episcopal Chancellor had an Imperial Authority over the Commons, and only
Precarious over the Nobles, and was a Fiction, if he derived his Authority from
the King, of the weakness of the Royal Power, and of a Dishonor to it, as if
it was not able to do Justice to the Commons against the Nobles, as well as to
the Nobles against the Commons; if a Sheriff at Common Law should Execute his
Praecipe quod reddat, and his Praecipe quod faciat (whereby he is willed by the
King to command those against whom those Writs are directed) by writing his
humble Letters, when he perceives they concerned Noblemen, to pray their
Lordships to do what he was appointed to command, the Law makes him liable to
high punishment; and why a Chancellor should not be liable to the same, who
commits the same offense, and having the Kings Process to command in his hand,
will not, or dares not administer Equity by the same equal Process, to his
Majesty's Subjects both Poor and Rich, appears no reason, or rather an higher,
Quanto Major qui peccat habetur, by how much greater the Power of a Chancellor
is, extending to a Kingdom, than of a Sheriff confined to a single Country.
The next in the Letter is, Nothing deubting but that your Lordship will have
the care and regard which appertains, (but another man may doubt whether he
spoke Truth or Fiction,) He concludes well, if not in Hypocrisy, I leave your
Lordship to the most Merciful keeping of the Almighty, from Saint A. the 9th.
of May, 1654. J. P.

Prolixity caused by Fiction.
The Bill in Chancery for want of the Oath of Calumny is known to be commonly a
Pack of Lies from beginning to the end, which is full of infinite Mischiefs,
and destructive to all Justice, and makes it of such immense Prolixity, (for
Lies may be infinite, but Truths are few and short) that it compels the Answer
to be longer than it self; for every Lie must be Answered as well as the Truth;
and by reason of such Prolixity, neither the Chancellor, as he ought to do,
will take the pains to read, nor the Council to be instructed in either; but
the Truth like a Grain of Mustard-feed thrown into an heap of Tares, is lost,
and impossible to be found; and Sentences and Decrees passed both
Interloquutory and Final, without the least Merit of the Cause Started, Stated
or Debated.

The Process of the Chancery is almost as mischievous a Fiction, as the
Outlawry at Common Law, which is the Commission of Rebellion, that on
nonappearance, the most Loyal Subject that is may be Feigned, Proclaimed and
Imprisoned as a Rebel; so the Chancellor needs nothing but a Fiction to elude
Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, and an Hundred Acts of Parliament more
if they were made to that purpose, to which the Fiction is point blank contrary
and destructive, and as inconsistent with all the Fundamental Laws of Liberty
and Propriety, as Darkness with Light; yet is there no necessity of it at all:
for where it is not necessary to take the Defendants Oath, but the Plaintiff
can prove his Bill by Witnesses, full Justice may be done either by Missio in
Possessionem, where the Action is Real, or where it is to stop Suits by the
English Injunction or Scotch Suspension; and where the Defendants Oath is
necessary either for Discovery or Probation on proof made of the Bill, and of
the Countumacy and Sentence Declaratory, a Capias may be awarded against the
Defendant, as after a Judgment passed.

Fictions of Latitats.
If we go to the Common Law Process, that is as bad infected with Fictions as
the Court of Conscience. The Latitat is a mere Lie; first it supposes a Bill
of Middlesex to precede, where there is no such matter; then the Defendant is
slandered Latitare and discurrere, when he lives as openly as any of his
Neighbors, and never stirs from his home; the suggested Latitations are
therefore Lies: Then it says, De placito Transgr' Ac etiam; for if the Ac
etiam be true of Debt, then it is false as to Trespass; for there can be no
Joindure in Action of Debt and Trespass in the same Writ; and so the
King's Bench ought to have no Jurisdiction of Debt, notwithstanding this
Fiction, except on a Writ of Error, which is, upon the matter, confessed by
Coke himself, though he was Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench; for he
says, 4. part, 76. In former times some ill disposed Clerks of the
King's Bench, because they could have no Original returned out of Chancery for
Debt in that Court, they would Sue out an Original Action of Trespass, a mere
feigned Action returnable in this Court, and so proceed to Exigent; and when
the Defendant appeared, the Plaintiff would waive all the former Proceeding,
and file a Bill against the Defendant for Debt; which, he says, deserves
severe Punishment according to the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 29. If the
King's Bench therefore ought not to entertain the Fiction of a Trespass from the
Chancery, to hook in the Jurisdiction of Debt with it, but the Practice ought
to be severely punished; why does that Court allow it self the Fiction of a
Trespass in a Latitat, to hook in the Ac etiam Jurisdiction of Debt, and not
severely punish the same? Acts of Parliament eluded by Fictions.
according to the Censure of their own late famous Chief Justice Coke in a
stronger Case, when the Fiction comes from the Chancellor under the great Seal
it self. Or why should a Chief Justice be suffered to elude Magna Charta, the
Petition of Right, and all other Fundamental Laws of Liberty and Propriety, and
starve and rot the Poor Subjects in Prisons on mere Fictions of Latitats, more
than a Chancellor ought to be when he pleases by the Fictions of his
Commissions of Rebellion, seeing both Latitats and Commissions of Rebellion are
both point blank contrary to the Fundamental Laws of Liberty and Propriety?

Fictions of Summons served.
Then, the Original Summons in the Common Pleas, which should by Law issue
before the Capias and Outlawry, is usually by Fiction of the Clerks taken out
as of a former Term, and Antedated, the Sheriffs Returns upon them forged, the
Returns of the Exigend and Proclamations forged, the Outlawry forged; Crimes in
Clerks and Attorneys, which, if a Law were published for it, deserves death. So
a Clerk will Outlaw any man in an hour, as well as a Twelvemonth, and this he
does by Fiction, and as he calls it, of Course; and all those Acts of
Parliament which have been made, or will be made, against the secret Stealing
out of Outlawries, are to no purpose, and every Clerk derides and eludes them
by Fictions of Course, and will do, unless all Fictions in all Actions, and all
Outlawries in Civil Actions are clean taken away, root and branch.

Fictions in Trespass.
Then for the Action of Trespass, it is full of Fictions; it makes a Clausum
fregit, where there is neither Hedge nor Ditch, nor other Enclosure; my Lord
Coke indeed says, There is one in the Eye of the Law; but I am sure there is
none in the Eye of the Gosp^^^; then there is a Fiction of a Vi and Armis in
the Trespass, though a Woman, or a Child, or a Sheep, or a Lamb do it. Then a
Fiction is made of a Continuando of the Trespass, when the Trespasses were all
severally committed, with intervals between each Trespass; then because the
Writ-maker will be sure to run as far beyond the Truth as he can, he will
conclude with the Fiction of Alia enormia ei intulit, though the Lamb did
nothing there, but what was scarce enough to make it a Trespass, Fictions of
Transitory Actions. Fictions in Trovers.
cat some of the Grass. Transitory Actions are Fictions and great Abuses.

A Trover is properly an Action of the Case, which a man may have against
another for Finding, and detaining from him of his Goods so found; as for his
Hawk reclaimed with her Bells, for his Gold-chain, Purse of Money, Box of
Writings lost and found by another; and the Declaration is, Bona praedicta
casualiter amisit Quae quidem bona and Catalla ad manus and possessionem praed'
A devenissent, yet do they use to bring this Action where there was never any
casual loss of the Goods, nor finding of them by the Defendant; as, an Action
of Trover may be brought by the Master, for Money which a Servant, sent with
Corn to Sell for him received on Sale of the Corn, M. 40, and 41. Eliz. B. R.
Holiday and Higs, yet here is neither casual losing or finding of the Corn or
Money; And it may be brought for Twenty Pooks of Corn, Tr. 38. Eliz, C. B.
Price, versus Sir Walter Sands, yet such Goods standing after Reaping, in the
same Field where they grew, cannot be said to be lost when they are taken away,
nor found by the Trespassor who took them, any more than if he had taken them
before Reaping; so a Trover is brought for an Hundred Load of Wood, and Forty
Beech-Trees, No. lib. intra 41. S. 33. which quantity cannot be said to be
casually lost; so they use to bring Trovers for a Cow or an Horse not found,
but bought bona fide, not knowing any other owner but the possessor who sold
them; and likewise on Goods lent by one to another, for which Goods the proper
Action is a Detinue, but they turn the true Action of Detinue, into the false
of a Trover, for these two Reasons; one to deprive a Third Person injustly of
his lawful Garnishment and Right of Interpleder; the other in this, to do what
they use to do in the rest, that is to say, Fictions make Judicial Proceeding
unintelligible. Fictions in Ejectments.
to make Judicial Proceedings Nonsense and unintelligible, that in so dark a
Mist of Ignorance on the People, they may judge what they please unperceived;
and this they may do with greater security than Latin, for Latin is
intelligible to some, but Fictions and Nonsense to none; and all this is caused
by neglecting the Oath of Calumny.

The General Trial of Titles by Lease of Ejectment is likewise by Fictions in
the Verge; Coke says, 2. part, 548. there can be no Suit, except one Party at
least be of the Kings House, yet Suits are there, though all Parties are
strangers, which must be by Fictions.

An Obligation made beyond Sea cannot be Sued in England, as says Perk. 25.
and 95. and, France by Fiction brought into England.
Bro. Obligation 70. and Dr. and Stud. 63. but Coke Com. 261. b. g. says, It
may be alleged to be made in quodam loco vocat' Bordeaux, in France, in
Islington, in the County of Middlesex, and there it shall be Tried. So though
in matter of Life, of highest concernment in High Treason, by adhering to the
Kings Enemies beyond Sea; it is certain says Coke, such adherency without the
Realm must be alleged within the Realm, Coke Com. 261. And before the Statutes
of 33. and 35. H. 8. etc. they used to alledg Treasons committed beyond Sea, to
be committed within the Counties in England, where the Lands forfeited lay,
though it was done on Oath, ib. and Stamf. 90. but this was in time of Popery,
when they could easily dispense with Oaths, and take away not only men's
Estates, but Lives by Fictions; I hope such Popish Fictions will no longer be
suffered in Protestant Courts of Justice.

Coke says, From the taking away of Oaths for the truth of the cause of
Essoin, by the Statute of Marlebridge, cap. 12. there arose after Fourcher per
Essoin by several Tenants alternis vicibus, and making false Essoins ultra
mare, all endeavored to be taken away by Westminster. 1. cap. 43. and 44. but when a
mischief comes by making an ill Law or Statute, it is never cleanly cured by
after Statutes of Explanation or Limitation, without clean repealing again the
Statute which causes the mischief; additions of new Patches to old Garments,
making the Rent but worse.

Fictions in Essoins.
The mischief of Fictions of Husband and Wife to be but one Person, have been
sufficiently shown, P. 66, 67.

Fictions de Plus petitionibus.
In the Common Law. Declarations the next Fictions, for want of the Oath of
Calumny, are de Plus Petitionibus. Conrad. 405. says Olim triplum
condemnabantur qui majorem Summam in libello assignaverant quam reus debebat,
but in more ancient times, I find they forfeited only the Tenth part, which
with an Oath of Calumny might be now sufficient to restrain the lawless laying
of Debt and Damage in their Declarations an Hundred times more than it is,
which is very mischievous and dangerous to Defendants, when Plaintiffs pack and
bribe Juries, and they happen to misplead, make defaults, or have other
Casualties fallen on them, whereby they cannot attend their Suits. Dr. Cowell
says, The Civilians are in no danger de Plus Petitionibus, by reason of certain
Cautelous Clauses they ordinarily have at the end of every Position, or Article
of their Libel or Declaration, to this effect, Et ponit conjunctim divisim and
de quolibet, and detali, and tanta quantitate vel summa, qualis and quanta per
Confessionem partis adversae vel per probationes Legitimas in fine litis
apparebit, and again in the conclusion of all, Non astringens se ad singula
probanda sed petens ut quatenus probaverit in praemissis, aut eorune aliquo,
eatenus obtineat. But Civilians and Canonists make their Laws like
Juglers-knots to tie with one finger, and untie with the other, they make a
great noise of their Oath of Calumny, and de Plm Petitionibus, and by these
secret Clauses in their Libels, make it all again to no purpose.

All the Common Law Writs of Questus est nobis, are now grown Fictions; and
Declarations Licet saepius Requisitus, are likewise Fictions, whereby men are
surprised by Arrests before any Demand made; the Inde producit sectam in the
end of the Plaintiffs Declaration is now turned a Fiction, which was heretofore
a legal proof of Witness, produced to prove his Declaration, for the better
Caution against the false Calumnies of Plaintiffs; the former Taking of Pledges
of the Plaintiff, is now turned to a Fiction of Plegii de prosequendo, John Do
and Richard Roe, the Counter-pledges exacted of the Defendant, are now turned
to a Fiction; John Den, and Richard Fen.

Courts of Justice compel to Fictions and Falsities.
It does not satisfy Courts of Justice to tolerate Fictions and Falsity, but
they compel to them; as, the Defendant shall be compelled to give color; a
mere insensible Fiction and Lie, he shall be compelled at Common Law to answer
Negatively or Affirmatively, as if he were Omniscient, and shall not be
permitted to say Dubito, or Ignoro, though Juries of greater number may all say
Ignoramus; he shall be compelled to a Plus petitio, to avoid a Variance between
his Obligation and his Declaration, as Bro. Confess. 37. If a man Sue an
Obligation for Ten Pounds, and the Defendant confesses all except Forty
Shillings, whereof he shows an Acquittance, the Plaintiff prays Judgment, and
says nothing of his Acquittance, for if he confess it, his Writ should have
abated.

Fictions of Acts made the first day of the Session.
If an Act of Parliament come before them to judge, when it was made, they will
judge it by Fiction, to be made the first day of the Session.

33. H. 6.17. the Case was this, In the Exchequer-Chamber, Fortescue Rehearsed
how the Parliament last past, made a special Act against John Pilkington Esquire
for the Rape of a Woman out of N. etc. and Rehearsed the effect of the Act, and
how by the same Process was granted to be made to the Sheriff of E: to make
certain proclamations in a Ville, that the said John ought to appear before the
Lords at W. at a certain day, etc. to answer to the Trespass contained in the
said Act, etc. and if he would not, that then he should be attaint of the
Trespass, and pay a certain Sum to the Party, etc. and that the Proclamations
were accordingly made and returned into Chancery, and the said John made no
Appearance, etc. and after the said John was taken, and in the King's Bench,
committed to the Marshals-Ward for certain Causes, on which a Transcript of the
Act, and a Mittimus was sent out of the Chancery directed to us, etc. whereupon
the Marshal was charged with him for the same Condemnation contained in the
Act, and the said Prisoner comes now and alleges by his Council, That the Act
of Parliament is not sufficient, and therefore prays to be discharged, etc. for
the Bill being directed to the Commons, passed them well, and was endorsed in
this Form, Let it be delivered to the Lords; but whereas the Bill was, That the
said John should render himself before the Feast of Pentecost next ensuing; the
Lords endorsed the Bill in this Form, The Lords grant, that in case he appear
not before the Feast of Pentecost, which shall be Anno Domini, 1452. etc. to
wit, at Pentecost next, after the Feast contained in the Bill. And therefore
the Lords granted a longer day then was granted by the Commons, in which Case,
the Commons ought to have had the Bill delivered back again to them and they to
have assented to the Grant of the Lords, which was not done; and therefore such
Act of Parliament is void. Fortescue, It seems we ought to intend no otherwise
but that the Act is good, for the King has written to us by his Writ, and has
certified unto us, That the Bill is confirmed by Authority of Parliament.
Illingworth Chief Baron, This cannot here be intended as you say; for the Writ
which is made only by a Clerk of the Chancery, cannot make an Act of Parliament
good if it be vicious in it self, etc. And afterward he sent for Kirkby keeper
of the Rolls, and for Faukes Clerk of the Parliament. Fortescue Rehearsed the
matter to them both; on which Kirkby, Sir, The course of the Parliament is
this, etc. But if any Bill is particular, or other Bill, which is first
delivered to the Commons and passed, they use to endorse the Bill in this Form,
Let it be delivered to the Lords; and if the King and the Lords agree to the
Bill without changing it, then they use not to endorse the Bill, but the same
is delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament to be Enrolled; and if it be a
Common Bill it shall be Enrolled and enacted; but if it be a particular Bill,
it shall not be Enrolled, but Filed on a File, and it is well enough; but if
the Party will Sue to have the same Entered for his better Security, it is well
enough, it may be Enrolled; and if the Lords will alter the Bill, that which
may stand with the Grant of the Commons shall not be delivered back to them;
as, if they will grant Tonnage and Poundage for Four Years, and the Lords grant
them only for Two Years; this shall not be redeliver'd to the Commons, because
it is consistent with their Grant; but if Vice Versa, the Commons grant for Two
Years, and the Lords for Four, then the same must be redeliver'd to the Commons
for their Assent, etc. Faukes, Sir the Case was thus, The Bill was put into the
Commons after the Feast of Pentecost, which was in Parliament time, and the
intent of the Bill was, That the Proclamations should last till the Feast of
Pentecost then next ensuing, which was Anno 1452. but every Bill of Parliament
shall have Relation to the first day of the Session of Parliament, though it be
put in at the latter end; therefore the Lords granted according to the
intention of the Bill. Prisot, Are you certain that the Bill was delivered
after the Feast of Pentecost which was in Parliament time, or not? Faukes,
Truly, I do think so, etc. Markham, Do you use to make Inrollment of the Day,
when you first receive the Bills. Faukes, No Sir. Markham, Verily this is a
Perilous thing, for the Court of Parliament is the Most High Court the King
has, and it were well done, if every Act and Thing there done, which is
material, and reason of it, were Enrolled, etc. For in this Case, if the Bill
passed the Commons and the Lords in the manner aforesaid, before the Feast of
Pentecost, then the Act is void, because of the variance of the Endorsement of
the Day by the Lords, etc. From the Bill, etc. And it was not redeliver'd to
the Commons, but it was delivered after the Feast of Pentecost; then it seems
they are agreed, for all is one day; wherefore this matter cannot determine one
way or the other by your Record, who are the Clerk, etc. And now we can give no
other credit to what is said, but that the Bill was delivered the first day of
the Parliament, etc. Fortescue, This is an Act of Parliament, and we will be
well advised before we make void any Act of Parliament, and peradventure the
matter ought to rest till the next Parliament, and then we may be certified by
them of the certainty of the matter; but however, we will be well advised what
to do, etc.

This Fiction and the Inconveniences of the same, are very well Reformed by an
Act of Parliament of Scotland. Jac. 6. P. 7. Cap. 121.

FOrsameilk as it is understand to the Kingis Majesty, and Three Estaites of
Parliament, that oftentimes Doubts and Questions arisis touching the
Proclamation of the Acts of Parliament, and Publication thereof, it being
sometime alleged by the Lieges, that they are not bound to observe and keep
the samin as Laws, nor incur any pains contained therein, quhill the same be
Proclaimed at the Market Croces of the head Burrowes of all Schires. For
remeding of quhilkis Doubts in time cumming: It is Statute and Ordained be our
Sovereign Lord and Estaites of this present Parliament, That all Acts and
Statutes of Parliament maid at this time, and sal happen to be maid at onie
time hereafter, sall be Published and Proclaimed at the Market Croce of
Edinburgh, only quhilk Publication, our Soverain Lord and Estaites, foirsaidis,
decernis and declaris, to be als ratiable and sufficient; as the samin were
Published at the head Burrowes of the haill Schires within this Realm; And
alswa declaris the haill Lieges to be bounden and astricted to the obedience of
the saides Acts as Laws Forty Days after the Publication of the samin at the
said Market Croce of Edinburgh being bypast.

Fictions of Members of Parliament, Resident and Native.
By the Statute of 1. H. 5. cap. 1. It is Enacted, That the Knights of the
Shires which from henceforth shall be chosen in every Shire, be not chosen
unless they be Resident within the Shire where they shall be chosen, the day of
the date of the Writ of the Summons of the Parliament; and that the Knights and
Esquires, and others, which shall be choosers of those Knights of the Shires,
be also Resident within the same Shires, in manner and form as is aforesaid;
And moreover it is Ordained and Established, That the Citizens and Burgesses be
chosen of the City and Burrows, Men Citizens and Burgesses, Resiant, dwelling,
and Free of the same City and Burrows, and no other in any wise.

And as though this were not sufficient for Excluding Foreigners from
Elections, It is Enacted further, by 23. H. 6.15. That the Knights of Shires
for the Parliament, hereafter to be chosen, shall be notable Knights of the
same Counties for the which they shall be chosen, or otherwise, such notable
Esquires and Gentlemen born of the same Counties as shall be able to be Knights.

So by these two Acts of Parliament it is Enacted, None shall be chosen for
Knights of Shires but such as are both Residents and Natives of the Shires for
which they serve: Acts of most high Wisdom and Justice; but alas, now both
Residents and Natives being in practice only turned to Fictions, what defense
are they to the Subjects, in what all they have is concerned, the Election of
an equal and faithful Representative, against the Two Hundred Thousand Pounds
discovered in the Letters of the late Horrible Popish Plotters, to pois on all
the Elections of Parliament Men through the Kingdom, by buying of their Places
to Papists and their Adherents, Pensioners to Rome and France, to sell the most
Protestant King, Religion, and Three Kingdoms, for a Spoil to Foreiners, and to
place such Sheriffs as may in tendency thereto, by Fictions of their Returns,
that the Freeholders, Vt major pars totius Comitatus praedict' tunc ibidem
existen' jurat' and examinat' Secundum vim formam and effectum diversorum
statutorum inde edit' and provisorum Eligerunt A. B. milit' and C. D. milit'
infra Comitat' praedict' commorantes, etc. Now if these Knights are not infra
Comitat' praedict' commorantes, Residents of the County, and Secundum vim
formam and effectum Statutorum, etc. Especially of the 23. H. 6.15. Natives of
the County, this Return is Fictitious and False and utterly unlawful, contrary
to the Sheriffs Oath, and for which he ought to be punished in One Hundred
Pounds to the King, and Imprisonment one Year without Bail; and One Hundred
Pounds more to the Knight injured thereby, or to any other Person who in his
default will Sue for the same, and is contrary to the two said standing Acts of
Parliament, of greater consequence than Magna Charta, or the Petition of Right
themselves, for if there is a Protestant Parliament, no doubt they will make,
and we shall not want Protestant Laws, but if once there get in a Papist
Parliament, both Protestant Laws, Religion, and Protestants themselves, will be
all destroyed. And as the Sheriff Returns Fictions to Courts, so do they send
Fictions to him, and it is hard for him to know when they speak true, and when
false; as, if a Venire Facias be sent him, to Return 12 Jurors, he must Return
24, which is double the number, or he shall be Fined, for as they write their
words in the Venire by halves, so do they (as it seems) their Meaning by
halves, yet the poor Sheriff is bound to understand them to his Cost; then if
they send him a Pone per Vadios and Salvos plegios, the Sheriff must Return no
other Plegii to answer their Fiction, than his own Fiction of Plegii, John Den
and Richard Fen, or they will teach the Party to have a false Imprisonment
against him. Suits are removed when the Plaintiff has been at all the Cost and
trouble, and is ready for a Trial, on mere vexation, and to delay on Suggestion
or Fiction of a Cause, without any Oath of Calumny. Attachments, and Arrest of
Goods and Persons is used in the City without any Oblatio Libelli, or Oath of
Calumny, on mere Fictions and Suggestions, City Law, 22. but very wrongfully,
for a Citizen has as good Right to Magna Charta, as he has to the Charter of
the City, and under the name of being free of the City, does not lose the
liberty of a Subject, to be free from Arrest before Judgment. Coke Vind. Law.
26. says. Abuses of Fictions to Arrest before Judgment.
This brings to my remembrance how a Gentleman was Arrested for 1500 l. the
same day that he was to have been Married, without any colorable cause of
Action, spitefully to hinder his Match, and was not able to give Bail, but the
Party being Nonsuit, the Gentleman notwithstanding could recover as I remember
no more than 7 s. 2 d. Cost, yet he lost his Moneys, and indeed himself by it,
for I know it was the occasion of his utter Undoing; and a man that is
Cannibally given, may devour the Credit of 500 men, Arresting them for 5000 l.
a piece, never declare, yet pay no Cost, though Party Arrested had better have
paid 500 l. and this is so usual, that it is commonly said, I Will bestow a Bill
of Middlesex on such a man to stay him in Town, that I may have his company
into the Country when I go down. And I my self was informed by a Sea-Captain,
who was a Sufferer in such an Arrest, That there happened to be two Merchants
in London, each of which designed a Voyage to the same Port of Barbary, whether
he who could arrive first, was assured he should to his great gain obtain the
Prime of the Market, to which purpose they both strove with all diligence
possible which should be foremost at the Spring, and it happened that he who
had his Ship first ready had entertained this Captain of my acquaintance to
command her for him, and all being ready to set Sail, the Captain would needs
walk into the City to take his parting Cup and Farewell of his Friends, where
unexpectedly he was Arrested for 5000 l. though not owing a farthing, and the
same being a Choak-Bail-Sum, he knew he should get none to be Surety for him,
and thereupon sent to his Merchant, to inform him how he was boarded before he
could get aboard, who being much troubled that his Captain was taken by a Land
Pyrat, repaired to him, and understanding from him that he did not owe the
Party at whose Suit he was Arrested a farthing, and knowing withal that it was
done by the Spite of the other Merchant to stop his Ship from getting before
him, he gave Bail for his Captain; and sent him immediately on the Voyage. All
which Mischiefs happen, because there is no Law to compel to give a Copy of the
Declaration and Oath of Calumny before Arrest, by which all Fictions are
prevented. All the Judicial Transactions of Fines and Recoveries, are Fictions;
Fictions of Fines and Recoveries.
so though we have fled from Land to Sea, and back again from Sea to Land, we
know not where to find Rest for the Sole of our Foot from Fictions. We are next
come to another horrible cause of their Increase, which is, that no Averment or
Probation to the contrary is admitted against the Sheriff or the Clerk, nor the
Returns or Records; how Records, which are nothing but the Scribbling of Clerks
in false Latin and Court-hand, for their Fees, come to be of higher Authority
than the Scripture it self, is strange; for it was never denied, except against
Mahomets Alchoran, but Averment and contrary Probation might be brought against
the false Copying, false Translating, or false Printing of any word, or Clause
in the Scripture, or it would be very difficult to overthrow Popery. What
greater reason is there of so many Forgeries of Clerks, but that there is no
Averment allowed against their Records, nor contrary Probation, whereby they
may for Money insert what Fictions and Falsities they please. Estopples are
another mischievous cause, and the denial of liberty of Travers as bad or worse
than the other.

Turpia quid referam vanae mendacia Linguae? I am weary and ashamed to recite
so much, reflecting so deeply on the Honorable and necessary Profession of the
Law.

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
But all this may be easily taken away of Fictions and Falsities, if so small a
matter of Form were but altered, as to give liberty to Traverse all is false,
and to cause the Plaintiffs and Defendants to give Copies of their Declarations
and Pleas, and to give their Oath of Calumny to them; for I saw it by
experience in Scotland, which I must acknowledge and testify to the Honor of
their Form of Judicial Proceedings, That I could never for the space of Six
Years, observe the least Fiction in the same, which I can attribute to no other
cause than the wise and just Act of Parliament concerning the Oath of Calumny,
Jac. 1. P. 9. C. 125. and the present Practice accordingly, which Act being
short, I have transcribed.

That Advocates and Fore-speakers in Temporal Courts sall Swear.
THrow the consent of the hail Parliament, it is Statute and Ordained, That
Advocates and Forespeakers in Temporal Courts, and alswa the Parties that they
plead for, gif they be present in all Causes in the beginning, or he be heard
in the Cause, he sall Swear that the Cause he Trowis is good and leill that he
sall Plead; and gif the Principal Party be absent, the Advocate sall Swear in
the Saul of him, after as is contained in their meters.

Illud juretur quod Lis sibi justa videtur,
Et si quaeretur verum non insicietur.
Nil promittetur nec falsa probatio detur,
Vt Lis tardetur dilatio nulla petetur.
Of Judgment before Hearing.
Part of a Satyr translated out of Seneca, page 685. on the Sottish Emperor
Claudius, who used to Sentence before Hearing.

Deflete virum,
Quo non alius
Potuit citius
Discere Causas
Vna tantum
Part audita,
Saepe and nutra.
Quis nunc Judex
Toto lites
Audiet Anno?
Tibi jam cedit
Sede relicta
Qui dat populo
Jura Silenti,
Cretaea tenens
Oppida Centum.
Cedite moestis
Pectora palmis
O Causidici,
Venale genus,
Vosque poetae
Lugete novi,
Vosque in primis
Qui concusso
Magna parastis,
Lucra fritillo.
Weep for the Man,
All ye who can,
Then whom none would
Or sooner could
A Cause right catch,
Or it dispatch,
Though part but one
He heard, or none.
A Judge alas,
Is now an Ass,
He cannot hear
In a whole Year,
Or end a Suit,
There Is such Dispute.
To thee give place
Minos his Grace.
Though he has Men,
And Ten times Ten,
Cities in Creete,
Who do him greet,
And with his Laws
The silent aws,
Goblins and Ghosts
With all their Hosts,
Oh Saleable,
Lawyers now Yell,
And likewise you
Ye Poets new,
And you whose pains,
For easy Gains,
Causes to have,
The Dice did cast.
It is further mentioned, that when Claudius for this kind of Justice was
Arrested in Hell on a Latitat, and many complaints were there made against him
by those who were injured thereby, he desired he might be heard to answer for
himself, and espying there P. Petronius who had been his Creature while above
ground, he humbly requested Aeacus who was the Judge, that Petronius might be of
his Council and plead his Cause for him. Petronius having been used to the
Trade while alive, very readily Venit and Defendit, Vim and injuriam quando,
but Aeacus sharply forbid him to speak, being clear of opinion, that Claudius
who had condemned so many before Hearing, ought in Justice to suffer the Talio,
and be himself so condemned, he therefore to as many complainants as desired
it, gave liberty to lay more Arrests and more Bilbo's on him before Judgment,
and to as many as desired Judgments, gave them as many as they would have
before Hearing, and to Execute as many punishments as they would; against
which, he strugled much to have been heard to answer for himself, yet they
thrust such a Gag into his mouth, that he was enforced to suffer many Judgments
to pass against him on a Nihil Dicit.

Now though a feigned Aeacus is to be derided, yet there is a Judge of the World
who will not be mocked; and though there are many forward enough to condemn
Claudius, yet may there too many if they will but inspect their own Forms of
Judicial Proceeding, find themselves guilty of as great if not worse Vices in
their Judicatories, than he.

An Enumeration of diverse Forms of Judicial Proceeding, whereby the People are
Condemned, and Judgment passed against them before Hearing.
The First is, When Men are repelled from showing the Truth and Merit of their
Cause, and compell^d to make their Allegations in Formalities and Fictions.

A Dispute between two Judges, concerning Formality and Truth in Judicial
Proceeding.
The point of Formality in Judicial Proceedings is very well Disputed by two
famous Judges, Fitzherbert, and Brook, 14. H. 8.25. b. Where the Case was this,
In an Action of Debt brought on an Obligation indorsed with a Condition, to
perform all Covenants in an Indenture, between the Defendant and Plaintiff,
which Indenture contained Four Covenants, One whereof was, That a stranger
should be Clerk to the Sheriff, who was then Plaintiff; and also that the
stranger should pay at the Profers Seventeen Pounds at such a Feast, and Thirty
Pounds more at such a Feast, and other Covenants which he Recites; and says
further, That he was a Layman, and not Lettered, and that the Indenture was
read to him, concerning no more than the two first Covenants and no other,
which two he had paid and performed, and so damands Judgment Si Actio, and says
not Et sic non est factum, on which Plea the Sergeants demur'd in Law.
Fitzherbert, I conceive this a good Plea, for by the Law a man is Compellable
to no more than only to show the matter of his Case in Truth and good Sentence,
and if the Parties in their showing cannot agree, then to join Issue upon the
matter of Fact on which they differ, and put it on Trial of the Jury, and then
the Judge, on the Truth of the matter of Fact found, shall adjudg what is the
Law; and here it seems the Defendant has shown in Truth and good Sentence, for
he has shown he was a Layman and not Lettered; and that only two of the
Covenants in the Indenture were read unto him, and no more; and I think he is
only bound to perform what was read to him, and so the Obligation to be good
for the same, and void for the Residue which was not read; and I find it
adjudged, 47. E. 3. where one was bound to an ignorant Layman, who was not
Lettered in an Hundred Pounds to be paid at several days of payment; and at the
first day the Obligor made due payment for what was then to be paid, and the
Obligee made him an Acquittance of the first Sum, and in the end of the
Acquittance was added a general Release; and of this, only that part was read
to the Obligee which was an Acquittance of the first Sum, but the part which
mentioned a general Release was not read; and this matter was pleaded in an
Action of Debt after brought against the Obligor, and it made the Acquittance
which was read good, and the Release which was not read void, and so the Deed
was adjudged good for part, and void for part; and it would be a great Mischief
if it should be otherwise, for in the same Case, if the Deed should be void in
whole, then the Obligor should lose all the Money he paid, and if it should be
good in the whole, then the Obligee should lose his Obligation, which were
unreasonable that any man should be deceived by his Ignorance of the Fact,
though he may by his Ignorance of the Law. And here the Defendant being bound
to perform two of the Conditions in the Indenture, which were read to him, he
cannot plead non est factum, for that would be a Lie, and contrary to the
Truth, of his own confession; therefore seeing he has pleaded the Truth in
good Order and good Sentence, and concludes Judgment, Si Actio, I think he
cannot plead or conclude in any better Form. And Brudnell agreed with
Fitzheabert.

Brook, Chapter Justice. I conceive the contrary, and that the conclusion is not
good. And Sir, as to what is said, that the Law is no other, but that a man
shall Declare his matter in Truth and good Sentence; the Law is more than so,
for without Formality the same is nothing worth; as the Form of Law is, a man
shall show his matter without Duplicity of Multiplicity, yet may matters more
than one be True and in good Sentence, but they want Formality, and therefore
are nothing worth, and a Form ought to be used, or otherwise all things will be
in confusion. So in Trespass, the Defendant ought to give a color of Right to
the Plaintiff, yet the color is not true, nor the Sentence the better, but it
is the Formality which is required; and Formality is the chiefest thing in our
Law, and though the matter in the present Plea appears in Truth and good
Sentence, yet here wants Formality, for he ought here to have concluded not
Judgment Si Actio, but Sic non est facium, for I conceive, in regard only two
Convenants of the Indenture were read to him, and there were more Covenants not
read, that the whole Indenture is void, and it is Fraud in the Obligee. And
Pollard agreed with Brook that it was no good Plea, and that the whole
Indenture was void. But to this Fitzherbert and Brudnell might have replied,
that admit the whole Indenture had been all void in Law for the Fraud in part,
and the Defendant might Rigore Juris Plead it, yet Quilibet potest Renunciare
juri pro se introducio, if the Defendant was more merciful than the Law, and
his Conscience would not suffer him to use Summum jus, but does assent to
perform those Covenants were read to him; is it therefore Reason or Conscience
that the Plaintiff for his good Nature and Courtesy, should return him Evil
for Good, and put the Burden of all the Covenants on him, because he would
perform any when he needed perform none, if he would have pleaded in a Form
against his Conscience, and that Truth ought to be preferred before Fiction and
Formality? But I leave the Merits of the Cause to others to Censure, and shall
only upon the whole Dispute, take th^se Observations,

(1.) It appears by the Case, that there are but Four Judges in the Court, and
they are divided Two against Two, Fitzherbert and Brudnell for Truth against
Fiction, and Substance against Formality; and Block and Pel^ard for Fiction
against Truth, and Formality against Substance, whence is shown, that there
have been, and are many good men Judges, and other Professors of the Law, who
with all their their Power, Desire, and long to remove those Abuses of
Fictions, Forms, and other Irregularities, which are Reproaches on the
Practicers; but should they afflict themselves to death, can do nothing, if
equipoised or overpoised by the other Party, therefore they ought not to be
imputed to those who are not guilty, but the consideration of them ought to be
left to the Legislative, which has Power to Redress them when they please with
a word, and shall give account to God if they neglect the same.

(2.) It may be observed how many Contentions arise about a petty piece of
Formality, when there is none about the Substance; which is acknowledged by
Coke himself, Com. Lit. 303. whose words are these: When I diligently consider
the Course of our Books of Years and Terms, from the beginning of the Reign of
Ed. the Third, I observe that more Jangling and Questions arise upon the manner
of Pleading and Exceptions to Form, than upon the matter it self, and infinite
Causes lost or delayed for want of good Pleading; by which he means, Formality
has destroyed infinite good Causes, which is a most horrible thing to be
Tolerated in any Government.

(3.) The next thing observeable is, The great Ignorance of Cour^s themselves,
in their own Formalities, for they have continued by Coke's confession,
Jangling and Wrangling about them ever since Edward the Thirds time, and are
yet never the wiser, nor any perfect Form invented or settled by them; they are
still ever Learning and never come to the knowledge of Truth, and so will be to
Doomsday, if they are not by God sooner called to Account of their
Stewardships, and this point of Ignorance in their own Formalities, is further
confessed by Coke in another place, where he says, It were to be wished, that
Littleton had writ something concerning Pleadings, which shows, he was but a
wisher or woulder at it himself, for whom, if he had been able, it had been far
more proper to have writ a perfect Form of Judicial Proceeding, than to wish
the same had been done by one dead Hundreds of Years before, and if he could
have had him alive, it is likely he was as much to seck as himself; for he could
not write any directions concerning it to his own Son, though it was a point
above all other which he desired he might Learn; and in respect of which, his
Tenures were but Trifles, but he is fain to leave it to him as his other
Quaeries de Dubiis, and a Terra Incognita, where he should g^t Rich Mines of
Gold and Silver if he could light on it; in these words: And know my Son, that
it is one of the most Honorable, Laudable, and Profitable things in our Law,
to have the Science of well Pleading in Actions Real and Personal, and
therefore I counsel thee especially to employ thy Courage and Care to learn
this. Which yet neither he nor any since ever learnt or found out in this
Climate, neither is it possible for any to do, unless those very Forms of
Actions and Writs are made only Directive and not Coercive, and Liberty given
of Commenceing and Disputing Suits on more Solid Foundations of Right, than can
be laid on any Forms in the World, especially on such, in which the Courts
themselves are Ignorant how to proceed; and their so many divided and contrary
Opinions in the Expositions of the Law, have so entangled the cross Threads of
their several Clues of unravelled Opinions, that now no Courts unless they
clean break them all to pieces, are able ever to get out of their own Labyrinth
of Formalities, and are most commonly in the pitiful Condition, wherein
Vigelius Dia. Jur. 477. finds his Judge who is Ignorant of the Forms of Judicial
Proceeding At nunc, says he, Cum Judex Litiscontestationis adeoque judicandi
ratione sit ignarus sedet inter Advocatos and Procuratores tanquam Asinus inter
simias, nescit quando Disputationes in Causa permittendae sunt, quando contra
sunt inhibendae, hinc ne necessarias inhibeat non necessarias permittit, and
Advocatis in infinitum Disputandi Licentiam concedit, non Semel sed saepius
dilationes Dat, easque velex levissima causa. But now says he, when a Judge is
Ignorant how tostate the Point of the Cause, and of the Form of Judicial
Proceeding, he sits amongst the Barristers and Attorneys like an Ass amongst
Apes, he knows not when Disputes of the Cause ought to be permitted, nor when
they are to be restrained; then lest he should restrain the necessary, he lets
loose the unnecessary, and casts the Reins on the Pleaders necks to run whither
they will, and on every Trisle multiplies Delays: and as the same Author
further says, p. 610. Vt nunc Status Judiciorum nostrorum habet, viginti,
interdum Triginta dilationes Dari solent, eaeque ex causis plerumque
levissimis, nec ad Pr^bandum solum sed ad Excipiendum, replicandum,
duplicandum, triplicandum, etc. Sed and conclusa Disputatione Judex etiam trium
vel quatuor, interdum plurium annorum Dilationem sibi sumit ad pronunciandum,
etc. n^que ii qui reformandis Judiciis praeficiuntur tam Crassos Errores
perspi^iunt, sed and si perspiciunt defendere tamen quam Emendare malunt.
Vereor itaque ne juris peritorum eundem quem and Clericorum Authoritas Exitum
sit habitura. As now the state of our Judicial Proceeding stands, it uses to
give Twenty, sometimes Thirty Dilations, and those on mere Toys, and not only
for Probation by Witnesses, but to Except, Duply, Triply, Quadruply, etc. As
likewise when the Disputations are concluded, a Judge will delay Three, Four, or
more Years, before he will pronounce Sentence; neither do those who are set to
preside in Judicial Proceeding see so gross Errors, and though they do, yet had
they rather defend than amend them. I fear therefore lest the Lawyers come to
the same end which the Popish Judges and Clerks, their Predecessors in their
Courts did. It is certain the Soldiers in the late Troubles were so much
enraged, that they would have cut all their Fictions and Formalities to pieces,
if any would have prescribed them a Form of Proceeding which should be
intelligible to them. Now all these Delays rise from Disputes or pretense of
cause of them, and all Disputes at Common Law, rise from Formalities; and how
can it be otherwise, seeing the Writs on which all Judicial Proceedings are
founded are nothing but Formalities? and all Demurs and Disputes relate only to
the Gist of the Writ, or the Form of the Declaration or Plea which are Relative
to the Writ, and there can be never any Demurrer or Dispute at Common Law on
the Writ of the Merits of the Cause, which though one Form of Writ will not
bear, another may, and all Equity on which the true merit of all Causes
depends, is clean Excluded out of all Common Law Courts, because to Judge by
Formalities is more profitable, and raises more Contentions than the Merit or
Equity of the Cause.

(4.) It is to be Observed, how contradictory these Formalities are to
themselves, and one another, as in the Case of Color before mentioned, a mere
unintelligible piece of Nonsense (for what is more insensible than a Lie or
Fiction) yet will they force the Defendant to this Lie, and not to plead the
General Issue of Not Guilty, not allow him to plead a Special Issue according
to his Case, as a Formality whereby they take the Cause from the Jury to
themselves at their Arbitrary pleasure, so as unintelligibly and Arbitrarily,
in all other Cases, they compel poor men to take or leave the General Issue at
their Fancy, for Formalities so uncertain, as they themselves often contradict
themselves, and sometimes they are all divided, what Plea shall amount to the
General Issue, and what not, or what ought to be given in Evidence on the
General Issue, or what ought to be pleaded specially, and not given in Evidence
on it, and frequently spend the whole Term in unnecessary, long, tedious and
costly Arguments, de Lana Caprina on Demurrers on both, when if they would give
but a Formulary directive, and not coercive, how they would have men plead, men
were permitted but to speak the Truth of their Case in such Words and Language
as their own Sense and Reason which God has given to that end, prompts them
according to the same, and where it fitted not their Case, to wave it, all this
were saved, and the merits of so many good Causes, miserably destroyed for so
petty and pitiful insensible Formalities preserved. Coke Com. 282.
acknowledges, that by one mistake of giving matters of Justification in
Evidence on the General Issue of Not Guilty, the loss of most Causes depends,
yet would he and others keep it up still; to what end none can tell, unless to
keep the same Pi^ open, that so many more Causes might continue perpetually to
be lost in it for the gain of Practicers pleading to Juries, before whom it
being matter of Fact, they ought not by Law be suffered to speak. And this Rule
of not giving in Evidence, but pleading on the Issue Not Guilty, they will
force the same man in one end of the same Room to plead his Justification, and
not give the same Evidence; and in the other end of the Room to give it in
Evidence, and not plead his Justification. As in a Trespass for Battery at an
Assizes, If at the Nisi Prius he will plead Not Guilty, and give his
Justification in Evidence, That he beat the Plaintiff in his own defense, he
loses all. And if at the Crown-side, he who has beaten and killed a Robber or
Thief in defense of his own Life on the Highway, or of his House by Night,
plead his Justification, and will not say Not Guilty, and give it in Evidence,
be he never so Innocent he loses all; and well he may, when he is to be Judged
by those who contradict themselves, and are not able in their Fictions to
follow that necessary Rule, Oportet mendacem esse memorem, and forget at one
end of the Hall the Formality they Commanded or Prohibited at the other.

(5.) The Fifth Observable may be, how great a prejudice and danger it must be
to the People, to be forced to put all their Estates on the haz^rd of such
Forms as the Judges themselves understand not, nor can agree about, but are in
perpetual Contention and Contest for, one with another; and the vast charge
they must be at to maintain these Disputes to destroy themselves, which would
not be, if Formalities were taken away, and only the merit of the Cause
examined in Judgment. Most Noble Fitzherbert the first Flower of Judges which
ever sprung in Westminster Hall, we may thank God for thee from Generation to
Generation, who first did dare with the Sword of Justice oppose the whole
World of Enemies to Truth, and to give the monstr^ us Romish Hydra of
Formality, and the Devil himself the Father of Lies and Fictions that wound in
Judicial Proceedings, whereof they shall never be cured.

(2.) The Plaintiff, especially if a Poor man, is Condemned without Hearing, by
being compelled to begin his Suits by the Purchase of Original Writs, and so
likewise the Defendant.
This excludes the Plaintiffs of the Poor out of Courts, and only takes in the
Rich. (1.) Because of the remoteness of sending for Writs, the same being the
greatest part sent for Hundreds of Miles. (2.) They are limited to so many
short Returns, only to multiply unnecessary Fees for Aliases and Pluries, that
they are extremely troublesome and costly to the Poor. (3.) The Forms of them
are so ticklish, that when got, they are easily abated and overthrown for the
miss of a word, a syllable, and often a dash to an half word, not made more
clericorum, and often for false Latin. A Writ abates likewise for any default
of Form varying from the Register, Omission, variance in order of words, from
the order used in Chancery; the following matters are likewise good exceptions
to abate Writs, rasure, interlining false Latin (yet they never write true)
Omission of the words Vi and Armis, or of the words Contra pacem, Outlawry,
Misnaming, a Twice naming of the Person, Misnaming of the Village or Hamlet,
Misnaming of Barockshare for Barkshire, Misnaming of the Village, Misnaming of
the Person; so variance between the Writ and the Declaration, or Count, in the
least toy is a sufficient Exception to overthrow both Writ, Declaration, and
Count, Hastings and Hasting?.
as 9. E. 4.42, 43. Det by Edward Hastings, and Counts, that he by the name of
Edward Hasting?, recovered Land in Ancient Demesne, and One Thousand Pounds
Damages, and brings his Action for the Damages; by Three Justices against Five,
the Writ ought to abate.

28. Ass. 52. A Record removed, and a Variance between the Record and the
Mittimus, and the Certiorari, for one was H. Green, Just. Green and de Green.
Molineux Moliney.
and the Writ was Henry de Green; the omission of the word De stopped the
proceeding of the Justices. Trespass, the Writ was Molineux, the Protection
Moliney, and therefore disallowed for the Variance. 7. H. 6.22.

Nuper omitted.
Trespass against J. N. nuper de D. in the Protection Nuper was omitted,
therefore Variance. 19. H. 48.

Audita querela upon an Indenture, which was Langa White, the Writ was Lang
Whaite, which put the Party to great Cost to get it to be amended. 21. H. 6.7.
7. Port. said an Outlawry was reversed for the Variance between Dockwra and
Dockawre. 21. H. 6.7. Dockwra Dockawre


I. In the Obligation the Defendant was named J. M. de M. in the Writ M. was
left out, and therefore abated. 38. E. 3.24.

In Mayhem the Writ was, Contra pacem Nuper Regis, and the Count Contra pacem
nunc Regis, therefore it abated. 8. H. 4.21. 2. E. 4.25.

Amendment 21. A Dispute is whether Wagam and Vagam are a material Variance.
Wagam, Vagam.


Count less than the Writ.
A Judgment given in a Writ of Annuity was reversed, because the Writ was, That
Twenty-six Marks, Six Shillings, Eight Pence, was Arrear of the Yearly Rent of
four Marks, and in the Count Six Shillings Eight Pence omitted, which is a
Variance. 9. E. 4.51, 54. Here the Poor man was punished for his Conscience,
because he desired less in his Count, than his Attorney had put into his Writ;
and it is said there, that is not Misprision of the Clerk to be amendable,
because the Count is made by the Party, and not by the Clerk.

A world of other Abatements of Writs there are, too many to trouble at this
time the Reader with, both as to Variances between the Writ and Count, and
between the Writ and another Writ, between the Writ and Specialty, between the
Writ and Testament, between the Writ, Count, and Specialty, between the Writ
and Warrant of Attorney, etc. And the more Writs are abated, and Causes thereby
overthrown, the more Money the Courts and Clerks get to send out new; but the
more miserably are the Poor by them oppressed, and it were more merciful, in
short, to deny them Hearing, than to cause them to hazard and lose all that
little they have, and at last not to be Heard. This mischief of Writs was first
invented by the College of Priests at Rome, and were called Formulae Juris,
which is, little Forms, or diminutives of Forms; the little Forms were those we
call Writs, the greater Forms, whereof the lesser pretended to be as the
Contents of the Chapters, were, what They called Libels, and We Bills and
Declarations. These Formulae though set up by the Priests for their Gain, were
contrary to the Law of the Twelve Tribes, in regard Oblatio Libelli being by
that Law to precede Vocatio in jus, as before is shown, these Writs or Formulae
were useless, and the Forms of Libels were sufficient to direct the People
themselves, Original Writs abolished by Justinian,
and better than the other which were so rigorous in their punctilios of
Formalities, Vt cadente Syllaba caderet Causa; these Forms therefore of
Original Writs of the Priests were totally abolished by Justinian, lib. 2. tit.
58.

De Formulis and impetrationibus Actionum Sublatis.
Juris Formulae aucupatione syllabarum insidiantes cunctorum Actibus radicitus
amputentur. Dat. X. Calend. Feb. Constantio III. and Constante II. A A. COSS.

Let Forms of Actions insidiating by hawking at Syllables in all men's Suits, be
cut up by the Roots. Baldus Notes on the place, Quia supervacuae Formulae sunt
sublatae, and non oportet Actiones a Pontificibus impetrare, sed sufficit eas
aperte proponere, and very well against this insidiation of Writs in Words and
Syllables, agrees the expression of Isa. 29.21. They make a man an offender for
a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the
Just for a thing of naught.

The like to this of Justinian was done by that famous King James the Fifth,
the great Justitiar of Scotland, where they had formerly their Writs as we
have, till they were sick of them, and able to bear them no longer, which was
remedied by an Act of Parliament. Jac. 5 p. 6. cap. 75. The words of which Act
follow, ordering a Copy of the Libel to the Person or dwelling House.

The Ordour of Summounding all Persons in Civil Actions.
Copy of a Bill or Declaration served in stead of a Writ.
ITem, For eschewing of great Inconvenientes and Fraud done to our Sovereign
Lordis Lieges, by Summounding of them at their dwelling places, and often times
falsely and gettis never knawledge thereof, It is Statute and Ordained, That in
times cumming, quhair any Officiar or Schireffe in that part passes, at
Command of the Kingis Letters, or the Schireffes, Stewardes, Baronnes, or
Baillies Precept, to Summound any Party, if they cannot apprehend them
Personally, they sall pass to the ett or Dure of the principal dwelling
place, quhair the Person to be Summonde dwellis, and hes their actual Residence
for the time, and there sall desire to have entresse, quhilk gif it be granted,
they sall first schaw the cause of their cumming, and gif they cannot get the
Party Personally, they sall schaw their Letters or Precept before the Servandes
of the House, or other famous Witness, and sall execute their Offices and
Charge, and thereafter sall offer the Copy of the saidis Letters or Precept to
any of the Servands, quhilk gif they refuse to do, that they affix the samin
upon the ett or Dure of the Persons Summoun'd; and siklike, gif they get na
entress, they first knockand at the Dure Sex Knockes, they sall execute their
Office before famous Witness at the said House and dwelling place, and affix
the Copy upon the ett or Dure thereof as said is, quhilk sall be leiful and
sufficient Summounding and delivering of the Copy, and the Party and Officiar
sall not be halden to give any usher Copy bot at their awin pleasure. And
every Officiar in his Indorsation sall make mention of his awin Execution in
manner fore said, and the Party at quhais instance the Letter or Precept is
direct; sall pay to the Officiar Executour the Expenses of the Copy affixed as
said is, and sall be taxed and given again to him the giving of the Decree or
Sentence, gif he happenis to obtain. And gif the Officiar heis foundin
culpable in the Execution of his Office, he sall be put in our Sovereign Lordis
Prison, and punished in his Person and Gudes, at the Kingis Grace Will.

Coke 4. part 99. says, The Common Pleas may in many cases proceed against
their own Officers by Bill without Writ, and why may not all the Subjects have
the same Right, as well as the Officers of the Common Pleas? In London before
the Mayor and Aldermen, Debt and Personal Actions are determined by Bill
without Writ. City-Law, 3. And so are Assizes of Nuisance, ib. 4. and why may
they not by Copy of the Bill be commenced better than by Writ, over all the
Kingdom?

The mischiefs of Original Writs from the Chancery.
Besides the Delays of Original Writs and Process, by remoteness of Courts
whither they are to be sent for, and by the multiplications of Aliases and
Pluries, and the manifold dangers when gotten and executed, to be again
overthrown and nullified by Abatements, for a multitude of frivolous Causes and
Formalities, and likewise for so many sorts of Variances as before mentioned;
of all which, the Declaration might have been free, if no Writ had preceded:
(1.) It is excepted against Writs, that Declarations are not amendable, and it
costs many times so much in amending the Misprision of Clerks in their Writs,
that the Plaintiff if he is not so poor as not to be able, were better abate
his own Writs and Declaration himself, and pay Costs, and buy Twenty new Writs,
than get one of the old amended. (2.) Writs Original are altogether useless,
except to get Money for nothing. (3.) They are saleable, contrary to Magna
Charta, Nulli vendemus Justitiam, and the Civil Law, for Lege Julia tenetur
repetundarum, qui accepit aliquid ob Judicem delegatum dandum, mutandum, vel ob
non dandum, etc. And what does a Writ of Right, a Justicies, or any Original do
besides, but assign a Delegat Judge to hear the Cause in the King's Bench or
Common Pleas, or Lords-Court, or County Court? Then it is contrary to Equity,
the Plaintiff should be compelled to buy a Writ, which is not only useless, but
pernicious to his Declaration, and puts it in ten times more danger to be
overthrown, than if he might, as he ought, be permitted to use it without a
Writ, and the Plaintiff being to deliver a Copy of his Declaration, Expensis
Actoris, to the Defendant, it is no reason he should be at any expense to pay
Clerks for Writs impertinent. (4.) As to the Writ in Chancery, of Subpaena,
Mischiefs of the Chancery Writ of Subpaena.
which is to be distinguished from the Writs to the Common Law Courts, it is
contrary to Magna Charta, Nulli negabimus Justitiam; for if a Poor man Sue a
Nobleman there, a Chancellor will deny a Poor man his terrible Writ, which he
uses to grant under a Hundred Pound Penalty, in Terrorem Pauperum, and he shall
get no more of him, if he do that, at a greater price than the Writ would have
cost, but a poor begging Letter to the Nobleman, to send his Answer to the
Complaint against his Oppression; which is no other, than to bring into England
the old Slavery of Rome, whereby no Slaves were permitted to Sue their Lords
before the Praetor, or any other Judge, were their Tyranny over them never so
great and unjust. What a wretched dishonor is it to Public Justice, which
heretofore was blind to the Person, that she turns now blind to the Cause, and
who heretofore carried the Sword in her hand, Parcere Subjectis and debellare
superbus, to have now lost her Sword and got a Crutch, to become only a blind
Beggar when she is to approach the Gates of Nobles? neither is there any Law of
God or man in England, to justify a Chancellor, that he shall presume to use
a different process of Concumacy against the Commons, Chancellor has no Power
to Imprison Commons any more than Lords.
which he dares not use against the Lords; for if it be not lawful for him to
Issue Attachments or Commissions of Rebellion against the Lords, or to imprison
them; then is it not lawful for him to Issue Attachments or Commissions of
Rebellion against the Commons; for both are equally Interested in Magna Charta,
and the Petition of Right, not to be imprisoned without the lawful Judgment of
their Peers, and they being both Allies and Confederates by the said Acts to
maintain the Commons Liberty; The Liberty of the Commons is the Outwork which
preserves the Liberty of the Lords.
if the Commons be Invaded, though for the present such Invasion touch not the
Lords, yet when it has destroyed the Liberty of the Commons, the Lords will
not be able to defend theirs, when their Allies are lost.

The Liberty of the Commons is the Outwork which preserves the Liberty of the
Lords, the Liberty of the People is the Outwork which preserves the Liberty of
the Parliament, the Liberty of the Subjects is the Outwork which preserves the
Safety of the King; and as Solomon says, Prove. 20.28. Mercy and Truth preserve
the King; and if contrariorum contraria est ratio, Cruelty and Fictions of
Writs of Subpoena's in Chancery, Latitats in King's Bench, and Capiases without
Summons in Common Pleas, wherewith they abuse the Kings name in false
imprisonments of his Subjects without Crime or Cause, destroys the prisonments
of his Subjects without Crime or Cause, destroys the Safety of the King
himself; and in a Case between the Duke of Lenox and the Lord Clifton, M. 10.
Jac. Though a Lord was not to be Committed for Contempt in a Poor man's Case,
yet in this Case between two Lords, Chancellor Egerton said, If Noblemen will
commit Contempts, they are to be Committed. Now that the Imperial Power which
has been usurped by Chancellors, to imprison the Freeborn Subject Arbitrarily
at their pleasure, is contrary to the Acts of Parliament, both of Magna Charta,
and the Petition of Right, so late in memory, which abolish all Imprisonment
both of Nobles and Commons, without the lawful Judgment of their Peers; so
likewise is it contrary to all other Fundamental Laws of the Land, made for
defense of the liberty of the People, which is more necessary and more dear
than Life, as may appear by the Reasons following, (1.) There is an Act of
Parliament made, 15. H. 6. cap. 4. That none shall Sue a Subpoena until he find
Surety to satisfy the Defendant his Damages if he do not verify and prove his
Bill to be true, this Statute had nipt in the Bud the Overflow of all those
innumerable Fictions and Falsities, which have since followed in the
Suggestions of Bills in Chancery; for this being made, 15. H. 6. there is no
mention made in all the Year-Books, of any quarrel between the
Common-Law-Judges and a Subpoena, till 37. H. 6. which is above Twenty Years
after, so great a Fright had this Act falling from the Supreme Power, put
amongst the Froggs, though now despised as a dead Logg, as likewise are all the
rest; and it is in vain to make more, unless the Honor of these is vindicated
by the same Authority that made them; for Chancellors, as if Jura negant sibi
nata, they were two-great to be bound by Acts of Parliament, though they have
not the least pretense to color their Authority against these Three, the
greatest Acts for Security of the Subjects against false Imprisonments, that
ever were made in England, for there is no Prescription or Custom of any Court
can be alleged against an Act of Parliament, be it never so old; and there is
no Pretense to alledg any against the Petition of Right, Chancellor has no
Authority to impose a Fine.
being in so fresh memory; and no longer since, than 3. Car. 1. they have
trampled under soot the Authority of these Supreme Acts, and all lawful
Judgments on them. (1.) To lay Fines on the Subject, thus Trin. 3. Jac. did
Chancellor Egerton impose a Fine on Sir Thomas Themilthorp, for not performing
his Decree concerning Land of Inheritance, and Estreated the same into the
Exchequer; and upon Process against him, the Party appearing pleaded that the
Chancellor had no Authority to impose a Fine; the Attorney General Petiit
advisamentum Curiae, concerning the Authority of the Chancellor, and on mature
advice, It was adjudged, That he had no Power to Fine in the Case, Coke 4th.
part, 84. (2.) To Extend; according to which pretended Power, the said
Chancellor Decreed against Waller certain Lands, and for not obeying the
Decree imposed a Fine, and upon Process out of the Court of Chancery extended
the Lands that Waller had in Middlesex, whereupon Waller brought his Assise in
the Court of Common Pleas, where the Opinion of the whole Court agreed in
omnibus with the Court of the Exchequer, ib. (3.) Not only to proceed to
Imprison the Subjects on false Suggestions, without taking any Surety of the
Complainant, according to the Statute, to verify his Bill, but without so much
as taking his Oath of Calumny to his Bill, and have further presumed so high,
as by their Edicts and Orders of Chancery (which they have not the least
Authority to make) to order the Subjects to be Attached and Imprisoned on every
Affidavit of any Knight of the Post, and no Probation to be admitted to the
contrary; and if while the Innocent Party is imprisoned, being remote from his
Home, and suffering great Loss and Damage by this his false Imprisonment, he
shall at length offer to prove the Affidavit false, and Knight of the Post
perjured, he shall be discharged, but without any Cost, for the great Service
the Knight of the Post did the Court to Forswear himself against the Prisoner,
whereby they get some Fees: See here, a Chancellor, in desiance of Three Acts
of Parliament, without any Sureties, without any Oath of Calumny, without any
Judgment of Peers, publishes in sight of the Sun his abominable Orders, to
cast into Prison the most Innocent Person on the false Affidavit of every
Perjured Knight of the Post, yea a single Affidavit, as appears by the Orders
of the Chancellor and Master of the Rolls, Printed 1669. Page 67. and yet they
pretend Page 65. under the Title of Commitment, that they are tender of the
Liberty of men's Persons, and of their Imprisonments on Affidavits, and confess
they are often Malicious, and made by one mean and ignorant Person; yet in the
same breath, Page 67. as if they soon forgot, or understood not what they said,
in the beginning of their Order, they, the next leaf conclude, That a single
Affidavit of such a malicious, mean, and ignorant Person, yea though he is
proved afterward to be Perjured, shall be sufficient to Imprison the Innocent
Subject; and when he again gets out of Gaol, if he can let the Innocent Party
be indamaged his whole Estate, he shall not have a Farthing Cost for the false
Imprisonment; and observe the depth of the Reason why, given by a Chancellor,
and (as the Printed Orders say) with advice and assistance of the Master of the
Bolls. it is this, as appears Page 68. at the top of the leaf, viz. IN RESPECT
OF THE OATH MADE AGAINST HIM AS AFORESAID, that is to say, the Oath, though
false, of a Villain Perjured, against the Innocent Person; for so is the
implication of the Order, and likewise, though they durst not say so in express
terms, yet so is the implicit Non Obstante, notwithstanding any Law of God or
Man, or Acts of Parliament to the contrary. Does not here a Chancellor assume
the Omnipotent Power of the Pope, to dispense with the Laws of God and Men, and
assume a Power of Imprisoning the Subjects above the King and Parliament, yea
contrary, and in contempt of their Laws? he does; for the Law of God and
Precept of Christ is known to prohibit the Imprisonment of any, No Imprisonment
ought to be, but where the Witnesses and Party are brought Face to Face.
without two Witnesses at least, and without bringing the Witnesses and the
Party accused face to face, that he may know them, and except against their
Persons or Testimony if he has cause, which is never done on an Affidavit. And
the Laws of the Land, Magna Charta, and Petition of Right, utterly prohibit all
Imprisonment of the Subject on Affidavits, whether they are true or false,
without bringing the Witnesses and the Party face to face, and a Judgment on
such Testimony against him by his Peers; and if such Evil Precedents be
suffered to pass without some example of Justice shown on them, all Acts of
Parliament which ever have been or shall be for protection of the Liberty of
the Subject, Forgery Licensed in Chancery, thereby to Imprison the Subject
falsely.
will be vain and to no purpose. (4.) The Chancellor in the said
Chancery-Orders, Printed 1669. presumes to do in the Court of Conscience, what
was never heard of to be done in the Courts of Turks, Infidels, or the most
Barbarous Judicatories in the World; for he is not ashamed publicly to give
License to Cursitors and their Clerks to commit Crimen Falsi, which we call
Forgery, by Antedating Writs, taking them out of Returns past, or of a former
Term; by reason of which Forgery of Writs, and Forgery of Returns, Antedated
Capiases, Proclamations, Exigends, and Outlawries Antedated have been likewise
Forged, and Thousands of Poor men unjustly cast in Goals, and miserably undone,
without any Summons or Hearing; and these are likewise the damnable effects of
the Chancellours Writs, by which, as by others, the Plaintiffs, so here the
Defendants, are destroyed without Hearing; and certainly these Crimes of
Antedating and Forgery of Judicial Acts, though here Licensed by Orders of
Chancellors, and Protected by Courts, by not Licensing Averments against them,
are by the Civil Law, and Laws of Scotland, and of many other Nations, both of
these, and Instruments, Death; and even by our own, the imbeselling of a Record
by a Clerk, and Counterfeiting of Fines, is Felony; and, if the second time, so
is the Forgery of Deeds. Writings, and Court-Rolls; and deservedly, the
Offender better deserving death than a Robber on a Highway; and why any Crimes
of this Nature should be publicly Licensed to the Ruin of all Truth and
Justice, by any Chancellor in his Chancery Orders, is very strange; the
mischievous effects of which said Attachments on Affidavit, and Antedating
Writs, and Forgery of Outlawries, are notoriously known, and not complained of
here without good Cause and Testimony; and some particular experience of my
own, to my loss, who have (as well as others) suffered in an high degree by the
false Affidavit of a Fellow, who Subscribed and Swore it by a false name, and
not his own, and likewise procured a Forged Outlawry antedated against me. It
belongs not to a Chancellor to be a Judge of Equity in England.
(5.) It belongs not to the Chancellours Office to be a Judge of Equity, or to
make Orders, Edicts, Laws, or Writs, and thereby to Imprison the Persons, and
dispose of the Lands and Goods of the Subjects Arbitrarily and at his Pleasure.
Coke 4. part 82. says, That all Statutes which give Authority to the
Chancellor to determine Offenses in Chancery, are to be intended only in the
Ordinary Court there, which proceeds in Latin, and is Secundum Legem, etc. and
not in any Extraordinary Court which proceeds in English, Secundum Aequum and
bonum, and 37. H. 6.14 and 27. H. 8.18. it is Resolved, That the Court of
Chancery Proceeding by English Bill, is no Court of Record, and therefore it
cannot bind either the State of the Subjects Lands, or the Property of his
Goods or Chattels, and therefore they there admit he may Imprison the Person,
Chancellor cannot bind the Subject's Goods not Persons.
which is not only a Non sequitur, but a contrary conclusion follows on it, for
if he cannot bind the Subjects Goods, a Fortiori he cannot bind his Person; For
the Life is more than Meat, and the Body is more than Raiment. Luke 12.23. And
though those Common Law Judge; of H. 6. and H. 8. so sordidly delivered the
Subject Prisoner to the Chancellor, so as they might keep his Lands and Goods
to themselves, yet had they no more Law or Right to do it, than they had to
deliver him Prisoner to the Turks, or to send him to the Barbado's; for the
Subject is no Slave, neither ought he to be given or sold for one, without his
own Assent by his Representative in Parliament; and having so good a Protection
against the Chancellours and Common Law Judges, and the Orders and Writs of
both, as Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, both for his Lands, Goods,
and Person, they ought to show some greater Laws than their Writs and Orders of
Courts, or Forgeries of Clerks, before they presume to invade either. (6.)
There being no Law in England which ever Ordained a Chancellor to be a Judge of
Equity, or to make Edicts or Orders concerning the same; he can pretend no
Title thereto, unless from the Laws of France: and to that effect Polydor
Virgil says, The Chancery came in with the Conquest, to which, though my Lord
Coke says, Perperam Erravit, because the Mirror says, The Constitutions of
the ancient Kings were, that every one should have out of the Chancery of the
King, a Writ Remedial for his Flaint without difficulty, yet he himself seems
to be in the Error, and not Polydore, for though the name of Chancellor and
Chancery was before the Conquest, and diverse other Countries use the name of
Chancellor as well as England, yet the greatest part of the Writs came from
Normandy, and are mentioned in their Customary, as who will peruse it shall
find, but as to the Writ of Subpoena, Centum librarum, and Arbitrary Power of
the Chancellor, and to be a Judge of Equity, came first from the Conquest, and
was never used before, nor did it belong to the Chancellour's Office, either of
England or Scotland, that having other employment, and more than a Chancellor
could do, though he never troubled himself with Judgment, but left the same to
the Judges, to whom the King Delegated the cause by Writ, and this the very
name of Chancellor testifies, who was Originally no other than a Master of
Requests to the Prince whom he served, and on Petitions delivered to him by the
Subjects, if unfit to be Granted, he struck cross lines over them like
Cancelli, or Lettices, by which he Cancelled them, and thence had his name of
the Canceller or Chancellor, as Turn. lib. 11. advers. c. 25. and not
according to that Fictitious Verse of his Power, Hic est qui Leges Regni
Cancellat iniquas.

For when was ever any Chancellor in England allowed to Cancel any Roll or Act
of Parliament? And when these Petitions for Justice were delivered by the
People to this Master of Requests, called the Canceller of such of them as were
Evil, such as were Just he Cancelld not, but on behalf of the Petitioner,
Granted the Princes Rescript or Warrant to the Praeses Provinciae, where the
cause of Action arose, or the Defendant lived, for Actor Sequitur Forum Rei,
which Rescript or Warrant we now call a Writ, containing in it self, (1.) A
Questus est nobis, a short recital of the Complaint. (2.) Si A. fecerit te
securum, a taking Security or Pledges of the Plaintiff; de Prosequendo. (3.) A
Summoneas, or Summons of the Defendant to appear before the Prince himself, or
such Judges as he Delegated, though out of the Province or County where he
lived, which was the Reason of taking Pledges of the Plaintiff, because he made
the Defendant appear many times Hundreds of Miles from his Home, when he might
in those days implead him before the President or Sheriff, or Lord of the
Barony in his County, unless he excepted Partiality, or other just cause
against him. (4.) A taking of Pledges of the Defendant to appear. (5.) To make
Return of the Writ; and left Writs should be Counterfeit, the Chancellor was
Keeper of the Seal, and Sealed them. It appears by the Lex Julia de repetundis,
Chancellor not to sell Writs and Copies of Bills and Answers.
that the Master of Requests or Canceller, was not to take any Fees for these
Writs, for giving or not giving a Judge out of the Province or County where the
Defendant lived, for it was a great vexation and oppression of the People to be
Summoned out of the Provinces on malicious Suggestions, without cause; and our
own Parliaments in England have often complained against the same oppression
here by the Pope, on whose Citations and false Suggestions without cause, men
were compelled to give personal Appearances at Rome, as many and as often as he
pleased, if any would but buy there of his Officers a Citation; and to prevent
this vexatious exaction of Appearances on Writs, of men out of their own
Counties, besides the requiring of Pledges on all Common Law Writs, and the
enjoining of Pledges to be taken in the Chancery-Writ of Subpoena, as in the
Lex Julia, so is it mentioned in Magna Charta, Nulli vendentus nulli negabimus
Justitiam vel Rectum, which is intended of a Writ of Right, and all other
Writs, whereby Right is obtained; for if the Chancellor were not to take Fees,
and sell his Subpoena's and other Writs, he would not so often by them make men
Travail thorough Nine Shires to Westminster (when they may have better Justice
done at home in their own County) on no other cause than Fictitious and
Malicious Suggestions of the Plaintiff, and that he may take a Fee for the
same, and he would Cancel according to his Office more Petitions and Bills than
he would Grant; but as soon as Chancellours took Fees for Writs (which Sale of
Right, it is likely, as Polydore says, came from the French) then no Suit could
be begun without Writ, all were driven to Westminster, Parties, Witnesses, and
Juries, unnecessarily, and to no purpose but to enrich the Judicatories, and
undo the People; in like manner the Plaintiffs and Defendants ought to give one
another mutually Copies of their Bills, Declarations, and Pleas, at the
expenses of the Giver, which is very small and easy to the Parties, and not to
be compelled to buy them of the Chancery, or Common Law Officers; so the
Chancellor had neither his Jurisdiction to Judge of Equity, or his Sale of all
the Judicial Parts of the same, and of the Law with it, from the Law of
England, but A-lamode de France from the Conqueror, till Magna Charta abolished
his Tyranny by the Judgment of Peers, and of his French Comtes, by the 28. E.
1. cap. 8. by which Act that gallant King grants every County the free Election
of their own Sheriff, after which the Land was free from the Chancellours
Troubling men out of their own Counties by his Subpoena's, till H. 5. Conquered
France, by which, as is usual in other Conquests, some Touch of the Diseases
and Vices of the Conquered will be returned on the Conquerors, and accordingly
in the time of his Son H. 6. the Subpoena and a Chancellor with a Pretorian
Jurisdiction pretended of Equity, with Power of making Laws, Edicts, and
Chancery-Orders, and Forms of Writs, and to Sentence above all Appeal, all
which Powers belonged to the Roman Praetor, of which the French Chancellor was
the Ape, and Ours of the French; and this pretended Pretorian Jurisdiction ever
since has grown so much A-la-mode, partly by making Bishops Chancellors, who
pretended Supremacy in all matters of Conscience, and had in their hands
amongst the Superstitious the flaming Sword and Thunderbolt of
Excommunication, partly by their Power, overtopping and overawing the Common
Law Judges, and partly by flattering the People with doing Justice in the
English Tongue, which was very grateful to them (and would be as grateful now
in the Common Law Courts if they could get it) the Chancellours contrary to the
greatest Fundamental Laws and Acts of Parliaments of the English, introduced on
them a most lawless Arbitrary Power, and Servility of a Foreign Nation, to
dispose of their Lands, Goods, Persons, Liberty and Propriety, at their
pleasure.

And what is more, have assumed like the old Romish Pretors the Power of making
Laws, Edicts, Forms, Writs, Obligatory to the Subject's Persons, Lands and
Goods; for Coke on the Question, In what Text the Common Law is to be found,
says, In Forms of Writs, and Forms of Entries, in Courts of Records. And
Bracton says, Breve ad similitudinem Regulae Juris Formatum. So who assumes
the Power of making Writs, Judicial Edicts, Forms and Orders, assumes the
Legislative Power, notwithstanding, and above Acts of Parliament, to dispose of
the Subject's Liberty and Propriety at pleasure; yet this have Chancellours
done, Forming diverse Writs in the Register out of their own Heads, Lamb.
Archeion. which always are Formed for the greatest Profit of the Clerks and
Courts which make them, and not of the People, and Episcopal Chancellours have
so far in time of Popery deceived Parliaments, that Westminster. 2. cap. 24. gives
the Clerks of the Chancery as good as Power to make what Writs they will, and
the pretense is insinuated by the Clerks, De caetero non recedant querentes a
cur' Regis sine remedio, or Ne Curia Regis desiceret in Justitia exhibenda,
whereas none who understands the least part of the Forms of Judicial Proceeding
there is, who does not know that the Kings Court if he please may do far better
Justice, if all the new Writs made by Clerks, and all the old Writs in the
Register were made a Bonfire all together, and none but Copies of Declaaations
served without them, then it is possible to do with them; which Del gation of
Power to Clerks to make Writs, must be void; for the making of Forms of Writs,
Edicts, or Orders, is an Act of Legislation; and to give Votes in Legislation,
is a Personal Office of Trust reposed by the People in their Representative
Elected by them; and by the known Law, no Office of Trust can be Assigned,
Granted over or Delegated; if the Parliament therefore please to enact
themselves any Judicial Forms or Orders of Proceeding, they ought to be obeyed
as Laws; but it would be a great injury to the People, if they should Grant
over the Office of Trust in them, to a Chancellor and Clerks never Elected or
Entrusted by the People. Chancellor of England or Scotland no Praetor.
Let a French Chancellor be therefore what he will, it is clear no English
Chancellor ought to be a Praetor, Judge, of Equity, maker of Laws, Edicts,
Forms, or Orders of Judicial Proceeding, nor any Chancellor of Scotland, the
full of the matters of both whose Offices, though they may differ in the Fees,
are mentioned Stat. Mal. 2. cap. 2. that is to say, (1.) To Seal Writs. (2.) To
Seal the Kings Pattents, Grants, and Commissions. (3.) Presentations to
Churches. (4.) Pardons to such Malefactors as deserve them; which Statute of
Malcom 2. cap. 2. follows in these words,

(1.) Item, They Ordained to the Chancellar the Fie of the Great Seal, that is,
for ilk Chartour of an Hundredth Pound Land, and above that, the Fie of the Seal
Ten Pounds, and to his Clerk for the Writeing two Marks.

(2.) Item, For ane Precept of Suising conform to the Chartour, to the
Chancellar for the Fie of the Seal ane Mark, and to his Clerk two Shillings.

(3.) Item, For ane Letter of Attornay or Protection, for the Fie of the Seal
Twelve Pennies; and to the Clerk for the writeing Thrie Pennies.

(4.) Item, For ane Brieve closed with Walx, to the Chancellar Sex Pennies, and
to the Clerk for writeing Thrie Pennies.

(5.) Item, For are Letter of Remission given by the King for the Slauchter of
a man, to the Chancellar 40 Shillings, and to his Clerk for the writeing Sex
Shillings Aucht Pennies.

(6.) Item For ane Letter of Presentation to ane Kirk, or to ane Hospital, to
the Chancellar 40 Shillings, and to his Clerk for writ^ing Aucht Pennies.

(7.) But that part of the Office of the Chancellor of Scotland which concerns
Original Writs, is since Reformed, and all Writs Abolished, except Seven, Only
Seven Writs left in Scotland.
which Skene de verb. sign. tit Breve recites thus, Bot Seven Forms of Brieves
all anerlie are now commonly used, The First, The Brieve of Mortancestrie. The
Second, The Brieve of Tutorie. The Third, The Brieve of Idiotry. The Fourth,
The Brieve of Terce. The Fifth, The Brieve of Line, or Lin^ation of Lands and
Tenements within Burgh. The Sext, The Brieve of Division. The Seventh, The
Brieve of Perambulation. Quhair of the Three first Brieves are Answered, and
retour'd again to the Chancellary, and the uther Four receives na retour'd
Answer. And in all other, Actions, instead of Writs, by an Act of Parliament of
James the Fifth, after mentioned, the Defendant ought to be served with a Copy
of the Declaration to begin the Suit.

Only one Writ in Wales for Real Actions. Writs pull men out of their Houses,
Beyond Sea.
In Wales, and some parts of the North, they Try all Real Actions by a Quod ei
deforc^at.

(8.) The mischiefs of Writs are, they pull men out of their Houses before
Judgment, contrary to the Civil Law; ff. siquis in jus vocatus non ierit l. 21.
de Domo sua nemo extrahi debet, which is expounded by Bartolus, Invitus quis de
domo non debet extrahi, sed ibi existens potest verbaliter citari, and contra
contumacem fit Missio in possissionem.

(9.) Writs help not for any matter rising beyond Sea, unless by Fiction of the
place beyond Sea to be in England, so honest men are without Remedy, and only
Liars obtain it.

No Oath of Calumny can be to a Writ.
(10.) No Oath of Calumny can be given of a Writ, whereby it becomes full of
Falsities and Fictions, but to a Bill in Chancery or Declaration, an Oath of
Calumny may be given, which will purge it from all Falsity and Fiction, if no
Writ; but if there is a Writ false, it will compel the Declaration to be
false, because it will otherwise be abated for Variance from the Writ.

(11.) Writs make Declarations to be of double length, and contain two
Declarations, one a vain repetition of the other, for 7. H. 6.47. In every
Action on the Case, the whole Cause of Action at large ought to be contained in
the Writ, for it is not sufficient to have a general Writ and special Count,
whereby the Party is compelled to Enter, and the Defendant to Copy a double
Declaration of huge length, and often twice as long as a Chancery Bill; and
Four Judges on Demurs to have each a Copy, and of the whole Process, to the
intolerable Charge of Suitors, and Gains of Clerks and Officers of Courts,
though it be but a trifling Action for Words, or the like.

(12.) Writs must pass the hands of Under-Sheriffs, who often times will delay
and betray them as long as the Party will give them Money.

(13.) The old Writs which are in the Register, and all the new which have been
coined or joined by Chancellours or Clerks, are defective and insufficient to
supply Justice in the multitude of Cases which happen.

(1.) Because the greatest part of the Writs of the Register are Antiquated,
and never used, but remain as Forms out of Fashion, and matters as unprofitable
Lumber.

(2.) All real Actions are thrown aside; and the truth is, Lawyers are so
ignorant how to manage them, that, like the old ^ion in his Den, they draw all
their Clients into Chancery, whence Vestig^a nulla retrorsum.

(3.) The two old Principal Writs of Droit Patent, and Novel Disseisin, the one
to determine the Right, the other the Possession; no Lawyer now knows in them
to join the Mise, or arraign the Assise, any more than he does when he talks of
Robin Hood to Shoot in his Bow, whereby the two chief Writs, which dispatched
more Justice than all the rest, are utterly lost.

(4.) It is as impossible for a Chancellor and Clerk, though they make in
their Officina Brevium a Thousand Forms of Writs more than they have, to fit
with them all that want Right, any more than for a Shoemaker in his Officina
Calceorum, though he has a good stock of Shoes ready made, to all the Feet
with them which want Shoes; yea more impossible; for the Shoemaker makes his
Shoes of soft yielding Leather, his Straps or Buckles open or shut them wider
or closer, his Shoeing-horn, Weesel-skin or Fists, draw, pull, and thump them
off and on, and many pretty tricks and Instruments he has to curry, shave,
stretch, punch, oil, water, and stand them on the Last, to accommodate them for
the Foot, but a Chancellor makes all his Writs of Iron or Latin, and puts in
them so many Gravels of Fictions, Falsities, broken Words, Repugnancies,
Absurdities, Nonsense, that it kills or creeples any Case to walk from its own
Home to Westminster.

(5.) That there is an intolerable defect in Writs to supply Justice to the
People, appears in this, That though all Originals come out of a Court which
in^itles it self a Court of Conscience and Equity, yet there is not one Writ to
Remedy a particular Case of either, nor any Action on the Case, for a Case of
Conscience or Equity arising from the Moral Law of God, but all fall down and
worship the Themis or Great Idol of the Ceremonial Law of Man, of Livery and
Seisin, Fines, Recoveries, Inrollments, Writings, Seals, Forms of Entries,
Forms of Pleading, Forms of Words, Fictions, and the like, which are not able
to give a Right to the least foot of Land or handful of Goods, nor any other
Law than the Moral Law of God of Truth and Equity; neither if these Writs were
Formed according to the Truth and Equity of the Moral Law of God, is it
possible a sufficient number should be Formed, for Writs are finite, and Cases
of Equity infinite, and not to be put in Writs, or written, except by God, in
the Fleshly Tables of the Heart, and in the Spiritual Tables of the Soul it
self, and Conscience.

It will be asked, How could they subsist before H. 6. without a Sub paena and
Equity from a Chancellor, seeing the Common Law Writs could not supply it; and
what expedient is there now how Equity may be supplied? To which I answer, That
Equity was then supplied by the Writ of Right, and Justicies, the Titles of
both which Writs signify Equity; and likewise other Writs, and the General
Issues Formed on them, of the Mere Right, Not Guilty, Null Tort, Null
dissersint, Nihil debet, guided the Jury to find according to Right and Equity,
by the Moral Law of God, and not the Ceremonial Law of Man; till the Judges, to
wrest the Power belonging to Jurors into their own hands, brought in the Tender
of the Demi mark, to turn the Issue of mere Right into a Possessary Issue, and
instead of Truth brought in the Pictions of Colors, destroyed the Justicies by
Writs of Remover, gave way to false Laying of Counties in Transitory Actions,
changed Venues, granted new Trials, abated Declarations for Variance from the
Bond, and not Sueing for what was paid, as well as for what was not, granting
Arrests of Judgment after Verdict, and not permitting to demur first to the
Law, and after to plead to the Fact before Verdict, prohibited on the Issue Not
Guilty, matters of Justification to be given in Evidence, admitted Demurs to
Evidence, admitted special Verdicts, caused Juries to be of an even and not of
an odd number, and the Verdict not to be according to the Plurality of Votes;
and many other ways they had to weary Juries from giving a Verdict according to
Conscience and Equity, or when they had so given it, to same.

I conclude therefore, to compel men to Commence Suites by Writs in the
present Age, is to condemn them without Hearing of the Equity and Merits of
their Cause; and to compel them to revive again those Ancient Writs, and try
Equity by Juries, has many great inconveniences, before mentioned to be
incident to all Writs, especially such as are Antiquated and not understood;
but all these mischiefs are salved by Commencing Suites by a Copy of the
Declaration Sworn, in stead of a Writ, which cannot be Sworn, and a Judge
Commissionated with Jurisdiction of Fact, Law, and Equity, under Appeal, which
single Judge in a Court by himself sitting without Vacation, as a Chancellor
has Power to do, will, no doubt, be able to dispatch more Causes without
troubling any Writs, Juries, or Council at the Bar, and more justly and under
Account in one Year, then it is possible for any Chancellor with Plurality of
Offices, or Court with Plurality of Judges, Juries, and Council at the Bar, to
do in Seven.

(6.) Men are condemned before Hearing on the Capias Vtlagatum, and
Excommunicato Capiendo.

A Satyr on a Papist and a Protestant Imprisoned, one on an Outlawry, the other
on an Excommunicato Capiendo, against Imprisonment before Hearing.
A Papist and a Protestant
Who used, when they met, to Rant
About the Altar and the Rail,
Were both together Clapped in Gaol:
The first was caught by an Outlawry,
The last whose Conscience did vary
From Bishops and their Common Prayer,
As Felon or a false Betrayer,
Was therefore Excommunicate,
And put to beg within a Grate.
Pap. Brother then quoth the Papist sad,
Are Protestants too grown so mad
To have an Inquisition here;
Who thus can, though no cause appear,
Forfeit our Goods and Selves at will,
In Prisons cold to starve and kill
Before they Hear us? do not know
Amongst our selves it is not so:
Who by Experience wiser grown,
Will Inquisition now have none?
Witness the Rich Venetian,
And wary Dutch, who late began
For Liberty against such Lords,
And Swisse, with their two handed Swords.
For this Proud Aragon Rebell*d;
And Naples Silk-men hardly quelled,
And many more abhorred such Tricks,
Yet are they all good Catholics.
So Holland justly now prevents
Imprisonment of Innocents,
And makes (to help the Poor oppressed)
Before a Judgment no Arrest.
Is this the Charta, and of Right
Petition, for which you fight?
That every 'Torney and his Clerk
(Who use to live upon the shark)
Forge all the Outlawries they please,
Remedies worse than the Disease,
And, that Poor men may be betrayed,
First Forge the County where it is laid?
They Forge and Antedate the Writs
Of Parchment cut in little Bits,
Then next they Forge the Sheriffs name,
And Forge Returns upon the same:
They Proclamations Forge and Feign,
And Exigends next without pain;
And all this Knavery you may spy
Page Sixth of the Academy,
Which is their Mother and their Nurse,
Teachers to Forge and Steal of course.
Such Clerks deserve hanged to be
As Nicholas Clerks upon a Tree;
And thus, though made them to prevent,
They fool all Acts of Parliament;
For no Averment must deny
The Shrieve or Clerk, although they lie.
Is this the Liberty so proud,
(You use to cry it up aloud)
And Property you so much Vant
That every Papist it does want?
What Purgatory can you tell
Is worse than this on Earth, your Hell?
Or what Hell is there more worth fearing,
Than Your Damnation without Hearing?
He neither shows me Time or Place,
Nor Witnesses brought Face to Face.
My Goods are all Confiscated;
My very Wives and Children's Bed
The Bailies Seized, without account
Of Price to what they did amount,
Or Witness; Writings, Boxes, Chest,
And Money too on a Suggest,
And Lies and Fictions; in worse case
I am than Felons in this Place,
Their Goods, although the Law is strict,
Not Forfeit are until Convict,
But left to feed them: Oh the blessed
Justice is shown to men distressed
By Protestants who only, you
Say, have the Religion true!
But Christ says, Know them by their Works,
Which shows you worse than Jews or Turks.
I have not left a Bit of Bread,
Witness these unfeigned Tears I shed:
The Plaintiff asks of me a Sum,
As at the Dreadful Day of Doom
I answer shall, and God does know,
I do not him a Farthing ow;
Yet can I not, although I try,
Be brought to answer or deny
His Forged Stuff, or see the Face
Of Judge or Jury on the Place;
But here to perish am designed,
And to this Dungeon confined,
Unless I give what e're he will ask;
This is my miserable Task.
I think you now turn Witches too,
The Rogues the mischief who did do
To bring me here, sure had a Spell,
(What Language 'twas I cannot tell)
'Twas written in a little scrow,
Half-words and dash't, that none might know;
Or rat^er scratched it was in Soot,
With Devils Claw, or Cloven Foot.

Prot. Brother, your self when Caught you find,
In snares for others you designed,
Learn, Who ill Principles extends
Against his Foes, destroys his Friends;
And when for us you dig a Pit,
You are the next fall into it.
It was your Church, what er'e it says,
Law- Latin left, and Latine-Faith;
And Babbled without Mood or Tense
In Church and Court, and without Sense,
That blind might lead the blind, and they
Rob so, all passed through their dark way.
You before Hearing first did Curse,
And Oulaw too to take a Purse,
Of which too late you now complain,
And we to help have tried in vain.
The Papist too brought Fictions in,
And Forgery that foulest Sin;
The Papists too were the first sharks,
And sat in Courts, Bishops and Clerks.
And left their Cursed Presidents
Of Forms, for their wicked Intents;
Which still continue now, and you
As well as we begin to Rue,
At least the Poor of either side,
Though they touch not the Prelat's Pride:
And if you Perish by the same,
Who but your selves now can you blame?
The Protestant at length Essai'd,
Although by greater Power dismayed,
Forms, Fictions, and Forgeries,
By Papist left to blind the Eyes
Of Justice and Religion,
And in a Language still unknown,
And the High Places of old Baal,
Which did both Souls and Bodies Thrall,
To take away, and teach their Youth
Worship in Spirit and in Truth:
And Justice too, by those who swayed,
In a True Balance to be weighed;
For Fictions and Forgeries
Come from the Father of all Lies;
But still the Protestant in vain
To Supreme Power did complain,
While Papist-Peers in Parliament,
And Pensioners, the Public Rent
Force from the Common's Skin and Bones,
It was in vain to make our moanes.
From Justice then, with many Jeers
You kept, and first made us shed Tears;
Although deceived in your hope,
Perhaps now from your selves they drop,
And you and we suffer alike,
From strokes which you and us did strike.
Am I not in as bad a Case
As you within this Dismal Place?
And me to make yet in a worse,
They Outlaw may, as well as Curse.
You have unto the Dreadful Doom
Of God Appealed, which is to come,
You nothing owe; I to the same
Appeal, and his most Dreadful Name,
I have committed no Offense
Against men, nor against my Conscience,
For which I Am Sentenced to lie here,
And be your Fellow-Prisoner.
Who Rule the Conscience can, but God?
Or who can change it with a Nod?
I see not when the Bishop winks,
Or if I think not as he thinks,
Or cannot by Implicit Faith
Believe what e're the Bishop says:
Is It just, because that I cannot,
I should lie here to Starve or Rot?

Pap. Brother, I Will freely tell my mind,
And say where Protestants are kind
To Catholics, in Recompense,
They each enjoy their Conscience;
And Toleration has united,
Not only those before Recited,
But bloody Wars could not be ceased
In Germany, 'till Conscience eased
On each side was, in the same Nation,
By a mutual Toleration.
The like in Hungary was acted,
And no Peace there could be transacted
Between the Emperor and them,
'Till Grafted both on the same Stem;
And many other like appear,
Too many to be Cited here,
They are not Commons, but our Peers
Who set us both now by the Ears;
They Pensions take from Rome and France,
Poor Us to Tyburne to advance;
And with some part when it is espied
They Pardon, Buy, and us Deride:
Why then should English Freedom miss,
More than our Neighbor Dutch or Swiss?
Or Driven be to Gaol or Church,
Conscience and Justice both to Lurch?

Prot. Brother, I Am not so void of Sense,
As Punishment on Conscience
To wish, who in so high degree
Suffer for it my self, you see:
But on what Terms the wiser State
Will both Religions Tolerate,
I cannot tell; or if no fears
They have of Poor, but only Peers,
I know not: only this I say,
We should small Prudence then bewray,
To try for others, and in vain,
'Till our own Liberty we gain.

Pap. Yet we in this do both agree,
Though Toleration none there be;
And both alike for this contend,
That whether he is Foe or Friend,
Yet before Hearing he ought not
In Cruel Prison Starve or Rot;
And Magna Charta none can be
Of Property or Liberty,
Unless it is in the same Expres't,
Before a Judgment no Arrest.

(7.) The Three Kingdoms condemn one another without Hearing, by a Non-Union of
their Three Parliaments.

Of the Fatal Danger threatening all Protestants, by the Division of the Three
Parliaments of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the inestimable Benefits
ensue the Union of the same in one House.
Unless the Supreme Judicatory is rightly constituted, to Judge between the King
and his Subjects, Church and Church, Kingdom and Kingdom, Nation and Nation,
Possession and Succession, and between one Subject and another, it is in vain
to constitute inferior Judicatories to any of those great ends of Preservation
of Religion and Justice, Peace and Truth, Liberty and Propriety; for there
being no Supremeequal Judge constitute, there will-be no inferior Judge equally
constitute; and being no equal Judge Supreme or inferior, if Kingdoms happen to
become Plaintiffs and Defendants one against another, for Religion or any other
Quariel, they are necessitated to condemn one another without Hearing, because
they agree not by what Judge they will be heard, but will, like the Scythians,
worship the Sword and Fortune for the Gods and Judges of the World, and begin
their Suit one against another with Execution by the unjust Capiases and
Outlawries of War, and Proclamations of the same by the Trumpet.

(1.) First therefore the great danger these Three Protestant Kingdoms lie
under, is, If any Papist should again (as they have by their perpetual Plots
hitherto endeavored to) kindle a Civil War, there can be n^ Judge equal Elected
by them able, without the Persons Elected sit in one House, to punish the
Incendiaries and prevent the War.

Succession of the Crown divided by divided Parliaments.
(2.) If the Succession of the Crown should happen to become contentious between
Competitors; and the Parliaments continue as they do, divided in several
Houses, and several Places, the Three Kingdoms, if they depart from the
immutable Moral Law of God, either to the Ecclesiastical Laws of their several
Churches, or to the Temporal Laws of the several Kingdoms; they may each have
several Laws, Privileges and Customs of Succession one from another, and the
Houses of Lords may have different Customs and pretenses to Judicatories from
Houses of Commons, and the Episcopal Assemblies and Synods may pretend several
Rights of Judicature from the Law-Courts, so every Kingdom may happen to be
divided in their Sentence of Succession, and one to Judge it to A. another to B.
another to C. the House of Lords in one to Judge it to D. in the other to E. in
the other to F. the House of Commons to Judge it in one to G. in the other to H.
in the other to I. the Episcopal Synod to Judge it in one to K. in the other to
L. in the other to M. The Persians did better, who made but one Judge, though
'twere an Horse, by first Neighing at the Sunrising, to declare his Master
Successor to the Crown of Persia, than to dispute it with Thousands of Men and
Horses vomiting their Votes in Blood. How joyfully would Rome Triumph in the
Spoils of Self-divided Protestants slaughtered with their own hands! This would
be the sad effect of divided Parliaments, divided Houses, and divided Kingdoms,
according to what Christ himself deel res, Matthew. 12.25 Every Kingdom divided
against it self, is brought to desolation: and every City or House divided
against it self, cannot stand.

(3.) It divides the Head from the Bodies, for a Prince cannot be Omnipres^nt;
if he is in Person wi^h any One of his Parliaments, the other Two are without
their Head; but if the Three Parliaments are united in one Body, then is there
one Body, and one Head.

(4.) The Head which is separated from any of the Bodies is insensible of the
Pains, Distempers and Dangers of those Bodies from which it is separated; those
Members who are Elected as Natives of England to serve in Parliament, cannot be
but ignorant of the true State of Scotland, and Ireland, and Scotland and
Ireland of one another, and both of the true Sta^e of England; but when they
sit altogether in one House, they can inform one another, and his Majesty, and
give him a full prospect at once of the true State of all his Kingdoms, and the
Affairs in them.

Parliaments divided delayed with Nine Negatives.
(5.) Parliaments divided by Hundreds of Miles distance by Land, and passage
over Sea, are most dangerously dilatory in all Affairs of War, and all other
matters concern^ng public safety; for every Vote to raise Money, or if it be
but to relieve a Garrison, must pass Nine Negatives, or Nine Affirmatives,
Three in the Parliament of England, Three in the Parliament of Scotland, and
Three in the Parliament of Ireland, before which will be passed and executed,
Nine Towns may be taken.

(6.) This Dilatory danger of Division of Houses sufficiently appears in the
Higher and Lower House, though neither divided by Lands nor Seas. And how much
Time is wasted in fruitless Messages from one to another, till the opportunity
and what is contended for is lost! whereas if they had sat in one House, and
the Matters to be carried by plurality of Votes, there must have been an
expeditious Dispatch. Coke mentions some Records, wherein appears, that when
there was a necessity of Levying Money for a War, the Commons would assent, and
the Lords refuse, Rex accersitis Regni Barombus tractabat cum iisdem de Regni
Regimine, deque pecuniali subventione sibi ferenda; sed proceres regiis votis
tum minime paruere. Et 18. E. nu. 14. The Commons Granted Money, but the Lords
would Grant none. In the time of H. 4. the Commons would have Granted an Aid,
but Subsidium denegatum fuit Proceribus renitentibus. Walsingham says, p. 475.
His diebus clerus and populus primo quintam decimam and postmodum tricesimam
bonorum suorum Regni Angliae in subsidium concesserunt. So here is no mention
made of the Lords, which is always done when they give; where by it seems they
evaded the Subsidy. 29. Eliz. The Commons desired the Lords they would join
with them in a Contribution or Benevolence to the Queen; the Lords gave Answer,
They would leave the Commons to themselves, and they would Rate themselves;
which they did at the Rate of Two Shillings in the Pound. The like 13. E. 3. n.
7. b. 18. E. 3. n. 10.20. E. 3. n. 11.27. E. 3. n. 8.4. R. 2. n. 13. When the
House of Commons had offered to grant an Aid, if the Clergy, who had the Third
part of the Land, would pay the Third part of the Aid; the Clergy Answered,
They were not to pay Aid by Parliament, but willed the Commons to do their
Duties, and they would do their own. All which Examples show, That more Houses
than one are a great clog in all matters concerning Public Safety; and a far
greater are many Parliaments remote one from another.

(7.) There can be no Pledges given of Peace and Unity, but by the Union of
Parliaments, wherein each Nation in One House, give themselves as Pledges of
Amity one with another.

(8.) There can be no Love without it, which is the greatest Bond of Union,
for, Ignoti nulla Cupido; how can they be acquainted, where they can neither
see nor hear one another, and how can they Love where they are not acquainted?

(9.) Parliaments United strengthen one another against the common Enemies,
like the Cable made of many Cords, which holds the Ship of the Commonwealth at
safe Anchor, against all the fury of Winds and Waves, and cannot be broken; or
like the Arrows when bound in a Sheaf, invincible; when separated, easily
broken.

(10.) When separated, either Parliaments, or Houses, it is easier for
Enemy-Princes to corrupt Members with Money; for, it is easier for the Shepherd
to watch one Fold, and secure it against the Wolf, than many; the corruption
likewise is easier of Messengers between Parliament and Parliament, and House
and House, than of the Members, who may casily in traveling have opportunity
of spreading false News, Bruits and Rumors, and cause thereby Misunderstanding
between the King and his Parliament, and People, and between every Parliament
and House one against another; whereas there need no Messengers, if only one
House of Parliament.

Secrecy of Union.
(11.) The more Parliaments and Councils there are, the less Secrecy; there was
at Rome but one only Senate, and what Livy lib. 48. mires at, there was no
Privy-Councel for matters of State allowed, but all matters of Peace and War
were transacted in the Senate prudently enough (though Livy hesitate as to the
Prudence) and the Secrecy of this great numerous Senate was so close, that none
of the Ambassadors of Greece or Asia could fish out, either by Friends or
Money, amongst so great a number of Senators, what Eumenes his business there
(who had Audience in the Senate) was; a thing impossible to be done, where
there is a Senate and a Privy-Councel, or a Plurality of Supreme Senates.

(12.) One dissentient Parliament or House standing divided, may clog or betray
the Defense of the rest; it is already mentioned how often Dissension between
the Higher House and House of Commons have stopped Military Provision against the
common Enemy; and how often fell it out in the same man er at Rome, That when
Recruits and Supplies were to be sent to an Army in the Field, Discords were
importunately raised between the Senate and the Tribunes of the People, whereby
the Enemy commonly obtained his Design of Stopping the Raising new Forces
against them; for the Tribunes of the People sat not in the Senate, but were a
divided State, having a Negative on their Votes, but no Vote with them and were
indeed a most imperfect constitution of Defensors of Liberties against Senators
permitted to be Hereditary, and was no way to be remedied, unless the People
had taken on them the Election of the Senators, as is now done by such Nations
as have the Liberty of Parliaments; but if Two dissentient Negatives, or
Houses, or Parliaments, are joined together in one House, where the matter is
to be carried by Plurality of Votes, there dissentient opinions of the several
Members are so far from hurting the Public, as they do the same much Good:
First, by the contrary Dispute of the Question, the Truth is the better
understood; Secondly, When two Extremes contend, they commonly moderate one
another, and produce a more temperate Sentence, than if the whole Senate were
all of the same mind, without any Faction; so, as long as Cato and Caesar made
Orations one against the opinions of the other in the Senate, it mitigated them
to moderation; and it was the Contention in the Field and not in the Senate,
caused so much mischief to the Public; which could not be avoided in such a
Senate which was no equal Representative Elected by the People, but some
Senators, so disproportionable in Power, as Caesar and Pompey were to the rest.

Strength of Union.
(13.) Though Confederacy of Foreign Princes ought not to be neglected, yet the
Confederacy of the Three Parliaments by Union in one House, is a far greater
assistance, than of any Three Foreign Princes Confederated and living in
Foreign Palaces; and such Three Protestant Parliaments in one House, and under
one Protestant King, are (by Gods help) of greater Strength and Council than
any Three Catholic Kings, and the Pope with them, if they should wrongfully
confederate against the Protestant.

Examples of Un on of Parliaments.
(14.) All these, and (no question) more dangers of Disunion, and Benefits of
the Union of Parliaments were foreseen to the Wisdom of King James of famous
memory; and how zealously the desire of such an Union was pressed on him by
him, between England and Scotland, appears by the Act, 1. Jac. cap. 1, and 2.
And thereby Commissioners of each Nation were appointed to meet and Treat, and
to reduce their D^ings therein to Writings or Instruments Tripartite, every
part to be subscribed and sealed by them, and one part to be delivered to the
King, the other to the Parliament of England, the other to the Parliament of
Scotland; this was promoted several times in the House, and vigorously Seconded
by many Noble Protestant-Patriots; after which, as appears, Coke 4th. part,
347. there started a question amongst the Commissioners, whether there could be
made a new Kingdom of Great Britain, before there was made an Union of Laws,
which Question was, by Command of the King, referred to all the Judges of
England in Trinity Term, Anno 2. Jac. who unanimously Resolved, Coke being then
Attorney General, That Anglia had Laws, and Scotia had Laws, A ridiculous
Answer of Judges, touching Union of Kingdoms.
but this new Erected Kingdom of Britannia had no Laws; and therefore where the
Forms of all Judicial Proceedings of England are Secundum Legem and
consuetudinem Angliae, it could not be altered, Secundum Legem and
consuetudinem Britanniae; an Answer fitter for Protonotaries than Judges, as if
no Union were possible to be made of Kingdoms, but by Rastall's Book of
Entries; whereas one word of a Nuper would have salved this horrible objection,
and but two lines of a Proviso in the Act of Union, might have made the Style
of their Formality what they would have had it; but this unlucky Pedantry of
Theirs was a fatal Scourge to Great Britain, for in all humane probabilities,
if there had been then made an Union of Parliament, the late Bloody Intestin
Wars had never been. 3. Jac. cap. 3. A Recital is made of the long and worthy
Labors of the Commissioners of England and Scotland, and how, albeit all
things had been by them fully and effectually pursued and accomplished, etc.
Yet for that diverse other matters required present Dispatch by the Parliament,
and the matters concerning the Union might be considered as well any other
Session, therefore the same was deferred for that time.

Anno 4. Jac. 1. An Act is made for Repealing certain Acts of Hostility, in
former Ages made between the two Nations, where the Commissioners lost all the
Pains they had taken, to the discouragement of any other who should thereafter
attempt the like; so by the Power and Subtlety of the Popish Episcopal Party
and Lawyers (all whose Interests a Reformation of Laws for Britannia would have
crossed) the whole business and Attempts of Union have been ever since
obst^ncted.

As for Examples, In former Histories we find none more free than the Romans,
to Naturalize their Associates, and to make the Natives of the Provinces
Citizens of Rome. The Grand Seignior takes into his Council the Natives of
several Kingdoms, yea though Christians, when once Educated in his Religion.
The several States of Greece had not been able to have subsisted against the
Persian, had they not United themselves in one common Council of State, though
their Laws and Commonwealths remained several. The Netherlands had been never
able to have subsisted against the Spaniard, had not the Provinces been United
in one Staadt-House and Common Council; yet is not that Union perfect, they
remaining still under several Laws and Customs, and in the nature of several
Commonwealths, and therefore not impossible to be again divided, as the Grecian
States thereby were. So were it imp^ssible for the German Empire to subsist
against the Turk, were they not United in one Supreme Diet and Common Councli;
for a Parliament of Kings in person, as the Electors are in Power, is better
than none at all, and better than a Confederacy of Kings by Proxies, they
remaining in their several Palaces; yet in many other respects the Union being
of the Prelates and Princes, and not of an equal Representative of the People,
it is liable to perpetual dangers of Civil Wars, and the Dividing of one Prince
against another, who may perhaps, as the Captains of Alexander the Great, and
the Italian Princes, in the end set up every one for himself, there being
nothing to hinder but the Terror of the Neighboring Turk; whereas if the Union
were constituted of an Emperor and Parliament equally Elected by the People,
the Empire were invincible, for the Prince were then but one, and the Senate
but one; but this is impossible to be performed, except in Protestant
Dominions, for then must the Pope and Prelates be Cashiered, which no Catholic
Prince can, or dare attempt. How great thanks do we therefore owe to God, who
has vouchsafed Protestants so great a Privilege, to Unite all their
Parliaments, if they in blindness and stubborness neglect or resuse not so
great a Mercy, as perhaps may not again be so easily offered? The Cantons of
the Swiss could not subsist without being United in a Common Council for
State-Assairs. So of the Grisons. Yet do the Cantons remain in the nature of
several Commonwealths, with several Laws and Customs, which Union is very
imperfect. Livy lib. 2. complains of this defect of Union of Councils in Rome,
and says, Profecto si essent in Republica Magistratus nullum futurum fuisse
Romae nisi publicum consilium; nunc in mill Curias Concionesque cum alia in
Esquiliis, alia in Aventino fiant Concilia, dispersam and dissipatam esse
Rempublicam. And by this does Tacitus confess it was, that Rome Conquered Great
Britain, Nec aliud adversus validissimas gentes pro nobis utilius, quam quod in
commune non consulunt, rarus duabus tribusque Civitatibus ad propulsandum
commune periculum conventus, ita dum singuli pugnant Vniversi vincuntur.
Neither (says he) was there any thing so profitable for us against the most
valiant Nations, as that they had no Common Council; a rare matter it was
amongst them to have a Convention of Two or Three Cities against the common
danger; so, while they every one fought single, they are all Conquered: Whereas
if Great Britain had been then united under one King, and one Parliament of the
whole Island, they perhaps might have as well said of his second Landing, as of
his first, Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis.

So does Justin mention of the States of Greece, every one of them had at last
their Councils apart, and fought single, whereby, one after another, they were
all overthrown. What has United the Heptarchy of the Saxons, and the mixture
of Danes inseparably, but the equal Mission of their Representatives to the
same Parliament? and what did Unite the Noble Remainder of Britains to England,
but the Statute of 27. H. 8.26. Enacting, That all Persons born in Wales should
enjoy all Liberties, Privileges and Laws, as other Subjects in England do: and
should send their Knights and Burgesses to the same Parliament with them? The
Glory of a King is the multitude of his People, and what more Glorious for a
King, who has the Royal English, Scottish, Irish and British Blood United in
him, who is the Head, than to have the same United in his Parliament, who is
the Body. Let it not offend, if I mention here the late Experience of Union of
the Three Parliaments in one House, by the late Usurper, seeing we are
commanded to learn Wisdom, though from the Serpent; and if he under so great
disadvantages of Opposition, made great Benefit, the lawful Prince may make far
greater thereby, and his Subjects likewise by his Favor participate of the
same. I cannot deny that it was my Fortune, though I never sought it, to be
chosen for a County, and to serve in that great Convention at Westminster, Anno
1656. called then a Parliament, wherein the Parliaments of England, Scotland
and Ireland, were Convened and United in One, with the same facility as they
are Convened to sit in Three Places, and there being then a War designed
against Spain, it was wonderful to see, with what Expedition and Courage all
things were moved toward the Design, and what an Endearment it was between the
Three Nations to meet, be acquainted, eat, drink, and converse together, about
the Common Concernments.

Having considered so far of the great Benefits of an Union of the Three
Parliaments of the Three Kingdoms in One, it may not be amiss next to consider
the Requisits necessary to perfect the same.

(1.) Whether an Union of Crowns be necessary to perfect an Union of
Parliaments and Kingdoms?
It seems for the Affirmative.

(1.) Because, where the Natural Person of a King is One, if the Politic
Person or Capacity is not made One, the one Politic Capacity may be divided
against the other, in the same Natural Person; as on the Succession of King
James to Queen Elizabeth, the Queen of England had declared War against the
King of Spain, the King of Scotland was in Peace with them; so in the diverse
Rights of Two Crowns, there was War and Peace at one time between the same
Persons; the like Doubts may arise, Whether the Royal Assent may pass contrary
Politics Acts and Laws in the Parliament of one Nation, to what he has passed
in the other, in reference to the contrary Rights of each Crown: Whereas if
both are consolidated and made one, no contrariety of Acts can happen.

(2.) It is as dangerous to have Two Crowns, as Two Marble-Chairs; for they may
be kept in several places, and the more easily may an Usurper happen on the
possession of one of them, and the Vulgar be deluded to think Possession of
those Signs of Supreme Honor, to be equal to the Right; and besides that, a
Fatality will follow them.

(3.) Seeing it has pleased God to make the Head of the Three Kingdoms One,
men ought to follow his Example, and make the Crowns One.

(4.) The continuance of several Crowns is apt to continue a perpetual memory
of Hostilities between the Kingdoms.

(2.) Whether an Unity of Protestant Churches is necessary, to an Union of
Protestant-Kingdoms?
It seems for the Affirmative;

Because, if Protestant-Churches divide one against another, the Kingdoms will
be a Prey to the Papist, and the Protestant will have none to Unite.

(3.)Whether permission of Protestants to Excommunicate Protestants, is
consistent with the Unity of Protestant-Churches?
Neg.

If the Pope Excommunicate Protestants, it Unites them the firmer; but if they
Excommunicate one another, they denounce War, and destroy one another with
their own hands, and leave the Spoils to be divided by the Pope.

An Elegy on Protestants, in the late Civil Wars, Excommunicating Protestants.
LVgeat in trisidis jam moesta Britannia flammis,
Et doleat jam fulminibus percussa trisulcis,
Intonuit falsus nebulosa Tibride Petrus,
Et Magicis stolidum perterruit Artibus Orbem.
Piscator Twedae retonat, multisque cachinnis
Rupibus ingeminans sua fulmina misit: ab Altis,
Becketi Lemures contra hunc torsere minaces,
A Thamisi gelidas Vulcania tela per auras.
Heu non Oceanus circum vaga Littora fusus
Nec freta compescant tantis ardoribus ignes.
Risit Romanus Tarpeia Rupe Tyrannus,
Cumque suis, inquit, sese immisere Gebennis
Pontifices Britonum per mutua vulnera tandem
Ne sic deficerent inferno gurgite flammae,
Ipse super terram viventes igne cremabo.
Ecce jocum, mintrat mus rodens, Rana coaxat,
Et cum limosis ineunt certamina juncis;
Milvus, spemque suam motis circumvolat alis,
Ipse paludosam sic vellem carpere Ranam,
Et sic ridiculum vellem discerpere Murem.
Englished.
LET Britain mourn, who burns in triple Fires,
And struck with threefold Thunderbolts expires,
A Peter false from Tyber in a Cloud,
By Magic Art did Thunder it aloud.
The Fisherman of Tweed with many Mocks
Returned his Thunder double from the Rocks.
Proud Beckets Ghost against him from Thames broke forth,
And with Vulcanian Darts fired the North.
What Ocean, which her wandering Shores does drench,
Or Seas, alas! so many Flames can quench?
The Romish Tyrant on Tarpeia smiled
To see the British Priests thus both beguiled.
When they have sent each other unto Hell,
Says he, by mutual wounds (hark what I tell)
Lest they want Fire should, in the Pit profound,
I will them both alive burn above ground.
Behold the Jest, the peeping Mouse and Frog
With Bulrush fighting are on Hill and Bog:
Like Kite, mean while, hid in a Cloudy Day
With soft moved Wings I Will soar about my Prey;
So I, at length, the Croaking Frog shall gull,
And Mouse ridiculous in pieces pull.
I shall proceed next to the Form and whole Nature of Excommunication, and the
further manifold mischiefs it brings to all Protestant-Churches, which shows,
Bishops who use it, are neither sit Judges of Marriage, nor of any thing else.

The Form of the Jewish Excommunication.
By Decree of the Cities, and Command of the Saints, We Anathematize and
Adjure, Exterminate, Excommunicate, Curse and Execrate by the Will of God, and
the Church, by the Book of this Law, by the Six Hundred and Thirteen Precepts
written in the same, by the Anathema wherein Joshua Anathematized Jericho, by
the Curse wherewith Elisha Cursed the Children; and by the Curse wherewith he
Cursed Gehazi his Boy, and by the Excommunication wherewith Baruch
Excommunicated Merath, and by the Excommunication which the men of the great
Synagogue use, and by the Excommunication which Rabbi Jehuda the Son of Rabbi
Jehezkiel used in this matter; and by all the Anathemata's, Imprecations,
Burnings, Excommunications and Exterminations, which have been from the time of
our Master Moses, and since by the name of Acetheriel Jah Lord of Hosts, by the
name of Michael the Great Prince, by the name of Mittraton, whose name is as
the name of his Master; by the name Sandalipon, who Binds the Bindings by his
Lord, by the name of the name of Forty-Two Letters, by the name of him who
appeared to Moses in the Bush, by the name by which Moses divided the Red Sea,
by the name of Four Letters, by the Writing which is Writon the Tables, by the
name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, sitting on the Cherubin, by the
name of the Sphaeres and Circles, and the Holy living Creatures and Ministering
Angels, by the name of all the Angels which Minister to the Supreme God, let
every Israelite and Israelitess wittingly or willing violating any of the
things denounced to be observed, be Cursed to the God of Israel sitting on the
Cherubims, let him be Accursed by the Name Glorious and Bright, which the
High Priest expresses in the Day of Expiations; let him be Cursed by Heaven
and Earth; let him be Accursed by the Omnipotent God; let him be Accursed of
Michael the Great Prince; let him be Accursed of Mittraton, whose name is as
the name of his Master; let him be Accursed as Acetheriel Jah, Lord of Hosts;
let him be Accursed of the Seraphim and the Orbs, and Holy living Creatures
and Angels who Minister before the Supreme God in Holiness and Cleanness: If he
was born in the Month Nisan, which the Angel called Vriel, as Prince of the
Rank under which he is, Governs, let him be Accursed of him and all his Rank;
and if he was born in the Month Jier, which the Angel called Trephaniel, as
Prince of the Rank under which he is, Governs, let him be Accursed of him and
all his Rank; and if he is born under the Month Sivan, etc. (this Cursing runs
through every Month one after another in the same words) Then follows, Let him
be Accursed of the Seven Angels set over the Seven Days of the Week, and of all
their Ranks and helping Powers; let him be Accursed of the Four Angels set over
the Four Quarters of the Year, and of all their Ranks and helping Powers; let
him be Accursed of the Seven Palaces; let him be Accursed of the Princes of the
Law, in the name of the Crown; and in the name of the Seal; let him be Accursed
of the Great God, strong and bright; let their be Confusion of his Seed; let
him fall with a swift Ruin; let the God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh,
destroy and cast him away; let the God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh,
subdue him; let the God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, overthrow him;
let the God, the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, keep him down; let the Wrath
of the Lord, and a violent Whirlwind fall on the head of the Wicked; let the
Angel of Destruction fall upon him; let him be Accursed in all things to which
he sets himself; let his Soul depart in Terror; let him die of the Quinsey; let
not his Breath go out nor return, with the Consumption, Fever, Burning,
Drought; let him be smitten with the Sword, with pining away, with the
Jaundice, nor before his Destruction be freed from them; let his Sword enter
into his heart, and let his Bow be broken; let him be as Dust before the Wind,
and let the Angel of the Lord scatter him; let his way be Darkness and
Slipperiness, and the Angel of the Lord persecute him; let unlooked-for
Desolation come upon him, and let the Net which he has hid take him; let them
Expel him from the Light into Darkness, and from the habitual World they shall
Banish him; Tribulation and Straights shall terrify him, his Eyes shall see
his own Destruction, and he shall drink the Wrath of the Almighty; let him put
on Cursings as a Garment; let him devour the strength of his Skin; also God
shall scatter him for ever, and shall root him out of his Tabernacle: The Lord
will not rest to forgive him, but the Wrath of the Lord and his Jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and all the Curses which are written in the Book of
this Law shall lie upon him for Evil, out of all the Tribes of Israel,
according to all the Curses of the Covenant which are written in the Law. But
you who adhere to the Lord your God, bless you this Day, he who blessed
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses and Aaron, David and Solomon, and the Prophets of
Israel, and those who amongst the Nations are Holy, bless this Holy
Congregation, and all other Holy Congregations: Except only He who shall break
this Curse, God of his mercy keep them and make them safe, and take them out of
all trouble and misery, and Prolong their Days and their Years, and send his
Blessing and a prosperous Wind to the Work of their Hands; and let Him Revenge
them speedily with all other Israelites, and so let his Will and Decree be.
Amen. Seld. de Jur. Not. and Gent. Juxt. Discip. Ebr. lib. 4. Cap. 7.527.

The Form of the Greek Excommunication against Thieves.
If they Restore not to him that which is his own, and possess him peaceably of
it, but suffer him to remain Injured and Damnified; Let him be Separate from
the Lord God Creator, and be Accursed, and Unpardoned, and undissolvable after
Death in this World, and in the other which is to come; let Wood, Stones and
Iron be dissolved, but not they: May they Inherit the Leprosy of Gehazi, and
the Confusion of Judas; may the Earth be Divided, and Devour them like Dathan
and Abiram; may they Sigh and Tremble on Earth like Cain, and the Wrath of God
be upon their Heads and Countenances; may they see nothing of that for which
they Labor, and Beg their Bread all the Days of their Lives; may their Works,
Possessions, Labors, and Services be Accursed, always without Effect or
Success, and blown away like Dust; may they have the Curses of the Holy and
Righteous Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; of the Three Hundred and
Eighteen Saints, who were the Divine Fathers of the Synod of Nice; and of all
other Holy Synods; and being without the Church of Christ, let no man
administer the things of the Church, or Bless them, or give the (...) or the
Blessed Bread, or Eat or Drink, or Work with them, or Converse with them; and
after Death, let no man Bury them, in penalty of being under the same State of
Excommunication, for so let them remain until they have performed what is
herein Written.

The Form of the Popes Excommunication against Queen Elizabeth.
Pius, Bishop, Servant of Gods Servants, etc. She (Queen Elizabeth) has clean
put away the Sacrifice of the Mass, Prayers, Fastings, choice or difference of
Meats, and single Life; she possessing the Kingdom, and by Usurping the place
of the Supreme Head of the Church in all England, and the chief Authority and
Jurisdiction of the same, has again brought the said Realm into miserable
Destruction. Unto her all such as are the worst of the People resort, and are
by her received into safe Protection, etc. We do declare, That the said
Elizabeth, and as many as stand on her side in the matter abovenamed, have
incurred the Sentence of our Curse: We also declare, That we have Deprived her
from that Right she pretended to have in the Kingdom aforesaid; and also from
all and every her Authority, Dignity and Privilege. We charge and forbid all
and every the Nobles, and Subjects, and People, and others aforesaid, that they
be not so hardy as to obey her, or her Admonitions, Commandments, or Laws, upon
pain of the like Curse upon them: We pronounce, That all, whosoever by any
occasion have taken their Oath unto her, are for ever discharged of such their
Oath, and also from all Fealty and Service which was due to her by Reason of
her Government, etc.

All the said Forms of Excommunications Wicked and Antichristian.
Forms of Excommunication Wicked and Antichristian.
As to which Forms of Jewish, Greckish, and Romish Excommunications, they are
all Wicked, and liable to their several Exceptions. (1.) The Jewish and
Greekish praying for Curses to Angels and Saints, fall into the Crimes of
Angelolatry, Idolatry and Daemonolatry; for it is manifest, if they on
malicious Prayers of men do any Malefice to any of Gods Creatures; they are
Evil and not Good Angels. (2.) They ramble together a company of Angels names,
not knowing whether there are any of the Names or Offices they assign them, or
not, or whether they are Angels, or Demons transformed. (3.) They pray for the
Curse of Gehazi, which was to him and his Seed; whereas God declares he will
not punish the Sins of the Parents on the Children; therefore they can pray for
the Curse of Gehazi to none but Demons. (4.) All the three Curses, both
Jewish, Greekish and Romish, are Antichristian; No such word as
Excommunication in the whole Scripture.
for Christ commands to Bless, and not to Curse.

I suppose therefore none will dare to use any of these Forms in England; nor
if they are true Christians, will they dare to coin a Form of their own Heads,
there being not so much as the word Excommunication used in the whole
Scripture, nor Pattern or Precept of a Form from Christ* who gave a Form of
Prayer to forgive Trespassors, but none to Curse or Excommunicate them. The
Form of Proce ding to Excommunication is set down by several Writers concerning
our Ecclesiastical Courts, as appears in Linwood, 500. That anciently when the
King and the Sheriffs did continue Communion with the Excommunicates, or let
them out of Prison, This may as well prove Bell Book and Candle to be from
Christ, as Excommunication.
contemning all the Keys of the Church, the Bishop renewed his Sentence by the
highest Romish Ceremonies of Bell, Book and Candle; for so is the Canterbury
Canon, Huic ergo morbo congruum vo^entes adhibere remedium, Statuimus quod
Excommunicati sic capti ac taliter excuntes de Carcere ad majorem detestationem
liberatorum and liberantium public and solemniter pulsat^s campanis and
candelis accensis excommunicentur. These were the Form of Ceremonial Acts, but
I find no Provincial or Common-Law-Author which sets down any Form of words to
be used in Excommunication; only there is a blind old Certificate of the
Archbishop, lib. Intra. 320. The Form of the Archbishop; Certificate of
Excommunication.
in this Form recited, Vniversis and singulis Justic' Domini Regis and aliis
Christi fidelibus quibuscunque praesentes literas visuris and audituris salut'
and fid' indubiam prosecutionis adhiberi sicut ovis morbida ab ovili penitus
ejiciend' ne aliis infectiva reddatur: sic Excommunicati sunt a Communibus
actibus excludend' ut ex hoc Censura Ecclesiastica magis teneantur, and
Excommunicat' hujusmodi rubor' confusi ad reconciliac' gratiam citius
inclinentur. Vniversitat' igitur vestrae notitiae deducimus per praesentes quod
frat' I. Prior Priorat' de L. nostrae Dioc' propter suas manifestas and
multiplicat' contumac' rebelliones and offensas non parend' certis monitionibus
licitis and canonic' authoritat' nostra ordinaria sibi fact' in Mens' M. ult.
praeterit' suit and est majore Excommunicationis sententia eadem nostra
authoritat' ordinar' innodatus and pro sic Excommunicato publ' denunciatus, and
eadem sententia excommunicatus per immodica tempora perseveraverit and
perseverat animo pertinaciter indurato, Dat' sub sigillo nostro, etc. But here
is nothing shows the Form of the words of Excommunication used by the
Archbishop.

Form of words of Excommunication, 1648.
In the late times of Usurpation, Aug. Anno 1648. cap. 118. The new coigned Form
of words of Excommunication appears to be this,

Whereas thou N. have been by sufficient proof convinced (here mention the Sin)
and after due Admonition and Prayer remainest obstinate, without any Evidence
or Sign of true Repentance; Therefore in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
before this Congregation, I Pronounce and Declare Thee N. Excommunicate, and
shut out from the Communion of the Faithful.

After the Denunciation of this Sentence, the People are to be warned, that
they hold him to be cast out of the Communion of the Church, and to shun all
Communion with him; nevertheless Excommunication dissolves not the Bonds of
Civil or Natural Relations, nor exempteth from the Duties belonging to them.

If the Party after Excommunication show Signs of Repentance, then the Form of
Absolution is appointed to be this, or the like,

Whereas thou N. have for thy Sin been shut out from the Communion of the
Faithful, and have now manifested thy Repentance, wherein the Church rests
satisfied: In the name of Jesus Christ, before this Congregation, I Pronounce
and Declare Thee Absolved from the Sentence of Excommunication formerly
Denounced against Thee, and do receive Thee into the Communion of the Church,
and the free Use of all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, that thou may be
partaker of all his Benefits, to thy Eternal Salvation.

The old Episcopal Forms of Evcommunication being so gross, as if published,
not able to clear off the Charge of Exceptions in that furious time of Contest
made against them, the Anti-Power in the Forms before mentioned, screwed their
Wits to the highest, that they might so refine them, as if possible, no
Exception might be took against them; for it mattered not how the Form was, so
they might obtain the effect of commanding the Temporal Sword by the
Excommunicato capiendo, and continue to possess thereby the great Power and
Profits incident, which have been before mentioned, to belong to Marriage, and
all other points of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; yet there is always such a
Repugnancy in the mixture of Truth and Falsity, that never so artificially
gilded over, the Flaws of the one will be visible and lie open to Exception
from the Solidity of the other. Against these Forms therefore as well as the
former, may be the following Exceptions taken.

1. It is excepted against the Form of Excommunication, That it is in the name
of Jesus Christ, without showing a Sign of Mission from Jesus Christ; for Jer.
14.14. It is said, The Prophets prophecy Lies in my Name; I sent him not,
neither have I commanded them, neither spoke unto them. And Jer. 27.15. I have
not sent them, says the Lord, yet they Prophecy a Lie in my Name, that I
might drive you out, and that he might perish, ye, and the Prophets that
prophecy unto you. And 29.9. For they Prophecy falsely unto you in my Name; I
have not sent them says the Lord. So may a Priest of Baal, or a Papist Priest
say, he Excommunicates in the name of the Lord, or in the name of Jesus.
Christ, as well as a Presbyter, if he be not put to his Sign of Mission.

2. Here is a Civil or Temporal punishment of Excommunication or Banishment
from Society, Sentenced or adjudged by this Form, without a Commission shown
from the Magistrate or Tempor ^^^^^ver; which if suffered, that any without
Commission should be a Judge, then every man would Judge in his own Case; which
would be a confusion of all Government.

3. This Form Excommunicates from Communion with the Faithful, and declares not
who are the Faithful, or how they may be known.

4. This Form Excommunicates from the Church, but does not say whether a
Particular Church or the Catholic Church, or a National, or a Parochial
Church, or Congregational Church; and being only Formed to be Pronounced by the
Rector of a Parochial or Congregational Church, it is as improper to extend his
Spiritual Jurisdiction to a National Church, as the Temporal Authority of a
Petty Constable to a Kingdom.

The Form Excluding from Communion, declares not whether from Spiritual or
Temporal Communion, or both; if Spiritual, it declares not whether from the
Word Preached, or Prayer, or Sacrament; if from either, or all, the
Interdiction of a Carnal man from Spiritual Communion is no Punishment, but he
will rather rejoice in it than Repent, and had rather take the pleasures of
Earth than of Heaven; if it intend from Temporal Communion, then the Spiritual
Person exceeds his Bounds to Judge of things Temporal; and besides, the Comment
destroys the Teut; for it declares, That Excommunication dissolves not the
Bonds of Civil or Natural Relations: Now all Temporal things are under Bonds of
Civil or Natural Relations, therefore it cannot intend Excluding from Communion
in Temporal Things; but indeed it is such a Linsie-Woolsie of Spiritual and
Temporal, that neither it self nor any other knows what it intends; and such an
Amphibion of Flesh and Spirit, none knows in what Element to place it.

6. Excommunication a word insensible.
Excluding from Communion, or Excommunication, is a word insensible; the old
Pagans Interdiction from Fire and Water, the Druydes Interdiction from the
Sacrifices, the great and lesser Curse of the Jews, the Pharisees casting out
of the Synagogue, the delivery by Paul to Satan, were all Words Sensible and
Intelligible; but Excommunication is a Word without Sense, Signification or
Intelligence; no Wonder therefore if there is not such a word in the whole
Scripture, not that men could never draw the Form of a Chimaera without
incongruity, which has no Being in Nature, but in the vertiginous Notions of a
Phrenzy.

7. The same Ordinance of the long Parliament, in the Prayer appointed to be
used with this Form of Excommunication, calls it the Ordinance of God; which is
the same which is beforementioned, Jerem. 14.14. The Prophets prophecy Lies
in my Name, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spoke I
unto them. How can that be an Ordinance of God or Christ, which they never so
much as spoke, nor is the word to be found in the whole Scripture?

8. This Form brings in Popish Confession of Sins to the Priest, and Penance,
and Commutation-Money, and Punishment of one Sin Twice, first by the
Magistrate, and then by the Priest.

(1.) Of the Effects of Excommunication of the Greek Bishops, either by
Witchcraft or Cheat, on the Bodies of the Excommunicated; and of the Apples,
Grapes and Nuts found in their Graves after Burial. (2.) Of the Ghosts called
Catechanae, returning into their Bodies after Death, in manner as into the
Excommunicated. (3.) Of Excommunication of Locusts, Flies, Fishes and Dead
Bodies. (4.) The Effects of Excommunication on the Soul ought to be contemned
by all who fear God more than the Devil. (5.) Of Excommunication of the Devil.
Mr. Ricant, amongst many other his rare Observations, Relates, page 277. That
the Greek Christians believe, If any Person die Excommunicate by the Bishop,
and not Absolved, some Evil Spirit enters into the Body in the Grave, which
Actuates and preserves him from Corruption, in the same manner as the Soul
informs and animates a living Body; and that they feed in the Night, walk,
digest, and are nourished, and have been found Ruddy in complexion, and their
Veins after Forty days Burial, extended with Blood, and when opened with a
Launcet, have yielded Blood as plentiful, fresh and quick, as that which issues
from young and Sanguine Persons; And it was informed him by a Candiot Caloire
called Sophronio, a Preacher in Smyrna of great Repute and Learning, That a
certain Person for some Misdemeanors committed in the Morea, fled to the Isle
of Milo, and being Excommunicated died: In the mean time the Relations of the
Deceased were much afflicted and Anxious for the sad Estate of their Dear
Friend, whilst the Peasants and Islanders were every Night affrighted and
disturbed with strange and unusual Apparitions, which they immediately
concluded arose from the Grave of the accursed Excommunicate; which according
to their Custom they immediately opened, and therein found the Body
uncorrupted, Ruddy, and the Veins replete with Blood, the Costin was furnished
with Grapes, Apple, and Nuts, and such Fruit as the Season afforded: whereupon
Consultation being made, the Caloires Resolved to make Use of the common Remedy
in those Cases, which was, to Cut and Dismember the Body into several Parts,
and to boil it in Wine, as the approved means to dislodg the Evil Spirit, and
dispose the Body to a dissolution. But the Friends of the Deceased being
willing and desirous that the Corpse should rest in Peace, and some ease given
to the Departed Soul, obtained a Reprieve from the Clergy, and hopes that for a
Sum of Money (they being Persons of a competent Estate) a Release might be
purchased of this Excommunication under the hand of the Patriarch; in this
manner the Corpse were for a while freed from dissection, and Letters thereupon
sent to Constantinople, with this Direction, That in case the Patriarch should
condescend to take off the Excommunication, that the Day, Hour and Minute that
he Signed the Pardon, should be inserted in the Date. And now the Corpse were
taken into the Church (the Country People not being willing they should remain
the Field) and Prayers and Masses daily said for its Dissolution, and Pardon of
the Offender; when one Day, after many Prayers, Supplications and Offerings,
(as this Saphronio attested with many Protestations) and whilst he himself was
performing Divine Service, on a sudden was heard a rumbling noise in the Cossin
of the Dead Party, to the Fear and Astonishment of all Persons there present;
which when they had opened, they found the Body Consumed and Dissolved as far
into its first Principles of Earth, as if it had been Seven Years Buried: the
Hour and Minute of this Dissolution was immediately Noted, and precisely
Observed, which being compared with the Date of the Patriarch's Release, when
it was Signed at Constantinople, it was found exactly to agree with the Moment
in which the Body returned to its Ashes. And he after says, Such is the
much-tobe-Lamented Poverty of the Greek Church, that they are not only forced
to sell Excommunications, but the very Sacraments; and to expose the most
Reverend and Mysterious Offices of Religion unto Sale for the maintenance and
Support of the Priesthood. The same Author writing concerning the Armenian
Church, page 439. says, That Excommunication is as frequent amongst them as
the Greeks, by the Abuse of which, the Priest procures the most considerable
part of their Gains; nor is any Ecclesiastical Right performed, nor a Benefice
conferred without Money. And, p. 439. he says, That amongst the Armenians, the
Penance on which Excommunication or Absolution is to follow, being once imposed
by the Priest, no man can Remit, no not the Bishop or Patriarch himself.

(1.) Hence is to be Observed, That the only Final Causes why the Greek,
Armenian, Romish and British Popes agree to Exercise Excommunication, Penance
and Absolution, and to set Heaven and Hell to Sale for Commutation-Money, are
only Covetousness and Ambition; and thereby to Lord it more imperiously over
the Consciences, Lives, Liberties and Propriety of their Superstitious Adorers,
than any Temporal Emperor is able to do over his Vassals.

(2.) That it is the Prelate only pockets all the Money in the Greek, Romish,
Ethiopian, Muscovitish, Russe and British Churches, and starves the inferior
Clergy, and the Parochial Priest in the Arminian; and that the Penance and
Excommunication of the Parochial Priests must probably be heavier, and his
Absolution sold dearer than the Pope's or Prelat's; because the remoteness of
the one, and the greatness of his Territory, and that he must thereby leave all
to Underofficers, and cannot Act in Person, cause his Inquisitions not to be
so strict, but multitudes will find easy Evasions from them; whereas the
Parochial Priest having the narrow Bounds of his Parish always under his Eye,
and within his reach, will not only swallow every Camel, but strain at every
Gnat which comes within his verge, for the advantage of his Petty Dominion and
Gains.

(3.) That the Greek Popes are notwithstanding but Poor, and the Romish Rich,
because the Grand Seignior being not Superstitious, nor his Empresses, nor
fearing such counterfeit Fulminations as Excommunications, and his Mufti's or
Archbishops being only Durante Beneplacito, and his Parish Priests Elected by
the People without Consecration or Ordination, and Independent one of another;
neither the Greek Popes, Patriarchs, Bishops nor Priests, nor his-own, dare
Excommunicate him; whereas the Christian, both Eastern and Western Emperors,
their Empresses, Children and People, having been permitted to be perpetually
Educated by the Popes in Blindness and Superstition, he has them, upon the
matter, in the condition of Sampson and Polyphemus, with their Eyes pulled out,
and makes them grind for him as he pleases, or with his Ecommunications sends
them packing (as they in their Ignorance think) to Hell or Purgatory, which
makes most for his Gains and Profit, whereby he has accumulated infinite
Riches.

(4.) The Effects of Excommunication on the Bodies of Dead men, is either
Witchcraft, or a Cheat; Witchcraft is possible to be sometimes, not always, as
may easily be proved from the Raising of Samuel by the Witch of Endor, and an
Hundred Histories more related by Authors of unquestionable Credit. And as the
Devil may sometimes be permitted to abuse the Bodies of the best men when
Living, as he did Job's, and, what is the highest Example, Christ himself,
carrying him to the Pinnacle of the Temple; so he may when they are Dead. I
shall Instance one only Example further in the Primitive times, mentioned by
Cornelius Agrippa de occult. Philos. lib. 3. cap. 41. where he Relates out of
the Cretensian History, That certain Ghosts, which they called Catechanae, were
wont to return back to their Bodies and go into their Wives and lie with them;
for the Avoiding of which, and that they might not annoy their Wives any more,
it was provided by their Common Law, That the Hearts of them who did Arise,
should be thrust through with an Awle, and their whole Carcasses be burnt to
Ashes. These without Doubt are wonderful things, and scarce credible; did not
those Laws themselves, and ancient Histories witness them. The frequent
practice likewise of Necromancers, by their wicked Art to call the Devil into a
Dead Body, and take Responses from him, confirm what has been said. And it may
be likewise a Cheat; for it may be easy for the Priests to put Apples, Grapes
and Nuts in a Coffin, and by Night to make fearful Noises, Shrieks, Groans, and
Counterfeit Apparitions about Graves and Tombs; whence the horror of the very
place, and darkness, make such impressions on timorous Fancies, as they shall
not dare to approach, much less examine the matter, and take out the new Body
out of the Coffin, and put in one had been Buried Seven Years, and then a Vault
made of purpose to make a noise under ground in the Church, and Sofronio know
nothing of all this.

(5.) But whether it were Witchcraft or Cheat, it is most horrible wickedness
to make Use of either, under pretense of Church Discipline, or the Worship of
God, seeing they both come from the Devil.

Alvarez, a Portugal Priest, Relates of himself, That at the Town of Barva in
Ethiopia, there appeared a Terrible Cloud of an infinite number of Locusts,
which at length fell and Devoured the Country; and that he and another
Portuguez Priest took a Consecrated Stone, and the Cross, and sung the Letany,
and in this manner went in Procession through the Cornfieldsd for the space of
a Mile unto a little Hill, and there he caused them to take a quantity of the
Locusts, and made of them a Conjuration, which he carried with him in writing,
which he had made the Night before; Requiring them, Charging them, and
Excommunicating them, Willing them within Three Hours space to begin to depart
toward the Sea, or toward the Land of Morez, or toward the Desert Mountains,
and to let the Christians alone; and if they obeyed him not, he called and
adjured the Fowls of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, and all the Tempests to
scatter, destroy and consume their Bodies: And for this purpose he took the
quantity of Locusts and made this Admonition to them that were present, in the
name of themselves, and those which were absent, and so let them go, and gave
them liberty. The Locusts began forthwith to depart, and in the mean while a
mighty Tempest and Thunder arose toward the Sea, which drowned all the Locusts
in the River, and the dead Locusts remained in heaps two Fathom high on the
Banks; so by the Morning there was not one Locust left alive. This
Excommunication, if true, were Conjuring and Witchcraft.

Flies Excomunicated.
Peter de Nathal, in vita Bernhardi Relates, That St. Bernhard denounced the
Sentence of Excommunication against Flies; Whether this may be called
Witchcraft, or a Silly Prank of St. Simplicius, I cannot say; but if he could
Excommunicate Flies without a Magical Telesme or Enchantment, Fishes
Excommunicated.
he shall be the Domitian of Divinity. Mere. Gallo. lib. 6. p. 592. says, That
Anno Domini 1593. The Bishop of Conagtion very maliciously Excommunicated the
Innocent Fishes. Theodosius a Bishop of Alexandria, Dead Excommunicated.
Excommunicated Origin Two Hundred Years after his Death; if he is censured
only for a Cheat, it is less than so wicked a practice deserves. Now though God
may permit wicked men to Excommunicate, and Demons, Witches, wild Beasts and
Tyrants, to abuse the Bodies of the best men after they are dead, they have no
Power to touch the Soul. And we ought not to fear, but contemn their
Excommunication; for so says Christ, Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them that can kill
the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear Him which is able
to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.

Excommunication of the Devil.
Devils Excommunicated.
Mengus de Flagell. Demon. Describes part of the Form of the Romish Exorcism
to be, I Command you Oh Davils (who are come to the help of those that vex this
Creature of God N.) upon pain of Excommunication and Immersion into the Lake of
Fire and Brimstone for a Thousand Years, that ye yield no Aid and Assistance to
these Devils. It seems the Devil is of the Society of these Romish Priests;
otherwise he could not be Excommunicated.

To grant a Bishop Power of Excommunication, is to grant him the Legislative,
Judicial and Executive Power.

Excommunication gives the Pope the Legislative Power over all Nations; for by
this he made his Canon Law, whenever he pleased, to be observed through
Christendom, by no other Obligation, than his Command they should be observed
on pain of Excommunication. By granting the Power of Excommunication, the
Legislative Power is granted; and the Clergy in Convocation used anciently,
without asking the Royal Assent, to make Canons touching matters of Religion,
to bind not only themselves, but all the Laity, without Assent of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament. It was used in ancient time for Creditors, besides other
Security, to procure Debtors to Swear they would pay them, and thereupon there
being then no Arrest in the Temporal Courts for Debt, they Sued them in the
Spiritual Courts on their Oaths; and they granted an Excommunicato Capiendo to
Arrest them without Bail; which were so frequent, that E. 1. could not keep his
Servants free from Arrest in his Court, till, to prevent it, he caused a Writ
De Promulgantibus Sententiam Excommunicationis Capiendis and Imprisonendis,
Commanding to Imprison such as Excommunicated any of them, Rot. Parl. 25. E. 1.
Intus. Henry the Second, according to Hovedon, would, That all such of the
Clergy as were Deprehended in any Robbery, Murder, Felony, Burning of Houses,
and the like, should be Tried and Adjudged in the Temporal Courts as Laymen
were. But Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, stood proudly on the Pontificial
Prerogative of the Clergy, That no Clergyman ought to be Tried, but in their
own Spiritual Courts, and by men of their own Coat: And if they were Convicted
before them, they ought only to be deprived of their Office; but if they after
offended, they should be Judged in the Kings Courts: This Power of Judgment he
drew to his own Court, only by his Power of Excommunication.

A Copy of a Prohibition of Excommunication.
A true translated Copy of a Writ of Prohibition, granted by the Lord Chief
Justice, and other the Judges of the Common Pleas, in Easter-Term, 1676.
against the Bishop of Chichester, who had proceeded against, and Excommunicated
one Thomas Watersfield, a Churchwarden, for Refusing to take the Oath usually
tendered to Persons in such Office, to Present such who absent from Church; by
which Writ the Illegality of all such Oaths is Declared, and the said Bishop
Commanded to Release and take off his said Excommunication, etc.

CHarles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Reverend Father in Christ,
Ralph, by Divine Providence Lord Bishop of Chichester, or any other competent
Judge in his behalf whatsoever, Greeting; We are informed in our Court before
our Justices at Westminster, on the behalf of Thomas Watersfield, That whereas
by the Laws of this our Realm of England, no Person ought to be Cited to appear
in any Court Christian before any Judge Spiritual, to take any Oath, unless it
be only in Cases Matrimonial or Testamentary: But whereas also by a certain Act
in Parliament, began and holden at Westminster the 8th. Day of May, in the
13th. Year of our Reign, and there continued till Wednesday the 30th. Day of
July, in the 13th. Year of our Reign af^resaid; and from the same Day the
Parliament Adjourned till the 20th. Day of November then next following;
amongst other things it was Enacted by the Authority of the said Parliament,
That it should not be lawful for any Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General,
Chancellor, Commissary, or any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
to offer, tender or administer to any Person whatsoever, the Oath usually
called the Oath Ex Officio, or any other Oath, by which such Person to whom it
may be offered or administered, might be burdened or compelled to confess or
accuse him or her self of any Criminal matter or thing, whereby he or she might
be burdened with any Censures or Punishments: as in the said Act amongst other
things it is more fully contained. Yet you the aforesaid Bishop after the
Coming forth of this Act ( viz. the 23d. Day of July, in the 27th. Year of our
Reign) in no wise regarding the said Law and Statute, at Chichester in the
County of Sussex, did offer and tender unto the said Thomas Watersfield, being
then Church-Wapden of the Parish Church of Arundel in the said County of
Sussex, a certain illegal Oath Ex Officio, to be performed by the said Thomas
Watersfield, in a Cause neither Matrimonial nor Testamentary; by which the said
Thomas Watersfield might be forced to accuse himself of diverse matters
Criminal, and with which he might be Burdened with diverse Punishments and
Censures Ecclesiastical. In which Oath as it was then tendered, the said Thomas
Watersfield, should with his utmost Diligence Present every Person, which then
or lately was Inhabiting within the said Parish of Arundel, who has done any
offense, or neglected any Duty mention^d in certain Articles contained in a
certain Printed Book (which Book was then and there shown by you the said
Bishop to the said Thomas Watersfield) and the said Thomas Watersfield does
Aver, at the time of the Tendering of the said Oath, and before and afterward,
ever since, and hitherto, That he has dwelt and been Resident in Arundel
aforesaid; and that in the said Printed Book at the said time, that the said
Oath was tendered to be performed, there was contained amongst other things
this Question (viz.) Whether every Person Inhabiting or Sojourning within the
Parish of Arundel aforesaid did daily resort every Lord's Day and Festival
appointed for Divine Service, to the Church? and whether they did there remain
the whole time of Divine Service quietly, with Reverence, Order and Decency?
and whether Church wardens, and Officers called Sides-men, did observe those
which came late after the beginning of Divine Service, or went away before the
end of the same? and whether they did suffer some to stand idle or to talk in
the Church Porch, or to walk in the Churchyard, during the time of Prayer and
Preaching, or other Sacred Duties? And forasmuch as the said Thomas Watersfield
did then and there refuse to take the said Oath; you the aforesaid Bishop did
pronounce the Sentence of Excommunication upon him afterward; that is to say,
upon the 23d. Day of July, in the 27th. Year of our Reign aforesaid, at
Chichester aforesaid; In Contempt of Us, and the manifest Damage, Prejudice,
and Impoverishment of the said Thomas Watersfield, and against the Form and
Effect of the said Statute, and the Common Law of this Our Realm of England.
And whereas such Pleas, by the Laws of England of Right belong to Us, and not
to You, We therefore being willing to maintain the Laws of our Crown, and the
Law and Custom aforesaid, as by the Bond of our Oath we are bound to do, We
forbid you; firmly enjoining you not to intermeddle or hold before you the said
Bishop, the Plea and Sentence aforesaid, as to any Answers in the said
Articles, concerning the said Thomas Watersfield, or any thing from thence
attempted: But that you Release and Dissolve all Decrees and Sentences (if any
be) against the said Thomas Watersfield, by reason of the said Fulmination: And
that you do absolutely Release him the said Thomas Watersfield from all Decrees
and Sentences, upon occasion of the said Fulmination.

Test at Westminster the 6th. Day of May, in the 28th. Year of Our Reign.
Wurley.

The Suggestion on which this Prohibition is granted, remains Recorded in the
said Court of Common Pleas in Mr. Wurley's Office. Roll 551.

Excommunicators Murderers.
John Hus, and Jerome of Prague held, That Priests ought to Preach
notwithstanding Excommunication; That Bishops were Murderers, for delivering
men over to the Lay-power for Disobeying them; That such Excommunication was a
humane Invention, to maintain the Pride and Cruelty of the Clergy: And were
Martyred for this and other Truths. The King shall be forced to Execute every
Decree of the Pope or Priests with the Temporal Sword, though contrary to his
Conscience; otherwise he shall be Censured, if obstinate, not worthy to hold
his Crown. Sheriff of Englands Oath.
The Sheriffs of England are compelled to be Sworn to Assist and Execute all
the Commands of Bishops, not excepting against the King himself; which is a
most wicked Oath to be suffered. For though it does not Swear in express words,
to give the Supremacy of the Temporal Sword to this Spiritual Sword of
Excommunication (that the Priests were too subtle to have appear openly in
their Form; Excommunicators Usurp Supremacy.
) yet does it require him to Swear what is Aequipollent, to assist and maintain
the Bishops and Commissioners of the Holy Church, as often as by them requir^d;
whereby their Spiritual Sword is made the Imperant, and the King's Temporal
Sword the Obedient. The Imperant has Supremacy over the Obedient, as it is
said, Romans 6 16. Know ye not, to whom ye yield your selves Servants to Obey,
his Servants ye are to whom ye Obey? Shall the Sheriff therefore be compelled
to be a Traitor, to deliver the Temporal Sword entrusted in his hand by the
King, to those who assume that Luciferian Title of the Holy-Church to be
Supreme above the King? which is point blank contrary to his Oath of Supremacy,
which obliges him to suppress with it such a Rebellious Pride to the utmost of
his Power. The Sheriff is likewise by the Law of Scotland to do Execution on
Excommunicate Persons, as appears* Skene de verb. signif. tit. Schiriff;
Sheriff of Scotland.
whose words are, The Sheriff shall take and apprehend all Cursed and
Excommunicate Persons at the desire of the Bishop or his Official, and put them
in Prison until they satisfy God and the Kirk, Stat. 2. Reb. Br. specially
them quhahes remained under the Censure of Excommunication by the space of
Forty Days, Quon. Attach. Rextali, 76. And by Ja. 2. P. 4. cap. 7. it is
Enacted, That nane against quhome the Process beis led be received in the Kings
Castle or Place, or in his Presence, nor admitted to Council or Parliament,
heard nor answered in the Law of Judgment of Fee and Heritage, or uther Causes;
bot ever Eschewed as Cursed, unto the time the said Persons cum to amendis, and
assyith the Party, and obtain Absolution in Form of Law. And Jac. 6. p. 3.
cap. 53. in the Kings Minority an Act was got by the Kirk, 'That all
Excommunicate Persons not Conforming 'in Forty Days, should be denounced
Rebels, and put to the Horn. The English Commissioners in the said late time of
the Troubles had Instructions to take from the then Kirk, such Letters of
Horning, and not to assist any Excommunication with the Temporal Sword; which
we performed accordingly. The King of Spain joined with Tyrone and the Rebels
in Ireland, against Queen Elizabeth. And Don John de Aquila, Landing in Ireland
with 4000 Spaniards, entitled himself Master-General, and Captain of the
Catholic King, in the Wars of God, for holding and keeping the Faith in
Ireland, only on pretense of Excommunication. Sextus Quintus the Pope of Rome,
on the Invasion prepared by Spain against England, Anno 1588. sent out his
Crusado, as if against the Turks, and having passed Sentence of Excommunication
and Deprivation by his Bulls against Queen Elizabeth, promising Pardon of Sins,
Heaven, and Eternal Life to all who di'd in the Invasion.

(1.) To grant a Pope or a Bishop Power to Excommunicate Protestant-Subjects,
is to grant him Power to Excommunicate Protestant-Kings. (2.) To grant him
Power to Excommunicate Protestant-Kings, is to grant him Power to Levy Money,
Raise Soldiers, Denounce War, and Depose them. (3.) Of the Dilemma of Danger
threatening Princes who seek Security of Goverement from the Excommunication of
Popes, or Bishops, either over a People Religious, or Superstitious. (4.) Of
the Impossibility of Security for Princes, unless their Subjects are Educated
or Instructed to be free from the Superstition of Excommunication, and to
contemn it. (5.) Of the Impossibility of obliging Popes or Bishops, either by
Benefits or Oaths.
Excommunication is, as Proscription, made a pretetence of Confiscation without
showing cause. The Romans, says Aman. Marcellus, proscribed Ptolomy the then
King of Cyprus being their Confederate, for no fault, only they wanted Money in
the Treasury; who therefore poisoned himself, and the Isle became Tributary to
the Romans: In the like manner do Popes and Bishop; fall on the Richest with
their Excommunication, to fill their empty Purses.

Pope Gregory the Tenth, Commanded Percham Archbishop of Canterbury to pay him
Four Thousand Marks within Four Months, on pain of Excommunication. So
Excommunication is a ready way to Levy Money for War.

Anno 1230. The Pope having Excommunicated the Emperor, the Emperor was fain to
pay for his Absolution an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Ounces of Gold, Plat.
Nam. Anno 1231. The Emperor for memory of this hard Pennyworth for his
Absolution, put into a Pool at Helbrand, diverse Pikes and other Fishes with
Brass Rings, having Inscriptions of his name, and the Year of the Lord; one of
the Fishes was taken up 267. Years after, Ann. Suev. Calv. Henry the Second,
after that Traitor Beckett, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, had been Slain,
though not by the Kings Command, was enjoined amongst other things this Slavish
Penance: He walked Three Miles barefoot on the sharp Stones, that he at length
had so cut his Feet, they marked the ground with Blood every step he went. And
after this, which was worse than Running the Gantilope, he Received of the
Priests, Monks, Bishops and Abbots, on his naked Flesh so many Jerks with Rods
(Oh brave Pedants and Pontifical Government for Princes!) as according to
Baronius amounted to at least Fourscore Lashes, which doubtless was the Number
the Jew administered to the vilest Rogues, lest their Brothers should be
despised in their Eyes, and not heard to have been Exercised in their Eyes, and
not heard to have been Exercised on the Priests, Bishops and Abbots themselves;
though they killed and murdered many Laymen without Law or Justice, they
incurred only a deprivation; and instead of Hanging, which they deserved
sometimes, no more than a suspension Temporary ab Officio.

In the time of King John, Anno 1211. The Pope Excommunicated him, and gave the
Kingdom of England to the King of France. Paris Wend. The Pope Excommunicated
Henry the Eighth, and gave the Kingdom Primo Occupanti. Queen Elizabeth was
Excommunicated by Three Popes, Pius Quintus, Gregory the Thirteenth, and Sextus
Quintus. Anno 1308. The Pope Excommunicateth Andronicus, Emperor of the East,
and sets up the King of Russia against him, Bzou. So he dealt alike with the
East and Western Emperors. Excommunications have brought the Venetians to
extreme Straights formerly, therefore they are yet no Friends of it. Dandalus,
Duke of Venice, was compelled by Pope Clement the Fifth to Crouch under the
Table Chained like a Dog, before he could obtain Peace for the Venetians. The
Pope Excommunicated John King of Navar, and Granted his Kingdom to the
Spaniards. Nicephorus Phocas, Emperor of the East, was Excommunicated by
Polyeuchus then Patriarch of Constantinople, because he had been Godfather to
a Child of Theophania, Wife to his Predecessor, and after his Predecessor's
Death Married her. Pope Zachary deposed Chilperick the French King, and gave
the Crown of France to Pepin. The two French Kings, H. 3. and H. 4. who were
Assassinated, had great Guards, whereby it appears, though Princes may secure
themselves in Vaults and Caves from Thunderbolts, yet can they not against the
Bishops of Romes Ignis Fatuus of Excommunication; but that to Assault them, Per
medios ire Satellites
Et perrumpere amat saxa potentius
Ictu fulmineo,


Eight Emperors were Excommunicated by Popes, who were these: Frederick the
First, Frederick the Second; Philip Conrad; Otho the Fourth; Jews of Bavaria;
Henry the Fourth; and Henry the Fifth, The Emperor Henry the Fourth Fought in
Threescore and Two several Battles, and had for the most part Victory; he was
Excommunicated by the Pope, and to obtain his Absolution, came Three Days
together barefoot to the Gates of the City Canusium, where the Pope then was,
and with much difficulty obtained it. The Catholic Majesty's of Spain cannot
secure themselves from Excommunication, without Money; nor their great
Viceroys in America; for a Rebellion was Raised in Mexico, by the Archbishop
there Excommunicating the Governors; the People by Superstitious Episcopal
Education, made more afraid of the Counterfeit Power of the Keys, than of the
true Power of the Sword, and will side in Rebellion with the Bishop, against
the Secular Governor: men may talk therefore and believe what they please, that
the Supremacy of the Temporal Sword is Consistent with the Spiritual of
Excommunication; but when it comes to Trial amongst a Superstitious People,
they will be very much deceived, and perhaps Ruined. Bzovius de Pont. Roman.
611, 612. to maintain the Power, That the Popes may depose Kings, Recites a
Catalogue of above Thirty Kings and Princes deposed by them; all which,
pretended Power of Excommunication; and if Bishops are granted the same Power
of Excommunication which Popes have, what hinders, but that British Popes and
British Bishops are thereby granted, when they dare, and have opportunity to
Excommunicate and Depose Kings, as well as the Romish Popes and Bishops, who
are as quiet as the British, till they have opportunity, and dare show their
Teeth?

Pagan Priests claim Supremacy in Judgment above Kings.
This was commonly practiced by the Pagan Priests, whom the Pope and Bishops
follow, to claim Supremacy in Judgment Jure Divine over their Kings; to which
purpose Tacitus speaks, lib. 4. cap. 2. That the Priests amongst the Germans
took on them the Power of Judicature, not by Commission from the Prince, but by
Command pretended from God, whom they account to be then in presence, and to be
assisting in their Fights; which Power claimed by those ancient Pagan German
Priests, is no other than the Jurisdiction at this day claimed by the later
German Archbishops and Bishops over their Emperors. The like Power long before
them was claimed by the old Egyptian Priests over their Kings, whom they
thereby diverse times Sentenced, and put to Death.

How vain the hopes are of obliging Bishops, either by their Duty of Allegiance
to their Native King, or by Benefits or Oaths, it appears by the Examples
following.
Bishops not to be obliged by Benefits or Oaths.
When William the Conqueror came in, he took this Kingdom from the Gift of the
Pope, and promised in consideration thereof, to hold it Feudatory of him, and
thereupon coming hither with a Bull and an Hayne of St. Peter, and other Romish
Trinkets the Bishops, who were then more Potent than the Temporal Barons,
forsook Edgar Atheling their Native Prince and the unquestionable Lawful
Successor, and betrayed the Land to a Foreigner, though he after served them in
their kind, and left not a man of them to sit in their Sees. Henry the First,
after the Death of his Queen Matilda, Married Adeliza the Daughter of Godfry
Duke of Lorrain; when she was to be Crowned, Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury
who was appointed to Crown her, first came to King Henry sitting Crowned in his
Chair of State, asking him, Who had set the Crown on his head? The King
Answered, He had now forgotten, 'twas so long since. Well, said the
Archbishop, whosoever did it, he did me wrong to whom it belonged; and as long
as you had it thus, I will do no Office at this Coronation. Then, said the
King, do what you think good. Whereupon the Archbishop took off the Crown from
the Kings Head, and after, at the People's entreaty, set it on again; and so
proceeded to Crown the Queen. It was a sufficient favor that the King
appointed him to Crown his Queen, and whosoever Crowned himself, it was fit the
King should have his own choice, if done by a Bishop, who should do it: But the
Archbishop will have the Power of a Pope or none; to put on and take off the
Crown from a King at his pleasure; so that unless well paid, if he please, the
King shall not be Crowned. And all this Imperious Pride p^oceeds from his
Imaginary Power of Excommunication, and the Profuse Bounty of Kings toward
Bishops; which does not oblige, but disoblige, and cause them to despise their
Benefactors, who have Raised them to Revenues equal, or Superior to their own^:
Of which a notable Example appears in Hubert, another Archbishop of
Canterbury, Anno Domini 1021. The Feast of the Nativity approaching, King John
and his Queen appointed to keep that Festival with great Magnificence at
Guilford; Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury being in disfavour of the King, to
show how little he regarded it, and to put an Affront on him, Published he
would keep a Ch^istmas of as great Magnificence as the King; and accordingly
performed it in his own Palace, with that Splendour and Multitude of Attendants,
Richness of Banquets, Pageantry, Costly Attires and Gifts at Canterbury, as the
King could not exceed him at Guilford. Matthew. Par. in Antiq. Eccl Angl. in vita
Huberti. Which very much Incensed the King to see himself purposely outbraved
by a Priest. Anno 1473. Edward the Fourth Seized on the Mitre of George Nevil
Archbishop of York, which was so Rich with Gold and Precious Stones, that the
King of the same made himself a Crown; and likewise he Seized on Twenty
Thousand ^ounds-worth more of his Money and Goods: A vast Sum in those Days,
Ant. Brit. Anno 1421. The King wanting Money for the French Wars, pawned the
Crown to the Bishop of Winchester for Twenty Thousand Pounds, Ant. Brit. So we
see the Bishops Head is as Richly Crowned as the Kings; and when a Bishop grows
so Rich a Broker besides, as to take Crowns to pawn, it may be then said in no
Disloyal sense, The Mitre is above the Crown; for the Borrower is a Servant to
the Lender. Which Excess of Riches, Insatiable Covetousness, High Titles,
Precedence of the Temporal Barons, and (till the same was altered by Act of
Parliament) Precedence of the Archbishop of Canterb^ry, of the Kings Brothers
themselves, Elevates Prelacy to so great a height of intolerable Pride, and
makes them so much overvalue their own Merits, as it is impossible to oblige
them by Benefits. Bishops perfidious to the English Kings.
Henry the Second Raised Becket from nothing, to be Chancellor of England, and
after to be Archbishop of Canterbury, and to have the Education of his Son;
yet as soon as he saw himself invested with the Power of Excommunication, he
moved all the other Bishops, being under the Oath of Canonical Obedience, to
him; and Threatened the King, that His Sword struck only with Temporal Death;
but that of Bishops struck the Soul with Eternal Death to Hell. The difference
between the King and the Bishop; was, the King would have it Ordained, That the
Clergymen who were Malefactors, should be Tried before the Secular Magistrate,
as Laymen were; this Becket Proudly opposed, and said it was against the
Privileges of the Church, and therefore against the Honor of God; and very high
and hot the Contentions were about it, till at last Becket condescended to
assent to the Ordinance Salvo Jure Suo; the King liked not the Clause, as being
delusive of the Ordinance; at last with much ado the Archbishop yields to this
also, and set his hand to the Ordinance, and takes his Oath to observe it: But
going homewards, his Cross bearer and some other about him, blamed him for what
he had done; whereupon the next day, when they met again, he openly Repented
his former Deed, Retracts his Subscription, and openly sent to the Pope for an
Absolution of his Oath. Which the Pope not only granted, but encouraged him to
persist in the Course he had begun. The King seeing his Perjury, and that there
was no prevailing by fair means, Seises on his Temporalities, and withal
Threatens a Proceeding against his Person. Becket thereupon flies the Realm,
and appeals to the Pope, and procures an Excommunication from the Pope, of such
Bishops as kept not their Oath of Canonical Obedience to him, who was their
Archbishop. The King of France Intercedes for Becket; and the Pope Threatened
Excommunication against the King himself, if he Restored him not. The King out
of a Superstitious Fear of his Excommunication (as appears by his Receiving
afterward the Servile Penance imposed on him for Becket's death) Restores
Becket again to his See of Canterbury; whither again arrived, he continued,
notwithstanding the favor of the Kings: Restoration, as bad as before; in
Prosecuting his Excommunications he had got at Rome against such Bishops as
sided with the King; of which when the Excommunicated Bishops complained to the
King, and moved thereby his Passion, He cried out, Shall I never be quiet for
this Priest? if I had any about me that loved me, they would find some way or
other to Rid me of this trouble. Whereupon Four Knights standing by, took their
Journey to find the Archbishop; whom they found at Church on the steps; where
they struck him on the Head with their Swords, and killed him; which though, in
the manner of doing, it was no way Justifiable, being without lawful Hearing
and Trial: Yet it is very manifest, that the Archbishop by the Common Law it
self, without the trouble of an Attainder by Parliament, might have been
proceeded against Legally by Indictment of High Treason: and he was manifestly
Guilty; for it was, by the Common Law, High Treason to appeal to a Foreign
Prince. And likewise, for any Subject to bring an Excommunication from Rome
against another Subject, without the Kings Assent, was Treason: for this was
the ready way to give the Pope Power to Raise Rebellions against the King when
he pleased. Bishops Traitors to King John.
The Bishops in the time of King John Conspired with the Pope and the French,
and the Temporal Barons, and the Pope laid an Interdiction or Excommunication
on the Kingdom for Six Years, Three Months, and Fourteen Days; during which,
the Church Doors were shut up, and there was neither Exercise of Religion,
Mass, Marriage, Baptism or Burial, allowed in the Church or Churchyard, 'till
the King would Surrender his Crown, and take the Kingdom from the Pope, and
hold it Feudatory from him; which the King was, by the Treachery of his Bishops
deserting him, compelled to do; and accordingly he took off the Crown from his
Head, and laid it at the Feet of Pandulphus the Popes Legate, the Pope to
dispose of it how he pleased; which he kept Three or Four Days from him, and
would not Restore again, but on condition agreed, That he and his Successors
should hold it of the Pope, and pay him for it the Yearly Tribute of a Thousand
Marks, which was a great Sum in those days, besides all the other Tributes and
Exactions which the Pope then had from the Subjects: but this the King was fain
to do, before the Excommunication would be taken off from him and his Kingdom;
which being done, and be perceiving himself clear from the Pope, Resolved to
Raise an Army and be Revenged on the French King, whose Pensions had set all
this on work against him; and accordingly had Levied a very great Army, having
his Fleet all ready at Portsmouth to have Shipped them. The Archbishop of
Canterbury thereupon told him, He broke his Oath to the Pope at his Absolution,
if he Warred against the French King; which in truth the Bishops had themselves
by their Treason compelled Him to. To whom the King Replied in a great Passion.
That he would not defer the Business for his pleasure, seeing Lay-Judgment
belonged not to him. The Archbishop Threatened his Native Sovereign he would
Excommunicate him, unless he desisted; and this was in behalf of a Foreign
Prince his Enemy: So far could French Pensions prevail with Prelates; whereby
the King to his great loss was enforced to Dissolve and Disband again his Army,
in the nick of Time when it was ready for Action.

Henry the Third, the Tempest of the Barons-Wars beginning to Threaten him, was
asked by Robert Bacon, a Friar Predicant, What Seamen feared most, that they
knew best themselves? The Friar Replied, My Lard, I will tell you, It is Petrae
and Rupes, alluding to Petrus de Rupibus, The name of the then Bishop of
Winchester, and under him meaning the whole Body of the Bishops.

Edward the First, that wise and valiant Prince, disdaining to be
Priest-Ridden, as his two Predecessors had been, to so great danger of their
Persons and Kingdoms; and taught by their Experience, that it was in vain to
think of obliging by Benefits or Oath the Power of those who being a Body
United, and as it were an Army more firmly Banded under their Archbishop, than
'twas possible to make the Lay-Nobility to be under their King, he began first
to Lop off from their Ecclesiastical Auxiliaries, such Branches of Royal Power
as he could do himself without a Parliament; and Anno Reg. 6. Deprived many
famous Monasteries of England of their Privileges, and took from the Abbot and
Covent of Westminster the Return of Writs, granted them by the Charter of Henry
the third. And after he got to be Inacted by Parliament the Statute of
Mortmaine against the so enormous Increase of their Temporal Possessions, which
was so detrimental to the Military Service of the Kingdom: and in the Statute
of Westminster 2. defalked the Jurisdiction of Bishops and Ecclesiastical
Judges: He left not here; but growing more upon them, he Required the Moiety of
all their Goods, as well Spiritual as Temporal, for one year (and I think their
money and movables could grow no more the next year which he took in one year)
And at the first one Sr. John Knight, stands up amongst them in their assembly,
and said, Reverend Fathers, if any here will Contradict the King's Demand in
this Business, let him stand out in the midest of this Assembly, that his
person may be known and seen as one Guilty of the Breach of the King's Peace.
At which speech they all sat mute, and though it put them into Extreme grief
and perplexity, they yet were fain to yield to his demand. Dan. Hist. Which if
he had been possessed with a dastardly fear of Excommunication, he had no more
dared to do, than his Predecessors. Yet some say, to be able to deal with his
own Bishops, he was fain to send the Pope a Furnish of gold for his Chamber to
have his Connivence.

Edward the second Anno Regni 17 after the Overthrow he Received by the
Treachery of his own in Scotland, Bishops Traitors to E. 2.
Caused the Bishop of Hereford to be Arrested and Accused of High treason, for
aiding the Kings Enemies in their Late Rebellion: but he Refused to Answer
(being a Consecrated Bishop) without leave of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
whose Suffragan he was, and who, he said, was his direct Judge next the Pope,
and without Consent of his fellow-Bishops, who then all arose and humbly
desired the Kings Clemency in his behalf; but finding him Resolute, they took
away their fellow-Bishop from the Bar, and delivered him to the Custody of the
Archbishop of Canterbury till some other time the King should appoint for his
answer to what he was charged withal. Shortly after he was again taken and
Converted as before; which the Clergy understanding, The Bishops rescue a
Traitor-Bishop from the Bar of Justice.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, York, and Dublin, and Ten other Bishops, all
with their Crosses erected, went to the place of Judgment, and again took him
away with them, Charging all men on pain of Excommunication to forbear to lay
violent hands on him: with which audacious Act the King was much displeased,
and presently Commanded inquiry to be made Ex officio Judicis Concerning those
objections against the Bishop, whereto he Refused to appear and answer; and he
being found Guilty of the same, Judgment was passed against him as
Contumaciously absent, and thereupon all his Goods and Possessions were seized
into the Kings hands; this Act Lost him the Clergy, and added Power to the
Discontented Party; which by Reason of the misfortunes of the Prince, and his
having advanced unpopular officers, As Gaveston and Spencer were grown in the
people, and Concurred to his after Deposeing from the Throne, and horrible
Murder when Deposed. Hence may be very well observed, in what a sad Condition a
Prince is, who must Depend on the Protection of Bishops and their
Excommunications; And how shamelesly notwithstanding they will boast, that no
Bishop, no King. For here are France and Scotland Confederated against the
Kingdom; the King is valiant, but young and unexperiensed; his Bishops and
Barons are Corrupted against him by French Pensions, and cause the Overthrow of
his Army; he discovers one of the Bishops guilty of the Treason, and had he not
been Rescued by the other Traytor-Bishops his Companions, he might perhaps have
discovered the whole Plot and all his Accomplices. The King very Justly Sentences
him both as Mute, and Contumaciously absent, and seises on his Estate as
forfeit. What more Just proceeding than this? here is no condemning without
Liberty of Answer and Hearing; yet this must lose the King all the Archbishops
and Bishops in England and Ireland, and all the Clergy of both Kingdoms who
received Ordination from them; And they will no longer be his subjects, unless
he will allow them to betray and sell him to his Enemies, and not Punish or
question the Treason. But all concur to irritate the Temporal Barons, the
people and his own Traiterous Queen to depose and destroy him; And the Bishop
of Hereford Preaching before her, took this Text My Head aketh, my Head aketh;
and thence draws this wicked Doctrine and Use to a wife, that she must cut off
her Husbands Head who was her Head; and when after the King was deposed, and
his son chosen, the Archbishop of Canterbury Preached in Westminster Hall on
this Text, Vox Populi, Vox Dei, to encourage the people in the Treason, which
was after perfected by his horrible murder in Prison. The next Consideration
will be, how this might have been prevented by his Renowned Father, who was of
such Wisdom, Vigilance and Valor, as neither Gaveston nor Spencer nor Bishops
Dared to abuse; if he had suspected they would have practiced such Treachery
against the younger years of his son. Concerning which, it seems he was able
and might have easily prevented it, had he not Committed two oversights, the
one was, That he only Banished Gaveston, and had not cut off his head if he had
deserved it; for as soon as he was dead, Gaveston returned again, and corrupting
the young King, was the first occasion his Enemies made Use of to cast the
vices and misgovernments of his Favorites on himself. It may be here objected,
That perhaps though Gaveston was a wicked vicious person, yet he might not be
Guilty of any Crime for which he might be lawfully put to death. To which is
answered, That it possibly might be so, though it be not likely; And if he were
not Guilty of such a Crime, he ought not to have been put to Death: for a
Throne cannot be Established by shedding Innocent Blood. But neither he nor his
son needed to have been Guilty of it; for his son needed not have sent for him
Contrary to his Fathers Command; and though he incurred that fault, the Lords
cut ^ff his Head, who must answer for it, and freed him from the Guilt and
danger of him. The second oversight was of more weight, that was, When he made
an Act against Mortmain for the future, he had not taken away, as H. 8. after
did, all that was before Mortmained. And when he took the Moiety of the
Reverend Fathers Money and Goods, he had not taken all; and when he Lopt the
Branches of Privileges and Jurisdictions of Bishops and other Ecclesiastics,
he had not took both Root and Branch: For it is as lawful to take present
Mortmaines, as it is to prohibit Future. And if lawful to take the Moiety, it
was lawful to take the Whole: And if lawful to take the Branches, it was as
lawful to take the Root of Hierarchy; which if he had done, This clear Benefit
he had Received by it, he had left his son secure from any Spiritual French
Pensioners, who are the most Dangerous sort of all other; And the Temporal
Barons could not have had without them so great and specious advantages to have
Betrayed him. (2) He had freed him from such Audacious Traitors as would Rescue
their fellows from the Bar of Justice; which Temporal Barons never dared do
(3) He had f^eed all his successors who should happen to be superstitious, from
having Rebellions raised against them, and themselves Deposed by
Excommunication, by abolishing Bishops and their ordination; which had been an
advantage, none of his neighbor Emperors or Kings could hitherto ever obtain;
nor if Bishops had been taken away, Episcopal or Ecclesiastical Government by
halves; though it was sufficient to abate their Power as to himself, it was
worse for his Son, than if he had done nothing at all; for he thereby left
Bishops and a Clergy full of Rancour in their minds for those blows they had
been beaten with by the Father; which though they dare not revenge themselves
on him, yet did they on his Son to his destruction: and though there never had
been a Gaveston or a Spencer, would have found other pretenses enough for their
Treasons; which they could not have done, had he clean abolished them and not
left a See for a Bishop to fit in.

Archbishop threatens to Excommunicate Edw. 3.
Edward the Third being with his Army in France, and disappointed of his Supply
of Treasure, upon his last Return into England had in great displeasure Removed
his Chancellor, and Imprisoned his Treasurer, with other Officers, most of them
Clergy men. John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, on whom the King likewise
laid the blame of his Wants, writes a proud Letter to the King, and desired him
and his Council without delay to deliver the said Prisoners, otherwise he
plainly writes, That according to his Pastoral Charge he must proceed to the
Execution of the Sentence of Excommunication; concluding, how notwithstanding
it was not his Intention to include the King, Queen, or their Children, so far
as by Law they might be Excused. It was well for the King he was in the head of
a brave Army in France, for if he had been single as his Father was, they who
durst Menace him amongst all his Forces in the Field, if he had lost the Day,
as his Father did, were as likely to bring him (for a French Pension) to as
miserable a destruction, as they brought his Father; but by Gods Providence he
proved afterward Victorious, but first Replied by another Letter to the
Archbishop, That Relying on his Council, he was first put on the Action of the
French, and that he had promised and assured him he should not want Treasure to
perform the work; and that notwithstanding by the negligence and malice of the
said Archbishop and his Officials, those Provisions Granted him by his
Subjects in Parliament, were in so slender proportion Levied, and with such
delays sent over, as he was pressed of necessity to his great Grief and Shame
to Condescend to the late Truce with the French, though extreme Wants charged
with mighty Debts, forced him to throw himself into the Gulf of the Usurers in
such sort, as he began to look into the Dealing of his Officers; some of which,
upon apparent notice of their ill Administration of Justice, their Corruptions
and Oppressions of his Subjects, he removed from their Places: and others of
mean Degree he Committed to Prison, and there detained them, to the end he
might find out by their Examinations, the truth of their Proceedings. Then he
charges the Archbishop with his own Corruption, and declares how himself being
under Age, had through his ill Council made so many Prodigal Donatives,
prohibited Alienations and excessive Grants and Gifts, that thereby his
Treasury was utterly Exhausted, and his Revenues diminished; and how the
Archbishop corrupted with Bribes, Remitted without reasonable cause great Sums
which were due unto him; applying to his own Use, or Persons ill deserving,
many Commodities and Revenues which should have been preserved for his
necessary Provisions; and concluded, Unless he desisted from his Rebellious
obstinacy, he intended in due time and place more openly to proceed against
him: and the King, before the Archbishop Submitted, caused a Letter to be sent
to the Pope from the Parliament, not to make any more Collations of Benefices
in England, and prohibited them on pain of Death on any that should present or
admit them: which Resolute slighting of Excommunication, both from Archbishop
and Pope, though in the very time of War with France, made the Pride of the
Archbishop stoop, and with much ado got himself Reconciled to the Kings
favor; for which the King was bound to thank God and not the Pope or Bishop,
who gave him that Victory and Success against the French, as neither Pope or
Archbishop dared to Excommunicate him.

Against Richard the Second, one of the Articles brought against him; to have
him deposed, was, That whereas the Realm is immediately holden of God, after he
had obtained diverse Acts for his own particular Ends, he obtained Bulls and
heavy Censures from Rome to observe and perform them, contrary to the Honor
and ancient Privilege of this Kingdom; whereby appears, That even in a time of
Popery the Assistance of the Pope and Bishops which were included in it, was so
far from being a Protection to the King, that it was Destructive to him; much
more is the Assistance of Bishops likely to be Destructive, rather than a
Safety in a time of Protestancy. The Bishop likewise Concurred with the rest,
and accused him, That he had taken Money, Jewels and Plate from them at his
going into Ireland; Bishops accuse R. 2. for Trifles, to Depose him.
so far were they from seeking to preserve the Kings Life with those
Superfluities of theirs, where they could keep them and their Bishoprics
together, that they showed their Fidelity to their Native King, by endeavoring
to destroy him. For such Trifles diverse other Articles were laid against him in
behalf of the Bishops, by whose doing only the King was utterly undone. Truss.
46. And not one of all the Bishops in England or Ireland spoke so much as one
word to preserve their Native Sovereigns Life, but only one, namely, Thomas
Mercks Bishop of Carlisle.

Dilemma of danger from Excommunication.
As to the Dilemma a Prince falls under in expecting safety of Government from
the Power of Excommunication of Popes or Bishops, either the greater part of
his Subjects will be Religious, or Superstitious; if Religious, they will so
easily see through the Superstition of Consecration and Excommunication, as it
will rather Irritate and Provoke them, as it did in the late unhappy Civil
Wars; but if Superstitious, will the Pope or Bishop make Use of the great
Interest and Strength they gain thereby in the People, to advance their
pretended Spiritual Sword above the Temporal, and their own Supremacy above
Temporal Kings and Princes, which if Resisted by the Princes of such Subjects,
hazards their being Deposed, and losing Kingdoms and Lives together, as appears
by the Examples before Recited. In the same danger is a Prince who Trusts a
Temporal Officer, whether Treasurer or other, with too much Power of Money; as
Theocritus, Anno 518. caused Amantius an Eunuch to give Justin, Amantius.
the General of the Army, a great Sum of Money to give the Soldiers, to choose
Theocritus Emperor; but Justin distributed it for himself, and so obtained
himself the Empire. The Western Emperors first raised the Popes to that
height, as to Excommunicate the Eastern Emperors; the succeeding Popes to
return their Advancers due thanks, Excommunicated, after, the Western Emperor.
The French Kings assisted, and after raised the Popes to such height, that they
Excommunicated, Deposed and Poisoned the Western Emperor; after, by the same
Power the French King gave them, in thanks they Excommunicated and Assassinated
the French Kings. The Princes of Sicily and Naples had been mighty defendors of
the Papacy, but when they had made it mightier than themselves, the Succeeding
Popes took from them their Sovereignty, to themselves.

As to the Impossibility of Safety of Princes amongst Subjects, Educated in
fear of Excommunication.
Subjects Educated in fear of Excommunication, dangerous to Princes.
It is to be Noted as well from the Testimony of approved Authors, as from the
Scripture it self, that amongst the Primitive Christians, those who are now
called Bishops, but in the Original word signify only Overseers, were
Parochial Bishops or Overseers, and not Provincial, and that they were the same
with Presbyters, and differed not in Authority from them, and that they were
chosen and called by their several Congregations, or, what is all one, Cities
or Parishes, and not by the Emperor or Prince, till Constantine to corrupt them
(under pretense of prevention of Schisms and Heresies, which he thereby
increased) took away the free Election of the People of their Pastors, which
they had always before enjoyed, to make them Pensioners, and the Christians
Mercenaries, to Fight all their Quarrels Right or Wrong. That Presbyters were
only Parochial and not Provincial, is not doubted; That Bishops were all one
with Presbyters, and therefore were Parochial and not Provincial, A Bishop and
a Presbyter all one.
is proved, first, by the Authority of Jerome, who says, ad Tit. Cap. 1. That
a Bishop and Presbyter was all one. And that it may not depend solely on humane
Authority, this is proved by the words of Paul to the Philippians, Chap. 1. 1.
Paul and Timotheus the Servants of Jesus Christ, to all the Saints in Christ
Jesus, which are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons: Grace be unto you,
and Peace. Now Philippi is one of the Cities of Macedonia, and in one City
there could not be many Bishops, unless they were Parochial, and not Diocesan
or Provincial, and the same the Presbyters were, Acts 20.17. It is said, Paul
from Miletum sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church, and verse
27. he says to them, For I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole
Counsel of God. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock,
over the which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own Blood. For I know this, that after my
Departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. Here
appears that the same Persons whom Paul first ( verse 17.) calls, Elders,
Presbyters of Ephesus, he after in the same Chapter ( verse 27.) calls Bishops
or Overseers. And 1 Pet. 5.1. The Elders which are among you I Exhort, who am
also an Elder, and a Witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker
of the Glory which shall be revealed. Feed the Flock of God, taking the
oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy Lucre, but
of a ready mind: Neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being Examples
to the Flock From which Scripture appears,

(1.) That the great Apostle Peter himself, from whom the Bishop of Rome
pretends his Succession to Imperial Supremacy, Bishops ought not to be Lords.
calls himself no more than an Elder or Presbyter, and that he had other
Co-presbyters with him.

(2.) That these Presbyters who are now called Bishops, ought not to be Lord
Bishops; for the words are, they are not to be Lords of Gods Heritage. In one
Chapter of Mahomets, it is forbidden to all Persons of what Quality soever, to
call themselves in any sort Lords, except the great Caliph or great Bishop the
Successor of Mahomet, who at the first was the only Lordly Monarch, and Lord of
all, giving unto Kings and Princes their Principalities and Kingdoms, during
pleasure, until that the Ottoman Princes, the Cundes, and the Kings of the
higher part of Asia and Africa, by little and little Exempted themselves out of
their Power, by Reason of the Division between them and the Anti-Caliphs. Bod.
203.

(3.) That they ought not to have Temporal Baronies; for they are not to take
charge of Souls for filthy Lucre, but of ready mind.

(4.) That they ought neither to Counterfeit a Nolo Episcopare when they take
Baronies, nor to Refuse the Charge of Souls when they have none, for the words
are, not by constraint, but willingly.

Cranmer, That Bishops were Presbyters, and chosen by the Parish.
And it is likewise acknowledged by that Pious Protestant Martyr, Archbishop
Cranmer, though he were a Provincial, and chosen by the King himself, yet, That
amongst the Primitive Christians, the Bishops were chosen by the Congregations,
and were all one with Presbyters. From all which Premises these Sequels follow:

(1.) That if a Bishop were chosen by his City or Parish, he came not in Jure
Divino, but by human Election, and was only a Servant, and not a Lord, of the
City or Parish.

(2.) That he had no Sign of Mission from God, unless he had a Gift of Miracles.

(3.) That he could not Excommunicate any of his own Parish, for the Inferior
cannot Excommunicate the Superior, and Electors are Superiors to Persons
Elected, and the Host is Superior in his own House to the Guest, and he who
gives the Pension, to the Pensioner.

Bishops cannot Excommunicate.
(4.) That a Bishop Elected by the People, cannot on Excommunication deliver any
Person to Satan, without the Gift of Miracles as a Sign of Mission, for Nemo
potest plus Juris ad alium Transfer quam ipse habet, the Electors themselves
had no Power to deliver to Satan, therefore Bishops Elected by them cannot
without Miracle.

(5.) Though he has the Power of Miracles to deliver the Body to Satan, he
cannot deliver the Soul, nor can he have any Sign of Mission to do the same;
for that is a Prerogative inseparable from the Person of God to send the Soul
to Heaven or Hell, and Inter insignia imperii, which cannot be Delegated.

(6.) That as a Bishop cannot Excommunicate a Citizen or Parishioner who
Elected him, so, he can much less Excommunicate a King, or Interdict a Kingdom,
who if he had any Jurisdiction at all, can be no greater than within the Petty
Bounds of his City or Parish, and cannot extend to Empires or Kingdoms.

(7.) That he can give no Consecration or Ordination to a Bishop or Priest, for
where the Office ought to go by Election of the People, it cannot go by
Ordination of the Bishop; and where it goes by human Election, it cannot go by
Consecration, and after the Gift of Miracles ceased, both the Election by
Missioners from God, and Consecration and Ordination likewise ceased.

Subjects free from Superstition, the safety of the Prince.
(8.) That it is a great Safety to Princes to have their Subjects well Educated
and Instructed against the Superstition and Popery of Consecration, Ordination
and Excommunication of Bishops and Priests, for by this only means we see the
Grand Seignior, though he Tolerates a multitude of Sects and Religions in his
Empire, yet he is endangered by none, because all Mahumetan Priests are chosen
by the Parish, and though they are in great Reverence of the People, yet they
have neither Consecration nor Ordination, but continue as perfect Laymen as
our Ordinary Clerks of our Parishes; and much less have they Power of
Excommunication or Absolution, but Preach, That those that Fight Valiantly and
Die in the Field for their Prince and Prophet, go to Paradise; and who sly
Cowardly, go to Hell; whereby none of his People are Educated in the
Superstition of Pontifical Excommunication, and therefore fear it not, but
deride it. And for the Greck Patriarchs and Bishops, they dare not
Excommunicate an Emperor of such a People who Contemn their Excommunication,
and would Revenge it on themselves, if they should presume to make a vain noise
with it. Christ commands Wisdom to be learnt of the Serpent, and the experience
of all Ages witnesses to whosoever will but consult Histories, That there was
never any Prince Gentile or Jew, Mahumetan or Christian, who admitted near his
Throne Episcopal or Pontifical Consecration, Ordination or Excommunication,
could that remain, He or his Posterity secure, or not Ruined or Plagued by
those Devils Transformed, which he Superstitiously or Impudently had Raised
against himself, or them; as may sufficiently appoar by the Examples before
Recited.

Presbyters independent.
Lastly, (9.) If Parochial Bishops and Presbyters were Elected by the
Congregations or several Parishes, these were Independents in the Primitive
Christians time, and no Prelacy was amongst them; for though the Cities or
Parishes in greatness might exceed one another in greatness and in Precedence,
yet the Presbyters Elected were as Independent one of another, as Members of
Parliament Elected from great and small Shires.

As to the Impossibility of obliging Bishops by Oath.
Bishops not to be obliged by Oath.
It is impossible to oblige those by Oaths who claim to be Judges of Oaths and
Perjury, as all Bishops do, and their Spiritual Courts; for how many and easy
pretenses will they find to Evade and Nullify them? sometimes a Part Ante,
Force or Circumvention; sometimes matter Ex post Facto, that though at first
Law, yet by new matters since arising, the same is became unlawful to be kept.
So, grant a Bishop the Jurisdiction of Perjury, he will never Judge himself
guilty of it, nor any Subject who breaks his Oath of Allegiance to the King, in
obedience to the Bishop; and the rather, because he is not bound to show any
Cause or Reason of his Judgment; neither as Coke will have it to be questioned,
in the Kings Courts, of what he has the Jurisdiction, 25. H. 8. Cap. 19. The
Clergy Promise the King in verho sacerdotii that they will never her ceforth
Praesume to attempt allege claim or put in ure, enact, promulge or execute
any Canons Constitutions Ordinance Provincial, or other, or by whatsoever
other name they shall be called in the Convocation, unless the Kings most Royal
assent may be to them had, and that his Majesty do give his most Royal assent;
so it appears they used to make them before, presuming on their Power of
Excommunication; yet when Queen Mary came in, they were as high again as ever,
notwithstanding their Promises.

Holy water to wash off Oaths.
There was a water which Ran in the way Appia, dedicated to Mercury, wherein the
old Pagan Romans did believe, if they dipped a Laurel Branch, therewith
calling on Mercury, That they were discharged thereby from any breach of Oath
and Perjury they had Committed, Alex ab Alexandr. Genial. Dier. The Popes have
store of this Holy Water, and no doubt can spare some to the Bishops, as well
as Holy Oil. Guiccuardin. Com. de Pol. Relates a then in use Proverb, Proprium
esse Ecclesiae odisse et timere Caesares; Ecclesiastical Laws and
Excommunications therefore, made by such Enemies, are not likely to be friends
to Kings or subjects. Bishops are Ecclesiastical Persons Aiming at a supremacy
in Judgment of Heresy, in Judgment of Oaths, in Excommunication, all
inconsistent with Temporal Supremacy, as is their Interest, which has always
made them perfidious to Temporal Powers. Popes perjured.
The French King besieged Pope Alexander the Sixth in his Castle of St Angelo,
from whence after a time he came out swearing to such capitulations as he could
obtain, and the French King kissing his foot: Amongst other Articles he agreed
the French King should have his Son Caesar Hostage for the Performance, but not
long after, Caesar making an Escape, his Father the Pope, contrary to his Oath
contracted a League Contrary to the French, to their great Prejudice, and it
was the Custom of that Pope to use most Oaths when he intended most to deceive.

Pope Julius the second had obliged himself by Oath, to have a General Council
within two years after his Election to the Popedom, but this being not
performed, Maximillian the Emperor and Jews the French King Convened a Synod
at Pisa, whither some Cardinals under protection of the French King caused the
Pope to be summoned to make his appearance, but the Pope instead thereof
Excommunicated them and the French King, and called an Anti-Synod at Rome, to
whom he Excuses his Oath, and Dies, but how he Excused it after he was Dead the
Historian does not mention. Anno. 1414. In the Council of Constance convened by
Sigismond the Emperor and Pope John the Third, Consisting of about a Thousand
Bishops and Doctors, and Continued four years, yet amongst so many Bishops Vix
una Fides; Bishops perjured.
for though these declared that the Council was above the Pope, yet they
Resolved to be as perfidious to Protestants as he, and accordingly there
ordained, That faith ought not to be kept with Heretics: Here they ordered the
bones of John Wickliff that famous Primitive Protestant of England, to be
dug out of his Sepulcher and burnt at this Council: likewise was John Hus
and Jerome of Prague contrary to the safe conduct and faith given them by the
Emperor and Bishops, Perfidiously and Cruelly made Martyrs; and burnt for the
Protestant Religion. Here you see were a thousand Bishops, yet none kept the
Promise of safe conduct. Burchard Archbishop of Magdeburg taking some offense
at his Citizens besieged them with Armed Power, but they Redeemed their liberty
with a sum of money, he thereupon Swearing he would molest them no more: yet
shortly after, he besieged them again; but this Perjury was justly met with,
for in a Sally they took him Prisoner, at which time by his humble Demeanor,
and counterfeit Oaths never to molest them more, They Released him; but when he
was at Liberty, getting a Despensation for his Oath from Pope John the 23d, he
began to molest them again, Murdering them whom he had sworn to Maintain. But
it was Gods will he should be once again caught and cast into Prison, and
Punished for his wickedness, Magdeb. Cent. And did not the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Becket, as well as Burchard Archbishop of Magdeburg as is before
mentioned, commit as great a Perjury against his native King, Henry the second,
after all the Labor and pains taken with him, both by fair and foul means to
bring him to Agreement, as soon as he Recovered home to his House, by Retracting
his Oath and getting an absolution from the Pope for the same?

Bishops compel H. 2. to accept the Kingdom on their Terms, or not to have it.
By the Pretended Power of Consecration, Ordination, and Excommunication Popes
and Bishops Pretend a Divine Mission to Anoint and Crown Kings, and then again
to Excommunicate and Depose them all, to Null all Oaths of allegiance unless
they will buy their Crowns of them and pay Tribute. There is in our own
English History a Manifest Example of the same, in that noble King Henry the
second, who Complains to his Parliament against the Bishops and the whole
Clergy, That in their Election of King Stephen his Predecessor, who was a
Collateral Heir, they had imposed on him their own Conditions, with all
advantages to themselves, whereby they Deprived his Mother Maud the Empress,
and him who was her issue and the right Lineal Heir, of the Succession to the
Crown. And how they dealt with the People, as well as with the King, appears by
the Complaint of the Lay-Nobility to the King at the same time, That the
Privileges of the Clergy hindered all Execution of Justice, that the same could
have no Passage through the Kingdom; and having Exempted themselves from the
Jurisdiction of the Magistrate, there had been since the beginning of his
Reign, above an Hundred Man-slaughters Committed within the Realm of England by
Priests, and men within Holy Orders, Dan. Hist. 83. Such were the Fruits of
Bishops and persons within Holy Orders, and the three fine Knacks of
Consecration, Ordination and Excommunication, wherewith they both Allured and
Terrified the Superstitious People. And such were the fruits of their pretended
Divine Mission with the Olive Branch of Peace, for tho Unction and Crowning of
Kings; who confected their Ointment of the Ingredients mentioned in Psalm.
55.21. The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but War was in his
heart; his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords.

(1.) Of Gods Preservation of John Keysar, notwithstanding his.
Excommunication, and Delivery to Satan by an Archbishop of Canterbury. (2.) Of
Delivery to Satan by Bishops, and their Prohibition to cast him out again by
Fasting and Prayer, without the Bishops License. (3.) All Excommunication and
delivery to Satan by Bishops, without a Sign of Mission from God, if Malefice
follow, ought to be Punished as Witchcraft, if not as a Cheat. (4.) To grant a
Bishop Power of Excommunication, is to grant him Power to set up Idolatry; to
make all Sins equal, to Pardon all Sins for Money.
Coke part 3.42. Ex Mich. 5. E. 4. Rot. 143. Coram Rege.

Keysar delivered to Satan, protected by God.
John Keysar was Excommunicated by the greater Excommunication, before Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Legate of the Aposto lick See, at the Suit of
another, for a reasonable part of Goods, and so Remained Eight Months; and the
said Keysar openly affirmed, That the said Sentence was not to be feared,
neither did he fear it; and albeit the Archbishop or his Commissary has
Excommunicated me, yet, before God I am not Excommunicated; And he said he
spoke nothing but the Truth. And so it appeared, for that the last Harvest
standing so Excommunicate, he had as great plenty of Wheat and other Grain as
any of his Neighbors, saying to them in scorn, That a man Excommunicate should
not have such Plenty of Wheat; the Arch Bishop (denying these words to be
within the Statute of H. 4. concerning Lollards, who were the Primitive
Protestants and Protomartyrs of England) did by his Warrant in writing,
comprehending the said Cause by Pretext of the said Statute, Commit the Body of
the said Keysar to the Gaol at Maidstone, for that, says he, in respect of
publishing the said words, Dictum Johannem non immerito habemus de Haeresi
suspectum; by reason whereof, the said John Keysar was Imprisoned in Maidstone
Gaol, and in Prison detained under Custody of the Keeper there, until by his
Council he moved Sir John Markham, then Chief Justice Justice of England, and
other the Judges of the King's Bench, to have an Habeas Corpus, and thereupon
(as it ought) a Habeas Corpus was granted, upon which Writ the Jailer Returned
the Cause and Special Matter, and withal, according to the Writ, had his Body
there. The Court upon mature Consideration (and on Conference with Divines)
Resolved, That upon the said words Keysar was not to be Suspect of Heresy
within the said Statute, as the Archbishop took it; and therefore the Court
first Bailed him, and after, he was delivered, for that the said Archbishop
had no Power, by virtue of the said Act, to Commit to Prison. John Keysar
hereby proved the Archbishop to be no Incantor Messium, but he thereby proved,
though he was no Witch, yet he was a Cheat.

Prohibition to cast out the Devil by Fasting and Prayer.
In the Book of Canons newly Printed, 1673. the Canon 72. contains these words:
No Minister or Ministers shall, without the License and Direction of the Bishop
of the Diocese first had and obtained under his Hand and Seal, attempt upon any
pretense whatsoever, either of Possession or Obsession by Fasting and Prayer,
to cast out any Devil or Devils, under pain of Imputation of Imposture or
Cozenage, and Deposition from the Ministry. The Bishops in prohibiting to cast
out the Devil without their License, imitate something the Popish Exorcists,
part of whose Exorcism, is, according to Mengus Flagell. Demon. p. 36. The
Exorcist ties a Stole about the Neck of the Party with three knots, saying, Oh
ye Abominable and Rebellious Spirits, I Adjure, Conjure and Compel you,
wheresoever you have your Residence in this man, by the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, that ye immediately understand the words of my Conjuration,
and the virtue of it, and that ye dare not depart from the Creature of God, and
Image of Christ, without my License. This is not only Anti-Protestant, and the
way to bring in all the Popish Magic and Exorcisms into the Church; but is
Antichristian, for Christ himself affirms, There is no holier or higher way of
casting out the Devil than by Fasting and Prayer, as appears, Matthew. 17.14. And
when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man kneeling
down to him, and saying, Lord have mercy on my Son, for he is Lunatic, and
sore vexed, for oft-times he falls into the fire, and often into the water. And
I brought him to thy Disciples, and they could not cure him. And verse 18. And
Jesus rebuked the Devil, and he departed out of him: and the Child was cured
from that very hour. Then came the Disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why
could not we cast him out? And Jesus said unto them, Because of your Unbelief:
for verily I say unto you, if ye have Faith, as a grain of Mustard Seed, ye
shall say unto this Mountain, Remove hence unto yonder place, and it shall
remove: and nothing shall be impossible unto you. Howbeit this kind goes not
out but by Prayer and Fasting. Christ agian will not suffer the Disciples to
prohibit any to cast out the Devil, as Mark 9.38. And John answered him,
saying, Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy Name, and we forbad him,
because he followed not us. But Jesus said, Forbid him not for there is no man
that shall do a Miracle in my Name, that can lightly speak Evil of me. For he
that is not against us, is on our part. The Bishops Canon appears therefore
clean contrary to the Example and Precept of Christ.

It is before mentioned, how the Bodies of Dead Persons in their Graves are by
some believed to be Revived and Tormented by the Devil; and how Locusts, Flies
and Fishes have been struck with this Thunderbolt of Excommunication. There is
no Good man dare Torment or Destroy by the help of any Invisible Spirit, nor
will, nor ought any good Magistrate suffer them, without a Sign of Mission from
God, above the Power of his Temporal Sword; for all Magicians and Witches would
then Act their Mischiefs under pretense that they do it by the Spirit of God;
and that their Excommunication is the Curse of God. If therefore any Malefice
follow without a Sign of Mission, whereby they had a Warrant to Curse, the
Magistrate Sign of Mission, whereby they had a Warrant to Curse, the Magistrate
ought to punish them for Witchcraft, or all Laws against Witchcraft must be
Repealed, and the Devil let loose, by his Instruments the Witches, to do what
mischief he pleases, and no Judge presume to punish a Witch, if he only say,
What he did was done by the Spirit of God. It is impossible to distinguish
invisible Spirits, or to try the Spirit, whether God or the Devil, but by
visible Sign; if the hurt be done therefore by any Person, by assistance of a
Spirit, unless he show a Sign, he ought, by the standing Laws and Acts of
Parliament, to be punished for Witchcraft; and if he pretend to have a Mission
from the Spirit of God, and has none, he ought to be punished for a Cheat. And
under the same Dilemma fall the Authors and Executors of the before mentioned
Canon, prohibiting Ministers to cast out the Devil by Fasting, and must be
guilty either of Withcraft or a Cheat, if they cannot show a Sign of Mission to
make such a prohibition, and to give such a License as their Canon imports,
though they impute the same to the Ministers who Fast and Pray, when they do
not.

Excommunication makes all Sins equal.
Excommunication, as it came from Pagans, so it sets up again that old Pagan
Doctrine of the Stoics, Omnia Peccata esse Equalia. Excommunication for Two
Pence.
There was a Poor man who used to go to Labor for Sixpence a Day, he lived in
a Parish where the Custom was, The Clerk was to have a Penny every Year of
every House-holder, and being very Poor, rather needing to receive Alms, than
to pay Rates, he thought he might have been on that Cause excused, whereby this
Penny was neglected to be paid for two Years following, which amounted to the
Sum of Two Pence, for which he was Sued in the Bishops Court, and
Excommunicated; and he would often complain, that he could not recover his
Estate till he had given the Court Eighteen-pence. See the Piety of an
Excommunicator, he would, if he had had Power, have sold the Poor man's Soul to
the Devil for Two Pence, if he could not get some Money to redeem it.

Excommunication Pardons all Sin for Money.
Excommunication is done to no other end, than to drive them to buy Absolution,
which enticeth and encourages all kind of Uncleanness, and other Wickedness.

Excommunication sets up Idolatry.
Pope Gregory the Second, Idolatry.
Excommunicated and Deposed the Greek Emperor Leo Isaurus, because he made a
Law against Images, and Nicknamed him Iconomachus, or the Fighter with Images.

Excommunication and Power to Judge of Heresy, returns all to Popery and
Priest-riding.
Thus Excommunicators follow the Precedent of the old Pagan Priests of Mars,
whom they called (...) or the Fire-bearers, who having Solemnly performed their
Rites and Ceremonies of Cursing, Execration or Excommunication (as Balak would
have had Balaam to have done) used, before the Battle joined, to cast
Firebrarnds between the two Enemy-Armies, standing in Battle Array one against
another, and so stirred them up to fight, but they themselves yet retired out
of the medly and danger.

1. This gives the Popish Priest, that main Pillar of the Popish Empire, the
Jurisdiction of Marriage, Filiation, Aliment, and Succession, and the Arbitrary
disposing of the same, both in Kingdoms and Private Patrimonies.

2. This gives him the Power of setting up Images, as appears in the forecited
Example of the Emperor Leo Isaurus Excommunicated and Deposed, because he
forbad Images.

3. This gives him Power to Asassinate Kings, of which are a multitude of
Examples.

4. This gives him a Power of Confiscating Kingdoms, and Selling them to others.

5. This gives him Power to Confiscate and Imprison Arbitrarily the Subjects by
Excommunicato Capiendo's, as is before declared.

6. This gives him Power of taking from the People the free Election of their
Parochial Ministers, and imposing on them the Popish Sacrament, of Orders and
Ordination, contrary to the Law of God.

7. This gives him Power to compel Confession of Sins to be made to the
Priest, which ought only to be made to God, the Magistrate, and the Brother
injured.

8. This gives him Power to impose Penance and Corporal punishment; which ought
only to be done by the Magistrate, (1.) Because the Magistrate should else bear
the Sword in vain. (2.) Because it is unjust the Magistrate should penance or
punish once, and the Priest punish again for the same Sin; for, Nemo debet bis
puniri pro eodem delicio.

9. This gives him Power of imposing what Commutation-Money and Arbitrary Fine
he pleases, which is a Subversion of all Propriety in Goods.

10. This gives him Power to sell Absolutions and Pardons of Sins, and compel
the same to be taken from the Priest, which ought only to be taken from God,
the Magistrate, and the Brother injured, for unumquod que dissolvitur eodem
modo quo conflatum est, none can pardon an Offense against a Law, but a
Legislator; none can release a Trespass, but the Party against whom the Trespass
is committed.

11. This not only gives him Power, by Pardon to Null the Laws of God and Men,
and the Penalties of the same, but to Enact Arbitrarily new Laws and Penalties
contrary and Superior to the Law of God, viz. Ceremonial Laws made by the
Priest, contrary and Superior to the Moral Law made by God.

12. This Impowers him to Usurp the Throne of God himself, in the Soul and
Conscience of man, wherein none ought to be Judge but God himself.

Excommunication without a Sign of Mission, not Instituted by Christ, but
invented by Pagan Priests and Demons.
That Christ never Judged nor Condemned any, though he heard him Preach in
Person, and believed not, appears by the Scripture; Faith and Infidelity being
rather unavoidable Passions, than free Actions of the Soul, it being not in
humane Power to believe what the Conscience is not convinced of, or not to
believe that whereof it is convinced; and that Christ never appointed so much
as a Non-Communion (which is far less than an Excommunication) with Heretics
or unbelievers, appears by his Example of Eating and Drinking with the
Pharisees, and his frequent Converse with all the Jewish Sects, yea with
Samaritans; and, what is more, he Eat and Drank with Publicans and Sinners, and
taught, The whole needed not the Physician; but those who are Sick; Bishops
Murderers to deliver to the Lay-Power.
and how great a weakening it is to Religion, not to admit Liberty to
Dissentients in Faith and Form of Worship, but to persecute them with
Excommunication, though brevity permit me not here to speak, I may on another
occasion show. Waldus and Wickliff, who were Protestants, taught, That
Excommunications, Suspensions and Interdicts, were only inventions to maintain
the Bishops Pride and Covetousness; and that they were Murderers who delivered
over to the Lay-power: The same held John Hus and Jerome of Prague, who were
therefore Martyred by the Papists; Luther likewise opposed Excommunication; and
Erastus, and many other Learned men, have sufficiently proved the imposture of
it, and that it never came from Christ, but the true Original from whence it
came, appears in the Examples following: Numa Pompilius the old Superstitious
Lawgiver of Rome, who had his Law (or he feigned) from his Nymph, or She-Devil
Egeria, first instituted his Pontifex Maximus or High Priest, which name the
Pope has since assumed to himself, and gave him Power over all Sacrifices and
Ceremonies, to make propitious their Celestial, and especially to appease the
Manes and infernal Gods, under whose Power they believed the Souls lay after
Death, and made their Superstitious Followers to believe, That the Priests, who
were Masters of these Ceremonies, could send their Souls to Heaven or Hell, as
they pleased, according to Virgil, -- Animas ille evocat Orco,
Pallentes alias sub tristia Tartara mittit.
He some pale Ghosts with Voice, as with a Spell
Called up, and others headlong cast to Hell.


Supremacy got by Excommunication.
And by this Superstition the Pagan Priests got their Supremacy over the World;
by the like means did the naked Druides get Supremacy over the Gallick and
British Cavalry, as appears by Caes. Com. de Bell. Gall. p. 157. Where he
says, In omni Gallia eorum hominum qui in aliquo sunt numero atque honor,
genera sunt duo; nam plebs pene Servorum habetur loco, sed de his duobus
generibus alterum est Druidum, alterum Equitum. Illi rebus divinis intersunt,
Sacrificia publica and privata procurant, Religiones interpretantur; ad hos
magnus adolescentum numerus Disciplinae causa concurrit, Magnoque ii apud eos
sunt in honor, nam fere de omnibus controversiis publicis privatisque
constituunt, and si quod est admissum, si caedes facta, si de haereditate, si
de finibus controversia est, iidem discernunt praemia poenaesque constituunt;
siquis aut privatus aut populus eorum decreto non stetit Sacrificiis
interdicunt; haec poena apud eos est gravissima, quibus ita est interdictum ii
numero impiorum and sceleratorum habentur, ab iis omnes decedunt, aditum eorum
sermonemque defugiunt ne quid ex contagione incommodi accipiant, neque iis
petentibus jus redditur, neque honos ullus tributtur. His omnibus Druidibus
praeest unus, qui summam apud eos. Authoritatem habet, hec mortuo siquis ex
reliquis excellit, dignitate succedet, si sunt plures, suffragio Druidum
adlegitur; nonnunquam etiam de Pontificatu Armis contendunt. And after, he
says, Druides a bello abesse consueverunt, neque tributa una cum reliquis
pendunt, militiae vacationem, omniumque rerum habent communitatem.

Here is the perfect Platform of the modern Excommunication, and the Privileges
claimed by Bishops, and that impious Punishment, Neque iis petentibus jus
redditur, that a Person Excommunicated, right or wrong, shall not be permitted
to Sue for his Right, though never so just; and the like, with the
Excommunication instituted by the Beast, Rev. 13.17. That no man might Buy or
Sell, save he that had the Mark, or the name of the Beast.

A Satyrin Defiance of all Excommunication, without a Sign of Mission from God.
Damned Fiend of Hell, who first in Earth or Sky
Did counterfeit the Voice of the most High,
And both to God and Man, to show thy Hate,
In darkest Clouds did dare to Fulminate;
Either of Ignorance or Air, the Light
Of humane Souls, or Sun to close in Night;
That thy Sulphurean Sentences might blaze
Like Comets, and the foolish World amaze;
That to thy false Fires Knees and Hearts might bow,
And the true Fire and God they might not know.
Thou Druids first taught'st in our Isle to sing
Dirge's to Souls, which made the Woods to ring;
And did, they thought, transport them in a trice
to happier Groves, or to Fools Paradise;
This the old Britons Courage made renew,
And more than Woad themselves their Foes look blue,
Whose trembling Souls they made with Fear to groan,
Of Styx, with Fiery Water, where was none,
To Bless or Curse, they cared not, right or wrong,
Thus Priests the Spoils got, Soldiers a Song;
Who should be Archpriest, raised Civil Wars,
The Forest ratled then with Armed Cars;
And naked Anti-Popes far off from Fights,
Spit Fire at one another, just like Sprights:
Each side were Martyrs inade, who died of Wounds
Sans nombre, which did so o'restock the bounds
Of the Elizian Common, that they tell
Souls after Death Fought, who should go to Hell;
With this enchanted Sword more ill to do,
They stole or took by force the Civil too;
And like so many Kets in Savage State
Under their Oaks of Reformation Sat,
And Judged all Causes, and of Peace and Wars,
The Treasures got thus, without Wounds or Scars;
All to their Sentence bowed, as to Fate,
Whom they but doomed to Excommunicate;
Yet they no Sign of Mission thus to do Druydes Sign of Mission.

Had, but their Oak, and on it Misleto.
The Druids dead, they left their Furies Whip,
Brothers and Sisters falling first to strip;
And as their Worships pleased, to Lash and Jerk,
First to one Pope, then many in a Kirk;
Nobles and Poor Barefooted, and Bare-Leg'd,
Stood at Church-door, and for their Pardons Begged,
Which to be granted, were so long delayed,
Till Commutation-Money first was paid;
Unto the same, they next gave by their Will
Their flaming Sword, to Strike, Depose, and Kill
High Emperors and Kings, and cut the bands
Of Subjects Oaths and Faith at their Commands;
Blind Cupids Arrows first they stole of Love,
And after, thus, the Thunderbolts of Jove. The Romish Bishops Sign of Mission.

The Romish Druids next to show a Sign,
That their Infernal Mission was Divine;
By their Black Magic Art in time most strange,
The hollow Oak to holy Church did change;
And on the top they made the Mislet^
To turn, and there into a Steeple grow,
And Leaves to Ropes, and Berries into Bells
Transformed, to Ring to Weddings, and to Knells.
To an Aceldama their Church turned next,
And the dead Bones for Burial-Fees they vexed;
Their restless rest thus purchased in vain,
They then for Relics dig'd them up again;
And sell their Merits, though of Tyburn-Saints,
And Heaven to all, whose Purse or Faith not faints.
Oh Joseph, of Arimathea named,
And on the British-Shores for ever famed;
Whose Ship of Olive-planks from Palestine,
Of Tidings glad the Packet brought Divine.
The Sea Nymphs danced each with a Triton Mate,
For joy thou made their Isles the Fortunate.
Oh tell us! had thy Vessels such broad sides
Of Canon, as that which in Tybur rides?
Whose roaring Thunder beats, and buries Towns,
Cities and Churches, Kingdoms and their Crowns,
And sinks them, how, or whither none can tell,
To Time-set Limbo's or Eternal Hell:
Or from thy Bark, being then the Western-Church,
Thy Passengers to leave so in the lurch,
Did thou cast overboard, and in the Dark
Leave them there to be snapt by the old Shark,
That thou their Cargo rifle might the while,
And Gold and Silver, like a Pyrat vile?
Tell us, did Christ the great or lesser Curse
Teach, who were bad before, to make them worse?
Or Bless or Curse not, did he who did say,
Intend, and mean the clean contrary way?
Who left his Peace, did he bid to annoy,
Who came the World to save, would he destroy?
From Satan who so often delivered men,
Them back again did he cast to his Den?
He in this World who Kingdom would have none,
Did he bid Priests Depose Kings from the Throne?
Deliverance to Captives who did Preach,
Priests them to starve in Prison did he Teach?
When Peter warmed, did for his Master mourn,
All whom he Mastered did he bid him burn?
No Joseph, no; this was not the good Seed
Thou brought and Sow'd'st, whereon the Flocks might feed.
The Evil One those Fiery tasted Tares
Sowed, and them entangled with Snares;
None but the Devil, from the Infernal Pit,
Does Curse and Ban, and Fire and Brimstone Spit.
Great Hus and Jerome now for ever blessed,
Oh two true Witnesses Slain by the Beast!
Whose Treachery safe Conduct gave to both,
But basely perjured broke it, and his Oath.
You who made tremble the Infernal States,
And dared Attacque black Dis at his own Gates,
What was your Doctrine, which so terrified
The pompous Popedom in its highest Pride?
You held, (and that made them so highly hate)
That Bishops could not Excommunicate,
This did you both from thence to Heaven raise,
And sent you thither Crowned with Fiery Bays;
And Sparks of you, to Stellifie, this sent
With Protestants the British Firmament.
Brave Hero's now, the horned Miter pull
From Phalaris of Rome his Brazen Bull,
Hear your dead Martyrs how they do you press,
And cry from all his Fiery Furnaces,
Dismount his Canons from the Battlements,
Of his Church-Catholick, which get his Rents.
Take from the Building but the Thunder-stone,
Oh then for ever down falls Babylon.
An Epode on Protestants Excommunicated by Papists.
What though with Bans and Curses,
They Rob and Kill, and take our Purses?
In highest Faith come on,
And know there has, or shall be none
Happy decreed by Fate,
But who first was, or is unfortunate.
Arm, Arm, against the Devil,
He Will fly, and all his Spirits Evil.
And Beast with Seven Heads, At this time was a great noise in the Countries,
of Armies seen rising out of the ground, and others in the Air.

If on your Land or Sea he treads,
To fight him never spare,
Soldiers and Poor, each one then take your share.
What though whole Armies rising
From Earth, are fearful hearts Surprising,
And Demons of the Air
Fighting in Clouds, tempt to Despair?
What though they come from Hell?
There Is no Enchantment against Israel
Hark how our Canons Thunder,
And keep the Romish Canons under;
Their Organs grunt and whine,
Our Flutes and Haubois are Divine;
And Cornets to the Sky,
Sound for Religion, and for Liberty.
Angels to hear, grow prouder,
Than theirs our holy Music louder,
And valiant Souls shall bear
From Death to Musick's highest Sphere.
Who burn would not like a Brand,
That thus renowned may die with Sword is hand?
Whether an Union can be of Protestant-Parliaments and Churches, without a true
Test between Papist and Protestant?
Test between Papist and Protestant.
Neither Protestant-Parliaments or Churches can be Known without a true Test,
much less therefore can they be United.

Whether Recusancy to pray in a Temple, or in the Form of Common Prayer, is a
true Test between Papist and Protestant?
A true Test ought to Provide and see that there be none in it of the Servants
of the Lord, but the Worshippers of Baal only, 2 Kings 10.23. But in this of
Recusancy to pray in a Temple, are all the true Worshippers of God in Spirit
and Truth, if we may believe Christ's Precept and Designation of them, at large
before Debated, p. 210. etc. in Reference to the Omnipresential Worship of God.

Christ in thy Closet bids thee Pray,
Thine is there both the Church and Key;
What though no Bishop walked it round?
Gods being there makes holy Ground.
The mischiefs of Compelling Protestants to a Form of Common Prayer, appear too
much in being the occasion of the first breaking out of the late miserable
Civil Wars, and the Irreparable loss of his then Majesty; the mischiefs of
Compelling Papists to Protestant-Churches, appear in this, That one
Church-Papist is more Dangerous than an Hundred open Absenters; and they who
truly understand the Danger of Mixing, would rather think it prudent, like the
Primitive Christians, to have a Non-Communion with Idolaters, and their
Ostiarii as they had, to see none crept into the Places of their Convention for
Prayer, than compel such Bloody Spies, incensed by Penal Laws, thither to
betray them.

Whether Recusancy to receive the Sacrament in a Temple, or in the Common-Form,
is a true Test?
This likewise is before Discussed, p. 212. and Examples of the frequent
Poisoning the Sacrament by the Priest, p. 240, and 241. To compel therefore
any Eminent Protestants to Receive the Sacrament of such Persons of whom they
cannot be assured, were to be Accessory to their Murder.

Whether Subscription to the 39. Articles is a true Test?
It Is shown before, That no true Test ought to endanger the Conscience of any
Protestant; but it is notorious, that the greatest part of Protestants are
Dissentients in Conscience to diverse Doctrines of the 39. Articles, and
therefore Subscription to the same is no true Test, nor ought to be Imposed on
them. (1.) Because these 39. Articles were made by the Bishops, Anno 1562. in
the Fourth Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, while the Papist Peers were
yet in Parliament, and in Power, who with the Bishops in their Front, were too
hard for her, and of whom she might then say, Res durae and Regni Novitas me
talia cogunt.

She was not able to perfect Reformation at one Stroke. (2.) Because in these
Articles Bishops presumed to be Legislators, Judges and Executioners in their
own Case, for the Bishops make the Article 36. whereby they Constitute
themselves Archbishops and Bishops; and Article 32. They Declare it lawful for
all men to Marry; Article 34. They Ridiculously make Traditions of the Church
to be Changeable, according to Diversity of Countries, Times, and men's Manners;
so before they come to their Ceremonial Law, they set up their Legend-Law, and
the Ceremonies must be Founded on what Legends they please, and no man must
oppose either Tradition, or Legend, or Ceremonies set up by Common Authority,
that is, by Authority of the Bishops (for the House of Commons never Authorized
them) Rog. Art. 34. Prop. 2. p. 196. Then, Article 33. they Order
Excommunication, Delivery to Satan, Penance, and Absolution. Then, to compel
the Observation of these Articles, Anno 1603. They assume the Legislative Power
to make Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, without the assent of the
House of Commons; they Order Saying or Singing of Common Prayer and the Letany,
with all the Ceremonies prescribed by the Can. 14, 15. Copes, Surplices and
Hoods to be wom in Cathedrals, by Can. 17, 27. Marriage not to be without Banns
or License. Can. 62. None to deliver from Satan without the Bishops License.
Can. 72. And no Minister to Preach, Read Lecture, or Catechize, without
Subscription to the 39. Articles. Can. 36, 37. And then to make clear work,
they Order, That if any affirm any of the Nine and Thirty Articles made by the
Archbishops and Bishops, to be in any part Erroneous, or such as he may not
with a good Conscience Subscribe to, let him be Excommunicate Ipso facto, which
is without Summons or Hearing. Can. 5. Can. 9. So, unless the
Protestant-Minister will Popishly acknowledge the Bishop to be Infallible and
without Error, and that all his Traditions and Ceremonies of Worship, of
Marriage, and the like, Ordained by Episcopal Authority are, of Divine Right to
oblige the Conscience; and that he neither can Teach, nor Fast, nor Pray,
though to deliver from the Devil, without his License; Here is a Test wherein
the Bishop assumes to be Legislator, Judge, an Ipso facto Executioner in his own
Cause, against a Protestant-Minister, and not only prohibited to speak, Book of
39. Articles, and of Canons, oblige not the Subjects to Clergy or Lay.
but his Conscience to think against it, in his own Defense. (3.) This
Subscription to the 39. Articles ought not to be Imposed as a Test, because
neither the said Book of Articles, nor Book of Canons, had the Assent of the
House of Commons at the time of their Making, without whose Actual and Express
Assent, no Law, or Canon, or Article, can be made to oblige the Subject, which
is more fully proved before.

Whether the Positive part of the Oath of Supremacy is a true Test?
The Form of the Oath, 1. Eliz. 1. is as follows.
I A. B. do utterly Testify and Declare in my Conscience, That the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness's Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Things or Causes, as Temporal; and that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Potentate, has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within
this Realm; and therefore I do utterly Renounce and Forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities, and do promise that from
henceforth, I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and lawful Successors, or United and Annexed to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

It being granted that no true Test can be, which the Conscience of a
Protestant, weak or strong, ignorant or knowing, refuses, or is doubtful to
take, it is manifest, that the positive part is refused by a very considerable
part of the People, and a greater part are doubtful, and take it with
Reluctance; yet are they such as cannot be doubted to be sincere Protestants in
Religion, and most Faithful and Loyal Subjects to the King; and their
Objections seem to be these:

(1.) The words [only Supreme Governor] are of so infinite and unlimited an
Extent in the Letter, that there is necessity of limiting them in the
intention, which intention being Implicit only, and not Express, may be made so
various by Expositors, that the same likewise is infinitely ambiguous and
unintelligible; and that Pious Queen Elizabeth being at her first Entry to the
Kingdom, as good as under the Wardships of Bishops, could not avoid the Forming
of this Oath of Supremacy by them, on the first Act and Year of her Reign, and
to impose the same on the Subjects; not for her Benefit, but their own, though
after finding the same so general, obscure, and wrested by false
Interpretations, she endeavored by a subsequent Declaration published, to have
explained and limited the same, according to her true intention and meaning;
but the same being not done by Act of Parliament, proved not sufficient to
relieve many doubtful and wounded Consciences amongst the People; of which vide
more at large before, p. 167, 168.

(2.) The words [Supreme Governor,] include both the Legislative, Judicial and
Executive Power, The words [only Supreme] exclude Parliaments.
and the word [only] excludes literally the Parliament from having any Vote in
either; whereas the known Law of the Land is, That no Law can be Enacted to
bind the People, without the mutual Assent of the King, and their lawful
Representative in Parliament; and that no Contract of Supreme Government can be
made, without the Assent of two Parties at least, and not one only.

(3.) The words [only Supreme Governor in all Spiritual things,] according to
the Letter, include the Papal Power of Dispensation with the Law of God, of
Receiving Confessions of Sins, Imposing Penance, Excommunication, Absolution,
and Pardon of Sins, which are Powers only belonging to God in Person, and ought
not to be Assumed or Exercised by Angels, Saints, Demons or Men.

(4.) The same words include Supreme Power over the Souls and Consciences of
men, which is a Power belonging only to God in Person, and ought not to be
Assumed by Angels, Saints, Demons or Men.

(5.) When all this Supremacy in Spiritual things is congested into an Oath,
and the Flowers inseparable from the Celestial Crown presumptuously attempted
to be torn thence, and annexed to a Temporal, what is the Design and Effect of
it, but that the Bishop Robs both God and the King of the Supremacy pretended
to both, but intended to neither? for where will the Bishop permit the Temporal
Prince to dispense with the Law of God, to Receive Confession of Sins, to
Impose Penance, to Excommunicate, to give Absolution and Pardon of Sins, but he
will command him to desist, or, what is worse, with his Temporal Sword to beat
the Bush, that the Bishop may catch the Bird, or with his Excommunicato
Capiendo, and Heretico Comburendo, to catch and roast the Bird himself for the
Bishop to eat it; and of the subtlety of the Bishop, as to this matter, see
more before, p. 167, 168, 169. How little encouragement there is therefore, for
Protestants to take this Oath of Supremacy, wherein the Kings name is only
abused, and made a Stale, to draw a Supreme and Arbitrary Power to Bishops,
both over the King and them, and to drein the Royal Treasury into their own
Pockets; and how untrue a Test such an Oath must be, is humbly submitted to
Supreme Authority.

Supremacy granted, by Act of Parliament, of Marriage and Legitimation, to
Canterbury, yet Sworn to be in the King.
(6.) By the Statute 25. H. 8.21. Power is granted to the Archbishop of
Canterbury and his Successors, by their Discretions to Grant unto the King, his
Heirs and Successors, all such Licenses, Dispensations, Compositions,
Faculties, Grants, Rescripts, Delegacies for Causes not contrary to the holy
Scriptures and Laws of God, as heretofore had been used and accustomed to be
held and obtained by his Highness, or by any his most Noble Progenitors at the Sea of Rome; and all Children procreated after Marriage, by virtue of any such
License or Dispensations, shall be admitted and reputed Legitimate in all
Courts Spiritual and Temporal. So this Act of Parliament made in time of
Popery, translates the Pope from Rome to Canterbury, and the Supremacy before
used or accustomed by him, over the King and his Subjects, concerning all the
matters mentioned in the Act, is placed in the Person of the Archbishop; and
the Bishops call this a Supremacy in them according to Scripture and the Law of
God, which is worse, and more Papal, than to claim it only by Act of
Parliament; for what more Papal Supremacy can there be, than Power to Grant
Licenses, Dispensations, Faculties, Compositions, Grants, Rescripts, Delegacies
of Marriage, Legitimation, and all other matters which Popes have formerly
granted from Rome to Kings and their Subjects at discretion? and this Exceptio
is contraria facto; for the granting of Licenses by Popes to Kings, is contrary
to the Law of the Land, and is a Power Supreme to the Legislative, and Law of
the Land; so the Grant in the Act is Repugnant to the Exception; for (...)
Licenses or Dispensations are necessary, but where there is a standing Law of
God or Man to the Licensed or Dispensed with, no Composition or Pardon
necessary, but where there is a standing Law violated or broken; no Faculty
necessary, but where is a standing Law disabling the Party to do what he
desires to have a Fa^ulty for, that he may be enabled to do. No Rescript is,
but from a Supreme Prince; no Delegacy, but from a Superior to an Inferior; for
the Pope is Superior to his Legate, though he be Legatus a Latere; and the
highest preferment this Popish Act of Parliament allows the King, is, to be the
Archbishop's Legate; then the Act having made him Supreme to the Legislative,
Law, and King, gives him as high Supremacy over the Judicial Power in all
Courts, as well Spiritual as Temporal, which is, Supremacy over the Parliament,
which is a Court-Temporal. This Act therefore does set up more than Prelacy or
Arch-Prelacy at Canterbury, for that was there before, and the Giants had piled
up Pelion on Ossa already, and now they steeple it with Olympus, and if they
set not on the Giants head the Triple Crown, it is sure they have the Triple
Miter three stories high, of Prelacy, Arch-Prelacy, and Supremacy. When the
Archbishop got therefore of the Parliament this Act, he was something like the
Carpenter who begged of the Wood only one Helve long enough to turn his Hatchet
into an Ax, and when he had got that, he cut down the whole Wood, for he having
now got so long a Helve to his Spiritual Hatchet, as Supremacy over the
Marriage, not only of the old Palm Trees, and Legitimations of the young, at
his Discretion (that is to say, if they give him whatsoever Money he asks for
Dispensation and Legitimation) this gives him likewise Power to strike both at
Root and Branch of all the Royal Protestant-Cedars themselves, in the Popish
Points of Ceremonial Marriage and Legitimation, endeavored now to be brought
to the true Test of a more Supreme Law and Judge than his, the Moral Law of God
himself. How therefore the Protestant can safely Swear in Conscience, the
Supremacy to be only in the King, when so great a share of it is granted to the
Archbishop by the King and Parliament; until the same Act of Parliament of 25.
H. 8.21. by which it is done, is Repealed, I confess my Ignorance, and, if it be
without cause, crave Pardon.

(7.) The Party who is to Swear who is the only Supreme Governor, must be
intended to Swear either who is Supreme De Facto, or De Jure; if De Facto, who
has the Actual Power of the Sword, it may happen to be in a time of War, when
two Armies are in the Field, and Inter utrumque Volat Dubiis Victoria pennis.
It is necessary at such a time, that the Swearer, unless he will Forswear
himself, be a Prophet; of whom there are not many in this Age, amongst such as
take the Oath of Supremacy; if it be said the Swearer ought to Swear De Jure,
who has Right to be only Supreme Governor, to this is Answered, (1.) Unless he
can Swear to the matter in Fact, he cannot Swear to the matter of Law or Right,
for Ex facio jus Oritur, all matter of Law must arise from the matter of Fact,
therefore the Fact must be first known, before the Right can be known, which is
to be deduced from it. (2.) The Right, when the Oath is required, may be as to
Succession of the Crown; wherein the matter of Fact depending only on
Genealogies, the Heralds themselves, especially after Wars, may not be able to
make any clear probation of the Descents; as Ezra 2.62. and Nehem. 7.64. it is
said, These sought their Register among those that were reckoned by Genealogy,
but it was not found: therefore were they, as Polluted, put from the
Priesthood. If therefore the Genealogies of Priests who wore themselves the
Registers, and kept their own Descents as curiously as was possible, may be
lost, much easier may those of the Lay; and the Law and Divinity may likewise
be so doubtful, that it is justly acknowledged by the King and Parliament
themselves, 25. H. 8.22. That Ambiguities and Doubts touching the Successions
of the Crown, have been Causes of much Trouble, and no perfect and substantial
Law has been made for Remedy of the same; and accordingly at the Death of
Queen Elizabeth, there were no less than Sixteen titles endeavored to have
been set on foot to the Succession, partly by Papists to overthrow the
Protestant-Religion, partly by others to overthrow the Union between the two
Kingdoms, in the Person of King James, in which the Protestants of both were so
much concerned, and others for their own private Ambition; if therefore
Parliaments themselves have not, or shall not sufficiently clear Ambiguities
and Doubts, to answer so many pretenses; How can it be expected that Ignorant
people can clear the same, upon their Oath or Conscience? (3.) It is permitted
to Grand Juries, when it does not appear to them whether the Bill is true or
false, to find an Ignoramus; and where the people are totally Ignorant, both of
the Fact and Law of Supremacy, why ought they not to be allowed the same Equity
according to the Truth, to Answer Ignoramus? (4.) It is against the known
Maxim, That Only matters of Fact can be Testified by Witnesses, and matters of
Law or Right cannot be Testified but by the Law it self.

(8.) An Usurper or Idolater may happ^n to get the Possession of the Crown; How
then can a Protestant Swear to the Right of the first in Temporals, or of the
second in Spirituals?

(9.) It does not appear how a Protestant may Swear, That no Foreign Prince or
Person ought to have any Power, Authority or Pre-eminence Ecclesiastical within
this Realm, and that he does renounce all Foreign Power; in regard it may so
happen, that a Protestant-Prince has, or may be born beyond Sea, and be a
Foreign Person, and yet on failure of a Lineal Heir, may happen to be the next
right Heir to a Protestant King after his Decease; it may seem therefore to
cross Gods Providence, to Swear to Renounce or Abjure all Foreign
Protestant-Power as to the Succession; for the Oath puts no distinction between
Protestant and Papal Power, but Renounces all alike, if they are Foreign
Persons.

Of the Mischiefs which ensue a false Test between Protestant and Papist.
(1.) By the same, Power is given to the Favorers of Popery, to turn the Edg
of all the Penal Statutes made and intended against Papists, to destroy the
Protestants, and the Preteritions and Pardons intended the Protestants, are
wholly applied in favor of the Papist; the Plagues designed against the
Egyptians, are wholly let loose on the Israelites; and the Passover to which
were invited the Israelites, is made only a Feast for the Papist. So did Bishop
Bancrost, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, persecute all Anti-Papist-Protestants
under the name of Puritans, and Protected all Dominican Priests, Seminaries and
Papists; under pretense of Opposing the Jesuits, by pressing the false Tests of
Recusancy to Pray in a Temple, to Pray after the Common Form, to Receive the
Sacrament after the Common Form, to take the Oath of Supremacy, to use all
Episcopal Ceremonies in the Worship of God, and the utmost Rigor and Penalties
of such Recusancy against the Anti-Papist Protestant, who has been the only
Counterpoise against the Papist, that he has not over run the Land; and giving
Protection to Papists against the very same Tests and Penal Laws, so furiously
Prosecuted against the Anti-Papist Protestant. So did the subtle Gundamore give
a new Whet to the High-Commission-Court, and turned the Edg of the same
Originally intended against the Papists, to be against the Anti-Papist
Protestant. And since Bishops have been discharged of that Commission, yet the
same Course of Bancrofts and Gundamores has been still continued against the
Anti-Papist-Protestants, as then under the name of Puritans, so since under the
name of Fanatics; such Protestants have had the Penalties of Recusancy laid on
them, when Papists have Compounded for Trifles, or been absolutely Pardoned,
such Protestants have had the Oath of Supremacy forced on them against their
Conscience, when Papists have neither had Supremacy nor Allegiance required of
them, nor their Consciences troubled, but have remained absolutely unsworn,
from so much as any Oath of Fidelity, unless to Foreign Princes; such
Protestants have had their Houses utterly Disarmed, and not so much left as
sufficient to keep out a Thief, when Papists have had their Houses full of
Arms, and not so much as searched; such Protestant's Children have been, by the
Usurped Power of Bishops Certificates, made Bastards, because not Married with
the Ceremonies of the Book of Common Prayer; and this they have done by
pretense of the Canon of the Council of Trent, a Foreign Jurisdiction, long
since abolished by Act of Parliament; but such Bishops have never troubled
Papist's Marriages made by Priests or Jesuits, with Romish Ceremony, nor Nulled
them, or Bastardized their Children; such Protestants have been Excommunicated,
Cursed, and given to Satan, when a Dog has not dared (against Papists) to move
his Tongue; such Protestants have been Confiscated, and cast into Prison, when
Papists have Triumphed in Liberty and Propriety.

(2.) Many Able, Loyal, Zealous, Protestant-Ministers are hereby Excluded from
Preaching, and Teaching the Gospel.

(3.) Many able Loyal and Useful Instruments, both in Civil and Military
Offices, who are Protestants, are Excluded, and the King and Parliament
deprived of their Service.

(4.) The Offices and Arms of the Three Kingdoms are engrossed into the hands
of Persons Recommended by Papists.

An Essay of the Form of a Test, whereat it seems no Protestant can scruple.
I A. B. do utterly Testify and Declare in my Conscience, and in the presence
of God, and do believe that the Pope or Bishop of Rome, or any Bishop on Earth,
is not the Head of the Catholic Church, nor of any National Church of England,
Scotland or Ireland, and that they are not Infallible; and that all such Popes
and Bishops as pretend to Supremacy, either Spiritual or Temporal, or
Infallibility, without a Sign of Mission from God, are Heretics. I believe
that the Host Consecrated, Crucifixes, Images, Idols, Relics of Saints, or
Saints themselves, ought not to be Worshipped, or Prayed to, in Public or
Private; and that the Mass is Idolatry. I believe neither Popes nor Bishops
have any Power or Mission from God to Exact Auricular Confession, or to Impose
Penance, or to give Absolution, Indulgence or Pardon of Sin, or to Redeem from
Purgatory, or to give or sell Heaven or Paradise, or any Place in the same, or
to Excommunicate, Curse, or Deliver to Satan. And I do therefore utterly Abjure
and Renounce all Absolutions, Indulgences, Pardons of Sins, and Redemptions
from Purgatory, given, or to be given by any such said Popes or Bishops, or any
deriving Authority from them, and defy all their Excommunications. And I do
Promise and Swear to be True and Faithful to our Sovereign Lord the King, his
Heirs and lawful Successors. So help me God.

Whether any Test of the Conscience ought to be Penal, either to Protestant or
Papist.
It seems not:

(1.) Because to Plant Religion by Penalty, is to Plant it by the Sword,
whereof Christ gave neither Precept nor Example, but rather a Prohibition
Implicit in his Express Command to Peter, Matthew. 26.52. Then said Jesus unto
him, Put up again thy Sword into his place: for all they that take the Sword,
shall perish with the Sword. Which though it prohibit not lawful Defense to
those who have the Power of the Sword, which Peter had not; yet it prohibits
unlawful Invasions; amongst all which, that of Conscience is the greatest, with
a Denunciation of the ill Success shall follow, sufficiently verified in the
many Examples of Emperors and Princes, when they went to make War against such
as Defended their Conscience.

(2.) To Plant Religion by the Sword, is a Relapse to Popery, and we commit
that Crime our selves, which we impute to be the highest in them.

(3.) Error in Conscience is not in the Power of the Party to Redress; it is
unjust therefore to Impose a Penalty for what was not in the Parties Power to
prevent before, or amend after.

(4.) Thoughts ought not to be punished by men before they break into External
Acts or at least discover themselves by Words or Deeds to External Witnesses.

(5.) Tests Penal are no other than the Romish Inquisition, compelling men to
accuse themselves Criminally, or to commit Perjury to avoid it, or to rebel to
Defend themselves against it.

(6.) Protection is the more Honorable, which is hence given the Consciences
of Foreign Protestants against Foreign Papists, by how much the more merciful
the dealing is of the Native Protestants here, toward the Consciences of their
Native Papists.

(7.) If a Test is made Penal it ceases to be a Test, for men will Swear
contrary to their Consciences to avoid the Penalty; whereas, if no Penalty on
Confession, they would confess the Truth.

(8.) This will Punish the Innocent together with the Nocent, there being many
of the poor sort of Papists who Curse the Covetousness of their great Ones, who
take Bribes, Gifts, and Pensions to themselves, and leave the Inferiors exposed
to all the Dangers.

It is a sufficient Use of a Test therefore, if it only Dis-Office the Papist,
to preserve the Public Government in Protestant-hands.

Whether Papists or Protestants ought to be Compelled to Confession of Faith,
or any External Form, or Ceremonies of Worship, against their Conscience, by
Penalties?
It seems not:

(1.) Because a Non-Compulsion is not an Approbation, Non enim idem est far
aliquid ferendum and probare si quid probandum non est. Cic. Fam. Epist. L. 9.
Ep. 6. Neither is it as much as a Toleration of the Popish Forms of Worship,
either of Images, Idols, Crucifixes, Crosses, Beads, Relics, Masses, etc. But
all Acts of Parliament remain in as full force against these Superstitions as
before, and the Command of Scripture as performable, Deuteronomy. 12.2. Ye shall
utterly destroy all the Places wherein the Nations, which ye shall possess,
served their Gods, upon the high Mountains, and upon the Hills, and under every
Green Tree. And you shall overthrow their Altars, and break their Pillars, and
burn their Groves with Fire, and you shall hew down the Graven Images of their
Gods, and destroy the Names of them out of that Place. But a Non-Compulsion
amounts to no more than this, That the Penal Acts against Recusancy and
Nonconformity may be laid aside equally, as to Papist and Protestant, which
destroy all Conscience in both.

(2.) Because a Non-Compulsion does not hinder but advance a Public free
Worship, according to such Form and Ceremonies as shall be allowed by the King
and Parliament, only it frees from Force, and takes away the Usurpt Supremacy
of the Bishops, of Forming Godliness into Gain, by restoring it to the
Legislative Power of the King and Parliament.

(3.) Recusancy is easier foiled by giving way, than contending; and Conformity
easier won with Lenity, than Rigor; Vitia quaedam facilius tollit Princeps si
patiens eorum est, says Senec. de Clementia.

Cede repugnanti, cedendo Victor abibis.
Minus placet magis quod suadetur, quod dissuadetur placet.
Plautus. Noli Vitia irritare vetando.
Vidi ego nuper equum contra sua fraena tenacem,
Ore reluctanti fulminis ire modo.
Constitit, ut primum Laxatas Sensit habenas,
Fraenaque in Effusa Laxa Jacere juba.
Ovid. I saw my self an Horse curbed with a Bit,
To fly like lightning in despite of it:
But still he stood, as soon as he no Check
Felt, and the loose Reins cast were on his Neck.
(4.) Chrysostom Hom. 19. in Matthew. says, Do the Sheep persecute the Wolf?
No, but the Wolf the Sheep. Whence appears, that those Protestants who
persecute Dissentient Protestants for their Conscience, are Wolves in Sheeps
Clothing, and to be Censured far worse than the Papists, who do it openly in
the Form of a Wolf.

(5.) Thy own Conscience is not Infallible, nor Immutable; Let him that
stands take heed lest he fall. It were a great shame therefore to be
over-violent in that from which thy own Conscience or Practice may perhaps
eftsoons be Changed.

(6.) Non-Compulsion to discover it self to punishment, is the best Right that
a Conscience so Innocent, as abstains from discovering it self only that it may
not thereby offend, can crave. Tacere liceat, nulla Libertas minor a Rege
petitur. Senec. Oedip.

Govetousness the only cause of Compulsion of the Conscience to Confession of
Faith, or Form of Worship.
(7.) The Final cause of Punishing Consciences which are silent, and offend not,
is only Insatiable Covetousness, which can pretend no other cause or color of
taking the Spoils of Innocents.

Thus Popes and Bishops Rob and Murder the greatest part of Christendom, under
the name of Heretics: And the Turks the greatest part of the World, under the
name of Unbelievers; and Mahomet, after he has in many places of his Alcoran,
incited his followers to Fight with, Kill and Slay such Unbelievers, and take
their Goods and Lands from them, wherever they can find them; he Commands
them to bring a share of the Spoils to the Prophet, meaning himself, and says
further, Alc. cap. 61. God loves those who Fight in Rank and File for his Law.
And what other Doctrine and Practice do Popes and Bishops Preach and Act, but
the same, which shall take the Spoil of the miserable People they get under
their Power, for no other Crime but their Conscience; for this they contend one
with another, and offer Force to destroy the Conscience it self, and Body and
Soul with it, so they may Seize their Prey of Goods and Lands, as Jezabel did
of Naboth, 1 Kings 21.8. So she wrote Letters in Ahab's name, and Sealed them
with his Seal, and sent the Letters unto the Elders and Nobles that were in his
City, dwelling with Naboth. And she wrote in the Letters, saying, Proclaim a
Fast, and set Naboth on high among the People; and set two men, Sons of Belial
before him, to bear witness against him, saying, Thou did Blaspheme God and
the King. And the men of his City, even the Elders, and the Nobles, who were
the Inhabitants in his City, did as Jezabel had sent unto them: They Proclaimed
a Fast, and set Naboth on high among the People. And there came in two men,
Children of Belial, and sat before him: and the men of Belial witnessed
against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the People, saying, Naboth
did Blaspheme God and the King. Then they carried him Forth out of the City,
and stoned him with stones, that he Died. Whence is to be Noted, (1.) That the
Whore of Babylon imitates Jezabel, in sending Letters in the Kings name; for so
are all Excommunicato Capiendo's, and Haeretico Comburendo's in the name of the
King in whose Dominions they are Granted, and Sealed with his Seal. (2.)
Jezabel pretended Religion, Proclaimed a Fast, and accused of Blasphemy; so do
the Ministers of the Whore pretend Religion wholly and solely in those Writs.
(3.) In this they are worse than Jezabel, for she accused only of Blasphemy,
which is an External Act, and if there had been any such thing, it had been
possible to have been witnessed, but these punish and destroy for Internal
Thoughts and Conscience. (4.) Jezabel accused of Actual Blasphemy against God,
which is Malum in se, and against the Moral Law; and though Ahab and she were
both Idolaters, yet did not accuse Naboth; That he was a Recusant or
Nonconformist to come to the Temple of their Idol, or to join in their
Common Prayer before it, or would not bow to their Altar, or observe their
Ceremonies; nor do we find amongst all the Idolatries amongst the Israelites,
that any was compelled by Force to Worship them, neither could there have been
Seven Thousand who had not bowed the Knee to Baal, had there been Penal
Statutes against Recusancy or Nonconformity; but the now Masters of Ceremonies
are worse than Jezabel, who destroy men unless they will break the Moral Law,
bow to Idols and Altars, and obey the Ceremonial Law of men above the Moral Law
of God.

(8.) That the sole end of Compulsion to Forms of Worship or Confession of
Faith, is to get Money, and not the Glory of God. Take these farther Examples,
in the Primitive times, Anno 346. Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia, a man of great
reputed Integrity and strictness of Life, being a Dissentient from the common
practice of other Bishops, absented himself from the Public Conventions, where
things were practiced against his Conscience; and kept Meetings in Private
Houses, Preached and Administered the Sacrament, not in the places and manner
appointed by the other Bishops Cannons; they seeing their Gainful Canons and
Orders like to be laid aside, Conspired together at the Council of Gangra and
Antioch, making severe Canons of their own, and likewise pretending Apostolical
Canons against all Bishops or Presbyters (for so were they called) which should
be Non-Conformists, that they should be Excommunicated and Deposed, not
regarding though to Acts against their Consciences, and not Commanded by the
Moral Law of God; but though this Corruption crept in, even in the Primitive
times, amongst those who called themselves Christians, and the misery of
Iniquity did then begin to work, 2 These. 2.7. And there were then many
Antichrists, 1 John 2.18. Yet no Example or Precept could they pretend from
Christ, or his Apostles, for these Antichristian and Anti-Apostolical Canons,
Coined to get Money, and Compulsory to Consciences, either to destroy
themselves by Acting contrary to their own Light, or openly to accuse
themselves, to be destroyed by others; where did Christ (who abolished all
Ceremonials, and Declared the Worship of God to be in Spirit and Truth) make so
much as one Canon against Recusancy to Pray in Temples, or Nonconformity to
Prayer in Forms? Where did Christ or his Apostles make one Law or Canon
Compulsory to the Conscience in Form of Worship, or with the Penalties of
Confiscation, or Excommunication hanging at the tail of it? where did they ever
make so much as one such Canon of Marriage, the matter now in Controversy? or,
where did Christ, or any Apostle of Christ, so much as Marry one Couple, or
give Authority to any Priest to do it, or to receives Fees for the doing? who
would never make Canons to compel the Conscience to that, or any thing else,
were it not to get Money. Cyrillus, who passes for a Father of the Church,
getting to be Bishop of Alexandria, Anno Dom. 4.18. turned out all the
Novatians out of their Churches there, they being Non-Conformists to his; and
the chief matter objected against them, was, They were against Bishops, which
might have satisfied a Successor of Christ, who pretended only to lay up
Treasure in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust does Corrupt; but he Rifled all
the Treasure from those Churches, and from their Bishop or Presbyter all the
Substance he had, and like a new Broom swept all clean into his own Coffers,
Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 7. How far different from the Example of Christ, who
though he whipped the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, and overthrew the
Tables of the Money Changers, took not one Penny of the Money; but Bishop
Cyrill aimed at the Monopoly of the Trade to himself here on Earth, and left
the Treasure in Heaven to Christ. Theodosius Bishop of Synada a City in
Phrygia, was a great Scourge to Non-Conformists, whom he called Heretics, but
he persecuted them not out of Zeal, but Covetousness to wring Money from them;
wherefore to that end there was no Device but he practiced; and to afflict them
the more, he put them in Fetters to hold up their hands at the Bar, Socrat.
lib. 7. cap. 3. But while Theodosius went to Constantinople, to obtain greater
Power yet to Squeez Dissentients and Non-Conformists, and particularly those
who were against the Faith of one Substance; and had above all other Persecuted
Agapetus a Bishop of a contrary Faith; Agapetus in his absence, to gain his
Enemies Bishopric from him, turned to be of the same Faith with his Enemy, and
acknowledged one Substance of the Father and Son, and who before was an
Homoiousiast, became now an Homousiast, and obtained thereby the Government of
the Diocese, Churches, and City of Synada; shortly after, Theodosius returned
home from Constantinople to Synada, and brought with him the Authority from the
Lieutenant, whereof he bragged not a little, that he had enough to Pepper the
men to the purpose, who were not of one Substance with him; and being Ignorant
of all the things which were done in his Absence, he straight way went to the
Church, where he found but small welcome, for the Doors were made fast against
him; and after he knew their Dealing, again he posteth to Constantinople; there
he bewailed his State to Atticus the Bishop, and opened unto him, That he was
Injuriously Thrust from his Bishopric; Atticus apprehending that all fell out
for the Profit of the Church of God, endeavored to pacify him with mild and
courteous Language, Exhorting him to embrace a quiet Life void of Trouble and
Molestation, and not to prefer his own Gain and private Lucre above the Public
Profit and Peace of the Church; and thereon writ to Agapetus, willing him to
enjoy the Bishopric, and not to fear at all the Displeasure of Theodosius, Id
ib. By which appears, though Bishops call themselves Angels and Messengers of
God, yet are they not like them, of whom it is said, Luke 15.10. There is joy
in the presence of the Angels of God, over one Sinner that Repents. Nor
though they call themselves Shepherd; of the Flock, are they like the good
Shepherd of whom Christ speaks, Matthew. 18.12. If a man have an Hundred Sheep,
and one of them be gone astray, does he not leave the Ninety and Nine, and
goes into the Mountains and seeks that which is gone astray? And if so be
that he find it, Verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that Sheep, than
of the Ninety and Nine which went not astray. Nor like Christ, who says, John
8.50. I seek not my own Glory. Nor like Paul, who says, 2 Cor. 12.14. I seek
not yours, but you. And Hebr. 13.14. Here have we no continuing City, but we
seek one to come. Nor like those he says died in the Faith, Hebr. 11.13. Not
having received the Promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded
of them, and embraced, them and confessed that they were strangers and Pilgrims
on the Earth. For they that say such things, declare plainly that they seek a
Country. And truly if they had been mindful of that Country, from whence they
came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned: But now they desire
a better Country, that is, an Heavenly. None of which Examples, would the
Alexandrian or Syadan Bishop, nor many others follow; nor do they with their
Penal Tests, Forms and Ceremonies, Persecute to Convert, but to Pervert; and to
that end form their Tests, Oaths and Ceremonies, as contrary to Sense, Reason
and Conscience, as they can possible; and as numerous as they are in the 39.
Articles, that they may have all either under blind obedience, and take
Arbitrarily from them what they please, or if they will not Renounce their
Sense, Reason and Conscience, they may have a pretense to Plunder them of their
Goods; and a Terrible Disappointment it would be to Bishops and their
Chaplains, if all Ministers should have turned Conformists to their Faith,
Oaths, Subscriptions and Ceremonies, for then would all Pluralities have been
supplied with single Incumbents Residents on the Places, and perhaps the
greater part of the Bishoprics and Benefices, with men more above Exception
than many of the Possessors may be; and there might have been many Peter's in
the Church, yet not a Simon found amongst them.

(9.) There ought to be no Compulsion used to Papists to Pray in a Temple,
because it is already proved to be Prohibited by Christ, for any to Pray in a
Temple or public Place, except the Parties are agreed.

(10.) It is a Compulsion many times of a doubtful Conscience, either to Sin or
Damnation, as some have doubted, Romans 14.23. or Martyrdom, or Hypocrisy, to
save their Lives or Goods.

(11.) It is as great a mockery of God, to force men to play the Hypocrites in
Ceremonies or Prayers, against their Consciences, in a place of Public
Convention, as to drive Horses and other Cattle into the Church at the time of
Prayer there; and as Banks did his Horse, make them fall on their Knees, and
Worship the Cross.

(12.) Compulsion of Papists or Protestants to Forms of Common Prayer, deprives
them of the Benefit of being taught the Gospel, by Reason that no distinction
of the place and time of Prayer and Preaching is made, according to the
Examples and Precepts of Christ, already shown; for all the Common Prayer being
Formed by Popes or Bishops, is chopped into so many pieces of Prayers, Chapters,
Lessons, Responds, Letanies, Psalms, pieces of Epistles, pieces of Gospels,
etc. as Confound both Method and Memory; and thereby, while the People
endeavor to Pray and Learn both at once, they can do neither effectually.

(13.) Compulsion to Common Prayer deprives both Papist and Protestant of the
Benefit of either Reading, or Hearing the Scripture Read. (1.) Because it is
Read in such a mangled immethodical way, neither according to the Contexture of
the History, nor according to the Titles of a Concordance or Polyanthy, but
both Examples and Precepts broken off confusedly from what preceded or followed
them, whereby they are made unintelligible, and not again joined with such of
one another, as should mutually expound them, and both Prayers and Psalms are
Read in such a Canting Note in Cathedrals, as they are not intelligible; so, as
there is no human Author, Art or Science Read or Taught so confusedly,
immethodically and Cantingly, as the Scripture, whereby such as cannot Read
themselves, never hear the same Read in any Edifying way their whole Lives,
which is done only on design of gain, to make more Dissentient Ministers, and
fewer of the Trade. (2.) Those who are able to Read themselves, are thereby
deprived of the Reading the same at their Homes; the Papists by their own
Priests being not suffered to have an English Bible in their Houses, and the
Protestants in England being not suffered by their Priests to keep themselves
at their Houses; whereas in Holland many Devout and Pious Protestants never go
to Churches to hear the Scripture Read, but Read the same on Sundays at home at
their own Houses, and are far more ready and skilful, and more Pious in
practice of the same, than those that do Repair to the Public Reading; neither
is there any man Compelled to Church or Chapel there, but may if they desire,
follow the Precept of Christ, to Read or Pray privately in their Closet; and
the Example of the Primitive Christians, amongst whom there was not a Temple or
Altar for near 300 Years after Christ, till Constantine corrupted them to set
up Cathedrals. (3.) Many things in the Common Prayer being offensive to many
Consciences, I dispute not whether weak or strong, or whether they are offenses
given or taken, but being offensive to many, such as are offended, and who
would gladly come to the Church to hear the Scripture Read by it self, or
Expounded in an Exposition, or Lecture, or Sermon, if the same were done as
Christ always used to do it, in a Synagogue, without Prayer mixed with it (the
Reasons whereof are sufficiently before show, p. (...)) but some Consciences
scrupling to mix any Prayers with Preaching in a Synagogue contrary to the
Precept of Christ; and others scrupling the Forms of Common Prayer, whether
single, or mixed, they lose the hearing of Scripture Read, because they shall be
forced to hear such Prayers as offend them Read or mixed with it; and as long as
they are compelled, how can it be expected, but the number of Non-Conformists
will be far greater than Conformists.

Nonconformity to the Prayer before Sermon.
(14.) As the mixture of Common Prayer deprives both Papists and Protestant of
the Benefit of hearing the Scripture Read in the Historical Contexture and
Order, wherein it was left written; so the Prayer before Sermon deprives them
of the Benefit of hearing the Scripture Expounded, either in that Method and
Order it was left written, or in any other Order or Method appointed by the
King and Parliament, of such matters as are necessary to Salvation, and tend
most to the Peace of the Church; for unless there were an Interval for the Bell
to Toll a space after the end of the Prayer, before the beginning of the
Sermon, the Parish who love not long Prayer will not be able to know when the
Sermon begins, and very many of them, though they would be all glad to join
with the Chaplain in his Prayer for the King, yet will they many of them
perhaps have Scruples in Conscience to join with him in Prayer for his Patron.
Patron if to be Prayed for in Public.
(1.) Because he may sometimes happen to be a Papist, and one that seeks the
Destruction of the Protestant Religion and all Protestants, and many may grow
doubtful to Pray for the Prosperity of such a one, the same seeming to be
Prohibited, 2 John 10, 11. Where it is said, If there come any unto you, and
bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your House, neither bid him God
speed. For he that bids him God speed, is partaker of all his Evil Deeds.
Patron a Papist.
(2) As to Public Persons, we are directed by the Scripture to Pray in Public
for none but Persons in public Authority; but a Papist is by Acts of
Parliament Excluded from all public Authority and Office, therefore no public
Person. (3.) As to private Persons, the Scripture and practice of the Primitive
Christians direct to Pray for no private Persons particularly, and by name, but
such as are sick or possessed by the Devil; for in such Case, the direction of
Christ, and practice of the Primitive Church, was, to cast him out by Fasting
and Prayer; but many Patrons are neither sick nor possessed, therefore there is
no direction in Scripture for them to be Prayed for by name in public. (4.)
The Chaplain uses to Pray for Bishops, especially if Patrons, wherein many
Protestants may not be free to join, in regard they many of them assume to
themselves to be Judges of Heresy, and the Rule of Heresy they make, is the
Four first General Councils, and the Papal Canons for Ceremonies, and against
Lollaries; the Parliament deceived by the Bishops to leave the Four first
Councils, the Rule of Heresy was, 1. Eliz. 1. In which Act to Prohibited
Commissioners appointed by the Queen by virtue of that Act, If Bishops are
Papists, or to be Prayed for who Judge Heresy by the four first Councils.
to proceed in Judgment of Heresy beyond the words prescribed them, the
words-Prohibited in a Proviso are these, viz. Shall not in any wise have
Authority or Power to Order, Determine or Adjudg, any Matter or Cause to be
Heresy, but only such as heretofore have been Determined, Ordered or Adjudged
to be Heresy by Authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first Four
General Councils, or any of them, or by any other General Council, wherein the
same was declared Heresy by express and plain words of the said Canonical
Scriptures, or such as shall hereafter be Ordered, Judged or Determined to be
Heresy by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the Assent of the
Clergy in their Convocation.

Of the Four first General Councils, by which Bishops would Judge Heresy, and
of the Suspicion lies on such Judges to be Papists, and not to be Prayed for in
Public.
The Four first General Councils which I suppose they mean, were the Council of
Nice in Bithynia; the Council of Constantinople, where the Great Turk Lives;
the Council of Ephesus, where the Great Diana of the Ephesians, and the Image
which fell from Jupiter were Worshipped; and the Council of Chalcedon in Bithynia.

Council of Nice.
As to the Council of Nice, there were two, one about Anno Dom. 330. the other
about Anno Dom. 381. In the First, called by Constantine the Great, there were
318 Bishops; in another called by another Constantine, there were 350 Bishops,
which of these our Bishops would have I cannot tell, but they may wink and
choose, and though each was Nice, yet neither of them was more Nice than Wise
for the Profit of the Bishops; and the Bishops 1. Eliz. were as wise as they,
to join the Canonical Scriptures and the Council of Nice, that nothing should
be Judged Heresy without their Joint Consent; for the Canonical Scripture has
not so much as one Bishop, they having falsely translated (...) a Bishop, which
ought to have been an Overseer of the Poor; so as there is not one Bishop to be
found in Scripture to be a Judge of Heresy, any more than of Marriage, whereas
at one of the Nices there were 350. And in the Scripture is not one Image found
lawful to be Worshipped, whereas at both the Nices there were a multitude; Set
up Images.
and at the last Nice all the Holy Images of Irene, the Empress, which the
Emperor Leo Isaurus had knocked to pieces, were Restored, and Two and Twenty
Canons thereupon made, That all Image-breakers should be adjudged Heretics, to
the great profit (no doubt) of the Holy Bishops, who knew as well as the
Silver-Smiths of Diana, wherein their Gain lay.

Council of Constantinople.
The Council of Constantinople was a General Council, called about the Year of
our Lord 383 by Theodosius the Emperor, where were 150 Bishops of several
Sects, 36 of them were Macedonians, who held the Holy Ghost to be an Angel,
because Christ is said to send him; and Macedonius their Teacher was then
Bishop of Constantinople, the place where this Council Sat; Him this Council
Deposed, and his Party became thereon Excluded Members, whereby all Votes
passed for the Bishop of Romes Doctrine, with whom the Bishop of Constantinople
was always a dangerous Corrival for Supremacy; there were joined in this
Council Theodosius, Gratian, Confirmed Images.
and Damasus the Pope; this Council confirmed the Nicene Faith, and their
Worshipping of Images, for a Pope could not live without them.

Council of Ephisus.
Another General Council was called at Ephesus, about the Year 834 by the
Emperor Theodosius the Second; and by the Instigation of Pope Celestine the
First, against Nestorius then Bishop of Constantinople, who according to
Evagrius, l. 1. c. 7. held, That the Blessed Virgin Mary ought to be called
(...), and not (...) the Mother of Christ, Continued Images.
and not the Mother of God, which Doctrine being dangerous to the Worshipping
of Images, and the drawing of the Supremacy from Rome to Constantinople, the
Pope got the Council called, and not to sit as formerly at Constantinople, but
at Ephesus, where Nestorius had not so much Power, and there being not able to
bring him to Submit to the Sea of Rome, they Deposed him, and Banished him to
Oasis. This Council of Ephesus is said to have left Two Copies of its Canons in
certain and variant one from another, and some of them are Condemned by the
Council of Chalcedon as Suppositious, which besides the Worshipping of Images,
continued by this Council, makes it a Rule of great incertainty to Judge Heresy.

Council of Chalceldon.
The last of the Four was the Council of Chalcedon in Bithynia, which was called
by the Emperor Martianus, about the Year 455. whereat the Emperor was present
in Person, and 630 Bishops and Reverend Fathers from the greatest part of the
World. What a work is here, who should Judge Heresy? yet they never placed the
Power of Judgment in the Right hand; neither will it be possible to be taken
out of the Wrong, nor did any of these Emperors (nor shall any else dare do it)
as long as Bishops continue hired with their own Treasure and Revenue, and
their own Temporal Sword delivered into their hands, for Rome and
Constantinople to Fight for Supremacy over themselves, and to Sentence and Judge
them and their Subjects (as Rome has done since it obtained Supremacy) at
their pleasure. The Bishop of Rome had at this time got a Bishop at
Constantinople placed for his purpose, who was content to acknowledge the
Supremacy of Judging Heresy to be in the Bishop of Rome, or any else, if he
might be Second, and enjoy so Fat an Office as to be Bishop of Constantinople;
but the City differed from their Mercenary Bishop, who was called Anatolius,
and disdaining in their Religion to bow to Rome, set up Eutyches an Abbot or
Archimandrite of Constantinople, to publish a Doctrine, That Christ had no
Humane, but only a Divine Nature in him, To suppress which Opininion,
Flavianus, a former Bishop of Constantinople; had moved the Emperor. Theodosius
the Second to call a Council at Ephesus, Anno. 449. wherein Eutyches was
Condemned by Flavianus, yet by the help of Chrysaphius the Eunuch, and Endoxia
the Empress, who favored that opinion, Theodosius was prevailed with to make
another Synod Judge of this Heresy, which was again Summoned by the Emperors
Authority at Ephesus, and Dioscorus of Alexandria made President, at which
Synod Eutyches is again cleared, and declared Orthodox, and Flavianus opposing
it was so, upon that Three Days after he died, and all this being done in the
Council of Ephesus, Anno 449. in Theodosius's time, was again Repealed and
Abrogated, Anno 455. in Martianus's time, at the Council of Chalcedon, And Leo
the First Bishop of Rome, by the help of Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople,
and his other Pensioners, carried the Day for Supremacy of Judgment, and
Punishment of Heresy; and Anatolius, and the Sea of Constantinople was to be
only next in Dignity to the Infallible Chair of Rome.

Considerations on the Judgment of Heresy when assumed by Bishops, according
to the Four first General Councils, if it make them suspect to be Papists, and
not sit to be Prayed for in Public.
(1.) Coke says this Parliament 1. Eliz: 1. was doubtful what they ought to
determine Heresy and Schism, and what not, which was as much as the Bishops
needed to desire, that the Layity might be Ignorant, and they have Power to
keep them so, and Heresy a Quaere to be Judged by themselves, pro Arbitrario.

(2.) It appears that the Pious Queen, the Dawning of the Reformation but newly
entering with her, she could not suddenly Dispell the Darkness yet hanging over
her own Protestant Party, nor the Blacker Clouds gathering from Foreign and
Native Papists against her, nor resist her own Bishops designing to continue
those Privileges of Profit, translated by -- from Rome to Canterbury; for
certainly if the Protestant Party had understood, That the Four first Councils
had adjudged all those to be Heretics who would not Worship Images, and had
been able to have over-Voted the Popish Party and Bishops, they would never
have given them Power to Judge Heresy according to those Idolatrous Councils,
for thereby they might Sentence them and all Protestants that were against
Images, to the Stake.

(3.) The Bible was but little before Translated into English, yet to keep it
more dark still, than if it had continued in Latin, they who alleged
themselves Protestant-Bishops, sent the People to Learn the same of Greek
Councils, and to Read there the Law of Heresy, while they Judged them at home
in their Latine-Law and Latine-Courts the mean while.

(4.) They equal Councils with Canonical Scriptures, that their Convocations
and Provincial Synods may have the same Authority.

(5.) They equal their Convocation with the King and Parliament; for the words
of the Statute are, or Determined to be Heresy by High Court of Parliament of
this Realm, with the Assent of the Clergy in their Convocation: Knowing if the
Miter once get equal, it is but one step more to be above the Crown.

(6.) By those words they Constitute to themselves the Power of a Negative in
Legislation, against the King in Parliament, and the two other Estates, which
makes them a Fourth Estate in the Legislative Power, knowing, such Fourth
Estate, like the Fourth Beast in Daniel, may easily Devour all the rest.

(7.) They Judge, since no Commissioners were made, every Bishop in his Diocese
a Judge of Heresy Jure Divino, and they by their own Popish Canons and the old
Popish Acts against Lollards, who were the followers of Wickliff, and the
Primitive Protestants, and the Proto-Martyrs of England, Judged Protestancy to
be Lollary and Heresy; and all the Sheriffs of England take an Oath with all
their Power, to Destroy all Heresies and Errors, commonly called Lollaries,
which is Protestancy, and to assist the Bishops in the same, whenever by them
Required, whereby they have the whole Military Power at their Command, to Judge
and Destroy Protestants as Heretics.

(8.) They Judge Heresy by their own Ceremonial Laws and Canons, whereby they
Arrogate a Power above the Moral Law of God, by which alone all Heresies and
Schisms, and all Error and Truth ought to be Judged.

I conclude therefore, That such Bishops, if there are any such, as Exercise
all these ways of Popery, many Protestants may happen to suspect them to be
Papists for their profit, and therefore scruple to join with their Chaplains in
their Prayer before Sermon, for God to speed them.

It will not agree with the Consciences of many Protestants, to join with the
Chaplain in public Prayer for his Patron, (1.) Because all Patronages were
invented and erected by the Pope and Papal Laws, all Patroage came from the
Pope.
and the Strength and Riches of all Popery consists in Patronages, or Power of
Presentation to Cathedral, Collegiat, Parochial, or other Religious Churches or
Houses. (2.) It is very unjust, that any who must pay the Lawyer or Physician
his Fees, should not have Election of such a one of either, as he can Trust;
and much more as to a Divine Lawyer, and Physician of his Soul, that any should
be Imposed on him whom he cannot Trust, and who may perhaps Poison him in the
Sacrament it self, of which Examples have been already Cited; but the Chaplain
who Prays for the Patron, is obtruded on the Pay of the Parish without their
Assent, and the Patron many times pays him not a Penny, but Sells to him his
Presentation, and Exacts so great a Sum for it, as brings him in Debt as long
as he Lives, which makes him rather Prey on the Flock, then Pray for it, and to
be in perpetual Contention, rather than Peace. (3.) Admit the Parish should
happen to be all Poor, and the Patron by Depopulation, Impropriation, Enclosure
of Commons, and other Oppression, Gets all, and Pays all; yet it is just the
Parish should Elect their Minister, and not he; for Christ sends it as Glad
Tidings to John, Matthew. 11.5. The Poor have the Gospel Preached to them, and
says nothing of the Rich, Christ pronounces all his Blessings on the Poor,
Luke 6.20. Blessed be ye Poor: for yours is the Kingdom of God. Blessed are ye
that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye
shall laugh. And James 2.5. Has not God chosen the Poor of this World, Rich in
Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised them that love him?
Dan. 4.27. Wherefore, O King, let my Counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break
off thy sins by Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by showing Mercy to the
Poor. Prove. 29.14. The King that faithfully Judges the Poor, his Throne shall
be Established for ever. 2 Cor. 9.9. He has given to the Poor, his
Righteousness remains for ever. And Matthew. 19.21. Give to the Poor, and thou
shall have Treasure in Heaven. But Christ never pronounces to the Rich any
thing but great Dangers and Woes, Matthew. 19.23. Then said Jesus unto his
Disciples; Verily I say unto you, that a Rich man shall hardly enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a Camel to go
through the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
God. Luke 6.24. Woe unto you that are Rich: for ye have received your
Consolation. Woe unto you that are full: for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that
laugh now: for ye shall mourn and weep. Isa. 5.8. Woe unto them that join House
to House, and Field to Field. And James 5.1. Go to now ye Rich men, Weep and
Howl for your Miseries that shall come upon you. Your Riches are corrupted, and
your Garments moth-eaten. Your Gold and Silver is cankred, and the rust of them
shall be against you, and shall eat your Flesh as it were Fire. Now if the Rich
should chose the Chaplain for the Poor, he would be apt to Preach contrary to
Christ, totally in favor of the Rich, and not reprove but animate them in
their oppressions of the Poor, which is too notorious in the Chaplains, both of
Ecclesiastical and Lay-Patrons; wherefore if Patrons have more than their
single Votes in Election of the Minister, the poor Parishioners may expect such
Law as is mentioned, James 2.6. Do not Rich men oppress you, and draw you
before the Judgment-Seats? But they shall never have such Gospel as Christ
Preached, and appointed to be Preached to the Poor, nor such Law as he
denounced against the Rich. (4.) The Chaplain in his Prayer before Sermon tells
God so many Lies to his Face in commendation of his Patron, that surely it must
be a mere Mockery of him, for he calls him his Grace, his Excellency, Right
Honorable, Right Worshipful, Pious, Virtuous, and his Very Good Lord and
Patron, when sometimes he is a Person of the most Vile, Unworthy, Sordid and
Wicked Conditions on the Earth. (5.) He gives him more Magnificent Appellations
than to God himself, for though he ingeminate many times in his Prayer, Good
Lord, and Good Lord, yet he never calls God my Very Good Lord, but reserves
that Superlative Title for his Patron; the meanest degree of which greatest
Divine Attribute of Good, Christ himself (to be an Example of Humility)
refused, Luke 18.19. Why call thou me Good? there is none Good but one, that
is God. (6.) If the Patron is so Very Good, Pious and Virtuous, as the Chaplain
makes him, he were more proper to ascend the Pulpit and pray for his Chaplain,
who many times proves none of the best, either in Doctrine, or Manners, but was
only one who came first and gave most for the Place he has. (7.) He is rather
an Herald hired to proclaim every Sunday in the Year his Patron's empty Titles,
than a Messenger of God to Preach on his Divine Attributes. (8.) By these
Parasitical Prayers the Patron is puffed up in such Pride and Folly, that he
grows like the profane Lord mentioned by Cambden, who said, He never needed to
Pray for himself, he had so many Priests to Pray for him; and the Patron and
Patroness are so fop'd with overmuch Flattery, that they seldom grow wise again
as long as they live, to discover those Faults wherein the Priest leads them,
and himself blinded to Destruction, and unto the Woe pronounced to them, Isa.
5.20. That call Evil Good, and Good Evil, that put Darkness for Light, and
Light for Darkness, that put Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter. (9.) As is
before mentioned, amongst the Primitive Christians the Election of the Minister
was always by the Parochial Congregations, till Antichrist who began to work
very early, deprived them of this liberty of Elections by Endowments and
Patronages; the Patrons of which, by this Imposing such Patriarchs, Bishops or
Presbyters as they hired, and corrupted for their Turn, and depriving the
Cities and Congregations of the Free Election of their Pastor, destroyed the
Purity of Primitive Christianity. The loss of Election of their own Ministers,
destroyed the Primitive Christians.
(10.) The restoring again the Election of their own Minister to Parochial
Congregations, and liberty of secret Suffrages, would, First, destroy all
Popery, for Popery cannot be without Patronages, and the Pope as the Apex of
his Supremacy, claims to be Supreme Patron of all Catholic Churches. Secondly,
This would prevent all Imposing of Church-Papists to be Ministers to
Protestant-Parishes. Thirdly, This would prevent all kind of Symony, either to
the Bishop for Ordination, or Patron for Presentation, which is impossible to
be otherwise prevented, and such Parochial Election is therefore better both
for the Minister and the Parish; No Patronages in the Ottoman Empire.
and the Grand Seignior may in this rise in Judgment against Christians, who
allows no Patronages to Parochial Cures in his Dominions, but gives Liberty to
every Parish to choose their own Priest, to whom he himself pays some small
Salarie out of the Public Treasury.

Liberty of Conscience given Papists, secures Liberty of Conscience to
Protestants. The Test of Oaths and Sacrament falls only on the Protestant, and
not on the Papist, he has Offices in Trustee's names. Liberty and Propriety
given Papists, secure the Liberty and Propriety of Protestants.
The Compulsion of Papists to Confession of Faith, or any External Form or
Ceremonies of Worship against their Conscience by Penalties, cannot be done
without bringing the Conscience of the Protestant into the same danger with the
Conscience of the Papist; for if a Papist is permitted to be Indicted for
Recusancy, or Absence from Church, a Protestant may on the same Penal Law be
Indicted on the same; if a Papist is punished for Nonconformity to any other
Ceremony, a Protestant who as much dissents from that Ceremony as a Papist, may
be likewise punished by the same, and a Legem quam tuleras feras be minded
against him, and the Protestant be brought in a worse Condition than the
Papist, whencesoever any Bishop Bancroft or Gundamore gets a Pardon of all
Penal Laws against the Papist, and their Execution sharpened against the
Dissentient Protestant; so if an Excommunicato Capiendo, and Confiscation
thereon be granted to the Power of the Bishop against the Papist or any
Heretic, we see by experience it shall not be emitted against the Papist, but
only against the Nonconformist Protestant.

The Compulsion of Papists to Confession of Faith, or any External Forms or
Ceremonies of Worship by Penalties, or any illegal Proceedings, which destroy
Liberty and Propriety in them, cannot be done without bringing the Liberty and
Propriety of the Protestant into the same danger, as the Penalties by Statutes
laid to compel Confession of Faith and a Form of Worship, and the illegal
proceeding on them, or without them, of beginning Suits with Original Writs,
Law, Execution, Summons before Oblatio Libelli, Oblatio Libelli before Oath of
Calumny, priety of Protestants.
Exaction of Pledges, Bail, Mainprize, Distresses, Condemning before Hearing,
Judgment before Probation, Arrest before Judgment, Outlawries and Excommunicato
Capiendo's, are Penalties and Abuses in the Forms of Judicial Proceeding,
destructive and impossible to consist with Liberty and Propriety in any Kingdom
or State; now if any of these are permitted to Invade the Liberty and Propriety
of the Papist, Tua res agitur, as well as his; it will be impossible for the
Liberty and Propriety of the Protestant to escape, such an Invasion suffered to
break in; unless therefore all the said Abuses are utterly Abolished, as well
against the Papist as the Protestant, it is never to be hoped that Liberty or
Propriety shall be enjoyed by either.

Compulsion to confession of Faith, or Form of Worship, causes Civil Wars.
It is impossible to prevent Seditions and Civil Wars, where there is practiced
in any Kingdom or State Compulsion of the Natives, who are but numerous enough
to Raise an Army, to any Confession of Faith or Form of Worship by Penalties;
this Cruelty being practiced by Antiochus Epiphanes against the Jews, Raised a
great Rebellion and Wars against him in that Nation, as long as he lived, which
Rebellion continued after his Death against Antiochus Eupator his Son, but the
Son advising with wiser Council than his Father had done, offered the Jews on a
Capitulation the Free Liberty of enjoying their own Religion, which granted,
they immediately agreed, and concluded a Peace with the King; Lysias his
General, after the Peace concluded Counseled Antiochus to put Menelaus the
High Priest to Death, as the Evil Counselor who had been the occasion of that
Rebellion and War, by giving such wicked Council to his Father to compel the
Jews to forsake their Rellgion; and the King understanding it, sent Menelaus
unto Beraea a City in Syria, and Commanded him there to be put to Death, he
having before his being sent thither been High Priest for the space of Ten
Years, and made Alcimus High Priest in his place; where appears, that to
Council a King to compel a Nation to a Form of Worship contrary to their
Conscience, tends only to the Advancement of Episcopal, and not of Regal
Interest, and the Kings Person is exposed to the hazard of the Battle, while
the Bishop Luxuriates in the delights of his Palace; Episcopal Councels
unsortunate to Kings, and why.
and this Evil Episcopal Council to compel the People to his Confession of
Faith and Forms of Worship, has not only been unfortunate to antiochus, but to
all Kings and Emperors who have trusted on the Staff of so bruised a Reed as a
Crosyer, on which when they have leaned a while, in the end it will go into
their hands and pierce them, for the Episcopal advice of Compulsion to Forms
and Ceremonies, makes a Rich Bishop, but a Poor King and People; and the
Interest Regal and Episcopal, and the Law of the Crown and of the Canon being
Diametrically opposite one to another, it is no wonder if the Councils of the
later level always at its own Supremacy, and the Subjection of the former; such
was the Episcopal Council of the Bishop of Rome, and Spanish Bishops, to Philip
the Second of Spain; for they Counseled him to break his Oath to his Subjects
of the Netherlands, whereby he had bound himself not to increase their ancient
number of Bishops, being but Three, to which he notwithstanding, contrary to
his Oath, added Fourteen, which no man doubts was highly for the Interest of
the new Bishops, and Bishop of Rome; but every man may see, was clean contrary
and destructive to the King's Interest; so they counseled him to bring in the
Inquisition amongst them, to cut off the Heads of the Protestant Nobles, to
Massacre the Protestant People, all tending to the Advance of the Romish
Episcopal Tyranny, but Destructive to Regal Government; and, what was the
Success of these Episcopal Councels, and Benedictions, of Perjury, and shedding
of Blood; the whole Power of Spain, with all their European and American
Dominions, were thereby disabled to reduce so small a Spot as the United parts
of the Netherlands, and with infinite Losses and Dishonor beaten thence, and
lost the Government ever since. Such Councels gave the Romish, and German
Bishops, to the Emperors, both in the time of Luther, and the Wars then, as
likewise in those later Wars, both in Germany and Hungary, to compel with Fire
and Sword the Protestants to the Episcopal Forms and Ceremonies, highly no
doubt to the Episcopal Interest, but Destructive to the Imperial, and what was
the Success? God has been pleased to make the Protestants stronger and
stronger, and the Emperors weaker and weaker, ever since Charles the Fifth, in
whose time those Wars began, and both he and his Successors have been still
compelled, before the Wars ended, to which they were set on by the Bishops,
Dishonourably, and with Loss, to condescend to a Free Exercise of Faith and
Religion, which is more than a Non-Compulsion to Confelsion of Faith and Form
of Worship, which they might have Honorably, and before any Damage and
Devastation to them, or their Country, have Granted, and would have been at
first Honorably accepted. So in the Peace concluded between the Emperor and
his Discontented Subjects in the Higher Hungary, Anno Dom. 1606. The first
Article agreed on was, That from theneforth it should be lawful for every man
through the Kingdom of Hungary, to have the free Exercise of his Religion, and
to believe what be would; and had not the Emperor been misguided by Episcopal
Councils to the contrary, he might with more Honor and less Damage to himself
and Subjects, have prevented those Intestine Dissensions, by not taking from
them that Liberty of Conscience, as to Faith and Form of Worship, which he was
compelled at last to give them; it being certain that the Bordering Turk, by
the Imprudence of diverse of the Emperors, in being blinded by the Romish
Bishops and their own, to violate the Liberty of Conscience of those Frontier
Countries, and thereby dividing and disuniting them against the Common Enemy,
he has thereof taken great advantages, to the great danger of the Emperors
themselves, the Empire, and the rest of Christendom. And how unfortunate were
Episcopal Councils in our own Country, in this point of Compulsion of the
Conscience to their Faith, Forms and Ceremonies, tending to Episcopal, and not
the Regal Interest, and how they thereby exposed his late Majesty, a Valiant,
Wise and Pious King, and his Three Kingdoms, to an unnecessary War; and the
miserable loss ensued thereby, is yet in Bleeding Memory. What Wars have been
in France by Compulsion of Conscience by Force, and destroying it by Perfidious
Treacheries of Episcopal Councils, is likewise sadly known; so that in all the
Kingdoms of Christendom, Bishops by this Compulsion to their Faith, Forms and
Ceremonies, have one time or other raised Civil Wars and Dissensions, dangerous
or destructive to Princes and People, and shared thereby the Spoils of both; or
what was a greater Prey got by our own, made Sale of all the Estates of the
Revenues of the Bishoprics fallen Twenty Years before they ever made a Sermon
in their Church, or Served at their Altar; so though the Wars were by
themselves occasioned and kindled, and were an universal loss to the People,
yet they lost nothing, and gained all.

That Compulsion against Conscience causes Wars, does likewise agree the
Learned and Pious Doctor More, who says, Denial of Liberty of Conscience,
brings upon Nations and Families Wars, Bloodshed, Subversion of Families,
Deposing, Stabbing, Poisoning of Princes, perpetual Hatred and Enmity amongst
men, and all the Works and Actions of the Kindom of Darkness; whereas if it
were universally acknowledged that Liberty of Religion were the Right of
Mankind, all these mischiefs would be prevented, the Prince could not pretend
any Quarrel against the People, nor the People against the Prince, or against
one another, except for Civil Rights, which are more plain and intelligible.
That Compulsion to Faith, or Forms of Worship, has had the same Destructive
Effects against the Eastern Emperors likewise, which it has had against the
Western, appears by the Example of Michael Palaeologus Emperor of Greece, who
fearing an Invasion from the Turks and other Foreigners from the East,
endeavored to strengthen himself from the Pope, and by him with the Emperor
and other Christian Kings from the West, and by his Ambassadors to that end,
treated with Gregory the Tenth, then Pope of Rome, to Unite and Conform the
Greek Church to the Latin, and to acknowledge the Popes Supremacy over the
Greeks, and Liberty of Appeal from them to the Court of Rome, which the Emperor
offered, and the Pope gladly accepted of; but the People generally abhorred
these Proceedings of the Emperor, and were so Tumultuous, that the Emperor was
fain to leave off the care of the Foreign Dangers, to look to these greater at
home, and told the People to quiet them, that this Alteration was made not out
of any good liking he had to it, but in respect of the dangerous Estate of
things in that juncture of Time, it behoved Prudence to admit the less Evil to
avoid the greater; for if by not granting the Latin Church what they would
have, they would take advantage of the Wars they had with their other Enemies,
and fall on them at the same time, whereby they would attain more by force from
them, than would satisfy them by Treaty, and not only by War become Lords of
their Religion and Ceremonies, but of all at once, their Wives, Children,
Estates and Lives, at the will of the Conqueror, therefore he required them to
yield to necessity, and not to compel him to use more Severe Remedies; and not
finding them pliable, some he Imprisoned, some Banished, some Confiscated, some
pulled out their Eyes, some Tortured, some Dismembered, on which some outwardly
Conformed, but not in their hearts, but the greater part fled, some to Thrace,
some to Achaia, some to Peloponesus and other Countries, and the Emperor
trusting to Foreign Forces whom he joined, and this and his other Cruel
Practices, in denying his Subjects Liberty of Conscience; seeing they were put
to Fight, only to confirm their own Slavery, so discouraged the Greek Army,
that the Turks overthrew them and their Emperor, and won the day, by which they
got their first Footing in Europe. Whereby appears, That as Compulsion to the
Faith and Ceremonies of the Bishop of Rome, and denial of Liberty of Conscience
to the first Arrian Christians, was the cause of the great Conquests of
Mahomet, who gave them Toleration in Asia, which they could not have of the
Roman Emperors; so this denial of Liberty of Conscience by this Greek Emperor,
and his Compulsion of his Subjects to the Ceremonies of the Bishop of Rome, was
the first opening an Entrance to the Turk into Europe, and after the losing of
the Grecian Empire to him, whence so many Fatal Miseries have ensued to
Christendom.

By the Interruption of the Press, I am compelled to break off this Book
abruptly.


