Victory over Death.

A SERMON PREACHED At Steeple-Ashton in the County of Wilts, upon the 27th day
of April, 1676. AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. Peter Adams, The late Reverend, Pious,
and Industrious Minister of Gods Word there. Sometime Fellow of
Vniversity-Colledge in Oxford.

By Paul Latham, P. S. and V. W.

Romans 8.37. In all these things we are more than Conquerours, through him that
loved us.

London, Printed by H. C. for Edward Gellibrand, at the Golden Ball in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard, 1676.

To my worthy and much respected Friend, Mrs. Margaret Adams, the sorrowful
Relict of the deceased: And to the rest of his near and dear Relations.
My Dear Friends,
VIctory over death, as it was one of the blessed fruits of our Saviors death
and resurrection, and is one of the glorious privileges of those that believe
in him; so if it had been represented unto you by the hand of that happy
Comprehensor, who now triumphs in the accomplishment of it, might have
appeared like Apelles his Picture drawn by his own hand, or like Cesars
Conquests by himself recorded in his own Commentaries.

But that the Discourse upon it fell into an hand so unsuitable to the subject,
the misfortune is imputable to the charity of him that made his survey of the
person with the charitable eye of a Friend, and committed a matter of such
weight, like a beautiful Face to a sorry Limner, or a rare Achievement to an
unskilful Herald, only because he had a kindness for him.

That the representation of this Victory appears without the Walls, where it
was once divulged, stands charged upon your candor, that entertained this
sudden production with more friendliness than the Parent had for it.

I shall not mention either the shortness of the time allotted for the
composure, or the intervening occasions that disturbed it; nor yet the little
leisure I had for reviewing and transcribing the Notes; but leave it to the
courteous interpretation of those, that by knowing how to do far better, do
know also how to bear with the imperfections of others.

For your own parts, I look upon your request for making this public, as the
desire of true Friends to retain the Picture of a deceased Brother, when the
Prototype is removed from them: Or like the ambition of the primitive
Christians, to preserve the memory of the Martyrs and Confessors, that were
gone before them, and had taken heaven by violence, Mat. 11.12.

He has run his part of the Christian Race, and has delivered the Lamp to us
that are left. God grant that we may not be slothful, but followers of him, and
of all others, who through faith and patience do inherit the promises, Heb.
6.12.

Though I know you have other and greater matters to draw you to hasten
homeward, yet I presume this will make an addition to the rest, that you may be
joined to our good Friend that sleeps, and to the rest of that general
Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn that are written in Heaven, even to the
Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.

I doubt not, but you have those comforts from Gods good Spirit, that will
support you under so great a loss: And that this small memorial of our Reverend
Friend may be a mean to stir up you, and his late Parishioners, and all others
that may cast their eyes upon these lines, to fight the good fight of Faith,
that they may attain victory in the great conflict, and finally attain
everlasting life, is the hearty Prayer of

Your sympathizing Friend and unworthy Brother, Paul Latham.
Warmister, May 22, 1676.
Victory over Death. A SERMON ON 1 CORINTHIANS. XV. 57. But thanks be to God, which
gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
IF the Interment of a good Christian afford matter of solemn thoughts to that
Minister, who seriously considers such men to be as the Grape-gleanings of the
Vintage, Mic. 7.1. If the parting with a dear and intimate Friend, be tedious
to him that considers such an one to be more precious than the Gold of Ophir.
If the translation of a dear Brother, and faithful Labourer, from serving God
in his Church on earth, to attending on him, and enjoying him in heaven, do
cause sad thoughts of heart in him, that duly surveys the greatness of the
Harvest. Once more, if the removal of a Minister, that was in his life time a
burning and shining light, be to a considerate Parishioner like the setting of
the Sun in the Firmament: Then all these circumstances combined in the sad
occasion of this solemn Assembly, may justly render it very mournful to me.

To whom the greatness of grief might most justly have enjoined silence, had
not the earnest request of our Reverend Brother now with God (which had the
power of a command upon me) appointed speaking to be my work this day.

Who if he had also thought fit, to have suggested words for my subject at this
time, they might have been like the Mantle of Elijah, attended with some of his
Spirit; and thereby, being dead, he would once more have spoken unto you, Heb.
11.4.

But seeing it was his pleasure to repose that confidence in me, as to leave
the choice of a subject to the conduct of my own thoughts, I shall not
disappoint his expectation by gratifying my own passion. For then, to express
my tender brotherly affection, I might have insisted upon such words as those
of David, I am distressed for thee, my Brother Jonathan! very pleasant have
thou been unto me; thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women, 2 Samuel 1.26. Or rather, to express a more honorable and reverent affection, more
suitable to my juniority in years, and deficiency in seize, I might have
spoken of him, and by a figure to him, in such words as those of the King of
Israel to the Prophet, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof! 2 King. 13.14.

But instead of humouring my self (which would be a very unsuitable design in
him that steps up into the Chair of so worthy and self-denying a man of God), I
shall rather choose to represent unto you, your late Reverend Minister, now
dead, in living colors; and in his example and seize, to set before you
at once your duty and happiness in obtaining a glorious and comfortable victory
over death. And for this end I have chosen to insist upon this portion of
Scripture, Thanks be to God, which has given us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Which words are the result of the Apostles joyful preapprehending by the eye
of Faith, that victory which shall hereafter be completed to Believers over
the last great enemy. Ver. 54. He stretches forward his head to look unto
this. So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal
shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory. Whereupon he subjoineth a confident
challenge to death, or rather, he manfully defieth it, v. 55. O death, where is
thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Which he further amplifieth, by
representing the length and strength of Deaths weapons, v. 56. The sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law. And concludes with this
(...), or song of triumph, in the words I have chosen to insist upon; But
thanks be to God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherein we have this blessed Apostle expressing the courage, and yet the
humility of a Christian: His confidence through Faith, and withal the lowly
deference that he owns to Almighty God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Or more particularly, we have the true Christians victory over Death:

First, joyfully reported, (...), a victory to us Christians over Death.

Secondly, thankfully resented, (...), thanks be to him that gives us this
victory.

Thirdly, the Author of it acknowledged and magnified, (...), thanks be to God.

Fourthly, the procuring or meritorious cause of this victory signified, (...),
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

I begin with the joyful report of this victory over Death, (...). This word
victory, is a martial term, and intimates:

First, that Death is an Enemy. There may be an obliging victory in the
friendly contests of Lovers, who endeavor to outstrip each other in offices of
kindness and good will. But this victory is of another nature; it is like the
battle of the warrior, with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood, Isa.
9.5. It is the overcoming of a great and formidable enemy. Such is Death; and
that,

First, To the natural concerns of man. To destroy either the Soul or Body of
man, is a work beyond the reach of Death, or any other, on this side that
infinite power that made them both. But what Death aims at, is the separating
of these old friends, and dissolving the union that was so intimate between
them.

And this is that which Nature so industriously endeavors to maintain, that
the dissolution must be an act of great violence to it.

To maintain this union, Nature is not only forward to gratify sense, by
eating and drinking what is pleasant and delightful; but sometimes content to
affront and annoy it, by submitting to severe abstinences, laborious exercises,
ungrateful and nauseous doses of Physic. To maintain this, the most greedy
Mammonist will break off some pieces of his adored Idol, employing his bags to
compass this greatest purchase of continued health. Yea the industrious
Merchant will discharge his Ship of the most promising return, to secure what
he accounts the most precious thing aboard, his life. To continue this union,
how many are content to undergo the tediousness of a lingering distemper, and
choose a dying life before death it self? To maintain this, how many do meet
force with force, and make their neighbors life a commutation for their own?
Yea for this end, how often do men expose, and sometimes yield to part with some
of the less useful members of their own bodies, to secure, by composition, the
health of the whole?

All which shows, how earnest desires, and what diligent care Nature has
inspired us with, of maintaining this union of Soul and Body, and perpetuating
it as far as may be: And consequently, what an enemy Death is, in attempting
the dissolution thereof.

Secondly, to a man in his moral concerns, Death is an enemy. Even a criminal,
while he can escape the arrest of the Law, thinks the best of his own
condition; and a sinner, while he can hold up his head in the land of the
living, is apt to bless himself in his own sanguine conceits, and to laugh at
the doctrine of a Judgment to come.

But look what an enemy the Malefactor esteems him, that hales him before an
earthly Tribunal; or a Debtor him that calls him to account for his scores;
such an enemy does every man that knows himself to have offended, and has not
sued out his pardon; every man that has run in score to Gods justice, and has
not applied himself to that Surety that so graciously offers to pay his debts,
esteems Death, that comes to bring him before Almighty God, as a righteous
Judge, from whom he may expect a dreadful sentence, and the great Creditor, to
whom he knows himself not responsible.

Secondly, this term Victory, supposes a conflict. Over a Coward that dares
not to fight, or a Town that surrenders upon summons, we are not ordinarily
said to obtain a victory. This is properly the effect of struggling and striving
for mastery. And with this enemy, Death, every man has a great conflict. And
that both

First, Eminus, at a distance, when it threatens us, and thus it begets
fear; which is a passion that commonly makes impression, especially upon
persons of soft and tender natures, not inferior to those that attend the
approaches of evil. Especially, O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee
to a man that lives peaceably in the enjoyment of his friends, to him that is
quiet and prosperous in his business, and to him that has an appetite, and can
relish his meat? Ecclus. 41.1.

This is such a conflict as does quietos sollicitare, disquiets those that are
at ease in Sion, and disturbs them that are settled upon their Lees. To think,
that this healthy body must e're long be distempered with diseases; that those
pleasures that have been the darlings of their souls, must everlastingly
forsake them; that those riches for which they have toiled and labored, must
take themselves wings and for ever fly away; yea, that this stately and
beautiful structure of the body must yield to dissolution, and (which is more
dreadful than all the rest) that when the dust shall return to the earth, the
spirit shall return to God that gave it, Eccl. 12.7. to pass an account of the
things which it has done in the body, and to receive a reward according to
them, whether they be good or evil, 2 Cor. 5.10. This is that terror of the
Lord, through which so many are all their life time subject to bondage, Heb.
2.16.

Secondly, and especially, Cominus, when Death comes to conflict with us hand
to hand, when the battle is set in array, and pila minantia pilis. Can thy
heart endure, or thy hands be strong in the day when God thus deals with
thee? Ezekiel. 22.14.

When Death is represented in its most ordinary habit, this ghastly Skeleton,
armed with Scyth and Spade, beset with the skulls and bones of dead men, as
trophyes of its multiplied conquests; how dismally does it look! how far from
the aspect of one that designs to court delicate Ladies! yea more like to a
Mormo designed to affright mankind.

But especially when it clothes it self in an habit of extraordinary terror,
when it appears in the scarlet cloak of a violent calenture, in the purple
robes of a pestilential fever; when it enamels its weapons with the stone, or
stains them with the strangury; or when it comes raging in a violent and
masterless phrenzy. In a word, when it endeavors to appear more formidable
than it self, who ever could pretend to such strength as should not grow
seeble, or to such hardiness as should not be dismayed before it?

Its first encounter baffles the appetite, and causes it to languish, it
disturbeth and interrupteh the sleep, weakens the joints, commands a cessation
of the usual exercises, spreads paleness and wanness upon the skin.

Its next proceedings subject a staff for the necessary support of the
enfeebled structure, call in the Druggist to supply the place of the Cook and
Confectioner, cast a man upon his bed as the retirement of his wearied and
fainting limbs, and by degrees invade the seats of the vital and animal
spirits, afflict the heart with faintings, the head with pains, obstruct the
vessels serving for the passage of the blood and spirits, cause the keepers of
the house to tremble, the strong men to bow themselves, and those that look out
of the windows to grow dim for want of the usual supply of animal spirits. Till
at last the cold sweat takes possession of the Hippocratical face, the
disturbed soul sits upon the trembling lip, threatening to take its leave of
that body, where the enfeebled spirits will not prevail to fetch up that phlegm
that lies rattling and betokening suffocation: And then is the dust prepared to
return to the dust, whence it was taken. Eccl. 12.7. Then does man set forward
in his joyrney toward his long home, and the mourners go about the streets.
Then comes a shroud to be the modish apparel, and a sepulcher the bed for
repose; then begins this proud, aspiring Nimrod to know himself, and to own his
original, saying to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worms, ye are my
brethren and sisters, Job 17.14. Then he that so bustled above ground, as to
think the world too strait for him, is content with six foot of earth for his
patrimony. A rare conquest, the fruit of a signal conflict!

Thirdly, victory as it is here applied, supposes Death accustomed to conquer.
That challenge, or triumphant insultation, v. 55. O death, where is thy
victory? seems to suppose Death a tried Champion, fleshed in conquest. And if

First, we look to its power over man's body, we must confess it an irresistible
enemy, and a constant victor, Pallida mors aequo, etc. It is not the robes and
palaces of Kings, any more than the rags and cottages of beggars, that exempt
them from the arrest of this Sergeant; neither are those so high as to affright
death from attempting them, nor these so low that it should scorn to meddle
with them. It is not the long delay and forbearance of Death in demanding its
due, that can make it forget the debt that is owing by the aged. The short
histories of the strangely long lives of those Antedeluvians, that survived the
elapsing of several hundreds of years, are everywhere closed up with, and he
dyed, Genesis 5. Nor it is the pitiful cryings and pulings of the infant in
swaddling clothes (that is loath to be snatched away form its beloved breast, and
seems to plead that it has tasted nothing of the pleasures, nor understood the
design of its being set ashore upon the earth) that can move this Skeleton,
void of bowels, to hold its hand, and to draw back its envenomed darts: But
these things are done in the green tree, yea in the tender plant, as well as in
the dry, Luke 23.31.

The wisdom of Solomon, or of the seven Sages of Greece, would in vain have
attempted to out-wit Death. The strength of Samson, or of David's worthies,
(whose countenances were like the countenances of Lions, 2 Samuel 17.10.) could
not daunt this Messenger of Gods justice, or prevail in the last conflict with
it; but these also yielded to be led in triumph by Death.

In Golgotha are skuls of all sorts and sizes, as tokens of the impartial
conquest that Death is making. There lies Absalom so perfect in beauty, as well
as Mephibosheth a deformed Cripple. There lies the wanton and amorous
youngster, as well as the old man that doted and leaned on his staff. There
lies Goliath a man of overgrown nature, as well as David a ruddy youth. There
lies Hector and Achilles so famous for manly valor, as well as Thesites a
cowardly and seditious brawler. We may see there, that wise men dye, as well as
the foolish and brutish persons, Psalm. 49.10. There have Xerxes and all his
vast army, that threatened to level the mountains, and to drink the Oceans dry,
laid down their skuls, and owned deaths sovereignty. Nor could those many
million of millions, that like piles of grass have stood before Death, yet
blunt the edge of its Scyth, but hitherto it goes on conquering and to conquer.

Secondly, if we take measure of its strength in arresting the Soul of man, we
must needs own it as an absolute victor. It has a sting put into it by sin,
which makes it assault the sinner with deadly strength and violence. Man by his
wilful and disingenuous transgression incurred the sentence of the Law, which
was Death in the comprehensive notion of it. To bring men to that which the
Scripture calls the second death, Rev. 20.6. the former death has commission.
And who is able to withstand a Messenger of the Almighty, or refuse appearance,
when he summons us to that tribunal?

It is not men's hiding their sins like Adam, nor covering them with the
fig leaves of trifling excuses; it is not gilding over the potsherd of
abomination with the silver dross of Pharisaical pretenses, or outside
holiness: It is no palliating colors, no cunning conveyances, no subtle
evasions, no critical subterfuges, can deliver a man, in that last encounter,
or stand him instead when Death summons him to appear before the judgment seat
of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.10. So that in every respect Death pleads custom for the
victory it demands over mankind.

But yet Fourthly, the term here used and applied to a Christian, does
signify, that a good man may obtain a victory over this mortal enemy, in the
great conflict, though so accustomed to conquer, and so proud with success. And
the joining of the subject we with the adjunct victoriousness, shows, that it
is the peculiar privilege of true Christians, so that strangers do not
intermeddle with this joy, Prove. 14.10.

Not that a good man can expect to be exempt from the stroke of Death, nor be
secure as to any particular time or season of his life, nor plead exemption
from any sort of disease, or circumstance of Death; for what man is he that
lives and shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the power of the
grave? Psalm. 89.48. And it is appointed for men (indefinitely, and without
distinction) once to dye, Heb. 9.27. This being the passage through which we
are to enter into another world. But yet (though it may seem a wonder) even
when good men are killed all the day long, they are not only victors, but more
than conquerors, Romans 8.36, 37. And even in dying they are troubled, but not
distressed; they are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.9. More particularly,

First, they are victors over the fear of Death. That fear that arises from an
apprehension of turning their backs upon the fruit of their labors, they
overcome by considering, that in heaven they have a better and more enduring
substance, Heb. 10.34. Even an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1.4.

That which springs from the thoughts of the dissolution of this beautiful and
majestic piece of Gods workmanship, which has been so much adored and
deified, Phil. 3.19. is overcome by considering, that if their earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, they have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.

That which arises from the preapprehension of the pains of death, in the
violent ejecting of this old inhabitant the Soul, from its beloved mansion the
Body, is overcome by considering, both the necessity of this violence, and our
being but once molested with it, (which are thoughts that offer themselves to
all men's consideration); and withal, that Death is a passage, though a strait
one, unto life; a Porter, though a rugged and surly one, that lets us into the
Palace of the great King.

And who will dread that which delivers him from so much sin and misery, and
puts him into possesion of so great good in another place; though like the
Angels to Lot, it use some friendly violence in haling him hence? Genesis 19.16.

This makes a good man not only to submit to death, and say, the will of the
Lord be done, Act. 21.14. and, it is the Lord, let him do what seems good in
his sight, 1 Samuel 3.18. but further, to be desirous to depart, and to be with
Christ, as esteeming that to be far better, Phil. 1.23. yea, to groan, being
burdened, desiring to be clothed upon with their house which is from heaven, 2
Cor. 5.2. and to account Death as great gain, Phil. 1.21.

Secondly, they are conquerors over the pains of Death, which are a great evil,
and sorely pressing to humane nature. These a good man overcomes, not so as to
be exempt from the same exquisite sense of pain which other persons feel; yea,
God is ofttimes pleased, for most wise and gracious ends, to exercise the best
of men, under most tedious and exquisite pains: But yet they are conquerors in
the conflict, though the encounter be sharp.

Partly, through that great measure of Patience which God gives them under his
hand, which then has the best opportunity for showing its perfect work, Jam.
1.3. And it is a glorious victory, when patience holds out to the end, and this
strong man cannot be brought to bow under the greatest burden of extremity that
can be laid upon it; witness the case of Job, whose invincible patience under
the greatest sufferings, was to the glory of God, and to his own comfort and
ease at present, and future honor.

Partly, through the strength of that other grace of Faith, whereby they look
unto that fatherly hand that lays these things upon them, and thereby are not
only drawn to a filial submission (which gives ease to the mind under
sufferings) but also take the advantage of deriving comfort from him that
smites, and will also heal them. So that when the outward man decays, the
inward is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. And withal, this grace enables a
good man to look up into Heaven in the midst of the pains of Death, as St.
Stephen did, Act. 7.55. and to see his Savior there standing ready to receive
him to himself in glory. And this makes him, though not to hate his own body,
nor simply to desire to be unclothed, yet willing and desirous to be clothed
upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5.4. and comfortably
to bear those difficult methods, whereby the divine wisdom thinks it fit to
bring this to pass.

Thirdly, over the sting of Death. There is a sharp and poisonous thing put
into the tail of this Serpent, through our transgressing the Law of God; and
this is that which is most dreadful in Death, to a considering person, and that
which even a Roman courage could not prevail to master. But a Christian finds
that in the word of God, that fortifies him against this also.

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Chirst that died, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, and makes intercession
for us: who shall separate us from the love of Christ? I am persuaded, that
neither death, nor life, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.33, 34, 35, 38,
39. Here then is the strong man disarmed, the Lions mouth shut, the Serpents
sting taken from him.

Fourthly, over the Power of Death. To reason not improved by the supplemental
light of divine revelation it seemed incredible, that God should raise the
dead, Acts 26.8. And to him that considers the severity of Gods justice, it
might seem that when the judge should have delivered us to the officer, and he
cast us into prison; we must by no means come out thence till we should have
paid the utmost farthing. Math 5.25, 26. That is never at all. But when we
consider, that as Christ was delivered for our offenses, so he rose again for
our justification, Romans 4.25. we may thence very reasonably conclude, that he
that raised up the Lord Jesus from the dead, will also quicken our mortal
bodies, Romans 8.11. And upon this account a good man has confident hopes of
victory over the power of Death, and can say, I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my
skin worms destroy this flesh, yet with mine eyes shall I see God, Job 19.26.

The precedent discourse being reflected upon, may be useful,

First, to show us the excellency of the Christian faith above all other
notions of a Deity that have been entertained in the world, in that it enables
us for the great conflict, and gives us victory over the worst of our enemies.
Indeed the ancient Romans have showed themselves sufficiently audacious in
looking death in the face; but their confidence was supported by slender props,
Amor patriae, laudumque immensa cupido. a desire to advance and enlarge the
City whereof they were freemen, and to erect a monument of their own praise to
posterity; this made them prodigal of their lives, and fearless of death. But a
Christian has a desire to depart hence, that he may be near unto Christ, and
upon a full and mature consideration, finds this to be best for him, Phil. 1.23.

An heathen may take some satisfaction in reflecting upon his life past, with
Vixi, et quem dederat cursum natura peregi. I have lived, and filled up the
station wherein nature has placed me. But this comes short of the stable
confidence of the Apostles, when in leaving the world he could say, I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me in that day, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

A Socrates from principles of Philosophy might conclude the immortality of the
soul, and consider his wages in some sort. An opera nostra sit probaturus Deus
nescio: certe sedulo conati sumns ut ei placerent: Est mihi tamen certa spes
conatus nostros eum fore accepturum.

But by what means imperfect good works could obtain acceptance with the
strict justice of God, and how sin could obtain pardon with him, this
Philosophy could not teach them. But the Scripture tells us, that God will own
his people in the day when he makes up his jewels, and will spare them as a
man spares his own son that serves him, Mal. 3.17. That with the Lord there
is mercy, and with him there is plenteous redemption; and that he shall deliver
Israel from all their sins, Psalm 130.18. So that we may say, Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his abundant mercy has begotten us
again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, from the dead, 1
Pet. 1.3. and has hereby given us comfort through faith, in our conflict with
this last and mortal enemy.

Secondly, If a true Christian is conqueror over death, why then should he fear
it? The spirit of a man will help him to sustain his infirmities, or bodily
pains, Prove. 18.14. Manly courage should help to bear us up under outward
trials. And the Spirit of God, bearing witness with our spirits that we are the
children of God, Romans 8.16. will help us to master the fear of death, as an
enemy to the soul.

Why then should we fear that Serpent that is disarmed of his sting? that Lion
whose mouth is shut, and his jaw-teeth pulled out? that adversary whose weapons
are taken from him? It is enough for them that know no better place to go unto,
to to be afraid and unwilling to leave the world; enough for them that have
not a God to support them, to sink under pains and sickness; enough for them
that do not believe themselves to have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, who is a propitiation for their sins, 1 John 2.1. to be
afraid to appear before Gods, tribunal. Christian religion has taught better
things to all that duly embrace it. And therefore let us comfort our selves
therewith, and with joy draw water out of these wells of salvation, Isa. 12.3.

Thirdly, If we have overcome death, why should we sink under the fear of any
other troubles? Death is called the King of terrors, Job 18.14. in the same
sense as the Lion is called King among the beasts, and the Eagle among birds,
because it is the chief of all the rest. And if the leader of terrors be
overcome, why should we fear those that follow, and are less formidable! The
uttermost that can be threatened by any worldly misery, is to bring us to death,
under disadvantageous and dreadful circumstances. And if this be conquered,
what need we fear that which can but threaten to bring us thither? Therefore
let us not fear these fears, nor be afraid; but sanctify the Lord of hosts
himself, and let him be our fear and our dread, Isa. 8.12, 13. Let us with
cheerfulness expect, and with patience endure all the troubles of this life,
because we have victory over the last enemy, Death.

Thus much for the joyful report of this victory, which was propounded as the
first general to be considered.

The Second general in the Text, is, the thankful resentment of this victory
vouchsafed to us, (...), thanks be to him that gives it to us.

How thankfully every good man should, and does resent the victory vouchsafed
unto him over Death, will appear by considering how great a privilege this is.
And that will be evident to him that considers on the one hand the miserable
estate of him that lies under the dominion of Death, and at its mercy; and on
the other, the happy estate of him that through Gods mercy has obtained this
victory.

First, for the misery of those that are in subjection to Death, whose tender
mercies are cruelty; this will appear, if we take notice of their estate,
either when Death is apprehended at a distance, and under a remote prospect; or
when it is at hand, and comes to do execution upon them.

First, let us take notice of them when Death is apprehended at a distance, and
under a remote prospect; and so the thoughts of Death as victorious over them,
do

First, allay the generosity, and abate the sweetness of all worldly comforts.
He that duly considers, that his time is in Gods hands, Psalm. 31.15. and that
himself is not master of the next moment that is to pass by; that man goes
down to his grave, and returns no more; and if a man dye, shall he live
again? Job 14.14. What a cooler does this afford to his spirits, when warmed
and made brisk with the enjoyment of worldly affluence? This is apt to make a
man despair of all his labor under the Sun, and to reckon all but vanity and
vexation of spirit, Eccles. 2.20. Considering, that the riches for which he
has toiled, and about which he has disturbed himself; the pleasures in which
he has delighted to wallow; the honors to which he has aspired, and climbed
up by such a steep and slippery ascent, shall then cease from affording him any
more satisfaction: And withal, that he is not within the prospect of a better
enjoyment, that may recompense his loss of these present good things, but must
go naked out of the world in all respects, as he came naked in, and so lie down
in eternal misery.

Secondly, this abates the lively and generous actings of the soul, and dismays
it for any noble designs and attempts. When a man seriously considers all his
endeavors under the the Sun to be like Spiders webs, spun with a great deal of
painful labor, and exenterating care and contrivance, and after this, in a
moment swept down and destroyed by the besom of Death; that when man's breath
goes forth, he returns to his earth, and in the same day all his thoughts
perish, Psalm. 146.4.

And if withal, there be not a greater and more noble design which such a man
has proposed to himself, and has attained probable hopes of the
accomplishment of it; this is apt to make him conclude, that truly man walks
in a vain shadow, verily they disquiet themselves in vain; and that every man
living, upon ground, or in what capacity soever he stands, is altogether
vanity, Psalm. 39.5, 6. and to cry out with the wise man, Vanity of vanities,
all is vanity, Eccl. 1.2.

And if the profit that is in all labor do encourage a man to take pains, and
to endeavor to show himself wise under the Sun; then sure these thoughts, of
the vanity of humane designs and attempts, do take a man off from striving to
do wisely and worthily in his generation.

Thirdly, it duls the edge of the soul for good duties. He that fancies himself
to lie down under the burden of insuperable difficulties, that apprehends God
to be an austere Master, Heaven to be unattainable, and Hell unavoidable, will
have very little mind to stir up himself to lay hold upon God, or to work out
his own salvation, Isa. 64.7. Phil. 2.12. or to use that violence of holy
endeavors that is required in taking the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 11.12. For it
is hope of success that quickens endeavors, and despair of this does disspirit
a man, and make him dull and unactive.

Secondly, let us take notice of such a man when Death is at hand, and begins
to encounter him; and here we find him in a very miserable estate that has not
attained victory over Death, for

First, it dispossesseth him at once of all the fruits of his labors, and
ejects him from the enjoyment of all his worldly acquisitions. Though whilst he
lived he blessed his own soul, he shall go to the generation of his fathers,
and shall no more see the light of comfort; and therefore man that is in honor
and underctandeth not, is like the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.18, 19, 20. And
is it not a dismal condition, for a man that has toiled and bestowed great
industry, that has plotted and contrived to the disturbing of his head, and
interrupting of his sleep, that has pinched and denied himself the enjoyments
of many worldly comforts, to increase his heap by parsimony; yea, that has too
often stained his conscience, and hazarded his soul, to heap up that which
might be called a plentiful estate in this world; this man I say, to hear on a
sudden that dreadful and heartbreaking voice, Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be taken from thee, and then whose shall all those things be, for which
thou have labored? Luke 12.20.

Secondly, It dasheth all those vain hopes of Heaven, with which such a man had
flattered himself. As there are politic projecting hypocrites, who know
themselves to be no better than whited Sepulchers, Matthew. 23.37. so are there
many foolish Virgins, who bear about the lamp of an outward profession in their
hands, and want oil to make it burn, Matthew. 25.3. and yet are so simple as to
expect at last to enter in with the Bridegroom as well as the best.

And how sad will it be to them, when at death coming to the door, and crying
Lord, Lord, open unto us, they shall be repulsed with, Verily I say unto you, I
know you not. What is the hope of the hypocrite, though he have gained applause
from the World, when God takes away his soul? Will God then hear his cry, when
trouble comes upon him? Will he then delight himself in the Almighty? will he
always call upon God? Job 27.8, 9, 10.

Beside, there are many, who though they could not find in their hearts to day,
while it was called to day, to hear God's voice, Heb. 3.8. yet they verily
intended to take a time more convenient for these things. But now these men's
hopes are over; the Bridegroom is come on a sudden, those that were ready are
entered with him, and the doors are shut.

Thirdly, Death puts an end to his day of Grace. Some men indeed have so long
hardened their hearts against hearing the voice of God, that he has already
given them up to their own hearts lusts, Ps. 81.12. they have so long resisted
the Holy Ghost in its strivings, Acts 7.51. that God has resolved that his
Spirit shall no more strive with them, Genesis 6.3. But ordinarily men's day of
grace is commensurate with the day of their lives, and whilst men are alive,
there is no man so bad, but he may become better. But death puts an end to
these expectations, it shuts-men up in an unalterable condition; and as the
tree falls, so it shall lie for ever, whether toward the South, or toward the
North, Eccles. 11.3.

Fourthly, death commonly brings to a man's remembrance those sins, which before
he was unmindful of. In the day of health and prosperity men are apt to put far
from them the troublesome and ungrateful remembrance of their sins past.
Worldly business, and company, and divertisements, worldly pleasures and
delights suggest more sanguine thoughts to the mind. But when death comes, God
does ordinarily, to them that are of sound mind and memory, show that he has
set their iniquities before him, and their secrets sins in the light of his
countenance, Psalm. 90.8. Yea, after his long silence, he does then use to
reprove men, and set their sins in order before their eyes, Psalm. 50.21. and
causes men's iniquities to compass them about, as at their heels, Psalm. 49.5.
and lets them see and feel that it is an evil thing, and a bitter, that they
have forsaken the living Lord, and that his fear has not been before their
eyes, Jer. 2.19. And judge how unwelcome this is to a man's mind, that has long
lain asleep in security, when it makes him cry out with Ahab to Elijah, have
thou found me, O my enemy? 1 Kin. 21.20.

Fifthly, death puts the greatest affront imaginable upon the beautiful and
majestic fabric of the body. This pile of dust and ashes that appears so
stately through the Divine Architecture, that is so fearfully and wonderfully
made in its contexture, Psalm. 139.14. that is rendered so glorious by the
enstamping of God's Image upon it, that is by God's ordination become so awful
and formidable to inferior animals of far greater strength: This painted piece
of dirt, that has been so much doted upon, and adored for its delicate
feature, and amiable intermixture of lillies and roses; this well-formed
statue, which voluptuous persons have adored as a terrestrial Deity, Phil.
3.19. to which they have constantly sacrificed whole hecatombs of all the
dainties which the Earth, the Air, and the Sea could afford; this flesh for
which men have made provision to fulfill its lusts, Romans 13.14. This must then
become equal to the beasts that perish, a prey to the inferior animals, the
very worms, loathsome to the eye of its former admirers; so that they that loved
it best, when informed with a Soul, can afford it now no better complement
than, let me bury my dead out of my sight, Genesis 23.4.

This that was sometime fed and clothed by the contrivance and industry of so
many heads and hands, must go naked out of the world, as it came naked in, and
lie solitary and neglected in the grave, keeping an everlasting fast; yea,
instead of faring deliciously every day, it self must afford a meal to the
worms, and say to corruption, thou art my father, Job 17.14 But this is not
all, nor the worst yet.

Sixthly, Death sends the Soul to be a prey to the worm that never dies. Here
is the Morral of Prometheus his Vulture, the preying of the Conscience upon it
self, with the ungrateful and corroding remembrance of the pleasures of this
life, when they are to part as never to return; of the sins of a man's life, for
which God does now bring him into judgment, of the day of grace, which he
neglected, being like the fool that had a price put into his hands to get
wisdom, but had no heart to make use of it, Prove. 17.16.

This is a vengeance worthy of God, a punishment suitable to the nature of a
separate Soul, when it has not the company of the Body to partake of the other
torment, the fire that never shall be quenched, Mar. 9.44. To this torment
death sends the soul, as judgmet shall hereafter send the body to the other.
This is the unhappiness of those that so live as to fear death, and justly to
fear it, because under its power and dominion in the worst and severest sense.

But as we have seen the dark side, let us also take a view of the bright side
of the cloud, let us.

Secondly, consider the happy and comfortable condition of those that have
attained a blessed victory over death, and and live in the enjoyment of the
sense thereof, and so it will appear to be matter of thankful resentment, and
worthy of giving praise to the author thereof: For,

First, such a man enjoys more comfort in the world, then another man does or
can. God, as a bountiful Creator, has given us variety of comforts in the
things of this world, and it is his will that we should serve him with gladness
and cheerfullness of heart in the abundance of all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47. And he
is best able to rejoice and take comfort in the fruits of Gods goodness, who
has overcome the danger and fear of Death. For

First, This sets his Aflections above the world. It is most certain that
whatsoever we have of worldly enjoyments, either imperat, aut servit, to some
the world is a master, to others a servant. And as it is a very useful and
obsequious servant when it is kept under, so it is a very imperious and
tyranical master when we subject our selves to it.

Now he only is a truly free man, who has placed his most lively affections
upon better things. this frees him from those eager desires after getting more,
which like a (...) in the body, do gnaw the mind with perpetual unquietness:
from those distracting sollicitudes about worldly matters, which keep the soul
continually upon the Rack, drawing it this way and that way. And in the
affluence of the things desired, this prevents that puffing up with pride,
which like a status in the Hippocondries, or a tumor in any part of the body,
renders the mind subject to an uneasy calendure: that pinching greediness in
keeping together the heap, which like a compressed vessel in nature hindering
the free motion of the blood and spirits, binds the soul, and hinders it from
a comfortable enjoyment of its portion. This discharges the mind from that
anxiety as to losing these things, which in many takes away the pleasure they
should reap from the enjoyment of them; and finally so suits the spirit to a
compliance with the Divine Providence, that it reckons the lines fallen to it
in a pleasant place, Psalm. 16.8. and shakes off that repining and discontent,
which like an unfit shoe, makes a man step uneasily in the condition wherein
he walks.

Now this is the victory whereby we overcome the World, even our Faith, 1 John
5.4. This raises the heart above it, when we with comfort look on our selves
as strangers and pilgrims in it, and such as seek a better Country, that is an
heavenly, Heb. 11.16.

Secondly, this satisfies a man's mind that his main concerns are secured, and
the greatest of fears overcome. Go thy way, eat thy bread, drink thy drink with
a merry heart, for God accepts thy works, Eccl. 9.7. In worldly matters, then
are we at ease, and can enjoy a friend, or take satisfaction in any other
comfort, when our greatest concerns are secured, and our main business over.
And especially in spiritual affairs, then do a man's morsels go down sweetly,
and he does sleep with freedom and security, when the fear of God's wrath is
removed, and an interest in his love and favor secured.

This is bread that the World knows not of, hidden Manna, Rev. 2.17. such joy
as a stranger intermedleth not with, Prove. 14.10. Such is the sweetness and
satisfaction that this affords, that the like is in vain sought for in worldly
acquisitions. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us: And this
puts gladness into our hearts more than the men of the World have in the time
when their Corn, and Wine, and Oil increases, Ps. 4. 6, 7.

Secondly, such a man goes along in the way of his duty with vigor and
delight. It is a great happiness as well as a duty, to cut with a keen edge in
doing the will of God, to proceed with vigor, and to take delight and
complacency in doing well. And there is nothing so much conduces to work in us
this temper of mind, as confidence of a reward added to a conscientious sense
of God's command. Be not weary of well-doing, knowing that in due time ye shall
reap, if ye faint not, Gal. 6.7. Be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord; forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

Thirdly, he will pass through the difficulties of a Christian course with
courage and serenity of spirit. The Apostle tells us, that we have need of
patience, that after we have done the will of God, we may inherit the promises,
Heb. 10.36. because through much tribulation we pass into the kingdom of
heaven, Act. 14.22. And if we faint in the day of adversity, it shows our
strength to be small, Prove. 24.10.

Now this consideration, that death will put an end to all these troubles, and
a confident persuasion, that death shall be an happy change to us, will help us
to hold out with courage and cheerfulness, in opposition to fainting or
fretting at the difficulty of the way. Thus Moses chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin: because
he had respect to the rceompence of reward, Heb. 11.25, 26. Yea, the master of
that house, in which Moses was faithful as a Servant, was by the joy that was
set before him, encouraged to endure the cross, and despise the shame, Heb.
12.2.

Fourthly, he will be fit for every condition, and know how to behave himself
aright in it. It is an hard matter, in the day of prosperity to rejoice in the
Lord, and to carry that full Cup so evenly as not to spill it. And it is as
hard, in the day of adversity to consider, Eccl. 7.14. to be mindful, that we
ought thankfully to receive evil as well as good from the hand of God, Job
2.10. To keep from despising the chastening of the Lord, also from fainting
when we are corrected by him, Heb. 12.5.

Now nothing will better teach us these hard lessons than a true victory over
death. This will moderate our joy in prosperity, and make us rejoice with
trembling, and as though we rejoiced not, because the time is short, 1 Cor.
7.29. It will moderate our sorrow in the time of trouble, as considering, that
these are light afflictions, and endure but for a moment; and that they work
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. So every
way happy is that courageous Christian, that has obtained victory over this
last enemy.

The greatness of this privilege has in some sort been represented, to oblige
us to thankfullness. That this is a privilege attainable was showed upon the
former general head, But there is something required in, and from us, that
conduces much to the gaining of this victory, viz. Courage, strength and Skill.
First, Courage, or Christian resolution, faint-heartedness weakneth the hands,
disappointeth contrivance, and frustrateth endeavors. Let us therefore arm our
selves with the same mind that was in Christ, when he suffered in the flesh for
us, 1 Pet. 4.1. that same mind wherewith he endured the cross, and despised the
shame, Heb. 12.2. Let us manfully resolve to leave the World with willingness
and joy; not lingering in it, like Lot in Sodom, nor looking back with his Wife,
as unwilling to leave it, Genesis 19, 16, 26. But duly considering that in Heaven
we have a better and a more enduring substance, Heb, 10.34. Let the spirit of a
man help us to bear the infirmities and pains of our body, Prove. 18.14. And as
Christians let us consider that it is God's hand, and that this is the passage
he has appointed to eternal joys. Let us not be afraid of God's Tribunal, as
knowing that we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.

Secondly, Strength, without which Courage does bestow it self to little
purpose. Let us not go forth in our strength, but in the strength of the Lord;
and encounter this Philistine in the name of the Lord of Hosts, 1 Samuel 17.45.
from him let us derive strength by prayer, even the prayer of Faith; For this
is the victory that overcomes death, as well as the world, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4. even that Faith, which is the substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. Let us by Faith look unto Christ's
death and resurrection, as that whereby he has overcome death for us; and to
the joys that are before us: In this strength let us encounter death.

Thirdly, Shill, without which courage will make use of strength unhappily. Let
us acquaint our selves with death, and be at peace, so shall it be well with
us. Set not only God, but Death also always before our eyes, and in this sense
die daily, 1 Cor, 15.31. Let us exercise our selves in velitations and
skirmishes with the thoughts of death in the time of our health and strength:
Consider what death is in all its notions, and then its approach will be
familiar, and no ways dreadful unto us. Hereby we shall succesfully prelude to
that last conflict and conquest.

To conclude this head, let those that are so happy as to live in the
comfortable sense of their having obtained this blessed victory over Death, be
careful to walk as children of the Kingdom.

First, in holiness and righteousness before God. Because thou have delivered
my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling, I will walk
before the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 116.8.19. Seeing that all
these things must be dissolved, and we know so much, and are not afraid to
know and consider it, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy
conversation and godliness? And seeing we look for such things, a great
conflict, and a glorious victory over a formidable enemy, let us be diligent,
that we may be found of him in peace at that day, without spot, and blameless,
2 Pet. 3.11.16.

Those that fight or run for victory do diet themselves, and are temperate in
all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we observe rules
that we may obtain that which is incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25. Well may we then
be content to deny our selves, to keep under our bodies, and bring them into
subjection, that the sensual appetite being subdued, may not clog us in that
great congress.

Secondly, let our temper savor of Heaven. If ye be risen with Christ, and
have a sense of the benefit of his death and resurrection, in order to the
overcoming of death, seek those things that are above: Set your affections on
things above, not on things out he earth, Col. 3.1, 2. Let those that believe
death to be the end of all pleasure and comfort, give themselves up wholly to
enjoy the good things that are present, but let us declare plainly that we seek
a Country, Heb. 11.14.

Thirdly, let us walk humbly with our God, Mic. 6.8. Let us say, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us; but to thy name be the glory of this victory, Psalm. 115.1.
Let us be duly sensible that it is the Lord that delivers us from the paw of
the Lion, and of the Bear, and from this great Goliath. Let us not arrogantly
peark up our heads like empty boughs, or blasted ears of corn, but like those
that are laden with good fruit; let us stoop toward the earth in a thankful
sense of the great obligations that God has laid upon us. Which leads me from
this second general head of Discourse, to the

Third general in the Text, the Author of this victory acknowledged and
magnified, (...), Thanks be to God, that gives us this victory. The hand that
reaches out a favor does many times add very much to that which is conferred
upon us. Now this is a princely favor, bestowed by the royal hand of the King
of glory, it is Gods gift: For,

First, as all good things do come from God, so in particular all spiritual
gifts, all the graces and comforts of a Christian are the products of his
favor and bounty. Every good gift, and every perfect gift comes down from
above, even from the Father of lights, James 1.17. even from that supreme
being, and first cause of all things, in whom we live, and move, and have our
being, Acts 17.28. Particularly, he it is that blesses us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ. Ephesians. 1.3. He is called the God of all
Grace, that God who has called us into his eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, and
who, after we have suffered a while, will make us perfect, stablish,
strengthen, and settle us, 1 Pet. 5.10. He is the Father of mercies, and the
God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, 2 Cor. 1.3. And
therefore this especial comfort that arises from victory over death, is to be
owned with thankfulness, as his gift.

Secondly, it is a gift which none but himself can bestow. Human reason and
manly courage may in part support us under the thoughts of leaving the World,
and sleeping in the Grave, by telling us that the World is vanity and vexation
of spirit; and helping us to consider that we are every way as well at ease
when we are a-sleep, and forget the World, as when we are awake to enjoy it.

But what strength or courage of a mortal man can bear up without fainting
under weakening decays of bodily vigor, and endure, without complaining, that
tedious pain and anguish with which it pleases God sometimes to afflict our
bodies; except he that lays on his hand to afflict, do also put underneath his
everlasting arms to support? Thou, even thou art to b^ feared, and who may
stand in thy sight when on ^^th (...) w^^^^? Psalm. 76.7. Can thy heart endure,
or thy hand be strong in the day when God shall visit thee? Ezekiel. 22.14.

Especially who can bear up under the dreadful apprehension of appearing before
almighty God as the judge of all the world, except he has comfortable
apprehensions of God being reconciled, and the judge become his friend? They
were no cowards, nor sorry, mean spirited persons, but the Kings of the earth,
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty
man, and every freeman, as well as every bondsman, that sought to hide
themselves in dens and in the rocks of the mountains: that courted the
mountains and rocks to fall on them, and to hide them from the face of him that
sat on the throne, and from ^he face of the Lamb: for when the great day of his
weal^h should come, who, say they shall be able to stand before him? Revel. 6,
15.16.17.

Thirdly, this enemy Death, is in perfect subjection to God as his servant, and
therefore he is able to bless us with victory, and to command deliverance to
Jacob. No man can enter the house of a strong man armed, and spoil his goods,
except he first bind the strong man, Mar, 3.27. Now this can God do, not only
in respect of his infinite power to which all creatures in heaven and earth do
bow and obey, whereby he can stop the mouths of Lions, suspend the natural
influence of fi^e, appease the rage and swelling of the sea: But also because
Death is his servant, the minister of his wrath, the executioner of his
justice. And therefore he that says to the raging sea, peace, and be still:
yea that has placed the friable body of sand to be a rampart against its fury,
by a perpetual decree, which it cannot pass, nor return again to cover the
earth, Jer. 5.22. He also gives laws to death, and sets bounds to its rage,
giving victory over it to them that fear him.

Fourthly, the conferring of this victory is a favor, that will eminently show
the great love and kindness of God to his people, for naturally we are under
the power and dominion of death by reason of sin: it being as due as the wages
to the workman when he ended has his business. And it was the mere mercy and
undeserved good will of God toward the workmanship of his own hand (now
degenerated and become miserable through their own wilfulness) that helped them
to overcome that enemy, which themselves had formed to be a thorn in their
sides, and a prick in their eyes.

Yea it was a peculiar favor to mankind, not vouchsafed to the superior order
of reasonable creatures, to be able to vanquish that death, that misery, which
there ungrateful revolting from their maker had brought upon themselves; for
verily the Son of God took not on him the nature of Angels, nor helped them up,
but he took on him, and relieved the seed of Adam, and for them did by death
overcome him that had power over death, even the devil, and delivered them, who
otherwise through fear of death must all their life time have been subject to
bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15, 16.

Yea, it is a mercy not vouchsafed to all mankind, as to the actual enjoyment
of it, but to those only that believe in him. To as many as received him, he
gave power to become the sons of God, John 1.12. to have part in the first
resurrection, so that the second death should have no power over them, Rev.
20.6.

Fifthly, consequently this Garland of Victory does greatly oblige the hearts
of Gods people unto himself. It being the fruit of that preventing love, that
remembered us in our low and lost estate, even because his mercy endures for
ever, Psalm. 136.23. the manifestation of the kindness and bounty of God to
procure for us so great a privilege as this victory has appeared to be; and
that at so dear a rate, as the most precious blood of his own Son, that Lamb
without spot and blemish, 1 Pet. 1.19. So God loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. This tends to draw us with the cords of a man,
with cords of love, Hos. 11.4. It sets us upon our legs, to run the way of Gods
commandments; it renders us subjects capable of ingenuous service, by setting
us free with the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21. And withal it
lays the strongest engagements of love and gratitude upon us, to give up our
selves, both souls and bodies, as living sacrifices unto him, Romans 12.1. and
being delivered from our enemies, to serve him without slavish fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75.

This period being reflected upon, will be of use, First, to resolve that
wonder that sometimes possesses our minds, when we behold the great courage
and undaunted confidence of some persons in looking death in the face. Many
that could not look upon those instruments of violent death, a sword or pistol,
in the hand of an enemy, people that are of weak constitutions and mean spirits
for encountering an adversary abroad, have yet been able to entertain death,
when coming from Gods own hand, with great composure and sedateness of spirit;
yea many whose education has placed them under disadvantageous circumstances,
through want of due knowledge and clear notions as to other things, have been
able to grapple with death, when clothed with all that terror which cruel men
could hang on its back. The reason is, because God gave them that gift, which
is in his own power to bestow; and this wind blows where it lists; these
favors are many times conferred upon babes in Christ.

Secondly, to satisfy us on the contrary, concerning the dejectedness and
despondency wherewith some men do meet death; from whom yet better things might
have been expected. Men of strong bodies, athletick constitution, happy
education, great parts, much reading, how fearful have they been to look death
in the face! yea a good man, when God hides the light of his countenance from
him, does tremble to think of death and judgment; of this a reason is easily
given from what has been spoken; the Author of so great a blessing withholds
it where it does not seem good to his infinite wisdom to bestow it.

Thrirdly, this directs us whether to apply our selves to obtain strength in
the last encounter. We must not trust to our selves, to natural or acquired
gifts, but we must go forth in the strength of the Lord, and make mention of
his name, even of his only, Psalm. 71.16. On him let us call by prayer, him let
us solicit by acting faith on him, who gives power to the faint, and to them
that have no might he increases strength, Isa. 40.29.

Fourthly, what thanks and obedien^e can be sufficient for a just
acknowledgment to God from them, to whom he has vouchsafed this glorious
triumph over death? It is the greatest victory that can be imagined, to conquer
this king of terrors; the greatest gift we can think of imploring the divine
favor to bestow upon us in this world, that he will furnish us with that
strength and resolution, that will make us not afraid to leave the world. It is
one of the blessed fruits of our Saviors meritorious sufferings and obedience.

And therefore, what shall we return unto the Lord for this, and all other his
benefits! What thanks offering can be of due value to present unto him! what
fruit of the lips, what obedience of heart and life can be sufficient to
express (...) r^s^^ment of this favor? O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is
God, (...) h^^ me^^y ^^du^^eth for ever. Let the redeemed of the L^^d (...),
whom he h^^h redeemed from the hand of the enemy. O (...) would praise the Lord
for his goodness, and for his w^nderful wor^s toward the sons of men! Psalm.
107.1, 2, 8. But from the Author of this victory, which was proposed as the
third thing considerable, let us advance to the

Fourth General to be considered in the Text, the procuring cause of this
victory, by whom it was acquired, and purchased for us, (...), through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The main argument whereby the Apostle had established that great Article of
our Faith, the resurrection of the body, in the precedent part of this Chapter,
was grounded upon the resurrection of Christ from the dead: Who not only showed
that it was neither impossible, nor yet incredible that God should raise the
dead, Acts 26.8, because he himself overcome the sharpness of death, and broke
its bonds; but also by rising as a public person, the second Adam, the
first fruits from the dead, has made way for us also to follow him in the
resurrection of our bodies.

And this expression in the Text seems to be the Epiphonema, or close of that
discourse and arguing. It is in Christ that God blesses us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things, Ephesians. 1.3. And particularly this blessed victory
over death is derived unto us through Christ; several ways has Christ overcome
death, and made way for our being victorious over it.

First, he has destroyed the sting of death, even sin, by his merits and
sufferings. The sting is the most formidable part in those animals that are
armed therewith: And sin which rendered us obnoxious to the wrath of God, and
curse of the Law, was the chief thing that made death dreadful to mankind, as
arresting us, in order to bringing us before the Judge of all the earth, who
will render to every man according to his works, Romans 2.6.

But this sting has Christ plucked out from death, by his voluntary and
meritorious obedience answering the exaction of the Law, and by his
unparalled and meritorious sufferings enduring the malediction thereof. So
that there is now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.
As a great High Priest he has by one offering perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Heb. 10.14. As our surety he has paid our debts, and cancelled the
handwriting that was against us. As our God he has redeemed us, not with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with his own most precious blood, 1
Pet. 1.19. And in each respect God is just, and yet the justifier of the
ungodly, when he believes in Jesus, Romans 3.26. In him mercy and truth are met
together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other, Psalm. 85.10.

Secondly, he has overcome the pains of death by his example and promises. By
his example, who as the Captain of our Salvation was made perfect through
sufferings, Heb. 2.10. He suffered perfectly all that the Law of God could
exact, or the rage of his enemies inflict. And he was perfect under his
sufferings, so as not to entrench the least upon the bounds of complete
patience, Jam. 1.2. He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep
before the shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth, Isa. 53.7. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23.

Further, by his sufferings he perfected the work of our Redemption, and fully
satisfied Divine Justice. And hereby he has engaged, and encouraged us to arm
our selves likewise with the same mind, because Christ has suffered in the
flesh for us, 1 Pet. 4.1.

And by his promises he has encouraged us, telling us, that this strait way
leads to life; that in the mean time he will never fail us, nor forsake us,
Heb. 13.5. But when we pass through the fire and water, he will be with us,
Isa. 43.1, 2, and that these light afflictions that endure but for a season, do
work for us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Thirdly, he has wiped away the scandal of death, by his leading the way, in
suffering death, and lying in the grave. It is a great affront to this stately
piece of well-formed earth, to own kindred with corruption and worms, Job
17.14. But Christ, the best of men, yea the Son of God, has led us on the way
to Golgotha, and we need not be ashamed to follow him in the steps he has
trodden. He suffered before he was glorified, he endured the cross, and digested
the shame of that scandalous death, before he set down at the right hand of the
Majesty on high, Heb. 12.3. And therefore it is no disgrace to us to die, and
be laid in the grave.

Yea, it was a far bitterer cup that he drank off for us, than what God uses
to put into the hands of his people; and therefore we should not scruple at
drinking our own portion. He has perfumed the grave, by laying his own body
there before us: This Unicorn, by dipping his own horn beforehand, has
rendered these waters safe and wholesome: So that we shall rest in our graves, as
in beds; every man that has walked before him in his uprightness, Isa. 57.2.

Fourthly, he has vanquished the power of death by his resurrection. Blessed
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his abundant mercy has
begotten us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, 1 Pet. 1.3. Hereby he showed to the World that he had by death
overcome him that had the power of death, even the Devil, Heb. 2.14. Yea, that
he has not only commanded a passage for himself, whom death could not possibly
hold any longer than was necessary for the satisfying of Divine Justice, Acts
2.24. but has also taken away the keys of power from this surly Porter, and
made way for his own people to follow him: And because I live, ye shall live
also, Joh. 14.19.

Fifthly, he killed the Hopes of death by his Ascension. Thereby he made it
evident that he had fully accomplished his mediatory Function upon earth, and
that Christ being risen from the dead, dies no more, death must have no more
dominion over him, Romans 6.9. that he should no more submit to take on him the
form of a servant, and to be obedient to death, Phil. 2.8.

And consequently it may encourage Believers, that as it is appointed for men
once to die, Heb. 9.27. so this trouble shall be dispatched at once; so that
they that have part in the first resurrection, over them the second death shall
have no power, Rev. 20.6.

Sixthly, he shall destroy the very being of death at the last day. Death has
its commission extended to the end of this World; and then the rod that has so
long been used for the trial and chastisement of mankind, shall it self be cast
into the fire. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, 1 Cor. 15.26.
Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, I will ransom them
from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from death. O death I will be
thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction; repentance is hid from mine
eyes. Hos. 13.14.

As consequents of this that has been last spoken, First, we may consider how
glorious was the Conquest of Christ in his sufferings: Well might it be said
that he was made perfect by them, Heb. 2.10. For he obtained by dearh a most
complete victory over death in all its circumstances; and over him that had the
power of death, both for himself, and also for all his people.

Secondly, therefore how great was God's love in sending his Son into the
World! Joh. 3.16. So God loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son:
Scarcely for a righteous man would one die: Yet peradventure for a good, or
useful man, some might be found, that would even dare to dye. But God commended
his love to us, in that when we were so far from being good and useful men,
that we were not so much as righteous and innocent men, yet in due time Christ
dyed, even for the ungodly, Romans 5.7, 8.

Thirdly, let us hence learn to fly unto Christ, and to secure our interest in
him. This is the way to have a right to that comfort that flows from his
incarnation and death, and thereby to have satisfaction and comfort both in our
life time, and at our death; to be secure under the preapprehensions of it, and
to entertain it with joy and comfort when it comes. If his wrath be kindled,
yea, but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him; therefore
let us kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.11, 12. and give all diligence to make our calling
and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. let us examine our selves, whether we be in the
faith; and prove, and know our own selves, whether Christ Jesus be formed in
us, 2 Cor. 13.5. that when death shall summon us to an encounter we may be
victorious over it.

Fourthly, let the redeemed of the Lord walk with joy and thankfulness before
him, as in a sense of all other his mercies, so particularly of this blessed
fruit of our Saviors death and resurrection, the glorious victory thereby
obtained for us over death. Bless the Lord, O our souls, and all that is within
us bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, our souls, and forget not all his
benefits. Who forgiveth all our iniquities, who heals all our diseases. Who
redeemeth our life from destruction, who crowns us with loving kindness and
tender mercies, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4. And let us walk cheerfully before God in
a sense of our great privilege, amongst all the troubles of the world that
accompany us in our abode here, and under the thoughts of leaving this world at
last; forasmuch as this last enemy is vanquished, let us not fear any thing
else; but under our dependencies let us call up our souls to a more comfortable
and cheerful temper; let us chide away dejectedness and drooping, and say, why
art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope in
God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the help of my countenance, and my God,
Ps. 42.11.

And, that I may come to a closer application of the point, and pass a thesi ad
hypothesin, this victory over death, which I might have been representing unto
you from the words of the Apostle, as attainable by a Christian, and his
singular privilege was, no doubt, the acquisition and privilege of our dear and
reverend Brother, whose Remains we are now assembled to inter. And for that
reason I have insisted upon this subject, to press us all to imitate him in
fighting for the same victory. The name of the wicked shall rot (says the wise
man), but the memory of the just shall be blessed, Pr. 10.7. Of wicked Jehoram
it is said, he departed without being desired, 2 Chr. 21.20. But of good
Jehoiadah (and I am now speaking of a Priest, though not an High Priest) that
the people did him honor at his death, because he had done good in Israel, chapter
24.16. The wicked leaves the world like a filthy Lamp, leaving an offensive
stench in the Nostrils of all that knew him: but a Good man ends his days like
a Wax-taper that exchangeth its pleasant and useful light for the grateful
scent it leaves behind it.

The Psalmist tells us, That precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints, Ps. 116.15. And our Lord Jesus Christ, when he conversed with men
on earth, when Lazarus a good man was dead, (although as man he believed his
Soul to be removed to present Bliss, and as God he knew that he should return
to life again in this world) being free from those turbulent Passions that are
our sin, and at once our burden, it is said (...), Jo. 11.33. He troubled
himself, and expressed his trouble of mind by tears flowing from his eyes, ver.
35. to show us that we may so now (and ought to do it) even for them that sleep
in Jesus, but not as they that have no hope; (this Sorrow I encourage,) and yet
that it may not swell beyond its just banks, this Hope I am about to establish
concerning this our worthy Brother. In speaking of whom, though a passionate
Friend, and true Lover, I shall speak nothing but the words of truth and
soberness, either known to be true by my own personal acquaintance with him, or
attested by them that will not be ashamed to own their own testimony.

And if we begin in digging to the rock whence he was hewn, he was a Prophet,
the Son, and Grandson, and Nephew of a Prophet; a Priestly Family, from which
the former Generation sent two, and this last Generation four to serve at Gods
Altar; a sign of worthy and truly Christian blood running in their veins, when
they could value the Gospel of Christ, and that Office that employs us in the
dispensation of it (though attended God knows, with great troubles) above those
riches that might have flow'n into them in greater plenty, and with more ease
in other Employments; a true token that they were not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, which they found to be the power of God unto Salvation to those that
believe, Romans 1.16. A^ c^^^ain conviction of that vulgar Error that boads ill
success to (...) (...) of Clergy men, when in two Generations the Posterity of
such men was blessed: Nor need others despair of the like happiness, if they be
not wanting to themselves in drawing down Gods blessing upon their Families. An
happy and graceful Ornament to the Church, when Coals kindled in the Sanctuary
it self produce burning and shining Lights, John 5.35. and Bezaleel and Aholiab
train up workmen that need not to be ashamed of their work, 2 Timothy 2.15.

Though Nature does not always send forth boughs answering the qualities of
the root, and of the Seed that was sown; yet that Cultivation which in the
productions of the Earth does either advance the natural Fruit by melioration,
or alter the Tree by grafting more generous Offsprings upon the root, does
also in Spiritual productions conduce much to make the Branches as well as the
Root holy.

His promoting to the Schools of the Prophets was owing to the care of good
Parents: The happy proficiency he showed in his studies there, to God's
blessing upon his own great industry in tilling that rich soil that fell to his
lot: Which when it had brought to perfection that plentiful crop, that betimes
began to groan for the hook, invited hungry souls to desire to be fed
therewith, and brought him to be an early Shepherd in feeding Christ's sheep
and lambs. Which will lead me on to consider him.

First, in his Preaching, and so we find him feeding the flock of God, amongst
which he was, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; not as lording it over God's
heritage, but as being an example to the flock, 1 Pet. 5.2.3. Preaching the
word, being instant in season, out of season, reproving, rebuking, exhorting,
with all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.2.

And though I am far from being so bold or presumptuous, as to censure my
brethren, who do not think it their duty bis venire ad mulctram, yet give me
leave to pay due honor to the labors of such, who in so doing cannot be
suspected to seek any thing else than the benefit of the souls committed to
their care.

For his own part, he did willingly spend, and was spent for his. Flock, 2 Cor.
12.15. and burnt our his taper the sooner, in humane probability, by lighting
it, as we say, at both ends. Pertinaciously continuing in his Lord's work, even
then when himself did by his providence call him off; as thinking, that
Imperatorem decet stentem mori, and concionatorem concionantem: And
endeavoring to emulate the industry of some worthy men before him, whom death
found employed in the ministerial work. He had prepared what he was not able to
communicate in the Pulpit, such instructions as should have helped you in
keeping this last Passover, so soon after which he went to keep the Feast in
Heaven.

Secondly, let us consider him in his life; and in this sense, whether a
Clergyman Preach more or less in the Church, he ought to preach every day to
the people; by being an example to the Flock. 1 Pet. 5.3. and to the Believers
a pattern, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Faith, in Purity. Here let
us consider him.

First, as the Master of a Family; and as the Apostle says, He that knows
not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the Church of God? 1 Timothy 3.3. In this he was an example to the flock, and to other shepherds also.
In his singular love and tenderness to his Wife (manifested, as all along, so
chiefly at last, in his fervent prayers for her and her children, and his
earnest recommending of them to the love and care of surviving friends.) In his
fatherly love and care for his children. As to their bodies, and the concerns
of this life (manifest in his denying himself in several respects, that he
might make a comfortable provision for them.) As to their souls, both in their
moral concerns (showed in the good education he afforded them, to the
qualifying of them in some respects beyond most of their neighbors.) And in
their spiritual concerns (manifest in the diligence he used in instructing
them, by word when they were with him, by letters when they were removed from
him, to remember their Creator, to make conscience of their ways, and to take
care of their souls in the first place: and finally by the fervent prayers,
whereby he recommended them to God at last).

And I hope I may truly say it, as to what has appeared already; and that they
will still give me occasion to speak it, by what shall appear for the future,
that his labors of this nature have not been in vain in the Lord. And that
herein he has not only afforded an example to others in doing his duty, but
also has left them encouragement to expect that the doing of it shall not want
good success in their Families.

Secondly, let us look upon him in a little larger capacity, as a neighbor and
friend. And here we cannot mention without great commendation, the perfect
concord and tender love that continued between him and his near relations,
though placed under the disadvantage of some circumstances that might have
interrupted that union, had not grace, and well-tempered spirits, continued the
cement. Beside this, his loving and friendly carriage toward all men, but
especially those of the household of Faith did commend him, both as a desirable
member of Society, and as a man adoring that Ministerial Function, which
employs us in preaching the Gospel of Peace, and commending God unto the World
as the God of love and peace.

Add to this his natural and unaffected gravity, which as it prevented his
years in the beginning, so it favored not of pride or furliness, but was a
very good ornament to ministerial Authority, and left no man just reason to
despise him.

Thirdly, let us look upon him in a yet more enlarged capacity, as a Christian,
or a member of the Church of God; and thus he left matter of commendation to
himself, and of imitation to us, by his singular sobriety and temperance.
Wherein possibly, through his great self-denial, he might have needed St.
Paul's advice to Timothy, to drink oftener a little Wine, for his stomachs sake,
and his many infirmities, 1 Timothy 5.23. Yet certainly his great abstemiousness
gave a check to the unhappy fault in others in his presence.

And yet neither the retiredness and abstemiousness of St. John Baptist, nor
the sociableness and free conversation of our Savior shall exempt them from
scandal, who are set to reprove the sins of a generation of vipers. But wisdom
is justified of all her children, Matthew. 11.19.

He was also a peaceable man, and a peacemaker, and therefore answered his
title of an Ambassador of Peace, who is entrusted to dispense that fruit of the
lips which is peace, peace. He was faithful in adhering to the Church of
England, of which he was a member, and a Son, as I can witness, from what he
spoke to me not long before his end; and as was evident in his earnest desire
to receive the Lord's Supper, when he apprehended his end to draw nigh.

But his piety and devotion was so eminent, that therein he exceeded most of
his age; which his private Books will testify: Wherein he recorded God's
eminent mercies, especially spiritual, vouchsafed to him and his, and also
contrary passages of providence in the series of his whole life, with pious
reflections and ejaculations attending each particular. His exemplary diligence
in religious duties, both retiredly by himself, privately with his Wife, and
also with his Family; as also his seriousness in public exercises, will show
that Holiness was his temper, Religion his business, and Heaven his end and aim.

And thither let us follow him, at least for the present, let us attend him to
the mount of corruption, his sickbed, from whence he took his ascent thither.
And the relation of God's dealings with him there, and of his behavior under
God's hand, I must preface with the words of David, Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright; for the end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37. Or with this
comparison; As the Rivers when they draw near the Ocean into which they
discharge themselves, begin to receive more of its savor, it meeting them upon
the way with its brackish waves; so this River that had so long made glad the
City of God, when it was about to disembogue it self into the Ocean of
Eternity, was vouchsafed to have Heaven to meet it upon the way, in the blessed
anticipation of an heavenly temper and fruition.

Witness, First, his singular patience, which had its perfect work in him, when
exercised under the tediousness and faintness of a lingering distemper, attended
with failing and nauseousness of appetite, interruption of sleep, yea and great
and exquisite pains, which at sometimes he endured toward his later end. All
which he suffered with great perseverance of patience, expressing some
jealousy over himself, left he should seem to discover the least of impatience
in bearing the hand of God.

Secondly, the strength of his Faith, whereby he gave glory to God, Romans 4.10.
Not staggering at those promises through unbelief, of which he had endeavored
to beget a belief in others, no not then when the hope of the hypocrite does
perish. This vessel of grace was brimful of consolation (to use his own
expression) not in an airy or enthusiastical sense, but as the fruit of a
steadfast Faith built upon a rock, and the accomplishment of those gracious
discoveries of his love, which God had formerly vouchsafed him in the time of
his health, especially after great zeal expressed in religious exercises.

Thirdly, His Devotion did not flag or languish; in public he was a burning
and shining light, even then when he was so far spent as to be advanced to a
Prolonger: He spent all his Oil in giving light in the Church of God; all his
strength was laid out in his Masters work: When restrained from Officiating in
public by a Super-sedeas from Heaven, yet still in his own person, or with the
assistance of Christian Friends, he continued instant in Prayer, yea, even then
when he was not able to cry or speak, till at last he wasted up his Soul to
Heaven upon the wings of Prayer. And this zealous Elijah was thither Translated
as in a Fiery Chariot, conducted by those Angels that rejoice in one Member
added either to the Militant or Triumphant Church.

And now, to conclude; First give me leave to speak a few words to you my
Reverend Brethren of the Clergy, and make bold to join my self also as an
unworthy Brother; Let us take my Brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the
name of the Lord for an example, Jam. 5.10. We are taught by our Church
devoutly to bless God for all his servants departed this life in his faith and
fear, and to beseech him to give us grace so to follow their good examples,
that at last we may inherit his heavenly kingdom. We have in this our Reverend
Brother an eminent example of piety, industry, zeal, gravity, love,
peaceableness, gentleness, and usefulness in his Family, and amongst all his
Relatives such as I will not say to you, but to my self I must confess has
afforded matter of regret and shame, to consider that in my seize, and
the management of my self in my Office I have come far shorter of him, then in
years: Certainly his zeal may help to provoke and kindle Zeal for God in all of
us.

Secondly, to you of his Family, I would not have you, I know you are not
ignorant of him that is asleep, that you sorrow not as others that have no
hope; for if ye believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again, even so him and all
others that sleep in Jesus shall God bring with him; wherefore comfort one
another with these Words, 1 These. 4.13, 14, 18.

Let his memory be always precious with you, and his love warm in your hearts:
let his Example be still before your eyes, and the good things that he has
left upon record, for your satisfaction and encouragement as to his Eternal
estate, let them be as Nails, and as Goads to you to settle you in goodness,
and to provoke you to go forward in the ways of true Piety.

And though God has in great mercy placed you above the necessity of a
miraculous provision, yet I dare boldly say, that sooner would God work a
Miracle, then that the Family of such a Prophet living as becomes such a man's
Family, should come to want.

Thirdly, Lastly to you of this Parish; it is remarkable that God has blessed
you with Able and Worthy men to be Guides to your Souls, at least as long as
the Eldest of you can remember; and which is another mercy, that God has
lengthened out their lives among you, so that though there have been Removes,
yet not one Minister of this Parish has dyed here in above Seventy years last
past.

Here stand still, and consider what God could have done more to this his
Vineyard, which he has not done. But what Fruit has it brought forth by way
of Return? I charge not, nor censure you in the least; but Examine I beseech
you your own selves, whether you be in the Faith, prove your selves, Whether
Christ be formed in you: Let every man prove his own Works.

Again, Let the memory of Gods faithful Ministers be precious among you,
especially of this Worthy Person now with God. Be not of them that hate and
malign them that reprove in the Gate.

Pray God to raise you up a Pastor after his own heart, a Faithful and able man
that may feed this people with the words of wholesome doctrine, and lead them by
the pattern of an holy and exemplary life.

Remember them that have spoken to you in the name of the Lord, whose Faith
follow, knowing the end of their conversation, Heb. 13.7. For your Fathers,
where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever? but Gods Word, and his
Statutes which he commanded his servants the Prophets, did they not take hold
on your Fathers? and will they not take hold on you? Zech. 1.5, 6.

Be ye not therefore slothful, but followers of them, who through faith and
patience inherit the Promises; that when the last Enemy that is to be destroyed
shall assault you, it may come disarmed of a Sting; that ye may be able to say
triumphantly, O Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory? thanks
be to God that gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Which God
of his Mercy grant, through the Merits of him who through Death overcame him
that had power of Death, even the Devil, Now to the Blessed Trinity be Glory
and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

