AN ABATEMENT Of most of the Motions and Orders IN CHANCERY And other
chargeable Courts;

AND OF The greatest part of the Charges which may be in those hereafter:

OR, Motions and Orders reduced from twenty to two, and most of those to the
tenth part of the Charge, as formerly has been.

Written by W. Leach, for the same intent, and tendered to the consideration as
his former are.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, in the Year 1652.

AN Abatement of most of the Motions and Orders in Chancery, etc.
FOrasmuch as in Ancient times when the master Clerks of the Chancery (being in
those Ages very learned in the Laws of this Nation) did contrive all manner of
special Writs then called master Writs very pithily, and well, seldom
committing any error or mistake in any of them. And whereas also the ancient
Sergeants at the Law in such times did contrive and draw all special pleadings
in like manner, and then were all suits speedily, and with so little Charge or
trouble ended, as the people of this Nation did find and perceive that they
had full speedy, and equal Justice done unto them, and did sit down in quiet
without multiplying suit upon suit, and turmoile themselves in trouble and
discontent many years together, as has been too often used by very many of
late, since such master Clerks and Sergeants have been employed about other
businesses (that is to say) such master Clerks about References, Reports and
Accounts, bringing them in much greater benefit. And such Sergeants altogether,
or for the most part taken up in moving and arguing at the bars of several
Courts, and pleading at trials at the Common Law, and hearing in the Chancery,
whereby few or none can procure them to contrive any such thing: And (as it is
thought) few or none of such master Clerks can tell how to contrive, or draw
any thing which before by such their predecessors were in those ancient times
usually done; by occasion whereof Suitors in these latter times have been
constrained to go to Clerks or Attorneys to have such things contrived or
drawn, whereof some (who have set themselves forth highest) have been very
ignorant, which many Suitors being but of weak or mean judgments or capacities
could not apprehend; whereby very many mistakes and errors have been committed
and omitted in such things which have caused many Suits and Causes upon Writs
and Bills at Trialls to be lost, and no further proceedings thereupon to be,
but the plaintiss therein forced and compelled to pay costs to the defendants
in such Suits, and diverse Verdicts to be quashed and overthrown upon matter
moved or showed in Arrest of Judgment; and also sundry Verdicts to be reversed
and annulled by Writs of Error all three of them many times the one after
another, after the suitors in such actions and suits have been at very great
charge, trouble and labor, and great losses in the hindrance of them in their
Callings and Professions, and thereby many have spent very much, some as much
as the very demand in question, before they have, or could obtain their just
debts and demands; and others have been so impoverished by the means aforesaid,
that they have not been of ability further to prosecure such suits for their
Rights, but have given over, and lost the same, and many inconveniences and
mischiefs, and such charge and trouble, and loss, have happened in
overthrowing, quashing, and delaying of diverse Decrees, Sentences, and Final
orders in many Courts.

And whereas of late time, most persons in possession of Messuages, Lands and
Tenements, and wrongfully holding out others, have had the same by lease, or so
claimed, and some of them held over their term in the same; and many of those
also (who have had the immediate right of possession of such Lands and
Tenements) have had the right to the same by leases, whereby most Suits in such
case have been brought, by actions of Ejectments, framed upon Leases which
could not be tried by writs of Assize, which has been the most speedy remedy
in this behalf, and Judgments given at the same Assizes, when and where the
Verdicts have been found; and many times one of the parties to such Actions of
Ejectment have departed this life between the day of the Trial, and the day in
the Bench, then next following, whereby all the proceedings before mentioned
have fell to the ground, and the parties, their Executors or Administrators to
begin anew, and by the same occasion, Writs of Assize be grown so obsolete,
that few know how to proceed, as they should do in the same, and thereby most
causes (which might have been prosecuted by Writs of Assize) have been begun
and ended upon, and by such Actions of Ejectment which have occasioned diverse
of such inconveniences and mischiefs as before are expressed. And whereas also
in these latter times more ^ight has appeared in all manner of learning to the
several sons of the people of this Nation, then has in ancient times (ten
being learned in these times to one in those; most ordinary people then
depending wholly upon the Priest in most ordinary matters) and it is hoped the
people here, will more and more increase in learning and judgment. And
therefore it is expected, and desired by most, that all manner of proceedings
in Law should be amended, and not run into worse and worse order, as they have
done of latter years.

And forasmuch as great, and most pitiful lamentations have been made to
diverse persons, in many places by multitudes of people (who have been turmoiled
in Suits in the Court of Chancery, and other Courts, that many of them have
been, and usually are put to diverse unnecessary and excessive charges, by
Registers and Enterers, and writers of Orders, and rules their Deputies, Clerks
and Agents in such Courts; and that diverse unnecessary Orders have been made in
such Courts by such Registers, and others with them before mentioned, and drawn
out much longer then has been, or is necessary, and contrary to the note, or
notes by them taken upon hearing, and debating of the matter touching the same,
for their own only lucre, troublesome and burdensome to such Courts and
Council there, and hurtful to the parties in, and to such Suits; and that
there has been such multitudes of Orders in those Suits, that very many (who
have prosecuted and defended the same Suits) have given long, and much
attendance, before they have procured, or could procure any Entries or Copies
thereof to be made, by reason (as diverse such lamentations have been) of money
or rewards given, or promised to such Registers, Writers or Enterers, their
Deputies, Clerks; Servants or Agents to draw up such Orders, or rules stricter,
or to some other sense then such Courts did truly direct and order; under
color whereof very many have complained that many honest and just Causes have
miscarried, and that in the same much charge, perplexity, trouble, travel and
vexation have been to resort to the Counsel in such Suites, and afterward to
repair unto, or attend with Counsel, the Chancellor, Judge or Judges (who
made, or pronounced the same Rules or Orders) to have the same drawn and entered
according to the true sense thereof.

And whereas it has been much complained of, that many others (who have not
undergone such perplexity, trouble, toil, and vexation, before they have
procured, or could procure such Orders or Rules to be drawn up according to the
true sense of the Chancellor, Court, Judge or Judges, who made or pronounced
the same) have been at great charges in giving large rewards to Registers and
enterers of Orders and Rules, their Depuries or Clerks (who have agited
therein:) And also whereas the like complaints and lamentations have been, that
such Courts have been so full of business, that many Suitors could have no
proceedings there without great trouble and charge; and that diverse before they
have had, or could have any end of their business or suites there, have spent
as much, or more then that which they have sued for there, has been in value;
besides, their trouble, perplexity and vexation of mind for many years
together; and diverse others by such occasions have been quite, and others
almost distracted, amd many utterly undone; and that many others have given
over, and left off good Causes for lost, and proceeded no further in the same,
by reason of the extreme charge and trouble, which they have not been able to
undergo after they have been brought into, and entangled in such Courts, some
against their wills. And whereas a great part of those troubles and charges
have been occasioned by reason of the keeping secret and hidden all presidents
in most Courts (unless it be in the Courts formerly of the Kings Bench; and
Common Pleas, and now of the Upper Bench, and Common Bench, and Public
Exchequer at Westminster) in such manner, that some Suitors upon urgent
occasions have often been constrained to give to Registers, their Clerks or
Agents in the Court of Chancery, and such like Courts sometimes five pounds,
other times ten pounds, and other great sums of Money for choice presidents
upon such occasions, or otherwise have been constrained to go to, and retain
most Counsel belonging to such Courts, and give them extraordinary large Fees
for the same purpose.

It is proposed to be desired that it may

Be Enacced, That no matter in arrest or stay of any Judgment, Decree,
Sentence, or Final order shall be moved, insisted upon, or given in exception,
or assigned for Error against, in, or concerning any Plaint, Bill, Declaration,
Information, Libell or Complaint, Presentment or Indictment, Plea, Allegation,
Replication, Rejoinder, Surrejoinder, Rebutter or Surrebutter, unless such
matter be, or shall be first showed and delivered in wring to the party or
parties, his, her, or their Attorney in the Cause, wherein such matter be, or
shall be intended to be moved in arrest or stay of Judgment, or any thing
therewith before mentioned, or assigned for Error, in which the matter of
Error, or mistake is, or shall be, (that is to say) what may, or should be
added to, or detracted from, or supplied by further instructions in any such
Bill, or other proceedings therewith before mentioned, or continuance or return
of Writs, or process thereof, or entering up of Judgment, or any other thing
therewith before mentioned, thereupon as certain as if the same matter or
mistake were, shall, or should be amended, such Bill, Plaint, Declaration or
proceedings before mentioned were, or shall be good and sufficient in the Law:
So that a true Copy, or true Copies of every of the same writings wherein such
matter or mistake is, or shall be delivered to, or left for such party or
parties, his, her, or their Attorney in such Cause at his, her, or their
dwelling house or houses, or most usual place or places of abode by the space
of two days next after issue, or demurrer be, or shall be joined, or judgment
acknowledged, suffered or permitted, or within fix days next before such
Decree, Sentence, or Final order be, or shall be given, or to be given,
decreed, or sentenced in, or concerning the same Cause, Action, or Suit, in
which such process or proceedings be, or shall be.

And that within three days after the delivery of such Copy or Copies, the
party or parties against whom such matter be, or shall be intended so to be
moved or assigned for Error (paying unto the other party, his, her, or their
Council, Clerk, or Attorney in the same Suit or Cause, who do, or shall find
such Error or mistake, and deliver such Copy or Copies in writing of the same,
three shillings for the first, and one shilling for every of the residue of
those Errors or mistakes, may amend the same: And that that party and parties
by, or for whom such Copy or Copies be, or shall be so delivered within four
days next after he, she, or they shall have notice of the amendment, according
to such writing or writings, which be, or shall be so delivered shall again
Answer, Plead, Demur, put in Allegation, Reply, Rejoyn, Surrejoyn, Rebut, or
Surrebut, as the Declaration, Bill, Plaint, or other things therewith before
mentioned, do or shall require, unless such new matter do, or shall arise,
and appear upon such amendment, that the Attorney of such party or parties
neither can, nor according to the course of Law ought to Answer, Plead, or to
do any other thing as before therewith is mentioned without further
instructions, and then within eight days only for every forty miles distance
of the habitation, or abode of the party or parties, so again to answer, (when
he shall be first summoned, attached, arrested, or warned to appear, or answer,
reply, or to do any other thing before therewith mentioned, to any-Bill,
Replication, or any other thing before therewith mentioned) from the place or
Court where such prosecution be, or shall be. And that every one making default
in any of the premises shall, or may be taken, or proceeded against for saying
nothing, as for not answering, pleading, replying, or not performing any other
thing therewith before mentioned, as has been used in other cases wherein
defaults have been suffered.

And that any who do, or shall find such error or errors, mistake or
mistakes, shall have such money so to be paid, to and for his and their own
benefit and advantage: And that he or they so committing, omitting, or
suffering the same, shall pay the same money so for amendment to be paid out of
his, or their own moneys respectively, according to the number of error or
errors, mistake or mistakes, as each of them do, or shall so omit, commit, or
suffer.

And that after a Verdict, or Nonsuit in any Action, Cause, or Suit, wherein
such amendment be, or shall be, and Witnesses Examined, Recorded and Certified,
according to the Propositions formerly published in that behalf, Judgment may,
and shall be given according to such Verdict, or Nonsuit the next day in banck
after such Verdict or Nonsuit, as of the day of giving such Verdict, or
suffering such Non-suite, notwithstanding the intervening of the death of any
of the parties in, or to such Action, Cause, or Suit.

And that no motion or petition shall be made, moved, or presented in, or to
any Chancellor, Court, Judge or Judges in, or concerning any Suit, or Cause
there depending, but that first the matter to be moved, or mentioned in such
Petition, shall be put into writing, and a copy or note thereof delivered to
the party complainant, Plaintiff or Demandant, Defendant or Tenant, against,
or concerning whom such motion or Petition be, or shall be made, moved,
preferred or delivered, or to his, or her Clerk, Attorney, or Solicitor is such
Cause or Suit, or left at his, her, or their, or one of their dwelling house or
houses, or place or places of abode under the hand of a Council learned in the
Law.

And also that within two days, or some other conv^^ient time, next after the
delivery of such note or writing as aforesaid, for a Party, Complaint,
Plaintiff or Demandant, Defendant, Defendants, or Tenant, his, or her Clerk,
Attorney, or Solicitor in such Action, Cause, or Suit (to whom such note or
writing be, or shall be so delivered) shall give, or deliver to, or leave as
aforesaid, for the other party Complaint, Plaintiff or Demandant, or Defendant
or Tenant (to whom, for whom, or on whose behalf such note or writing be, or
shall be so given, delivered or left) or to his, or her Clerk, Attorney, or
Soliciter an answer in writing to such first note or writing, or leave the same
in writing at his, their, or one of their dwelling house or houses, or usually
place or places of abode, and that each party may reply, and the other rejoyn,
etc. the one party of them after the other party of them, in, or by some short
convenient time in writing to be delivered, or left as aforesaid till the doubt
of the matter be, or shall be agreed upon, and put to the question, or stated,
as or in the nature of a case.

And that if either such party Complainant, Plaintiff or Demandant, Defendant
or Tenant, do not consent the one part of them to the demand or request of the
other of them, that then each party of them, who does, or shall so petition, or
have, (showing or expressing to the other of them, some reason in such writing,
or note respectively; for what cause, or reason by, or according to the former
presidents or orders it has been, and was requisite and necessary that such
the request of him, or her, who do, or shall so petition, or move, ought, or
should be granted) that then, and not before, either of such parties may
petition to such Chancellor, Judge or Judges; or to, or in such Court for his,
or her demand, in such his, or her writing or note to be granted, and show
forth such notes or writings on either side to be read, veiwed, and considered
in such Courts.

And further, that if the demand or request of such motion or petition, shall
be granted or ordered against such party Complainant, Plaintiff or Demandant,
or Defendant or Tenant, against whom such petition, motion, or demand is, or
shall be made, (notwithstanding any thing to the contrary thereof to be
alleged, or expressed in his, or her writing so to be delivered, or left) that
then he or she for not consenting to such petition, motion, or demand, or for
putting into such note or writing, any vain or frivolous matter not material
against such request or demand shall be compelled to pay to the other of them
the ordinary Costs, Charges, and expenses of the other of the said parties
which he or she, or they shall lay out, or expend, and shall make Affidavit
before some Judge of the Court, where the same Action, Cause or Suit be, or
shall be depending, if such motion or petition be not, nor shall be granted
upon some matter, for which there neither was, nor shall be any former Order,
or leading President in such case.

And that such party (against whom such Petition or Demand be, or shall be
granted, or ordered as aforesaid, or shall consent to the demand of such
petition or motion of either of such parties Complainant, Plaintiff or
Demandant, or Defendant or Tenant) be compelled to perform the same Petition,
Order, Demand or Request which shall be so granted, ordered, or consented unto
without further charge or trouble, under pain and penalty, that for not
performing the same, be, she, or they refusing, or failing in performance of
the same shall forfeit, lose, and pay to every person to be grieved or
damnified thereby four times the value of such value to be recovered, as is
mentioned in other Proposalls*

And further to prevent excessive charges and troubles occasioned by Registers
and Drawers, Enterers, and Writers of Orders and Rules, and their Clerks,
Deputies and Agents, that such Registers, Drawers, ^^terers, Clerks, Deputies
and Agents shall, in, and to such note or writing, write what such Chancellor,
Court, Judge or Judges do or shall order, or adjudge of, and concerning the
same, and no more without re^^ar^ing, or reciting any of the matters or
contents of any such notes or writings, and after that any of such parties, or
any, or either of them (within convenient time) shall set, or cause to be set
down in writing, under his, or her Counsels hand, and deliver to such
Register, or any of the parties before with him mentioned respectively,
exceptions against any part of the writing down of such Order, and not
otherwise such Register, or such with him before mentioned shall attend such
Chancellor, Court, Judge or Judges who shall make such Order or Orders, and to
alter or amend the same, according as such Chancellor, Court, Judge or Judges
do, or shall sign, or write to the same, and after to enter so much only in
a book as such Register or Registers, Enterer or Enterers of Orders, his, or
their Deputy, Clerk or Agent shall write, and such Chancellor, Court, Judge or
Judges so sign (if any need of such signing be) in, or to such writing or
writings, with the parties names, and the day when such Motion or Petition was
granted, and to keep safe in an alphabeticall manner, such notes or writings,
together with the subscription or writing one such note or writing of such
Register, or any of such persons before with him mentioned, signed by such
Chancellor, Judge or Judges, for further satisfaction of such Court, or
either, or any the parties, Suitors there, and concerned therein, if need
should require: and that Registers, and such others before with them mentioned,
may only, take a competent gain for drawing, and copying of Orders and Rules
(according to rates usually taken by Clerks for drawing, entering, and copying,
wherein they have taken as much, or more pains then they in drawing, entering,
or copying of such Orders or Rules) upon, and under pain and penalty that every
such Register, or other party before with him mentioned, transgressing in the
premises, or taking more then before mentioned, shall forfeit, lose, and pay to
every party grieved or damnified, or to be grieved or damnified in the premises
for every offense and default concerning the premises, forty pounds of lawful
English money to be recovered, as before is mentioned.

And that for the ease and quiet of all Courts and people that all Registers,
and such other persons before with them mentioned (who have, or can come by any
choice Presidents or Orders of diverse natures made in several Causes of sundry
natures upon solid, and mature deliberation) be desired, or required that every
one of them may, and will produce, and bring in as many of them in particular,
as he in particular do, or shall know where to find, or come by to be entered
together, and that a method may be kept for the ready, and easy finding of the
same to be viewed by any: or that the same may be collected together, and
published in such a method in print, for the purpose aforesaid, that people may
not remain hood-wincked and blinded of the proceedings and Causes of making
Decrees and Orders in the Courts of Chancery, and such like Courts as they have
been, but that they may be informed and advised in, and of the same, as well as
they have been in other Courts: And that such Orders or Rules (as hereafter
shall be made upon solid, and mature deliberation as aforesaid) may be brought
into such Courts, and so entered, or published as aforesaid.

And that if any of such Registers, or any other before with them mentioned,
do, or shall draw up any Order or Rule contrary to the notes taken by any of
them in any Court upon the matter moved, or argued, or to be moved or argued,
whereupon such Order or Rule shall be made, and the same be also contrary to
that which shall be pronounced in such Court, and such Chancellor, Judge and
Judges (who pronounced the same) or the major part of them neither do, nor
shall justify and maintain that which such Register or other party before with
him mentioned shall so draw (though it be contrary to such note or notes,
taken, or to be taken) that then every such Register and party before with him
mentioned, shall for every time he do, or shall so draw, contrary to such note
or notes, forfeit, and lose, and pay to every party to be grieved or damnified
thereby a 100 marks of lawful English money to be recovered as aforesaid.

Whereas diverse stubborn, perverse, froward, and unconscionable people, after
they have been served with Writs under pains, or Warrants to appear in the
Chancery, and other Courts; and there to answer to Bills exhibited against them,
have stood out Attachments, Proclamations, and Commissions of Rebellion, and
processes to Sergeants at Arms for many years, before they have appeared, or
would appear; whereby many honest people of this Nation have been defrauded of
vast sums of money by chargeable Motions and Orders, and otherwise.

It is proposed to be desired, that for remedy thereof, it may

Be Enacted, That if any person or persons hereafter, being served with a Writ
or Warrant, commanding him or her to appear in any such Court, and shall not
appear, but stand out an Attachment, or other process, then when he or she
shall be Arrested or Attached thereupon, he or she shall be kept in prison, or
safe custody, until sufficient Sureties be, or shall be put in, to and for the
use of the Complainant in such Suit, not only for his or her appearance there,
but that he or she shall perform the Order of such Court to be made upon the
hearing of the Cause in such Court.

And that if such person or persons so served, or warned to appear; and shall
not appear within two months next after such warning, or service; and the same
be proved by the Oath or Affidavit of two honest Witnesses, and of good ability
in Estate, then may such Court put the Complainant or Complainants in such Suit
to make proof of so much as he, she, or they can, and after to proceed
thereupon to hearing, as if such defendant had confessed the residue thereof;
and to pronounce a decretall Order, and award Execution thereupon: if the
Complainant or Complainants in such Suit do, and shall find, and put into such
Court, good, able, and sufficient Sureties to make, restitution of that which
such Defendant do, or shall lose, or have taken from him, or her, by virtue of
such Execution; if after his or her appearance, and answer sufficient, and
examination of Witnesses in such Court, it shall be there so considered of,
pronounced, or adjudged.

THE END.

