A MESSAGE TO THE Philadelphian Society, Whithersoever dispersed over the whole
Earth. Together with, A CALL to the Several Gathered Churches among Protestants
in this Nation of England.

By I. Lead.

Isa. 58. 20. Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a Voice
of Singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the End of the Earth.
LONDON: Printed and Sold by I. Bradford, in Iewen-Street, near Crowder's-Well,
1696.

THE EDITOR TO THE READER.
BLessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, is not
without the greatest Reason prefixed in the Front of that Heavenly Doctrine,
which in the Greatness of the Majesty of Love, is delivered to us by our
Blessed Master, from the Mountain of Holiness. Wherefore the Opposite hereof is
most True: and there must certainly be a Woe unto those who are Rich in Spirit,
because theirs cannot be the Kingdom of Heaven. But notwithstanding that a Poor
Spirit is at this day so much Ridiculed, and is even Proverbially become a
Reproach among those who call themselves Christians, and Profess themselves the
Disciples of JESUS, who was so eminently Poor in his Spirit, above all the Sons
of Adam; yet the Wisdom of God which runs counter to that of Man, and Charges
his Prudence with Folly, will have that to be Honored, which he has
Dishonored: and will have that to be Dishonored which he has most of all
Honored, and Prided himself in. For that Poverty of Spirit which is the Scorn,
the Contempt, and Offscouring of the World, in the Day when God will bind up
his Jewels, will be made the Glory, the Crown and the Kingdom, to as many as
shall have followed the Steps of their Master in the Regeneration.

We find that at this time the many Bodies and Societies of the, so nominated,
Religions, do all fall in with the Laodiceans, saying, We are Rich; but the
True and Faithful Witness may shortly let them see that they are Poor, and will
cause their Spiritual Merchants to cry out, Alas! alas! in one hour so great
Riches are come to naught. And then shall the Poor Spirited Philadelphians,
that are now a despised Handful compared to the rest, who have indeed but a
little Strength, and confess it, be known to be the Children of the Kingdom,
having stood out the Hour of Temptation, and kept the Living Word of God; not
denying his Name, Power and Spirit, nor taking or bearing it in Vain.

The true Poverty of spirit is the primary Qualification for reading, as of the
most Holy Scriptures, so also of this little Treatise, now given to the World
from the Fountain of Love and Peace; and is the very Foundation and
Cornerstone of the New Creation, upon which the most glorious Temple of God is
to be built. Whereas if we go to any of the Outward Professions, that so much
cry out the The Temple of the Lord! the Temple of the Lord! we shall find them
to be of the number of those, who esteem themselves increased with spiritual
Goods, and to ^ave need of nothing. This is the Foundation and Cornerstone of
Ba^ylon, and of the Con^u^ion of the Sects; which, according to the ^entence of
the Righte^us Judge, must be all ^^umbled and moulder'd ^^to pieces, that so
out ^f this Chaos a beauti^^l Fabric may arise, ^^ly joined together,
ce^^ented, and compacted ^^y that which every part supplieth, to the Building
up, or Edifying of it self in the Love. And in order to this the Decree is gone
forth; the Account of which is given in both the Ensuing Messages, from the
Spirit and Word of Prophecy. The Great Angel, being now descended with his
Measuring Line, and having received a Commission not to leave one Stone upon
another, of any Temple which Man has ^uilt, is measuring out the foundation of
the New Temple, upon the Gates of which shall be written PHILADELPHIA.

To the raising up this Temple of the Holy Ghost, all the living stones of
fire, which have been, and are, seperately prepared, are Now called together by
the Harmonious Sounds o^ the seven Spirits of God^ Such as have only a Name to
be alive, but are dead, may not hear these Sounds to call them: yet as these
shall grow louder, it is not despaired but that even the Dead, and those that
stick most in the lifeless Sardian Constitution, shall hear their Voice, and be
brought into this living glorious structure. Yea: O God, let the Dead hear thy
Voice: Amen. Let the Dead hear thy Voice: Amen: Hallelujah. Let them hear thy
sweet Sounds, and come with Singing into thy Temple: Amen: Hallelu-IAH. Let thy
Voice break the Cedars of Lebanon and the Oaks of Bashan: Let it shake the
Wilderness, and let every one in thy Temple, hearing it, speak of thy Glory.
Amen: Hallelu-IAH. Thou will give Strength unto thy People; yea, unto
Philadelphia, the Least amongst the Thousands of Judah, will thou give
Strength. Thou will Bless thy People with Peace; yea, even with the Peace of
JERUSALEM will thou Bless them. Hallelu-IAH. The Proud will thou scatter in the
Imaginations of their hearts; thou will put down the Mighty from their Thrones
and wilt exalt the Humble and the Meek: yea, thou shall exalt, and establish
them, and they shall be established as Pillars in thy Temple, to go no more
out. Hallelu-JAH. Let thy Right Hand do this, O God of Glory: and let thy Right
Arm establish these Pillars in thy House. Yea, let the very stones of Babylon,
and even such as have been Pillars in the Temple of Maozim, be sanctified and
fitted for thy service. Let even those that know not that they are wretched,
and miserable, and poor, be brought to Buy of thee the Gold of Ophir, which is
seven times tried in the Fire, that they may be Rich; Let those that know not
that they are Blind, be convinced, and made to anoint their Eyes with thy
Eye Salve, that they may see, and obtain the Blessing of the pure in Heart; Let
those that know not that they are naked, having clothed themselves with their
own devised Forms, be undeceived, that they may not take that to be the
Covering of thy Spirit, which is but a Covering of Fig Leaves; that so they may
be persuaded to Buy of thee the White Raiment, and the Immortal Robe of thy
Flesh, that the Shame of their Nakedness may not appear. Let tyh Priests be
clothed with Righteousness, and let thy Holy Ones rejoice and sing, having put
thee on, O Lord JESUS. Yea, let them sing aloud from from the Isles. Amen:
Hallelu^JAH^

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas some Things have been Scandalously^ set forth, and Printed under the
Name of this Authors to the Reproach of Truth, and the Dishonor of that which
is Holy, it is thought fit for the putting a Stop to such Impostures, and the
Evil which might thence ensue, to give a Catalogue of the Books which the
Author has hitherto Published.

THE Heavenly Cloud, or, the Ascension Ladder, 4 to. 1682. p. 40.

The Revelation of Revelations, an Essay toward the Unsealing, Opening, and
Discovering of the Seven Seals, the Seven Thunders, and the New Jerusalem
State. 4 to. 1683. p. 130.

The Enochian Walks with God, found out by a Spiritual Traveller. 4 to. 1694.
p. 38.

The Laws of Paradise; Given forth by Wisdom to a Translated Spirit. 8 vo.
1695. p. 69.

The Wonders of Gods Creation manifested in the Variety of Eig^t Worlds, as
they were made known Experimentally to the Author. 8 vo. 1695. p. 89.

The Message to the Philadelphian Society.

There will shortly be Published by the same Author, The Tree of Faith: or, the
Tree of Life springing up in the Paradise of God.

A MESSAGE TO THE Philadelphian Society, Whithersoever dispersed over the whole
Earth. Together with, A CALL to the SEVERAL Gathered Churches AMONG PROTESTANTS
In this Nation of England.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by I. Bradford, in Iewen-Street, near Crowder's-Well,
1696.

A Message to the Philadelphian Society, etc.
. 1. A Voice from out of the Throne of the Majesty on High did ^hus cry,
saying; U^seal the living Testimony, wherein new and Fresh things will be
revealed. For in as much as there are holy Seekers, and loving Inqui^ers, so
accordingly my Spirit is at hand, to open Seal after Seal, ^ill the whole
Mystery of a Total and Full Redemption shall be understood.

. 2. Now the same Voice did a second time cry, saying; Ye that have an Ear,
hear what the Spirit says, cast up and remove all stumbling blocks ou^ of the
way. For the Lord whom ye have waited for, is drawing near to be revealed, in,
and after a wonderful manner. Therefore as my Dove-Flock do ye assemble, and
wait in the Unity of pure Love, praying in the Holy Ghost, who may go forth to
multiply more Universally. So shall my Kingdom upon the Earth spread, as Plants
of Righteousness in my own Likeness: and so beholding my self in them, my Joy
shall be ^illed. I am your Immanuel, who am the Tree of Life^ that with variety
of Fruits will you feed: and as ye are a Fountain of Gardens unto me, so will
the golden Floods from pure Deity ^low to water you throughout; that in a
distinct way ye may grow, and spring, as the Lily, and Rosy Sharon. In the
midst of which I your Kingly Shepherd will walk, and familiarly with you talk;
so as you shall not complain that I am as a Stranger to you, and gone away to
leave you, as if ye were nothing more to hear from me. Know it is far from me,
so to desert my Love-Inquirers, who will not leave you to live upon an old and
literal stock; for I am that Ancient present Rock, that will still follow you,
to open and give forth the Power of All-acting Wonders, that will gush out
plenteously.

. 3. Then the Voice the third time, cried; Blow the Trumpet, and proclaim the
beginning of the Lamb's Reign, who is come to pitch his Throne in Virgin Minds:
Into which the Honey-Dews shall fall, to keep them from all Famine and Drought;
for that the Fountain^ of Life now stands open to refresh and cherish every
Plant.

. 4. For a farther Confirmation of this, and in order to gather up prepared
Souls to Mount Sion, by the sound of the Trumpet which now blows forth from
thence, and to knit them in the pure Unity of the Virgin Philadelphian Church,
tha^ they may be presented as one holy Bride, without the least spot or
deformity, by the beloved Bridegroom to his Father; I had a Representation
showed me of the several Gathered Churches, belonging to Protestantism, that
came every one in their Order, before the Head-Shepherd, who was sitting upon,
the Throne of Judgment. Which alluded to Iesse's Seve^ Now ^ons, that were
called to pass before the Prophet.

Now follows the VISION of the Seven Churches.
. 5. First came the Eldest, which was the Prelatical Function, with their
National Church and Disciplined Members, who would be owned as the Lord's
Anointed: but they were refused, and shut^out. The Second were of a more
refined Order, nominated by the Name of the Presbytery; these also were
excluded as the former: they could not enter, nor have their Mission sealed.
Thirdly, came up a sort that assumed the Apostolical Dispensation, in a
separated way in the Use of Ordinances more Purely, called Independants, or the
Congregational Churches: these were also excepted against, and dismissed Then
in the Fourth place, another sort, that imitated the former, but such a Flock
as came up all washed, and linked in the Faith of Water Baptism, known by the
name of Anabaptists, presented themselves: these also passed away. Then
Fifthly, a Congregated Company, that were in the outward formal Part, wholly
looking and gazing after the State of Christ's Reign, and Monarchical
Government upon the Earth in a visible manner; not turning into, or e^ing the
foregoing Reign of the Holy Ghost, as that which constitutes the Heave^ly
Corporation, named the Fi^th Monarchy Church: but these were also disowned.
Then did I see a Body greater then any of these, come up with great Boldness,
as deeming themselves to have arrived to Perfection, and so visibly
distinguishing themselves from all the rest, and said; Now surely the Anointed
of the Lord is before him. But a Voice said, Neither are these they; for the
Lord sees not as Man sees: No Formal Temple shall henceforth be in the
everlasting Church of Christ^

But of the Stem of David a Virgin Church, which has known nothing of Man, is
yet to be born into this Earth, as to the Manifestation and Propagation thereof.

. 6. And it was farther shown me, that as David was one of the Seven, yet least
of all set by, or accounted of, so it will be also in the matter of the
Anointed Church. For the Spirit of David, who has derived from Abraham the
Spirit of Faith^ Love, and Meekness, as the Type of Heart-Perfection; (which
though it be of no repute, but lies obscure and hid, yet the Holy One will
find out such to be the Blossoming Root to precede Solomon's Day) will bring
forth a blessed Offspring, whose Train shall be lifted up to the Throne; where
no more Types, or Shadows, or Forms shall be. For all of this kind shall flee
away, and dye: no corrupt Figure can stand with the Lamb upon Mount Sion. For
to such a Celestial Degree will the Seventh be Anointed, for the
Tabernacle-Church, that no other Form but God and the Lamb shall be therein
seen, or understood.

. 7. And it was evidently Revealed to me, that this great Mystery is upon the
Agitation now in this very time: And it was thus cleared to me. That as David
in his Minority was Elected and Anointed in a secret hidden way by the Prophet
of the Lord, yet as to the outward possession of the Kingdom for a considerable
time, was not admitted; Saul keeping up his Reign, and David not regarded, or
the least looked upon in that Capacity; but the Counsel of the Lord must not by
Man be overthrown. For the Election upon the Holy Seed shall for ever stand,
and God will bring it forth as a Rising-Sun; upon which shall be no Cloud of
the Fall.

. 8. And it was given me to see, how this Church would be gathered, which
should proceed as Stars in the Right hand of the Head-Shepherd. And as it was
thus typified out by a Virgin-Woman that brought forth CHRIST after the figure
of an Humane Body, as the Rock which the Apostolical Church was built upon. So
likewise, according to John's Prophecy, a Virgin Woman is designed of a pure
Spirit, and of a bright Sun-like Body, all impregnated with the Holy Ghost,
that shall travail to bring forth the Firstborn, that will multiply and
propagate into such a Body, as shall be filled with the Spirit, Power, and
Temple-Glory of the Lamb of God. This is the Church that shall be called The
Lord our Righteousness; Because God himself will tabernacle there, and Sign
them with the Mark of his own Name, and adorn them with Miraculous Gifts and
Powers, beyond whatever yet has been. Whereby all Nations shall be brought
in, so that the Increase of his Priestly Kingdom will be very great. And then
shall all these Churches aforementioned, give up, out of them, those precious
lively Stones, which have been herefrom excluded under the covert of a Form. No
Bonds, or Imposing Powers there will be, no partition Walls: all these shall
fall flat by Sion's everlasting Trumpets; For the Holy U^ction must among these
newborn Spirits be All in All. And this is the Church that was by the Holy One
and True thus defined; against which no exception can be.

. 9. Objection. It may be objected that true it is, such a Glorious Church will
be hereafter, but for the present we do see no such thing; therefore we may
hold in with those Formal Ministrations that are now existent, among the
highest of those Degrees.

Answ. As to this receive what the Most Holy One has made known unto me: That
though this Real Mount Sion Church, made up of Philadelphian Spirits, is not
known in Visibility, yet at present it may lie hid at this present time in the
Womb of the Morning Sun. The Virgin-Spirit that is overshadowed with the Holy
Ghost in order hereunto, is in the Wilderness, where for a time she must be in
Concealment. The last Half Time is now upon expiring. Then, O ye who shall be
accounted, worthy to be called out of Babylon, out of that state which is in
Confusion, Darkness and Formality, upon whom the Vials of the Lamb will be
poured forth, Arise, come ye forth, and return to Sion, being Redeemed from the
Earth, and delivered from this long Captivity and Bondage under which ye have
groaned. Even also amongst those that judge themselves nearest come up to the
Apostolical Dispensation, there will be a shaking, and great Frustration. Their
Sun of Righteousness will be clouded as in a Mist, and they will see their
Light was too short by many Degrees, of what the Virgin Daughter is upon the
travel for, and which will be brought forth in this present Age.

. 10. As therefore I received this Caution from him, who says, Behold I come
quickly; the same I do commend to all those who are waiters for this Kingly
Birth of Power; that they would not put far away this Day, nor limit it to
future Years, neither be found sticking in any Form, though in the most refined
Appearance. But let such wait, every one in their own Place and Station,
wheresoever scattered under the Spirits Ministration, which is able to
constitute for a perfect Membership, that is suitable to the Head-Shepherd, who
will take care suddenly to gather in his True Mount Sion Flock.

. 11. And one thing more I shall add as from the Lord, ^or a sign that this
Nation's saving Birth is near to be revealed. It may be observed, there is a
mighty Spirit of Inquiry, crying, How Long? and a mighty sense of Bondage,
Darkness, and Oppression, both Internal and External, under the Prince of
Darkness and his Agents in this Region. Now when the Holy One^, the Seed of
Abraham do groan, travail, and cry, as know^ng themselves to be in Pharaoh's
Land under hard servitude both ^n Body and Mind; this is a cer^ain Foreruner
and Token, that ^he Lamb of God will raise up a Prophet like unto himself, who
shall save and deliver his People. As Moses was a Type hereof, so this expected
Birth, shall by the Scepter and Rod of God's power, ransom and recover the
Captives, that are under the Tyranny of the Pharaoh Prince; which signifies
the Earthly Life, that has been the Seat of the Man of Sin. These are the glad
Tidings which the Spirit of JESUS does bring to you his scattered Flock,
wheresoever dispersed, and howsoever oppressed. And this is from the Holy One,
a Call out of the gathered Churches, in order to be gathered up to the Church
o^ Mount Sion: until which time let every one be fervent, worshipping in their
own Temple till the Breath of the Power d^ call them together.

. 12. For which end the Seven Angels from before the Throne, are going forth t^
all Parts of the Earth, to an^ fro, to summon into the Temple of Wisdom, all
her Chi^^dren, and all that will come under her Discipline. The Eve^^lasting
Priesthood is now to b^ performed by Mount Sion's Inhabitants, which has been
f^^gured out unto my Intern^^ Sight in a Divine Draugh^ wherein I was made to
see i^ Spirit the holy Order, Beauty and Glory thereof, according t^ the
Original Pattern, which Moses did view upon the Mount with God, as he went
Personally up. So somewhat that is unknown came down into the secret deep of
the Mind, and so described first the Holy City, then the Magnificent Temple and
Altar, with all those holy Apartments, that are required for Sion's Priests to
officiate in.

. 13. The whole Limit hereof, even to the outmost Court and very Borders, is to
be most Holy, according to the Word of the Lord, which thus declared it self
afresh, as my Ear was opened to hear. Behold I will do a New thing upon the
Earth, and when it springs forth, it shall condemn the highest Forms and
Appearances of all visible Worships, which now are reckoned Sacred. For God
intends to frame a New Church; which he will delight himself in, and rejoice
over.

. 14. For a deep Groan, with a Voice, was heard from the Invisib^e O^^, saying;
Oh, Father, suffer me to put an end to all Oblations and Sacrifices, which are
offered by those who are not of the most holy and anointed Priesthood. To which
Word my enlightened part did well agree; for I have been of late much
di^satisfied, at all low and mixed Offerings, which are ministered while yet
resident in the Body, both of Sin and Mortality, These not being worthy of a
God so holy as is our God, could not be presented from any one in such an
imperfect state, because of their Deficiency, as perfect. Upon which
Consideration, nothing can be more grateful to us, O my Lord, then to have that
New and Living Way revealed, through which we may come to know after what
Manner and Pattern thy Worship now is to be, and who also ^he Worshippers are
that be required.

. 15. Now as to this Virgin Church, the Lord did show me how, and after what
manner it was to be Constituted, with the Invalidity of all that which has
been in a Formal Imitation thereof.

As first in Answer to an Objection, which I made, How such a Pure Church could
possibly be in such a Polluted Region?

Which was Answered thus: While I was plunged into deep Introversion in my
Spirit, call to remembrance, (spoke the Holy One) Abraham the Faithful, unto
whom I appeared, and consider how that he became the first Root of that Visible
Church which was Peculiar of all the Earth unto me. And farther, this observe,
that the numerous Offspring hereof did proceed from that one Seed; for so
likewise it will be again. God will send out One, and Another, that shall be
after his own Heart, who shall be ordained as the principal Pillars of this New
Assembly. And the mighty Spirit of a CYRUS will be absolutely Required both for
the first laying the Foundation thereof, and also for supporting it in its
progress.

. 16. Now from hence it was revealed to me, that Abraham and Sarah were a Type
of that which should be produced, and manifested in the last Age of the World,
according to all the Prophecies that run pointing still to the Glory of Mount
Sion, that has always been expected to be revealed in every Age since Christ.
Immediately after Christ's Ascension it was looked for, and believed in, when
the Apostles gathered several Branches relating to such a Church to their Day.
But this was not fixed for Substance, because Corrupted since, and so in the
Confusion of Babylon, as it is at this Day; the ruins of which are yet to be
raised up and a perfect Temple-Body, answerable to the Head-Power. Which now
the Holy Spirit has given the true Model of, in the Figure of Him who was the
Beginning of the Israelitish Church, whom God chose, and called from out of his
own People, and from the Land of his Nativity: Who in the Spirit of Faith
obeyed all, and every Requiring of God. Upon such a Spirit as this was, God
will found this Virgin Church, who shall be as the Firstborn out of Wisdom's
Womb, of which Sarah was a Type, who by Faith conceived him, of whom came the
great Increase, as to the making up of a Visible Church; Am^^g the Genealogy of
which CHRIST was born after the Flesh; in which Human Property he was Despised;
and though he came to his own, yet was neither received, nor owned by them. But
now in, and from the Spirit of Faith there will be brought forth, as from the
Dead, a New Offspring, and Virgin Generation, altogether after the purifying
nature of Faith; unto whom CHRIST will Personally appear the second Time, a
Body being for that purpose, thus prepared Him.

. 15. This I can say, I have received from the LORD, that this cannot be until
such an holy separated Congregation be found who have absolutely denied, and
come out of the Old Birth, and all of that Nature's Property, into what is of
the Spirit of Faith's Property, and into Love's Nature: Till then, it is but a
a fruitless expectation, to believe the Lord will appear from Heaven, before
the Church, the Bride, be found thus ready to receive him. Now the approaching
Day is near, in which He is moving his Fiery Wheels for the finishing of that
Mystery, the Foundation of which was first laid in Human Property: who does not
reveal this great thing by his Spirit, that so some one or other may, in a
sweet sense, and Spiritual Emulation hereof, be the Firstborn of Wisdom, if
possible. For a Mother there must be of this Virgin Church, that will appear
without Evil upon the Mount of Holiness; whose Increase will be as great as
what did spring out of the Loins of Abraham.

. 16. That Prophecy is yet to be fulfilled, and accomplished, which the Beloved
John saw, Rev. 7. where the Twelve Tribes were first to be sealed, before the
Angels could hurt, or destroy the Earth. And as it is written, the Number out
of every Tribe was Twelve Thousand, which summed up, makes up the Hundred and
Forty Four Thousand, who with the Lamb shall stand upon the Mount of Sion. Now
from hence let all be convinced, that as yet there is not to be found such a
Church, as bears those Characters, that are expressed for Sealing. Therefore
it is time to awake out of this dead sleep, and to see where we are in all that
fair Appearance, in which Church-Forms and Fellowships do yet abide? The Lord
has several times, both by Vision and Voice, shown me all to be as an empty
fruitless Vine, much void of the Spirit, and Water, and Blood of Life. And now
again has he set before me such Golden Candlesticks, as he himself will walk
in the midst of. And I have heard this Cry, saying, Where shall I find Spirits
that will go out of the Land of Pollution, and walk with God perfectly, as did
my Faithful Abraham; who never stuck at any thing required of him: therefore he
became Great and Mighty, because he believed before he possessed. From the same
Spirit therefore of Faith, Truth, and Purity, shall the New Covenant be
established, for an holy Priestly Convocation, as the First Covenant was with
him, according to the Figurative Ceremony of things. So where the same Spirit
shall spring again, they shall substantially bring their Priestly Offerings
into the very Holy of Holies; because the Mediation is now doing away.

. 17. O the great Blessing, without all controversy! that will be doubled upon
them, who shall put to their Hands to cut the first Stone out of this
Mountain-Rock, for the Foundation building of this unblemished Church, which
will be upon a daily Increase, till that it come up unto Wisdom's Number Seven:
who has built her Temple upon so many Pillars, and calls aloud for every one
to come, and enter into it. And thrice great will be the Blessing of him, who
is chosen from the Womb, to raise up this Temple, and to be made such a
si^gular Instrument in the Hand of his God. A mighty Standard will be lifted
up, to which the Dove Spirits will flock apace, and shelter themselves under
it. The Priestly Trumpets are now going forth to summon in the Children of the
Captivity under this glorious Standard of the Great God and Savior, which
shall be pitched in the Valley of Dec^sion. Many things further in order
hereunto were showed me, and not without great matter of Encouragement unto any
such, who find their Hearts bent thereunto.

. 18. Then was it made known unto me, that where this united Spirit of Faith
and Love did find a fixed Birth in any Person, it should go forth with such an
Eminent Breath of Power, as daily added to it should be Spirits of like Virgin
Purity, preparing for those great Degrees of Sion's Glory. Who still look
forward after the utmost Redemption, out of all that Sorrow and Distress, which
the Mortal Image is liable to. For as the divine Sense shall clear up in them,
to make them see and feel under what heavy Oppression they are, being subjected
to the Pharaoh-Spirit of this World, which will be throwing heavy weights, and
imposing servile Works upon them; which suffered must be, and will be so for a
while, to provoke and draw out their Cries to the most holy and great
High Priest, that so he may be a Savior of these his separated Ones, after a
most miraculous way. For therefore he will yet now again, as in the days of
old, show forth his great Wonders. His mighty Hand must be lifted up on high,
to bring them out of Egypt, that figured out this Servile Creation, under which
each one of Abraham's Seed does groan. A Prophet will the Most High yet raise
up, who shall deliv^r his People from all Babylonish Charms, by mere force of
Spiritual Arms, and release them from the Tyranny of that Dark Prince, who does
visibly reign all over the World. And how must this be, b^t by the Standard of
the Spirit, that will in a Moses-like Figure, stretch forth the Royal Scepter
of an everlasting Throne-Might? For the Seed of Abraham must still expect to be
under Oppression throughout every Age, until the Sovereignty of the Holy Ghost
come to be annexed to some holy Souls, by which they may be enabled to do the
Wonders of JEHOVAH, in the sight of their Exactors and Oppressors. For by no
other way can the Lamb of God set free his chosen Flock, whom he has purchased
with his Blood, but by raising all the Powers of a God, which may go forth in
the Birth of That, which shall shake the ^ron-Rod over all N^tions. Then will
the Reign of CHRIST have its beginning in Spirit. For before his own distinct
and Personal Appearance, his Birth of Power will be first brought forth in some
chosen Vessel, or Vessels; as M^ses, Joshua, and Aaron, were Types, anointed to
be Heads and Leaders unto the rest, to bring them into the Promised Land: So
likewise the Lord has expressly revealed, and shown to me, That there shall
again be raised up Head-Powers, such as are to be of great Eminency and Favor
with the Trinity, whose Dread and Fear shall fall upon all Nations, because of
the mighty Acting Power of the Holy Ghost which shall rest upon them; whereby
they shall make way for the Ransomed Ones to return with Joy unto Mount Sion.
Where the New and Living Priesthood shall according to the Covenant, and Law of
the Spirit of Life, be offic^ously and effectually performed, after a much
different manner then the First; All Similitudes being too short to reach the
Essential Top, and highest Degree, which shall be acted by holy and perfect
Spirits, within the Walls of the New Jerusalem when it comes down upon the
Earth, and by them be offered up as a most perfect Sacrifice in the New Temple.

. 19. For it was given me to understand and know in very Truth, that such an
holy Order of Priests should be Anointed, that was to be what the great
High Priest was in this World, Holy, Perfect, without Guile, wholly Born again
of a pure Spiritual Nativity without Sin Even such as our Lord might not be
ashamed to own as his Priestly Brotherhood; He only having the Preeminence of
being Anointed with a double Degree: yet the Lower Order is to be without Sin;
that so there may be no exception, but all freedom to ascend up to the holy
^phere, where God himself will ^ppear in an everlasting Taber^acle, to talk,
and give forth his Mind freely, unto such as do draw near to him in a Priestly
Spirit and Body. For the Spirit, which has opened these Secrets, did declare
that it was expedient, (...) thus upon this account it should be.

. 20. First, because our Head Prince could not yet descend, for that his Bride,
the Church, was not yet ready: neither any Temple-Body, as yet, prepared that
is able to bear the Glory of his Personality. As God therefore took of the
Spirit of Moses, and caused it to rest upon Seventy chosen out to bear the
Burden with Moses: So verily, and in like manner, will the same Spirit of our
Lord JESUS be given out to Qualify and Furnish for that high Degree of
Spiritu^ Government: Which will be pu^ upon some that yet are in a Mor^tal
Figure, until another Body be put on them after a Priestly Order: Which will be
given when they are called up to enter into the most Holy Place of Purity. When
Power also w^^^ given to them, proportionable to that State into which they are
called, and to the State of that Virgin and Glorious Church which they are
chosen, and Redeemed from among Men, to bear up and support, in the Latter Day
upon the Earth.

. 21. Secondly: Now because Christ himself is in the Heavens to remain, till
such a Perfect Church be brought up, as has all those Characters and Marks
that the Hundred Forty and Four Thousand are to have; He will ^ctuate some by
the Ghostly ^ower in an Extraordinary Man^er, to Officiate as if he himself
^ere upon the Earth. This is ^he Great Design that is Now ^ertainly on foot to
bind the Mi^istration of the Spirit withal. ^or what else in this unbelieving
Age will be of Force or Preva^ency, but a Power that may work according to
Omnipoten^y: Which may bear down all that would still keep up the Formality of
Things, that is to ^e laid desolate.

. 22. All Oblations and Sacrifices which are weak and im^erfect, must have
their Cessa^ion. For Pure Worshippers, all composed of Life, Power, and Spirit,
must now wait upon the Altar for free Entrance into the most Holy Court. For
which ^igh and signal Endowments we are pressed to wait, that so no going out
may be, till we be richly furnished with every Gift, to credit our High Priest
withal; who has made himself a Debtor to us for it; and as we are his
Remembrancers, he will stand Charged to make full Payment unto us of these
Great Things.

. 23. This only required is on our part, to suffer the Spirit of Burning to do
upon us the Refining Work, fanning us with his Fiery Breath, until all be Pure
and Clean. For this Burning and Perfuming Oil of the Holy Ghost, searching
every part within us, is the true Consecration for the Everlasting Priesthood,
that so we may come near to the Holy Being, and be acceptable Worshippers
before his Throne, to Mediate for all these adorning Powers and Gifts, that may
demonstrate we are in Election to be the Beginning of that Priestly Church,
that is coming out of the Wilderness, like to Pillars of Smoke, and Flames of
Fire, terrible in Crystalline Purity; whereby we may display the Banners of
JEHOVAH, as the Sealing Character of the Virgin-Church.

. 24. Upon all the foregoing enforcing Arguments of the Anointing Power, this
Word was renewed: Happy art thou, who is like unto thee, before whom a Fiery
Law shall go forth, which shall not be after Mount Sinai Inscription, that
could never abolish Sin: but this contrariwise shall open as a Spirit-flash of
Lightning, that shall judge and try, burn and consume every rising Motion, that
from the First Birth of the Earthly Man has been. Therefore observe and
cherish this Burning Spring, into which suffer all and every part to be plunged
thoroughly. For this will give witness for it self to be the Tri-Une Baptism.

. 25. Then was it further revealed, that this Fiery Law would be the Fixation
of the Vrim and Thummim. Which was opened unto me, to be a divine sight, from a
Fire-piercing Eye, that could have a deep inward search into the secret things
of the Deity, and could Prophecy therefrom in a clear Ground; as knowing wh^t
is couched in the first Originality, bringing forth therefrom, according to the
Counsel and Pleasure of the Most High, Things New and Old, even according to
the Love-driving of this Fiery Law, which is the high binding Law, that will
most naturally, and essentially, from all Mount-Sion Inhabitants, and from the
pure Philadelphian Race of all the Redeemed Holy Ones, that are brought out of
Babylon, to stand upon this Virgin Mount go forth.

26. For it was expressed, that this Law was before Sin entered, and it should
thence again enkindle it self, and obliterate in a known Number, what the Law
of Sin has defaced of the pure Image. And it was also shown, that this Vrim
and Thummim were only to be appropriated to the Priests of the Melcbizedeck
Order, that is, to such whose Descent is not to be counted, or recorded in the
Genealogy of the Creation which is under the Lapse; but from the Restoration,
and the Birth which is from the Olive-Root, that is ever more consecrated to
put on this Breast Plate, as the Signal Character of this Holy Function and
Heavenly Calling; as it was given me to know from the Lord. The Properties of
which extend ^o all Clearness of Sight and Soundness of Judgment. All which
will make for the praise of Him, who shall for us this Transl^tion effect,
bringing us into the Membership of this most holy Virgin Church and Priesthood.

. 27. As I was further considering the Refining Work, as being the present
Business which the Spirit provokes to in order to those greater Things to be
revealed and entered upon; the Word again thus opened it self The LORD, whose
Hand is lifted up, swears in Truth and Righteousness, that from Abraham's
Line, according to the Spirit, there shall arise a most holy Priesthood indeed,
that must assume the high Prerogative of Priestly Soveraignity, which hitherto
in this Principle has never in manifestation bear, since the days of the
Apostasy. It will begin with the Wise and Perfect in Heart; from such the
Scepter of Dominion shall never depar^.

. 28. Much from the Lord did at the same time ^ill my Temple to utter forth, as
Four of us were met together to rehearse by way of Prophecy, what an
approaching time is drawing near. When this Word more particularly was given to
me, That God was coming from Teman, and the Holy One from Mount- Paran, to
revive the Work, and to make known where the hiding of his Power has been. For
a Fiery Law shall proceed out of his Mouth, by which he will try all N^tions,
and divide as under the Everlasting Mountains, and make them bow before him.

. 29. While my Spirit was Exercised upon these Great Things, there came before
me two Pillars of Fire: which at present I only understood to be applicable to
our selves, who were met together, as if signifying, that such Pillars as were
as burning Lights, did become the Temple of God, and ought there to be for
fixation. But the Night following, the Lord opened it further unto me, and
showed me, that they did signify a more Public Matter; to wit, some Eminent
Spirits these Two Pillars should be, by whom an Entrance or pass would be made
into the Secret and Separated ^^nctuary, where they were to and fixed, to give
entrance in^o suchlike separated Spirits as ^^emselves, who, as Flames of
^^re, might minister in the Holy Courts in their Priestly Power.

. 30. O hereby all this do I ^ee, that the Lord is putting all things in order;
that he may ^ave a true Temple-Body, all of light, paved with Fire-S^ones of
Love. For the support of which House, or Body, he will send forth, until he
himself shall appear in Person, such Pillars that shall be tried as Gold, and
powerful as the Fire, as being so made meet for the Master's use. I do see in
Wisdom's Glass, that the Divine Powers in the Heavens are at Work hereunto very
swiftly.

. 31. As I was still further attentive to hear and see, wh^^ what would be
presented beyon^ the Veil, in relation to the Re^fi^ing Work, which is to
pre^pare and make way for the Ma^nifestation of this Holy Church I did see a
round Glass like a Globe, and at first sight it wa^ all full of Matter, that
was lik^ putrified Blood, black and i^ colored. Then saw I the Glob^ turned
with the Vent downward and it was all discharged of tha^ corrupt matter. Then
arose a Spring that filled it again, as with Water, which emptied it self out
again. And I beheld the Figure of a Heart with an Engraving thereupon within
the Globe^ And I marvelled how it came there, and no sight of any Person to put
it in; and all this was acted, as without any visible Hand. Further, there
arose a Golden Liquor in the Globe, and ^^e Heart ^luttered up and down (...)
it, and shined as Gold. This ^as a wonderful Presentation; ^^to which my Spirit
enquired, ^^d I heard a Voice sound, This ^ews what the Oracle will be, ^^at is
filled only with the clear and true U^ction; there will be rising Spring with
all floating ^oy. Consider, oh my Soul, that Wisdom may open, for a ^urther
Instruction herefrom: ^or deep is the Globe of Wonders.

A Revelation upon the Vision of the Glassy Globe: Which was ^hewn me to be the
signification of the Oracle, in which the New Heart shall be conceived; upon
which God does engrave his own Name, which from the Foundation of Wisdom, and
Spring of all Knowledge and deep Understanding do flow.

. 32. Now it was testified, and thus opened unto me, that some were Elected for
to be fixed Oracles, who are to be clarified for this purpose with pure Water
from the Glasfy Sea. Whose Operation should be all forceable to work out the
impure Matter of the Bloody Issue, which is the Spring of Sin, that only can be
fully cleansed with this Water Baptism, from the rising Scum of putrified
Nature. Which once was as a clear Glass in the first Formation, as it came out
of the Hand of the Great Creator, but now so mudded with strange Mixtures, that
all Crystalline Beauty of the Globe of Nature is turned into such a swarthy
Blackness and Dimness, that nothing is left clear for Spiritual Seeing.
Therefore what has infinite Grace sought out ^or help and redress, for such as
^re known by Name, to bear that high and living Fame, as the Oracles of which,
the ever spring^ng Testimony, shall daily renew. Therefore they are to be
guarded and secured, with the outspread^ng Wings of the anointed Che^ubims,
that may henceforrh ^eep off the mortal Dust: which ^ stirred, and raised by
the arm^d Enemies, that do ride pran^ng on, to cast up Earthly Soil after those
Washings, which will ^reatly endanger that, which ^^e holy separating Water of
^ife enters in for clarifying of; ^at so Nature may come to be ^fined, and made
all Crystalline, ^r God's own Heart to move in.

. 33, But caution the Holy ^host has given to u^, that as ^e would be
partakers of this ^^gh Ministry, as not ^n^y to speak, but to be in truth the
very Oracles of God. The^ from hence we are given to u^derstand, that no
unclean an^ polluted Essences must rest wi^^ us. For the Spirit does let ^^
know, that no mixed Matter ca^ here agree; for Christ in Spir^^ is demonstrated
for this ver^ end, so to infuse himself as the true Anointing, that he mig^
inwardly cleanse from these gro^ pollutions of Sin, through the sending in pure
Waters from the dropping Element, which is the true foregoing Baptism that Io^
the Baptist did figure out. (...) that Water was Visible and E^^teriour, so
this is Invisible, a^ Internally effectual for Salvation Here the Name JESUS do
become all-saving, because Water is poured into a Ves^ to rinse and cleanse it,
so the S^rit of Christ is poured in, as p^^^^ming Water for Life renew^^g, that
nothing of the old ^ent might be felt, for to send ^^rth an evil savor. This
is (...) to be done, as not to be li^^le to D^filement, after that ^e are
baptized with this Water ^ Life: then no more dead and ^^trified Flesh is to
remain. ^his is the Wonder of all Won^ers, whereby God will yet ^agnifie his
anointed One, by whom all things are to be re^red.

. 34. B^t an Objection ^^mes to be answered, This is ^^ch a Washing as is only
Figura^^^e, but not yet in any Actually ^complished, for such a durable ^arity,
as to know nothing ^re of the Rising Scum, that ^th make the Spirit of the Soul
^m and dark; which the Glassy ^obe does present the 1st Created Being in, but
now all thickne^ with gross earthly Matter; An^ how this can be clearly
dischar^ged, and washed out, so as n^ more to be infected again there withal,
this altogether is incre^dible. For no such Person yet but the Lord Christ,
has bee^ ever known, or recorded o^ therefore even the Spirit would never put
any upon such Impo^^sibilities to strive and labor for that which in this
Lifetime ca^ never be reached unto.

The Holy Word of Trut^ does now reply and cry, Sto^ oh, stop thou, whose Voice
I d^ well know to be from a Birth that is of a low Sin rooted being, and so
willing still to b^ Only thou art thus far convi^^ced, that thy Branches that
be^ evil Fruit, are to be croppe off; but the Ro^^ of the Matt^^ may be still
allowed. But against this Doctrine, the Pure and Just One does declare: who
will wink no longer at imperfect Spirits, who do rest in the midst of druggy
Senses, as in an easy Bed, out of which they would not be disturbed, but would
be contented with what is too short and narrow a Covert: For nothing of naked
Adam may more ^ppear to God's pure Eye. For now, as in the clear Day, the
Spirit does me show, that this ^ndulgence to the Imperfect thing, has in all
these latter Ages done great wrong, and has been a Let to the coming down of
the Lordly Dominion. The Old Earth e're this would have been renewed, had not
this D^s^ensation gained upon the whole Creation. But this false Covering is
rolling away, and it ^s given some to believe, that Sin shall be found no more,
when the First and Second Baptis^^ shall meet together in the Gla^^ Globe,
which will renew old N^^ture, and will clarify it to b^ the Glass of Wonder.

. 35. But it may be said, tru^ it is, that such Prophecies ther^ are, that
relate to a New Cre^^tion, and the passing away o^ the Old: But the time, when
this Mystery will begin to work we cannot foresee.

For this, it is answered, Tha^ this is the very acceptable Day and the true
Sign is already gi^ven, the immediate forerunne is already come to baptize with
the Water of Life, that hence forth we may expect the Baptizing Fire of the
Holy Ghost; no more Transient, as in the Aposto^lical time, but as a Fixed
Pow^er, that may no more depart till it has swallowed up Sin and Death in
Victory.

. 36. Thus will the Globe of Nature be cleansed with the Fountain-streams from
the Eternal Element, and then it will be purged with Everlasting Burnings, that
the Face of all things may be renewed in Nature's Globe, as was seen in the
Vision. A pure Heart floating up and down in its own Golden Oil, that does
issue forth continually from it self, as the procession of the Holy Ghost. If
this was not the very Time for the accomplishment, what means the Cry of
Elias in Spirit, to come to his Baptism in way of preparation for it? Of a
truth I must bear witness, it has been an unc^ssant Cry in the Wilderness of
Nature of late Years, and hereby I am so convinced of the necessity, that now I
would gladly suffer my self to be plunged, and buried with my Lord in this
Baptism, which is the true ^inking into Death, by which the way of the Kingdom
is prepared: wherein God in Nature, an absolute King, Priest, and Prophet will
come down, and appear manifestly, to govern and rule thus arbi^rarily by his
Saints in great Power and Majesty. Having no other Rule o^ Law, but the
Engraving of God in the cleansed Globe of Eternal Nature, so quickened and
raised to its ancient degree and matter.

. 37. Thus it is given me, in the Spiri^'s Eve to see, that all Nations,
Kingdoms, and Languages, that shall remain in the old Nature, and broken state,
of what is found in Mortality, shall be converted and brought in. So many as
are numbered in God's Book, shall bow to this New Creation-Government, and shall
come to^ the Pool of the holy Baptizing of the Water of Life, and so agree to
wash; and be thereby prepared for the All-pleasant Burning Spirit.

. 38. It was further verifyed, That those only, who to this perfect degree are
come, shall receive the opening Key, for an absolute Dominion over those parts
of the World, that in the might and greatness of an Astral Spirit, have ruled
as potent and strong. But the divine Magus, that God will ra^se, shall far
outdo all rational C^aft and Subtilty; so that all must be Tributaries and
Servants to the anointed of the Most High. This is the Crown that will; be ^he
certain Reward to them, who to these Baptisms do fully arrive.

. 39. An additional Opening came upon an Objection in my self, that was raised
upon the clear Oracle Dispensation, which was this: How we should possibly come
to distinguish the true Sound of the Holy Ghost passing through us, without
being adulterated by contrary Spirits, that do dash in before the Globe of
Nature come to be all fully refined, and the muddy Issue stopped?

This has been the ground that has made such deviation and erring from Truth.
For the method and manner of God's revealing his Mind is not Now so much by
those Local Voices, as before the Anointing of the Holy Spirit was given. For
the Patriarchs and Prophets before Christ's sending down the Holy Ghost, had
God's Mind delivered unto them by an Express Voice, and plainness of Speech,
which was well understood, and known by them to be the express Word of the
Lord. And though in those Ages there were false and mixed things, that did
enter into some, who did also reveal true Prophe^ies from God, yet the Event of
things did it show, and there God's witness was against them. But the very Holy
Men of God, who were truly inspired from his Mouth, were ever more attended
with a Signal Power, whereby they knew it to be of the Lord: As much might be
called up from what is recorded in Scripture ^or to justify this Truth. But to
Answer this grand Objection, how it may be cleared? What i^ of the Spirit's
true dictate, from that which is otherwise? for it must be granted, that it is
rare to fi^d, that any one has arrived to that Clarity, that nothing of Soil
is cast up in the Mind, to discolor the Golden Spring of Divine Revelation,
that does distinctly run. Which is discernible by the Spirit of Sound Judgment^
that decides and determins all Matters according to the Laws of Christ's
Invisible Kingdom, which differs and thwarts all of this visible and exterior,
judging that Kingdom down. For such a superior wise understanding Spirit does
still survive in some Elected hereunto, as in Moses, Samuel, and Solomon, and
so all along according to the gift of God, that does run from Age to Age,
rising yet more high and eminent, as the Most High takes pleasure to dignifie
those, who are of the right Line of Abraham's Seed, to whom the Promise does
belong, that there shall never cease to be a Prince upon the Throne, to judge
in Truth and in Righteousness, as God's impartial witness in the Soul. Of this
Moses and the seventy Elders were a Type, upon whom God's spirit of Wisdom did
rest, for determining of Causes, that the People from day to day brought before
them. So verily it is now applied more Internally, to those innumerable
generating Essences, that within the circumference of the Mind do still rise as
matter of Controversy, to be decided by the true Judge and Lawgiver. Who in
no wise will be corrupted or biased, but make all to bow, according to the
Light and Eternal Word of Truth. Oh the strange Insurrections of Thoughts, as
so many Princes, that would put in to bear part of the Priesthood and
Prophetical Function, rushing in as Korah, ^athan, and Abiram, that rose ^p
with all their Trains, saying, Are we not meet to judge? equal with the Spirit?
Why take ye so much upon you? are not we Spiritual? Why may not our Verdict be
heard in the Court of the Lord's Tabernacle? This is the Language that may be
understood in, and among the confused Thoughts, that would ex^lt themselves
against the One only Anointed of the Lord in us. Who has the preeminence to
draw nigh to hear, and to receive from the most Holy in a distinct separated
way from all the common thoughts that rise from the sensitive ground, that are
under all mixed Confusion: Which are the intruding Spirits, that are to be
brought to trial, and hereby it will be made to appear, as in the case betwixt
Moses and those murmuring Princes, the Decision was given. God owned and took
part with his own meek Spirit in Moses, and gave power to send them down alive
into the Deep. And thus it will be carried on Internally; the Lord will raise
and magnify his own true Prophet within us, that shall have a peculiar access
unto him in the holy Priesthood, and go apart from the whole Congregation of
thoughts, which are denominated for the mixed Multitude. Upon which bounds are
to be set, that they break not in, where God calls his holy anointed One up
to commune about ^he Secret Things, that are yet fur^^er to be revealed, in
order to the ^^tling of the Priestly Kingdom, in (...) ^eaceable Reign of
Christ.

. 40. For indeed all need there is, for this Wise Solomon to sit upon the
Throne to judge the many Causes that will arise, and still come before him for
determination: Till such time that all Strife and Commotion from the Astral
Spirit shall cease, and no more any such evil occurrent shall be. To which
effect, the Spirit's Reign will bring all unto, and every thought that
contrarily does stir, and yields not up to these Princely Spirits, that in Love
and Meekness, with Truth and Righteousness, do govern all things in the reign
of the Soul, that is to be reduced to this pure and spiritual stilne^, for a
quiet Habitation, in which the Trinity may a^^ee to dwell, meeting wi^^ (...)
in most excellent Harm^^y, that answers to the Eternal Unity of their own
Divine Being.

. 41. This is that Leb^non Glory in all its high d^grees. Which the Spirit of
Jesus is driving into, from the cursed murmuring Spirits, that still would be
mi^^ng with the Lo^d's anointed Prophet within us. Therefore Authority is to be
taken in Iehovah's Name, to exclude and throw out, what will not suit to the
Priestly Government. For with that Mosaical Spirit, God will only be free with
all to tell his Mind, and commit his Secrets to. All other springing Essences
that do fly upward from the imaginary part, must be searched, tried, and judged
in the superior Court, by that Unction of God, that is abstracted from all
stirring strange Essences, that would readily give in their Votes to corrupt
the pure rising Spring of God's Counsel. Which had need to be strongly guarded,
for Attempts to thrust in may easily be discerned. But the cry, that I do hear
pass through me, is to keep the Oracle clear, that the Heart of God may always
live and move there. And for this cause, Ioshuah after Moses does arise to
bring us forward, and on, till we come to possess the choice and rich things,
that are reserved to this Day in the New Jerusalem Land, where our Lot does
stand, and will be divided to each one, according to their Spiritual Nativity.

. 42. But it may be further opposed, that this does not take away all matter of
objection, for in doubt we still are, whether there may be found any now, since
the Apostles Days, through whom God does speak expressly; and does declare
without adding or diminishing?

I Answer, according to what is given me to know in the deep Abyss, whereinto
my Spirit has been plunged, by a strong driving power that has brought me to
an Experience of renewed Revelations, and that they are from the true and
original ground of Truth And though I cannot father Belief upon others, that
the unm^xed Oil of the Spirit is infused into a still mind: yet where this
U^ction does abide, it may well be known and distinguished by the poss^ssors of
it, though not so clearly to others, but to themselves, who live in the light,
sight, feeling, hearing, and tasting the pleasant Powers that the holy Spirit
of Jesus does bring in. And I must in a Spirit of Sobriety and humble Ownment
of this Gift of the Word of Life, opening and renewing its Witness again, as in
the Apostolical times: which bubling Spring, as from a clear and unmixed
Fountain, I have often experienced the flowing forth, and by several Effects
have known that it does come from the true royal Priest and Prophet, that is
risen up in me, who has set up his Seat of Judgment, and bears now a
pre^ence of Majesty and Power to silence all Flesh, and to vanquish from his
Throne all those false and treacherous Spirits, that would have thrust in for
the Priesthood, to have profaned it, through those mixed thoughts that do so
aptly throng in. But now through the long continued Exercises of the spiritual
Senses, they do know perfectly what is from the true ingrafted Word. Which Word
speaks distinctly from those common puttings forth of the Rational Root that do
so generally spring, and readily would mix with the sharp, quick, and powerful
Word of Wisdom. But this being grown up as an engrafted Word, knows its own
true Root, and there abiding as the Lord has said, we may expect the
fruitfulness thereof; as Branches of Righteousness, springing from the Tree of
Life, that is in the midst of the Paradise of God; whereby we shall be
distinguished from all those that grow from any other Root.

. 43. Thus will the Unction of the true anointed Church, which was shown me in
David, be discerned from that which is false, low, and counterfeit; which shall
in his Spirit go forth generating and multiplying it self continually, till all
the Ancient Prophesies relating to it be fulfilled, and the Covenant
established with David, and with his Spiritual Seed be fully performed. For
from the Root and Line of Iesse shall the Virgin-Branch spring up, and spread
forth it self to an innumerable Increase; whereupon the Holy Ointment shall
most plentifully flow.

. 44. Now at another time a Cry from the Heavens sounded in my Ears, to this
effect: O thou that art traveling to bring forth the Omnipotent Birth, which
has for so long a time staid in the place of Breaking ^orth; yet rejoice in
this that thou shall see the King of Nations that shall be born in the
Almightiness of a Godhead Supremacy. For true (...) is, what thou have said,
and ^ften complained, that no Dis^atch can be made of the Great ^ork. Which
only accomplished ^an be, as Wisdom's Firstborn shall ^ome forth upon the
Earth, ap^earing no more as an Infant, ^ut now coming forth in full ^rown
Stature; that both a King and a Nation, may be born as in ^ne Day. Now then
lift up thy Head.

. 45. Nay, further the Great ^LOHIM does say, The E^erlasting Womb shall open,
that herefrom may issue forth Powers ^ndeed, that may be expressed ^y Acts and
Deeds, which all of others though in Regeneration ^orn, must far exceed; In
that (...) is a Codeified Matter, that will ^uffer no mingling with Earthly
^lements. O how strange and ^mazing will this Lordly Birth be! who will it live
to see? This provoked the Virgin Spirit in me to send forth Groans and Cries
yet more ardently. For that must be the way, as it is shown to me, that must
unlock this long shut-up Womb; that so the mere and pure Acting Ghost may
appear^ and go forth to do greater Works than in the Day of Pentecost. For I do
tell thee, who am thus in pure Virgin. Nature to be born again, that hereby
will be produced a present Redemp^ion; which will dilate it self so generously
to Myriads of Angelical Births, which shall in the Earth be manifested; that so
of this sort Saviors upon the Earth may stand, and as Priestly Kings rule and
govern over the Babylonish Land, and also turn the long Captivity of the Tribe
of Judah. This may you do, as you may and can abide in Me: From whence all your
Powers must proceed. Up therefore, and quicken your pace: see you not the
Morning of this Day begins to clear? Therefore blow the Trumpet, and charge all
true Sion Spirits, that do love, and long for my Appearance; that they with One
Heart, in pure Unity and Accord, do watch, and in Jerusalem the City with^n
wait for the Birth of this Mighty King.

Postscript.
. 46. NOw It was further Queried in me, since the several Societies and
Assemblies linked together at this Day in separated Bodies, have been all
rejected and excepted against by Christ, what will be the Signs, Tokens and
Characters, by which this Pure Virgin Church shall be certainly known, and
distinguished from all other?

Answ. The first and main sign and Character hereof must be, that as this is to
be a Pure and Spotless Church, so must it be brought forth from the Virgin Womb
of Eternal Wisdom, and so grow to all the Degrees of Perfection, under a strict
Law and Discipline, which extends it self so far as to abolish the Law of Sin.
Another Sign is, that as it is conceived by the Holy Ghost, it will grow up to
such a Manifestation, as is to give absolute Power according to the
Resurrection Life of Christ; for that this Church must be agreeable to himself,
perfected in the Beauty and Strength of Holiness: who will not own any that
shall be found in any Disparity to him. Therefore her Adorning must be with
Purity, Power, and Spiritual Gifts; to do and act those worthy things, which he
did and acted upon the Earth, as representing the New Jerusalem State. For
Spirits that are thus purely begotten, and born of God, can ascend to the
Jerusalem Above, where their Head in his great Power and Majesty does reign;
and thereby receive such mission, to empower these to bring down its Glory upon
this Earth, having such an Oneness with God and Christ, that will open through
the Tri-Unity the Wonders of Time, that will be acted forth by certain High and
Principal Instruments, dignified hereunto; and make out that their Redemption
is perfectly completed. For such Invincible Powers will go forth as shall draw
to them the scattered Flocks, and gather them into one Fold, out of all Nations
and Languages and Kindreds; whose Worship shall consist in nothing but in pure
Light, Life, and Spirit, without any degree of Mixture, whereby all outward
Formalities must fly away, when God shall thus come to pitch his Tabernacle in
Man: And the Ark of his Testimony will so open it self, that Dagon must fall
before it. Nothing but the pure Fire and Air from the Holy Ghost, shall be the
Or^ans through which God will speak for^h his Mind; whereby all shall be taught
of God, as being only filled wi^h God: Which Word of his Speaking through them,
will beget a New and Heavenly Generation, that will multiply it self over the
Face of the whole Earth; and make the old hereby to vanish and sink away. This
is the Bridal Church that Christ will make ready for his Appearance: and until
this be accomplished and effected, he cannot come down in his Visible and
Personal Glory, for the Solemnizing of this Eternal Marriage, which will be the
Joy and Praise not only of the Earth, but also of the Heavens: which shall both
be united as into One, and the Militant Church and the Triumphant be no longer^
twain.

. 47. In order ^o this the Angel-M^ssengers are gone forth to proclaim, That
this Day is upon the World dawning, and that the Virgin Wisdom ha^h her
Representatives upon the Earth that do ^ravail in the greatness of the Godhead
strength, for the bringing forth these mighty Bi^ths, that shall rule and
subdue all Nations under them; that so the Kingdoms of this World may become
one all-pure and powerful Kingdom, in which Christ with his Bride shall rule
and reig^, in the Father's Glory and Might.

. 48 After this there was heard from Heaven the Sounds of a joyful Acclamation,
pronouncing Endless Joys, Powers, Glory and Blessing, to such as should be
counted worthy to be the First Fruits of this New Jerusalem Bride. Now what
have we more to say, but that the Bride and Spirit in us do acquiesce to this
gracious Invitation and Call: Even so

COME LORD JESUS.
A Further Manifestation Concerning this Virgin Philadelphian Church: Given
upon New-Years-Day in this Present Year MDCXCVI. BEING A Second Message to the
Philadelphian Society, and a Touchstone to the Gathered Churches.
Ian. 1. 1696.
. 1. UPon the Turn of the Year I was waiting and Praying, having such a Pray^r
given me that was very mavelous, whence the Virgin ordered her Angel to write
it down as a Memo^i^l; which the Great High Priest pres^nted with burning
Ince^s^ to the Supreme Majesty, giving ^ssurance that it should be answered
according to all that was Prayed for, not only upon my own account, but upon
that of as many as I had made request for. And in particular, praying that the
same Spring of Supplication and Prayer might open in you, and that all the
Prophesies and Promises running upon the Melchizedeck Line, might have their
Accomplishment; it was Answered so it should be. For as the Father had given
you to Him, that you might be One with Him, as He was with the Father, so
should the same Spirit rest upon you to bring you forth Conquerors, through all
Vicissitudes, and Changes that should happen in Time: and that this present
Year should be the Beginning of a New Race of Life, wherefore so excited you
are to run as to win the Prize that has been waited for.

. 2. Then Virgin Wisdom said unto her Representative, There is a Path that ye
have not yet descried, nor any Vultures Eye discerned, which I will bring you
into. So taking me by the Hand, she led me into it, whereupon I requested that
some of my Spiritual Offspring might also be taken to walk with her
Representative. Then having a Golden Key, she opened with it a two-leaved Gate,
looking like a transparent Amber. Which being unlocked, it appeared to be a
Path all of golden Oil: Then said she, Put off your Shoes, for this is Holy
Ground: none that tread the common and broad Way of this Worldly Principle can
set their Foot here. But unto you it shall be given thus to dip your Feet in
Oil; where Fatness and all flou^ishing Life shall in you spring. It was ^hen
showed to me, that on each side of this Walk were Rows of Olive Trees, and to
every Tree was an Angel to guard the Way, having all Flaming Swords in their
Hands, and the Olives continually dropped the same golden Oil. So we we^^ led
on till we came to a mighty Mountain, which was said to be the Top Glory of all
Mountains: and its consistency, or matter, appeared to be of the same glorious
Oily Substance. Upon this Mountain there did appear the Glorified Person of the
Lord, and with ^^m stood a Virgin Woman clothed with the Sun, having the
twelve Stars on her Head, according to the Description in the Revelations, whom
he held in his Hand as his Bride. And a Voice was heard to be uttered, This is
my Spouse. Then I beheld to be generated from them a multitude of Stones of
Fire; which as they came forth, were all changed into Angelical Figures, like
to the Lord himself. The Majesty of the Father did at the same time^ as in a
wonderful Globe of Glory, overshadow the Bridegroom and his Bride. Then a Voice
said, Thus shall the Paradis^cal Earth be replenished with Virgin Wisdom's
Ang^lical Offspring, which shall be called the Church of the Firstborn, and be
named JEHOVAH SHAMMAH, The Lord of Righteousness is their Clothing. After this
Wisdom said to her Representative, and to her Followers, Ye must pass into this
Mountain, and come forth tinctured with the Glance of this D^ified Mountain; so
shall ye become capable of the same Glorification with these. Then Wisdom's
Representative, with one known by the Name of Cyrus, that was highly favored,
and given to be as a chief Pillar of Support to this New Modelled Virgin Church
that has been so long prophesied of; and with the rest, passed into the Mount,
and came out tinged according to the Q^ality and Property of it, as new
Generated Angelical Figures. Wisdom then said to her Representative, Now have
thou seen the Virgin Church, that is not only Glorious within, but also
without; being clear as the Sun, fair as the Moon, and terrible as an Army with
Banners. This is the Mountain of the Lord's House, which shall be established
for Glory and Magnificency over the whole Earth. At the Conclusion of which a
mighty shout was heard in the Heavens, and the Angels sounded their Trumpets,
rejoicing that the Marriage of the Lamb was come, and the Bride was glorified
with the self same Glory as Himself.

. 3. And it was said unto me, Seal not up this Vision; for the time is
approaching n^ar for its Fullfiling. But stand you, and all your
Fellow-waiters, that are looking for this blessed Hour, and Glorious Appearance
of this Nuptial Day, in the working Properties of the Divine Agent, the Holy
Ghost, that shall not fail to complete you according to this Prophesy, and to
effect all that has been foreshewn.

January 6.
. 4. Upon the Opening of this Vision I found many Debates in my Mind, Querying
in my self How and When such a perfect Virgin-Church should be consummated in
the Earth: And so directing my Prayer to the Father, to have some Resolve in
this matter; upon this I found the Spirit of Wisdom in my inward parts to open
her Oracle and reveal her Counsel in this deep and weighty concern; bidding me
be free, to spread before her what were my Doubts concerning the Glories which
I had seen upon this Mountain, it being of such a strange and wonderful
Consistence as I had never before beheld, into which Corporeal Figures were to
enter in, and come forth transmuted, and clarified into the same Substance.
Then was it cast up in my Mind how little Appearance there was of such a State
at this Time. And Liberty of Speech being granted me, I Queried with my Lord,
how frequently from the beginning of the Creation Sin had reigned even unto
this time, and that though the Promise of Redemption was given immediately
after the Fall, yet Sin had dominion from the First Adam unto the Second,
albeit there were Holy Men, Patriarchs and Prophets, who were raised up before
his time, who had a Prospect of all the good things of this Thorough Redemption
in Christ.

. 5. Then did I plead, that when he came, and was manifested in Flesh, it might
be expected that there should have been then a perfect Renovation and
Restoration, such as had been so long Proph^sied of, but that it was yet
delayed, and failed. And it troubled me exceeding much, as a most mavelous
thing, that after all these Prophesies and Promises, and long Expectations, he
should be rejected even by that Church and People which God had most peculiarly
chosen and set a part for himself, and even by those of them who were the
strictest, and most Religious.

. 6. All this with much more I did propose to the Father of my Spirit, and to
the Eternal Virgin Mother. Where upon it was answered me, That it was of great
acceptance that I had made search into this Matter, which few or none had
deeply considered of, and which was needful to be understood; for that in it
lay a great Mystery, which was to be opened in its season and time. Then was it
further said, That God did well know that so many Ages and Generations were
thus to pass away, before the Perfect Redemption should be finished, as to the
Universality. Yet it was given me to understand that Christ in all Ages was
still gathering to himself some who were perfected, as the Foundation and
Beginning of this Blessed Church; whom he took care of both before and after
Death for their Compleatment, to be joined to him. Then was I bid not to sorrow
as without hope, but that there would be even in this present Time a New
Springing Generation, that should be as the Firstborn from the Dead, and carry
the Marks of Christ's Resurrection, being redeemed from the Earth, and from
Mortality, into the Number of the Hundred and Forty Four Thousand. For so it
was presaged in me by the Prophetical Spirit of JESUS.

. 7. Still I Queried, Lord how shall this be, since I see all, with my self,
lie in weak and impotent Mortality? Then was it answered me, Do thou not yet
understand what the Omnipotent Creating Power can do, to bring forth a New
World as in one Day? And this One Day was revealed to allude to the D^y of
Christ's Resurrection, b^ing the Third, or Last Day, or Day of the Spirit,
according to that, I will raise them up in the Last D^y, that is, in this Day
of the Holy Ghost, in which greater Deeds and Acts, and Wonders must be done,
than ever have been since the Fouundation of the World; Christ's Person in the
Flesh being not able to effect that which it is now able to do in the Spirit,
by the joint Power of Wisdom and the Eternal Father, that must move a New
Mystery.

. 8. Then did Wisdom show me numerous Molds of a golden Earth, whereout came
forth some of all degrees and sizes, who stood up as a mighty Army. And then
pointing to me, she said, Do thou not see what a sudden Resurrection of a
Newborn Church here will be? Whereupon the Kingly Shepherd did suddenly appear
in the midst of this New Flock, spreading out himself as a mighty Sun of Glory
upon them, making them all to shine in his Brightness; pronouncing, These are
the Flocks that I will make my Companions; for that I have glorified them with
the Glory, which the Father has glorified me. And so he cast a Circle as of
Fire round about them for their Defense; by which they became as a City
compacted within themselves; Christ the Head walking in the midst of them: and
were all made Kings, Priests, and Prophets therein to r^ign wi^h him, who had
now endued them with all the Miraculous and Apostolical Gifts. Then he told
them that having thus Established and Installed them, it was expedient that he
should for a time withdraw up into the Upper Fold, but that he would have his
Deputies and Representatives that should be more Principally Spirited and
Empowered, for the Increase and Propagation of this Church, and the bringing
them from the four Corners of the Earth; as the principal Witnesses to proclaim
this New Modellized and Immortal Church. And so he bl^ssed them, that they
might go forth to increase and multiply upon the Face of the whole Earth, and
fly as Lightning, and a Divine Leaven to tinge, spice, and transform others
after the same Likeness.

. 9. Hereupon seven Principal Pastors, or Witnesses were chosen out by him, to
whom he gave this Authority, and command to sound forth their Trumpets over all
the Earth, and publish the Everlasting Gospel, proclaiming the Acceptable Time
and Year for all to be brought in, being that which was to reach not only to
the Living, but also to the Dead, that were to be Born again. Their Message was
Peace, Love and Good Will unto all that will into this New Born Church come in.
After which was shown me, that though many did attempt, yet none could pass the
Fiery Circle, and enter in, but such for whom it was broken by these chief
Shepherds, and these were to be all moulder'd and crumbled into pieces, that
they might be cast into, and come forth from those Golden Molds, in the
Resurrection State. At the same time as I was viewing these Seven Angel
Messengers sent forth, many did furiously resist, and make War against this
City, but were repelled by the Strength of the said Circle. But these
Trumpeting Angels did gather in many, and bring them into the Circle, whom I
did accordingly see cast into these Molds, and come forth figured in to the
express Life and Nature of Christ; that as he was, so they might be in this
present Principle. This was said to be the First Resurrection which breaks
the Bonds of Sorrow, Hell and Death.

. 10. Then it was moved in me to make a Query to the Virgin Wisdom, that had
opened in me all this great Mystery of the Church, Whether it were necessary
for this Body to be gathered Personally into one Place, for cohabitation
together? And it was Answered me, That for as many as could with convenience be
so embodied together, this would be greatly advantageous, as to freedom of
Fellowship, and Personal Conversation, while remaining as the present Case
stood, until that Corporeity had fully put on Incorporeity, and this Church now
in its Infancy had grown up to an higher Structure. For then Faith will be so
strong and omnipotent, as to translate from the low Elementary Life, into the
Supercelestial Element: and that as Christ put on his Body of Transfiguration,
so there should be Ability to do the same^ as occasion should require, that
admittance may be had into the Familiarity of the Supreme Head, and his Upper
Fold, when a bright shining Raiment must be put on, which may be called the
Immortal Robe. For till such a time as this Earth shall be changed into a
Paradisical Nature and Property, the course of things mustrun after the manner
of Corporeity, both as to Feeding and Clothing. Then was it further given me
to understand, that though we cannot be at the beginning in one Family or
Place, yet we are to be of one Principle, one Light, one Love, and one Faith,
and one in all the excellent Qualifications of Wisdom, Humility, Meekness,
Fortitude, Righteousness, Temperance, and other Fruits of the Spirit, which are
the Golden Chain by which we are linked together; there being nothing to be out
of the Unity and Harmony of this blessed Church.

. 11. Fur^hermore it was noted to me what was required of this Congregated
Society, as to their Calling and Employ, wherein they were chiefly to be
Exercised all Spiritually; though as the present necessity of things requires
an Allowance may be made for External and Outward Callings, which followed may
be until such time that the Heir of Faith in each one may be grown up; to whom
the Inheritance from a Supernatural Store does belong. Therefore this C^ution
by Wisdom is given, that none do rest and stick in the low rational way of
making provision for the Outward Man; as if nothing more were to be ^xp^cted
^hen what the Rational Spirit can provide for. And the resting herein, as if
there were not an higher way of Living, has not only among the Worldlings, but
even among the Illuminated themselves, been the main stop and hindrance, and
prevented the Blessing from the Everlasting Mountains, which would otherwise
have come down upon them. For the further Confirmation of this, there were some
Scriptures brought to my mind; as that Prophetical Pass^ge in the 45th Ps^^m,
The Daughter of Tire shall be there with a Gi^t, even the Rich among the People
shall entreat thy Favor: That also in the Prophet Isaiah, Surely the Ships of
Tarshish shall wait to bring thy Sons from far, their Silver and their Gold
with them unto the Name of the Lord thy God, Chap. 9. 9. It is there also
promised, That the Sons of Strangers would build up the Walls of Sion, bringing
their Forces and Riches to her, and that their Kings should minister unto her.
That Promise was likewise brought to my remembrance, Strangers shall stand and
feed your Flocks, the Sons of the Alien shall be your Plow-men and your
Vine-dressers: But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord: Men shall call
you the Ministe^s of our God: ye shall eat the Ri^hes of the Gentiles, and in
this Glory shall ye ^oast your selves. Now it was shown to me, that these
Prophesies do appertain to the New Modelled Church, and will have their
Fulfilling according as it shall grow up from the State of Childhood to that of
perfect Manhood. And i^ this wise will be the beginning of it, the Father
should depute his Representative, and the Eternal Virgin also hers, to stand in
the latter Day upon the E^rth, for the bringing forth a Virgin Offspring in
Corporeal Figures, that should multiply and increase to a numberless number:
And that the Propagation of such shall be conceived after another, and more
holy manner then what the Ordinary way of Generation has been, which is in
Sinful Lust; who may be as Jeremiah and John Baptist sanctified from the very
Womb: who as they grow up may be capable of an Enochs Translation.

. 12. Then secondly, there is another way of Begetting, no less real then the
former, which is in Spirit, and of such as are to be converted to the Faith:
thus are there to be Spiritual Fathers and Spiritual Mothers, which will be
true Fathers and Mothers indeed, in this Church of the First born, that shall
generate and bring forth Births in the Spirit, and after the Will of God. Thus
the New Creation will go on, from which Root Christ's Reign upon the Earth will
spring up, and begin to be established, and the Love-Kingdom from hence will
open in the Spirit of Faith, by which mighty Works shall be done, to make the
Kingdoms of this World submit themselves, and bow down to this Rising-Sun of
the Virgin Church.

. 13. Moreover it was shown me that several Eminent Saviors and Supporters of
this Church would stand upon the Mountain of Holiness; from whom such a Power
and Spirit shall go forth as all Nations, People, and Languages shall fly to
the Body of this Resurrection Church, as Eagles to the Carcass, to be fed and
nourished thereby, and joyfully bring their Offerings of all precious things,
that may be necessary to set this Infant Church free from all care, toil, and
labor; paying their Tribu^e to this Royal Priestly House, that is of the Tribe
and Family of the Great Melchizedeck King.

. 14. Now then Hearken and Hear all ye Islands, and give ear all ye Lands, even
from the utmost parts of the Earth, from all the four Winds, and from the Ends
of the Sea, ye are summoned all, by the Great Herald the Archangel, to come to
the Brightness of Wisdom's Star, that first arises in a Northern Isl^nd. This
Word of Commission is gone forth by Wisdom's Representative, to excite, invite,
and stir up from all the wonderful Motives that have been mentioned; that none
to whom this M^ssage shall come, should make any Staggering or Delay: for that
this is the Lord Christ's Acceptable Day, and a thousand times blessed will
those be that do this Message Obey, who shall be clothed with the Rays of the
Everlasting Sun. For the Encouragement of which there is already a good
Beginning from several Persons in Germany, Switzerland, and Holland; as also at
Home, that have expressed their Living Testimony, and have felt powerful
Drawings to this Lifted up Standard of CHRIST in his Espoused Bride and Church:
Which will be the Crown and Glory of all Nations.

. 15. Before this Subject be concluded, it will be necessary to answer an
Obvious Question that may be made, Whether this Representative of the Church,
as also of the Father's Power, ought to be considered as in One Person, or as
in Plurality of Persons? To which it is Answered, that it may be both: but in
the Beginning it will fix in Two, after the manner that i^ did in the First
Adam and Eve; and so the travailing for the Birth of this Church will be by
Virgin Sp^rits that are joined in perfect U^ity, that will labo^^ together in
the greatness of Iehovah's strength, to bring forth the Man child, from whom
shall proceed an Innumerable Host.

. 16. It may be here further Queried, Whether these have a present Being and
Existence? I must hereupon say to you, as Christ did to John's Disciple, Come
and see. For is there not a Star Risen which those that are of a wise Heart may
see, and understand the Time and Season, when this expected Kingly Birth is to
be brought forth? Therefore come ye as Wise Men from the East, fly ye as
Clouds, flock ye as Doves to the Windows, to the Brightness of this Arising of
the Day Star from on high.

. 17. Thus have you had the Description of the True, Perfect and Catholic
Church, wherein Christ is risen, as the Firstborn from the Dead, in his
Members; that is the Quick^ning Spirit, that will gather Persons out of all
For^alities into Power, Life and Su^stance; which as the little Stone cut out
of the Mountain will dash to pieces the Image which is of a mixed and
inconsistent Matter, and then become it self a great Mountain, yea, the Top of
all Mountains, and the Fullness of the Earth, which it shall fill with its
Glory. This is the Philadelphian Church which I must proclaim, and which is
already in some measure beg^n: and though at first it has but A little
Strength, and be comparatively as a Grain of Mustard Seed, it shall spring up
as a mighty Tree, where the Lebano^ Glory under the Shadow of it will come to
open, in Power and Majesty. This Lebanon Door is now opened, by him that has
the Key of David, and none shall be ever able to shut it: there shall be
continual going in and out through it, to find the rich and undefiled Pasture,
such as none elsewhere is to be found. Let none be offended at what the Trumpet
of the pure Spirit has sounded, but fall in, and submit themselves to the
Ruling Scepter and Government of CHRIST, in this Day of his Appearance, as
having already^ begun his Mighty Reign in Spirit. The Bride and the Spirit can
never cease to cry Come: even so come Blessed Lord, according to all that thou
have here Revealed and Declared.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

