THE Heavenly Cloud Now Breaking.

THE Lord Christ's Ascension-Ladder Sent down; To show the way to reach the
Ascension, and Glorification, through the Death and Resurrection.

By J. Lead.

JOHN 20. Verse. 17. -- Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father; to my God, and your God. London, Printed for the
Author. 1681.

The EPISTLE. Grace, Mercy, Love, and Peace, from him who is the first begotten
from the Dead.
TO all of you who rejoice to die daily out of that Life which is essenced in
Sin, Curse, Bondage, and Sorrow, to such the following Treatise is commended;
knowing to no other it will be pleasing, but them who have received the Spirit
of Christ, that has convinced of the necessity of dying, out of the Body of
Sin, offering it up as a whole burnt Offering upon Christ our Sacred Altar. Who
is it then that would grieve to die thus, to become a living Sacrifice, for so
great a Joy and Glory as will hereupon follow, as will be matter of great
encouragement to go forward on in spiritual dying till Sin expire, whereby
secured you will be from the Serpent's Sting? Who can therewith reach no Souls
that are plunged into this dying Pool, where Christ the Lord has first moved,
to purchase a full and perfect Cure; to heal every spiritual Malady which the
Soul groaneth under. For which end I am commissionated, as both Servant and
Friend to my Lord, and Heavenly Bridegroom, to invite you to the great Supper
of God, and the Lamb. A Table here is furnished, suitable to four ranks, and
degrees of Persons and Spirits. The first Course that is set hereupon, is the
broken, and crucified Body of our Lord Jesus. This is proper Food for dying
Saints, who by eating of this spiritual Flesh, may come to have their own
sinful Flesh to die, and moulder away; for it is known, and experienced, as we
do daily feed upon a Crucified Christ, it devours, and gradually works away the
life of Sin, and all the evil Effects of it. Whosoever is wise, let them
understand, and find out this Mystery, and discern, and taste the Lord's
Mystical Body; which being well digested down, the Table is again spread for
such, who are risen from the Dead. Now what is it comes on here? behold and
see; Christ the Lord presents himself in a Paradisical Body, and says,
Children, here I give my risen Body, as more powerful, strong, and pleasant, to
seed upon: For you it is, who have not feared to encounter the Death. Oh, what
less is this, but the Marriage Feast, where the Water is turned into Wine! and
by the Governor of this Feast, ye are most earnestly called upon to eat of
this transmuted Body, which is so restorative, as nothing of putrefaction shall
more be known in the Soul's Properties. Such sweetness, and pleasure there is
in eating of this Paradisical Body, that all other perishing things are
disdained, and put out of taste. What joy now is it to God the Father, to see
his Table beset with risen and spiritual Souls, saying, hasten and dispatch;
also from this Degree, taking off, and setting on that, which is proper for
Ascension. Here now Christ the Lord comes down as a mighty Eagle, Body rushing,
without spreading Wings, to bear and carry away the Waiters for Ascension, that
with him they may go up to worship in the New Jerusalem, there for to hold the
seven days Feast of Tabernacles, with all high celebration of praises. Here you
may believe a Table is most richly furnished, in the most high and excellent
degree, for all of the Lord Christ's ascending Eagles, which cannot be
satisfied with any other prey, but to feed upon the glorified Body, which
filled is with all the fullness of God, which flows largely into them, whose
Vessels are here prepared. Now then, in the fourth and last Ministration, What
may be expected in the great Nuptial-day of this Feast, when the Holy Trinity
shall descend, in the ascended Angels of Time, for the celebration of the
Marriage with the Lamb, and Bride? What Joys and Glorys are now renewed? for
now appears the glorified Person of Christ, for a public owning of his
ascended Ones; and cries, in his Fathers, and his Own, and Holy Ghost's Name,
saying, These are those in whom I will be glorified; the long-sealed Fountain
is broke open; the everlasting Mountain droppoth down the Powers of the Holy
Ghost. Come all ye who have labored and not fainted, and have yet kept up your
Faith till this day, you are those that are to be fed and nourished with all
the choice and precious Fruits of the Tree of Life, and are ordained to be
those Joseph's that shall give out of these Heavenly Stores, and maintain an
open communit, to the thirsty and needy, that in a divine Hunger are, that they
may also be enriched, and partake of the same Glory with you. This is the Lord
Christ's own Prophesy, now renewed by his Spirit, and is sure and stable, and
nigh to be fulfilled in those, that shall advance on, to all of these Degrees,
that are mentioned and further enlarged upon in this little Treatise following:
For that Dayspring from on High, that has visited me, would not have me to
conceal those considerable Heavenly Mysteries, that I have been taught in by
the Holy Unction, having well assured me, that there is a bright Star that from
Heaven shall descend, and closly attend all these practical and weighty Truths
revealed, and fosten them with a Golden Nail, which shall not be moved away;
tho I am made to know also, that this Divine Ray shall pass over some, and
glide away without making any impression. The which sort I shall spare to make
mention what losers they will be, by slighting and neglecting this feastival
Invitation; I shall leave such to take what they will not care to find. But now
to return to them who all desirous are to taste of those choice and heavenly
Portions, who most readily do embrace their Lord and Bridegroom's Call to this
continued Spiritual Feast. Know it, that for you, great Things are prepared in
the New Jerusalem, there to have Communion in one Spiritual Body at one Table,
each one according to their measure, and degree which they have attained unto,
without grudging at one another: for you may see how the Lord Christ has set
himself forth in a fourfold transmutation in his heavenly Humanity, for a
feeding and strengthening Life, to four sorts and ranks of Spirits, that all
may participate according to their growth. 1. For newborn Babes. 2. For
Children. 3. For the young Man's State. 4. For Elders or Fathers, who are come
to full and perfect Age, from whom may be expected the generating Power of the
Holy Ghost, to go forth for the replenishing the New Heavens and Earth. So as
now ye may see here is suitable provision for every sort and degree, according
to their Calling and Election in God, for Communion in one Body together. Oh
why should there then arise such emulations, strife, and spiritual Wars, among
the Heaven-born Spirits that should meet one another in Harmony, Love, and
Unity? Great is this Evil which has, as a Leprosy, spread over all Nations,
Kindreds, and Tongues; and truly the Infection is got so deep in, as I see no
cure here for, until the mighty Sealing Angels do come forth with Viols filled
with the Love Oil of the Holy Ghost, to pour forth everywhere that; so that
the Lord Christ's disjointed Body may come, Bone to his Bone, and Member to its
Member; for the which we shall not cease to invocate, and daily intercede for
the Holy Trinity to hasten the Saints gathering into this Unity, for which a
hopeful approach there is, which I in spirit do see; for which end this is sent
out as a Pilgrim to find whom it may meet with in this lonely Walk. Oh how
great would be our rejoicing, to meet with some fellow Travelers herein, that
are resolved in God's Power not to grow weary or faint, till they may reach the
top-step of this ascending Ladder, that we may together be comforted,
supporting each other, while in the traveling way, still putting off, and
putting on our changeable Raiment, that we may sit down at the great Supper of
the Lamb, whose Joy will be so great, that as a Bridegroom, he will come forth
himself to serve us, with the new Wine of the Kingdom, that will spirit us, for
the great things that are to be brought forth into manifestation; which things
are now upon the working Wheel, tho it works hiddenly in such chosen Vessels,
whom God will honor as his faithful Stewards, being entrusted with the great
Secrets of his Kingdom. I shall now conclude, with all true servour of Spirit,
and Love, for the effectual operation of the Holy Ghost, to attend this whole
Matter and Subject, which has been given forth. It was my purpose, that some
preceding Openings and Revelations given to me, should have been the firstborn
in way of publication; but the wisdom and counsel of the most High, has
changed what was so intended, and has ordered this first, as a preparation for
the other, which also in time may come forth to disclose yet more wonderful and
hidden Things, that have been under a Seal, that shall be broken up; for there
is a ripe Age coming on that may be ready for their Reception. In the interim,
I shall be waiting for the knowledge of such as signatured are with that high
graduated Spirit, in the which I would be known and found as a Friend and
Servant to my Lord Christ, and so to all my fellow Members, that wait for this
great Day of his appearance in his Saints. Even so prays yours, in him that
was dead, but now lives, for our springing Life and Joy evermore.

J. L.

The Introduction to the Spiritual Dying.
THe Spirit of Wisdom, Revelation, and Prophecy, having been shed abroad
abundantly, to declare many great and wonderful Mysteries now in this last Age;
has shown also, by the same Spirit, the way for Consummation. The first
passage hereunto, is through the Mystical Death, as the foot-step to the
ascending Mount of the following Glory. But before I shall proceed upon this
Particular, it will be necessary to let you know, what has occasioned the
setting evidently before your eyes the crucified Body of Sin. Upon a deep sense
that opened in me concerning the threefold Bondage and Captivity, which the
Holy and Royal Offspring of God are groaning under, as to Spirit, Soul, and
Body; the which things I being well acquainted withal in my self, could the
more feelingly deplore and bewail it, on the behalf of all the Elect Seed of
God: And truly, the Spirit of Daniel came upon me, and set it strongly on work,
and caused me to set times often apart to lament and mourn, as beholding under
what a Law of Sin and tyrannical Bondage the Saints are under; in a threefold
consideration: The first from that old Serpent, which from the beginning
introduced the original venom of Sin, whose vigilance is to increase and keep
it stirring; having great advantage, being a potent Prince in this World, from
which he presents all kind of Temptations to allure withal, to prevent the
Souls Restoration, by holding of it in the worldly Charms. The second Power,
which under him does rule, is the Beast; that is as the oppressing Pharaoh,
that consults to impose such weights and burdens as may wear out the Saints of
the most High. The third is the Airy Region, of which it is said, he is also
the Prince, having infected it with his poisonable Influences, so as the very
outward Elements are corrupted, as they do contact with our outward Bodies,
bringing them to know Sickness, Sorrow, and Death, with many other evil
Effects. All this being set before me, my Soul in me was sorrowful unto Death,
and so great was my heaviness, as if the Sin of the whole relapsed Creation had
been upon me: and then with all this, there was this farther aggravation of my
troubles, to observe the Strife, Wars, and great Divisions that are at this day
enkindled among the Sion-Professors, which is the greatest Evil under the
Sunshine of the Gospel Dispensation, and to be seriously taken in, and
sonowfully to be bewailed. The which came upon me as a very burdensome Stone,
which has lain on me very heavily; and being for some time under this exercise
in mind, and spent, praying and pleading with my God, very close and constant
in this mourning posiure, refusing all Comforts; behold Michael, the Prince of
the new and everlasting Covenant appeared unto me, speaking in these words: I
have seen thy Soul's contrition and humiliation, for the oppressed and
desolated Daughter of Sion, whose hurt and wound lies still bleeding: I am
come to inform thee what is to be done, for the putting an end to all of this
deplorable Captivity, which has lasted thus long, by reason there has been
lacking such Sion-Mourners, that might be seriously affected, and inwardly
afflicted for that inherent Root of Sin, as not having searched into the depth
of the infecting Matter, which has leavened the whole Man, and kept him under
this tyrannical Servitude. I have waited in the Office of Mediatorship, for
such Soul-afflicted Mourners to come up unto me, to spread and show me all
their internal woundings, from first to last. Let it be known, that it has
been a grief to my Spirit, that I have not been more servently sued unto, and
made use of for easing the Burdened; for there has been a secure carelessness,
that has made them carry it lightly off. But a consumption is determined upon
the whole Man of Sin, and thou have been all well-pleasing unto me, in that
thou have presented the whole and full of the relapsed state, in a sensible and
sorrowful Spirit, which is acceptable. I have also taken notice of this trouble
and concern for the disunity among my own Sheepfold, whereby they have rent and
divided me in Spirit, all which springs from the bitter essence of Sin.
Therefore in order hereunto, do thou signify what way must be followed for
restitution, and setting together my disjointed Members; which cannot be
accomplished, but through the passage-gate of Death. Which from me thou art
commissionated to declare, as I have revealed it to thee, and as thou have the
practical knowledge of it; being what is designed by the Father, as I am the
Way unto it, to bring forth Life, and Redemption through it, which promised was
from the first wound of Sin, that was introduced by the Serpent into Adam,
which all fully is to be healed by conformity to the Death with me, going
forward in the fourfold Process; as the inward Spiritual Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, and Glorification. This I leave with thee first to publish before
the other part, as the Foundation that must bring up to the Top-Ladder, that
has been given by Vision and Prophecy, to see and understand: So hereby shall
the utmost Salvation be wrought out by the Mystery of Death, finishing with the
following degrees, which puts an end to all of that Evil, the Fall has
brought in, as having reserved this as the highest wonder that is to be brought
into manifestation. Go thou on, nothing doubting, having Faith in me, who will
always be with thee, and also among my Mourning Flock every where: Even so come
Lord Jesus.

Thus you are given to understand by whom I am led forward, to open and lay a
sure Foundation for the new and heavenly Restoration, even in that living
Word, which died out of flesh, but now cease not to live to send forth his
renewed Springs, and is at hand to reveal and expound all things, which may
gather in the lost and scattered Flock, for the bringing them into God's Tent
and Tabernacle of Rest, which only can be, by passing through this fourfold
Ministration.

I shall take them as they lie in their own Degrees and Order. First, To show
what is a spiritual inward Death that must be passed through, by such as do
look for a reigning Life with Christ. And for this, it cannot be made out
better, than that worthy Apostle has done it, as you will find in the sixth
and seventh Chapters of the Romans, laying down full and clear Arguments,
showing the necessity for a Spiritual Death; so as we need not doubt but it
will be granted: in the next place we are to consider, how it shall be
effected. I would not fright any, if I tell them, it is at the first onset,
bloody Work: wherever this Sacrificing Knife does come, it will touch to the
quick. But then consider in whose hand it is put; our Emanuel's, whose love we
may well confide in, who acts this tragical part by the Lance of his Spirit,
and will fall only upon the viperous Body of Sin, to let out the very heart
blood of it: so it must be, for there is no favoring that Life, that has made
all this to do, as in reference to God and our selves, spoiling and defacing
that pure Angelical Image, in which the most Holy One took such delight to see
his own Similitude in; But now so changed, that it may give God cause of
repentance, that ever he made such an unstable Creature to grieve his Spirit;
upon which account we must be driving out from his Face and Presence, to live
in that awakened Principle of Good and Evil. But here is a Door of Hope opened
for such as are weary and oppressed, and are willing to give up their whole
degenerated Life unto Death. But you will say, If we must suffer at this rate;
to what end did the Lord Christ offer himself as a Propitiation for Sin, in his
own Person, if our sinful Life must go also for it? In answer to this, take
notice, That tho our Lord Christ was made a visible Sacrifice for Sin; yet he
never intended that should excuse any one of his Members from a conformity and
fellowship with him in his Death, knowing his Death for us would not do alone,
without coming by his Spirit, to put the Sin to death in our Flesh; and so
jointly he becomes Salvation to the utmost, he having no sin to put to death
in his own Body, and so was a living Type and Example for us to follow. But it
may be still objected, Who is able to go through such a full and total death,
to all that infection of sin, which the first Adam brought in? We must say, No
one is sufficient, but the mighty God and Savior, as by his Spirit coming to
incarnate himself in our Flesh, who has the Key that opens this mystical
Gate of Death, and thereby to pass us through the Vail of the Flesh: And for
your comfort know, he goes not to work violently all at once, but considers
our mold and frame, and allures the Soul into it by degrees, showing and
setting before it the absolute necessity for it, forcing all of
love-incitements to follow him in this track of dying, despising the shame and
contempt of it, as by Faith seeing what glory, honor, and immortality of Life
with Christ will ensue hereupon. This is then only our business, to intervert
our Life into Christ our Lord, for him to offer it up in us, through his
Eternal Spirit, as he did in his own personal Body, who laid it down freely: so
now he wooeth the Soul to a voluntary assignment of the whole Man of Sin for
expiation; so that when the Heart and Will is gained and brought over, dying
Work will not be so grievous and terrible, as many have feared: I can assure
you, from my own experience, having been long and deeply exercised herein,
knowing that great comforts and supports will meet you in your dying Agonies,
through internal infusions, that may be felt as a burning Spirit that runs
into every part, till it gives ease to the burdened in sin, and will not
leave it, while there is any thing of an evil essence remaining, if the Soul
agrees and gives consent thereunto. And truly, a well-informed Soul, that lies
under any powerful constraint of Christ's Love, can do no less, but herewithal
comply, and deliver up the accursed Thing; and when it comes to this, what a
hopeful dispatch will there be for the cutting off every Member in the Body of
Sin? O, where shall we find a wise and valiant Jael to smite Sisera, aiming at
the Head, Life, the very Root of Sin in its original! Oh, how do I hear the
echo of some good willing Spirit about me, thus saying, Seeing you have
presented the necessity of Crucifixion, and the great benefits thereof; and
have rightly placed the Lance of Death, as in the hand of him that has given
such a full proof of his love and naturalness unto the fallen Offspring of
Adam, We have now an open Ear to hear further what the Particulars are we must
die unto, and I most readily shall herewith comply; as from the Center of
Light, and experimental Knowledge, give forth a Narrative hereof, as reducing
this inward Death to three several Branches. As first, The Animal, Rational,
Sensitive Life. Proceed we to the first of these, which is the more gross and
right-down earthly Life, consisting of a beastly Nature, of bruitishness and
worldly-mindedness; loving and embracing the vain empty Honors and Riches of
this Principle; bringing forth such cursed and vile Fruits as these, namely,
Arrogance, and an Evil Covetousness, Self-promotion, Wrathfulness, Slandering,
Revengeful, and Evil Surmisings, Cruelty, Oppression, Unmercifulness, with much
more of this kind; all which is to be most deeply deplored, that such a Life as
this should show its face, where any thing of a God is known, and a Christ
revealed, for redemption out of all these bitter Fruits; and that instead of
dying out of them, there is a living in them; and so becoming insensible of
their Weights, Fetters, and Chains, all which is a most dangerous state to
continue in, and not to make haste to die out of them. But we are persuaded
better things of them, who are enquiring to find out the Passage-gate of Death,
knowing they dare not allow themselves to live in any one of these, but as any
matter of this kind does spring unwillingly, for to Arraign, Judge, Condemn, and
deliver up unto the piercing Nail of the Cross, as a testimony that they have
abrogated the gross Evils, and will not cherish and harbor what the Serpent
will hereby challenge place in the Soul's Essence, and will keep his Hold;
Therefore on that Men in good earnest to die, will neither touch, taste, nor
handle any of these poisonable Fruits.

Now we proceed to the Rational Life, which is reckoned to be a wise, sober,
righteous Life, and therefore not to be laid aside; being as a King that would
govern the whole concerns of the Soul, both as to heavenly and earthly Things,
determining all Matters and Causes. Why then it may be alleged, if he be such
a prudent Ruler, What Exceptions have you against him, that he must fall under
Death? But know it, from the Lord, and that of a truth, that the Serpent lies
more hid in this than the other. It is in some, as a grand Idol set up in the
room of God: Nay, it is so subtle in its Counsel, as you can hardly know it
from the true and superior Wisdom; for it will have Righteousness for its
Covering. Therefore none, but a high enlightened, and well-instructed Soul in
God, can have a right discerning of this great Supplanter. And that he may be
known so to be, here is a first and second Charge brought in against him.
First, Although it may be granted, that he carries an appearance for God, and
eternal Things, and that with Zeal too; yet there is such a near alliance to
the worldly Interest, and earthly Property, as there will be a holding fast in
the mixed Property, putting heavenly Things in one Scale, and earthly Things in
the other: if they can go upon even balance, then the Rational Spirit carries
all smoothly, as wise in his Generation, not being willing to lose his part,
either for Spirituals, or Temporals; but the worldly Interest shall be sure to
be followed close. For if they cannot consist together, but the one must be
laid down, then Wise rationality will soon show himself that his Birth is but
from the Astral Region, it is of no higher descent, but from the Womb of fallen
Time, and therefore a Spirit not to be trusted.

The second Charge we bring in against the Rational Life, is the great Enmity,
that he stands in to the Spirit of Faith, which curbs and nips it in its first
buddings. For as long as degenerated Reason lives, this Plant can never thrive
or prosper; for it is ever more casting in choking Doubts, as in the case of
Nicodemus, How can a Man be born again that is old? And as in Elisha's Time,
when the Famine was so grievous in Samaria; the Prophet then declaring, how
Scarcity should suddenly be turned into Plenty; the unbelieving Lord of Reason
presently stands up, If God should make Windows in Heaven, can this be? so as
unbelief prevented him from seeing the Accomplishment. So it does at this day;
therefore if we would have any great and wonderful thing effected, either for
Time or Eternity, we must shut out Reason as a treacherous Counselor; and
there is no way, but to give him up for spiritual Martyrdom, for the sharp Ax
of the spirit to do execution upon him. But you will say, This is too severe a
Judgment wholly to cut him off; for he may be regenerated, and made subordinate
to the Life of Faith. That indeed may be allowed upon the Animal Man's Account,
to order and govern those low and terrestrial Affairs, which the fallen State
has necessitated into, if he may be bounded there, but not to clime higher:
For in no case must he be admitted, as to the inward and sublime Matters of the
Spirit, and Soul, because the way of its Restoration depends so much upon
Faith, which crosses the who^e course and grain of Reason. All his refining
and regenerating, can never make him serviceable to help the Soul toward its
translation for degrees of Perfection, its Birth being of an incredulous
Nature, looking hereupon as unattainable for the Soul to regain what it has
lost; so here is enough to lay him aside for in all spiritual Matters: For as
Rationality was not in Adam before his relapse, so he had no occasion to use
subtilty or craft, all things were provided to his hand. So now in the way of
our return to the more transcendent Liberty and Glory, for which the Holy Ghost
operating in the power of Faith to perfect, will admit to have nothing
contributed from the Rational Spirit. Nay, the time is coming, when he shall
also be put out of his Stewardship for the very outward Man; for it is very
rare to find a just Steward in the use of this worldly Mammon. And therefore
God will settle the Power for all blessing and increase for the bodily
requirings upon the Spirit of Faith; as that in the Saints shall get up to its
superiority, all of the worldly Goods which now are engrossed, where the
corrupted Reason bears rule. Therefore it will be worth our care and vigilance,
in keeping our Stock, going on upon Faith's Bottom, as in reference both to
heavenly and earthly Things; deposing the Rational Spirit, as to all power and
claim to the superior Transactions betwixt God and the Soul; only allowed he
may be, for the present necessity, as a hewer of Wood and drawer of Water, till
we shall discharge him upon this servile account also. Now you see what a full
charge is given against the Man of Reason, which may be a sufficient inducement
to die, as we are able from day to day, unto him, till fully dead. The conquest
of which will produce wonderful and miraculous working Powers, which in its
piace and order shall be made out more fully to you.

Now we fall upon the third particular, which is the Sensitive Life; dividing
it into three Branches; Exterior, Interior, and Natural.

I shall begin with the Exterior; as first, the lusting Eye, that delights to
please it self in visible Objects, Shadows and Figures of Mortality, minding
outward adornings, and settings out of a poor piece of Mortality. These are
tempting Objects for the very Heart and Mind to be tainted withal. For the
outward Eye is as a wandering Star, it glides up and down to please its own
unsatiableness, among all the various gross and perishing Things, that in this
evil World can be found. So every depraved sense does pursue its own vain
delight and satisfaction. But of this more gross part of Sensuality, I shall
not further enlarge, knowing that it has been sufficiently set forth, and
decried down by the godly and pious Ones.

I shall pass on to the Interior Sense, which is in part renewed and
enlightened, so as for to escape the Pollutions, which the gross sense falls in
withal; this being an inward sober sense, comprehending immortal and divine
Things: but yet it is so nearly annexed to the Man of Reason, as being the very
Body of that Spirit, and can have no congruity with a Life of Faith. So that
here comes in a hard struggle, as to the matter and case of a Soul in its
looking for Redemption out of the Body of Sin. Here now the good sense, that is
awakened upon this account, will very aptly run out it self into a despondency,
as seeing, feeling, and tasting the strength and bitterness of sin; so as it
may raise such an uproar and mutiny in the Soul, as will not be for some
considerable time quieted and allaid. But you will say, This is good and
necessary to be immersed into such a deep sense of sin. It is in some degree to
be granted, that an effectual sorrow for sin, is to be allowed from divine
Light and Conviction; that is, awakened by the Holy Anointing: thus it was with
the Saints of old, crying out to be delivered from the Body of Death and Sin.
And what penitential Psalms did that Holy David in this sense make; but mind
all along here was no sticking there, but soon acquitted their sense, flying up
to the operating Spirit of Faith, as David and Paul did in the same case;
crying, Thanks be to God, that gives us victory through that Blood, which
cleanses from all Sin, springing from the Vein of Christ's Life opening
within, that washes out the pollutions of sin. For should not a Soul hasten
out of this working sense of Sensibility, it would soon be overwhelmed. So that
if in the life of this good sense, any should too long abide, what an anxious
and sorrowful Life would they know? Therefore what says the Spirit of Jesus,
Believe, and ye shall enter into your rest; for insensibility you will find
none.

Now to speak to the Natural and bodily Sense, this hangs close as the Skin
unto the Flesh, it affords an unwelcome constancy, as resolving not to leave
the Soul, unless mortality comes to be swallowed up of Life. This sense indeed
is apt and fit for such an inferior mortal state as we are fallen into; a low
and earthly sense does well agree with a low and earthly World; But oh! what
enlightened Spirit, that has been in the Divine Seeing, can take up here. For
it is the great and only impediment to all of Divine Vision, Prophecy, and
Revelation, (for now all three degrees of Sense we include). They are as a dark
gathering Cloud upon the Center of Light, and a strong Enclosure, to keep the
Spirit from passing into that Principle, where the Trinity, and all the Holy
Train of Angels, Seraphims, and Cherubims, do attend God's Throne. This I
soberly aver, from a particular Experience, that no Soul or Spirit can come to
have a plain and open view of a glorified Personality, as seen and known in the
Heavenly Spears, but as their sensible part is suspended, and laid as in a
dead sleep, during the time that it is in broad open sight, of such an express
Glory. Indeed there are representations of heavenly Objects, and things in a
lower degree, which may consist with the bodily sensation, as introverted into
calmness, and sweet stilness. Then the Spirit of the Soul stands in a powerful
capacity for divine Seeing and Hearing, and this is very frequently known, and
enjoyed by Saints in this present time. But that, which is the most certain
knowledge, and sight, and hearing, is, when the whole sensitive motion of Soul,
Spirit, and Body, is entered into a transical, eternal Nothingness; then it
knows, hears, and sees, as in God's Glance, and Light of Eternity. Thus it was
with Duniel, Paul, and John; they were struck out of their Senses, while the
Visions lasted upon them. So it, has in these last days, been witnessed, That
when the Lord had any special Revelation to give forth by his chosen thereunto,
how has the Element of Reason shut up, and the Stars of sparkling Sense fallen
down, as not consisting with a purer Spirit, descending from God, with great
and deep Revelations, that his Mind and Word might not be adulterated, which is
the more sure way for it, even through the sensation of the senses. But here
does meet me an Objection, that thus happens upon some extraordinary account,
that any are so caught up out of their senses; but it is not expected it should
be durable, as you seem to drive at. You cannot blame us if we do; for did you
know what it were to be but one hour from the working motion of Sense, by which
ye might really and substantially find your self entered into the very
beatifical Vision of God, you would never care for to know your sense more.
This does but agree with that good saying of St. Paul, Knowing that while we
are present with the Body of Sense, we are absent from the Lord. But we shall
be sober, and not run you out of your sensitive Life all at once; except some
sudden Shower from the Heavens shall fall and drown you, as it has for some
time done, upon the good-willer hereunto, which would heartily congratulate
further Witnesses hereof.

But to set by at present those great and eminent Effects of cessation from
Sense, which is not the lot of every Saint, nay, very few, that may as yet know
open Vision, and yet will find their Names written in the Book of Life. But
seeing it opens a Door, and makes way to have more clear knowledge, and familiar
access to God, and the glorified Person of Christ, and the high Order of
Angels, let this be a powerful motive, to be dying by degrees, from that Life,
which is separating and eclipsing the Face of God, wherein all Peace, Joy, and
assurance of Love is enjoyed. But here meets me this Question; Who is it that
can die out of their own sense? For so great and glorious are the advantages of
it, that if we could find the Passage-door out of them, we would not stay in
the molested, and troubled Sense. For this, I shall give you what has been
effected in my own experience, which I found great remedy and help in this
case, as being instructed by the Spirit of Jesus herein, which brought me to
famish the life of low mortal sense; first, avoiding all that might feed and
nourish it up, drawing out of all multiplicity of worldly Concerns, which
tends no higher than the exterior Life, denying every thing, which was not of
an absolute necessity; for as dying to all superfluity, that sense does work
upon, and you will find it will grow weak, and gradually expire, and go
currantly on for the anatomizing of every mutinous sense, so as there may not
be so much as an evil Essence left. But indeed, while this is but doing, and
not thoroughly done, the senses will be striving, and casting up muddy Waters,
that cloudy the divine Sight, and stop the inward Hearing, whilst you stay
amongst the noise and throng, that from this worldy Region do all incompass.
Therefore I can give you no other hopes to get victory over the sensitive Life,
but by starving it coming out, from all the gross Matter which feeds it. Indeed
there may be a quenching and silencing of this stirring motion, before there be
an arivement to the high degree of annihilation for fixation; which is a good
introduction, and as daily exercised herein, may come at last to depose
whatever will not consist with that most excellent Life of Faith, which is the
only Ministry, which the Lord Christ does set on foot a fresh now in this day.
Therefore let it not be thought a strange and severe Doctrine; blessed are
those that are able to receive and practice it, there will be no loss; sor as
this Sense dies, the fresh and supersensed Life will spring.

There is one Sense more, which we must not omit to speak something of; which
is, the Dolors, Pains, and Griefs of the Elementary Body, which may abide where
the finful Sense is much wrought out, which must be allowed till this corporal
Figure is changed; as sensible hunger, and thirst, and want of this and that
refreshing for the outward Body, carrying symptoms of mortality; impediments of
this kind, may be, and yet sinless. Christ the Lord, was not without the sense
of this, hanging upon his outward Corporiety; so as we cannot expect to be
loosened here-from, till something else do sollow; but yet carried through
cheerfully in hope of the Redemption of the Body also. Here then we shall
conclude, as well agreeing with that precious saying; Gal. 2. 20. I am
crucified with Christ, yet I live, yet not I: Mind how he calls that word
back again; do not think it is I, whose life did consist of the animal,
rational, sensitive Being, that is worn out and dead; I live upon another Root,
though I appear in this very Elementary Body. I have changed my Life of Sense,
for that high graduated Life of Faith, in which I please God, and am beloved,
finding all acceptance with him, and therefore never desire for to know the
disharmony of Sense any more. This is the victorious Triumph of a Spirit and
Soul, that has got over that low Sensibllity! Here is a new Model indeed, you
will say; but who is it that has put off the Body of Sense thus conqueringly?
We shall not determine who has done it; but we may determine, that except it
be done, or doing, there is no Foundation laid for Resurrection or Ascension.
Now then see your way, and in what you are to be exercised, in order to what is
to follow, Christ the Lord has beaten the Track; he is again returned in
Spirit, with great and mighty Power to carry you through, as ye give up, and
let him take your Wills, and give consent to demolish, and pluck that off,
which has been as a twisting Briar about the Lilly, which is to be
transplanted, when got free from the Valley of Death, to the Mount of
Immortality, and open Vision of God's Face in Glory. Thus you have had the true
dimensions, what it is to be died unto, which will finish and complete the
whole Mystery of Death: pronounce, we may, blessing, joy, and glory to the
Overcomers. Who can show these dying Marks, as has bin described? Who shall
now keep them from the presence of God and the Lamb, for right they will have
to possess and inherit all things, in heights above, and depths beneath?

One thing more we shall further add, which may be worthy of our taking notice
of; That there is a space of Time limited for such, who have accomplished this
mystical Death, to be buried. As Mortals when they die, they bury their Dead
out of sight: so it is with those who are departed out of the Body of Sin;
there is for them a quick dispatch by those, who are yet alive to all that
which they are dead to. Take them under what fellowship or form you will, there
is no agreement between the living and the dead; the dead are very unpleasant
Company, as being senseless and actless, as to Matters and Things relating to
the fallen Life and Principle; and so being unserviceable, they may well be
forgotten and deserted by Persons, Fellowships, and Societies, that are out of
the dying Order. We need not think much at it; for was it not thus with the
Lord Christ, when he went to suffer and die? Did not most of them, with whom he
was conversant, forsake him? and some followed afar off, keeping only a
love-inspection on him, as John and two or three more: others were afraid they
could not bear to see the Crucifixion. So it was, and so it is at this day;
there is a kind of an horror, to see one a dying from all pleasant joys and
things delectable, and invitable, and reckoned lawful to be enjoyed; but a Soul
and Spirit that has been under Christ's Discipline, understands other things,
and does know that the Fall has brought in the Poison of the Curse, which has
spread it self through the whole Creation. Paradise is hid, and fled, and
cannot be known, but to the risen from the Dead; and therefore look from one
end of the Earth to the other, and gather up all into one scene or
representation for allurement; and alas! what is in it, but bundles of thorney
Cares, that lie at the root of every pleasant Flower, that suck away the life
and sweetness of it? Therefore in a true sense it is matter of Joy and Glory,
to die out of that Principle, where we live as banished exiles from God, in
curse, woe, and misery? and then why should it be such a reproach, and shame,
to suffer crucifixion hereunto? Oh that the face of this Covering might be
taken off, especially among those that are Fellow Members of the dying Body of
the Lord Jesus. It is meet they should encourage, and not despise it in one
another; it is enough for the worldly Spirit to cast contempt, but fellow
Saints should rejoice in nothing more, than to see a crucified Christ in one
another. There is great need of all strengthening Angels to encourage to hold
out upon one open Stage; the onset of inward Fears and Temptations will not be
wanting at such a dying hour. Suggestings will rise from within, and speak in
the suffering Soul, as the Thief did to Christ; If thou be the Son of God,
save thy self: Let the Deity secure, and save the Humanity, and let it not die
so ignominiously. But all this must not move a living Christ in a dying Soul,
who sees deeper, and beyond the visible appearance, and therefore will go
through it, and despise the Despisers. But now here follows a grave silence, in
which there is great questioning, and a demur among the very Disciplehood
concerning the Resurrection, most doubting; so as here comes a black Cloud of
Dissertion; while no Resurrection appears, Censures and Judgments run from one
to another. We expected, says one to another, that great things would have
been shown forth upon the finishing such a Course; that a present Redemption
would follow. Thus it must be suffered and debated a while; for Christ is as
buried in the Soul out of sight, feeling and sensation, which is the highest
degree of Spiritual Death, far more proving than the dying to the whole sinful,
and worldly Life. As Christ the Lord committed his Spirit to the Father upon
the giving up of the Ghost, so it is with the dying Soul, its Spirit is given
up, and hid with God in Christ, and so the Soul may remain in a Grave, silence,
darkness, and confinement, under the weighty Stone, and cannot move, till the
Spirit returns from the Father and the Son, to give its quickening Life for a
glorious Resurrection. Therefore fear not, but be comforted from the Lord ye
holy Souls. Whoever have wrought out Death, or are upon working out, according
to what has been described in the threefold dimensions, you have no more
cause to doubt of your Resurrection, than Christ in his own Person had; for ye
are hereby become Christ's dead Body, and therefore the same Spirit which
raised him, must and will raise up such as are dead in him; but some there are
that may lie longer bound in the Grave than others; but then it is, because
there is not a through Death in all members and parts of the Body of Sin; for
else they could not be long detained, the Witnesses must rise at the third day.
Therefore by what has been declared, let us examine our selves, by showing
forth the Lord's Death till he come, for life-quickning. But it may be said,
while this is doing, and not finished; What if the mortal Death come and
prevent the manifestation of it in this World? Why, if it should, nothing that
has been wrought shall suffer loss upon this account; for after dissolution,
the Soul immediately ascends to be joined to that Body, that does consist of
the Angels which are of the Resurrection, who beforehand are translated with
Moses, Enoch, and Elias. Therefore so far as any have attained, it will be
accounted for in that invisible World; and so will have no cause to repent,
except it be, that they did not set upon the dying Work sooner, for carrying of
Time before them, for the finishing with Christ the whole Process. But now we
will leave our Dead in the Lord, as those that have ceased from their own
Works, and are in the still rest with God; and although the living Inhabitants
of Mortality and Time, do leave and forsake them, they need not be careful, for
Christ's own Lifeguard of Angels are about them, to comfort, watch, and
secure, and at the third day to roll away the Stone, to make way for the Dead
to come forth. And who shall them first know and see, but the faithful Lovers
and Believers, that have watched the Sepulcher, and would not go from it;
attending there, in Faith and Hope, for their Friends return from the
reproachful Death, to a Life all new and incorruptible, joyous, and glorious?
This is the hidden Treasure that lies in the darkness of Death, and will be a
Jewel, even to them that find it; and though the Grave may obscure the beauty
and sparkling shine of it; yet know, it will appear in a threefold
transparency. As it has died to the threefold Life of Degeneratedness; so it
shall be quickened and restored into the Glory of the Father, Son, and Spirit.

Thus you have had the Passover of the Lamb dressed, and set before you, and
commended to you by the Lord, the true Passover, through such as he has
here-for chosen, and set apart to receive and give forth, as from Light and
Experimental Knowledge. For I would not be a taken-up Instrument to declare of
Death, unless I had first tasted it; and I must give it this good Word and
Credit, that although it was tart and bitter in the beginning, so as I had some
struggle to get it down; yet through the daily exercise of my Mind, and bent of
my Will hereunto, through and from the Holy Spirit's Conviction, I was made
thoroughly resolved in it, and then it went on pleasant and smooth, and the
grievousness of it was turned into joyousness. This I speak, not by way of
boasting, but for comfort, and encouragement to such as are in fear to
adventure to go through all the parts and degrees of it.

I shall conclude this Subject with this Petition; Lord Jesus increase the
number of thy dying Flock, and that the Earth may not cover her Slain ever, but
cast out her Dead to spring up in thy Life, O dear Emanuel.

LEt none now fear, or suppressed be,
If they shall see
Death from the Life of Christ to spring,
To put an end to sense of Sin,
And to bring in the supernatural Thing.
What welcome News do our Ears hear?
We need not fear;
Though to us fierce approach each Death,
Stops Rational and Sensual Breath;
And no Pulse more beats in us here beneath.
This is our Hope, and Way we count,
To Nebo's Mount:
In which bright, and glorious place,
We shall behold the shining Face
Of God, with all those Saints who'ave run Death's Race.
The Universal Law's gone forth,
Of excellent worth:
All that is born in Sin must die,
Natural, and Spiritually;
Or else no part have in Christ's Monarchy.
Who would not leave his mortal Breath
To embrace Death?
What are dying Sigbs, or Groans?
But for a moment are those Moans,
When Love new Life brings to those Holy Ones.
What we see, to you we boast;
In Death's no Ghost
T'affright, as it supposed may be;
A Feast it is to the Faithful free,
Who shall through it to rise a new Life see.
Here follows the Resurrection.
NOw having laid the Foundation-Stone with Christ in Death, the Arch-Angel's
Trumpet sounds for a Resurrection in Spirit, Soul, and Body. There has been
a foregoing Resurrection in the Spirit, which has been frequently known, being
more sublime, apt, and ready to fly and mount up to its own Either. This I have
experienced, while my Soul has been under bindings, heavy, and ponderous. But
now for the foulish part to get up, is a more difficult case, because it cannot
rise, till it has a Spiritual Body all new organized. For although sown in
Death, a natural sinful Body, dishonorable, and vile, and must lie in the
mystical Grave, till all of this be mouldered away; That so, both in new Matter
and Form, it may rise, and come forth according to the working of the Heavenly
Mystery. For herein a Soul is to be wholly passive, can contribute nothing to
this new Frame and Model, all that it is to do, is to cease to do. God knows
how to give to the Spiritual Seed a Body after its own Kind, that it may be
suitably clothed upon; for the honor of the Resurrection, of which, I shall
now present to you a Platform in these Particulars.

First; How it is raised, and by whom; and to what State; and the inscription
which it bears after the Resurrection, to be known from others.

To the first Particular; which is, How, and after what manner the Dead in
Christ are raised; There is a secret infused Breath, after the manner as is
expressed by Ezekiel, that gave Life to the dry Bones, which do very properly
figure out the Resurrection of the Soul. To which we may add, that which the
Lord Christ also discoursed to Nicademus, of the Birth of the Spiritual Man, as
born again from the Dead; so indiscernably it comes, as none can see how this
pure Breath enters in, but as it is felt for a quickening Life. For as a
Child that in a natural Womb lies passive, and contributes nothing to its own
Life; so it is with one that is born from the Dead, as to the matter of its new
consistency, which is from the superior and incorruptible Element, which
fashioned is within this gross bodily Figure, as airy, thin, and of a
transparent purity, in which the Spirit and Soul moves: But upon the first
awakening to Life, it may stir but weakly, so as a Soul may not discern its own
quickening Life, because of stirring so slowly; but yet all the Motions are
working in a right and due order, increasing in strength from the eternal Root
and Fountain of Life, and so comes on daily to grow strong in every organical
Faculty. And as it died to the corrupt, animal, rational, sensitive Life, and
has lost all of that; so it has regained to a thousand sold advantage, by the
Resurrection, into a new Principle: which we shall make out, and illustrate for
motive hereunto.

1. Here is felt a Divine Animation of Life, that runs into pure, high,
union with the Holy Trinity; there it concenters, as finding all pleasurable,
and satiating Delights, which it can know no bounds nor excess in. The chaste
Eye may be allowed all fully to gratify it self upon Heavenly Objects, without
control; nay, now it may be taken with its own Beauty and Comeliness: whereas
before in the other state, there was matter of abhorrency, having reason enough
to despise its own Image; but now to admire it self, as having put on the fine
Robe of the Resurrection. And whereas self-love was in the old Body to be
abrogated and denied; here it is all lawful to be owned, for now it loves the
Holy Trinity in it self, and every spiritual Member belonging to that eternal
Body as it self; and as to all Dignification and Riches, Fullness, take it as to
what lies within the Circle of the Superior Heavens, those precious things
which the Sun and Moon, that in the one pure Element is fixed, do put forth for
Blessing and Increase; and then as to all of this lower Orb, as cause requires,
for any use of them; they are all made subservient to the Resurrection-State;
the Holy and Just One can well confide in a Soul, that is fully risen, to make
him Ruler over much; knowing of what Spiritual Temper it is raised up in, that
will not abuse its Trust, either as to eternal or temporal Revenues: Here is no
engrossing in a partial Spirit, to any thing wherein it is entrusted, as a
Steward for God; as giving all freely out in love-Community.

In the next place; What is to be considered for the loss of the subtle Spirit
of Reason, that managed all things by exterior Craft; For this comes now in the
high gradiated sound Wisdom, which comes from the Father of Light, by the
which he made all that of a visible consistency, is out of Nothing. This
outvies, and puts Rationality to the blush, which moved all upon the Wheel of
earthly and visible Things, that included, are under the Curse; for this has
no other Matter to work upon. But the superior Wisdom, that connexed is to the
Body of the Resurrection, that cooperateth with the eternal living Word, that
creates all things anew, calling those things to be, which were not; there is
no Matter or Cause obvious to any outward Eye; for the Matter it works upon, is
not gross or tangible, but all AEtherial and Spiritual, where God singly is the
only productive Cause and Ground, through effectual operation, for the bringing
forth into Essences, and Substances; according as this Wisdom shall in the
Spirit and Soul lay its Platform in order to the restoring that Virgin Nature,
and Godlike Simplicity, that have been defloured through the subtilty of
Reason. It is not to be said what Wisdom cannot do, as it is in Marriage-union
with God's Omnipotency; where then it will not go forth naked, but all clothed
with Power and Strength, to effect strange and mavelous Things, by way of
Plantation and Regulation of this old Creation, that now lies drowned in the
Earthly Craft, and Babylonish Confusion; all which must fall, as this day of
Wisdom's Resurrection comes to be manifested; for what shall be able to stand,
when she opens her Principle, where the Powers of Eternal Nature will all be
set awork to cloth the old face of Things, with a new spring of unfadable
Glory? Oh, there is great need for this day of Wisdom's Resurrection, that so
this old corrupt figure of Things may pass away; for the which many Prophesies
we have had from Christ the Lord so many Ages past, as signified by the beloved
John, testifying the desolation that must come upon the great City Babylon,
where all the worldly Merchandises have been carried on! Oh what a sudden
destruction will come upon it, as in one Hour, when that the Mighty Angels of
God's Wisdom shall descend, having great power to burn and consume, shake and
dissolve the earthly Frame of Things; at which the Children of the Resurrection
shall not be dismayed, but rejoice to see this long expected day, through which
all shall be governed by the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation.

Now we come to the third Particular, which is the restoring of the lost Senses
in a supernatural way. For a risen Soul and Spirit have all the sensation of a
Spiritual Body; this is very high and unconceivable to any, except it be to
such as have been caught up, as out of the earthly Body; (as is mentioned by
Paul) to know something of it beforehand; which may happen before the full and
total Resurrection be attained; as there are some that have, and so can the
more knowingly define it, after what manner this divine Sensation does show
forth it self. It is an advance, upon some consideration, beyond the Life of
Faith, and all Visions and Representations, which were through that medium: For
it now cease to see through that Glass, which presents heavenly Objects at
distance and so but dimly; but in this Spiritual Body of the Resurrection, it
sees in the Light of God's Eye, as being translated into that principle, where
one perpetual everlasting Day does shine, where it does behold greatness,
goodness, and purity, as being entered into the same. This is a broad open
sight, that do change from Glory to Glory; this was it that made that worthy
Apostle, having known something of this Glory, when he was caught up to the
third Heaven, press so after the Resurrection, to be in that Body, in which he
might know no more absence from the Lord; for in this sense he speaks, 1 Cor.
5. 7. We yet live by Faith, and not by immediate Sight; and although Faith is
the great moving Wheel that must run us up to this Resurrection, as its
Operation is in the Power of God; but then it has done its Work, having
received the end of our Faith, which is the Resurrection of our Spirit, Soul,
and Body; so as now it may be given us to understand, that spiritual Sensation
upon this account excels the Life of Faith, for it is a Translation, where we
do see, Eye to Eye, and hear as we are heard, and know as known; what of
eternal and heavenly Objects were invisible, are most clearly obvious hereby,
exercising every particular Sense, as Tasting, and Feeling, the essential
Power, Goodness, and Sweetness of a God, whereby unutterable pleasantness is
enjoyed, without the least shadow of interrupting Fear or Sorrow. When once got
beyond the Resurrection-probation then it can go out of Time into Mansions of
Eternity, as often as it pleases. But it may be questioned, Whether any shall
ever arrive to such a Resurrection, before this visible Body be dissolved, as
the manner of all the Earth is to die? For this, we shall Answer you in
Christ's own words, That such as shall be accounted worthy to obtain that
World, and the Resurrection from the Dead, they can die no more, for they are
equal unto the Angels, Luke 20, 35, 36. So that Mortality may come to be
swallowed up in the Body of the Resurrection. To which agrees that saying of
Paul; All shall not die the mortal death, but he changed, even this visible and
vile Body transfigured: Therefore it is no incredulous thing, though it has
yet been so rarely seen, because the way hereunto has not been walked in, as
the Spirit of Christ has shown; for few there are that have got through the
Death, and fewer that have reached the Resurrection: But the Time is at hand
now, when as the principal Shepherd will quicken the slow-paced of his own
Flock, that are yet so much behind in the dying, and rising-Work; who will give
forth of his Spirit in greater abundance, for the finishing of this great
Mystery. This is verily the strange and new Thing that will spring, in which an
everlasting God will be evidently seen, for highest wonder and praise. All this
now considered, who would not only and altogether set hard on upon the Eagle
rising Body, which the Lord our only Life and Resurrection is compared unto?
But, queried yet further, That if we could see any precedent for it in this
present Time, it might gain a belief for this great Thing you declare of.
Answer, Whether or no there be any in this Age, that can give proof of such a
Resurrection? We shall not decide that, but hope and believe, what is not yet
made manifest may in time be. For the mortal Figure being upon a rising Spirit
and Soul, and not changed, must necessarily be a cloud, and a hiding of the
excellent Perfections that are there; but if nothing of this kind could be
produced, this must not make void the true Doctrine of the Resurrection. It is
sufficient that Christ the First Fruits, is risen for us to follow after.

We shall add one more Evidence mentioned in the Revelation of John, of the
raising the two Witnesses, of which there are various Interpretations: but that
which may be grounded upon as sure, and firm, is, Christ in his Deity and
Hamanity, in which he rises in the Soul, where he has bin slain, and has
lain as dead in the properties of degenerated nature; which clears by whom we
do come to be raised, even by and through the nighty Power of the Deity.

Now it follows, to what we are to be raised unto. Is it not to sit in heavenly
Places with Christ? and to have all our conversation there, and to have nothing
more to do with the state of things below? For the Angels of the Resurrection
are now only for high Communion and Fellowship with the Trinity, and those of
their own Spiritual raised Order. They can contract no low Unions with
Creatures, nor walk among the Dead, hor immerse themselves with any thing,
while they go in and out among Mortals, that should lessen the Dignification
they are raised unto; for there is a Probation-time betwixt Resurrection and
Ascension, as our Lord Jesus herein did show us in his own Person, who went in
and out forty days, before he ascended into his high Throne of Glorification,
taking care to secure himself from being touched: No, a beloved Mary must stand
off at this Time, left she should detain from Ascension. All of which
deportment of our Lord is for our Example, to be very cautious what we touch,
taste, or handle, of those perishing Things that we are risen from; or
permitting any indeared Thing, to lay the weight of their Concerns upon us; for
here is Enoch's Life so walking with God, as not to be. But you will say, How
can such a high raised Life consist with the present Model, and Circumstances
of Things in this Creation, where there must be care, industry, and trafficking
in these low things, for the service of themselves and one another? This indeed
is a considerable Mountain, which has kept down Christ's risen Life in his
Saints, which Faith in God must only remove. But to answer this grand
Objection, you are to understand, That this is a state of Life wholly peculiar
to such, who are born again from the Dead: For it is not to be expected, that
others can altogether live so untouched, and unconcerned in the Affairs of this
mortal Life; But them who are in special called out of the worldly
multiplicities, and imploys, for to be God's anointed Priests, and Prophets,
and Messengers, to act and live after such a Spiritual way of Consecrations,
different from others, that are not assigned to this holy Separation; although
with Moses it might be desired, that the whole Heritage of God were ordained
Prophets, and instituted for more high and heavenly Services; which we may hope
shall be wrought out in time, by the mighty redeeming hand of our Sion King,
who will first begin with them who freely can leave all rudimental things, and
give up for holy Dedication, as is expedient for all, who of this high Calling
and Profession would come to be. I must say it is great, it is worthy, and
exceeding joyous, and honorable; blessed are those that can get discharged
from all low and earthly Impediments, to follow and mind this Heavenly
Vocation, which turns to the best of accounts; which in the conclusion will
prove the most gainful Employ and Calling.

But to return where we left; As to the watchful, wary deportment that is
required betwixt Resurrection and Ascension; for it is the last Probation,
therefore it concerns the risen Soul to be very cautious, to keep up to the
Celestial Region, improving all those sublime Faculties that it is raised in.
We may observe, that our Lord, after his Resurrection, did show himself only to
the Brethren going in and out, giving among them but short stays, having other
Worlds and Spheres, to visit the Inhabitants there: So it is with the risen in
Christ, who are his living Witnesses, who do appear to their Fellow Saints, to
their great astonishment; declaring, the Lord is indeed risen in them: and
where a doubtful Spirit is that does question the truth thereof, they are able
to show the apparent Marks for evidence. But you will ask, What are they, that
so we may not be deceived in them? First, You may know them by their swift
Motion, and sublime Faculties, going in and out as Strangers, no longer
dwellers upon the Earth: their Home is properly with the Lord, and can with
their invisible Spirit and Body, pass through diverse unknown Spheres, some
times more immediate with the Deity; and other times with the Orders of
glorified Angels, and Saints of high Degree, that have got beyond Mortality;
and then again return to be seen and known of such as are in this lower Orb.
The truth is, they are so spiritually greatned, by the birth of the
Resurrection, that they cannot but despise all mortal, terrestrial appearances
of things in this low World; although while living in it, subject to the just
and necessary things of it, in all moderation; while corporiety in its visible
Figure does remain: for Christ himself did in his humane Body appear after his
Resurrection, and did eat common Food with his Disciples, to prove all this
might consist with a risen Life. Then again you may know the risen in Christ,
by their designing only great and noble Enterprises; they having got so much of
God's Nature into them; that they are straightened till they bring it forth into
manifestation, in way of fruitful Powers, acting God's great wonders upon the
visible Stage of this World: in order to which, they always do keep the Ladder
of Ascension steady in their eye, knowing their stay is not to be long before
their way will be made to the everlasting burning Throne of God's open Face; as
being thus qualified, they do stand in all readiness for Ascension. But we may
add this by way of Information, that there are many degrees of risings, and
liftings up, in order hereunto, which often may be so strongly beset with a
watch of unbelieving Spirits, which may beat the Resurrection-life back. This
has been known by such as have been hard pressing forward to be of the
Resurrection-Flock. In this I speak my own Experience, as finding it the
greatest Impede; for when the Mystery of the Resurrection was first opened unto
me, and incitements from my Lord, Christ set home upon me, that as he raised up
himself personally, so he would me spiritually. No sooner did I begin to
entertain a belief herein, but I had Legions of Spirits came about me to make
all void, as not attainable in this present time, discouraging and weakening my
Faith; but the mighty God stood up in me as a flaming Wall, driving back that
floating sea of Sensibility, and invading Spirits, shutting and binding them
out of his own risen Body. Now then by all this that has been declared and
proved by Scripture and Experience, we hope it may fasten a belief of this
Truth, and leave a provocation for getting up upon this Resurrection-step, by
which an high advance and great assurance is given, for the third Staff of
Jacob's Ladder to set foot upon, of which we shall go forward on to describe.

The Resurrection.
YE Angels rise from Death, come up yet higher.
Mount to the place of the Seraphick Quire,
And there, without all anguish, and all pain,
In God your Temple full of Joys remain.
Ye who the Vails of Flesh have broken through,
Your blissful risen Glory still pursue.
Oh ye Highborn, arisen from the Dead!
You now are raised, to live with Christ your Head.
No more below cast down on things your Eye,
That in the worldly Dust do grovelling lie:
For Soul, and Spirit, still must upward flee,
And seek the Bosom of the Deity.
What Trumpet's this, which sounds now so loud?
Comes not the sound from the Etherial Cloud?
Calling the dead in Christ to come away,
And to shake off the heavy fleshly Clay?
Up, up ye Souls, that shine like Morning bright,
From whence is banished quite black Death and Night.
Come now with me, a Secret I Will unfold,
God's glorious Body you shall all behold!
Your Senses all shall new enlightened be,
And exercised in Divinity:
In glorious Heaven, where low and mortal sense,
In risen Spirits, shall be banished thence.
Here follows the Tract of Ascension.
HAving passed through, and got over the Resurrection-step, and held out the
Probation-hour; the Heavens do open, and the bright Cloud breaks, as the open
Gate for Ascension, to receive the Spirit and Soul that has put on its risen
Body; it is now to be parted from the Earth, and carried up to have
conversation with the Holy Trinity, and all those princely Dignities in
heavenly Places. Oh what Angelical Sounds, and winding-up Powers, that do make
a Soul all restless, till it comes to its own prepared Mansion! With what
Love-Zeal is it now fired withal? Every motion is all ascending toward its own
Center; for now it is very painful to live any space of Time, out from the
Heavenly Element, and it is judged as expedient for a risen Soul to depart
mystically and spiritually, as the Lord Christ did personally; nothing must or
can long detain it. All Dues, Debts, and Demands being cleared in Christ, the
Life and Resurrection, who also has ransomed the Soul from Death, so as that
the Evil Accuser can bring no charge against a risen Spirit, having once died
to his Kingdom; no nor any of his Worldly Agents, that would readily lay wait
of earthly Cares to keep down, from mounting up to the Lamb's Throne; but they
have nothing to do in that Principle, in which ascending Spirits are centered,
as moving straight forward, not looking back or down any more to what they are
now redeemed from; keeping pace, and maintaining their Walks with the Holy
Trinity, being so refreshed and satisfied, both as to Place and Company, that
they mind and study no other thing, but to become as fixed Pillars, no more to
come out, being answered there to the fullness of all Joy.

But here it may be queried, With what Body do you ascend? If your mortal
Figure be yet confined to stay in this visible World, How shall it be discerned
when you do ascend?

In Answer to this; No gross earthly Eye, that looks at things according to
outward appearances, can indeed discern the Lord's Mystical Body, which is put
on for Ascension; no one can be in the true Perceivance, but such as are in the
same free and light Principle; others are not to see it or know it, till they
come to descend in the Tabernacle-Body of the Holy Ghost; then they shall be
confessed and owned by them, who are doubtful and unbelieving, as questioning
all of this internal Ascension, because not known experimentally. But blessed
are they who know themselves in it, and are received as out of sight, to be
very much with Jesus their Lord. How is that, you will say, to be out of sight,
and yet in sight amongst mortals? You are to understand it thus; That the Soul
and Spirit in the secret Divine Body, which it puts on in the Resurrection, is
so highly soaring and moving, as the Cherubim-Wheels mentioned by Ezekiel,
lifted up by the Spirit, and ascending from the Earth, as neither caring or
minding worldly Matters more. It has no patience to demur its stay, such
worthy and glorious Objects, as all amazing it does in the Spirit's Eye behold,
that it is so enkindled in flames of Love-desire, as it can take in no check
nor control to detard it from Ascension. Oh! what is given us for to descry,
though yet appearing in a mortal Vehicle, as relating to Ascension; at the
entrance of which Gate do stand numerous Angels and Scraphims, with Flags of
Victory, to give to each ascended Spirit; shouting with Joy of Salvation, that
is now wrought out: Then does this Holy and Heavenly Train usher in the
Ascended, and bring them close up to the Throne of the Lamb, who all in Jasper
Light and Glory does appear, rising up from his Throne-Seat them for to meet,
and shows each one their reserved Crowns and Thrones, given them for their
Instalment. Oh we must be silent, for we can find no words to set forth what
Love, Joys, and Embraces, do mutually pass betwixt the Lord Christ, and the
ascended Ones. No measuring out of any Heights, and Lengths, and Breadths of
Love, which is enjoyed here in the highest Solacements; it may be well and
truly said, it passes all understanding. But this is not all, there is yet
much more to be done and conferred by the Father of Ascending Spirits, whom the
Lord Christ presents unto him, and says, Behold, and see them whom thou gave
me, are come up after me, being no more of the World than I am: Therefore, O
Father, confer upon them what thou have done upon me. At which sight and
request, the supreme presence of Glory seems all well-pleased to behold the
effect of Christ's travel through Death and Sorrow, thus to save and redeem.
Upon this then there is a Council held jointly by the Holy Trinity, all
agreeing in one, as to what Immunities and Gifts that are to be conferred, with
all those promised Rewards, which do belong to the Conquerors, for the
encouragement of the rest of the Elect Flock to pursue Ascension also. But here
the Lord, and great High Priest, as more nearly entrusted, acts the part of an
Advocate, and makes Demands from God the Father, for all those eternal
Land-Revenues settled by fore-Ordination, upon those whom he had recovered and
raised from the Death of Sin. Whereupon a Cry does go forth from an ascended
Soul, as the Widow Woman, whose Son Elisha raised to Life; who in a time of
Dearth and Famine, sojourned in a strange Land; which when again returned,
cried to the King to have her House and Land restored again; showing her Son
and Heir whom the Prophet had from Death brought to Life. Thus it is with a
Soul that has been banished from its ancient heavenly Inheritance; for which
Christ the now glorified Mediator sueth, that there may be a return of all
spiritual Revenues and good things; at which the mighty God and King appoints
his Angelical Officers to search the everlasting Records, and to bring forth
the ancient Deeds, which to the Resurrection and Ascension-state do belong;
every Name therein to be found, which are predestined unto Glorification. For
Christ the Lord has a most lawful Plea, and does now make claim for the Tree
of Life also, to stand all free to be fed upon, without any prohibition; for as
Adam sucked in Death by that other Tree, so here is confirmation in eternal
Life; and as Adam's Angelical and Paradisical Body was changed into that which
was mortal and vile; so by virtue of feeding upon this Tree of Life, we shall
again reassume a pure and unfadable Body, far more transparent than he had in
that first Creation-state; which may be made out clear in the various
Properties of this Tree of Life, which we shall draw up the number of.

The first Property, It gives a single, clear, and christaline sight, to behold
Celestial Glories, without any medium.

Secondly, It gives a supernatural hearing, it comes to understand the Heavenly
Language, as from Eternal Nature spoken; which Language is in corrupted Nature
now quite lost, and can only be restored in the Ascension.

The third Property is, the most profound and deep Wisdom, which does most
highly excel and outvie all the craft and subtilty sucked in from the Breast of
fallen Eve, whole Children have herein been nourished up in a shifting way of
worldly Wisdom, which showed it self in Adam and Eve, when the Lord called them
to an account for their disobedience to his Command. All which subtilty must
die and fall away, when God's Wisdom shall be restored again.

The fourth Property of this Tree of Life, it gives an everlasting and
unchangeable Righteousness, as a white Robe that covers from Head to Foot,
suffering no more spot of the Earthly Life to fall upon it.

The fifth Property is, an unutterable ravishing Pleasure, and Joy drawn in as
the sweetness of the Dew, which lies always upon the Branches of this Tree, the
precious favor hereof never departs from the Soul; it is all Paradisical Power.

The sixth Property is, a flowing torrent of Love, which knows no bounds; it
expatiates it self from lengths to breadths, and from heights to depths; it
runs through all degrees first and principally; it runs it self into its own
original Being of Love, where-out it comes all covered with Love, Sweetness,
and Amity toward all, to scatter among all Fellowships and Societies, these
pure sparkling Powers of Love received from the Deity.

The seventh Property produces an absolute, free, and eternal Liberty of Will,
which stands fixed in God, knowing no restraint or bondage; for whatever it
wills or decrees is made good, because it moves in the Will of the Holy
Ghost.

Eighth Property is, the serene Meekness, and tender Mercifulness let forth, as
from God's own nature of Goodness, to Objects that may require succor and
help, whether upon an Interior or Exterior; if in spiritual desertion and
temptation, how readily is the Balsam Tincture of this Tree given sorth, to
heal and cure the wounded in Spirit, that so they may find present Cure.

Ninthly, Here is the donation of durable Riches and Honor, which is so
infinitely great and glorious, as it draws a black Cloud of Contempt upon all
the Babylonish Treasures, that have been gotten and raised by earthly Science
and Craft.

Tenthly, Know in Truth and Verity, here is an eternal springing Bank, that
will never be spent out, for it is the Generating-Revenue, which the Holy
Trinity spends upon, and freely does receive the ascended into Community, to
share in this springing Gold-Mine, where there will be no need of digging, nor
labor, either of Body or Mind; there will be no occasion to say, What shall we
eat or drink, or where-withal shall we be clothed? The Lilly-Time is now here
come, that all of this kind will be supplied from God's flowing Fountain of all
precious Store, that will confer such a plenty of dowry Riches and Honors,
that cannot be degraded, nor plucked away from the Ascended. Which as a Ship
they will sail with out-spread Banners of Conquest and Victory, floating upon
the Throne-River of Life, daring all Sea and Land Enemies of this worldly
Principle, whose strength is rottenness, and cannot stand before the Ark of
God's moving Power, in which his Kingdom shall be established.

The eleventh Property of this Tree of Life, is known by sending forth
sweet-scented Odours and Perfumes, a compounded Spicknard, which is so strong
and powerful, that it is all-penetrating: So deep, that it touches and does
influence, and is an Antidote against all Putrefaction of Sin, and the evil
Consequences thereof; the very out-breathing Words, are all perfumed with the
Oil of the Holy Ghost, which sends forth a virtual healing-Life, among whom
they converse with in a Spiritual Sense.

The twelfth and last Property, which is the consummating Glory of all, is an
unceasant flow of immortal Life, which fed is from the Christalline River,
proceeding from the Throne of God, which River does encompass this Tree for
fixation, that so no more Death, nor Curse may be known, but all swallowed up
in Victory, according to the Vision which the beloved John saw, how that this
Tree grew in the midst, and of either side of this River, signifying it to be
the Holy Trinity in their distinct Variety, springing up for a feeding Life to
the Spirit, Soul and Body, which has reached to Ascension.

Now then by all that has been opened and revealed of the wonderful Properties
of this Tree of Life, can it do less than enforce most ardiant longings and
aspirings, to go on forward to all of these Degrees? Oh let not this low
Elementary Kingdom, with all its subtle Enchantments, and binding Weights,
keep down any that are of the Resurrection. The Ascension-gate, our Emanuel
has passed through, and does cause it to stand open for all that have good
Will and servent Love to come up after him. What though as yet there may be but
few Presidents that have reached this Ascension Mark; the Serpent with his
twisting Tail having drawn down many ascending Stars: let not that discourage,
but rather fire our Zeal the more, and watchful be to avoid his Subtilty, who
is not wanting to lay numerous Stumbling Blocks in our way; but through the
Spirit of Faith, there may be a striding over all, taking up courage and holy
resolution in this ascending way. For something I do see breaking forth as the
Light of a new Day, and by the great Alpha and Omega it is testified, that what
by his Spirit has been revealed, shall not go off as a dead Seane, shown only
in literal description, and so foulded up again. No, a more lively draught the
Holy Ghost will draw upon the Hearts and Spirits of those who are born again;
this being now the very Time wherein our expectation grows big, for bringing
forth the Heir to all of these Heavenly Immunities which has been mentioned;
and what the tenor of the new and everlasting Covenant runs upon, wherein a
new Heart, and another Spirit, in which God's own eternal and pure Nature will
be restored, so as to abolish the very Root-Essence of Sin, which no verbal
Ministration, or doctrinal Precept could reach, nor intellectual Knowledge, or
Vision, that gives divine Seeing, and speculation of heavenly Objects and
Things: All of these have the cessation and termination; but that which is the
surer groundwork, far excelling all, is to find our selves rooted and effenced
in the birth of the Holy Ghost, which is firm, stable, and unchangeable,
wherein the Issues of a new-springing Life will go forth in every motion,
putting a stop to all profuse and impertinent Imaginations, that from Nature's
Root has been put forth. Such a signal Change we in our selves shall find, when
the Lord from Heaven shall descend for to bring up to Ascension, and will for
ever maintain his Superiority and Kingly Power over all Principalities in this
Worldly Region; putting all things under, which has exalted themselves above
him. This is the unreversible Decree of our great Sion-King, wherein the
ransomed shall passively stand, for the ruling Scepter of the Holy Lamb of God,
to take all kingly Power into his own hand, to manage a pure, righteous, and
peaceable Kingdom, of which there shall be no end. This is that great and
mighty over-turn, which we are looking and hastening for.

The Ascension.
WHat is this rushing sound which I now hear?
The fiery Chariots whirling through the Air,
For Souls to mount up to the Heavenly Station;
And there for to put on their Glorification.
Mount risen Souls, and not in Eden stay;
Life's Tree does for you all its Fruits display.
Fear not, be bold, as Cherubs mount apace;
Ascend on high into your native place.
Love's Heart stands open; it is there alone,
You Will see God Face to Face in his bright Throne;
Where you shall Pleasures feel, Life, Joy, and Peace,
For you prepared, that will never cease.
Mount then the Ladder, and to Heaven ascend;
There lies the Treasures, that shall never end:
Whose endless Riches so shall take your Eyes,
All temporal Wealth for it you shall despise.
The Income everlastingly shall flow;
And of the end of Wealth no one shall know.
In this Ascending State, all Spirits are
Free from all Thought, disburthen'd of all care:
For in this glorious, and this wealthy Land,
An endless Store, and Bank does open stand;
Which still does multiply, increase, and grow,
As it does from the Godhead Fountain flow.
Upon Ascension and Descension.
EXpect now that Day of God, which as a fiery Oven and molten Heat, shall come
upon the old Heavens and Earth not only to shake, but dissolve them; such a
signal change will be effected through the fiery Baptising Cloud, in which the
Holy Ghost will descend the second time upon the New Jerusalem Waters, who
called and fixed are to mind no other thing but Ascension, to receive Power
from the most high, for to do Works of Glorification, which none can be capable
of, but such as are separated and redeemed out of the Earth. The Apostles were
commanded of the Lord Christ, when he intended to pour forth the Holy Ghost,
wholly there to tend; upon which they accordingly received the first Fruits of
it. But now where shall we find a holy separated Fraternity, that in pure
Concord and Unity of Love, do together wait for the residue of the Spirit, to
do the great Works of God in this Earth, which has lain so long barren from
bringing forth any of this kind of fruitful Powers? Therefore it is but all
necessary to provoke to such a gathering in Spirit, and ascend together unto
the Mount of Olives, as apart from all worldly Impediments hereupon, for to
wait till the bright glance of the Ghostly Majesty shall again break forth in
Power and great Glory, that we may show our selves to those of our Brethren,
who yet in the Kedar of a worldly State do dwell, to invite them out of this
imbondaged Life, where the sorrow and servile droil do attend. Who then shall
of these glad Tidings first bring, but such close and servent Seekers that have
set the Morning-Watch, looking for the Eastgate to open, which has been the
six working-days of Man's Labor shut? all of which is to cease, when the great
Prince of the Sanctuary shall rise and ascend in us, to enter into the most
holy and inward Court, as that one perpetual Sabbath, where we come to rest
from all our own Works; that the Holy Ghost may act, and do all in the most
Holy Place in us, as an Offering well pleasing to the Father, who accepts
such Worship only, as performed is by this most excellent Spirit. Therefore how
lightly and unavailably are all our Actings and Workings to be set by, till the
Power of the Holy Ghost comes to move all pure, strong, and effectual? for
nothing will or can hold out or abide, but what is wrought up to the numberless
measure of God the Holy Ghost: Therefore this golden Reed is given to be our
Measure, from thousands to thousands, till the living Waters from under the
threshold of the Sanctuary do rise as an unpassable River, to drown all that is
drossy and earthly, so as nothing may live there, but what is of a
Godhead-appearance. Now then let us go on to pursue that, for which the lively
Hope is begotten in us, not looking back to any veiled or shadowed
Ministrations, which could never perfect what we in the everlasting Counsel of
the Holy Trinity are designed unto; for know it for a Truth, from the Yea and
the Amen, that the now vile drossy Man shall be made all Gold, through the
tincturing virtue of the Deity entering into him: This is the amazing Wonder
which is left for the Holy Ghost to bring about. But who are the elected
hereunto, as Subjects upon whom this shall first be wrought upon? It may be
further queried, There are various fore-running Qualifications which have been
already mentioned, as in the Death, and following Process. This only I shall
further add, That those who are chosen in God for to be the first springing
Plants of this new Creation, there will be given to them a mighty Spirit of
Faith, and a clear and satisfying Persuasion, that this great, through, and
mavelous Change is to be effected, and for this they must be cast as into a
new Spiritual Model, fitted out by the Spirit of Wisdom, and so found in a
believing and waiting posture; for let none imagine this will fall upon any
suddenly, but they will have a foregoing Work for it, and know a great change
in the secret of their Souls inward part; which is all necessary, that through
cleansing Work, there should be a getting through, to make ready for this great
and last Baptising, into the pure Nature of the Deity, who then will discharge
all our bodily Exercise, as to the most Holy Things, wherein fault might be
found; because performed from a mixed ground, where Good and Evil in contest
was. It shall no more be said, The Spirit and we together do work, for Man must
come to the end of his days Work; for the Holy Ghost does take upon him to do
this great Work, which appertains to Glorification, in those that are come thus
forward on to cease to their own Works, and does see the utmost ends of their
unprofitable and dead Earth, and can no more act from that mixed Property,
being made to know another more excellent Ministry, by uniting now with the
seven Forms of eternal Nature compacted, and made up for a pure Ghostly Body,
where all Ability and God-sufficiency will show forth it self quite of another
sort, than while under internal Purifications, and Soul-cleansings, which were
always a doing, and never done, nor could ever be expected, till the Holy Ghost
comes to fix his own Body, which will go forth in various working Powers, which
I should unfold as they have been revealed unto me; but not knowing yet any
that can bear or receive such wonder-working Powers, they must lie a while
under the Seal of Secrecy, till it be known who are worthy of them, which God
will reveal to us in his Time; for the bringing forth a new creating Store,
that has in bank been treasuring up, for those that shall meet me in this high
and heavenly Track, who have left this visible and fadable State, for the more
sure and weighty precious Things, which the Day of the Holy Ghost must and will
bring in; to which Lot, the Wisdom of God has charged us to stand, and not to
let the Golden Stone which is left in trust, as unadvisedly to slip out of our
hands; but wait for him to work upon it, who only is mighty, able and skilful
to use it, by opening the wonder-working Virtue of it. In the mean time we are
taught to hold out our six workingdays, till the seventh Year of this
Sabbatical Rest is come. Blessed are those which are arrived to the sixth and
last day, in a ready preparation and hopeful expectation, that the Eastgate
will open to give an entrance into that good Land, where we may be as those
true Rachabites, no more to Build, or Plant, or Sow into a corruptible Soil,
nor any more to drink of the Wine of any adulterated Vine, wrought out by the
sweat of the Brow; but come to reap all of those rich, good, and plentiful
Things, which are made ready unto our hand, according to that saying of our
Lord Christ unto his Disciples, I have sent you to reap that whereon you
bestowed no labor, (Joh. 4. 38.) referring here unto the Gifts and Powers of
the Holy Ghost, which so fluently were shed abroad and given in that day. So
again, much more will be known, when the residue of the Spirit shall be poured
forth, a rich prize shall be possessed, even such a living stock for
subsistence, as shall be blessed with the multiplying Power of the Holy Ghost.
After this way will God for his own Household provide distinguishingly; but for
this it is given us to understand, there will be such a kind of Faith given, as
shall run up as high, and extend it self as large, as an Almighty and Infinite
God can answer unto; for such a Spirit of Faith is all-necessary for the
accomplishment of such mighty Things; therefore we may be provoked to pray
uncessantly for this Gift.

Thus we have defined some part of the Glory that does follow upon Ascension,
through being fixed in the Body of the Holy Ghost; by whose glance of Light it
is given us to see another Degree, how that the Ascended and Glorified, are
again to descend, to show and declare to their fellow Saints, what Dowry they
are by the Holy Ghost possessed with to serve their Lord and Master's
appointment with here in this visible Principle. This is a secret written in
the Book of Life, upon which there has been a fast Seal: But now the Lamb of
God is in Spirit come to break it open, that we may read and know the great
Royalties, which he has redeemed us to enjoy. We in the first place are to
remind and make observation, that when any great and mighty change was to be
wrought and effected upon the Earth, it was to be done still by Angels that
descended from Heaven, as mentioned is in Holy John's Revelation, Rev. 18. 1.
and 20. 1. which is not to be understood or limited unto those Angels, which
never knew a Birth in Time, whose descent was ever in Seraphick Figures; but
more properly to the Angels of the Resurrection, that have passed through the
ten days Tribulation, and have overcome through the Blood of the Covenant.
These are those whom the mighty God will employ for the replenishing of a New
Creation, and coming down with the ghostly Powers to lay the Foundation for the
Mount-Sion Glory; and it could never be expected that this great over-turn, and
change upon the confused Babylonish State of things, as now standing, should be
effected, till Angels of Time had ascended, and again descended, as having
obtained personal conjunction, and Power from Christ their Head-life, to act as
his Representatives in this World, showing a Godhead-Commission beyond and
above all worded Testimonies, by Signs, and Deeds of Wonders; all which are
reserved till elected Angels do ascend to receive a mighty impowring from the
Holy Trinity. This is the finishing Mystery that is waited and looked for, that
so the ruinated and apostratised State of Creatures may be restored to their
first Principle, where the New Jerusalem will open and descend, then shall the
Priestly Kingdom be revealed, and its Government be known, and managed by the
Saints of the most High, who after Ascension must have some space of Time for
their Instalment and Fixation in the Powers and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, that
they may not transiently come and pass away again, as formerly they did, but be
established and founded as upon a Rock immutable. For as the Heavens have
received the Lord Christ out of visible sight, so it will these ascended
Angels, till they be confirmed for Kingly Dominion: for their visible Figures
may be scen by Mortals, while their inward transformed Spirits, Soul and Body
are translated out of sight, and are taken into the Heavens. But it may be
queried, Whether those that may hereunto attain, shall be secured from the
Mortal Death? To this each one must stand to their Election and Lot, as known
to God. We cannot say any thing more as from the Lord, but only this; we have
received good Assurance that if Bodily Death should overtake us, while upon
this Ascending Ladder, there will be a considerable advantage, that an open
access by Christ the Lord is made for such as die in the Faith hereof; who will
find a free pass through the mortal Death into that Mount Sion, to be received
where the Lord Christ, and the high Order of Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, are beforehand gathered. And therefore slack not your Work, but
pursue forward on, for nothing shall be lost, but all runs on upon account
according to each one's measure attained; although it must be granted, that
such as shall continue in this visible Body, till the whole Process be
accomplished, they will be more eminent Instruments to glorify God in a World
that lies under Death and Curse. For here comes in the very Redemption of the
visible, weak, and impotent Body, which shall not die dishonourably, as the
manner of the whole Earth has been; but be changed, and Mortality swallowed up
of Immortality, and so all Rule and Authority put under, as personating the
Lord Christ in the Earth; according as it is prophesied, That Judah shall rule
with God, and be had in admiration by Dignities, Principalities, and Powers;
such Honor will the descended Angels have. I shall omit any further
enlargement upon this particular, having reserved it for another part, which is
to follow this, wherein greater things will be discoverable for the sakes of
those who have a living Portion therein. But as to what is at present
communicated, let it be accounted of as weighty and considerable to provoke,
and stir up all pure Minds to meet harmoniously upon this Ascending Ladder,
where one Saint may call to another in the Attractive Power of Love, to go up
together. Oh where, where shall we find such, that so highly raised in the
Spirit of their Minds are, and that will agree to run and hold out this
heavenly Race with us, till we reach the Descension to bring down
Glorification! Is there not a sealed Number here-for? Oh God bring them into
manifestation and knowledge of each other, that as clustered Grapes we may be
all filled with the Wine of the Spirit, that ready is to be pressed out for the
chearing the weak and faint, that also are Members of this Body of the Lord
Jesus, which yet remain in an humbled suffering Life, crushed down under sin.

We should now conclude this present Subject, but there meets me one Objection
which I am to give answer to, which is this: You have here discoursed of a high
and wonderful State of Ascension and Descension for visible Glorification, How
come you to understand the way of it, without you were actually ascended by a
Cloud of Glory, coming down to receive you out of all mortal sight, after the
manner of our Lord Christ? We answer to this, You are given to know, there is
an Ascension in Spirit, which beats the Track for the Soul with its
Resurrection Body to follow after: For who knows the way of Spirit, it flies as
a Bird in the Air, no Mortal can discern; it is of that sublime quality, as it
can easily pass into the Principle of Light and Glory, for a prospect and view
of that Celestial Orb, which is to descend into Time for the manifestation of
what is to be Eternal; and thus it is given to some to be taken up in Spirit,
for to make discovery of what lies cancealed in Superior Regions, as not yet
understood: so as from hence we may give satisfaction to this Query, how truly
and safely we may declare, and open these mysterious Deeps concerning
Glorification, although the Holy Ghost's Descension is not yet, He having not
Ascended in personality, but only in Spirit, but not in Soul, and with a risen
Spiritual Body. For there we must keep a distinction, and not pretend to any
thing beyond what is attained; for I may have a Revelation of what is designed
and purposed, shall be accomplished by the Power of the Holy Ghost, as ground
for Faith to work upon: but while this is not done, so as Spirit, Soul, and
Body are made one entire Angel for Ascension and Descension, till then it is to
be appropriated only to the swist flight of the Spirit, that is as a Heavenly
Spy sent beforehand to be a Speculator, to be hold the Pattern of those
Heavenly Things, which are to be replanted, in like manner and order here in
this World, by and through the creating Word descending from on high, into the
low, meek, and pure in heart, with whom the high and lofty One will tabernacle
withal. for generating with New Heavens and Earth, which is the effect and
consummation of all Spiritual Sight, Vision, and Revelation, as the purer
production of the Holy Ghost in fruitful Powers exerting forth. This is the
substantial Thing which in greatest valuation is with us to be, as for to be
pressing on in the Lord's Spirit, to attain and possess what each step of this
Ascending Ladder will bring up unto. For far be it from any, who have known
translation in Spirit, to see and hear what is in the Heavenly Sphere, to abide
and stay here, without waiting for such a Body as may be exercised in the Holy
Ghostly Might, or else will never turn to that advantageous Account, which is
to be greatly desired upon our mighty God and Savior's renown, that he alone
may be exalted and glorified in his Saints, filling up the full measure of it
in his elected Dove-Flock, who by me has sent, for to declare unto them, that
he stands all ready to receive, and in Glory to instal each one of our
ascending Angels, and to descend with us for the establishing an everlassing
Kingdom, where Joy, Triumph, and Glory shall be the new Song, which the
redeemed from among Men shall to their mighty God and Savior sing. Thus I am
now returned in Spirit as a Heavenly Spy, to make report of those substantial,
high, and worthy precious things, which I have seen and sound in the Love-deep,
and unmeasurable spaces of Eternity, which has all-fired my Soul to be
clothed with that Body which may effect all, which the Spirit has been made
to see and understand; for which good assurance is given to all that shall
unite, travel, and journey on together with me in the Love-harmony and Spirit
of Faith, shall and may see that Key suddenly to come down, that will open the
Ascension-Gate, where we may pass in one by one as meetly herefor prepared, Now
who, O God, to this Holy Resolve will come, that may gird up, and as mighty
strong Elijah's, outrun all the Ahab Chariots, that enters but into Jezrcel?
1 King. 18. 46. Even so let thy mighty Hand, O Lord God, be upon thy Ascending
Angels, which are thy Chariots, which all swift do move, as driven on by the
Whirlwind of thy Spirit; for which set our Eye be fixed steady evermore; so
Amen.

The Descension.
OYe Spirits of the Augelick Race,
That must descend, why stay you in that place?
Descend, and with your presence cheer the Earth,
It languishes, and waits for this new Birth,
That by your heavenly Powers its Sons may be
Released from Bondage, Thrall, and Misery.
O mighty Prince, and Savior! in the end
Thou will with flaming ministering Spirits descend,
Who in this World shall Kings, and Monarchs be,
And represent thy Power and Sovereignty?
Thy Kingdom then descended they will proclaim,
Whilst they as Kings, and Priests, rule in thy Name.
O bow, O bow ye Heavens, and come down!
O Prince of Peace descend in thy bright Throne!
Wonders and Signs shall through the Earth be burl'd,
From the four Quarters of this outward World.
All earthly Craft shall then be brought to naught;
And Wisdom's hidden Stone to light be brought.
Those Glorious Saints, whom Christ then represents,
Shall all be clad in Glorious Ornaments:
In brightness and in glory shall shine free,
Where nothing is of Earth's obscurity.
The Elected Seed shall all be then brought in,
Christ then shall reign, and put an end to Sin.
FINIS.

