OBSERVATIONS upon a Short Treatise, Written by Mr. Timothy Manlove: Entitled,
The Immortality of the Soul Asserted; and Printed in Octavo at London. 1697.
AS an Introduction to these Observations, and in nature of a Preface to them,
the Observer thinks fit to set down and deliver a true Narrative of his
Proceedings in the Enquiry after the Nature of the Humane Soul.

Diverse Years ago, the Observer fell into some doubt concerning the Nature of
this sort of Soul, and thereupon began to enquire after the true Constitution
of it: And finding himself strongly inclined to think it perishable, and
extinguishable at the Death of the Person; he had several Disputations with
himself, and others, concerning the truth of that Surmise, all which concluded
in the Opinion, or Judgment, That the extinguishment of it at Death, was more
probable, than the separate Subsistence of it after the Death of the Person.

After having stood sometime thus inclined, He enterpris'd to deliver his
Thoughts in Writing concerning the same, and in the space of Six Months had
Composed a Treatise concerning it, comprised in the space or compass of Fifteen
Sheets of ordinary Paper; which being finished, he did willingly offer to be
Perused by as many as usually frequented his Company, and whom he conceived
capable of giving him Advice thereupon: But he found very few that were willing
to take the trouble to examine his Disquisition; and but one, a
Neighbour-Minister, who did undertake to Dispute and Argue this Point against
him. The performance of which Argument passed in Writing betwixt them, and
continued for the space of about a Year.

That Minister offered to the Consideration of this Observer, all those Places
of Scripture mentioned in the Treatise of Mr. M. and all those Reasons which in
the said Treatise are comprised, with some accumulate Additions of each kind.
To all which, the Observer returned his distinct Answers, which did not satisfy
the Judgment of his Opponent; but seemed sufficient to the Judgment of this
Observer. Finally the Minister was rather tired than satisfied by this
Encounter, and gave notice to the Observer, That Mr. Bently had lately Printed
a Sermon concerning this Subject, which might tend to give him some
Satisfaction or Light concerning it.

Upon this Notice, the Observer, procured and Perused Mr. Bently's Sermon,
Entitled, Matter and Motion cannot Think. An Argument in the very Point, about
which they were then Disputing; and therefore the Observer forsook for a small
space, those Searches about which he was then employed, That he might Write
some Observations upon that Sermon, which he did, and Comprised them in a
Quarto-Pamphlet of Two Sheets and a half of Paper; and this Pamphlet is become
the Subject of Mr. M's present Treatise, now to be Examined: The intention of
those Observations, was to excite Mr. B. to the communicating his fuller
Thoughts to the World concerning this Subject. He promised in the beginning of
that Sermon, to prove what now Mr. M. has undertaken to perform, viz. That the
Humane Soul is in its Nature Immortal, and that it does so subsist by it self,
in a State of Separation from the Body.

This Assertion, the Observer believed was not well Proved by Mr. B. in that
Sermon. And therefore he designed by that Pamphlet, to Summon and Provoke the
said Mr. B. to a better and more full Performance of that Promise and
Undertaking; expecting from Mr. B's further progress, thereupon to gain some
further knowledge and insight into the Being and Nature of a Humane Soul.

But Mr. B. perhaps taken up with Occasions of more Concernment, or neglecting
the Summons of so short a Pamphlet, and so unknown an Author; it seems forbore
to prosecute any further the Performance of that Promise made in the beginning
of his Sermon; because we hear no further of any thing Published since by him
upon that Subject.

After the Printing of the aforesaid Observations upon Mr. B's Sermon, the
Observer returned to the pursuit of his former Inquiries concerning the Soul:
And set down in Writing the Heads of those Objections which the aforesaid
opposing Minister had made for the Refutation of his aforementioned
Conceptions, annexing unto them his own Answer in that largeness wherein before
they had been delivered.

After which Performance, another Neighbour-Minister in a Visit made to the
Observer; gave him Notice, That he had lately met with a Book which gave him
great satisfaction upon this Point; by making a strong Proof of the Soul's
Immortality: And he was so kind as to bring the Book it self with him, and
leave it with the Observer to be Perused at his greater leisure.

The Title of this Book was, The Soul of Man, and Written by Mr. Flavel late
Minister of Dartmouth, whom the Observer found by his Perusal, to be a Man of
very considerable Learning, and that he had diligently amassed together all
those Arguments for the Soul's Immortality which the Observer had before met
with in other Books, and Places; and had drawn Inferences from them as
Rationally as he conceived the Argument would bear.

The Observer, Therefore thought it not his part to let this Book pass under
his Perusal, without such Answers as he was able to make to every Argument and
proving Parcel of it; and this he pretends to have performed in his
beforementioned Treatise, of which he has made that Examination a Part.

After which Performance the Observer considered, That what he had hitherto
done upon this Subject amounted to no more than a Negative Proof, and that it
might reasonably be demanded of him to give some Positive Proof concerning the
Extinguishable Nature of his sort of Soul: For which purpose, he has in the
close of his forecited Treatise Quoted diverse Texts of Scripture, and some
Natural Reasons, tending to prove the Veracity, or at least the Probability of
his present Conceptions. Which Three Parcels of his before-quoted Treatise,
amounted in bulk to other Fifteen Sheets of Paper, in which he intended to
finish his said Treatise: But the same lying by him the space of many Months,
he light upon some Thoughts concerning the same Subject, which he thought fit
to set down in Writing, and to add them to the aforesaid Treatise; which
increased the bulk of it to the number of Twenty Sheets more, whence the
forecited Treatise amounts to the bulk of Fifty Sheets of Paper. This Treatise
lay by the Observer some Months after these Additions were finished, and then
he sent it to London for a Publication of it by the Press; surmising such a
Publication might be obtained from Men of that Profession, without the Author's
charging himself with any further Cost or Trouble about it. But therein he
found himself very much mistaken, for his Correspondent informed him, That no
Man would undertake the Charge and Hazard of such a Publication of the Work of
a Nameless Author, or that however, was like to pass under a Name unknown and
very obscure; but that such a Publication was like only to past at the sole
Expense and Charges of the Author, and could not be procured at less Charge
than that of Fifty Pounds.

This brought to the Observer's remembrance an old Athenian Story, viz. That a
Philosopher of that City much Enamoured upon a Courtisan there, made her a
Civil Visit, and after some Discourse, desired to know the Price of her last
Kindness? To which she replied, That no Man ever obtained that Favor under the
Price and Charges of One hundred Pounds. This Rate so surpised the
Philosopher, that after he had sat a while, musing upon it; he rose up, and
giving the Lady thanks for her Civil Reception of him; he told her, That her
Price was too high for him, and that he would not purchase Repentance at so
dear a Rate. This the Observer applied to his own present Condition, he looked
upon Fifty Pounds as a very considerable Sum of Money, and that might do many
better Services other ways. He pondered with himself concerning the Fruits
which might arise through the expense of that Money, and found them most likely
to be evil Surmises of Men possessed with the contrary Opinion, and their hard
Speeches, and Reproaches, likely to ensue upon such a Publication; and found
his Inclinations thereupon somewhat averse from purchasing those and the like
Persecutions at so dear a Rate. He therefore gave order to his Correspondent,
that he should procure a shallow Box suiting the Dimensions of that Treatise,
that he should put his Writings into that Box, and Write upon it, The Treatise
of such a Man concerning the Humane Soul. Which Directions he has since been
cerify'd, are carefully and duly performed. And in this Condition has his
forementioned Treatise continued for the space of diverse Months Elapsed since
that time, and might likely have continued for a much longer time, and even
during the short space of the Observer's Life, if no new or accidental
Occasion, had called for the Publication of it. It is a received Axiom, That he
who ordains the End, ordains the Means. As we Read, That God who by the Prophet
Jeremy, had foretold the return of his People from the Babylonish Captivity,
by the Direction and Power of Cyrus; did in his appointed time, stir up the
spirit of that Monarch to the fulfilling of that Prophecy: And did the like by
Josiah King of Judah, while he was yet Young, to the fulfilling of what was
foretold he should do to the Altar and High Places erected at Bethel by
Jeroboam: Also that upon the defection of Solomon from God's Service, he
stirred up the spirit of Hadad the Edomite to raise war against him, and that
God also then stirred up against him another Adversary, Rezon the son of
Eliadah to make war also against him, upon the same Account. And this also the
Observer applies to his present Condition, finding the Spirit of Mr. M. stirred
up against him upon his former Observations upon Mr. B's Sermon; which in the
sequel lays upon him a Provocation and a kind of necessity for the Publishing
of his forementioned Treatise; which very probably may prove such strong
Arguments, as may break the bond of his former Frugality and links of
Fearfulness, and bring to Public View, that Treatise which he has before so
often mentioned, and which it seems Mr. M. is so well prepared to Encounter, as
that if in the same there be found any thing that may appear any way
Infectious, or Poisonous; there will be always an Antidote ready at Hand, from
the Judicious Labors and Powers of Mr. M. who has promised to employ his
uttermost Industry, Labors, and Learning, to that purpose. And herewith shall
be concluded the Preface or Introduction, to those Observations which the
Writer intends to make on Mr. M*s present Treatise.

The Frontispiece of this Treatise speaks it Printed in Anno 1697, and yet a
printed Copy of it came to the Observer's Hand in the beginning of December. 1696.
The Observer will make no further Inquiry what the Reason of that mistake may
be; but go on to observe, That Mr. M's Treatise is ushered in, by a Preface to
which are subscribed the Names of Jo. How, and Matthew Sylvester: The reason
of which Proceeding is not certainly known to the Observer. But because he
hears that Mr. M. is Minister to a Congregation of Dissenters, he is apt to
imagine, that these two Persons may be his Elders, and Assistants in the
government of that Congregation, and that their assent to his Enterprise may be
alleged in justification of this Undertaking. But howsoever that may fall out
to be, the Observer at present Captus Oculis, having caused the Preface; and
Treatise to be distinctly Read before him, finds so much agreement between the
Matter and the Phrases of these Two Pieces, as persuades him confidently to
believe, That they are both Woven in the same Loom, and that the same Head,
Hand, and Spirit, runs through them both. The truth of which Conception he
willingly leaves to be determined by the Judgment of others, who shall happen
to Peruse the same.

The Observer does not find in this Preface a Design to Prove; but passes it
rather upon the account of a Declamation, or Harangue, proceeding principally
upon a grand Mistake, viz. That he who denies the Immortality of the Soul,
denies effectually the Being and Providence of God, and the full expectation of
Recompenses to be distributed after this Life, according to the Actions which
dying Persons have Practiced through the Race of their Mortality. The certainty
of a Resurrection and Last Judgment, is so fully, and clearly evidenced, by a
strong Current and agreement in the Gospel; that it seems as True, Evident, and
well Proved, as the Truth of that Text is, which tells us, That Christ Jesus
came to save sinners: Although Mr. M. his Elders and Churches, and many others,
take too little notice of them, and make mention of them accordingly.

Forasmuch, as concerns the hard Speeches, passing under the Name and color of
those Elders, the Observer is resolutely bent to take no notice at all of them:
For that when he began to Treat upon this Subject, he intended to follow our
Lord's Direction; He sat down and counted the cost of such an Undertaking; and
found the least sort of its Effects to be evil Surmises, hard Speeches, and
Reproaches of Men pre-possessed (who are likely to be in a manner, all those
who should come first to the Perusal of his Writings) against all whose Verbal
Violence, he hoped a resolute Patience would be a very good Defense, and such a
Buckler as would shield him from all the fiery Darts of that kind; which he
could reasonably expect would be shot against him. And he farther considered,
That his Opinion upon this Point, was either an Error, or a Truth; and if it
prove to be an Error: Admonitions, Reproofs and hard Speeches, were but due
Recompentes, and proportionable to his Deservings, 1 Pet. 2.20. For what glory
is it, if when ye are buffetted for your faults ye take it patiently. Duty
binds Men to suffer patiently what they know they have deserved, and there is
no thanks, or commendations to be expected for their so doing: But if there
happen to be much Truth in this Opinion, he may add to his Patience Hope, and
some measure of Joyfulness: For the Apostle there adds, If ye do well and
suffer for it patiently, this is acceptable with God, and Chap. 3.14. If ye
suffer for the truth's sake, happy are ye. James 1.2. My brethren, count it all
joy when ye fall into diverse temptations, viz. of this kind: And so the Hebrews
took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, which was perhaps a greater degree
of Persecution, Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are ye when Men shall revile you, and
persecute you for the truth's sake. But this measure of Joyfulness which
belongs to a Reviling for Truth's sake, shall by the Observer be put off and
deferred till the Point here in Question shall be more fully Examined, and
Discussed.

And therefore his Intention is to sit down with the Practice of our Lord's
Rule, In your patience possess ye your Souls; without making any other return
to these Elders, or Ministers, than by repeating to them the Motto of the
Garter, viz. HONI SO IT QVI MAL Y PENSE, with Advice to remember our Lord's own
Prediction, viz. With what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again.
Although the Observer never intends to make them any Return of that nature.

Hence we proceed to the Treatise it self, which Mr. M. has divided into Ten
Chapters: Upon each of which the Observer intends to make some short
Observations, That it may appear he has Perused and gone through them all.

Upon Chap. 1. p. 2. He observes, That Mr. M. well understands the Powers Men
may obtain, by getting such an Ascendant over their Proselytes, and attaining
such an Esteem amongst them, as that he may be able to Command their
Understandings; because, perhaps he may say true, That they themselves never
knew how to use them.

Secondly, p. 8. Mr. M. says many things concerning the Soul, which the
Observer agrees with him in, Mutatis mutandis, viz. by changing his Name of
Soul into the Terms of the Rational Faculty, or Mind of Man, which has given
vim Intelligendi and Volendi cum Angelis, and yet be Acted by such Materials as
God has Appointed and Formed in Man for those Purposes.

M. says, The Soul of Man was Redeemed by the Sufferings of Christ. By which he
seems plainly to intend, Such a Soul as is Intelligent in it self, had once a
Being separate from the Body, is during Life conjoined to the Body, and after
Death shall Live, Act, and Suffer in a State of Separation from the Body: And
then the Observer utterly denies the truth of his Proposition; and says, The
true End of Christ's Coming into the World, was to Save Sinners, the Persons of
them, both Souls and Bodies.

It is an usual Practice of the Scripture, both in the Old and New Testament,
to intend and design the Humane Person, by the Term and Name of Soul; and the
same is also sometimes done by the Name of Body, though nothing so often: And
this is done by the common Synecdoche of Pars pro toto. For the Proof of which,
two Instances of each kind are here intended to be produced,

First, Genesis 3.7. God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living Soul. The Observer,
Asserts, That Soul in this Place, must intend the Person of Adam, and be so
understood, as if it had been said, Man became a Living Person. It has been
commonly supposed to intend, That the Breath which God breathed into Adam's
Nostrils became a Living Soul: But this surmise is plainly Confuted by the
Grammatical Construction of it: For the Words which would have suited to that
intent, should have run thus: God breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of
Life, and that, or it, viz, That Breath became a Living Soul. But Moses was so
cautious in this Point, that he chose to use something of a Tautology in this
Place, rather than that his Readers should be so mistaken in his meaning: He
says, God made man, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of Life, and man
became a living soul, or Person. He would not suffer them to think, That Breath
became a Living Soul; but prevents that Conceit, by saying, That it was the Man
that became the Living Soul, or Person. Whence this Observer, concludes, That
by the Soul in this Place, the Person of Adam was somewhat clearly intended by
this Great Prophet and Lawgiver of the Jews. His next Quotation for this use,
shall be Isaiah 53.10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him
to grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin. He shall see his
seed, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. The Observer
says, That by Soul in this Place must needs be intended, the Person of Christ,
whose Body as well as Soul was made an Offering for Sin, that was Bound, Whipped,
Buffetted, Spit upon, Crowned with Thorns, Loaded with his Cross, Nailed to it,
and Expired upon it, to obtain Redemption for Sinners, and the whole Race of
Mankind. Whence he concludes, That by Soul in this Place, Is intended the whole
Person of Christ, as well Body as Soul.

He proceeds in two like Instances, for the Body. The 1st. He takes from Heb.
10.5. Sacrifice and offerings thou would not; but a Body have thou prepared
me, ver. 7. Lo, I come to do thy will O God, ver. 10. By the which Will, we are
Sanctified, through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ, once for all. The
Observer says, By the Word and Term of Body in this Place, is intended the
whole Person of Christ; whose Soul was sorrowful even unto Death, and his Mind
and Intellects so afflicted, as to wring Drops of Blond out of his Body, and
reduce him to that bitter Exclamation upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? All which do sufficiently Prove, That by the Word Body in
this Text, the whole Person of Christ is comprehended and intended.

His next Text is, Luke 12.4. where the Words are, Be not afraid of them that
kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. He says, That the
Word Body in this Text, must needs intend the Person, or whole Compositum of
Body and Soul; for that a Body without a Soul is Dead, and therefore cannot be
Killed. By which Instances and Arguments, he thinks it well Proved: That though
the Redemption be called of the Soul in diverse Texts of the Scripture; yet all
those Places do intend, the Redemption of the Person, and that there never was
any such Redemption intended, or performed as Mr. M. has in this Page Asserted,
viz. Of the bare naked Soul separated from the Body, asbefore has been
Collected and Specified. Hence we proceed to his Second Chapter.

M. says, That a Soul made of corruptible perishing Matter, is not fit to be
called an Image of the Immortal God. But the Observer, says, That Man made as
he is, of corruptible perishing Matter, was yet made after the Image of God,
and is so accounted to continue at this Day; and for that Purpose He has joined
the Soul and Body together in a strict Union, which cannot be Dissolved. but by
Death.

M. says, That the Reasonable Soul, was Created after the Image of God. Which
the Observer denies, and says, That the Reasonable Soul is but one Constituent
Part of the Man, and his Body is the other; that the Soul therefore is not the
Man, any more than a Part can be equal to the Whole; and that it was the Man,
that was made after the Image of God, and not any other Part or Parcel of that
Compositum. And Mr. M. goes on here, and calls that which Moses calls the
Breath of Life, the Spirit of Life. Which difference perhaps the Hebrew may
bear, as the Greek Word (...) does in that Language. He says of this Spirit,
or Breath, That it was Created by God at Adam 's Creation. Which is more than
Moses's Text does Warrant him to say: For the Text of Genesis speaks of no other
Creation there, than that of the Man; without saying, that God then Created
either the Spirit, or the Breath; nor is there any other Creation there spoken
of, save that of the Man. The rest he passes as the Invention of Mr. M. who
like some other Scholars, may desire an Enterprise to be better than his Book.

In this Chap. he has Collected many Texts of Scripture, which seem to maintain
his Assertion, amongst which there is nothing new to this Observer; save the
great use he pretends to make of St. Paul's Rapture, which he sets down p. 17.
from whence he pretends to Prove, That St. Paul conceived, his Soul was really
divisible from his Body; and capable of a Subsistence without it. As if he
agreed with Dr. Moor's Opinion, who Teaches, That the Humane Soul may, and
sometime does forsake its Body, and wander about in the Airy Region, and other
Parts of the World, and make its return to the Body again at convenient times,
or upon some sudden Occasions. But the Observer denies, That St. Paul was of
any such Opinion, and takes the sense of St Paul's Words, in the body, or out
of the body, to be no other; but that he was wrapped up into the third Heaven,
and there saw, and heard, as perfectly and distinctly as if he had done it with
his Bodily Organs, and remembered it as well: So that he could not certainly
know, whether these Bodily Organs were employed in that Rapture, or not; or
whether that Vision was only a Rapture or Ecstasy of his Mind. We find a
parallel Place to this in the History of the Kings, where Micaiah the Prophet,
says to Ahab, I saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and all the host of
Heaven standing by him, on his right hand, and on his left. And there further
relates, what he heard and saw in that Vision. And it is thereupon probable,
That he was not certainly knowing, whether it was made in his whole Person of
Soul and Body, or whether it was only a Rapture and Ecstasy of his Mind and
Intellect. He thinks this Case very like that of St. Paul's, and that the Words
of his Rapture must prove exceeding weakly the separate Subsistence of Souls
after Death.

Amongst all the Texts of Scripture he has Quoted, there is no more than one,
which clearly maintains his Assertion, viz. that of St. Matthew. 10.28. Cited by
him p. 17. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul. These Words the Observer grants, do with clearness Prove, That Souls may
have a separate Subsistence after the Death of the Person. And therefore he
will take upon him here, memoriter Collecting the Sum and Substance of that
which he has said more at large in his forementioned Treatise upon this
Subject. Where in opposition to the force of this Text, he Quotes Luke 12.4.
where the Words of our Lord are, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and
after that have no more that they can do; but fear him, who after he has
killed has power to cast into hell. The Observer believes, That these two
Texts of Matthew. and Luke do intend to relate one same Fact and Doctrine of our
Savior. And this Text of St. Luke does not prove, That Souls have a separate
Subsistence after the Death of the Body, nor make any mention of the Soul at
all. And that upon these two Texts, the Question must needs arise, Which of
them have truly related the Expressions which our Lord used at the delivering
of this Doctrine? Upon which Question, may be considered the Persons and
Qualities of these two Writers. St. Matthew was indeed, an Apostle; but his
former Profession and Practice was that of a Publican; an Office very hateful
to those of the Jewish Nation; and so much, that no Person of Quality would
undertake it, nor willingly Converse with those that Practiced it. And hence
the Observer Collects, He was not likely to be furnished with any great stock
of Humane Learning; but might easily be carried away by the common Opinion of
that Time, believing the Humane Soul was Immortal and capable of Subsistence in
a State of Separation from the Body; and that therefore he might, and probably
did, deliver this Part of our Savior's Doctrine, in Words and Terms suiting
his Conceptions of the Things. And that, on the contrary, St. Luke was a
Knowing and Learned Physician, and wrote from the Mouth of St. Paul, who was
the most Knowing and Learned amongst all the Apostles, and who it seems was not
possessed with the Opinion of the Soul's Immortality, or the separate
Subsistence of it after the Death of the Person; and therefore has delivered
this Doctrine in Terms very different from those of St. Matthew, and for the
further strengthening of this Apprehension, the Observer Quotes, Matthew. 21.1.
where the Words are, Jesus sent two Disciples, saying, go into the next
village: and there ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with her: loose them,
and bring them unto me: And they went accordingly, and found the ass and the
colt, and brought them to Jesus, and put on them their cloths, and sat him
thereon. This Relation plainly Intends, That they brought two Beasts to Jesus,
and set him upon them both at one time; which is an unusual, and very unlikely
sort of Riding, incongruously, and somewhat untruly related: For that the other
three Evangelists are clearly against him in it; for each of them relate this
Fact of our Lord, and mention but one Ass in the Case, which truly was a Colt
the Foal of an Ass. And this Error of our Evangelist, seems not a bare, but a
willing mistake, for the obtaining of an End which he designed in it. He Quotes
in this Chapter, the Words of the Prophet Zechariah, saying, Tell ye the
daughter of Sion, behold, thy King comes unto thee, meek and sitting upon an
ass, and a colt the foal of an ass. His Quotation shows, that this Place of
Zechary was known to him; and his own Relation of the Story, seems to Prove,
That he intended to make our Savior's Fact in this Place, agree punctually and
in terminis, with those Words of Zechary, which he had before Quoted. And the
Observer, conceives it somewhat likely, that he has erred in like manner, in
delivering the Words our Savior used in the Doctrine beforementioned, where
our Lord Teaches his Disciples, to Fear God, rather than Men: And to give a
further strength to this Conception, he Quotes Matthew, 28. which delivers many
Circumstances concerning our Lord's Resurrection, viz. In the end of the
sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week; came Mary
Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the sepulcher. And behold, there was a
great earthquake; for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came
and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. His countenance was
like lightning, and his raiment white as snow. And for fear of him the keepers
did shake, and became as dead men. And the angel answered and said unto the
women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is
not here: for he is risen, as he said, come see the place where the Lord lay.
And go quickly and tell his disciples, that he is risen from the dead; and
behold, he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him, lo, I have
told you. And they departed quickly from the sepulcher, with fear and great
joy, and did run to bring his disciples word. And as they went to tell his
disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came, and held
him by the feet, and worshipped him. Comparando with this Relation, he Quotes,
John 20. where the Words are: The first day of the week comes Mary Magdalene
early when it was yet dark, unto the sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away
from the sepulcher. Then she ran to Peter, and John, and says unto them, They
have taken away the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we know not where they have
laid him. And the two Apostles were so affected with this Relation, that they
arose and ran to the Sepulcher to make themselves Eyewitnesses of the Truth of
this Fact: And coming to the sepulcher, they went into it, and saw the linen
cloths, [used at his Burial; but the Body was clean gone.] Then the disciples
went away again unto their own home. But Mary stood without at the sepulcher,
weeping: and as she wept, she stooped down, and looked into the sepulcher, and
sees two angels. who asked the cause of her Weeping? She answered, Because
they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. Then
turning her self back, she saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was he.
Jesus says unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seek thou? she supposing
him to be the gardener, says unto him, Sir, if thou have born him hence, tell
me where thou have laid him, and I will take him away.

Men that well examine these two Relations, will find a great difference, and
even an incompatibility between them: For that if Mary Magdelene had seen the
Angel Discoursed of in the Text of St. Matthew, and heard such Tidings from
him, and soon after had seen and spoken with our Lord himself; it opposes the
common Reason of Mankind, to conceive, she should so behave her self upon this
Occasion, as the Relation of St. John has described to us. It seems somewhat
clear to this Observer, That there is error in one of these two Relations; and
he thinks, That the Relation made by S. John is more credible, and that the
error lies on the side of St. Matthew; because St. John was Pars magni facti.
He tells us what himself saw and knew; whereas it is probable, That St.
Matthew's Discourse was rather grounded upon Relations of some of the frighted
Women, than proceeding from any thing of his own certain knowledge. These two
Instances Prove, That all the Relations we find in St. Matthew, are not
Infallible Truths; but some of them have need to be searched by Humane
Sagacity, and the comparing of them with other Scriptures. The Observer
inclines to take his Wording our Savior's Doctrine against the over great fear
of Men, to be like one of the two former Instances; and that it may stand in
need to be compared with its parallel Text in the Gospel of St. Luke, and to be
Examined by it. But he is resolved to leave this Point to the further
Consideration of Mr. M.

In this Chapter also, he Quotes many other particular Texts of Scripture,
which he thinks may Prove or Strengthen his Assertion: But the Observer finds
not one among them, whose Proof is so full, or so clear, as that before Quoted
out of St. Matthew: All his other Texts, [except the Parable of Dives, and that
of the Thief upon the Cross] seem to arise from Collections upon Inferences,
and some accidental Expressions or Forms of Words in Places of Scripture, which
do not Teach any thing concerning the future State of Mankind; nor are spoken
in those Places, with intent to Teach concerning it. In which rank he places
Solomon's short Saying, The spirit returns to God who gave it. He does not
wonder that Mr. M's Quotations seem to him, such clear and evident Proofs as he
pretends they do: For the reason thereof may be, and very likely is; because he
Reads and Considers them with the Mind already satisfied and assured, That the
Soul is Immortal, and capable of Subsisting in a State of Separation from the
Body. But to a Man that is otherwise persuaded; the much greater Part of his
Quotations, will seem to be of very little force for the Proof of that Opinion,
which he produces them for. The Observer can, and does inform him, That there
is not one of them, which is not mentioned and discussed in that larger
Treatise of the Observer's, which is beforementioned. He has no mind in this
Place Acta agere; but rather chooses to refer Mr. M. in this Point, to that
Treatise, which he has a strong Inclination and Intent to Publish if God please
to lengthen the feeble Thread of his Life, and give him Opportunity so to do.

Observations upon Mr. B's Sermon; but does not think fit to take Notice, what
is there demanded by a great Naturalist, viz. What kind of Matter, or Thing, is
the Soul apart from the Body? Where lies the Cogitation which she has? What
does she apart by her self, without the assistance of Bodily Organs.

Mr. M. in this Chapter ascribes to his sort of Soul, a great number and
variety of Actions and Powers; but he does not so much as affirm, that any of
them are Used or Acted without the assistance of the Bodily Organs. P. 25. he
ascribes Noble Faculties and Capacities to the Humane Soul, which he does not
say ever appeared to the World; saving in, and by its Conjunction with the
Body. He says, The excellency of a Substance, must be known by the Powers
Radicated in it. It seems he should first have proved, or said something
concerning the Substance of his Soul separated from the Body, or that really
there is such a Substance; before he had ascribed such Excellencies to it. The
Observer ascribes all those Excellencies to the Person; agreeing, that they do
belong especially to the Rational Faculty, or Mind of Man; which Mr. M. neither
does, nor can maintain to have a separate Subsistence after the Death of the
Body. P. 26. Mr. M. says, It is manifest that the Nature of the Soul is very
vigorous and sprightly. He should first have Proved, That a Soul considered
separate from the Body has a Nature, and discovered something to us concerning
it. But he did well to forbear the pretending to that Performance, which the
Observer believes is far beyond his Ability; but seeing he has not done it, the
Observer conceives, That all his following Structure and Arguments proceed ex
non concessis, and therefore make no good Proof of those things which they have
been alleged for: But that all those things which he has ascribed to the Soul,
are really belonging to the Person; but are principally Performed by the
Rational Faculty, or Mind of Man. P. 27. Mr. M. says, When we are asleep the
Soul is often at work, in causing diverse Dreams and Apprehensions in the Night.
And thus he ascribes to the Soul, those Operations which properly belong to the
Imaginations of Men; and which never was known to proceed from a Soul
separately considered. Mr. M. says further, That a Philosopher thought, That
Men's Dreaming when asleep, was an intimation, that they should Live when Dead.
Which Thought is here past by the Observer, for a Philosopher's Dream. P. 28.
Mr. M. says, It is evident from his Collections here, That the nature of the
Soul is very active. Whereas it does not yet appear, That the Soul has any
Nature at all, if it shall be separately considered from the Body. He says
further, That the vigor of the Mind in dying Persons, appears sometimes as
strong, or rather stronger, than it did in their better health. This Case the
Observer thinks to be very rare, and that when it happens; it may reasonably be
ascribed to such Obstructions as hinder the passage of those Spirits, to and
through the other Parts of the Body; which forces them to a close and more full
residence in, and about the Brain, than in their former State they used to have.

M. says, That when the E. of Rochester was very near his End, his Body very
weak in all the other Parts of it; his Reason and Judgment was still so strong
and clear, as that be became thereby more strongly persuaded of the Soul's
Immortality. To which the Observer Replies, That the Earl might possibly be
mistaken, as well in the strength of his Reason and Judgment; as in that of his
Soul's Immortality: He might have a better Opinion of his Reason and Judgment
at that time than perhaps there was cause for; but if that Opinion of his was
true: The Observer says, That the Spirits might then be more plentiful in his
Brain, because they had little Employment in the other Parts of his Body; and
because they are better preserved in the Head from all assaults of Nature, by
the strength and fortification of the Dura matter, and the Pia matter, and the
strong Efforts of Nature to preserve the Head; for whose Defense the other
Members of Man's Body, are apt and ready to expose themselves. P. 30. Mr. M.
says, That the Understanding is a very Noble Faculty, eager in its pursuits
after Knowledge. And then goes on to Prove this by diverse Instances, but
without any need for his so doing; because all that he has said here agrees
well with the Observer's Opinion, and is not opposed by him.

M. asks, What it is that compounds and divides things at pleasure, and raises
invented Beings of them? The Observer Answers, It is the Imagination of Man. He
makes several Demands, What it is produces several like Effects. Answered, It
is the Mind of Man, or his Rational Faculty, which dies and perishes with the
Person.

M. says here, That there is a difference betwixt Man's Imagination, and his
Understanding: Which the Observer thinks consists more in Terms and Notions,
suited to Men's Conceptions and Discourses; than in the essential or real
Differences amongst the Things, or Powers. He says further, That the
Imagination is jaded and tired: Which the Observer takes liberty to deny: For
that if the Eye can be satisfied with Seeing, or the Ear with Hearing; yet the
Imagination is never tired with Conceiving, or Thinking in general; although it
may be glutted with Thinking very long of one Subject. P. 33. Mr. M. goes on
here to magnify the Power of Humane Understanding from many Topics, all which
it seems conduce little to the Proof of this Point; for that in all this he
never observes, or affirms, That it Acts in any thing separated from the Body,
nor without the assistance of Bodily Organs; nor has any Man ever affirmed, nor
does himself say, That the Humane Understanding survives after the Death of the
Person. Mr. M. says further, That Men cannot imagine, that a little Wheat-meal
in two or three Days should become capable of Mathematical Speculations. By
which Words it appears clearly to the Understanding of the Observer, That Mr.
M. is very much mistaken in the State and Case of this Argument: For the
Observer has never said, intended, or maintained, That Wheat-meal in Two or
Three Days time, or at any time, is, or can be capable of understanding any
thing at all, and it shows want of ordinary Apprehension in Mr. M. if he ever
has, or does now conceive there was such an Error in that Pamphlet which he
undertakes to Answer. And therefore to clear up the Clouds of his Understanding
in this Point: The Observer will take pains to inform him, That the State of
the Case in this Question, stands thus: He conceives and affirms, That God
Created the Body of Man, and put it into such a State of Perfection, so filled
with Blond and Humor, and set them into such a State of Pullulation and
Fermentation; that the Steems thence arising became fit and capable of being
tinded and kindled by the fanning of a competent Breath, or Wind, which God
caused to be Breathed into him, or according to the usual Expression, God
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. This Breath tinded the fresh
Steems of the Blood and Humor, and kindled in Adam the Flame of Life: And that
was continued and maintained in his Body, by the continual fanning of that
Breath of Life: And whenever that Breath is stopped, such Flame must needs be
extinguished, and that Extinguishment is the very Death of the Person. Now though
this gentle Flame (when the Body is well conditioned) is not uritory, but
lambent; yet thereby, and by continual Motion of the pure Blood [which Daily
supplies inflamed Spirits for Actuating and Enlivening the several Parts of the
Humane Body] upon that account, it suffers a considerable and Daily waste and
consumption; for supply of which, a little Wheat-meal, or something of that
Nature, is often required, and Daily necessary. Our Daily Experience teaches
us, that an active and lively Spirit may be Extracted from a Decoction of the
Grains of Wheat, or Malt, or Flesh, or any like sorts of Nourishment, which by
Comminution, is fitted for a more easy Concoction; after which, the fitting
result, is converted into Chyle; and that after is changed into Blood, and is
then sent up to the Heart for a Purification; and thence departing, is fanned
and made glowing by the Breath, and those inflamed Particles pass up through
the Arteries into the Head and Brain; where meeting with Organs, prepared by
God for that purpose; they cause and maintain such Life, Power, and Activity as
are suitable to those Purposes for which God at the first Created and Intended
them. And by such their Motion Activity and Energy, amongst those Capital
Organs, are produced the Affectionate Sensitive, Perceptive, Imaginative,
Estemative, Memorative, and Voluntary, Powers and Faculties of the Humane Head
or Brain: And such Stock of Spirits, as are found redundant in that Receptacle;
descend from thence by the Nerves, and are by them Communicated to every Part
and Member of the Body; to which they Communicate Life, Sense and Motion, but
no understanding; because there are no other Organs in the Body capacitated for
that Performance, but only in the Head: These Spirits and the Blood of which
they are formed, give Life, Strength and Motion, to every Part and Member of
the Body, and therefore are called Vital Spirits; and yet these Spirits and the
Blood, out of which they are formed, have neither Sense nor Life: For if a Vein
be opened, and the fresh Blood be suffered to spurt into the Fire; neither the
Blood nor the Party will be sensible of Pain by the so doing. Whence it
appears, That these Blood and Spirits cause that Sense and Life in the Body,
which they themselves have not, when separated from it: And the like we say for
the Inflamed Spirits, which ascend up to the Head, and actuate the Organs there
found: We say, that the Kephaline Organs deprived of such Spirits are not
intelligent, but a dead and stupid Matter. And that the Inflamed Spirits
[though of great Metle and Activity] are neither Intellective, nor Sensitive;
but that by acting the Kephaline Organs, they cause and produce Life, Sense,
Reason, and Activity in the Person, and thereby are performed such Actions, and
they produce such effects as God intended, should commonly be produced in the
Persons of Men. And this may be much illustrated and proved by an Argument; a
Simily taken from the Structure of a Musical Organ, the Fabric of which
consists of a great number of Pipes well ordered and put together; every of
which Pipes is made to render a Singular and Particular Sound of Treble, Mean,
Tenor or Bass: All which together well Constituted, and rightly Ordered by the
Skill of the Artificer, employed by an Active Hand; send forth such Pleasing
and Harmonious Sounds as are both delightful and admirable to the Considerate
Hearers; and yet all this Fabric is but a dead and stupid Matter, and can do
nothing of it self without being supplied with a suitable Spirit from another
Agent, the Bellows: But upon receiving from thence a suitable Breath or Spirit,
for putting all its Powers and Capacities into Action; it makes the most
excellent Harmony of any Instrument in the World; which is a Proceeding well
known unto Men by daily Experience, and whereby it clearly appears, That the
Fabric of the Organ by it self, or the Inspiring Breath or Wind of the Bellows
can make no Musical Sound at all, but are each of them singly utterly
incompetent for that purpose: The Wind proceeding from the Bellows, has no such
Sound in it self; but by entering into the Pipes and acting them, receives such
a Modulation and Conformation of Sounds, as the Artificer who made the Organ
intended should be produced. And by this Simily it plainly appears, That
neither the Wind by it self, nor the Fabric of the Organ by it self, can
perform any part of that Harmony, which by the Design of the Artificer was
intended to be effected: So as the Wind coming from the Bellows which has no
Sound at all, does by its Passage into the Fabric and Pipes thereof, and the
acting of them; produce Sounds so melodious, as affect the considerate Hearers
with Delight and Wonder. And now the Observer does apply this Simile to Teach
and Demonstrate the great Art and Skill shown by the great Artificer of the
World in contriving the Body, and especially the Head of Man, in such wonderful
manner, as it might be continually Enlivened and Acted by such a Material
Spirit as he intended for it, to be continually supplied from the Blood, which
was also to be supplied by Daily Nourishment provided by God, and given to Man
for that purpose, and was always to be fanned and thereby continued in a
lasting Flame, so long as the Life of the Person should endure. This Similitude
Proves, That a Material Spirit Acting in fit Organs, may produce such
Operations as the Spirit alone, or the Organs alone, have not the like Capacity
to Perform, and quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant. The inflamed Spirits
of Blood have neither Affections, Senses, nor Intellect, nor have the Kephaline
Organs these Powers, of, or by themselves; but the Spirit Acting those Organs,
as the Wind does in the Organ-Pipes; there is produced in both the Fabrics in
Statu Composito; by those Powers and Faculties so Acted, that which is in no
measure is found in the Constituent Parts of such a Compositum, considered in a
State of Separation from one another. And upon this whole Discourse, the
Observer thinks it very clear, That Mr. M. either did not understand the Intent
of that Pamphlet he pretends to Answer, and the Forms of Expressions there
used; or else he intended to Impose upon his unwary Readers, and Ridicule them
by his witty Expression here used: If the former, he seems thereby Convicted of
great Ignorance and Mis-apprehension; if the latter, it seems he Disingenuously
intended to Amuse his Readers and lead them into a false Apprehension
concerning the Meaning and Expressions of that Pamphlet: But whether of these
two Imputations he best deserves, shall here be left to the Sense and Judgment
of his Readers.

Mr. M. P. 36. Demands an Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Arguments; which the
Observer having presently Perused, finds Mr. M's Arguments much Transcribed out
of that Book and Place; and conceives, That his present Discourse is a good
Answer to them both: For that neither that Dr. nor Mr. M. in this Chapter does
really touch, or come very near the true State of this Question; which is not,
What the Soul, or Mind of Man can do in a State of Composition with the Body:
The Observer does easily agree, That those things which here the Doctor and Mr.
M. mentions, in this Chapter may be done, and are done by the the Soul, or Mind
of Man, in a State of Conjunction with the Bodily Organs: But he says, That
their manner of Proving the Point which they Maintain; ought to have been
founded upon Arguments asserting and declaring, What the Soulever has done, or
can do in a State of Separation from the Body; or as it may be considered in
such a Separate State abstracted from the Body. The Observer has granted, That
is Statu concreto, the Person can Act and Perform all those Things, which they
have ascribed to the Soul of Man. Aristotle is Quoted in the former Pamphlet,
where he concludes it improper to say, That the Soul is Wise, Learned,
Sorrowful, or the like; because properly speaking, it is the Man, and not the
single Soul that is so. And Mr. M. in his Treatise, repeats that observation
without offering to Answer, or Confute it. The Observer takes it for a very
true Rule, very agreeable to the State and Nature of Mankind; and conceives,
That the Question now in Dispute, is not, What Man's Understanding can do, or
what his Soul can do in Statu concreto with the Body? But whether, There be a
Soul in Man which has a Capacity of Living and Acting in a State of Separation
from the Body; and that those who would Prove such a Subsistence of the Soul,
by Instances of what it can do; ought to produce Instances, which Prove the
Power of its Living and Doing, in such a State of Separation; or if they think
themselves able, to make a clear Notional Abstraction of the Soul from the
Body, which they can render Intelligible to other Men: Their proving Instances
ought to be derived from such a State of Separation, or such an abstracted
Consideration, as they can Reasonably offer to the Minds of others; and not
from Instances of what Man's Understanding can do, or his Soul can do in Statu
concreto with the Body; for that these will be utterly unconcluding in the
State and Management of this Question. This Chapter of Mr. M's abounds with
Instances of the latter sort, and has not one amongst them, that reaches to the
Nature of the former; and therefore he thinks, There is no need of Disputing
any of them; but is ready to agree them and accept them all for true: But then
he conceives them all to be parum ad rem, and not at all Proving that Part of
the Question which he pretends to maintain; and therefore howsoever true they
may be, they are utterly unconcluding in this Argument: For which Reason, the
Observer, who denies not the Truth of them, does yet pass them for Tasteless
and Insipid, and thinks, they may very well be compared to the Herb John in the
Pottage, which does neither good nor harm.

M. says, Nil dat quod non habet. And to this, the Observer opposes his clear
Instance given in the Musical Organ, and which is equally true in all
Wind-Instruments, from the Bag-Pipe, to the Cornet and the Trumpet. Mr. M,
says further, That the self-determining Power of the Will, its Acts and
Objects, do argue, that the Soul is Immortal. The Observer Replies, That the
Will has not such a self-determining Power: But says, That in all its
Inclinations and Operations deliberately Performed; it depends upon, and
follows the Directions and Conclusions of the Judgment, which it Obeys,
Executes and follows with as great Promptitude and Natural Inclination, as
Water runs from higher Places, to lower Grounds: Not overruled by Power of the
Judgment; but by a Free and Natural Propensity inclining in to Execute those
Directions. And if the Judgment do never so suddenly, or unexpectedly change
its Resolutions, the Will Tacks about as suddenly, and follows with Execution
the late st^or last Resolution of the Judgment; and is comparable to the Sails
of a floating Vessel, which may be subject to some constant Winds of
Inclinations, and sometimes to the stormy Winds of Passion, the fresh Breezes
of Reason, and other Circular or Accidental Motions of the Watery Element: And
in all such Cases, the Sails are ordered by the subservient Mariners, who stand
and Work according to the Pilot's Directions; and have no Power at all to
dispose of themselves, but as they shall be Appointed by the Power of such a
Directer; expect in such Storms of Sea and Winds as take away all Government
and Order in the Vessel. The Will is by diverse called, caeca potentia, and
follows Naturally the Direction of the Judgment, as before has been said; and
therefore has no Determinate Power, over, or of it self. And this may serve for
an Answer to Mr. M's Assertion concerning such Proof as may be made from the
Determinate Power of the Will over it self. Mr. M. says further, That if at
any time the Will chooses a thing, it is, Sub Ratione boni. Whereupon the
Observer demands, What Faculty of the Mind it is that can truly discern what is
the Good and Evil of an Action, Choice, or Resolution; or by what means, or
after what manner the Will can discover such Qualifications of Things, or
Actions? Seeing there are no Natural Appearances, that any other Faculty in
Man's Mind can make a clear and true Distinction, or Difference in such Actions
or Cases; but the Man's Estimative Power, or Judgment. P. 38. Mr. M. Quotes St.
Augustine, in whose Text the Observer conceives, That the Word Anima, is put
pro Homine; and must intend which way soever Man turns himself, he can meet
with nothing but Grief till he rests in God. Qui haeret in Littora, haeret in
Cortice. Mr. M. further demands, Why the Soul cannot be satisfied till it rests
in God? To which the Observer Replies, by demanding, Why the Mind and
Understanding of Man, which cannot Act without the Bodily Organs, cannot choose
but Act and Desire accordingly? He thinks the Reason to be; because Man's
Reason and Judgment do conceive and believe, That God is the most Excellent
Object of Man's Knowledge and Love; and that to Adore and Obey him, is likely
to be the most beneficial to their Nature, by obtaining such future Rewards, as
Men believe, are promised and expected in a future State: All what he says
more of the Soul in this Place, the Observer applies to the Mind and
Understanding of Man in Statu concreto.

M. offers an Argument of the Soul's Immortality, from the Reflection in can
make upon its own Conceptions and Opinions. The Observer Replies, That it is a
Rational Power of the Mind or Understanding of Man, to make such Reflections
upon it self, and its own Conceptions and Conclusions; whereby it is enabled to
change and alter them as often as it sees cause, and the Change of Occasions
may require. Further, Mr. M. says, That indeed, we cannot know what the Soul
is; but by these Circular and Reflex Motions. To which, the Observer Replies,
That then indeed we can have no certain Knowledge of it at all: We do not doubt
concerning a Reflecting Power in the Mind of Man; but cannot perceive, That it
gives Men any more true Knowledge of the State of their Souls, than they had
before they considered this Reflecting Power. And if Mr. M. knew how this
Consideration might make them know more of their Souls than they did before; he
should have assisted them with Directions, to attain such Knowledge of it as
they are very desirous to obtain. P. 35. Mr. M. says, Let the Heard of
Materialists muster up their Forces, and give us a Rational Intelligible
Account of those Operations of the Intellect, and how they can arise from the
Effects of the Power of Matter and Motion? As if in other Words, he should ask,
After what manner the Animal Spirits do, or can produce Reason and Intellect in
the Heads of Men. Also P. 36. he demands, How Matter and Motion can produce
even Sense it self? To this Demand, the Observer Answers, That he acknowledges
his Ignorance how such things are Acted in the Persons or Heads of Men: But he
conceives this Demand ought not to have been made by Mr. M. until he had
Answered those other Demands which the Observer had before made to Mr. B.
concerning his sort of Soul, viz. That he should Prove quod sit, quid sit, unde
oritur quando ingreditur, ubi residot; quomodo operatur, quo avolat: To any of
which Propositions Mr. M. has made no Answer, although without so doing; he can
with no good Face Demand of the Observer to solve his quomodo operatur.
Concerning the Material Soul, the Observer says, He has given, and can give a
Rational Account of his sort of Soul in the Things before-named, viz. of the
quod, quid, unde quando, ubi, quo; but confesses his Ignorance concerning his
Quomodo: But things, That those who can Prove none of those Things
beforementioned concerning their sort of Soul, do very unfitly reproach the
Ignorance, of the Observer in this only Point, concerning the Quomodo; and
that their so doing suits well with our Lord's Expression concerning the
Practice of pulling Motes out of another Man's Eye, whilst they have Beams in
their own. First let them pull the beams out of their own Eyes, before they
undertake to charge their Brethren, with lesser Failings than may be found in
themselves.

First, Let them account for their quod, quid, etc. before they charge their
Opponent for his Ignorance in the Quomodo, which he esteems to be the Arcanum
Artificis, and Inscrutable by any Humane Power: And things it Reasonable, That
before they urge him to an Account for the Quomodo in this Question; they
should make some progress upon Questions of a like, but lower Nature, which
occur to them in the World. Let them First walk into their Gardens and
Orchards, and in the first consider the Herbs and Flowers which they may find
there, of which there may be a wonderful Variety and Diversity, and then
inquire within themselves, and confer with others concerning the Quomodo of
their Production, and what the Particular and Special Causes are, of their
difference in Bulk, Height, Fashion, Color, Luster, Scent, and the Quomodo of
all their Productions; the Particulars of which the Observer things to be
Inscrutable. In general, Men know there is Root, Stem, and Skin enough for
these Productions; and that there is Spirit and Sap enough drawn from the
Earth, for the Enlivening and Growth of them: But what the Modifications are of
such Matter or Spirit, or both of them together; and which produce among them
so great a Variety or Diversity, the Observer conceives was never yet found
out, nor undertaken by any Man, who has given an Account of his Success to the
World. And the like Question the Observer propounds concerning the Trees of the
Orchard. Men find amongst them a sufficient Matter, of Root, Bole, Bark,
Branches, and Twigs: Also a plentiful Spirit, or Sap, ascending mostly between
the Bark and the Tree, enlivening it and fructifying the uttermost Twigs of it;
and causing the Production of Leaves, Blossoms and Fruit; but the Quomodo of
this Performance he holds also to be Inscrutable. And before Mr. M. demand an
Account of the Quomodo the Spirits produce Intellingence in the Head of Man;
let him first account to the Observer, or the World, for the Quomodo of an
Oaken Leaf, by what means, and after what manner the Spirit and the Matter work
together for the producing of it: And then consider and account for the great
variety of Wood, Leaves, Blossoms, Seed and Fruit; from what particular
Compositions or Modifications of Matter or Spirit such Things, Varieties and
Differences do proceed. From these lower Inquiries, let him ascend to the
Consideration of the Brutal Nature; and consider by what sort of Operations, or
Contexture of Spirit and Matter, the Powers and Actions of that Nature are
derived. Men know that there passes a Spirit in the Seed of those Creatures
into Receptacles fit for the Fermentaion, Fomentation and Coagulation of them;
and that from those Principles the Bodies and Souls of Beasts do proceed, and
being afterward brought to Perfection, then to the World, in their several
Forms and different Structure of Body, they live, are nourished and grow to
their several Perfections; and that in their Natural State they enjoy, and use
Strength and Activity, Local Motions, Affections, Desires, Passions,
Sensations, Perceptions, Fancies and Memories. Men see that they have Matter
suitable for those purposes, Flesh, Bones, Nerves, Sinews, Muscles, Arteries
Veins, Fibers, and diverse other necessary Parcels of their Material Bodies, and
that these are enlivened and acted by the Spiritual, and yet Material Powers of
Blood and Breath. Out of the Mass of Blood purified, and heated in the Hearts
of such Creatures, there arise pure Particles of Blood, fit and ready to be
inflamed and which presently are kindled, and tinded by fanning of the Breath
in the same or like manner, as has been before described in relating the State
and condition of Man in such Cases; and by the Matter before described,
Organized; and the Material Spirits of the Blood before specified, acted
together in a fit and suitable Contexture one with another; it is evident, all
the Powers and Actions of the Brutes are thus derived: But concerning the
Quomodo from what sort of Contexture, and manner of Mixture; with what sorts of
Spirits and sorts of Organs; and what Quantity and Purity are thereunto
required: Also, the how after what manner (Applicando activa passivis) the
Bestial Powers and Actions proceed from them; the Observer esteems to be the
Arcanum Opificis, and this Mr. M. himself confesses to be so. How then can he
without some measure of Effrontery, demand an Account of the Observer
concerning the Quomodo, or manner of proceeding in Efficiency of Perception,
Intellect and Memory, by Motion and Operation of the Spirits in the Heads of
Men. Quae Supra nos, nihil ad nos. It is not in the Power, or Intellect of Man
to proceed so far in the Scrutinies of Nature; but rather it seems Men must let
that alone for ever; and leave that Mystery undiscovered and untouched, to rest
in the deep Fountain of God's Knowledge and Wisdom. It seems also to be worthy
of further Observation, That all Men who have received and believed the
Opinion, that there are separate Intelligent Spirits in the World, which Act
and Perform diverse things that exceed the ordinary Capacity of Humane Power; it
is ordinary for such Men to Apprehend (upon sight of any strange thing done,
the Quomodo of which they cannot Investigate, or find out the Reasons of it)
That those Things, or Actions, are the Performances of such Intelligent
Spirits. So Plato, Apprehending the Souls of Men, to exceed the ordinary
Capacity of Man's Understanding, framed this Imagination concerning them, That
they did Pre-exist before their coming into the Bodies of Men, even before the
Existence of our present World; That in a former World, they had displeased God
by their Misbehaviours; and that upon Creation of our present World, they were
doomed and put into Bodies of Clay, as into Cages, or Prisons, and to pass in
way of Drudgery from one Body to another, for their Punishment and Purgation,
until some of them might attain such Degrees of Purity, as to ratise themselves
above the Lower Regions, and attain to the Places of their former Stations: And
that other Ordinary Souls not so Purified, must still continue in the Works of
their Drudgery, and so pass from Prison to Prison, till the time Appointed for
the Duration of this World, be fully Passed, Finished, and Ended. Aristotle
conceived, That each of the Planets was fixed in a several Orb, which had a
continual Orbicular Motion. And when he could not invent for them a Rational,
or likely Cause of such Motion, he satisfied himself with pretending, That
those Orbs were moved each by its particular Angel; whom he was pleased to call
by the Names of Intelligences. We Read of some strange Fabrics made by the
Hands of Artificers, as Tripodes in the Temple of Vulcan made by Daedalus,
which would remove of themselves from one Place to another without any visible
assistance: And Architas's Pigeon, made at Tarentum, which would Fly high into
the Air, and there make diverse Doubles and Turns, and then return to the Place
from which she parted. The first of these passed for a Miracle done by the
Power of the God Vulcan, and the second for the Act of a Demon enclosed in the
Fabric of the Pigeon. In our Times, Namely, of King Hen. VIII. lived
Regiomontanus a great Artist of this kind, who at a Royal Reception of the
Emperor into Nuremburg, caused an Eagle of Wood covered with Feathers, to meet
the Emperor upon the Road, and return with him to the City; hovering over that
Royal Head, or near it, until he came to the Gate of it; which all the
Spectators took for a Miracle: But when they understood it was an Artificial
Fabric, they said, no Man could effect such a thing by Natural Means; but the
Motion must needs be made by an enclosed Demon, or Intelligent Spirit. From
which Aspersion of Necromancy the Artist could never reclaim the People;
especially, because that some Years after, he made a Fly, whose Matter and
Substance was all of Iron, which at a solemn Feast made by that Emperor, crept
from the Sleeve of the Artist (who sat at the lower end of the Table) and
rising thence she Flew up along one side of the Table, before the Guests Faces;
then crossed it at the end before the Emperor, and flew in like manner down the
other side of the Table to the lower end; where the Artist put forth his Hand
and received her, and she crept again under his Sleeve to her former Station.
This made a great noise and cry in the World against the poor Artificer; whom
the Emperor did with difficulty defend against the Violences and Exclamations
of the People; though he showed and demonstrated his Works and Devices made in
the Bodies of these Machines: For the People (who could not understand, that
such things could possibly be done by Humane Art) said, Those things were but
pretended to make a show of Artificial Working; whereas the Truth could not be
otherwise, than that such Motion or Action must needs be Performed by the Force
and Power of a separate Intelligence: And the Case now Disputed seems very like
this: Our Opponents will not believe, That the Skill and Power of God, can Act
the Fabric of Man's Body by the Force and Energy of a Material Unintelligent
Spirit; but that in the Acting of Humane Powers, he must needs employ a
separate subsisting and Intelligent Spirit. And this is the Case which is now
Disputed amongst us. The Observer Maintains, That God can Animate and Act the
Humane Fabric, and cause to be Performed all the Actions and Powers of Man, by
the Force and Energy of a Material Unintelligent Spirit: And this was the Issue
in the very Point Disputed betwixt this Observer and Mr. B. whose Sermon, p.
27. positively delivers in these Words, Omnipotence it self cannot Create a
Cogitative Body; not that there wants Power in God so to do; but that the
reason of his not being able so to do, arises from the incapacity of the
Matter, and because the Ideas of Matter and Thought are incompatible. The
Observer in his Pamphlet of Observations upon this Sermon, Flatly deny's the
Truth of this Assertion, and argues against it both by Reasons and Instances in
that Pamphlet: To which, Mr. M. in this Treatise professes to Answer, and yet
he is pleased to slip over this Point, without taking any Notice, or making any
mention of it. The reason of which his pretended Negligence, is clearly this,
He durst not undertake to maintain Mr. B's Assertion, and was very unwilling to
own, that it was an Error; or that the Observer had the better of him in any
thing. The Laws of True and Fair-dealing, required of him to take Notice of
this Question, which was mainly Disputed by the Observer against Mr. B. in that
short Pamphlet; and either to have Maintained Mr. B's Assertion, or confessed,
That it was an Error. And his avoiding so to do, testifies against his
Ingenuity, and the faithfulness of his Dealing in this Treatise.

It is true, That if upon Trial, the Verdict shall pars upon the Observer's
side against Mr. B's Assertion; and, That God can Act the Person of Man in all
his Natural Faculties and Powers, by the Activity and Energy of a Material
Unintelligent Spirit: There will still remain another Question behind, Whether
God has done so, or has otherwise provided for it? But till the first Question
be Determined, there is neither need nor Reason to Dispute upon the second; for
if God cannot Act the Persons of Men and all their Faculties, by such a
Material Spirit; then it is certain, He has not done so. And then there is no
need at all for Disputing the second Question. P. 40. Mr. M. Discourses upon
that which he calls a Natural Conscience; which the Observer thinks he is
mistaken in: For that Conscience seems not Emanant from Nature, in such manner
as his Natural Affections and Inclinations are; not as his desire of Food, or
Venery, both comprehended under the Name of Lust; nor as his Covetousness,
Ambition, Wrath, or Fear; nor as diverse other Things are, which proceed from a
Savage, as well as a Cultivated Nature. But to create a Conscience in Man,
there must some Law first be given him, and accepted by him; and by which he
believes, his Actions acd Behavior ought to be Governed. For that, where there
is no Law, there is no transgression: So that if Man has never Accepted, or
Submitted to any Law, whereby he thinks his Actions ought to be Ruled; he can
never be capable of any Stings of Conscience: For that those Stings arise from
the Persuasion Convincing him, That he has Offended against a Law which he
ought in Duty to have Obeyed. For all Conscience, whether he call it Natural,
or Acquired, must grow out of several Originals: Accordingly, First, There must
be a Law, next, There must be an Action, upon which two, the Memory must act
and represent to the Judgment, both the Law and the Action: The Judgment must
compare and consider them, one with another, and whether the Action be a Breach
of the Law, or not: If it be not, there follows an Acquittance by the Judgment;
but if a Breach be found, then it is considered, How far that Breach extends,
Whether it be wide and large, or narrow and small. And the Stings and Lashes of
the Conscience are greater or lesser, according to these Proportions: So that
he thinks Conscience to be no more than the Conviction of a Man's Judgment,
That he has Acted against his Rule: And whether that Rule be grounded upon
Verity and Sound Truth, or upon Falsity and Error; yet after a a Man has
received it for a Rule, and submitted his Mind to the Observance of it; the
Stings and Lashes of the well-grounded Conscience, and of the erroneous
Conscience are alike: But such Mistakes and Confusions are not incident to
Properties and Faculties Naturally Emanant from the Constitution of Nature it
self. He agrees, The Lashes of Conscience, or Self-condemnation, may be very
great; but thinks they are rather derived from Institution, than Nature. He has
spoken somewhat largely to this Point in his forementioned Treatise, and
therefore will Descant no more upon it in this Place; because it will there be
found, and because it is a Subject, that neither can be, nor ought to be
handled in few Words. P. 41. Mr. M. Demands, Is it possible, that any Man
should believe, That the Notions of a Moral Good and Evil, the Remorse of a bad
Conscience, and the Joys of a good one, should proceed from nothing else, but
the shufflings and cuttings of the spirituous Parts of the Blood up and down
the Ventricles of the Brain? To this the Observer Answers, The possibility of
Acting such Things as he specifies, by the inflamed Particles called Spirits in
the Brain; Depends upon the Question before Answered, Whether God can Act the
Humane Person and all his Faculties by those Material Spirits? For if so He can
do; then these Actions and Faculties are not derived barely by the Motions and
Actings of such Spirits; but from the Wisdom, Skill, and Power, of the Great
Artificer. He that looks upon a Pair of Bellows and sees and feels the Wind
which proceeds from them, and knows no more of the Composition of an Organ,
than what he can conceive by the Bellows and their Breath; could by no
Arguments be persuaded, That the Wind which proceeds from them, should cause
such Excellent Harmony in that Instrument, as our Daily Experience Proves may
be Performed. The Skill and Power of God has fitted and prepared suitable
Organs in the Head for such Performances, and such as being acted, moved, and
filled by these Spirits, can with, and by then Produce Sense, Conception,
Intellect, Memory, and all other Powers and Faculties whatsoever, which are by
God intended to be Performed in the Brain and the Ventricles thereof.

Concerning this Scbject, we find in Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Humane
Understanding, Fol. 310. his Opinion touching this Matter, where he says, We
have the Ideas of Matter and Thinking, and possibly shall never be able to
know, Whether any bare Material Being Things, or no; it being impossible for us
by Contemplation, without Revelation, to discover, Whether Omnipotence has not
given Power to some Systems of Matter (fitly disposed) to Perceive and Think;
or else, That he has joined and fixed to Matters so disposed, a Thinking
Immaterial Substance. He thinks it possible for God to put Matter so together,
as that it may be capable of Perception and Thought. Men cannot by Reason find
out the Grounds of Sensation in Bodies, or Matter, but must Attribute that
Power only to the good Pleasure of God. We must allow, That God has annexed
Effects to Motion, which we can no way conceive it able to produce. Whence the
Observer inferrs, That Perception, Reason and Memory, may be produced in the
Organs of an Humane Head, by the Activity and Motion of such Animal Spirits;
although we can no way conceive the manner how such Actings and Motions are, or
can be able to produce them. P. 43. Mr. M. says, The frequent Conflicts
between Reason and the Sensitive Appetite fully prove, That there is a Power
Superior to that of Matter and Motion, and that there is in Man a regent
predominant Principle, which sometimes chooses the things most distasteful to
Sense, and uses the Body as its Instrument to serve its own Will and Pleasure.
And this Power. says he, must needs be the Rational Intellectual Spirit in
Man. To this the Observer Answers; By denying that there is such a Regent
Predominant Power in Man as he supposes: For that daily Experience shows us,
that the Affections and Passions do far more often prevail over the Rational
Inclinations and Desires of Men, and hurry the rational Powers along with them
to act all Uncleanness with Greediness; then that such Rational Powers are able
to restrain and govern those Affections and Passions; and to keep or bring them
within that Compass and Order which they may desire to do. And the odds seems
to be at least Forty to One on the side of the Affections and Passions, against
the Forces and Powers of the Rational Intellect: So as the Observer cannot
discover that Monarchical and Regent Power in Man's Intellect, which Mr. M.
pretends to be there: But rather conceives, That the Powers of the Intellect
and Reason in Man, are Coordinate with the Powers of Sense and Affection, and
have not such a Command over them as Mr. M. supposes; because these Faculties
are always in Contention one with another, from the Cradle to the Grave; and
are seldom if ever totally Subjugated one of them to another: Insomuch that
Aristotle compares their Struglings to a Game at Ball, where sometimes one side
prevails, sometimes the other; so as that no Man can guess with certainty
whether Party shall have the total Victory or Conquest, till the last Stage of
the Humane Life be run out and the last Scene thereof finished. Whence the
Observer concludes, That the Powers of Sense and Intellect in Man are
Coordinate, and adds, that both of them are ready to submit to the Vegetative
Power, against the Inclinations and Desires of them both, when the great
Occasions, and pressing Necessities of the Microcosm do so require. And from
all these Premises he concludes, That there is no such Monarchical or Regent
Power in the Microcosm as Mr. M. has surmised; nor such an Immaterial
Intelligent Spirit as he has pretended: But that the Bodily Organs, and
especially those of the Head and Brain are so fitly made, suited and ordered by
their Great Artificer, and are so apt for the Execution of those Offices for
which they were Ordained; that all those Effects may be perfectly produced
amongst them, by the Intervention and Energy of the Superfine, yet Material
Unintelligent Spirits of the Blood: And consequently Mr. M's Arguments on this
Topic, are not sufficient to maintain his part of the Question. And for the
account which he says is to be made for Men's misbehaving themselves in this
World; the Observer conceives, That it can be truly expected at the last
Judgment only; as he thinks Dr. Sherlock in his late Book well Proves. And he
does not remember or know, there is any Scripture Proof of an Intermediate
Judgment, between Death and the last Judgment, but desires Mr. M's Directions
for finding out some Scripture Proof of that Point, which is no other ways
investigable or subject to a Rational Enquiry.

M. says, That there is in the Soul or Mind of Man a natural apprehension of
its own Immortality, which the Observer says, he does not agree or grant; but
does conceive that Opinion to be no elder in the World than the time of
Pherecydes; as Mr. M. in this Treatise after affirms. He says, That Pherecydes
lived in the time of Cyrus the first Persian Monarch; in the beginning of whose
Reign the Jews returned from their Babylonish Captivity, and laid the
Foundation of their second Temple. And 'saies further, That from the beginning
of Genesis till that time, we meet with no mention of the Soul's Immortality,
except Solomon's short Expression; The Spirit returns to God who gave it. The
Books of Moses make no express mention of the Soul's Immortality, or of any
other Future State after Death; which seems to the Observer a strong Argument,
that the Apprehension of the Soul's Immortality, is not naturally grafted in
the Minds of Men, but acquired and raised from other Seeds, which have been
sown amongst them; which from the time of Pherecydes, spread that Opinion far
and Wide over the Face of the whole Earth, and was greedily received and
cultivated amongst Men, and was communicated also to the Weaker Sex: So that
Mothers and Nurses were able to Sow it in the tender Minds of Children from
their first Infancies, which Fathers and Tutors increased amongst their
Children and Disciples, till it became generally accepted amongst Men, and
spread it Pelf amongst all the World; Error as it was.

In like manner as the Opinion of the Sun's Course about the Earth in Twenty
four Hours was received. Also as the Doctrine and Practice of Idolatry,
possessed and overspread the World, from the Time of the Flood until the
present Time. Of the Ancient Practice thereof we read much, and of our present
Time, we have certain evidence, that it continues to be practiced in India,
Tartary, China, Japan, Africa, and amongst the Gentiles of America, and amongst
the whole Grecian and Romish-Christian Churches. So as by the Argument of Mr.
M. It seems Men may as well conclude, That the Doctrine and Practice of
Idolatry is Natural to Mankind.

It is not the far spreading and long duration of an Opinion, that can
certainly Prove it to be Natural. But that which is truly Natural must have
been from the Beginning, and have a continuance amongst Men, so long as their
Natural State shall endure; as an Incident to the whole Kind, and Race, who
attain to the common perfections of Parts and of Degrees, as Effluxes of their
Natural Constitutions. Of which sort he does not conceive that any Opinion can
be: For Opinions in their Natures are mutable, and Naturalia non mutantur; and
therefore God did not leave Man to learn the Knowledge of himself from any
Natural Power, Instinct, or Inclination. But himself Instructed their First
Father and diverse others of his Progeny, down to the Time of Noah and his Sons,
in the Knowledge and Fear of God. And when these Rules became Obliterated in
the general Race of Men; he chose out Abraham from amongst them, and
communicated to him a greater measure of Knowledge concerning God, and his
Will, than any Man since the time of Noah had received before him. After which,
he Revealed to Moses many more Particulars concerning himself, his Attributes
and his Will. Afterward he declared the same to Samuel, and after to all the
Degrees, of Prophets down to Zechary and Malachy: And these Prophets have
delivered many Revelations in their Books. Amongst all which, there is not one
Sentence, or Saying, That the Soul of Man is Immortal; except what may be
Collected by Construction from the Fore-quoted Sentence of Solomon, transiently
delivered by him.

Whence it appears, That this Opinion was not from the Beginning, and therefore
not Natural, as Mr. M. supposes. And if from hence we pass to the New
Testament, we find not in it any Text; which says, The Soul of Man is
Immortal. It is true, That St. Matthew's Cannot kill the soul, seems somewhat
strongly to infer, the Soul's Subsistence in a State of Separation; although it
does not appear thereupon, That our Lord did not principally intend to Teach
the Nature of the Soul, in that Place. But concerning this Text, we must refer
to what has been before spoken with intent to diminish the Credit and Power of
it. The Parable of Dives agrees something with this Opinion; but we take it not
for Proof; because it was but a Parable, spoken (as we conceive) to a quite
other Intent; and without Design to Teach any Thing concerning the State of Man
after Death. Neither of these two Texts do Assert positively the Soul's
Immortality. And there is not another Text in the New Testament which speaks
with any manner of clearness concerning it. But Men are forced first to Collect
from them by Constructions, and then to draw Inferences from such Collections
for Proving their Opinion of the Soul 's Immortality.

When our Lord Discourses with Martha concerning her Dead Brother; neither he
nor she, takes notice or makes mention of his Soul; but pass that Particular as
a Thing not known to them; or deserving, their particular Examination; and yet
they both Discourse of his Future State. Our Lord says, Thy brother shall rise
again. She Replies, I know he shall rise again at the Resurrection of the last
day. The Observer pretends (by as good a Right as his Opposer does) to Collect
and Infer from this Discourse, That neither of these Parties knew the Soul of
Lazarus to be Immortal; for that such Knowledge would have occasioned them to
mention something concerning it in this Discourse.

And further, the Observer says, That in all the rest of the New Testament
there is no clear Mention or Declaration made concerning this supposed Truth;
nor is it any where so much as said, The Soul of Man is Immortal. How then can
this Opinion pass for Natural amongst Men of common Understanding and Reading,
when it is so little mentioned, and with so little certainty, and so great
obscurity, throughout both the Books of the Old and New Testament. And upon
this Argument, it shall be left to the Reader to conceive what he thinks fit
concerning the Naturalness of this Opinion. Mr. M. says further, That God
Rules the World, by the Force and Virtue of this Opinion of the Soul's
Immortality. To this the Observer Answers, That if his Mind were set upon
making sharp Returns, here were a fair Field, and a fit Occasion for putting
that Design, in Execution: But he will here content himself with the abhorring
the grosness of Mr. M's Opinion in it, and to Attest against him, That God
makes no use at all of this Opinion in his Government of the World; but grounds
his Government of it upon his own Goodness, Wisdom and Power; without having
any regard to the Opinions of Men, whether they be True, or False. Mr, M.
says, God need not, will not Rule the World in a way of Deceit. The Observer
agrees this Assertion, and thence concludes, That in such his Government, he
has no regard to this Opinion at all.

M. says, That the illiterate Vulgar, who are guided by the mere simple
Dictates of Nature, have more impression of this great Truth, than some of the
Learned: Which the Observer would have mended by altering it to many of the
Learned; and then he takes it for one of the truest Things which Mr. M. has
said; and applies to it the Old Rule which says, That Ignorance is the Mother
of Devotion The truth of which, is well proved, by the Effects it produces
amongst the Romish Proselytes, and those of other Sects and Parties in the
Church. P. 47. Mr. M. says, That the Author himself, [ P. 15. of his mentioned
Pamphlet] says, That by Death the Man's Faculty of Thinking is certainly
destroyed: Yet elsewhere, he speaks more dubiously, viz. P. 3, 11, 12. of that
Pamphlet. Whence he pretends to Infer, That the Minds of such Persons are
always wavering and unsatisfied.

The Observer upon this Charge consulted his said Pamphlet in the 3, 11, 12,
Pages before Quoted; and found not in any of them any sort of Doubt concerning
the Point before Quoted; nor could others whom he employed to that purpose,
find there any Doubt upon that Point. Which Proves Mr. M. in his last
Quotations, and that whatsoever he builds thereupon is a Fallacy. And it seems
doubtful, whether this Mis-quoting were accidental, or intentional; because Mr.
M. in some other Quotations has miscarryed accordingly, viz. P. 23. of his
Treatise, where he Quotes, Rev. 14.13. Reciting it in this manner, Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, and their works do follow, or rather accompany
them. Whereas the very Words of that Text, are these, Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord, that they may rest from their labors, and their works
do follow them. Hence it appears, That Mr. M. has altered this Text, both by
taking from it, and adding to it. He takes from it the Words, That they may
rest from their labor, and adds to it, the Words, or rather accompany them.
Apparently intending to disguise the true Sense and meaning of it. For the true
Words themselves seem clearly to import, That the Blessedness here intended,
was a resting from the Labors and Troubles of the World, and that their Works
do not accompany, but follow them, and that in due time, [ viz. The
Resurrection and Judgment] they may be beneficial to them. This Sense he
pretends to pervert, by turning that into Heavenly Enjoyment, which the Text
calls here, a rest from their labors; and making those Works accompany them,
which the Text says, do follow them. And this he Designingly does, with intent
to maintain his side of the Argument, beyond what, the Truth, or Text can allow
of.

Likewise, P. 75. he Quotes 1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink for to morrow we
die. The true Words of that Text, are these; If I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rife not? Let us eat and drink for
to morrow we die. Here Mr. M. suppresses the Words, if the dead rise not; and
by that mutilation, or falsification, intends to make his Reader believe, that
St. Paul intended to declare, That if the Soul was not Immortal, Men might Eat
and Drink, and Die, without any Hope or Fear of future Recompenses after this
Life. Whereas, the express Words of this Text, and the whole Tenor of this
Chapter, do plainly declare, That there shall be a Resurrection, and do lay the
whole Expatiation of future Recompenses upon that Ground, and the Promises of
Christ declared in the Gospel concerning it; without mentioning the Immortality
of the Soul, or taking any manner of notice of it: So as in this Place Mr. M.
has suppressed those words, to which his quoted Expression is by the Speaker
applied, for which the Observer believes he deserves a sharp Censure; and that
however, from the Mis-quotations before Cited, his Readers ought to be wary how
they confide upon his Fidelity in Cases of the like Nature; in which they may
do to trust him no farther than they see him, or can search the Truth of what
he delivers: It being apparent, he is so much possessed with his Opinion of the
Soul's Immortality; than like the Bilious Eyes he has before mentioned, he
thinks he sees Arguments for it in those Places of Scripture, which bend very
strongly against it. Mr. M. further says, That all Men, and Epicurus himself,
desire an Immortality. Whereas the Instance which he there gives, Proves no
more; but that they desire to be remembered after their Death, with good
Thoughts, and a Kindness amongst Men: As if he could not distinguish between
such a Remembrance, and Immortality.

M. Demands, Whence, and how, the Opinion of the Immortality came to the Minds
of Men? And if you cannot tell him this, he will conclude, That it sprang from
the Inclination of Humane Nature. To this the Observer Answers, That the
apparent Original of this Opinion, grew from the Conception, or Apprehension,
of his Named Philosopher Pherecydes, in a late Age of the World in comparison
of the Times which were passed before him: That this Opinion offered by him to
the World, seemed to gratify and comply with one of the chief Humane Affections
viz, Ambition, and was quickly improved to be an useful Instrument of
Government amongst Men: It was therefore desirously Received and Cultivated,
First by Mothers and Nurses to their Infants; next by Fathers and Tutors; and
at last by Priests and Princes; and a strong support of Virtue and Government
amongst the People of those Times; to whom the Promise of the Resurrection were
not Revealed, and who therefore had no Conception, or Knowledge of it: But was
no more a Product of Nature, than the Opinion of the Sun's Course about the
Earth; or diators, which was the first Ground of Idolatry, and Supports it in
the World, to this very Day.

Chap. IV. p. 49. Mr. M. says, Ex vero, nil nisi, verum. And this the Observer
agrees to be true. Mr. M. says further, That if the Material Opinion be true,
no Man is the same this Year, or Week, that he was the last. This the Observer
denies, and says, That the changes of Matter, whether Bodily, or Spirituous,
do not effect a change of the Person; though it be a Contexture of them both:
For that there is always in the Person, a like Contexture of Matter and Spirit;
producing in the Person, the like and the same Powers, by a continual
succession of Matter and Spirit, of one same Nature; the succeeding Particles
of Blood, and Parts of Matter being always of a Similar Nature in their
Renovation, with those which Daily and Hourly may be consumed. P. 51. He Quotes
a Saying of Heraclitus, That no Man can enter twice into the same River;
because [saies he] the Man will not be the same at his Second coming, that he
was at the first. Say we, It is because the River was not the same at his
second coming that it was at the first; because those Waters which were there
at his first coming, are passed far downwards and other Waters succeeded in
their Place. We say also, That a Tree, after it has stood, grown and decayed
for Three or Four hundred Years, is still the same Tree; although Yearly and
Weekly great Changes befall it: We can say, nor think no otherwise of it, but
that it is still the same Tree; because all its Changes and Alterations are
Acted by a Similar Spirit and Matter; all of the same Nature one of them with
another. Whence if it belonged to Mr. M. to Day, he will call it and think it
his own Forty Years hence; if he has not otherwise disposed of it. And
therefore whatsoever Mr. M. may tell the Observer concerning his Estate; it
will find no more Credit with him, than his Assertion of the Soul's Immortality
does. Daily Experience assures, That if a Child, or Man be Spirited, Lost, or
has Traveled into Remote Parts, or willingly absents himself from his
Relations; yet if after many Years Absence he return, and that by certain Marks
upon his Body, or other clear Evidence it do appear, That the Party returning
was one the same; no Enquiry shall be made concerning his Immortal Intelligent
Spirit: But the Jury will be bound upon their Oaths to find such a Sameness of
the Person, as will give him a clear Right to any of his Ancestors Lands, though
Deceased long before that time.

M. comes again to his former Argument, a Quomodo, and Asks moreover, If the
new Spirits know what the old were, or did? And to this, the Observer returns
his former Answer, That neither the old Spirits, nor the new, know any thing at
all, of what they do in the Head. And for the Quomodo of the Memory, and its
concerns; let Mr. M. first give us some Account how his Intelligent Soul works
in it; and by what sort of those Operations that comes to pass which he desires
to know, viz. Why Old Men remember Things long past, better than those Things
lately come to their Knowledge?

M. says, If there be no Superior Principle in Man, to Correct the
Irregularities of the Material Spirits, and their Motions, Man is not a capable
Subject of being Governed by Laws in a Moral Way. The Observer Answers, That
the motion of such Material Spirits well constituted in the Brain, are no more
Irregular, than that of the Wind is in the Organ: For they both Execute the
Appointments of God and Nature, in their several Instruments, or Places, and go
always to Work after the same manner; Performing their Offices according to the
Institutions of Nature, which never Alters, or Errs in such Cases.

Further, Mr. M. says, The Will must either be free, or else be necessitated
by the irresistible Impulse of some Superior Cause. The Observer Answers as
before, That as free as the Will is; it is in all deliberate Actions Directed
by the Judgment and moves the Loco-motive Powers accordingly; and that it can
not more deny Obedience to such Results of the Judgment, than Water can cease
to run from the higher to the lower Places: This the Water does freely, not
necessitated by any External Force or Power; but led by its Natural Propensity;
and so the Will follows in its full Natural freedom, the Dictates and
Directions of the Judgment, without being necessitated by any outward Force, or
other than its own proper Inclination.

Whence the Will, has a full Natural Freedom, and yet follows the Dictates and
Directions of the Judgment concerning Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong,
Beneficial and Dangerous, and all other such like Points of Choice whatsoever:
And Mr. M's shufflings and cuttings upon those Points, seem more uncertain and
Erroneous, than those of the Spirits in the Head and Brain, which he pretends
so much to Ridicule.

As to what he charges Mr. Hobbes with, the Observer is utterly unknowing
whether it be true, or no; nor dare he give full Credit to Mr. M's Quotation
thereupon, nor is willing to take the trouble of searching after the truth of
it.

M. says, That if the Material Spirits be inordinate in their Motions, you are
in a ready way to make God the Author of Sin. No more, says the Observer, than
by making him the Author of Man, or any other sinning Creature.

We have before said, That there are no inordinate Motions in those Spirits,
any more than there is in the Wind by which the Organ-pipes are Acted: Neither
of those sorts of Motions are voluntary, but necessary, and follow the Guidance
of Nature; which does not usually Err in her Productions. Mr. M. here Quotes
Cicero, sentit animus se moveri, and sentit se, vi sua non aliena, moveri.

The Observer denies the truth of Cicero's Assertion, and desires Mr. M. in his
next Treatise, to make some Proof that it is true, without passing it upon
Cicero's Ipse dixit. Mr. M. agrees, That we ought not to overlook the
Concourse of the First Cause, or his Acting with his Creatures in a way
suitable to their Natures. The Observer says, That if he had kept himself
close to this Duty, he would not have needed the Invention, or Opinion of Man's
being Acted by a separate Intelligent Spirit; but rather would have given God
the true Glory of Framing and Acting the Persons of Men, by such Art and Skill
of Natural Productions, and Agents, as Men's Minds may well Admire; but never
attain to the knowledge of that Skill, by which these strange Things are
wrought amongst us continually.

M. says, If the Materiality be true, no Man can Rationally believe a Future
State or Retribution; because the Person when he dies, is not the same that he
was a Month before. The Observer Answers, That the Man when he dies, is the
same Person that he was 40 Years before, if he has Lived so long, and the very
same Person that came out of his Mother's Womb, in common Account,
Understanding, and Reasoning. If Mr. M. should Buy a Horse, and Toll him in a
Market, and after he has had him a while, another should come and challenge him
for his; Mr. M. must Prove his lawful change of Property, by Testimony upon
Oath, That this is the same Horse which he Bought, and entered there into the
Toll-book. But this it seems Mr. M. cannot safely induce any Man to Swear,
because the Horse has suffered many Alterations [according to his Doctrine]
between the time of the Tolling, and that of the Challenge. It seems Mr. M.
would be loath to lose his Horse upon so nice and frivolous a Scruple, and yet
if he should prove so vain; the Observer would by no means follow such a
President. But durst himself Swear, and produce others to do so, That this is
the same Horse which he Bought and Tolled in a Market Two Years ago. And so for
Proof of a Marriage made 40 Years ago, That these Two are the same Persons whom
Witnesses saw Married at the same time and Place. And so for Trees, Rivers and
Mountains, though they are always under diverse Alterations and Changes; yet Men
often do, safely may, and for testifying the Truth ought to Swear, That they
have always during their knowledge, stood in such Places, or run in such
Courses, the same Hills, Trees, or Rivers that they now are. Mr. M. says, Nay,
none of those Things are the same that they were a Week ago, because of the
changes of their Particles, in every short space of time. And it shall
thereupon be left to the Reader to believe which of us he pleases.

M, says, That the Observer owns a Resurrection and Future Judgment (it is
likely to serve a turn.) The Observer Replies, That this Parenthesis contains a
very Impudent and False Assertion: For it must Assert one of these two Things,
That either the Doctrine it self is a pretended Doctrine, set up amongst Men to
serve a Turn generally: Or else, That the Observer owns the belief of it with
intent to serve a Turn, his particular Turn in this Dispute, or in other the
like Cases.

It seems Mr. M. should not have a Face so well steeled as to pretend, That the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, is, or can be pretended to be set up to serve a
Turn generally in the Church; because it is so thoroughly and undeniably Proved
by a clear and forcible Current of the New Testament, passing through all the
Gospels, and other Parts of it to the end and conclusion of the Revelations.
And, that the Observer sets it up for a particular End of his own, can by no
means be known to Mr. M. unless he pretend to the knowledge of those Men's
Thoughts he never saw, or that the Spirit had communicated the same unto him.
He does not declare, That he had this knowledge by either of these means, nor
by what other means he attained to it. But if he should pretend the Revelation
of the Spirit for it; the Observer is able faithfully to assure him, and does
assure him, That it was a Lying Spirit, and that it never entered into the
Observer's Heart, to make such a false Pretense in the Face of Heaven, and of
the World: And he does not know, or believe that lie was, or ever intends to be
guilty of such a false Design; nor [he hopes] of any Crime in that kind, that
may equal it. He expects therefore, That Mr. M. shall either make better Proof
of this Assertion in a future Treatise, or else acknowledge, That he has
wronged the Observer, by this False and Injurious Charge; against the
Observer's own Knowledge, and beyond any sort of Proof Which Mr: M. can make,
for justifying of the same. Mr. M's Arguments concerning the Knowledge of
Individuation and Personality, may be paralelled by a short Story. A Young
Student, coming home from the University, was at Supper with his Father and
Mother, and there were two Eggs for them all: The Father wished there had been
three Eggs, so that each of them might have had one: The Son Replies, He could
make them three; and taking up one Egg, showed there was one still in the Dish:
Then put in the other Egg again, and said, Now there are two Eggs, and then,
one and two are three: The Father thereupon took up one Egg for himself, and
gave the other to his Wife, and bad the Son take the third for himself; and
thus by plain Sensation confuted the Son's pretended Sophistry.

Mr. M. pretends; That all the certainty of Humane Personality arises from the
unchangeableness of the Intelligent Soul. But that [saies the Observer cannot
be seen, perceived, or known by any Powers of Humane Nature, nor is by himself
believed,] He says; That the Tree and the Horse, have each of them a Soul, or
Spirit of Life, as well as the Man; the Tree a Vegetative; the Horse a
Sensative, the Man a Rational one; yet none of these Souls can be known in
particular from others of their Kind: But the certainty of their Individuations
must arise from outward Signs, Testimonies and Tokens, which are subject to be
discerned by the Sensations of Men. And this he thinks is enough to Convince
the Reader, That the Absurdity, which Mr. M. pretends to raise from this Topic
is sufficiently Answered, and Confuted.

M. says, There is much in the Resurrection above the reach of Natural Reason.
The Observer says the same concerning the Immortality of the Soul; and
further, That it is not only above, but also opposite to the Sensations of Man.
Mr. M. asks, What must the poor Heathens do, to whom the Resurrection has not
been revealed? Upon which, the Observer asks, What must such poor Heathens do,
to whom the Mystery of Christ's coming in the Flesh has not been Revealed?

M. says, That the Immortality of the Soul, was commonly and naturally known
to Men. To this the Observer has spoken before, and now adds a Request to Mr.
M. That he would produce some Evidence of such Knowledge [besides Solomon's
short Saying] before the time and Doctrine of Pherecydes; or else he ought not
to be believed, That his Opinion has any thing of Natural in it.

Further, Mr. M. here says, That the Observer world not be thought to deny,
That there are Immaterial Intelligent Spirits. The Observer Answers, That if he
did deny them either in Word, or in Thought, he would not seek a Pretense to be
thought not to deny them: If he very much feared the Censures of Men's
Opinions, he would not (as he now does) maintain the Humane Soul's Materiality.

Mr. M. supposes [as himself says, very unreasonably] That the Observer does
deny the being of a Superiority and Order in the Invisible World. But therein
Mr. M. is very much mistaken: For that the Observer does Profess to Allow and
Believe, That there are great Differences and Degrees in the World of
Intelligent Spirits; the lowest of which are often conversant upon Earth, and
sometimes with the Inhabiters of it. P. 58. Mr. M. says, There is something in
Plants like Sense, in Brutes like Reason, and in Men like Spirits. [The
Observer saies] something like the Inferior Intellectual, Spirits, viz.
Apprehension, Reason, and Intellect, which is as great a Participation with the
lower Degree of separate Spirits; as the Brutes have of the Rational, or the
Plants have of the Sensitive Nature. The Observer, further agrees with Mr. M's
Metaphysical Author. P. 59. Mr. M. Quotes the Observer's Saying concerning Dr.
Moor and Mr. Baxter, who say, That the Souls of Brutes have separate
Subsistence after the Death of their Bodies; and there he says, That Dr.
Willis, did not think this Opinion merited the trouble of his Confutation. And
both there, and here, the Observer is of the same Judgment, That this Opinion
neither deserves, or needs any other, or further Refutation, than the
repugnancy which it will find in the common Sensations of every ordinary
Reader; except such only, as can swallow and digest the Pythagorical Opinion of
the Transmigrations of Souls. Pythagoras was the Disciple of Pherecydes, and
from him received the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality, and raised out of it
the Doctrine. of the Metempsychosis, Teaching from thence, That the Soul's of
Men departed, sometimes entered into Infants, and sometimes into the Whelps and
Cubs of Beasts, and reciprocally, That the Souls of Beasts, Transmigrated into,
and Animated the Bodies of Humane Infants, or of Beasts; as it might happen to
fall out. To Pythagoras, Plato succeeded, and held also a Transmigration of
Souls; but more restrained then that of Pythagoras; imagining, That Souls of
Men had in a former World, been separate and Intelligent Spirits; and that for
their Offenses then committed, they were Doomed to Inhabit and Actuate Bodies
of Clay, in our present World, in Nature of a Penalty, and as means of
Purgation, of, and for the Offenses by them committed in the former World, and
that as soon as they were dislodged from one Person, they must wait for
opportunity to enter into another Person, or Embryon of Mankind. This Doctrine
of Plato bounded the Transmigration of Souls within the Compass of Mankind;
excluding the Bestial Race from such a Communication with Men: Concerning which
Doctrine, Mr. Lock Dict. Lib. fol. 189, says, Taking (as we ordinarily now do)
the Humane Soul for an Immaterial Substance, independent upon Matter; there
would be no Absurdity to suppose, That the same Soul may at different times, be
united to different Bodies, and in each make up a Man. This Doctrine therefore
of Transmigration of Souls from one Man to another, seems to him a Rational
Deduction from the Nature and Subsistence of such a Soul, and accordingly the
Opinion of such a Transmigration spread it self far and wide over the Face of
the Earth; so as the Christian Platonists accepted of it, and Origin and some
others of the Fathers, were of that Opinion. The Gallick and British Druides
maintained it, and the most gross part of it, viz. The Transmigration
Reciprocal from Man to Beasts, is still believed among the Gentile Indians,
Tartarians, Chinese and Japanners, in our own Times; grounding it upon the
Opinion of the Soul's complete Subsistence in a State of Separation from the
Body.

The Observer says, That if he had to deal with such Men as these; he would
deal with them as with Dr. Moor and Mr. Baxter, by endeavoring to persuade
them, and offering to them such Proofs as he could produce [as he does to this
present Opponent] That the Soul of Man is not an Intelligent Substance, nor
capable of subsisting in a State of Separation from the Body; and if thereof he
should be able to Convince them, that Conviction would be a sufficient and
perfect Cure for all these Errors of theirs, and all other like Opinions
concerning the same.

He further says, The wiser and holier any Man is, the more firmly he believes
and rejoices in the Consideration of the Soul's Immortality. Other Proof of
this Assertion he gives none; so that we have but his bare Word for it, in the
truth of which, the Observer has no great Confidence; and he believes, That Mr.
M. is therein much mistaken. Mr. M. says, Men will not be persuaded, that,
That Divine Goodness, which has so often embraced them, mill ever desert them:
But that God is Stronger than Death, and more Powerful than the Grave, and that
they cannot believe, That their Souls shall ever fall down into a Dead unactive
State; because they have been Irradiated by the Divine Light and Grace.

The Observer Answers, Here are Two Assertions, First, they will not believe,
That God who has embraced them with his Goodness, will ever desert them; but
that God will preserve and deliver them from the Grave. This Assertion the
Observer willingly grants. The Second Saying is, That Men's Souls can never fall
down into a Dead unactive State. This the Observer denies, and says, That if
by Souls he does not mean Persons; his saying, That they are irradiated by
God's Grace, in any sort, or way, abstracted, or removed from the Body; his
Assertion here, is Erroneous and Deceitful: For that he never has Proved, nor
can Prove; That God ever bestowed any thing upon a single Soul in a State of
Separation from the Body. But all his Graces and Favors, Corrections and
Punishments, are applied to the Person in Statu Composito, and not to either of
his Constituent Parts in a State of Separation of the one from the other. P.
60. Mr. M. says, That many good Men have died with raised Expectations of
entering immediately into a Blessed State. This the Observer believes to be
true, and that Men Die with many other Conceptions and Errors about them
besides this, and yet receive no harm or hinderance by any of them. Mr. M.
here, further Repeats diverse like mistakes amongst the Philosophers.

M. says, He will not mention the Raptures of many Christian Martyrs at the
time of their departing, grounded upon this Expectation. The Observer thinks,
That such Examples of this, as he can find among the Primitive Martyrs, would
deserve his Quotation. Mr. M. says further, That it may justly seem a great
wonder, that many of the best Men have erred in this Point of great
concernment, and a very few Men, and those of mean Parts and Credit, should be
in the right of of it,

The Observer Answers, That this (among other like Accidents) is not so strange
as true. Whilst the Learned World, thought the Earth to be the Center of the
Planetary Circumvolution, some very few there were, that ascribed that Place to
the Sun; and they at last are proved to be in the Right. Did not the Learned
World (and particularly the Governors of the Church) absolutely deny the Being
of Antipodes; which is now as apparent and clear a Truth, as that there are
Countries called by the Names of China and Japan. Do not all true Proselytes of
the Romish Church profess firmly to believe, That there is no Salvation for any
who Die excluded from the Communion of that Church? And do not all Sectaries,
and Dissenters, and the very Quakers profess absolutely to believe, That their
ways and modes of Worship, are the most Excellent that are to be found among
the Christian Churches, or any other Assemblies in the World; and are they not
ready to expos themselves to Dangers and Death, for the Maintenance and
Advancement of their Profession? Errors as they are. Was not the Truth of
Religion justled into a very narrow room, when it was all comprised in one
single Family, Despised, Hated and Persecuted, by the Learned Chaldeans on the
one side, and their Equals the Egyptians on another side; whilst the vast
compass of the Earth besides, was muffled up in the dark Clouds of Ignorance;
and neither knew any thing of God, or else applied themselves to him by Devils,
or Demons, or other dumb shows of Idolatrous Figures; for maintenance of whose
Vain Services, they were ready to spend their Blood, and put to Death all those
who durst affront them. Of which Truth, Mr. M's Proto-Martyr Socrates is an
undoubted Evidence, who suffered Death, for daring to deny that, which the
World at that time undoubtedly believed for a certain Truth.

In these Pages Mr. M. Repeats the Words (wretchedly deceived) many times over.

The Observer grants, and believes, That a vast number of very good Men have
Died in the Opinion (Erroneous as it is) of the Soul's Immortality. But that
was no more hurtful to them, than an holding either part of the Questions
concerning Predestination, Original Sin, or the Procession of the Holy Ghost,
or any other Speculative Opinions of that Kind: And that if the Observer's
Opinion of the Materiality be true; the Persons Dying in the belief of the
Immortality, shall never find or know, that they were deceived in it.

That Faith, and those Manners, which will serve them at an Intermediate
Judgment, will serve them as fully at the Last Judgment; their Works do follow
them, and will serve them as well at the one Judgment as at the other: They
will not be lost or diminished by the largest Account of Time which may pass
between their Deaths and the Resurrection: As the Persons rising shall be
perfect and known, yea, and the very same that Died, though they have suffered
far greater Alterations than Mr. M. has before pretended. The Faith and Works
of such Dying Persons, shall then also appear to be the same, which they were
at their several Deaths. The Resurrection and Last Judgment are certain, and
clearly Proveable by a strong Current of Scripture: But the Intermediate
Judgment, is neither likely, nor Proveable, by any clear Assertory Text of
Scripture whatsoever. The Observer, Advises Men therefore to build their
Expectations of future Recompenses upon the rockie and sure Ground of the
Resurrection; rather than upon the soft and sandy Ground of an Intermediate
Judgment.

The Observer conceives it a very improper, and something absurd Course to
bring a Man to Judgment whilst the is asleep; without first wakening him out of
it. And we know that every where the Scripture calls Death a Sleep. St. Stephen
(stoned to Death) fell asleep. Those who sleep in Jesus shall God bring with
him. We that are alive shall not prevent them that are asleep. If there be no
Resurrection, then all those that are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. All
Dead Persons are said to sleep with their Fathers, and all Men Naturally do
know, that Death is a sound Sleep, and has the common Reputation of something
beyond it; but certainly it is that, at the least. We know further this Effect
of a sound Sleep, that whether a Man sleep Four Hours, or Forty Hours, when he
awakes he can find no difference, nor know any thing of the degrees of Time
which have passed over him; and so for Forty thousand Days, 4000 Years. When
the Person shall be awaked, he can have no sense or perceiving of any time that
is passed over him; but rises perfectly, as if he had but fallen asleep a short
time before, and then shall find himself the same that he was when he fell
asleep, and as able to Account for what he has done in the Flesh, as he was in
the best time of his Life: So as they who have no other Impediments, but their
erroneous Tenet in this Point, shall not find themselves deceived to their
prejudice; but shall receive those full and real Recompenses which belong to
their Faith and Manners.

Mr. M. here further Quotes his good Friend Cicero, whose Words make plainly
for his Opinion; but are of little force for the convincing of the Observer,
who attributes as much to the Bp. of Worcester's Thoughts, as he does to those
of Cicero; but concludes, amicus Cicero, amici Doctores, sed magis amica
veritas. Mr. M. pretends to offer a Sixth Absurdity arising from the Opinion of
the Materiality, which has little that needs Answer in it, and to that which
needs it, a sufficient Answer has been given it in the foregoing Pages.

M. takes Exceptions at the Observer's Anatomy, for his placing the Power of
Sanguification in the Liver. He allows therein, That the Observer agrees with
the Ancient Anatomists; but says, That the later Anatomists differ in this
Point from the former upon good Grounds; denying, that this performance is made
in the Liver. But he says not what other Part or Place the later Anatomists
have assigned for this Office of Sanguification; and till they agree amongst
themselves about that Point, it seems the Observer may be justly excused, for
following the Ancient Anatomists in this Expression.

Mr. M. goes on to a Secondly, which in the first Part of it needs on Answer,
till he comes to his Repeating the Observer's Quotation of Miracles, in his
Observations upon Mr. B' s Sermon. Where the Case stood thus: Mr. B. has
Asserted in that Sermon, That Omnipotence it self, could not produce Thought or
Intelligence, out of mere Matter, by any Skill or Power he could used. The
Observer there absolutely denies this Assertion, and maintains the contrary,
both by Reasons and Examples; inferring from God's making Matter out of
nothing, That he can make whatsoever he pleases out of any Matter: And shows by
Examples, That God has done such Wonderful Things upon other Occacasions, as
give no less difficulty to the Minds of Men to conceive; than the Act of
producing Intelligence out of Matter may do. Whence it seems, he did not
produce those Miraculous Examples out of Levity; but for a very just Cause. P.
65. Mr. M. Asks, Is not God able to uphold the Soul in a State of Separation
from the Body? The Observer Answers, He is able so to do; and when he declares
he has so done, or will so do; the Observer is ready to believe it.

2dly. Mr. M. Asks, Are God's ordinary Works in Nature, to be confounded with
his Miracles. The Observer Answers, No.

3dly. Mr. M. Asks, Is it a good way of Arguing, from the Power of God to his
Will? And is Answered, No. And further, Mr. M. here grants as by his
enumeration of Particulars, That God can make Matter Cogitative, if he pleases
to do it; without acknowledging, That therein he departs from Mr. B's
Assertion, which the Observer had before opposed. Here Mr. M. goes on,
Repeating his Expressions formerly used, and Answered. He says, That it is the
part of a Philosopher, to admire the Works which God has done. The Observer
says so too; but not such Works as Mr. M. says he has done, unless he make
better Proof of his doing of them.

Mr. M. Will not allow the Observer to lay down Hypotheses contrary to the
Sense and Reason of Mankind, and then to tell us, God can make those
Suppositions good.

The Observer Answers, That he neither has done so, nor ever intends to do it;
but that this Suggestion Savours of that Spirit which has hitherto much Acted
in his Treatise.

M. begins at P. 67. and from thence to P. 68. may pass for a Peroration,
little to the purpose of Proving any thing concerning the Question now in
Dispute. He declaims against the debasing, the Humane Prerogative to the Degree
of Brutes. The Observer Answers, That Prerogatives ought to be justly
discerned; and all those granted, which of right ought to be so: And whatsoever
is not so, (though never so loudly claimed) is not to be granted, but denied. He
ought to remember his own Rule, de vero, nil nisi verum, and therefore if it be
true, That the Humane Soul is Material; it is but a just and righteous Act, to
deny and reject such Prerogatives as have been unduly Arrogated for it, and
without good reason have been ascribed to it. P. 68, 69. Mr. M. Discourses
concerning the Atomical Doctrines, and raising Bodies from their Motions and
Cohesions, accidentally without the Direction and Assistance of God's Wisdom
and Power: With which Imagination the Observer has nothing to do.

M. says, Atomists tell us, That the Soul is a Material Spirit extracted to a
wonderful fineness; reaching to an invisibility. The Observer agrees, That Dr.
Willis delivers that Opinion, and says, That the Particles of Blood, inflamed
in the Lungs, and made lucid in the Brain, are such Spirits; and that, he
says, may be demonstrated to the Sensations of Men, viz. by the strength of
Natural Faculties, or the powers of Sense and Reason united.

And thus much the Materialists pretend they know, and can demonstrate,
concerning their sort of Soul. But Mr. M. and those that join with him in
maintaining the Intelligent Soul, neither know, nor can demonstrate any thing
concerning it, nor any particular matter about it; neither the Quod, nor the
Quid, unde, quando, ubi, quomodo, nor quo. But because they cannot imagine,
some of them, how God can, others of them, how God does so Act the Humane
Organs by these Spirits, as to produce in them, and by them together, Life,
Sense and Intellect; they think he must needs have recourse to the means and
assistance of an Immaterial Spirit: According to the course of Men's common
Conceptions, who, when they see wonderful Things performed by great Artists;
the true Reasons of which they do not understand, either because those Artists
will not declare them, or being declared, such People will not believe them, or
cannot comprehend them; therefore presently impute them to the Effects of an
Immaterial Spirit. The rest of Mr. M's Words here need no Answer, being voces
and praeterea nihil. P. 71. Mr. M. says, That the maintaining the Soul to be
Material, is a reproach to Philosophy, and all sorts of Humane Learning, and
will be a likely means to bring them into contempt and hatred. The Observer
Answers, That the Terms of Philosophy and Humane Learning, are both of them
equivocal, and each of them may be taken in several Senses. Humane Learning may
be employed about good Things, or bad Things; and there are Arts Teaching to
deceive and falsify, as well as to Teach real Faculties and Truths: And the
Term of Philosophy may be used in diverse and different Senses.

Mr. M. in this Chap. has given us some Instances of it, where he says, That
the Epicureans framed and defended a Scheme of the World's Production, by the
Fortuitous Concourse of Atoms: Which he calls, Nonsensical gibberish, and an
empty Sound of unintelligible Words. Which the Observer thinks, do intend the
same thing with Canting, as it is now commonly understood among us. Mr. M.
further says, That we must not let go the Opinion of the Soul's Immortality,
that we may fall down and Worship that Philosophy, which those Men have set up.
The Observer does not know who are meant by the Term of those Men, whether the
Epicureans, or Materialists; each by themselves, or both of them together: If
he mean the first alone, no opposition shall be made to him in it; if the
second alone, then all that has been before spoken, may be used for his
Conviction in it; and if he mean a mixture of both together; the old Rule shall
be applied to him, dolus versatur in universalibus, and he makes this mixture
only to mislead his Readers.

which Teaches, That we have every Week a new Soul, and that at length Soul and
Body Die together.

The Observer says, That Mr. M. here seems to imitate an Old Father, who used
in his Oracles to mix Truth and Falsehood together, so that one of them might
make passage for the other. He has met indeed with a mean Scholar, to whom he
apply's the Term of Philosopher, whom the Truth which he discovers in that
Tenet, enables to maintain the Affirmative of his latter Tenet, viz. That the
Extinguishment of the Soul, is the Death of the Person: But for the former part
of it, viz. That Man has every Week a a new Soul; he lays and leaves it at M.
M's own Door, as an Imp and Product of his own Brain.

The Observer has sufficiently shown, That his sort of Soul is always as much
the same, as a River, or the Sea, or Blood, or Sap of a Tree are the same: Though
they are always in Motion and Alteration, yet they continue always the same
things; the Supplies of them being of the self-same Nature of that which is
spent or altered: And Mr. M's Metaphysical Arguments to the contrary, are but
like the Scholars making Three Eggs out of Two; and may well pass for parts of
vain Philosophy, which ought rather to be Condemned than Approved amongst Men;
and notwithstanding all the Daily Changes of this Soul, mentioned by Mr. M. it
is, and ever will be as much the same, as the Persons raised at the General
Resurrection shall be so.

The Observer, does not design to follow the Tract of searching into diverse
Modes of Vain Philosophy, or Science, falsely so called, because Error est
multiplex; but rather, to give Mr. M. and the Reader an Account what he thinks,
to be true Philosophy. It begins with the Capacities of tender Age, Teaching to
Speak and Write truly, their own Mother Tongue, and so to proceed in others,
especially the Learned Languages, and this is commonly termed, the Art of
Grammar: After which, it Teaches to Speak, and Write Elegantly, Floridly,
Teachingly and Passionately, and this is called the Art of Rhetoric: From
Words, it proceeds to Teach the Arts of Things and Thinking, to Form Notions,
or abstracted Ideas, and to Divide, Compare, Compound, Collect, Propose and
Infer; also to direct distinct Places and Repositories for Things of different
Natures, and to rank them in fitting Orders for the support and assistance of
the Memory, and this Art is called Logic; as directing the Mind, in the
Ordering and Disposition of Things: Thence Men proceed to the Arts
Mathematical, of Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and Harmony; which help to
fix Men's wandering Appetites and Notions, to the Apprehension of known and
certain Objects, and the Comprehension of them.

Next we go on to the general Contemplation of Nature, and all Things that have
known and certain Beings in the World, and this is called Physica; and proceeds
to examine the Nature both of Heaven and Earth, the Heavenly Bodies, and the
four Elements, and all their Inhabitants, and things pertinent to them; the
diverse sorts of Earth, Minerals, Metals and Stones: So rising to the Surface of
it, and there examining the Grasses, Herbs, Flowers and Plants; proceeding to
the Insects, Fishes, Fowls, Brutes and Men, examining their formerly called
Specific Forms and Qualities; lately changed for the Terms, of Capacities and
Powers, without a great difference of their significations. For the better
effecting such Examinations, Men Daily make the best use they can of their
Sensations, viz. of their Five Senses, assisted (as they must be) by their
Rational Faculties, able and ready to Correct diverse Mistakes which the Sensual
Faculties are Naturally liable unto. Thus Men's Senses furnish the Mind with
suitable Objects for its Examination, and searching Men make Trial of them all,
and whatsoever belongs to them; the Parts of which they are Composed, the
Causes and Effects of them, their several manners of Working, and whatsoever by
their Senses can be found out concerning them: They ponder and ruminate upon
them, and divide, compare, compound, and collect from them, frame Propositions
concerning them; and thence Infer, as to themselves seems most Reasonable. Then
they communicate their Opinions to other Men, whom they think capable of
Judging in such Cases, and Dispute and Argue the same with such Persons, as
their present Occasions may require; sometimes extending such Conferences to
Foreign Regions and far distant Places: They examine the Traditions of their
Forefathers, and what our Ancestors have said and thought concerning them.
They Read and Study the Books which have been Written upon such Subjects from
the earliest Times which they can attain unto, and thus they Cultivate and
Enrich their Understandings, by storing up in their Written Collections and
Memories, the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, derived to them from the
beginnings of Time, and the most remote Parts of the Earth; grounded upon the
Testimonies of many Sensations and Experiments, which do not easily or
frequently deceive the Expectations of such as ground themselves upon them. The
Observer Designs to apply this to the Question now in Dispute, and says, He
had passed the 62d. Year of his Age under the apprehension and belief of the
Soul's Immortality; and that then solitarily, and unmoved by any Discourse or
Writing; the Consideration of this Question, fell upon him. He was Convinced or
Persuaded by his Sensations, That the Constitution of Man's Body, was made up
of Matter and Spirit, as those of all other Sublunary Creatures were. The
Grass, Flowers, and Plants, have Matter and Spirit; which appears plainly to
the searching Inquirers. The Infects have Matter of a light and weak Composure,
and an Humor analogous to Blood and Spirit. The Fishes are watery, yet have
some Blood, and some of the greatest sorts of them, have it in great
quantities. The Fowls are light and Airy; their Matter being Flesh and Bones,
and their Spirits of Blood, which some of their greatest sorts, as Geese and
Turkies have in considerable quantities. The Matter and Spirits of Brutes are
very well known amongst us, and it is visible and palpable to us, That the Life
of them is in their Blood, and that they never do, nor can Live without it; and
that Breath is as necessary to them; and upon the same reason, that it is to
Men. And Solomon Disputing upon this Question Ecclesiastes the 3d. speaks
concerning the Similar Natures of Men and Beasts, they are generated alike,
have need of a like Blood and Breath, and their Bodies return to the like dust,
and who knows what difference there is concerning their Spirits? He leaves that
undetermined, which is now the Subject of the present Question. But that the
Life of both is in the Blood, Moses declares, and Experience verifies: For if
one draw out of a Beast its whole Blood, and at another Orifice let into its
Body the Blood of another Beast sufficient for its repletion: the latter Beast
must Die by the loss of its Blood, but the first Beast may Live, by the newly
received Blood; and be affected with no perceivable harm by such a change. And
the same also befalls Men: If we let out all the Man's Blood at one Orifice, and
in the mean while intromit the Blood of a Calf, or a Sheep into that Man's Body
at another Orifice; the Beast must Die, but the Man will Live, without any
clear sense of the loss of his own Blood: Nor will he only live or move, by the
Virtue of his new received Blood, but he will have the use of all his Senses,
Speech, Intellect and Memory, as he had before; and which without such fresh
supply of Blood, would have been utterly lost.

The Observer further considered, That by a failure of any of the sensitive
Organs, the Man may, and often does lose the use of that Sense; so as the
Spirit cannot act the Sense, but only in its proper Organ, and both of them
must be sound for the production of it: The Spirit also can Speak by the
Tongue, but not without it; it can Imagine in the forepart of the Brain, but
no where else; it can Estimate and Judge in the middle-part of the Head, and
Remember only in the back-part of it. If the Blood and Spirit be over Thin and
Watery, Phlegmatic, Scorbutic, or too Hot and Fevescent, too Salt or Sharp;
the Brain may be ill affected from any of these, or the like Causes; which
Physicians intend to remedy by Purging, or restoring to a right State the
Stomach, Liver, or other Parts where the Sanguification is made. If the
Imagination be tainted, they apply Fomentations, Blood-letting, or Plasters to
the forepart of the Head; if the Judgment be crazed, they apply to the
middle-part of the Head; if the Memory fail, they do so to the hind-part of the
Head; and diverse times with very good success, performing diverse Cures
thereupon. He further Considered, That in Distempers of the Brain, and failures
of the Understanding, Physicians do Advise, and Men Practice with good success
the changes of Air, Diet, Company, fresh or sweet Smells, Mirth, Jollity with a
Cup of good Wine; and good Effects have followed all these Prescriptions and
Practices. The Observer pondered and conceived within himself, That all these
were Natural and proper Remedies for correcting the Distempers of the Blood,
and restoring the imbecillities of the Organs, or removing such Obstructions as
hindered the Operation of them; but neither any of them, nor altogether, were
likely to effect or work any thing at all upon an Immaterial Intelligent
Spirit. Men tell us, That this Spirit Acts and Works all that it does, by
Intervention of the Material Spirits of the Blood; but they give us no other
Proof of what they say, than that the Bodily Organs are not, cannot be Acted,
but by means of these Spirits. That we grant, and say, That there neither is,
nor needs an Intelligent Spirit, for the Acting of them; but that they of
themselves do Act, and are enough to Act the Bodily Organs, Daily supplied as
they are with Food and Nourishment, from the Ambient World; as a River is
supplied from its Fountains, and Plants, with Sap extracted from the Earth. If
the Root cannot extract that, the Plant must die; if the Fountains fail, the
livers dry up; and if the Sensitive Creatures want nourishment, their Spirits
fail, and their Limbs and Bodies wither, consume and die for want of such
Supplies gas are suitable to their Natures.

These Considerations wrought upon the Observer, to make a further search into
this Disquisition: He ruminated long upon it, and then propounded it to other
People whom he thought capable of it; but found not one amongst them, who had a
compliance for it, but maintained the contrary. The main Argument that they
relied upon for the defense of it, was the largeness of it spread in the World,
and amongst the Divines and Doctors of it, whence it was become so radicated;
that if it was an Error, it was become irremediable, and that the endeavoring
to remove it out of Men's Minds might do more harm to the Peace of the Church,
than the Planting of a new Opinion (though true) could do good by the Truth of
it. This Argument a Commodo did not enough prevail with the Observer to give
over and desert his Design and Search concerning this Point; but he still
Ruminated, Conferred, and Read, as Opportunity served him: He searched the
Scriptures and Read them many times over, and Noted upon a Paper whatsoever he
there met with concerning this Subject: He procured all Books that Treated of
it, and which he could attain by Buying or Borrowing, and gave them an
attentive Perusal, and then Writ down his own Thoughts, and Collections upon
them, and Published that Pamphlet how opposed by Mr. M. in such a manner, as
the Observer cannot tell in what manner to Reply to it. Mr. M. has so twisted
and complicated together his Rhetoric, Logic and Metaphysick, that it is not
easy to distinguish which of his Expressions belongs to one, which to another,
and delivered what he says in such an Athletick and Domineering Style; that he
has sometimes attracted a Sympathizing return from the Observer, different from
the usual course of his Nature: He apprehends that Mr. M. intended with
Alexander to cut in sunder the Gordian Knot of this Question, by his sharp and
piercing Style: But he thinks, he is therefrom well Defended by the Shield and
Buckler of Faith and Patience, the Faith and Belief, That he holds the Truth in
this Point, and a Patience supported with a knowledge, That New Truths are not
to be maintained without an apparent Consequence of Suffering. Prove. 26.4, 5.
Solomon gives a double Direction in this Case, one in direct Words contrary to
the other; and the Observer has happened to follow the Direction of both
Places, sometimes of the one, sometimes of the other, according as it happened,
and (perhaps) as Solomon intended.

The Observer did Incite Mr. B. to Write an Answer to his Pamphlet, expecting
from him such an one, as would be Knowing, Solid, and Temperate; instead of
which, Mr. M's Treatise is Printed with little of the first Requisite in it,
and nothing at all of the other two; as though he did not design to draw a Sinner
from the Error of his way, but weakly, Triumphum canere ante Victoriam. He
says, Men will be apt to censure all Philosophy, for the ill use the Observer
has made of it in his Pamphlet. The Observer says, That there are ill uses
made by Mr. M's Metaphysical Arguments, produced concerning the uncertainty of
Men's Persons, happening by the Alterations pertaining to their Bodies and
Souls, and such other like Parts of his Treatise: But those that consider the
Scheme of Philosophy that the Observer has now laid down, cannot without
contradiction to their own Sensations, pretend a probable Reason of Quarrel to
it: If that Herd amongst which Mr. M, Officiates, shall happen to make any
Quarrel to it; it will but prove the state of their own Ignorance, and that
they Err in so doing; as perhaps, they may be found to do in diverse other
Things.

The Observer did ever, and does still desire a sober knowing and Canvas of his
Opinion. The Primitive Greek Churches, Disturbed and Divided by the Heresies of
Sabellius, Arius, and diverse others, called upon Eleutherius then Bishop of
Rome to stand up for the Catholic Doctrine, and the Peace of the Christian
Church: So the Observer is desirous to incite and stir up the present Bishop of
Worcester, whose Light is now great in the Church, that as he has lately
Written excellently well concerning the Trinity; so he will take upon him to
Treat fully and purposely concerning this Question, if his Age and Infirmity
will permit; Conferring thereupon with his most able Brethren, and
communicating to some of them his Labors as they are Written in single Sheets,
during the course of his Progress, which may have a double Advantage. First,
That any thing therein found amiss, may be more easily amended, or Transcribed.
Secondly, A prevention of its passing forward with a communicative Tincture in
any of those Sheets that may follow it.


Our Lawyers are very cautious in their Proceedings upon Questions of great
Moment: If the great Counselors differ amongst themselves in a Point in Law,
the Matter is brought to Trial by Process in one of the Courts at Westminster,
where it is Argued before the Judges of it; and if they also differ upon the
Point, it is carried by Process, into the Chequer-Chamber, to be there Tried
before all the Judges of England, who sit and hear it Argued before them by the
ablest Lawyers on either side, three, four, or five times, at several
considerable Distances, Spaces, or Terms; that there may be time enough given
for the full Inspection, or Consideration of it: And after they have heard what
can be spoken on either side, then the Judges themselves Argue the Point as
largely as they please; each declaring his own Opinion thereupon: And then, if
there be a considerable number of Dissenters against the major Opinion, they
Adjourn the Case yet further, propter difficultatem, to further Days and Times,
having sufficient intervals; such as map still give more leisure for a fuller
Consideration: And in fine, if the dissenting Party still hold to be very
considerable; they Adjourn the Case before the Upper-House of Parliament, and
there it is again Argued by Counsel on both sides, as often as the Lords think
fit to Appoint: Then the Judges Argue again, and deliver their Opinions with
the Reasons thereof; then such of the Lords as please, speak to it, and it is
at last finally Determined, by the Majority of Voices in the Lords House; after
which, it passes for Law in all the Courts of Westminster, and throughout the
whole Kingdom of England, and stands for a Rule in the Case Disputed; and in
all other like Cases.

The Observer further says, That if the Forenamed Learned Bishop will take
the pains to Examine the particulars alleged by him in this and his former
larger Treatises, and give such Answers to them, as upon Conference he shall
think fit to do: And let the Staff fall which way it will, he will hereafter be
silent without publicly Disputing or Writing against the said Bishop's
declared Opinion, so delivered and confirmed as aforesaid. He knows that the
said Bishop has Defended the Opinion of the Immortality, in his Writings: But
he takes the Bishop for a Person of great Integrity, and that he is a Old, and
likely as near Death as himself: He knows of himself, That the whole Kingdom of
England offered him, to give a false Verdict in this, or the like Case, would
be utterly despises by him: And he conceives full as well of the Bishop; and
therefore dare remit the Point now in Dispute, to his Determination, as
aforesaid. P. 63. Mr. M. says, The Material Opinion cannot stand, but upon
the supposition of a continual Course of Miracles to make it good; which is
very Absurd and Vnphilosophical.

The Observer Replies (granting the Rule) That to Prove by Miracles is
unphilosophical; and that he holds it convenient in this Place to Examine which
of the Two Opinions now in Dispute, stand the most in need of Miracles to Prove
the Truth of it, and which of the opposite Parties, make most use of that sort
of Argument. The Material Opinion, he says, has only one wonderful Work in it,
viz. The great Effect of God's Wisdom and Power, in producing Life, Growth,
Motion, Affection, Sensation, Perception, Imagination, Judgment, Memory, all
sorts of Thinking, by his Skilful contexture of Matter and Spirit together;
which our Opponents are pleased to express by the Terms of Matter and Motion.
Mr. B. denies, That the Skill and Power of Divinity can in that manner produce
these Effects. But Mr. M. obiter or transiently grants, That the Skill and
Power of Omnipotence, can Effect such Things if he pleases, by Natural means,
applicando activa passivis; as we see he gives the vast Body of the Sea a
Motion with diverse variations; which Men cannot yet comprehend: So has he given
the Planets, Stars and other Heavenly Bodies, a perpetual Motion, generally
regular, but with such variations, as Men cannot comprehend or understand:
Plants and Trees Flourish and Decay, alternately, they shoot out Leaves,
Blossom and Fruit, in a wonderful variety, the next Causes of which Men cannot
find out: Fowls and Brutes, Live, Grow, Move, use their Senses and Affections,
and such low degrees of Fantasy, Memory, Estimation or Choice as they have by
the Virtue and Activity of the Spirits and Blood beforementioned, without Men's
being able to apprehend the Quomodo of it: And so we may say, concerning the
activity of the Wind amongst the Organ-pipes, a thing which we every Day see
with our Eyes, hear with our Ears, and handle with our Hands, and yet are not
able thoroughly to discuss and resolve the Quomodo of all those Actions and
Varieties which are Performed by it. The foregoing Instances have been
produced to Prove a Simile that such like Things have been made and done by
God, and are still continued and subject to our view in the World; as Wonderful
Effects of the great Skill and Power of God, and which Men are not able to
comprehend or understand. We proceed to the Immaterial Intelligent Spirit, and
require of Mr. M. and other Immortalists, some sort of Proofs maintaining their
Opinion, though they should be but a Simile. We desire them to produce at least
some one Instance in Nature where God acts Matter by an Immaterial Intelligent
Spirit: And the Observer considers, they cannot produce any one Instance of
such a Conjunction out of the whole Book of Nature, except this one, which they
have invented, concerning the Constitution of Man; and therefore it is no
wonder that they are put to the coining of Miracles for the maintaining of the
same. Two of which shall here be examined. The Wits of Men have never been able
to conceive any more ways for the production of the Soul of Man, but these
Three, viz. by Generation, by Pre-existence, or new Creation of such Souls upon
every Procreation of a Body. Mr. M. and his Aids reject the very true way of
producing Mankind, viz. That of Generation; being convinced, that whatsoever is
Generated, grows, decays and is corruptible. Orig. Sacr. P. 432. our Learned
Bishop says, Nothing in the World produced by Generation, can be incorruptible.
To avoid therefore this Rock of producing the Soul by Generation (though it be
never so true) Pherecydes the Invenrer of the Immaterial Opinion, with his
Scholars and Successors Pythagoras, and Plato, and those who came after them,
pretended another sort of Original of the Soul. The more Ancient held, That
Men's Souls did Pre-exist long before they came into the several Bodies, and had
been Existent in a former World, before the present World, and for Offenses
given to God in their former Stations, they were Doomed to inhabit Bodies of
Clay in this World, sometimes of Men and sometimes of Beasts; as a Purgatorial
Punishment upon them; that they lived in such Bodies, as in Cages and Prisons,
desiring continually to be delivered from them, and to escape thence into the
open Air. But the latter and Christian Platonists, amongst whom, some of the
Fathers say, They Believed, That God at the Creation of the World, made a vast
number of Humane Souls, enough by coming, going and removing, to Actuate and
Inhabit all such Humane Bodies as should after be Generated in the World; and
that all Men's Souls are still of that Pre-existent Nature. But Mr. M. and his
present Aids (upon diverse inconveniences found in this Opinion) have utterly
rejected this sort of Original of Humane Souls; and give themselves up to
maintain this sort of Original of them, viz. The Opinion of God's new Creation
of a Soul, for every new Procreation of a Humane Body, be the same never so
foul and Beastly, in Adultery, Incest, or the Conjunction of Men with Beasts:
If the Product fall out to be of Humane shape, God (say they) is ready at every
such Procreation to make, and does Create a new, clean and spotless Said, to
Actuate and Inhabit such a newly Procreated Body.

The Observer hereupon conceives, That all Creations are the Miraculous Works
of God! They do not tell us whether their sort of Creation be out of Matter, or
Ex nihilo; but which soever of those ways it be, it is however a Miraculous
Work of God: And by this course such Miracles must be multiplied continually
over the Face of the whose Earth; and through the Minutes of Time which pass
through the Ages of it. Another Miracle necessary for the maintenance of the
Immaterial Doctrine, and flowing from such new Creation of Souls, is this, That
these new Created, Pure, Innocent Souls, are put, thrust, or cast into the
Seminal Matter not exceeding perhaps the bigness of a Nutt, derived and coming
from the Loins of Adam, and tinctured (like an unsavory Cask) with a foul
Ingredient of Original Sin: This unhappy Intelligent Spirit, presently infected
with that abominable Poison, and going on to increase in Conjunction with such
a Body, is by no Natural force, able to shake off this Deplorable Corruption;
but it goes on increasing together with the Body and the Soul, till they both
together Taste deeply the ill Effects of it in this Life; and when separated,
this, at first Pure and Innocent Soul, in the Natural Course of it, falls or is
carried to be a Companion of Devils, and a fellow-sufferer in the Torments of
Hell: And this is a second Miracle, necessary for the maintenance of the Soul's
Immortality. They are both of them extremely improbable and very little
agreeable with the Goodness and Glory of God. To these a Third Immaterial
Doctrine shall be added necessary for the maintenance of that opinion, viz.
That Souls of Dying Persons go immediately before God, and receive a a Judgment
and Doom from him within a short time after their Deaths. The Observer has said
in his larger Treatise, and repeats it here in this Place, That if the
Immaterialists can by Reason or Scripture make a clear Proof of any one of
these Three Tenets which are all necessary for the maintenance of their
Doctrine, viz. Of this new Creation of Souls: This sort of infecting them with
Original Sin: Or, that there is an intermediate Judgment betwixt Men's Deaths
and the Resurrection: If they can make a good clear Proof of any one of these
Points, from Reason and Scripture, or from either of them; the Observer will be
ready to submit to their Judgment in the main Point of the Immortality.

M. says, The knowledge of the Spirits above us must arise from the knowledge
of our own Souls.

The Observer denies this Assertion and says, That the knowledge of Superior
Spirits has two other Originals, viz. Sensation and Revelation, and we do
plainly know and perceive more concerning Immaterial Spirits, by the effects of
their Operations and such Revelations as the Scripture makes of them; than
either is Revealed to us, or can be perceived by us, of such an Immaterial
Spirit as Mr. M. pretends to be in us. Mr. M. says further, That the knowledge
of our own Souls must necessarily go before the knowledge of God. The Observer
says, That both by Reason and Revelation, we may, and do attain to a more
large knowledge of God, and a greater certainty of his Being and Actions, than
Men yet ever have had, or are ever likely to have of the Immaterial Intelligent
Soul of Man. P. 73. Mr. M. Quotes a saying of Epicurus, That God is not angry,
or pleased with any Men. Which, he says, is a Notion more befitting
Sardanapalus than a Deity. This Comment of Mr. M. upon his Quotation, speaks
him (in the Observer's Judgment) a Man of a narrow Capacity; and therefore he
will endeavor to enlarge his Thoughts upon this Subject. It passes for an
accepted Rule, That if the Words of a Speaker or Writer, may fairly and easily
be taken in a good Sense, it is a sign of ill Nature, at least, to take them in
a bad one.

To understand the Words of Epicurus, both in a true and a good Sense, Men must
reflect with great Observation upon such an Idea as the Scriptures have
Revealed, and Reason Teaches to Believe concerning the Being of God. Job 23.3.
O that I knew where I might find God, he works round about me, but I cannot
perceive him; with what words shall one speak of him? Surely if one speak of
him, he that does so shall even be swallowed up and confounded. We cannot order
our Words concerning him, nor have we an Order of Words that can reach him: He
has no particular Faculties, Powers, or Parts; but being One and entire, is All
in One. Concerning him, Job 40.5. once have I spoken, but I will not Answer,
yea twice, but I will proceed no further. This Transcendent Immensity, having
no Parts; contained in no Place; affected with no Time; touched with no
Passion; filling, and in himself containing all Places and Things; Guiding
without Care; Working without Labor; Commanding without Speaking; Compelling
without Force; Rewarding without Inclination; Punishing without Provocation;
Knowing, Supporting; Supplying and Governing all Things, in all Times and
Places at once, with less Motion than that we call nutu aut intuitu; this One,
this All, in whom all Things are, what is his Name, and what is his Son's Name?

Mr. M. has set forth and magnified the Vigor, Velocity and Extent of Man's
Imagination and Intellect; but they can by no means extend to utter true and
adequate Conceptions concerning this Being: Concerning whom Job's Friends say,
If thou art wicked, what harm do thou to him? thy righteousness may profit a
man like thy self; but it can by no means affect that high Majesty. Man's
Goodness or Badness, cannot raise in God either Joy or Grief, Pleasure or
Displeasure: He has no more Affections than he has Parts: He Is free from all
Disturbances, Passions, or Inclinations, acting Justice and Goodness through
the whole space of his unconceivable Dominion, resting in his own Clearness,
Constancy and Serenity: He distributes throughout the whole Created World those
Orders which among us upon Earth, are the effects or products of Pleasure or
Displeasure, and distributes Rewards and Punishments without the incitements of
Wrath, but by the due and infallible directions of his Justice, Wisdom and
Goodness. Men do not choose, or suffer mortal Judges that are inclinable to
Wrath, Fear, Pity, Love, or any other Affections: And he that is the Judge of
all the World does absolute Right among his Creatures, without Affection,
Passion, or Inclination, or any thing like that we call Pleasure or Displeasure
amongst Men. P. 75. Mr. M. says, You may tell Men of a future Resurrection and
Judgment as long as you will, but if they can stifle Reason so far as to
disbelieve the Soul's Immortality; they may far more plausibly deny the Article
of the Resurrection: As if he thought the Proof of the Immortality was stronger
than that of the Resurrection. To which the Observer Answers, That there is no
comparison in the clearness of the Proofs of the Resurrection, and of the
Immortality: For that those of the Resurrection are clear and strong
throughout? the whole New Testament; but those of the Immortality, are neither
positive nor firmly concluding.

Mr. M. says, Others will say, as the Tree falls so it lies. And the Observer
agrees in the Truth of it, that so it must do until the Resurrection, That
there is no Device nor Counsel in the Grave; nor any sort of alteration after
Death, or between that and the Resurrection; but as the Tree falls so it lies,
until that Time, and as Death leaves us so Judgment shall finds us. P. 76. Mr.
M. Demands, What good purpose can there be in over-throwing the Immortality,
and establishing that of the Resurrection?

The Observer Answers, The purpose is, to establish Truth, and reverse Error,
and to plant Expectation of future Recompenses upon Sound and Rocky Ground,
viz. The Doctrine of the Resurrection, which is irrefragable to any that
believe the Scriptures.

Whereas, such an Expectation built upon the sandy Ground of the Immortality,
may be over-thrown by dint of Reason, and other Scriptures, and therewith, all
must fall which has been built upon it, and great will be the fall of it;
endangering the whole Doctrine of future Recompenses after the Death of the
Person.

M. says, That the Opinion of the Materiality is directly contrary to the
avowed Doctrine of the Church of England. And for Proof thereof, he Quotes
Expressions of a Prayer used in the Office of Burial, and those of a Homily,
dilating upon the Parable of Dives; neither of which is a positive Proof of our
Church's Opinion in this Point, nor so strong a Proof of it, as if it had been
asserted amongst the Thirty nine Articles, or in the Church-Catechism, or in
their Book of Canons: But he does agree, That it is a good presumptive Proof of
the Church's Opinion about it; and he does also agree, That the general Opinion
of the Divines of this Church does stand with, and support the Belief of the
Soul's Immortality.

Mr. M. says, That no honest Materialist, can declare his unfeigned consent to
that Prayer Quoted out of the Office of the Burial. And this shall be agreed to
him, but proves no more, than that in this particular, the said honest Man may
hold his peace at the reciting of that Prayer, and not join with the rest of
the Company in it. And Mr. M. says further, That if the Material Opinion be
true, the Dissenters from the Church of England should be more in the right, if
they sented in this Point also, from the Tenet of our Church. This also shall
be agreed to him. Mr. M. says, P. 78. There is no Point of Doctrine wherein the
Dissenters differ from the Church of England, so important as this of the
Soul's Materiality. To this also the Observer agrees, and says, That he
believes all the particular Points of Doctrine wherein the Dissenters differ
from the Church of England, are Things of very small moment in themselves, but
are blown up by the Wind of Fantasy to the show of a great appearance in the
dazzled Eyes of the Dissenters only, and are truly of no real importance to
Religion. They seem to ground their Offense upon our Church's observing such
outward Modes of Worship, as have too near a compliance and accommodation with
those used by the Whore of Babylon: Which Opinion if they will follow in
Doctrine as well as Discipline, they must forsake the Opinion of the
Immortality; because the Church of Rome do strongly maintain that Opinion, and
it has been by a General Council Ordained to be de fide amongst them. Our
Church of England does nor require so strict an Adherence to the Points of
Doctrine or Discipline maintained by it, as the Church of Rome does; but opens
the Bowels of her Compassion to her weak Children dissenting from some
particular Parts of her Doctrine or Discipline; provided, they be still willing
and ready to acknowledge Her for their Mother, and submit to Her Orders
generally, or in Things wherein they have not particular Reasons to the
contrary, and especially when they profess a readiness to appeal to Her most
considerate Judgment, for the Hearing, or Determining, such Doubts and
Scruples, as at sometimes may fall upon them.

The Observer has already called upon the Bishop of Worcester, assisted by the
most Knowing Persons of his Faculty, to produce their Reasons, and give their
Judgments in this Point; and if he, and they, shall at present wave the
delivery of their Opinions in this Point: He Appeals further to a National
Synod, or Convocation, to which he is ever ready to submit his Opinion; with
this caution, not to be Determined by a bare Majority of Voices, nor by a less
Majority, than Two third Parts of the whole Assembly: As is reasonably observed
in the Roman Conclave, and as was pretended to be observed in the
Trent-Council, where they said, They did not Determine Points of Doctrine, if a
great, or considerable Number of Voices did refuse to consent to the Agreement
of the Major Part: But our Dissenters on the contrary, like Froward and very
Ill-natured Children, do utterly Reject the Authority of their Mother the
Church. She like a tender Parent extends her Arms to receive them, sets open
the Doors of her Oratories, and calls them to her kind and wonted Embraces;
exhorting them to enter again into her Communion, with a readiness to forgive
all that is past and an inclination to heal or even to bear with their
Weaknesses and Infirmities, and their errors of Opinions, in Doctrine or
Discipline: Whilst they like Wasps (better furnished with Stings than Honey)
seek rather to destroy than cultivate the Hives and Stocks wherein they have
been preserved and nourished. They repudiate and disown their own Natural
Parent, because they think they discover some spots and wrinkles in the
Ornaments of her fine Linen, pudet hoec opprobia vobis, and dici potuisse, and
non potuisse refelli.

Chap. VI. P. 79. Mr. M. repeats the Names of Aristotle, Dicearchus and Pliny,
mentioned by the Observer in his Quoted Pamphlet, not as a Proof of the
Materiality; but to show there was need of better Proof of the Immortality,
than Mr. B. had given of it. Mr. M. here further mentions Pherecydes as the
first among the Philosophers, who Defended (or Invented) this Doctrine of the
Immortality, as before has been observed, and shall here be granted. P. 80. Mr.
M. Quotes Pythagoras as Pherecydes's Scholar, and next maintainer of the
Immortality. The Observer will mind the Reader of the effect of this Opinion,
held by the latter and Learned, from the former, viz. That their sort of Soul
had a perfect Pre-existence, before it came into the Body of a Man, and held
that same existence after the departure from the Body, whereby it was capable
of Animating another Man, Horse, Camel, or Dog, Fish, Fowl, or any other living
Creature; and that Souls did continually undergo such changes of Habitations,
throughout the World from the beginning of it. This Opinion therefore, the
Observer says; ought to be rejected, quia ducit ad absurdum.

Mr. M. says, Plato Traveled into Italy, to gather Learning out of the School
of Pythagoras there, and gathered from thence his Opinion of the Pre-existence
of Souls, which he after changed so far, as to conceive, That the
Transmigration of Souls was not common to Men and Beasts; but that they went
only from one Man to another, and were put into Bodies for Pennances and
Purgatories, and were enclosed in them as in Cages or Prisons, which they were
desirous to leave with the first opportunity. An Opinion convinced of Falsity
and Error by every Man's Daily Experience: Which Proves to us, That there is no
Union in the World more Natural, pleasing and desired, than that of Soul and
Body, nor whose separation is more grievous than theirs.

Mr. M. Quotes Dr. More's Verses P. 81. of which no more shall be said; but
like Lips, like Lettice. Mr. M. here further Quotes Plato and Cicero, both
which we give up to him as Gross and Erroneous Immortalists. P. 82. He pretends
to Quote Socrates, when his Quotation is only what Plato puts into Socrates's
Mouth, who in this feigned Dialogue, makes Socrates say what he pleases.

Mr. M. here gives us Plato's Opinion to the same effect, and near in the same
Terms, that the common Opinions of Men now hold it, and hence it seems the
Christian Platonists derived it, and delivered it to the Scholars of their
Schools, who spread the same accordingly, supported by St. Matthew's Words of
cannot kill the Soul: Wording our Savior's Doctrine according to that Tenet
which he believed, and was then common in the World. P. 83. Here he goes still
on to deliver such Words as Plato is pleased to put into the Mouth of Socrates.
He further Quotes Plotinus's Saying, If we could see the Soul in its own naked
Essence, we should not doubt of its Immortality. And this is agreed by the
Observer; who therefore desires Mr M. to show us this Soul in its own naked
Essence, or tell us by what search we may come to such a Sight of it. His
following Words are unpracticable. P. 84. He Quotes Maximus, whose Words shall
be left to the World to consider, not believed by the Observer. P. 85. Mr. M.
Quotes the Stoics, who say, The departed Souls are turned into Hero's, some
good, and some bad. Believe them who list.

Then he says, out of Seneca, The Humane Soul is a Deity dwelling in a Humane
Body. Mr. M. says, This is too high an Expression. (he might as well have
said, he knew it to be false.) P. 86. Is Quoted Seneca, who calls the Body the
Prison of the Soul. Like a right Platonist, and deriving his Opinions from
them. The Reader may consider, Plutarch was an Heathen Philosopher, and likely
knew nothing concerning the Resurrection of the Person. Mr. M. here further
says, That such Christians may be ashamed, who stand in need of Instructions
from a Heathen, concerning the Soul's Immortality. The Observer says, That
rather such Christians have reason to be ashamed, who derive their Opinion of
the Immortality from Thoughts of Heathen Idolaters, and follow their
Instructions concerning it. P. 87. Mr. M. delivers, That the Opinion of the
Immortality, was the ground of their Worshipping their departed Hero's. Which
was their Idolatry, and one very bad effect of their conceited Immortality. P.
88. Cicero's Words here Quoted, seem fit to be put into Mr. M's own Mouth. If I
be mistaken in this Point of the Immortality, I will still maintain it, Error
though it be, nor will I be drawn out of this Error as long as I live; because
it pleases me, and I am delighted with the apprehension of it. He says
further, That the Platonists and Stoics (the earliest maintainers of this
Doctrine) speak of the Soul, as if it were an Incarnate Deity. But it is to be
hoped, Mr. M. will confess, That they Erred very grossly in it: As the Observer
thinks they did in the whole Point of the Soul's Immortality. P. 89.
Xenocrates, held, There are future Rewards and Punishments; and that the Soul
is imprisoned in the Body. In the First, his Opinion is true; in the Second
false.

M. has before taken hold of the Opinions of Philosophers, believing the
Immortality, and thence deriving, their Doctrine of the Transmigration of
Souls, and the Idolatrous Worship of their departed Hero's: And here he prays
Aid of the Poets also, and their Elysium and Barathrums, Old Charon and his
Boat, all imagined to be in the Bowels of the Earth: And from such Fables and
Fictions, endeavors to support his Opinion of the Immortality; as if it were a
sinking Cause that needed support, by catching hold of those Osiers which grow
upon the Banks of Cocytus. Mr. M. Demands, Shall any who believe the Gospel,
deny the Immortality of the Soul? Yes, says the Observer, any Man who firmly
believes the Resurrection of the Person and the last Judgment, may do it: And
perhaps, will not be unlikely to fall into a disbelief of this Heathen
Immortality. P. 91. Mr. M. Confesses, That Socrates, Cicero and Seneca, his
Three great Maintainers of the Soul's Immortality (and he might have said the
same of his Master Plato himself) That each of them at diverse times did doubt
the Truth of this their Doctrine, concerning the Immortality, and were never
able to arrive at a certainty or constant Resolution in this Point. And how
then can their Disciples hope to do it? He Names Dicaearchus, as derided by
Cicero; but he is very highly commended by Pliny, and like a true Disciple of
his Master Aristotle, was a strong Defender of that Master's Opinions, and a
constant Declaimer against the Soul's Immortality; as was also Hippocrates the
most Learned Physician. P. 92. Anaxarchus calling the Body the Prison of the
Soul, shows, that therein he Erred with the Platonists.

For Epicharmus's Saying, it came from the School of Plato, and the Doctrine,
That the Souls of dying Men were turned into Hero's, which Mr. M. will not deny
to be a false and fallacious Opinion.

Mr. M. in this Chapter has gone no higher in the derivation of his Opinion,
than to the time of Pherecydes, who lived after the return of the Jews from
their Babylonish Captivity; which time was less than 600 Years before our
Lord's Incarnation, and 1000 Years after the Birth of Moses the Prophet and
Lawgiver of the Jews; from whose Writings the Observer pretends to Derive and
Prove his Opinion of the Soul's Materiality: Taking the said Soul and Life of
the Creature to lie and reside in the Blood of it; as being the Spirits of such
Blood, inflamed and glowing, which rise first from the Heart to the Head; where
being made lucid, they act the Brain and the Cephaline Organs, and thence are
conveyed by the Nerves, Fibers, and Tendons, to all the Muscles, Joints,
Members and Parts of the Body: All which, are invigorated and Acted by such
glowing Blood, and the Spirits of it, so knownly and apparently; as that where
the passage of this Blood is obstructed, so that it cannot arrive at any Part
or Member of the Body; that Part withers and becomes useless to the Person,
till such Obstructions be removed: And then it may, and often does recover;
sometimes to the wonder of those who effect such Cures. We have said before,
That the Blood of a Beast cast by Transfusion into the Body of a Man, will Act
the Person and all his Faculties of Motion, Sense, Speech and Understanding, in
the same manner that his own Blood performed it before, and without any great,
or even perceivable difference: Also if the Blood be totally corrupted, or
exhausted; the Person must certainly Die, beyond all hope of help or recovery
by Humane Art or Knowledge whatsoever: And with this Doctrine, the Text of
Moses seems fully to agree, Levit. 17.11. The Life of the Flesh is in the
Blood. And I have given it to you upon the Altar, to make an Atonement for
your Souls; for it is the Blood that makes an Atonement for the Soul (or
Person) Ver. 13. He that hunts and kills a Beast, or Fowl, shall pour out the
Blood thereof, and cover it with Dust; for it is the Life of all Flesh; the
Blood of it is for the life thereof: Therefore ye shall eat the Blood of no
manner of Flesh; for the life of all Flesh is the Blood thereof. This Doctrine
is Registered in a History more Ancient than Moses's time by 500 Years, Genesis
9.4. But flesh with the life thereof which is the blood thereof shall ye not
eat; and surely your blood of your Lives will I require at the hand both of man
and beast. Whosoever sheds this blood of the life of man, by man shall his
blood be shed; for in the Image of God made he man. And thus we find it Proved
by the highest Antiquity, and greatest Wisdom that has been in the World, That
Blood is the Life of Man and Beast; so as the Life is conveyed with and by the
Blood, to every Part and Member of the Body: Where it comes, it enlivens; and
the Part where it cannot come withers and dies: If the Spirits of it fail, the
Person grows feeble, and not able to perform any great matter, either Active or
Contemplative; till by rest or nourishment, or both, they shall be again
restored or recruited: And this is testified by Daily Sensation and Experience.
We know these Spirits can Act in this manner Daily and every Day, if thus they
be recruited; and if such Recruits fail, the Person waxes feeble and can do
nothing, but grow more feeble still to Death, in a short time, for want of
Nourishment. What these Spirits do, we are sure they can do, without knowing
they have, or need assistance from an Immaterial Intelligent Spirit. Quod fieri
potest per pauciora, non debet fieri per plura, and Natura nihil facit frustra.

Conclude then, we may, That the Blood is the Life of Man; and the inflamed
Particles of it, are those admirable fine Spirits, which Act the Person and all
his Powers: And when this Flame of Life extinguishes, Man Dies without remedy
or possible recovery by Humane Power.

Chap. VII. P. 93. Mr. M. says, He Is obliged in his sort of Civility, to
vouchsafe the taking notice of the Observer's Argument. Which he does in a
manner suitable to his former Expressions, and perhaps, to his Education and
Nature.

He goes on (according to his usual Civility) and tells the Observer, That he
wrangles in the Dark, about he knows not what: Without pleasing to Teach him
what he does not know. He says further, That the Observer does not Prove in
his Pamphlet, the Soul's perishing with the Body; but say it only.

The Observer Answers, That the Saying in that Place, was enough to excite Mr.
B. to a better Proof of his Assertion of the Soul's Immortality: And for his
Ancient and Modern Arguments, which he says are unanswered; the Saying shows,
That Mr. M. did not understand the Subject, or Design of that Pamphlet, which
he pretends to Answer; there appearing in it no intent to Dispute with Mr. B.
but only to excite in him a desire and endeavor better to Prove what he had
before Asserted. Mr. M's following Words express no more, but his own Nature
and Civility. P. 94. Mr. M. says, That the Observer does not prove the
Mortality of the Souls of Beasts. The Observer replies; This was no part of his
Undertaking either there, or here, nor does he think it needful to be done any
where; because he yet never met with any Man who maintained the Opinion that
Brutal Souls have any subsistence after the death of their Bodies; if Mr. M.
pretend to think that they so do; he shall here be pointed to Psalm. 49.12, and
20. where David compares Men, as good as Mr. M. to the Beasts that perish
[utterly.] And his Son Solomon, Eccl. 3.21. seems to know, That the Spirit of a
Beast goes downward to the Earth, and he suspects there, that the Spirit of a
Man may do so too; allowing little or no difference betwixt Man and Beast in
this Point; nor does the Observer know any other difference between them in
this Case, save that to Mankind there are certain and faithful Promises and
Predictions made of a future Resurrection, at the time of our Lord's coming to
Judgment; without mentioning the Beasts, or foretelling any such matters
concerning them. Page 95. Mr. M. says, He thinks it is easy to demonstrate,
That the Souls of Brutes are much more noble than the material Spirits of their
Blood.

The Observer is ready to say, beshrew his Heart for being so unkind as to
forbear or neglect, doing the World and the Observer that great Favor which he
says might so easily be done, and which the Observer would have accepted as a
greater Civility, than any which Mr. M. has hitherto showed him. But Mr. M. it
seems is resolved to deny him that Courtesy which he thinks he could so easily
have performed. Then Mr. M. proceeds to say, That he is not obliged to incumber
his Defense of the Soul's Immortality with such needless Controversies. The
Observer replys, That if the Question be needless, why does he quote or argue
it? But if very material and needful (as the Observer thinks it to be) why does
Mr. M. forsake it in this Place, without driving it through to some such sort
of Determination, as he was able to make of it? Mr. M. says further, We are
sure that the Humane Soul is much more excellent than the Brutal, because Man
can perform more Excellent Things, than the Brutes can do. The Observer says
the fame concerning Men's Bodies, That they have a more excellent Structure, and
apter Organs of Intellect than any sort of Brutes, which together with their
extraordinary Instruments of Hands and Tongues, make them able to perform
Things, that far exceed the Capacities of Beasts: But if such Hands and Tongues
were withdrawn from the Humane Body; some Beasts might equal, or exceed, the
Race of Men, in making Provision for their natural Subsistence and Defense, and
some other occasions belonging to each of their Natures. Thus Men are
advantaged in the Mode and Structure of their Bodies above the Beasts; and yet
these Abilities do not prove, That their Flesh, Blood, Bones or Breath, do
materially differ from those of the Brutes.

Whence we argue, That though Men's intellectual Faculties do far exceed those
of Brutes; yet that advantage does not convincingly prove, That the Spirits
which Act them are of a different kind and nature from those Spirits which act
the Brutes; but rather, That the different Organs in their Head, where such
Things are acted, are the true Causes of those Excellencies wherein Mankind
exceed the Brutes.

M. says, That the Natures of Men are made for higher ends than Beasts, and
this the Observer grants to be true. Further Mr. M. says, You carry the
Controversy into the Dark. The Observer says, It is his Part to bring it again
into the Light, which he pretends all this while to have been doing; but has
not yet performed it to his own Satisfaction. Mr. M. tells the Observer, That
he abuses his Reason, and will lose the Truth and his Labor together; which
Words, the Observer says, may with a more sharp Point be retorted upon Mr. M.
himself. P. 97. Mr. M. asks, Must we deny what is plain, because we are not
agreed about more remote Difficulties? The Observer Answers No; but desires Mr.
M. to make the Soul's Immortality plain, and then there will be no Controversy
between them about it. He quotes a Saying out of Tertallian, forbidding Men to
enquire into the Secrets of God. The Observer prays Mr. M. to apply this to his
many Demands and Questions concerning the Quoniodo, or how Sense and Reason are
Acted in Man and Beast, by the intervention and Operation of the Material
Spirits in the Heads of either Kind. The Observer has said, That Quoniodo is a
Secret yet reserved in the Storehouse of God's Knowledge, and hitherto
unrevealed to the Sons of Men. Further Mr. M. says, There is yet no
satisfactory account given of the Sensitive Perception and Appetite, by
reducing them to the Laws of Matter and Motion.

The Observer requires therefore Mr. M. to give some Satisfactory account of
the Production of Sense and Appetite, by the means or intervention of his
supposed Intelligent Spirit, which if he do, this Controversy will easily be
determined. P. 98. Mr. M. says, That the Animal Spirits and the Brain are
principally concerned in the Acts of the Intellect, and therefore the whole
Compositum is not concerned. The Observer denies this Consequence, and says,
That the whole Compositum is concerned, in Acts of the Intellect as well as in
those of the Senses: Prick or Cut the end of the Finger or Toe, the whole
Compositum instantly feels the smart, by contiguity of the Spirits and
quickness of their Communication. So for the Eye, the Ear, the Taste and the
Smell; the whole Compositum is instantly affected, by their pleasing, or
disagreeable Objects: So as a quick Smart, a horrid Sight, a piercing Sound, a
strong Smell, or a very ill Taste, breed an instant alteration in the whole
Compositum; and by any of these the Operation of the Intellect may be disturbed
or quite put out of order. Whence it appears, That though the Spirits and the
Brain are the Principal Agents for acting the Reason and Intellect; yet the
whole Compositum is concerned in every most ordinary Action of the Person;
which cannot be performed, or ever was performed, without such a contexture of
Soul and Body, as has been before specified. Mr. M. farther says, You must
answer all that I have written against the Capacity of these material
Corruptible Spirits for the production of such Acts. The Observer replies, That
he cannot find where Mr. M. has said any more against the Capacities of such a
Contexture, but that he assures himself and believes, That such a Contexture
cannot have those Capacities. Whereas the Observer conceives, They have
sufficient Capacity to produce and perform all Humane Actions, and Powers,
according to the Ordination of God, and the Constitution which he has appointed
in the Creation and Fabric of a Man. Mr. M. says further, That his sort of
Soul does exert some Actions, without assistance of any corporeal Organs, and
that it works upon these Organs, antecedent to any Operation by them. His
Assertion, that it works without them, and works upon them seems not at all
coherent in it self; for that if it work upon them, and without them, it cannot
work by them at the same time. But the Observer does constantly deny, That
there is any such Soul as he pretends, viz. an immaterial intelligent Spirit in
the Body of any Person naturally: So as he must suppose or beg the Question
that there is such a Thing, before he can persuade any Man, that it does, or
works any thing at all. P. 99. Mr. M. quotes a Latin Author who took the
Immortality of the Soul for granted, but with those that deny the Immortality,
his Assertion has no Consequence or Credibility at all. Mr. M. says further,
The musical Organ is not conscious of the Harmony produced by it, as the Soul
is of its own Acts, (he should have said as the Man is of his own Acts) for if
he intend this of his immaterial intelligent Spirit he knows it to be
constantly denied by the Observer, who affirms, There is no such Spirit
naturally in Man; and concerning the material Spirits, has asserted, That they
have no Knowledge or Understanding of what themselves do. So as it is not the
Spirits alone, or the Organs alone that can by themselves do any Thing; any
more than the Organ-pipes can make Harmony without the Wind, or the Wind of the
Bellows without the Pipes; sound and well ordered, in their proper Places where
the Artificer has ranked them.

Further, Mr. M. affirms, That in the Pamphlet which he intended to Answer, the
Observer had said, That Matter has a Self-moving Power, and gave instance in
some light Earth pulverised and made so apt for Motion, as that it might become
near a kin to the Atoms, which Men way perceive moving up and down in the Air
continually.

Mr. M. Does not deny the Propensity which such fine Atoms have to be moved by
any gentle touch of Air, or Breath; so as falling into a drop of May-dew, they
will rise up in the mixture of that moisture to the very tip of a Grass-Pile,
and be ready to drop from it again; as the weight and activity of the moisture
shall carry it. Thus the red Earth of which Adam was Created, Pulverised by the
Art of the great Machinist, was made apt to be moved, and acted by the inflamed
Particles of the Blood, tinded and maintained, by a continual fanning of the
Breath: So as this attenuated Dust acted by the Wind and Fire, was then capable
by the Ordinance of God, to act all that he has appointed to be done in or by
the Persons of Men; all which three Ingredients still act in Humane Persons,
all that really can be done by them.

M. mentions the moveable matters of Wind and Fire, but says nothing concerning
them that requires or deserves a Reply. Further, Mr. M. says, He does not deny
that the inflamed Particles of Blood called Spirits, are the immediate
Instruments of the Soul's Operations in its State of Union with the Body. The
Observer has oftten and constantly denied, That there is such an Intelligent
Soul in Man as Mr. M. supposes; and yet he will still go on to suppose that
which is still denied, without bringing any full and convincing Proof of the
Truth of it. A Thing and Proceeding which the Observer can by no means help:
But his Arguments drawn from such Premises have very little Force. P. 101. Mr.
M. says, The Observer has objected, That the Soul cannot operate in a separate
State; but he quotes no Page of the Pamphlet where he finds this Objection; or
in truth, is this Objection to be found in any Part of the foresaid Pamphlet,
but is the Progeny of Mr. M's. own Brain; intending to set it up like a Man of
Straw, that he may have the battering of it down again at his Pleasure.

Mr. M. Concludes, That except we better understood what the Soul is, and how
it acts whilst united to the Body; we ought not to deny its Capacity of acting
in a separate Subsistence. The Observer thinks he should have said, Except we
had more certain Knowledge, that there is an Immaterial Intelligent Spirit in
the Person, it is mere lost labor to trouble our Heads with the Notions of
what such a Soul does do, or can do, in statu concreto, vel separato.

M. says, It Is an endless work to write against those who will take no notice
of what has been said before in the Controverted Point. The Observer replys,
That if M. M. knew any Thing that has been said before concerning this Point,
that he thinks to be very Material or Convincing; he ought by the Duty of his
Undertaking, to make the Observer, and the World (whom he pretends to instruct)
acquainted with such material Points of Knowledge; that they might either
conform themselves thereunto, or be driven to make such Answers to them, as
they shall be able. But we find in this Place an apparent failing in Mr. M. in
the precise Point of this Duty. P. 104. Mr. M. would have us strictly to
consider, How little Alliance there is betwixt a Thought and any Bodily Thing:
He might as well have bidden us consider, How a Horse that eats and drinks, and
evacuates every Day for a Year together, should at the Year's end be still the
same Horse. The Observer, bears no inclination to trouble his Head about Mr.
M's Metaphysical Notions or Proportions, and therefore refuses to consider the
Thing propounded, or any of the like Notions. Mr. M. says, That the Notions
which we have of the Mind, i. e. something within us that thinks, Reasons and
Wills; are mighty different, from any Notions we can fasten upon a Body, i. e.
from Mr. M's Notions concerning such Things. But the Observer thinks, There is
no such Thing in the Person, as thinks, reasons wills, etc. but says as before
with Aristotle, That it is the Man, who thinks, reasons, wills, etc. and that
the whole Compositum is concerned in such Actions. Mr. M. says further, That
diverse who assert the Soul's Immortality, do likewise assert its Materiality,
and that diverse of the Fathers were of that Opinion. Page 105. Mr. M. says, It
can never be proved, That so pure, an Essence, as the Soul is, has any natural
tendency to Dissolution: He, ought withal to have remembered, That they who
deny the Being of such a Soul as he supposes, will never trouble themselves
about Arguments, whether it be Corporeal and Mortal, or the contrary. Mr. M.
quotes Cicero, who Men have reason to believe was of he same Opinion with
himself, and serves him instead of the Proverb asking a Man's Fellow, etc. P.
106. he tells us out of Vives, That Men are ignorant of the Essences of Things,
which is granted, and Mr. M. says thereupon, That the nature of Matter is not
so well understood, as that the determination of the present Controversy
should be supposed to depend upon it. This the Observer is also willing to
grant, though he does not well understand what the Effects of it may be in this
Controversy. He asks further, Shall we talk confidently, about Materiality, or
Immateriality, and dispute our selves into Atheism? The Observer replys, We may
talk with a reasonable confidence concerning Materiality and Immateriality
without disputing our selves into Atheism or Sadducism; for the Sadducees
denied the Resurrection, and future Recompenses after the Death of the Person,
and so do Atheists. So as the Observer is unjusty pointed at as one of their
Tribes, though he maintain the important Doctrine of the Resurrection; the
Happiness of which, and the Dread of it, are to be prepared for, in the time of
this Life, by the same means that are required for the obtaining the Happiness
of a Blessed Immortality, and avoiding the Pains, and Penalties of a cursed
one. Mr. M. endeavors to puzzle his Readers by propounding a hard Question,
Whether Matter be divisible ad infinitum, or not? Which the Observer says is
nothing to the present Point in question, and therefore he leaves the choice to
Mr. M. which side of the Question he will maintain in a Dispute which here
makes nothing to the purpose. He asks further, Shall the Immortality of the
Soul stand upon so lubricous a foundation, as this is? no such matter. The
Observer answers, It has not a foundation so good as this might prove, nor any
firm foundation at all either in Reason, or in Scripture, and therefore may be
rejected as a vulgar Error. Mr. M. forbids to shift off the Question upon the
Words material or immaterial. The Observer answers, He pretends to no such
matter, as appears by what he has already said, in answer to Mr. M's Scriptures
and Reasons; the only Weapons which he pretends to use in this Controversy,
and which are used more at liberty in his forementioned larger Treatise. Mr.
M. says, Some great Philosophers have affirmed, That the Soul is more knowable
than the Body: He ought to have given us their Reasons, means and manner of
attaining such Knowledge, or to have produced something of his own to that
purpose; that the Readers might make some judgment concerning the verity of
this Assertion. And because he has failed in so doing, his Saying proves very
impertinent. He says further, The Substance of our Souls differs so much from
any Corporeal thing, that it may well enough be called immaterial. This he has
Brass enough to say in the Face of a Man who he knows utterly denies, That it
has any Substance at all. And places it as an ens rationis, whose Substance and
Existence consists in Notion, and Opinion only; and this he does without
proving or offering to prove, any thing concerning the quod sit, or the quid
sit of it. The last Words of this Chapter may justly be put into the Mouth of
Mr. M. qui plus praestare potest praestet. There is great need of some other
Men's Labors to supply the weak Pretenses and performances of Mr. M. in this
Chapter.

Page 110. Mr. M. says, The design of those Men who oppose the Soul's
Immortality, is to persuade themselves and others that it dies with the Body,
and shall not be called to an account for its unnatural self-debasement. The
Observer answers, That the Soul single and separate shall not be called to an
Account, he believes for no other end, but because he thinks it to be the very
Truth, and without any other design, but that only of maintaining the certainty
of a future Account, and Judgment, wherein every Man shall give and yield a
full reckoning of his Stewardship, and the Talents which were committed to his
Administration, wherein his smallest Actions shall be considered, and an
Account given for every offensive and idle Word; many of which may possibly
arise to magnify Mr. M's Account, from the Records of his present Treatise. He
quotes Vives, again, who makes every jot as much for the Observer, as for
himself. Mr. M. says further: Some thinking Persons of a sober Conversation,
may so far affect singularity in Opinions to make themselves more taken notice
of, as to maintain the Mortality of the Soul upon that Account. The Observer
thinks it enough in him to deny this Charge, being well assured of the error
and falsehood of it, and that Mr. M. can never bring a shadow of Proof by which
it may be annexed to the Person or Intent of the Observer. Whence the Reader
may cast it upon Mr. M. as a bold, and unproved Calumny. P. III. He says, Men
would not have their Souls to be immortal, for fear of a future Punishment for
their Crimes. The Observer answers, They are apt to deny a Resurrection for the
same reason. Mr. M. says further, Be not over-fond of the present Conceits, it
becomes you to suppose that you may be mistaken, because many (as wise Men)
have been so mistaken before you. The Observer turns the point of this
Direction upon Mr. M's own Face, and bids him follow that Direction which he
gives to others. P. 112. Mr. M's Direction in this Page is very good, and
deserves to be well followed by himself; who has no other advantage to exempt
him from it but the commonness of his own Opinion, which is no certain Proof of
the Truth of it; for that some like mistakes have long since prevailed in the
world, to as great an Universality. Mr. M. further says, It Is a matter nearly
concerns you to know whether your Souls be immortal, or no? The Observer agrees
it to be a matter of great concernment for Men to think right in this matter,
lest their Expectations should be deceived on either side; and therefore he has
pursued the Search of it, to the best of his Abilities, and writ this Pamphlet
which Mr. M. now pretends to answer with Design to excite Mr. B. to the
performance of his Promise, to prove the Soul's Immortality; hoping to draw
some light from his Writings concerning the certainty and truth of it. Mr. M.
has thrust himself into this Dispute, pretending in this Treatise, to make a
good performance of Mr. B's Promise in fully proving such an Immortality.
Whether he has well performed his Undertaking or not, shall be left to the
Judgment of such as read, and consider what thereupon has been said on both
sides. And Lord give us Understanding well to consider, and resolve according
to Truth in this Question. P. 113. Mr. M. says, If after all this pains you
have taken to make your self believe the Mortality of the Soul, you find your
self mistaken. The Observer answers, He has taken no pains at all to make
himself believe it so, and yet after the Search he has made he is convinced
that most probably it is so, and has no Fears upon him from it being otherwise:
For that he makes the same Provision for a happy Resurrection, as he would do
for a happy Immortality, and puts no difference between them in respect of
humane Endeavors; believing that which will gain the one, will gain the other,
and what will lose the one, will lose the other: But he thinks the Resurrection
to be far better proved, more undoubted and certain than the Immortality is,
that therefore the first is founded upon a Rock, and the other but upon Sand,
or bare Ground at the best: And therefore he builds his Faith, and relyance
upon the Resurrection, and believes concerning the Immortality, That it is an
Error, or a Possibility so uncertain, as no Man reasonably should rely upon
it. P. 114. Mr. M. says, The best way to know that he Soul is Immortal, is to
keep its Noblest Faculties in due Exercise. The Observer replys, That he has
endeavored as much as in him lay so to do; but found an Effect thereof quite
contrary to Mr. M's Assertion, viz. That the more he read, labored and
pondered thereupon; the more he has been hitherto confirmed in the Opinion of
the Soul's Mortality; and even the weak Arguments Mr. M. has produced in this
Treatise of his, for the Proof of the contrary, have added some strength to
that Opinion, which he had before received, as the Effect of his former
Endeavors in this kind. P. 115. Mr. M. says, We should seek Truth for its own
sake, and to be thereby better enabled for the service of God: And then he
says, We may better expect Afflatum divini numinis. The Observer says, He has
done the one, and hopes he has received some measure of the other, so as Mr.
M's rash and indiscreet Censures make no Impression at all on him; nor he hopes
will do upon any Intelligent Readers of his present Treatise thus answered.
Further, Mr. M. directs to lay down the most plain and certain Truths first,
and so ascend gradually to those that are more difficult; trying those Things
that are uncertain, by those that are clear and certain. The Observer may here
justly reproach Mr. M. for his not observing the Rules which he has here laid
down; for that in his pretenses of proving the Soul's Immortality, he has not
produced so much as one Experiment or Rule, that is clear and certain; which
the Observer thinks he did not omit through negligence, but because he could
find no Experiment, or certain Rule, from whence he could raise Arguments, for
the proof of his Immortality. Mr. M. says further, There are many puzzling
Questions concerning his sort of Soul, viz. concerning its unde, its Union with
the Body, its moving of it, and direction of the Spirits, its different mode of
Operation in a separate State and its reunion at the Resurrection. The Observer
replys, That all these Questions become frivolous to those that accept the
Opinion of the Soul's Extinguishment at the Death of the Person, which fully
silences them all, and proves them needless, and somewhat ridiculous; and that
is the best and surest Solution that can be given of them altogether. Mr. M.
says further, We must not deny the Formation of a Child, because we know not
how it is made. The Observer agrees this; because Sensation and Experience,
prove there is a Child. Let Mr. M. prove by Sensation, Experience, or other
Ways, That there is such a Soul in Man, as he pretends to, and then he shall
have leave to dispute, de modo formationis, as he pleases: But to dispute de
modo of a Thing which is not granted, or proved to have a Being; must pass for
a Dispute, de lana caprina, or as of a Thing not extant in the World. He says
further, The Soul it Fettered in the Body. But this the Observer utterly
denies, and avers, That the Contexture of the Soul and Body, is naturally and
ordinarily the most amicable, and pleasing Conjunction in the World, and their
Separation is ordinarily one of the most terrible Actions that befalls Mankind,
and that it was a most gross Error in Plato, and those that follow him, to
think otherwise. P. 117. Mr. M. says, Atheism and Sadducism spring both from
the same Root, and must be attacked together. The Observer answers, That his
tacking Atheism, and Sadducism together, prove, That they who believe the
Resurrection, are neither the one nor the other; whatsoever Mr. M. may fancy.
Mr. M's Demands concerning the Making and Governing the World, are very
frivolous and needless in this Question, or to be demanded of the Observer, who
has often ascribed the Creation of Man, and all other Creatures to God, and has
acknowledged his Providence upon all Occasions; so as those Questions, and
those which follow them, are left by the Observer, as a Fruit of Mr. M's florid
Speaking, but in our present Dispute somewhat insipid, and of no concernment at
all. P. 119. Mr. M. says, That Epicurus and his Followers, said, That the World
was not Created by God, nor Governed by his Providence. The Observer demands,
Quorsum haec? and quorsum sic? What makes all this to the Immortality of the
Soul? or the Observer's Opinion concerning it? It shall therefore be past as
nothing to the purpose, nor deserving any Answer, nor needing any, as it is
produced upon this Occasion. P. 121. Mr. M. demands, Dare you take God's Name
in vain, or vilify his Works to his dishonor? You may flatter and befool your
self for a while; what will you do in the end thereof? How dismal will the
Thoughts of Eternity be to you in the last Hour? How severely will Conscience
pay you home for all the Tricks and Abuses you put upon it? The Observer
replys, That if a Man should judge Mr. M. by those Expressions it seems they
might judge him the very Spaun of Satan, whose proper Office it is to bring
false Accusations against the Servants of God, and slander them with such
Things as they were never guilty of, or intended to be so. His Demand, Dare you
take God's name in vain? Or vilify his Works to his dishonor? Seems pregnant
with an Affirmative, That the Observer dare do such Things. And if it be so
taken, it is a slanderous Surmise, and as false as any Thing that his Father
could suggest to him. The Devil himself was more fine in his Suggestions
against Job, which procured that Holy Man a severe Conflict, and a terrible
Trial. Upon which the Observer will make no other return, than that which the
Angel made to Satan, in the case of Joshua, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; the
Lord that has pleasure in the prosperity of his Servants, rebuke thy lying
lips, and thy deceitful tongue: What reward shall be done unto thee, thou false
tongue? Even mighty and sharp arrows, with hot burning Coals, who put forth
the horns of a Lamb, but speak with the voice of a Dragon. P. 122. He goes
on with diverse such Calumnious, Questions pointing at the Observer, who utterly
denies all the Charges laid against him in those Pages, and says, They are
false and feigned, and defies his false Accuser, demanding the Proof of any one
of them, which if this vile Railer cannot, or do not produce; the Observer
hopes he will pass among his Readers, for a false Slanderer, and Condemner of
the Innocent. P. 123. He talks of turning our Eyes in upon our Souls. The
Observer demands of him, whether he ever did so, and that he will tell the
World what evidence of his Soul followed upon his so doing: It seems just none
at all, or else he is very faulty in not declaring the same to the World. He
says, That as the Soul is separated from the Body by Death; so in
Contemplations we must abstract it from Corporeal Commerce. The Observer says,
This must needs pass for Gibberish and Nonsense, with one who denies the
Subsistence of Souls, in a State of separation from the Bodies. Here he Quotes
Pythagoras, pretending Men should desire Death, That their Souls might be
delivered from the Prisons of their Bodies, and some in those times killed
themselves, that their Souls might the sooner obtain their Liberty: And thus
this apprehension became a Doctrine of Devils, and it seems the present Opposer
now thinks it cannot well be maintained without the Practice of Devils, viz.
lying and slandering. P. 124. He says, Their Bodies are an hinderance to them
in searching after Truth. The Observer says, Souls can make no Searches after
Truth at all, nor do any other Thing without their Bodies; nor can he, or any
other Man prove, That they ever did so, or can do so. He says; After Death and
not before, the Soul will subsist without the Body. Here he denies what some of
his Partakers affirm, That the Soul sometimes wanders from the Body, and after
some time returns to it again. But all with a great probability of Falsehood,
both in the one case, and in the other: It seems he matters not how meanly he
begs the Question, when he uttered his last Position as it were ex Cathedra;
pronouncing that as an undoubted Truth, which he well knows his Opponent fully
denies, and how weakly himself has, offered at the poof of it. P. 126. He says
further, That if men follow the practice of a good Life they will soon be
convinced, that their Souls are Immortal, and not such earthly material Things,
as you are ready to imagine. The Observer Replies, That the Evidences of a good
Life, are well known to himself, and as evident to the World, as any thing Mr.
M. can produce for himself; and yet he does not find himself the more persuaded
of the Truth of the Soul's Immortality, nor believes it, ever the whit the
more, for the false Suppositions and Pretensions, which are made for it by Mr.
M. in this Treatise: But rather is confirmed in the contrary Opinion by those
deceitful, and false Courses, which the Opponent is driven to use, for the
support and maintenance of his Opinion. P. 127. The Opposer speaks Of Divine
Raptures and Anticipations of the Soul's Immortality while they are in this
World. All which the Observer thinks to be as well founded as Castles in the
Air, which are only Products of Fantasy, and vanish with the mere change of
the Apprehension. The Adversary says further, That if your Fantasy be right
placed, you will be apt to acknowledge the Natural Image of the Deity, which is
antecedent to the Knowledge of God. The Observer Answers, That the Image of God
in Man, is not in any single Part or Portion of him; but that the whole Man is
the only Image of God; for that in the Image of God made he Man, without any
more respect to his Soul than his Body, which are both together the wonderful
Work of God; and so great a Wonder to Immortalists, as they can by no means
believe, That God has Wisdom and Power enough, to produce Sense and
Understanding in the Humane Person, by the Energy and Activity of Material
Spirits; but that of necessity he must be driven, to use the subservience of an
immaterial Intelligent Spirit for those purposes: And this shall be left upon
them as a very gross Mistake and Error of their Minds. Our Adversary says
further, That there are a World of Spirits Malignant, and such at seek the ruin
of mankind, and carry on a Warfare against God, and his Interest and Religion
in the World. That such Spirits there are, the Observer does not deny, and that
prompted by the malignity of their own Natures, they carry on a War against
true Religion, and the Happiness of Man, he grants; but that they do War
against the Interest of God, or can do it, he confidently denis, and says, That
they have no power to act or effect any thing, without the Permission, License,
or Direction of that Omnipotent Being, known to us by the Name and Term of God.
The Adversary says, Those Spirits know well enough, that the Souls of men are
Immortal, Cujus Contrarium, the Observer says, est verum, and says farther,
The Evil Spirits take no pains at all to destroy the Soul, but the Man, of
whose contexture the Soul is but Part, and such a Part as extinguishes at the
Death of the Person. P. 128. The Adversary says, you may read from diverse
Authors there named, that there are good Spirits which watch over Men, for
their guidance and preservation. The Observer says, This needs no Proof from
his named Authors, for that the Scriptures do testify abundantly for the Truth
of it. P. 129. The Adversary discourses concerning Apparitions of dead Persons,
and delivers diverse Historical Relations upon that Subject. The Observer does
not deny, That diverse such like Apparitions may have been, jussu, aut permissu
superiorum, and that such Apparitions have taken upon them the Image or
likeness of the dead Persons: But he places all that sort of Apparitions, to
the account of inferior separate Spirits, ready to execute what shall be
appointed them in that kind. What is in this Place quoted out of Baronius, the
Observer imputes either to mere Invention, or otherwise conceives it to have
been a lying Relation of one of those Malignant Spirits. What he relates there
from Glanvil, concerning a Major and a Captain, may better pass for a Truth;
because the tenor of it agrees with what the Observer has before said
concerning such Things, who always Established, That such Apparitions are not
acted by the Souls of Men already dead; but by inferior separate Spirits,
subsisting by themselves, and which never were united to the Persons of Men. P.
130. The Adversary says, Men may find nobler things in the World than Matter
and Motion to entertain themselves with. This Assertion the Observer thinks to
savor strongly of Ignorance and Falsehood; especially, because he mentions no
Particulars of such Things, of which he ought to have given some Instances, and
for want thereof, the Observer concludes him true to his Principles of Boldness
and Ignorance. He quotes here the Names of Authors, as Plato, Plotinus,
Epictetus, Cicero, Senecae, Antoninus, which it is likely may have drawn him to
the Belief of the Soul's Immortality, or confirmed him therein: But their
Opinions weigh not much with the Observer, who in his Pamphlet upon Mr. B's
Sermon, propounds to decide this Controversy by the sole assistance of
Scripture and Reason. The Adversary pretends to flourish with Names and
Quotations of many Author, rather to create an Opinion of his own Reading, than
because they were needful, or useful in this Disputation; a Practice purposely
avoided by the Observer, as being apt more to perplex and lengthen the
Argument, than to shorten, or come close up to it, and the Particulars of it.
The Adversary says, If you believe that God regards the Affairs and Actions of
Mankind, then look unto him for light in this matter, and he that so seeks
after the Truth is in a very likely way to find it. The Observer Replys,
Physician Cure thy self: If thou had heartily pursued the course here
directed, it is very probable, That God might have preserved thee from uttering
and publishing such false and slanderous Calumnies as are inserted in thy
Treatise, levelled and discharged against an Innocent Person, whom thou know
not, not ever have heard any Man speak so of him; much less that thou art able
to prove any one of those Slanders which thou have heaped upon him, and for
which he leaves thee to the lashes of God and thine own Conscience, and to the
judicious and Rational Censure of thy Readers.

English Proverb, Let the Geese beware when the Fox Preaches: For that although
many of these Things which he says may be true, according to the practice of an
Old Father, Obscuris vera involvens; yet they are all spoken with intent, to
persuade and induce the Belief of an Erroneous Doctrine.

If I believed such Things as the Soul's Immortality I should use the greatest
care, and diligence to be Holy. The Observer applys this to the certain and
firm Doctrine of the Resurrection; which all Christians do profess to believe.
He says, This Doctrine requires as great Endeavors and striving by way of
Preparation for it, as that of the Soul's Immortality can do, and is much
better founded, and assured than that is; and therefore he advises all
Christians to take it more into their Considerations than they formerly have
done. The new Doctrine of the Immortality has in a great measure shouldred out
that of the Resurrection: And indeed, if the former were certain and true,
there would be little need of the latter among Christians. Persons after the
Resurrection are likely to live upon the New Earth, and under the New Heaven,
which will doubtless be a very happy State; but if it be compared to the Heaven
of Heavens, and Throne of God, whether they say, Good Souls repair at the Death
of the Person; the Joys of the Earth can come in no Competition with the Joys
of Heaven; which those separate Souls must then forsake, and come to live upon
Earth again in their Bodies, though Glorified; plainly such a Change as those
Souls must make, at the Resurrection of the Persons, is more likely for the
worse, than for the better: Whereas the Doctrine of the Resurrection intends a
completing of the Happiness of Man, and bringing it to its highest degree, and
Perfection; as has always been expected and desired by the Church as the
highest Happiness the Nature of Man is capable of. For Proof of this he quotes
Joh. 6. our Lord there four times over, says, Those that believe and serve him,
shall be raised up at the last day. And at his Departure he tells his
Disciples, I will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am, ye
may be also. Without saying any thing of an intermediate State: It runs through
all the Gospels, that at the Resurrection the Angels shall come and sever the
Good from the Bad; preserving the one sort, and destroying the other. Our Lord
in Judgment says, Come ye Blessed, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, and Go
ye Cursed into Everlasting fire. Not return ye Blessed to Heaven, from whence
ye came; nor return ye Cursed to the Flames of your former Fire. But they are
both to go to new Places, where they had not been before, 1 Cor. 15.1. 1 Thessalonians.
4. Paul in both these Chapters, Treats professedly concerning the future State
of Man after Death, and builds the whole strength of future Recompenses upon
the Doctrine of the Resurrection only, without mention of, or pointing to any
Thing concerning the Soul's Immortality. So Hebr. 11.35. Christians then
suffered cheerfully in expectation of a better Resurrection. He also prays that
Onesephorus might find mercy in the Last Day. And tells Timothy, That a Crown
of Glory was laid up for him against that Day. And so for all other true
Christian Believers. And the Observer says, That of all the Texts of Scripture
quoted for the Immortality, not one of them is delivered in a Place where the
future State of Man after Death is particularly discoursed of, or intended to
be taught, except what the Parable of Dives may have of that Nature. Hence the
Observer concludes, That the Doctrine of the Resurrection is the main and Rocky
Foundation, upon which the Expectation of future Recompenses, can safely be
builded, and therefore he leaves the Immortality to those who think they find
better Ground for it, than he has yet been able to perceive or attain to.

If you believe your Souls to be Immortal, take care to secure your eternal
interest by a good course of life. The Observer says, If you hope for a happy
Resurrection, you must take the same Course; and to his other Saying and
Quotations here, the Observer applys them all to the Resurrection, which is
most certain, whatsoever the other may be.

What will make amends for the loss of their Immortal Souls. The Observer asks,
What will make amends for their unhappy Resurrection and Condemnati-at the Last
Judgment. The Advers. says further, You must labor to understand what it is
must make your Souls happy, if ever they be so. The Observer says, They are
never like to be happy or miserable without the Body, and therefore labor to
obtain a safe and happy Resurrection of them both.

That men's souls will tell them something if they take them apart, and freely
converse with them. The Observer wishes he had told us some matter of Fact
concerning himself, or some other Man, who had taken his Soul apart, and so
conversed with it; without which, all he says here, is but Amusement, intending
to make Men suppose, Their Souls may be, taken apart from their Bodies, which
would truly be the Destruction of them both; for that the Person only consists
in the Contexture of them both. Further, the Advers. says, That the Immortality
is suitable for the Nature of the Soul. The Observer denies, That the Soul has
any Nature, except only in Contexture with the Body; and the Delights here the
Advers. speaks of, are only agreeable to his own Fancy, and such as adhere to
his Opinion, who may with him fancy themselves conversing with Spirits, or the
like fruits of their own Imaginations, which Men easily give themselves up unto
who are apt to follow the Dictates of their own Fancy.

exercise themselves in the Contemplation of a Deity, 'till correspondent
Impression be wrought upon their own Spirits, transforming them into the same
Image. The Observer thinks he gives his Followers a piece of dangerous Counsel
to imitate the high Ecstasies of St. Paul, in his Extraordinary Raptures, and
Revelations: For that they catching at the Words without understanding the true
sense and meaning of them, or the design of their Delivery; are apt to run into
great Errors of Fancy, and pretending to make themselves like God, become in
such Applications, more extravagant and vain, than the more sagacious sort of
Beasts that perish; not understanding what they say, or whereof they affirm:
And as one of that sort the Advers. shall here be left, The Blind to lead the
Blind, till both fall into the Ditch.

The Immortal Spirit may be starved for want of Food. The Observer says, The
Souls of Men may be so for want of their Meal, Malt, or their other
Nourishment, which it is every Man's Duty to provide for them (to their Power)
in due Seasons, and Distances of Time, which may require the same. The Advers.
says further, What if God e're this had sent you into a Place where the
Immortality of the Soul is better known. The Observer says, He ought to have
named his Place, and proved that there is such a Place in rerum Natura, before
he pretend his Immortal Soul is better known in any Place, than it is here. But
it seems his Place, and his Soul, are both of a Piece, subsisting more in
Imagination, than in Reality. We may consider the use of such a Place: If truly
such a Place there be, wherefore should it have been provided. Dr. Sherlock in
his Book of the Last Judgment, has well proved, That the Devils are not yet in
Hell. The Advers. himself says, That the Malevolent Spirits wander in the
World, and sometimes converse with the People in it. Which is Evidence, That
they are not presently in Hell. St. Peter and St. Jude, tell us, That the
Devils expect their Punishment, after a Condemnation at the Last Judgment,
which they believe and tremble at. The Revelations express, That there was War
in Heaven, Michael and his Angels fought there, with the Dragon, and the Dragon
fought and his Angels, but they were vanquished, and cast out of Heaven. Which
was done but a very short time before the Consummation, or Last Judgment.
Whence it seems reasonably inferrible, That the Devils are yet not only out of
the Verges of Hell; but that they are at some Liberty in the World, and make
sometimes their Progress unto Heaven. Whence there seems no need of a present
Hell for the Punishment of Devils, and for the Separate Souls of Wicked Men:
There is as little present need of it, for that in Truth there seems to be no
such Thing in the World, as a Humane Soul subsisting in a State of Separation
after the Death of the Body. Whence if there should be at present such a Place
as Hell, it must remain utterly unfurnished, empty and void, which would not be
a natural way of Proceeding, Quia natura nihil facit frustra. So as the
Discourses, of Separate Souls going to Hell, seem rather a Bugbear than a
Verity. But to this Men reply, If there be no fear of Punishment before the
Resurrection, bad Men mill grow more bold in their Wickedness. This the
Observer does not grant, but believes, That they, who will not care for the
dread of a cursed Resurrection, will not be persuaded by the pretense of an
immediate Immortality; a Truth which daily Experience confirms to us. The
Distance of Time between Death, and the Resurrection, how great so ever the
same may appear to Living and Sensible Persons; is not accounted of by the
Dead, nor is any Thing dead more Sensible of its passing, than the Urn or Stone
is, wherein the Dead Man's Ashes, or Dust are enclosed: Whence they rise as but
newly fallen asleep, without any Sense or Perception of what has passed over
them. So that Sensibly and Effectually to them, no Time has passed over them at
all. But their Death and Resurrection follow one another immediately, without
their perceiving that any intermediate Time, has passed at all between them:
But after the Resurrection and Last Judgment past, at the Creation of the New
Heaven, and Earth, we read, There shall be a Hell also contrived, Isa. 66.22,
23. After God had made the New Heavens, and the New Earth, those raised to a
Happy State, shall go forth and look upon the Carcasses of the Men that have
transgressed against me: For their Worm shall not die, neither shall their Fire
be quenched. So Revel. 20.24. Death and Hell, delivered up the Dead which were
in them, and every Man was judged according to his Works; and Death and Hell
were cast into the Lake of Fire; and every one that was not found written in
the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire. (Viz.) Such as were Condemned
at the Last Judgment. At which time God creates a New Heaven, and a New Earth
without a Sea; but with a Hell, for the Punishment of Condemned Creatures.
Chap. 21.14. Blessed are they who stand acquitted at that Judgment, for that
they may enter in through the Gates into the City, and have right to the Tree
of Life: For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whore-mongers, and Murderers,
and Idolaters, and whosoever loves, and makes a Lie. And such as follow the
old Satanical Rule, Audacter calumniare and aliquid haerebit. Among which
number the present Adversary shall have a prime Place given, him by the best
and truest Judgment which the Observer can make in this Case.

Think, lastly, on the World's great Doom,
When guilty Souls must to an Audit come,
A far more heavy Reckoning than ever
You met with here.


Men (of the best Reasons) will esteem our strongest Reasonings, as the
Leviathan does Iron or Brass, but as rotten Straw and rotten Wood. The Observer
grants he is very much in the Right in this Expression; but when he adds, If he
should happen to convine them (of which there is little likelihood) he thinks
their Lusts would prevail against his Arguments and their Convictions. In this
the Observer says he is True Blew, and continues very uncharitably and
malevolently Censorious.

The Power of Christianity is scarcely consistent with a dividing, censorious,
uncharitable Frame and Disposition. Hence the Observer inferrs, That the
Adversary has very little of the Power of Christianity in him; for that the
latter Part of his Treatise is full of censorious, uncharitable Expressions,
without any Truth in there, or Provocation to them, but proceeding rather from
his own natural Inclination and Practice, perfectly Pharisaical; which was, to
dignifie and magnify themselves by vilifying and despising other Men. Upon
which Practice, Meekness it self was whetted to use sharp Expressions. Our Lord
says, Mat. 23.33. Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the
Damnation of Hell? Chapter 12.36. I say unto you, That every idle World that Men
shall speak, they shall give Account thereof in the Day of Judgment. What then
is like to become of the Adversary at that Day, concerning his many idle,
uncharitable, censorious, false Expressions, purposely delivered in this
Treatise, without any just Provocation given him for so doing. May not our
Lord's Words be reasonably applied to this Person, Thou Serpent, thou
Generation of a Viper, how can thou escape that Damnation of Hell which,
after the Day of Judgment, shall be made ready to receive, not the Souls of
condemned Persons, but their Souls and Bodies together, into everlasting
Burnings, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. If Practice
has made this Course so habitual to thee, as that thou can not forbear the
Usage of it; yet ought thou to be careful to confine it to thy own Flock or
Herd, who probably are much used to it, illa te carcere regnare, sit tibi
satis. Be thou therefore advised to follow thine own Trade within the proper
Sphere of its Activity, and be guided by the old Rule, Ne suitor ultra crepidam.
Solomon directs Men to take care of their own Flocks and their own Herds; and
St. Paul forbears to judge them that are without: And yet if the Adversary
thought himself obliged to contend for the Truth against those who are without
his Precinct, he ought however to have done this modestly, though earnestly; and
therein to have avoided those contumelious Expressions which he has frequently
used; especially all Injuries and false Aspersions laid upon his Opponent,
contrary to the clear Truth and the Civility of Manners which ought to be used
by Men of his Profession, not to name his Calling; for that it does not appear
whether he has any, or no.

rather to proclaim to the World that he knows not what Spirit he is of? May
his Readers not have a just Cause of Suspicion, that such Fruits are earthly,
sensual and Devilish. The Adversary says further, That the Love born to one
another is the best Badge of Christianity, acting thereupon like Rowers in a
floating Vessel, who look one way and row another.

such who would hear God's Words, but not do them. What shall then his Judgment
be who will speak, but neither the Words of God nor those of civil Persons
amongst Men. The Adversary speaks of many good Duties Men may be able to
perform; to which he should have added, That wise and good Men are able to bear
patiently with other Men, who may fall into such Over-sights as they may think
to be Weaknesses and Errors without reproaching and reviling them upon those
Accounts; remembering St. Paul's Admonition, Take heed to thy self, lest thou
also be tempted.

Matt. 4. Texts of Scripture used by the old Serpent in his Temptation of
Christ; and we meet with like Things in diverse other Places of Scripture; and
that Satan can change himself, and is apt to change himself, into an Angel of
Light, thereby to deceive and mislead such as he can persuade to hear and
follow him.

It is no easy Matter to be a Christian indeed. The Observer grants it; and
that the Adversary's present Treatise is a good Proof of it.

That there are many who know not what Regeneration means, nor the other
ordinary Duties belonging to the Christian Religion; and if they be asked
concerning them, cannot answer Three Words of Sense about them. The Observer
replies, That in the Catechism of the Church of England the Doctrines necessary
for the Salvation of Men are well delivered and specified, and that ali devout
Members of that Church are taught and required to learn the same Memoriter, and
are daily taught in their Churches the Sense and Meaning of those Articles and
all other Doctrines, contained especially in the New Testament; So as that if
there be not great Fault and Defect, either in the Teachers or the Hearers,
either one or both of them; the People of our Church cannot be so ignorant as
he pretends Men commonly are, so as not to know the Water of Baptism is the
Laver of Regeneration; the Catechism teaching them, That by Baptism they are
regenerated and ingrafted into the Church of Christ, and are thereby directed
and enabled for dying to Sin, and to be Partakers of a new Birth unto
Righteousness; the Benefits of which are, to be made a Member of Christ, and an
Inheriter of the Kingdom of Heaven: And in Prosecution of that Design, Men are
thereby directed to forsake the Devil and all his Works, believe the Articles
of the Christian Faith, and keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the Days of their Lives.

Can ye believe two States so vastly different hereafter (as a happy or cursed
Resurrection) and yet not consider there must be some suitable Preparatiens
made whilst we are here, for avoiding the one and obtaining the other. The
Observer assures himself, There are very few Men who believe in that manner,
except they may be such as are of the Advers. own Education. The Advers. says
He has set a Description of Heaven before his Reader; meaning, it seems, such a
Heaven as Men's Souls go to presently upon the Death of the Person. The Observer
replies, That he finds no Description of that or any sort of Heaven in this his
Treatise; and for Souls going thither at the Death of the Persons, he, and all
they who read our Writings, cannot but know that it is the very Point in
Question: And for him to think that any Body will be led away, by his
presumptuous taking his Part of the Question for granted Truth; seems to be a
Folly and Vanity suitable to the rest of his Deportment throughout this
Treatise.

In many Things we shall be in the Dark, without the Assistance of supernatural
Revelation. The Observer says, There is a Sufficiency of supernatural
Revelation in the Scriptures of God for the bringing Men a happy Resurrection,
and a blessed State after it: But for our better Illumination the Advers. cites
a Sentence out of Porphyry, who was as great an Opposer of Christianity as any
he could have named; being a bare Platonist, and no more: To this he adds the
Names of Plato and Socrates, pretending to collect thence a more lofty Strain
for his Imaginations to work upon, than those which are delivered in Holy Writ;
and spares not to quote the Devil's Oracles in Confirmation of his own
fantastical Idea's, nor the Sibylline Verses dictated usually by a Spirit of
the like nature. The Advers. says, That the great Heathen Lawmakers pretended
to take Help of Spirits and Demons for the Inventing and Establishing their
Laws. From which Example, perhaps, he may intend to derive a Confirmation of
his Opinion, That there are other supernatural Revelations to be expected at
this Day, for Men's Guidance and Direction in their Religion, than those that
are delivered us in Holy Scripture. Which is an Opinion rejected by the
Observer, and not received by the Reformed Christian Churches. After this Train
of Heathen Oracles and Spirits, the Adversary returns again to the Holy
Scriptures, as if he pretended to add some Credit or Authority to them, by the
Testimony of his Commendations; which they neither need, nor can his Credit any
way extend to the advancing of their Reputation; Men knowing it is rather a
Disgrace than an Advantage, to be praised or commended by a slanderous Tongue.
But those Records are so Sacred, that they can suffer no Disadvantage by any
Man's Commendations or Discommendations, but stand fixed and firm as Pillars
and Foundations of the Christian Faith; not enduring to be compared with the
Fictions of idle Oracles, Philosophic Demons, or Poetical Inventions, nor
with the Miracles or Enthusiasms of the Romish, Mahometical or Phanatical
Imaginary Revelations. There can be no reasonable Comparison of such Vanities
with the Text of Holy Scripture; and therefore whatsoever the Advers. pretends
to say to that Purpose, seems a great Piece of Vanity in him, and an idle
Employment of his Time.

If you believe, that the Soul is Immortal, be not over-fond of the Body. The
Observer replies, If you believe the Resurrection and the Last Judgment; be not
so fond of the Body, or any thing else, as thereby to be drawn out of the way
of endeavoring to make your Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 3.10. The Day of
the Lord shall come as a Thief in the Night, in which the Heavens shall pass
away with a great Noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat; the
Earth also, and the Works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Seeing then that
all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye to be in
all Holy Conversation and Godliness; looking for new Heavens and a new Earth,
wherein dwells Righteousness. Wherefore seeing ye look for such things, be
diligent, that ye may be found of him in Peace, without Spot, and Blameless.
St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. directs, That they should not sorrow for their dead
Friends, as if they were without Hope, concerning them. For if we believe that
Jesus died, and rose again; so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him, and they shall be raised at the Sound of the Trumpet, and the Voice
of the Archangel. He does not tell his Proselytes, That their Friends Souls are
gone to Heaven, as any Comfort or Ease of their Sorrows; but he builds their
Comforts upon the strong Rock of the Resurrection. And thus have we both Peter
and Paul, to sound and credible Witnesses, in this Case, directing to a good
Life and a strong Comfort in Death, from a firm Hope of a future Resurrection,
in due Time, without one Word concerning the Soul's Immortality, or drawing any
Comfort or Help from thence at all.

Make not your Prison too strong; as if he assented to the false Platonic
Imagination, That the Body was made by God for a Prison to the Soul. Which
every Man's daily Experience contradicts, and proves certainly to us (as has
been before said) That the Conjunction of the Soul and Body is the most
amicable of any thing in the World, and their Separation most grievous and
terrible; and, That the Body's being a Prison to the Soul is an Opinion both
false and foolish, though it seems very well fitted for the Adversary's Part. He
goes on and says, Think how quickly this Flesh must be laid aside. He should
have added, And this Spirit extinguished; and then there will be no miserable
or happy Soul to take notice of.

What Relief will it be to your Souls, to remember that in this Life you had
your good Things? The Observer does not believe, that before the Resurrection
there will be any such Soul or Remembrance. It is true, that in the Parable of
Dives, Abraham says to him, Son, Remember that in thy Lifetime thou had thy
good Things. But the Parable no where, makes mention of a Soul, but in all
Places it applies to the Person. Lazarus died, and was carried by Angels into
Abraham's Bosom: And Dives died, and being in Hell, he lift up his Eyes, and
saw Lazarus afar off in Abraham's Bosom. It seems fit to be considered how
Dives could see a Soul at so great a Distance, and speak audibly to Abraham
afar off, without a Tongue. Men do usually imagine, This Discourse and Proposal
should be applied to the Souls of these two Persons. But the Observer thinks
there is no Necessity to take it in that Sense, but either to let it pass as a
bare Similitude, or Parable invented; or that it may as well or better be
intended concerning the Persons mentioned in the Text before quoted; and the
rather, because Abraham calls Dives, Son, Remember. This Term of Son cannot be
applicable to a separate Soul, because that Term is properly applied to the
Person, and also because, (if our Adversary say true) such a Soul could not be
descended from Abraham, but was newly created by God upon the Begetting of the
Body of Dives. Whence it seems still, That the Relation concerning these Person
is but a bare Similitude or Parable, and proves nothing: Or must be applied to
the State of these two Person considered in the Contextures of their Bodies and
Souls together. The Adversary seems to doubt whether Souls go to appointed
Places, or hover about those Places where their Bodies are interred. The
Observer says, It is no Wonder that Men of his Opinion have many Doubts
concerning their sorts of Souls, Quod, quid, unde, quando, ubi, quomodo, quo,
in none of which Points they ever yet came to an agreed Resolution; nor can
they make any tolerable Demonstration concerning any one of those Quaeries that
may give a Reasonable Satisfaction to a diligent Enquirer after them. He says,
That if his Soul had not been hindered by vicious Courses, it would have mounted
aloft into a purer Region. Which Doctrine is pure Platonic and Heathenish, not
proveable in any Part of Scripture, or Dictate of Reason. The Parable of Dives
says, Lazarus was carried by Angels into a Place of Rest, intending likely his
Person; but clearly he was carried, and did not mount aloft of himself into any
more pure Region. He speaks of a Relation we have to a World of Spirits whither
we are going. The Observer denies we have any Relation to those Spirits, after
our Deaths; or that any of us go to them, or have a Subsistence amongst them:
Whence the Adversary should better have proved what he here delivers, or have
been less magisterial and positive in the Delivery of it.

they do but dream of Afflictions, Sufferings and Pains, when they lie under
them, and are sensible of them. This way of amusing himself the Observer thinks
is fallen upon the Advers. whilst he sits musing and inventing with himself,
concerning the Being, Nature and Actions of his immortal Soul. For if he
conceive Men may imagine real Pains and Sufferings but to be Dreams, well may
his Imaginations concerning Immortal Souls be reputed Dreams by those who
nearly and impartially shall examine them.

Adversity and Prosperity, as if they were but Parts of a Dream. Which Opinion
really is yet a most manifest Error, and which he shall never be able to
persuade intelligent Persons to consent to. He speaks of our Arrival at the
invisible World of Realities which it seems he believes but as if we was in a
Dream, which the Observer conceives he has been in, during the greatest Part of
that Time wherein he wrote this Treatise. First, he has dreamed, That there is
such a Soul in Man as is an Intelligent Spirit, and shall subsist in a State of
Separation after the Death of the Body: And that after its Departure out of the
Body, it shall go to an invisible World of Realities to abide among them.
Where, or how, he neither does nor can tell; but he still dreams forward, That
his Soul, and those of whom he has a good Opinion, shall be in some sort of
Happiness, but what sort of Happiness himself yet is no way resolved; whether
in Heaven, Abraham's Bosom, or in the Air, or in Alcinous's Garden, the
Fortunate Islands, or the Elysium Fields; or that with the Americans they shall
live dancing and singing beyond certain high Mountains; or in Mahomet's
Paradise, shall sit by Rivers of Milk, Honey, Oil and Wine, and fulfill their
lustful Appetites as often as they please. Take all these sorts of States of
Souls, after Death, they are all but Dreams of a suitable sort, and Nature, fit
Subjects for Men of Fancy to be employed about: And to such Pleasing
Imaginations the Adversary shall be left, whilst the Observer sets up his Rest
upon what the Scripture teaches plainly, and proves, concerning the
Resurrection of the Dead, and last final Judgment, and a blessed or cursed
State after them; finding by diverse clear Natural Experiments, That the Life of
Man is maintained by Blood and Breath, and acted by the inflamed Particles of
Blood called the Spirits, which must daily be renewed and refreshed with
Nourishment and Rest; that when these are spent, the Person languishes and
decays; and when they are restored and refreshed the Person is vivid and
active: If Nourishment fail, or the Breath be stopped, the Person dies, beyond
all Remedy, and the total Extinguishment of that Flame of Life, which is
nourished in the Blood, is the Death of the Person, and cannot be rekindled in
it by less than a Divine Power who first kindled and tinded it in the Body of
our Grandfather Adam: And the same Death which dissolves the Contexture
between the Soul and the Body, destroys the Persons of Men as well as the
Contextures of Beasts, without any other Difference between them, save that of
the Resurrection. This is foretold, promised and threatened to Mankind, and the
World of Humane Persons; without that there are any such Prophecies, Promises
and Threatenings delivered concerning the Beasts; and therefore David rightly
calls them the Beasts that perish utterly. And as by natural Experience we find
that maintains the Life of Man; so if we search into the Beginning of his
Nature and Composition, ab ovo, as Men use to speak, we may find one Man does
not less perfectly beget another, than a Horse or any other Animal begets
Creatures of a like Species with themselves: There passes a Vital Principle in
their several Seeds, which being coagulated in loco idoneo proceed to a
Fermentation; and being there fomented in their proper Receptacles, they arise
and grow by degrees to a Vegetation: This Vital Spirit, still operating in the
Mass, now vegetated, it proceeds to the Formation of the several Parts and
Organs of the Body, extending and spreading it self throughout the whole Mass,
and therein working till all the Parts and Organs of the Body are fully formed
and perfected. And thence this Vital Spirit proceeds to the Production of Sense
in the newly formed Embryon; which perfected, it brings with it into the World
the two forenamed Faculties of Vegetation and Sense, which remain with the
newborn Infant as its only proper Powers for some time after its Arrival in
the World; till that by degrees the Bodily Organs become so dilated and
strengthened, and the Spirits of the Blood so vivid and active, that they
produce in the Infant some low degrees of Thinking and Knowledge; such as we
find in the Brutes, what Diet pleases them, and to distinguish such for their
Friends as give them Food, Ease and Pleasure; and to avoid such Things and
Persons as are terrible and strange to them. And thus they live and grow till
their Bodily Organs increase and grow in Capacity and Strength, (...) till the
Stomach, Liver, and other sanguificial Parts, are able more strongly to concoct
the Nourishment, and to prepare and rectify the Blood to a higher Degree of
Purity and Vigor: And thence the Spirits ascending to the Brain, and finding
there the Organs or Instruments still more enlarged and apter to perform the
Duties of the Rational Faculty; they act therein to such Purposes as God has
there appointed and ordained to be performed. And thus the Vital Spirits and
Bodily Organs proceed and grow together, until they both obtain their
Perfection of Degrees; such Blood and Spirits acting throughout the whole Body,
and in every Parcel and Member of it, those Powers and Activities which the
great Artificer intended them for: And by the Continuity and active Motions of
those Spirits, spread over the whole Body; it comes to pass, that the least
Wound in the end of a Finger or Toe is immediately felt over the whole Body;
and so by Sight, Hearing, Smelling or Tasting, the whole Person is immediately
perceptive and affected therewithal; like the String of an Instrument (how long
soever the same may be) if touched to a vibration in any Part of it, the whole
String answers to that Vibration, and sounds accordingly: And this seems to be
the Reason of the wonderful Velocity of Sensation and Perception in the Persons
of Men, and therewithal the Brutes may well be conceived to have a great
Affinity upon a like Account. This Spirit is not incaged or incarcerated in the
Body, but maintains as amicable a Conjunction with it, and with as much Liking
and Kindness to each other as any known Things in the World can do: And the
Athanasian Creed tells us, That as the Body and Soul are one Man, so God and
Man are one Christ; whence the Union of the former seems as amicable and kind
as that of the latter, though using a joint Contexture, one of them with another;
this sort of Spirit acting in and by the Bodily Organs and Members, they
together effect in the Person all those Motions, Faculties and Powers which the
great Artificer intended and designed to be produced in the Humane Person, be
they those of Vegetation, Sensation, or Rationality; all which Powers and
Faculties they continue to maintain so long as their said Contecture has a
Conrinuance: Whence the whole Person, both Spirit and Members, are all alike
affected, one of them with another, and never contrarily or differently one of
them affected against another. It is true, that diverse great Variances do often
happen between the two different Faculties or Powers of Sense and Reason; which
Differences are as durable and lasting as the Life it self: And these two
Faculties St. Paul often calls by the Name of Flesh and Spirit, which must pass
in his Writings for tropical and figurative Expressions. Upon which, and diverse
other Accounts, St. Peter says, there are some Things in St. Paul' s Writings
which are hard to be understood. Our Experience teaches us, That there are no
real Differences between the Bodily Organs and Members, and this sort of Spirit
of which we are now speaking; but that they live and act together, during the
Time of their Contexture, in the greatest Amity and Sympathy that can be
imagined: They are pleased and displeased, rejoice and mourn together, as two
constituent Parts of the same Person; they grow together to a State of
Perfection, are sick and well together, decay and decrease in like manner: And
where Men live to the uttermost Age, their Perceptions, Understandings and
Memories fail oftentimes before their Tasting and Feeling, which continues with
them the whole Extent of their Lives: Then the Person consisting of such Flesh
and Spirit dies together, the Flesh and Members turning to Dust, and the
Spirit, which is the Flame of Life, extinguishing at the Time of that
Separation: And at the Time of the Resurrection, the Body shall again be raised
with such a Temperature of the Blood, as shall then again be tinded and kindled
into such a Flame of Life as the Person had enjoyed in his former State, as St.
Paul declares, 1 Cor. 15. whereby there shall arise and accrue to the same
Person the same Sensation, Perception, Understanding, Memory and Conscience
that he had before in the Time of his former Life. So as Mr. Lock seems to be
in the right, when Fol. 183. of his said Book he teaches, That it is the same
Consciousness which at the Resurrection makes the same Person; such a sameness
as St. Paul declares by his Similitude of Grains of Corn, as much the same as
Grains are of the same Nature which spring one out of another. Thus united
again by the Resurrection, the Flesh and Spirit in a like Contexture as they
were before, shall come to Judgment at the last Day before the Tribunal of the
Lord Christ, and shall there receive Judgment, Sentence and Doom according to
their Works, and shall thence depart to Places of Joy and Happiness, or to
those of Sorrow and Misery; as by that Sentence and Judgment shall be appointed
for them. Thus from Experience it seems proveable, That there is such a Soul or
Spirit in Man, as has been before specified: That the same consists in the
Spirits of the Blood inflamed and made lucid and glowing: That the Original of
this Spirit proceeds from a Vital Principle in the Seed. The visible quando of
its Operation appears with the first Commencement of Vegetation in the Embryon:
The Vbi of its Residence is every Part and Member of the Body, through which
the same is contiguously spread, or rather is one continuate Spirit mixed with
the Flesh throughout the whole Body: As to the Quo, and what becomes of this
Spirit at the Death of the Person, it has been declared to go out by
Extinguishment. The only Point which the Observer professes Ignorance in, is
that of the Quomodo operatur: He professes not to know how these Spirits of the
Blood work in the Stomach a right and healthful Concoction and due Separation;
how in the sanguifical Parts the Chyle is converted into Blood; how the Breath
fans, maintains and communicates such Vigor and Flame to Particles of the
Blood which ascend to the Head; how those Particles of Blood working in the
Head and Brain produce there Sensation, Perception, Imagination, Understanding,
or Memory; how passing thence by the Nerves into the rest of the Body, they
cause Motion, Activity, Strength and Vigor; all obedient to the Will of the
Person, and subjected to the Dictates of his Judgment. Those are some of the
chief Ways of God with Man, and are most evident Proofs of his Divine Skill and
Power; concerning which, and other-like Divine Operations, Solomon says,
Eccles. 8.17. Man cannot find out the Work that is done under the Sun; because,
though a Man labor to find it out, or the Wise among Men endeavor to come to
the Knowledge of it, yet shall they not be able to find it. In this Ignorance
therefore the Observer is contended to be a Partaker with the rest of the
World, without herding himself amongst those, who, because they cannot find out
the Quomodo of this Performance; are easily persuaded to believe, That God has
not Skill or Power enough to perform this; and is therefore driven, and must be
driven to act those Things in Man by an immaterial intelligent Spirit which
they fancy therefore is newly created by God upon every fruitful Coition of Man
and Woman, or Man and Beast, where the Form of the Product happens to be
Humane; and that this new Soul which comes from his Hand innocent and pure,
should presently be thrust by him into an impure Body, at the best,
contaminated by Original Sin, which presently communicates that Tincture to
that pure, innocent, but unfortunate miserable Soul so newly created by him.
These Absurdities following upon and flowing from this Error, prove the Opinion
from whence they arise to be erroneous. And from this, and from all that has
been spoken before on this Subject; the Observer concludes, That the Opinion of
Man's being acted by an immaterial, intelligent Spirit, capable of subsisting
in a State of Separation from the Body, is an Error; and that it is much more
probable, That the Person of Man is a Contexture of Matter and Spirit both
rising from the seminal Agitation, and both mortal; and that the sound
Foundation, for the Expectation of Recompenses future to this Life, ought to be
grounded upon the rocky Foundation of the Resurrection. And herewithal shall be
finished the present Observations upon this Treatise.

FINIS.

