A TREATISE Relating to the Call, Work and Wages. Of the Ministers of CHRIST;
As also to the Call, Work and Wages Of the Ministers of ANTICHRIST. Wherein a
Testimony is born to that Call and precious Effects and Wages which the
Ministers of Christ Witnessed, Owned and Contended for. As also against that
Call, Work and Wages brought forth in the Apostasy, in the Degeneration from
the Primitive Purity of Doctrine and Worship, wherein Christendom became as the
Sea, Unsettled, Restless, Ungrounded. Herein also several other things are
touched, as in the Contents of the Treatise appear.

Thomas Lawson.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lumbard-street, 1680.

The Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
OF the Divine Call into the Ministry, Cap. 1. Of a Humane Call into the
Ministry, Cap. 2. Of the Original of Bishops in Gospel Days, and of the
Identity of Bishops and Elders in the Primitive Age, Cap. 3. Of the Work of the
Ministry of Christ, and of Antichrist. Cap. 4. Of the Wages of the Ministers of
Christ, being Free and Voluntary; and of the Coercive, Compulsive Maintenance
of the Ministers of Antichrist, Cap. 5. Of the Rise of First Fruits in
Christian-Churches, Cap. 6. Of the Rise of Mortuaries, Cap. 7. Of the Statute
against Mortmain, Cap. 8. Of Exemptions from the Payment of Tithes, Cap.9. Of
Frank Almoigne, Cap. 10. Of Peter Pence, Reek-Penny, etc. Cap. 11. Of Tithe in
Laymens Hands, Impropriators, Cap. 12. The Clergies Patriarchal Claim to
Tithes, Cap. 13. The Clergies Mosaical Claim to Tithes, Cap. 14. The Clergies
Evangelical Claim to Tithes, Cap. 15. Tithes a Mosaical Shadow, Cap. 16. The
Clergies Human Claim to Tithes considered; as also the Testimonies of several,
eminent in the Church in their respective Ages, against the Exaction thereof in
Gospel Days, Cap. 17.
A TREATISE Relating to the Call, Work and Wages Of the Ministers of CHRIST; As
also to the Call, Work and Wages Of the Ministers of ANTICHRIST.
CHAPTER I. Of the Divine Call into the Ministry.
ADAM considered as the Workmanship of the Lord, that unsearchable Architect,
Master Builder, Former of all things, was truly Righteous, truly Holy, and was
put into the Garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it; Paradise that was his
Storehouse, was his Workhouse also; blessed was he while under the Teaching
of his Maker; but being brought through the Insinuations of the Serpent, to
attend to his Teaching, he fell into the Region of the Shadow of Death, Death
entered his Windows, as the Lord had said, and a World of Wickedness, as a heady
Current, streamed in.

Now as a signal Testimony of the Riches of Divine and Never-failing Love, the
Everlasting Gospel was proclaimed and sounded in Adam's Ears, That the Seed of
the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head, crush his Power, bring him under.

After that, in every Age and Generation the Lord called true and faithful
Witnesses, and by the Influence and Virtue of the Anointing qualified them, to
bear testimony to his constant immutable Loving Kindness, and against the
Wickedness of the World, introduced by the Serpent, and to stir up men to look
after, and wait for the Revelation and Manifestation of the blessed Seed, in
whom the Families of the Earth should be blessed. Peter, an Apostle of the
Lamb, bare record, saying, Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. So that the Testimonies of the Lord's Witnesses and
Worthies in all Ages, were derived from the Sourse or Spring of Heavenly
Abilities, the Spirit's In-dwellings; not from the strength of Acquired Natural
Tongues. Arts, Sciences and Spoiling Philosophy: herein are excluded all
Testimonies and all Ministers made and brought forth by the Will of Man.

For the Confirmation of this a Cloud of Living Witnesses in the Scriptures of
Truth is recorded.

Abel a Keeper of Sheep, through the Word of Faith he became Righteous, a
Witness for the Lord in the Morning of the World; he and his Offering found
Acceptance with the Lord, Genesis 4.2, 4. Hebr. 11.4.

Enech, called of God, by the Spirit, the Word of Prophecy, without which no
true Prophet, nor Prophecy, Genesis 5.24. Hebr. 11.5. Jude 14, 15. Joel 2.28, 29.

Noah a Husbandman, Just, Perfect and Righteous; he walked with God; he was
called of God to be a Preacher of Righteousness, made so without recourse to
Heathen Arts and Sciences, Genesis 9.20. Genesis 6.9. Genesis 7.1. Hebr. 11.7. 2 Pet.
2.5.

Lot was a Just and a Righteous Man, called of the Lord to bear a Testimony
against the World, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.

Abraham the Friend of God, Isa. 41 8. was a Prophet, replenished with the Word
of Prophecy, Genesis 20.7. he knew the immediate Call of God, Genesis 12.1. and 15.1.
and 17.1. he was a Teacher in the Spirit, Genesis 18.17, 19. blessed thorough
Obedience, Genesis 22.18.

Moses was a Keeper of Sheep, Exodus 3.1. called of the Lord to the Work,
whereunto he was appointed, Exodus 4.12. Numb. 12.6, 7, 8. a Man of God, Jos.
14.6. through the living Word he was made a Minister and a Prophet.

Joshua was called of God, Jos. 1.5. and 37. the Lord's Power and Presence with
him and in him was the Rule he walked by.

Gad, David's Seer, was called of the Lord, he heard the Voice of the Lord, and
obeyed the same, 1 Chronicles. 21.9, 10. 2 Samuel 24.11, 12.

Aaron, though excellently qualified, admirably endued with Gifts, yet he
entered not upon the Priests Office, without the Call of God thereunto, Heb.
5.4. Exodus 28.1. when he and that Priesthood was instituted, not a word was
mentioned of School Sciences, Natural Languages; he was no Intruder into the
High-Priest's Office, but answered the Command of the Lord. Priests in the
Latin Tongue are called Sacerdotes, because their Office was, Deo sacra dare,
to Sacrifice to God, or because they were sacra dos, consecrated, and as it
were severed from the rest of the People, and given up to God, as says Ridley
in his View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law.

Bezaleel and Aholiab were filled with the Spirit of God in Wisdom, and in
Understanding, and in Knowledge, and in all manner of Workmanship for the
building of the Tabernacle, Exodus 31. implying, that such as in the Evangelical
Dispensation are appointed for the building of the Spiritual Tabernacle, be
they Sons or Daughters, their Preparation and Qualification for that Work, is
of the Lord, and not of Man.

Nathan the Prophet, was called of God, the Word of the Lord came unto him, 2 Samuel 7.4, 5. and 12.5. and David humbled himself before him.

David a Keeper of Sheep, 2 Samuel 16.11, 12. a Man after God's own Heart, Acts
13.22. he was called of God, 2 Samuel 23.1, 2, etc. the Spirit of the Lord, the
Word of Righteousness, was the Spring of his Ministry.

Saul, the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied, 1 Samuel 10. but
turning from it, he went to the Dead, to a Witch, 1 Samuel 28. so became a
Persecutor of David, 1 Samuel 19.1. losing his Head, it was sent into the Land of
the Philistines, 1 Samuel 3.9. When it was scornfully demanded, Is Saul also among
the Prophets? one answered, But who is their Father? As who should say,
Prophecy comes not so much by Man's Teaching, as by God's, therefore wonder not
that Saul prophesies, though not bred a Scholar, 1 Samuel 10. Trap. on the Acts.

The Seventy Elders were called of God, without recourse to Heathen Education,
Profane Arts and Sciences, the Spirit, the Word of Prophecy came upon them,
Numb. 11.

Eldad and Medad were called of the Lord, the Spirit of Prophecy came upon
them, Numb. 11.26. etc. Joshua the Servant of Moses said, My Lord Moses forbid
them: He said not, Stock, Stone, Imprison, Persecute, Beat them with Staves,
Bibles, as the Language of many in our days have been, who would be accounted
Ministers of the Gospel. Moses answered, Enviest thou for my sake? Would God
that all the Lord's People were Prophets, and that he would put his Spirit upon
them. Here was a precious Frame of Spirit, Fervency for the Propagation of the
Truth.

Samuel a Prophet, was called of God, contrary to the Will of Man, 1 Samuel 3.

Oded a Prophet was called of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28. his Testimony from the
Mouth of the Lord was effectual.

Ah^jah the Prophet was called of the Lord, 1 Kings 11.29. and 14.26. If thou
come uncalled, God will say unto thee, Friend, how came thou hither? The
Calling is Null, if it have not the Living God for the Author and Caller.
Wilson's Christian Dictionary.

Iddo the Seer was called of God, 2 Chronicles. 9.29.

Jehu the Prophet was called of the Lord, the Word of the Lord came unto him, 1
Kings 16.1.

Jahaziel a Prophet was called of the Lord, the Spirit of the Lord came upon
him, 2 Chronicles. 20.14, 15.

Elijah was called of the Lord, made a Prophet by the Living Word, 1 Kings
17.1, 2. his Testimony was against Ahab and Jezebel for their Idolatry and
worshipping of Images, for the which they persecuted him, calling him, A
Troubler of Israel, 1 Kings 1.8.

Elisha a Plough man was called of God, 2 Kings 2.15. he reproved the Idolatry
of Priests and People in his Age; he cured Naaman of his Leprosy, upon which
Naaman testified, saying, I know that there is no God in all the Earth, but in
Israel; Naaman offered him a Gift, and urged him to take it, but Elisha
refused, showing forth another manner of Spirit, than is in Man-made Ministers,
who speak much the Horsleeches Language, Give, Give; 2 Kings 5.

Micajah, a Prophet called of the Lord, concerning whom the King of Israel
said, I hate this Micajah, for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but
Evil: One advised Micajah, To speak well of the King, as the Four Hundred
Prophets had done; Micajah answered, As the Lord lives, what the Lord says
unto me, that will I speak. 1 Kings 22. showing forth another Spirit than is in
Manmade Ministers, Men pleasers.

Huldah a Prophetess was called of the Lord, the living Word came to her, and
she bare Testimony against the Backsliding and Idolatry of that time, 2 Kings
22.

Shemaiah a Prophet, a Man of God, called of God, the Word of the Lord came to
him, 1 Kings 12. 2 Chronicles. 12.

Azariah, the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he preached true, sound and
wholesome Doctrine, 2 Chronicles. 15.

Hunani the Seer, in the Word of Prophecy reproved Asa King of Judah, for his
Reliance upon the Arm of Flesh, and for his Non-reliance upon the living God;
Asa imprisoned him for his Message, 2 Chronicles. 16.

Zechariah a Prophet was called of the Lord, the Spirit of the Lord came upon
him; he reproved the People for that they forsook the Lord, saying, The Lord
had forsaken them; for the which they conspired against him, and stoned him, 2 Chronicles. 24. Thus they that are in the Flesh, they swell against them that are in
the Spirit.

Balaam was called of God, he heard his Voice, the Spirit of God came upon him,
he prophesied of the coming of Christ; but by looking after Gifts and Rewards,
he went astray, Numb. 22, 23, 24 Chapters.

Miriam a Prophetess was called of the Lord, Exodus 15. for Murmuring against
Moses she became Leprous, and was shut out of the Camp seven days, Numb. 12.

Isaiah the Prophet was called of the Lord, Isa. 38.1. and 48.16. he bare
Testimony against such Teachers as came by the Will of Man, saying, His
Watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are all Dumb Dogs, they cannot
bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber; yea, they are Greedy Dogs, which
can never have enough; they all look to their own Way, every one for his Gain
from his Quarter, Isa. 56.10, 11. Who are called of God now, they see and
comprehend such as come by the Will of Man, who have nothing but what they
receive from Schools and Colleges, Natural Tongues, Arts and Sciences,
School Divinity, to be the blind and ignorant Watchmen, seeking, yea, Extorting
Gain from their Quarters, from their Parishes, watching for the Fleece more
than for the Good of the Flock. Trap on the Corinthians says, That Luther
never found himself once tempted to Covetousness. Among Man-Made Ministers
herein few are Lutherans.

Jeremiah was called of the Lord when a Child, without recourse to Heathen
Education, Jer. 1. he said, Ah! Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a
Child: The Lord said, Say not, I am a Child; thou shall go to all that I send
thee; and whatsoever I command thee, thou shall speak: Here he is drawn from
Man, to the Mouth of the Lord. I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart
(says the Lord) which shall feed you with Knowledge and Understanding, Jer.
^.15. Such Teachers are of the Lord's giving, not of Man's sending. He reproved
their great Corruption, as in the Civil, so in the Ecclesiast^cal State,
saying, A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets
prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their Means, and my People love
to have it so, Jer. 5.30, 31. In the Light of Truth such as these are found out.

Again, He testified against such as ran and were not sent, saying, They make
you Vain; they speak a Vision of their own Heart, and not out of the Mouth of
the Lord; I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to
them, yet they prophesied: but if they had stood in my Counsel, and had caused
my People to hear my Words, then they should have turned them from their Evil
Way, and from the Evil of their Doings, Jer. 23. In the Prophetical
Dispensation such as ran for Self Ends, not being sent of the Lord, the
Prophet's Test^mony was against them: for his Testimony the People stroke him,
stocked him, imprisoned him, and sorely persecuted him: The same is fulfilled
in our days.

Ezekiel was called of the Lord, chap. 1. he bare Testimony against such as
came by the will of Man, without a heavenly Call; he prophesied, That the Lord
would deliver his Flock from the Mouth of such, and set up One Shepherd, who
should feed them: This one Shepherd is known, and the Shepherds that mind the
Fleece more than the Flock are turned from, Ezekiel. 34.

Daniel, through the virtue and influence of the living Word was made a
Prophet; he foresaw the Messiah: and his Kingdom, and how the Saints should
take his Kingdom; and of the ^^ishing of Transgression, and of the putting an
End to Sin, and of making Reconciliation for Iniquity, and of bringing in
Everlasting Righteousness.

Hosea was called of the Lord, the Word of the Lord came unto him, cap. 1.1. he
bare Testimony against profane Priests; saying, My People are destroyed for
lack of Knowledge; because thou have rejected Knowledge, I will also reject
thee, that thou shall be no Priest unto me, Hos. 4. And as Troops of Robbers
wait for a man, so the Company of Priests Murder in the Way by Consent, for
they commit Lewdness, Hos. 6.9.

Joel the Prophet was called of the Lord, Joel 1.1. he prophesied of the Glory
of the Evangelical Dispensation, saying, It shall come to pass afterward, that
I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh; your Sons and your Daughters shall
prophecy, your old men shall dream Dreams, your young men shall see Visions;
and upon the Servants and Handmaids, in those days I will pour out my Spirit,
Joel 2.28, 29. So it is the Spirit of the Lord that enables to Pray, to Preach,
to Prophecy, to bear a faithful Testimony for the Lord; not acquired Heathen
Arts, Sciences, and natural Tongues.

Amos, a Herds-man, and a Gatheres of Sicomore Fruit, was called of the Lord to
be a Prophet, Amos 1.1. he rebuked Israel, for that they would have had the
Lords Prophets silent, Amos 2.12. Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou Seer, flee
into the Land of Judah, there eat Bread, and Prophecy there; but Prophecy not
any more a^ Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court,
Amos 7. Thus he who had the Letter, without the Spirit, would have limited him
that was in the Spirit, the Key which opens, and no man can shut: And how
man-made Ministers now, and others, in the Will of the Flesh, have and do
labor to stop the Testimony of Truth, because not born by Artists, Logicians,
Philosophers; I need say little.

Obadiah was called of the Lord, contrary to the Will of Man, cap. 1.1. he
prophesied, That Saviors should come upon Mount Zion, to judge the Mount of
Esau, and the Kingdom should be the Lords, verse. 21.

Jonah was called of the Lord; the Word of the Lord came unto him, That he
should preach Repentance unto Nineveh; but consulting with Flesh and blood, he
steared his course to Tarshish; a great Fish swallowed him up; through
Repentance he was delivered, and sent to preach Repentance to Nineveh, Jonah 1,
2, and 3. chap.

Micah was called of the Lord, cap. 1.1. he bare Testimony against such as came
by the Will of man; saying, Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that
make my People Err, and cry, Peace, Peace; and he that puts not into their
Mouths, they prepare War against him: In the Living Word that came to Micah,
such Teachers are now seen, preparing War against them that put not into their
Mouths, that refuse to give them Tithe, Easter-reckonings, Midsummer-dues,
Martin-Mass-Calves, Mortuaries, Reek-pennies, such they Sue, recover Tribble
Damages, Imprison; what spoil is made on this account, very many Parishes in
England affords Examples. The Sun was gone down over such Prophets, yea, Night
was upon them, and they had no Vision nor Answer of God, Micah 3.5, 6, 7. Now
such as deny Revelation and Vision, the Sun is gone down unto them, Night is
upon them. Further says Micah, The Heads judge for Rewards, and the Priests
teach for Hire, the Prophets divine for Money; yet will they lean upon the
Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? Micah 3.11. In the same Spirit now
revealed, such are now seen.

Nahum was called of the Lord, cap. 1.1. he spoke of slumbering Shepherds, cap.
3.18. In the Soul-quickning, Life-restoring Word, such Slumberers and Sleepers
are now seen, who are not kept waking to Righteousness, nor vigilant for the
good of their Flocks.

Habakkuk was called of the Lord, cap. 1.1. he prophesied of a comfortable
Dispensation, of the scattering of the Exhalations of Darkness and Ignorance;
saying, The Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of the Glory of the Lord,
as Waters cover the Sea, cap. 2.14.

Zaphaniah was called of the Lord, cap. 1.1. he testified, That the Lord would
cut off the Names of the Chemarims, that is, Black coats, with the Priests,
Zeph. 1.4. He said of Jerusalem, That her Prophets were Light and Treacherous
Persons; that her Priests had polluted the Sanctuary, and had done Violence to
the Law, cap. 3.4. Such as have no Call but of man, will be found guilty hereof.

Haggai was called of the Lord, he cried out, saying, Is it time for you to
dwell in your Ceiled Houses, and this House lie waste? cap. 1. Such are in
Transgression, who dwell in their own, who cover themselves with the black
Curtain of Self, and natural Endowments, and neglect the Dispensation of God,
where the building of the true Temple is.

Zechariah was called of the Lord, cap. 1.1. he bare Testimony against such as
ran unsent; saying, Woe to the Idol Shepherd that leaves the Flock; the Sword
shall be upon his Arm, and upon his Right Eye; his Arm shall be clean dried up,
and his right Eye shall be utterly darkened, cap. 11.17.

Malachi was called of the Lord, cap. 1.1. he reproved the Priests for
neglecting the Covenant, cap. 2.1, 2. as man made Ministers now are justly
reproveable for neglecting the new Covenant, the Law written in the Heart, the
Spirit put in the inward Parts, the great blessing of the Evangelical
Dispensation.

John the Baptist was called of the Lord, without recourse to Heathen Arts and
Sciences, spoiling Philosophy, Luke 1.15. Luke 3.1, 2.

Christ Jesus, the End of the Law, the End of the Prophets, in his prepared
Body, called not the Wise and Prudent, Painted Oraters, Subtle Sophisters,
Crafty Logicians and spoiling Philosophers, but weak and contemptible
Instruments, as unlearned Fishermen to preach the Everlasting Gospel, that
they might be in him, what they were, that they might be Workmen solely and
wholely, through his Power, Virtue and Influence; not through acquired Arts,
Parts and Sciences, Mat. 4.18, etc.

Christ sent not Orators (says Augustine) to work upon Fishermen, Andrew and
others, but by these Fishermen he reduced Kings and Emperors to the saving
Knowledge of the Truth.

Omnipotency being Agent, faith one, it matters nothing what like the
Instrument be.

Of Fishermen he made them Fishers of men; they came to the Discipleship to
learn of Christ, before they came to the Apostleship to be Preachers of Christ;
they were taught and caught by him, before they taught and caught others.

Unlearned Fishermen, says Jerome, are sent to preach, that the Faith of
Believers may not be thought to be gotten by the Power of man, but by the
Teaching of God.

Christ sent his Apostles (says Chrysostom) as the Sun sends out his Rays, as
the Rose sends out its sweet Odor, as the Fire disperses its Sparks.

If you do not firmly believe, says Zuinglius, that you may be taught of God,
without the teachings of men, you are without true Faith, De veritate verbi.

Christ said unto his Disciples, Pray the Lord of the Harvest, that he will
send forth Laborers into his Harvest, Mat. 9.38. He bad them not have recourse
unto Schools and Colleges, to natural Languages, Arts and Sciences, but to the
Lord of the Harvest; no other Fountain nor Wellspring he commended them to,
but to the Lord of the Harvest: So the qualifying and sending of Gospel
Ministers is the Lords Prerogative Royal.

Fulke, Augustine, Marlorat, Poole, Bishop Jewel, and many more which might be
mentioned, say on this Scripture, That Ministers of the Gospel are sent of the
Lord, and are furnished and qualified by him for that Work, and that all others
are Intruders; as Christ sent the Twelve, so he sent the Seventy, Luke 10. He
said to his Disciples, As my Father has sent me, even so send I you, John
20.21.

Bishop Usher in Vindication of the Waldenses, by way of Apology said, God did
choose Fishermen, that so he might not give his Glory to another; the little
Ones that asked Bread, received the same; but the Learned being busied about
vain Contentions and Disputations were sent empty away.

Further, Christ after his Resurrection bad his Disciples, Wait for the Promise
of the Father; saying, Ye shall receive Power, after that the holy Ghost is
come upon you; and ye shall be Witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the outermost part of the Earth, Acts 1.4, 8.
So that their Witness-bearing was an Effect of the Lords heavenly Appearance in
them and among them; And who run without this, relying on their stock of
Natural Tongues, Heathen Arts and Sciences, they will be found false Witnesses.

Without the concurrence of Spiritual Aid, says Spark, the King's Chapline,
the rarest Orators are but as sounding Brass and tinkling Cimbals.

Christ's Disciples were unlearned men, but he gifted them, and made them
learned in Spiritual Learning, before he sent them abroad, insomuch that the
Rulers, Elders, Scribes, High Priest, etc. marvelled at the boldness of Peter
and John, perceiving that they were unlearned and ignorant men; and they took
knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus, Acts 4.13.

As Bishop Jewel said of Councils, God is able, not only without Councils, but
also against Councils, both to defend and to enlarge his Kingdom, in Apol. So I
say, Christ the same yesterday, to day and forever, is able to qualify and
accomplish, and does qualify and accomplish for the Ministry, such as are his
Ministers, without sending them to the bitter Waters of Heathen Wisdom, Heathen
Learning: It Is Heathen, not Christian Education I speak against.

Further, the Apostles choosing seven Deacons, we read not that they enquired
for men profound in Heathen Arts and Sciences, but for men of Honest Report,
full of the holy Ghost and Wisdom, Acts 6.3. So that the holy Spirit only
qualified for that Work.

Paul was called of the Lord for the Gospel Ministry: While untouched with the
Finger of Heaven, his Recourse was unto the High Priest, to receive Commission
from him; but after the heavenly Touch, his Cry was, Lord, what will thou have
me to do? Acts 9. While he had nothing but what he received at the Feet of
Gamaliel, he ran a fierce Carreer, says one, to the zenith of Persecution; at
length a heavenly Siste gradum Saul, caused him to run Retrograde; and in his
Apology before King Agrippa, he ascribes his Call, not to Gamaliel, but to the
Lord, Acts 26. Acts 20. Gal. 1. 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. A Call, says Aug. Marl. cannot
be lawful, except it be of God.

As for Bishops; Gospel-Bishops, they are called of the Lord; therefore Paul
said, Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock, over the which the holy
Spirit has made you Overseers, that is, Bishops, Acts 20.28. They are made
such, truly such, by the holy Spirit; Aug. Marl. testifies the very same. Now
if any bear that Name, or pretend that Office, without the Spirit, such are
Aposcopi, says Espeusaus, rather than Episcopi, By-seers, rather than
Overseers.

Further, Paul called of the Lord, bare this Testimony, saying, How shall they
preach, except they be sent? Romans 10.15. Aug. Marl. said on this place, This is
spoken against them who go to the Ministry without a Call, who run, not being
sent; hereupon they do no good; what they do, it is for their Belleys sake, not
for the Glory of God. Poole on the same place, speaks to the same purpose.

Further, Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, said, When he ascended up on
High, he led Captivity Captive, and gave Gifts unto men; and he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers; for the Perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry,
Ephesians. 4. So that Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, Bishops,
Elders, Deacons, as truly such, are qualified by the Gift of the Lord, not by
Natural Tongues, Heathen Arts, Sciences, Endowments, Accomplishments; though
Tongues may be, and are useful in their place: Gave Gifts to men, says the
Apostle; the Hebrew Psalmist has it, Psalm. 68.18. Thou received Gifts for men:
Christ received them, that he might give them. Gave Gifts to men; the Psalmist
adds, Even to the Rebellious: The Rebellious have a Gift to lead them out of
the state of Rebellion, or to leave them inexcusable, if they continue therein.

Paul to Timothy and Titus, setting down the required Qualifications of Bishops
and Deacons, mentions no Mathematics, Logicks, Spoiling Philosophy, but
Gravity, Blamelesness, Sobriety, Justice, Holiness, Temperance, etc. 1 Timothy 3.
Tit. 1.

Were such men taken into holy Orders, says the Author of the Book called, The
Naked Truth, and constituted Pastors, the Church of Christ would be better
edified, though Plato, Aristotle, Euclid, Scotus, Aquinas, were never known to
them; the holy Sciptures are able to make wise unto Salvation, through Faith in
Christ Jesus: If so, why are Heathen Philosophers so much doted upon? And all
Scripture is given by the Inspiration of God; and is profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of
God may be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good Work, 2 Timothy 3. Mark,
thoroughly furnished, without Logic, Spoiling Philosophy, Pagan Ethics,
Physics, Metaphysics, School Divinity: If thoroughly furnished without these,
what need of these?

The Ministerial Office may be better performed, says the Author, by Grave and
Conscientious men, though they never saw University, nor know any Language, but
their Mother Tongue, than by any Aristotelist, Scotist, Aquinatist, with their
knacks of Quiddities, Qualities, Syllogisms, Enthimems, Distinctions and
Subsumptions, etc.

Were such Grave and Conscientious Persons, says this Author, admitted into
the Ministry, as the Apostles ordained, such Preaching set up as they
practiced, and all other decryed, then Thousands in the Nations would preach
the Gospel for Conscience sake.

Paul speaking of the Aaronical Priesthood, said, No man takes this Honor to
himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron was, Heb. 5.4. Aaron was not to
execute the Priests Office, till called of God; he was to be anointed with Oil,
to have a Breast Plate, and the Vrim and Thummim in it, a Girdle, etc. Exodus
28. Without these he was not to Minister, a Type of Christ, and of the
Evangelical Ministry, fulfilled in the Substance, Christ Jesus, a Kingdom of
Priests, a Royal Priesthood, into which no man is to intrude, nor pretend, till
called of God, furnished with the heavenly Anointing, Breast Plate of
Righteousness, Urim and Thummim, Light and Perfection, Girdle of Truth, etc.
Such as deny an Immediate Call, and confess they have not the Apostles Spirit,
they want their Armor, their Breast Plate, they plead against their Urim and
Thummim, Light and Perfection: so are man-made Ministers excluded from the Call
of the Aaronical Priesthood, the Type, and of Christ, the Substance, and of the
Evangelical Ministry.

The Call of God, says Aug. Marlorat, on this place, makes a Lawful Office;
this was common to Christ and Aaron, for God called them both.

Let such (says one) as run before they be sent, with their Dead, Carnal,
Formal Worship and Erroneous Doctrines, remember Nadab and Abihu, with their
strange Fire, such as was not sent down from Heaven, Lev. 10. Core and his
Accomplices with their dismal Usurpations, Numb. 16. Vzza with his exemplary
Punishment, 1 Chronicles. 13.

The Lord commanded, That such of the Sons of Aaron as had Blemishes and
Corporal Deformities, should not execute the Priests Offi^e, Lev. 21. Implying,
that Gospel Ministers should be freed from Spiritual Blemishes, the Defilements
of Sin, Iniquity, Superstition and Idolatry; whom the Lord calls to be his
Witnesses, he reconcils them to himself, and cleanses them from the Defilements
of Body, Soul and Spirit.

The legal Priest was not to be blind, but was to have his Eyesight; implying,
that Gospel Ministers, anointed with heavenly Eye Salve, are Quick-sighted, not
Blind, but Openers of Blind Eyes: It Is said of Hagar, That God opened her Eyes,
and she saw a Well of Water, Genesis 21. So the Lord opens the Eyes of his
Witnesses* to see the Well of the Water of Life, and to feel its comfortable
Virtue; so they cannot but invite others thereunto, and that Freely; and blind
Watchmen are offended, such as have no Call, but from Man, commended thereto
through Natural Tongues, Heathen Arts and Sciences: These are Blind, not Gospel
Ministers.

The legal Priest was not to be Lame, Lameness was prohibited; Gospel Ministers
are not Spiritually Lame, They run without Weariness, walk without Fainting;
but Man made Ministers are in Spiritual Lameness, not knowing the use of that
Foot that leads to Life; these halt in the Way: How can they say, as Paul, that
excellent Way-guide said, Be ye Followers of me, even as I also am of Christ? 1
Cor. 11. And walk as you have us for an Example, Phil. 3.17.

The legal Priest was not to have a flat Nose, such as have their Olfactory
Nerve, is often obstructed, so that they are void of the sense of Savor:
Gospel Ministers, called of the Lord, they savor the things of the Lord, they
savor the Sweetness of Christ's good Ointment, and are refreshed thereby; but
Man made Ministers, through a spiritual Obstruction, they savor not the Things
of God, but their Understandings are so darkened and depraved, as that they call
Evil Good, and Good Evil; and put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness;
and put Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter, Isa. 5.20.

The legal Priest was not to have any thing Superfluous, Excess in Number,
Quantity or Quality; implying, that such as are truly called to the Evangelical
Ministry, to the Gospel Dispensation, what they are, they are in the Lord, New
Creatures; Old Things are put off, all things are become New. James admonished
the scattered Tribes, To lay apart all Filthiness, and Superfluity of
Naughtiness, and to receive with Meekness the Engrafted Word, which was able to
save their Souls, James 1.21.

The legal Priest was not to be broken Footed, nor broken Handed. What implies
this? That such as are truly called into the Gospel Ministry, they are Sound
Footed and Handed; the Foot of their Mind keeps in Sions Way, it breaks not off
from the Way of God, it keeps in the Path of Judgment; their Hands handle the
Word of Life; but such as have no Call, but of man, they are Revolters, broken
off from the Path of Life.

The legal Priest was not to be Crook-Backt: What implies this, but that Gospel
Ministers, made so, contrary to the Will of Man, are not pressed down with the
weight and burden of worldly Cares? Now, what but the World, its Pleasures,
Profits, Lucre, Gain, Advantages and Preferments is in the Eye of Man made
Ministers?

The legal Priest was not to be a Dwarf, of small Bodily stature; implying,
That the Ministers of the Gospel, empowered from above, must not be stinted in
spiritual Growth, not Novices of low stature in the saving Truth, but grow like
the Palm Tree, Tall, Upright, always Green, Flourishing, Fruitful in spiritual
Growth, always tending Heavenward, till they attain unto the measure of the
stature of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. But such as are called by the will
of Man, and stand therein, they are strangers to the first Principle of pure
Religion, not so far as the Novice, or young Schollar's state; so no Ministers
of Christ.

The legal Priest was not to have a Blemish in his Eye, whereby his sight might
be diminished or depraved; implying, That the Evangelical Witnesses, whose Eyes
are anointed with spiritual Eye Salve, grow up in clearness of Understanding,
for their comfortable walking with God, and for bringing of others into the
Path of the Ransomed; but Man made Ministers may be exquisite in Tongues, Arts,
Histories, Civil and Ecclesiastical, Councils, Fathers, Schoolmen, yet
spiritually blind.

The legal Priest was not to be Scorbutical nor Scabbed, wherein the Peccant
humor of corrupt Blood so abounded, that it brake out and deformed the Flesh;
this rendered a man incapable of discharging the Priests Office: What implies
this, but that the Gospel Ministers should through the Power, Virtue and
Influence of the Cross of Christ know the Flesh Crucified, with the Affections
and Lusts thereof, and lift up pure Hearts and clean Hands without wavering and
doubting? but such as have no Qualification, but from Man, from Natural
Tongues, Arts, Sciences, Pagan Metaphysics, the Virtue of the Cross not being
known, Flesh ruling within, manifests it self without.

The legal Priest was not to be Concussus testiculo, that is, have his Stones
broken; this Imperfection unqualified the Sons of Aaron, dis-inabled them from
executing the Priests Office: This implies, that the Lord's Witnesses under the
Evangelical Dispensation, should be enabled to beget others into the healing
Power of the Living God. Paul told the Corinthians, saying, In Christ Jesus I
have begotten you through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. Phil. 10. Now Man made
Ministers beget others into dry, partched, sandy Forms, without Power, and
persecute others for Noncompliance thereunto.

Peter the Apostle gave a pregnant and lively Testimony for a Divine and
Immediate Call, saying, As every man has received the Gift, even so minister
the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, 1 Pet.
4.10. So Gospel Ministers minister out of the Treasure of God's Gift; not from
a stock acquired by Natural Languages, Arts and Sciences.

Further, says Peter, If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God:
If any man minister, let him do it, as of the Ability which God gives, verse.
11. So that the true Ministry proceeds from the Spring of divine Ability; not
from the muddy Lake of acquired Pagan Arts, Parts and Endowments.

Nothing conduces more, says Aug. Marl. on this place, to correct Murmurings,
then in considering that we minister not of our own, but what the Lord has
given us.

Further, it is said, I will give Power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall
Prophecy a Thousand Two Hundred and Threescore Days clothed in Sackcloth,
Rev. 11.3. Gospel Ministers, says Pareus on this place, who are the Lords
Witnesses, are empowered and qualified by the Lord, for the Performance and
Discharge of their Work.

After three days and a half, the Time of the Beasts Reign, that ascended out
of the Bottomless Pit, and Locusts coming out of the Smoke, Antichristian
Teachers bred and qualified in the Smoke of humane Wisdom, Spoiling Philosophy,
Unsavory School Divinity, whereby Kindreds, Tongues and People are made Drunk.
I say, after the Reign of the Beast, and of the Locusts, Antichrist and his Man
made Ministry, John fore-tells the Restoration of Witnesses, and of their Call
to the Ministry; saying, The Spirit of Life from God entered into them, Rev.
11.11. So that the Succession of true Witnesses of the true Ministry, after the
Apostasy, shall be through the Operation of the Spirit; not through the Smoke
of the Pit, Spoiling Philosophy, School Divinity; and through the Operation of
the Finger of the Ancient of Days, The Kingdoms of this World shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall Reign forever and ever,
Rev. 11.15.

So that the Spirit of Life entering into men, after the Beast and his Locusts,
Antichrist and his Ministers have had their Day, is to be the only Qualifier
for the Evangelical Dispensation. Most of the Ministers among the Waldenses
were Tradesmen, as Merchants, Fishermen, Tailors, Shoe-makers, Husbandmen;
and these Waldenses, ancient Pratestants, Witnesses against the apostatised
Roman Church, bare Testimony, That it were lawful for any to Preach, who were
called of God: Though Strangers to Natural Tongues, Arts, Sciences, Philosophy,
such the living God is raising up to stand on their Feet, and they must bear
their Testimony in order to Season, and rectify the Nations; though by the
Sons of Belial, under the Delusion of Antichrist, they be branded as
Anti-magistratical and Anti-ministerial, and Persecuted.

CAP. II. Of a Humane Call into the Ministry.
WHile the Primitive Faith was kept, the Ministers of the Gospel were Stars in
Heaven, shining as Stars through purity of Doctrine, and heavenly Spotless
Coversation; while Stars in Heaven, fixed in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus,
they had the heavenly Key, letting them into the royal Court of the Lords
Presence; they entertained no Wisdom in Church or School, but what was
Heavenly, no Call into the Ministry, but what was Divine, Immediate, contrary
to the Will of Man: Holy men of God, as Peter said, spoke as they were moved by
the holy Ghost: Yea, and these in the Life of Righteousness, Power of
Godliness, saw such as got the Letter without the Spirit, the Scriptures
without the Power, and bare Testimony against them to be false Teachers,
Antichrists, Preaching for filthy Lucre, Gifts and Rewards. Yea; Paul spoke of
the Rise of Self-lovers, Covetous, etc. who should have the Form of Godliness,
without the Power thereof, Scriptures without the Spirit; such, said he, are to
be turned from, 2 Timothy 3.

John foresaw a great Star fall from Heaven, to Earth, then being in the Earth;
an earthly Key was thrust into the hand of his Mind, even the Key of the
Bottomless Pit; out of the Pit arose a Smoke, darkning Sun and Air, Spoiling,
Corrupting and Depraving the Glory and Purity of the Primitive Church: What was
this Smoke? Earthly Wisdom gushing as a heady Torrent into Church and School,
Traditions, Errors, Lies, strange Doctrines, Superstition, Idolatry, Lacivious
Poems, Wanton Comedies, Vain Tragedies, Frivolous Fables, Spoiling Philosophy,
Heathen Logicks, Ethics, Metaphysics: As this Smoke steamed into Church and
School, the Pearl of heavenly Wisdom, and the Pure, Divine, Immediate Call into
the Ministry was lost in the Smoke. Yea, and John foresaw Locusts come out of
the Smoke: What Is that? Swarms of Man-made Ministers, bred and qualified in the
Smoke of earthly Wisdom, be they Garduates or Under-graduates, if they have
nothing but from Man; so that since the steaming in of that Smoke, the Call
has been of Man, through Natural Languages, Heathen Arts, Parts, Endowments,
Qualifications at Schools and Colleges; yea, and the Locusts have been so
senseless and benumbed, as to plead against any other Call, or Manner of
Qualification.

The true Ministry was and is peculiar to the New man, 2 Pet. 1.21. John 20.21.
But the heavenly Capacitating Ability, being lost, through the Smoke of the
Pit, a Qualification without was set up in the place of it, gained by Schools,
Universities, Languages, Spoiling Philosophy; so Preaching is made an Art of
the old Man, by Antichrist.

Let none apprehend that I deny Schools of Learning; for Schools teaching the
knowledge of the Creation, and of useful and necessary Things, and Languages,
useful in their place, I own; but it is the Lord of the Harvest that must send
forth Laborers into the Harvest; Universities cannot do that.

I might produce a Cloud of Witnesses, showing, that after the Beast was risen
out of the Sea, and Earth, Apostatised Christendom was become as Waters,
Kindreds, Tongues, People and Nations professing Christianity, yet were made
drunk with the Cup of Fornication, Spiritual Idolatry; no other Call into the
Ministry was admitted, but what was gained at Schools and Universities, by
Acquired Tongues, Heathen Arts and Sciences; though in all or most of Ages, as
by the Waldenses, Albigenses, etc. the Lord had his Witnesses, bearing
Testimony to the Virtue and Power of a divine Call, and that without it, all
Natural Tongues, Heathen Arts and Sciences were insignificant and insufficient.

In the days of King Henry the 4th, the King, Lords and Bishops agreed, That
no man within his Dominions should preach privily, or otherwise, without
special License of the Ordinary of the same place. Was not this an Usurpation
of the Prerogative of the Lord of the Harvest.

Before Henry the 8th's days, the King nominated who should be Bishop of such
a Diocese; being presented to the Pope, the Pope was to approve of him: After
the Popes Approbation, he was consecrated by the Archbishop in England. In the
Apost^es days Bishops were made by the holy Ghost, Acts 20.28.

Henry the 8th casting off the Pope, then he and his Parliament Enacted, That
no Bishop should be commended to the Pope; but that the King should nominate
them, and approve of them to be suffi^ient Ministers.

About the year 1547. Edward the 6th put forth Injunctions, That none should
preach, except sufficiently Licensed.

King James Enjoined, That none should Preach, except lawfully Licensed
thereto, by the King or the Bishop, Fox Acts and Mon.

Queen Mary, in the first year of her Reign Enjoined, That none should preach,
but such as were allowed of by her Authority, or by the Archbishop, or by the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.

In the thirteenth Year of Queen Elizabeth 'twas Enacted, That none should be
made Ministers, or admitted to preach, unless he were able to answer and render
to the Ordinary an Account of his Faith in Latin, that is, he was to be a
Linguist, a Scholar. Now how Peter and John, unlearned and ignorant men, could
have passed such a Trial, let the wise in Heart judge.

Further, Queen Elizabeth Enacted, That none should be admitted to any
Benefice, or above the value of 30 l. per ann. unless he were a Batchellor of
Divinity, or allowed of by the University of Oxford or Cambridge. Now how Peter
and John, and others, the Ministers the of Waldenses and Albigenses, being most
of them Tradesmen, Non-Entes of no standing in Universities, could have passed
this Trial, I see not, though called by the Lord of the Harvest to labor in
the Vineyard.

In the Year 1644. the Parliament made an Ordinance to authorize the Presbyter
Assembly of Divines, for the Ordination of Ministers, and gave them Rules for
the Examination of such as were to be ordained by them; as, Whether they had
Sworn, and taken the Covenant? What Degree they had taken in the University,
etc? Herein, notwithstanding the swelling pretense of Reformation, Christ, the
Lord of the Harvest was denied.

In the Year 1653. Oliver Cromwell and his Council ordained, for the
Approbation of public Preachers, and appointed Commissioners for that purpose,
to judge of the Abilities of men, before they were admitted to preach. And how
such were entertained, who were sent by the Lord of the Harvest, to bear
witness against Man-made Ministers, and their Unscriptural Covetous Practices,
it is fresh in the remembrance of many.

Now you that plead for a Mediate Humane Call, let me thus Reason with you,
Must the Aaronical Priesthood, which typed out Christ, and the Prophetical
Dispensation, which foresaw Christ, allow of no Call but what was Divine,
contrary to the Will of man? And must the Evangelical Dispensation, the
Substance, the end of the Law, the end of the Prophets, the Glory of
Dispensations, lean upon the bruised Reeds of a Humane Mediate Call, by Natural
Tongues, Heathen Arts and Sciences? I have done when I have answered a few
Objections.

Objection, Acts 1.24.

Answer, This makes nothing for a Humane Mediate Call by the Will of man, but
against it: The Apostles, after the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ,
judged it expedient, that one should be ordained a Witness with them of the
Resurrection of Christ, instead of Judas, who was gone to his place, they
appointed two, Joseph and Matthias, men that had been conversant among them,
had seen the glorious and wonderful Works of Christ, grew up in the Faith of
the Gospel with them; not trained up in Natural Tongues, Heathen Arts and
Sciences, Logicks, Spoiling Philosophy, Pagan Metaphysics, for that purpose;
and the Apostles said, Thou Lord, which know the Hearts of all men, show
whether of these two thou have chosen, Acts 1.24 Mark this, Whether of these
two thou have chosen. So that the adding of him to the cleaven Apostles, they
ascribed it to the Lord's Call, Choice or Election.

Obj. Moses was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22.

Answ. It Is true; but his Egyptian Wisdom was not his Call, into the Work of
the Lord; neither his Egyptian Philosophy, Hieroglyphics, nor the Smaragdine
Table of Hermes Trism^gistus, could qualify him for that, notwithstanding his
Egyptian Wisdom; yet when he was to be concerned for the Lord, he was (as I
may say) Mute; the Lord said to him, Go, and I will be with thy Mouth, and will
teach thee what thou shall say, Exodus 4.12. Here he is drawn from the muddy
Lake of Egyptian Wisdom, to have his Dependence and Reliance upon the Mouth
and Teaching of the Living God, from whom he had his Call.

The Smoke of the Bottomless Pit, says the Book called, The Naked Truth, has
so blinded men, as that it is grown up into a general Opinion, that none are
fit to be admitted into holy Orders, but University Students; and if he has
learnt a little to chop Logic, he is presently deemed fit to divide the Word
of Truth, and is easily instituted into a Living; and if he can bring some nice
Metaphysical Speculations from Aristotle, some Theological Distinctions from
Thomas Aquinas, then he is judged worthy of two or three Livings. And thus
University Youth, and even Boys of no Experience, says this Author, are made
Spiritual Pastors, the most weighty Office in the World.

Obj. Acts 13.2, 3, 4.

Answ. This makes nothing for a Humane Mediate Call, acquired by Heathen Arts,
Sciences and Philosophy, but against it; the holy Ghost said, Separate me
Barnabas and Saul, for tht Work whereunto I have called them [Mark this,
Whereunto I have called them] So they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, etc.
[Mark this, sent forth by the holy Ghost.] Here both their Call and Mission is
ascribed to the holy Ghost. Further, if Paul was not called before that, he
preached without a Call, Acts 9.6. where Saul said, Lord, what will thou have
me to do? Here he was taken off from the Mouth of the High Priest, to the Lord,
to know his Will, and do it, verse. 15.20. Heavenly Wisdom being revealed, his
Idolized, Magnified, and highly Prized Arts, Parts and Endowments, fetched from
Philosophers, he accounted as Dung and Dross.

It is an Error (says Luther) to say, that a Divine is not made without
Aristotle; rather a Divine is not made, except that be done without Aristotle,
Tom. 1. Fol. 10.

The weighty Work of the Ministry (says Poole on this place) is not to be
undertaken without the Command and Mission of God.

None but such as are chosen and called of God, can be fit to preach the
Gospel. Aug. Marl. on this place.

No kind of men are less capable of receiving the Doctrine of Christ, than they
that have their Mind stuffed with the Opinions of Sciences; these leave no room
for the holy Spirit, says Cornel. Agrip. Of the Vanity of Sciences.

Obj. 1 Timothy 4.14.

Answ. This is nothing to prove a Humane Mediate Call, but the contrary. Paul
writing to Timothy said, Neglect not the Gift that is in thee: There was a
Divine Gift in him, which he was not to neglect, but to improve for the
Edification of others. Timothy was a holy man, and he was to minister, and did
minister from the virtue and influence of a heavenly Gift in him; hereby he
came to the Ministry, not through Natural Tongues, Heathen Arts, Sciences,
Metaphysics, Spoiling Philosophy. From the dignity of the Calling, says Aug.
Marl. on this place, Paul exhorted Timothy, That for the Edification of the
Church, he would improve that Grace wherewith he was endued. To the same
purpose he wrote to him a second Epistle, saying, Wherefore I put thee in
remembrance, That thou stir up the Gift of God that is in thee, chap. 1.6.
There was a heavenly Gift in him, out of which, as a faithful Steward, he was
to minister for the good of others. Timothy (says Aug. Marl. on this place)
wanted not this Gift before, but then it showed it self more evidently, when
the Charge or Care of Teaching others was imposed upon him. I put thee in
remembrance, says Paul, that thou stir up the Gift of God that is in thee;
rather that thou clear up the heavenly Spark that is in thee, (...), A Spark
buried in Ashes, lies, as it were, dead, useless and unprofitable, but through
the Breath of the Bellows, it is quickened, cleared, puts forth its virtue and
influence, kindling combustible matter, giving light and heat to others. Paul
would not have Timothy to bury in Ashes the heavenly Spark of divine Grace in
him, but that through Faith and Vigilance it might be stirred up, cleared, and
he by it be kindled into Fervency, to minister Light, spiritual Heat, Benefit
and Advantage to others. An Allusion, says one, to the Fire of the Altar, that
came from Heaven, which should always be burning, and never go out, Lev. 6.13.
To the Candle of the Virtuous Woman, that went not out by Night, Prove. 31.18.
To the wise Virgins Lamps, Mat. 25.8. To the Lights of the Disciples, which
Christ commanded to be burning, Luke 12.35.

Obj. 2 Timothy 2.2.

Answ. This proves not a mediate humane Call into the Ministry, by acquired
Natural Languages, Heathen Arts and Sciences, but expressly the contrary; The
things that thou have heard of me, says Paul in this place to Timothy, the
same commit thou to Faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also.
Faithful men, men full of Faith; are any full of Faith, but through the
indwellings of Christ, the Author and Finisher of Faith? And are any able to
teach others, but who are taught of Christ? Who witness these things, in a
great measure, they witness Flesh Crucified: So who are able to teach others,
or truly desire to be serviceable to others, they are Spiritually called
thereto; Is it not said, that It is God that works in man to will and to do
of his own good pleasure? This I say, that the Call of faithful men, of men
able to teach others, is of God, and not of man. No Talent (says Trap on this
place) is given for private and proper use, but for the transmitting it to
others, for their benefit and advantage.

Obj. We learn Natural Tongues, Arts and Sciences, to enable us to understand
Scriptures, and the Scripture and Spirit are inseparable; so though we be
ordained of men, yet we exclude not the Spirit, for the Spirit and Scripture
are inseparable.

Answ. This Doctrine, if truly understood, and weighed in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, savours of Simony; Simon offered Money for the Spirit, but could not
have it. Now if the Letter and Spirit had been inseparable, as many have taught
and affirmed, he might have had it for Money; for the Bible may be had for
Money.

Further, Simon had this acknowledgement, that the holy Spirit was the Power of
God, and that man's having the Scripture without the Power signified little; but
many teach and affirm now, that he that has the Scripture, he has the Spirit
also, for they are inseparable, and that the Scripture is the Power of God;
herein coming short of Simon.

Further, Simon bewitched the People: so man made Ministers, who have nothing
but from man, who keep people in their corrupt Interpretation of the Letter,
out of that which gave out the Letter, the Spirit, and bring them not to
Shiloh, to whom the true gathering is, such are in spiritual Witchcraft,
drawing People from the Life of Righteousness, the Seed, in which the Families
of the Earth are blessed, into the Dungeon of dead, dry, empty, sapless Forms.

Again, Simon gave out himself to be some great one; so man made Ministers who
know no Call but from man, be they Graduates, or Under-graduates, they are puffed
up with Heathen Education; that knowledge puffs up, but Love Edifies: If the
Lord of the Harvest raise any to be his living Witnesses, wanting Natural
Tongues, Heathen Arts and Sciences, such are branded as Illiterate ignorant
Mechanics, and Persecuted; as if the Gospel Ministry were entailed upon
Natural Languages, Heathen Arts and Sciences; yet the knowledge of Languages is
useful in its place; but the Gospel Ministry stands in that which was before
Natural Languages.

Though it be clear by History, that the Mahometans descended from Hagar the
Bondwoman, which thing they cannot deny, yet for Name and Kindreds sake, they
had rather be called Saracens, as if they descended from Sarah, the Freewoman,
the Wife of Abraham. So man made Ministers, though they plead against any Call
but of man, and brand them as Heretics, Schismatics, Fanatics, Enthusiasts,
who plead for the Call of the Lord of the Harvest, or for seeing the Lord, or
for the hearing of his Voice; yet these man made Ministers would be called
Ministers of Christ, not of man.

Furthermore, Natural Tongues, Arts and Sciences, are but such qualifications
as a Natural man may have, and the Natural man knows not the things of the
Spirit of God, they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. So it is the Spirit,
the heavenly Key; that opens Scriptures, not Natural Tongues, Arts and
Sciences. It Is said of Christ, that he opened their Understandings, that they
might understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. He told them not that they must
have recourse to Natural Tongues, Arts and Sciences, for to accomplish them to
understand Scriptures; No, Scriptures being things of God, they are not truly
understood but by the Spirit of God.

Obj. Universities, as Cambridge and Oxford are Well-springs of Divinity, the
Fountains of Gospel Ministers.

Answ. Israel being Apostatized from the living God, the Lord by his Prophet
complained, saying, My People have committed two Evils, they have forsaken me
the Fountain of Living Waters, and have hewed them out Cisterns, broken
Cisterns that can hold no Water, Jer. 2.13. Thus Israel was guilty of forsaking
the Fountain of Life, of Living Mercies, and of having recourse to broken
Cisterns.

The labor of the Apostles, and their living concern was to bring People to
Shilo, the Storehouse of heavenly Wisdom, Knowledge and sound Understanding,
the Fountain of Life, the Wellspring of pure Wisdom, spiritual Treasures,
Virtue, Peace, Joy, Consolation and Spiritual Refreshments, in whom the fullness
of the Godhead dwells Bodily, of whose plenitude, that is, fullness, his receive
Grace for Grace.

Now after the Apostles days, the Star being fallen, Smoke arisen, Sun and Air
darkened, the Purity of the Primitive Church spoiled; in a word, upon the
encroachment of the Apostasy, the golden Cup of Abomination and Fornication was
received by Christendom, which became as Waters; in this smoke evaporating out
of the bottomless Pit, the pure Fountain of Life was lost, the truly impowering
Call of the Lord of the Harvest was lost; then in the Apostatized Roman Church,
Schools and Colleges were erected, into which were received Heathen Poems,
Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy, Heathen Metaphysics, and in
and through learning of these, Youth was qualified for the Gospel Ministry, as
they say: and these Universities were called by the Apostatized Roman Church,
Well-springs of Divinity, Fountains of the Gospel Ministry: Thus the Fountain
of Life being turned from, broken Cisterns were entertained.

Luther on 2 Pet. 2.1. spoke freely of Apostatized Popish Universities.

The whole World (says he) is of this Opinion, that these are Fountains or
Well springs, from which proceed such as ought to teach the People: This is a
horrible Error (says he) forasmuch as nothing so detestable proceeds from any
thing or place, as from Universities, etc.

The Roman Popish Religion being brought into this Nation by Austin the Monk
and others, in process of time Cambridge and Oxford came to be founded, and
made Universities, and were called Well-springs of Divinity, etc. And though
Protestantism, and a great share of Reformation be pretended and professed, yet
the divine Call into the Ministry is denied, and altogether, or in a high
measure ascribed to Schools of Humane Learning; yea, and Cambridge and Oxford
are still termed Well-springs of Divinity, the two Fountains, and the two Eyes
of the Nation. The Almighty is opening an Eye to see the Living Fountain, the
Wellspring of Life, and to press after the same, and to deny the Idolatrous
use and abuses of Man made Well-springs and Fountains; though Schools, teaching
the knowledge of the Creation, of useful and necessary Accomplishments, are to
be contended for, but out of their place Idolatrous, as in setting them in the
room of the Lord of the Harvest.

William Tindall in his Parable of the wicked Mammon, says Many are not
ashamed to rail and blaspheme, saying, How should he understand the Scripture,
seeing he is no Philosopher, has never seen his Metaphysics? and how can he
be a Divine, who knows not what is Subjectum in Theologia. Nevertheless as a
man without the Spirit of Aristotle or Philosophy, may by the Spirit of God
understand Scriptures, even so by the Spirit of God understands he that God is
to be sought, etc. and yet knows not what means Subjectum in Theologia, that
is, the Subject in Divinity, because it is a term of their own making.

Drawing to a Conclusion, let me say, that to confine the Ministry to Natural
Tongues, Arts and Sciences, is contrary to the Lords Call in the Patriarchal,
Mosaical, and in the Morning of the Evangelical Dispensation, yea, and contrary
to the Call promised after the Apostasy, after the three days and an half,
wherein the Beast and the Locusts, Antichrist and his apostatized Ministry
should be bred; fitted and qualified in the Smoke of the Pit, earthly and
fallen Wisdom, Rev. 11.11. Besides this my Testimony, take the Testimony of our
Countryman Gell, who said,

I do not here confine the Gifts of God unto man's Approbation or Ordination:
Surely, (says he) the Lord may fill whose Hand he will, speak by whom he will.

In all Ages (says this Gell) God raised up Priests and Prophets without the
Authority, yea, against the Authority of Men, Amos 3.8. Acts 4.18, 19, 20.

It Is unreasonable (says he) to confine the Spirit of God unto certain Theses,
Articles, Confessions and Opinions of men's making: they seem to dare and
provoke the wise God, in that they cannot say, that their Dictates proceed from
an infallable Spirit; yet would they limit and bound the infallable Spirit of
the God of Truth by their presumtuous humane Spirit, which as themselves
confess, is Fallable and subject to Error.

We stay so long (says Bishop Hall) upon the Shell of Tongues, that we can
hardly have time to chew the sweet Kernel of Knowledge.

So may I say, Natural Tongues, Arts, Sciences and Endowments are so doted
upon, and concluded to be the enabling qualification for the Gospel Ministry,
as that the heavenly Anointing, the real ability for the Gospel Ministry is not
waited for, but by most of the Worldly wise Linguists and Sophisters derided.

CAP. III. Of the Original of Bishops in Gospel days, and of the Identity,
that is, Oneness and Sameness of Bishops and Elders in the Primitive Age.
THe Apostles in the Power of the Lord labored, and were livingly concerned to
turn the Jew from Judaism, and the Gentile from Gentilism, to Christ, in whom
Oneness and the new Creature is witnessed.

After visiting the Churches, before gathered, and in the Spirit of discerning,
observing a Care begot in some particular Members, for the good, prosperity,
growth, and decent order of their fellow Members; the oversight, care and
charge of particular Assemblies were commended to such, and they were called
Elders, because chosen for the most part of the elder sort of People, and the
same were also called Bishops, that is, Overseers, or Superintendents, because
of their Office of overseeing and taking care of the rest.

They were called (...), that is Presbyters or Elders, for that they were so in
Age, (the Law having so provided, that no man should be promoted to that
Dignity, till he was thirty five Years old) or else because they ought to be
such in Manners and circumspect Carriage, says Sr. Thomas Ridley in his view
of the Civil and Eccleslastical Law.

Pope Boniface the First thought good, that not any under thirty Years of Age
should be ordained a Presbyter, that is, an Elder: Afterward it was decreed by
the Authority of the Lateran Council, that one might be made an Elder at twenty
five Years old, Polydor. de Invent. lib. 4. But this limiting to a certain Year
savours of the Will of Man, not of the Spirit.

Now it is my Judgment, that the same Individuals, particular Persons, that in
the Purity of the Primitive Age, were sometimes called Elders; they were also
called Bishops, that is Overseers, as the same Person may be sometime called a
Minister, sometime a Teacher; this Doctrine in the Beauty of the Primitive
Church, was not called Heretical, but tempora Mutantur, Times are changed; and
in reference to the Identity, that is, oneness and sameness of Elders and
Bishops in Primitive times, Scripture record is not altogether silent.

Though in Scripture it is not in terminis, that is, express words, that an
Elder and a Bishop were one and the same Order and Office, yet the
circumstantial Expressions are so strong and pregnant, that they are Equivalent
to a clear Expression in terminis, that is, Express Words, says the Author of
the Book, called, The naked Truth.

Paul being at Miletus, sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the Church,
and said unto them, Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock, over the
which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, that is, Bishops, Acts 20.17, 28.
Paul with the same Breath, as I may say, first calls them Elders, then Bishops;
this evidently proves them one, both in respect of Name, and in respect of
Office, says Durham.

Paul writing to Titus, said, For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City, etc. For a Bishop must be blameless, etc. Titus 1.5, 6, 7. So the very
same that he calls Elders, he presently calls Bishops.

Further, Peter said, The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also an
Elder, feed the Flock of God, taking the oversight thereof, (...), which may
thus be rendered, Overseeing the same as Bishops, says Darham, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.

So the very same Individuals, whom he first calls Elders, he presently calls
Bishops, proving the Identity, Oneness, Sameness of Elders and Bishops in the
Primitive Church; these Titles were Synonyma, Synonymous, both attributed to
one and the self-same Person: if they were not distinguished then, who can
justly distinguish them since? The Jesuit Lorinus, on this Scripture
acknowledges this Identity; You see that Peter and Paul, who were (...), taught
of God, (...), inspired of God, were clear and pregnant for the confirmation of
this Truth.

Further, Jerome in his Epistle to Evagrius, as in other places, and upon other
accounts, Theoderet, Occumenus, Clarius, Valla, Hammond, Bilson, the Author of
the Book, called, The naked Truth, men eminent in the Church since the Apostles
days, with many others such like, have born Testimony, that an Elder and a
Bishop in the Apostles Language were one and the same, and that they were Names
indifferent, and used to the same Persons.

Michael de Medina, cited by Bellarmine, Lib. 1. Cap. 15. de Clericis does
affirm, that not only Jerome and Aerius, but also Ambrosius, Augustinus,
Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostomus, Theoderetus, Oecumenus and Theophilactus
held out this Identity, the Waldenses and Wickliffians were of this Judgment:
Hence it follows that there was no difference betwixt the Names and Offices of
Bishops and Elders in the Apostles days; the difference was not begun by any
Apostolic Constitution, but upon Church-Custom, Decrees of Councils, and such
other Grounds.

These things we have spoken (says Jerome) to show that Elders and Bishops were
the same in the Primitive times, and that Bishops may know that they are
greater then Presbyters, (that is Elders) rather through Custom, than by the
Lords appointment. This I own.

As the Smoke of the Pit arose, the Apostatical Leprosy overspred, Discord and
Contention arose about Religion; Men drew into Parties, one crying up this man,
another that man; as in the Apostles days, one cried he was for Paul, another
for Apollo, another for Cephas; and every one accounted those his own, not
Christ's, whom he Baptized. Then for the Eradicating the Seeds of Divisions,
and for the Restraining of Disorderly Pastors, it was decreed, That one should
be chosen out of the Presbyters, that is, Elders, and have Authority over them;
and by way of Emineney be called Bishop. Thus the Bishop shouldered out the
Elders, got Superiority over them, Polydor de Invent. rer.

Nations being converted, Bishops increased, Differences arose: For the
restraining or preventing of which, one was set over the Bishops, so called
Archbishop.

Archbishops increasing, to restrain or prevent Heresies and Differences among
them, one was set over them, called a Patriarch.

Patriarchs increasing, to restrain or prevent Differences and Disorders among
them; one was set up above them, called Catexochen; by way of Eminency, Papa,
that is, Pope; though Papa, that is, Pope, before was a Name attributed to
other Bishops, Jerome on Titus, Naked Truth. Thus Elders and Bishops, which were
one Office in the pure Primitive Times, through the Ground of Apostasy, became
divided: Thus Bishop got Superiority over Elders, Archbishops over Bishops,
Patriarchs over Archbishops, Pope over the Patriarchs.

For the maintaining of Uniformity in the Church of Rome, every Province was to
be governed by one Priest, or more, who for Reverence sake should be called
Bishops: Then by permission of Christian Princes, Kingdoms were divided into
Diocesses, Diocesses into Shires or Counties, Shires into Parishes: It was
decreed, That every Parish should yield Obedience to their Parish Priest, the
Parish Priest to the Dean, the Dean to the Bishop, the Bishop to the
Archbishop, the Archbishop to the Primate or Patriarch, the Patriarch to the
Legate, the Legate to the Pope, the Pope to General Councils, and General
Councils only unto God, as they said.

The Title of Bishop is of divine Institution; the other of Archbishop,
Primate, Patriarch, Metropolitan, Subdeacon, Archdeacon, Pope, are not
mentioned by the Apostles; so of latter Institution by Man.

These things being considered, it is my Judgment, with the abovesaid, and
others that might be mentioned, that the same Individuals, who were in the
Primitive Days, called Elders, they were also called Bishops, that they were
one and the same. Leigh also in his Critica Sacra says the same, That the same
Persons, who were called (...), that is, Elders, ab at ate, from their Age,
were also called (...) Bishops, Over seers, ab Officio, from their Office.

CAP. IV. Of the Work of the Ministry of Christ, and of Antichrist
CHrist Jesus, the Branch of Righteousness, having called Disciples, he
influenced them with Salutiferous heavenly Wisdom, and armed them with heavenly
Armor, that they might War under his Banner, against Abaddon, Apolyon, the old
Serpent and his Kingdom, and be concerned as Instruments in the hand of she
Lord, for the rescuing of many out of his Captivity and Tyranny.

As the Disciples, the Worthies and Warriers of the Lord, were called of
Christ, so he appointed them their Work; they were to do his Work, grow up in
like-mindedness with him, heavenly-mindedness: So he said to his Disciples, Go
therefore, and teach all Nations, etc. Teaching them to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat. 28. Consider this, here was a divine
Limit; they were to minister that, and nothing but that which they received
from Christ, the Wellspring of Life and Living Mercies. Here the Smoke of the
Bottomless Pit, Anti-christians Doctrines, Error, Heresy and Traditions are
excluded.

Augustine Marlorat said on this place, Christ sent out his Apostles with this
Exception, That they should not press upon others their own Inventions, but
that they should purely and faithfully distribute what he commanded; that they
should gather Disciples unto him, not unto themselves.

Yea, and Poole our Countryman says on this place, Christ commands no other
thing to be taught, than what he had commanded; hereby excluding the Traditions
and Inventions of Apostatised Men.

Paul said to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, I have not shunned to
declare unto you all the Counsel of God, Acts 20.27. So Ministers of Christ are
to teach the Will and Counsel of God, not their own. But Man-made Ministers are
guilty in this case, who neither know the Call, nor do the Work, nor are
content with the Wage of Gospel Ministers, though for Lueres sake they are
pretenders thereof.

Paul writing to the Saints at Ephesus, mentions the Work and End of the true
Ministry; saying, When Christ ascended, he gave Gifts unto men, to Apostles, to
Prophets, to Evangelists, to Pastors, to Teachers. To what end were these Gifts
given? For the Perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the
Edifying of the Body, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, etc. unto a
Perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4. Yea, and the Apostle writing unto the Hebrews, mentions their precious
Growth, and high Attainment in the Life of Righteousness, saying, Ye are come
unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem,
and to an innumerable Company of Angels; to the general Assembly, and Church of
the First Born, which are written in Heaven, and to God, the Judge of all, and
to the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect, Heb. 12.

Now Man made Ministers deny Perfection in this Life; so deny the end of the
Ministry, of the truly Gifted Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers: Yea, and they exclude themselves from the precious Seize of the
believing Hebrews: Yea, and they deny the Substance of the Aaronical Vrim and
Thummius. What is that?

Aaron was to have a Breast Plate of Judgment, in which was put the Vrim and
Thummim; by Interpretation, Light and Perfection, or Lights and Perfections,
Exodus 28.15, 30. A Type, fulfilled in the Substance, Christ Jesus: This
implies, that in the Evangelical Dispensation, the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, with Urim and Thummim, Light and Perfection should be received.
Christ, the Breast Plate of Judgment and Righteousness, the Urim and Thummim,
Light and Perfection, said to his Disciples, Be ye Perfect, even as your Father
which is in Heaven is Perfect, Mat. 5.48. Yea, and the Apostles having received
the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Urim and Thummim Spiritually, Light and
Perfection, they preached Perfection, as before is touched. So that Urim and
Thummim spiritually, that is, Light and Perfection, was witnessed and preached
in the Morning beauty and purity of the Evangelical D^spensation.

Now the Aaronical Urim and Thummim were lost in the Babylonian Captivity, Ezra
2. So after the Apostles days, the Star fall^ng from Heaven, such a weight of
Smoke evaporated out of the Bottomless Pit, as that it darkened Sun and Air; so
spoiled the Glory of the Primitive Church, as that the Christian Church became
Babylon, Mystery Babylon: In this Babylon, spiritual Captivity, the heavenly
Urim and Thummim, Light and Perfection was lost; and the Smoke of the Pit,
during this Captivity, was and is preached up for Gospel Truths.

Nehemiah foretold the Restoration of the Aaronical Vrim and Thummim, Nehem. 7.
So Christ Jesus, the Son of Righteousness, the heavenly Nehemiah, by
interpretation, The Consolation of the Lord, by the Breath of his Mouth, and by
the Brightness of his Coming is chasing away Smoke out of a Remnant, the Carnal
Exhalations of Mystery Babylon; and the Spirit of Life from God is entering into
Witnesses, and the true Breast Plate of Judgment, with Urim and Thummim, Light
and Perfection, is restored and restoring.

Now the Locusts, Man-made Ministers, which come out of the Smoke, are bred and
formed in the Smoke of Earthly Wisdom, they cannot endure to hear of the
finding of them; plainly discovering they want the Breast Plate of
Righteousness; for where it is, Urim and Thummim, Light and Perfection is
witnessed and contended for.

The Dispariety of the Ministers of Christ, and of such as come by the Will of
Man, in several Particulars.

1. Christ's Ministers were not to be called Rabbi, Masters, he forbad it; they
were Obedient: Paul called himself a Servant, but never pleaded for Mastership;
James, Peter and Jude styled themselves Servants, but no where Masters, Mat.
23.8. James 3.1. Zuinglius on Mat. 23. said, "Thou hears here, that the Titles
of Masters "and Doctors are not of God, because Christ forbids this thing,
Further, Wilson in his Christian-Dictionary said, "That Ambitious "seeking
after Titles ought to be eschewed. But Man made Ministers plead for the Title
of Rabbi, Masters, having let in the Poison of Ambition, Pride and Arrogance.

2. The Apostles preached against such as were in the Way of Cain, and in the
Error of Balaam, affecting Gifts and Rewards, 2 Pet. 2.15. Jude 11. The
Apostles walked not in the Ways of these. Now Man-made Ministers show
themselves to be in the Way of Cain, Drunk with the Wine of Envy, Murder,
Persecution, in the Error of Balaam, pursuing the Wages of Unrighteousness,
which Christ the Branch of Righteousness ordained not, Suing men at Courts of
Judicature, Assizes, in Courts, Temporal and Ecclesiastical, Imprisoning men,
neither sparing their own Flocks, nor others; not content with Gospel
Maintenance, taking Money for Funeral Sermons, taking or forcing Mortuaries,
Smoke-Money, Money for Churching of Women, for burying the Dead, for Bread and
Wine, Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues, making their Gospel chargeable: Are
not these Hearts exercised with Covetous Practices?

3. Paul preached, That the true Church was in God, made up of Living Stones,
fitted, prepared, polished for their Places in that heavenly Building, offering
up a Spiritual Sacrifice, 1 These. 1.1. 1 Pet. 2. But Man-made Ministers have
taught, and do teach, That a House of Lime and Stone is the Church, founded by
Papists for the Popish Service; and such as deny their Doctrine herein are
branded a^ Heretical, Schismatical, Heterodox.

4. The Apostles preached God to be the Word, and that it became Flesh; by it
the Prophets prophesied, it grew and multiplied, John 1.1, 14. Acts 12.24.
Man-made Ministers say, The Scriptures are the Word: The Scriptures were not in
the Beginning, it became not Flesh, it was not the Ground of the Prophets
prophesying: Such as got the Scriptures without the Word, such ran unsent: The
Scriptures contained in the Bible grow not, it is no greater now than a Thousand
Years ago, is not the Savior; it is a true Declaration of the Engrafted Word,
which is able to save the Soul, Luke 1.1. James 1.21.

5. The Ministers of Christ preached up Christ to be the true Light, the Way to
the Father, the Tree of Life in the Paradise of God; and Paul was sent to turn
People from Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan unto God. Peter
exhorted, To take heed unto the sure Word of Prophecy, as to a Light shining in
a Dark Place, until the Day did dawn, and the Day Star did arise in their
Hearts, John 1.9. John 8.12. Acts 26.18, 2 Pet. 1.19. But Man-made Ministers
say, The Scripture is the Light: Such walk in the Region of the Shadow of
Death; the Scripture was given out by the Eternal Light; a Declaration of it,
of God, whence it came.

6. The Apostles preached up the Baptism by one Spirit into one Body, 1 Cor.
12.13. as the permanent Baptism, of the Evangelical Dispensation, the
Heart-cleansing and Soul-saving Baptism, the Substance, 1 Pet. 3.21. Man-made
Ministers Sprinkle Infants, saying, thereby they are made Members of Christ,
Children of God, Inheriters of the Kingdom of Heaven: Thus the Visible is
inthroned, and the Invisible is dis-throned, which truly makes Members of
Christ: Paedorantism, that is, Sprinkling of Infants came not in till Hundreds
of Years after the Apostles days.

7. The Apostles knew Christ to be the Bread of Life, the Soul's Food, heavenly
Manna; here they fed at the Table of the Lord, had fellowship one with another,
were written in one another Hearts, these knew the Table and Supper of the
Lord. Man-made Ministers tell of a Sacrament, for which there is no Scripture;
'twas the old Heathen Roman Military Oath; their Communion is in visibles, Meat
that perishes; Christendom Professing this Communion is become as Golgotha, a
Place of Skulls; as Aceldama, a Field of Blood.

8. True Minsters knew the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World,
to be the Everlasting Covenant, Glad Tidings to Captive Souls, to Prisoners of
Hope; this Gospel was preached to Adam, Genesis 3.15.10 Abraham, Gal. 3.8.
Man-made Ministers say, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is the Gospel: Their
Writings are a Declaration of the Everlasting Gospel, Luke 1.1.

9. The Apostles preached Christ the Fountain of Life, the Treasury of Wisdom
and Knowledge, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells Bodily. Man-made
Ministers say, That Oxford and Cambridge are the Fountain, Wellspring or
Wellhead of Divinity, the two Eyes of the Nation; Though founded in Popish
Times for the Propagation of their Doctrine and Religion.

10. The Apostles preached the Word, which was in the beginning, to be the
Original, which was before Babel, many Languages, by which the Prophets and
Apostles were called, and drew others into the one pure Language, to know the
Virtue of the Everlasting Gospel. Man-made Ministers say, that Hebrew and Greek
is the Original: The Hebrews persecuted Christ, the Greeks accounted the Cross
of Christ Foolishness: Pilate, who had Latin, Greek and Hebrew, the World's
Original, he crucified Christ, Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and Ending, the
First and Last, the Original, the Author of the pure heavenly Language.

11. The Apostles preached the Saints to be the Temple of the Living God,
Christ the Antitype reigning in their mortal Bodies. Man-made Ministers say,
That a House of Lime and Stone is the Temple: An Imitation of Solomon's Temple,
a Type, fulfilled and ended in Christ the Substance. Stephen was stoned to
Death for witnessing against the Temple, the Figure, when Christ the Substance
was manifested.

12. The Apostles preached Christ, the one Offering, perfecting forever them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10. They preached Christ the end of that Priesthood
that took Tithe, the end of the Law that gave Tithe. Heb. 7.12. Man-made
Ministers preach up Tithe, the Heave Offering, Numb. 18. the Shadow; so deny
Christ, the One Offering: And by the same Rule they may introduce and uphold
all the other Offerings of the Aaronical Priesthood.

13. The Apostles, as Freely they received, so they Freely gave, Mat. 10. 1
Pet. 4.10. Buy the Truth, but sell it not, says Solomon, Prove. 23. The Wine
and Milk of the Kingdom is to be bought; but how? Without Money and Price, Isa.
55.1. Man-made Ministers say, They are gifted men; but will not part with their
Gift, but for a certain yearly Sum: Wisdom, the Gift of God is Free, and cannot
be bought and sold for Money. Wisdom (says Job) cannot be 'gotten for Gold,
nor Silver, nor for Coral, Pearls, nor Rubies, cap. 28. Who think to purchase
it, they are in the Gall of Bitterness, in the Bond of Iniquity, as Simon was,
Acts 8.

14. Such as Christ sent, they preached, That every one had a measure of Light
in him, leading to Life such as received it, the Condemnation of such as
received it not, Joh. 1.5.9. Joh. 3.19. Romans 1.19. Luke 17.21. Man-made
Ministers deny this Doctrine, saying, It Is a Natural Light, and belch out
Approbious Language against it; and that the Improvement of it advantages
nothing: And all this to keep People in a Reliance and Dependence upon them;
never to witness the new Covenant, the Law written in the Heart, the Spirit put
in the Inward Parts.

15. Paul told the Corinthians, That they might all Prophecy, that all might
learn and be comforted; and if any thing was revealed to him that sat by, the
first was to hold his Peace, 1 Cor. 14. This was Order in the true Church.
Man-made Ministers accounts this Confusion and Disorder; for if any should come
in, and speak while the public Minister is speaking, or when he has done, how
cruelly such have been used, I need not mention, showing that their
Church Members are Branches of that old putred stock, that they were of, who
stoned Stephen to Death, Acts 7.

16. The Apostles preached Freedom from Sin, Romans 6.6, 7, 18. Freedom from the
Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. A Sanctified State, 1 Cor. 6.11. A Cleansing
from all Sin by the Blood of Jesus, 1 John 1.7. Man-made Ministers teach
another Doctrine, That there is no Freedom from Sin in this Life; and that a
man must carry a Body of Sin and Death about with him, while upon Earth.

17. The Apostle James owned Christ's Doctrine, who said, Swear not at all,
Mat. 5. James 5. But Man-made Ministers plead for Swearing, saying, The Denial
thereof is an old Heresy; yea, and many eminent in the Church since the
Apostles days have born faithful Testimonies against Swearing, as Christ did,
who spoke with Authority.

18. The Apostles owned Revelation; without it God is not known, Mat. 11.27.
Till this was witnessed, Paul was Saul, a grand Persecutor, Gal. 1.16. Who are
of God now, they bear witness to this. But Man-made Ministers say, Revelation
is ceased: So conclude all to be excluded from the Knowledge of the Living God:
It Is true, who are in the Will of Man, Night and Darkness is upon them, the Sun
is set; Vision and Revelation such know not.

19. The true Ministers of Christ preached Present Salvation, Ephesians. 2.8. By
Grace they were saved, Tit. 3.5. 1 Pet. 3.21. Man-made Ministers preach Christ
and Salvation at a Distance, telling what Glorious things Christ will do, and
what Glorious things he has done; but to know his Energy, inward effectual
Operation at present, a present coming out of Babylon, to the new Jerusalem,
this is not preached up; In a word, they are such Trumpeters, give such an
uncertain Sound, as that their Hearers are not at all Alarmed, not all Armed,
not at all Armed against Abaddon, Apolyon, the old Destroyer, but the strong
man Armed keeps the House, has rule in the Heart; in this state man makes a
show of Religion and Worship.

Thus Man-made Ministers are stained with the Defilements of Doctrinal Errors;
and as John said, Whosoever Transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ, he has not God, 2 John 1.9. So consequently has nothing, Habet omnia,
qui habit habentem omnia; that is, He has all, that has the Haver of all; so
such as are out of Christ's Doctrine, they are Heterodox, Heretical; yea, and
according to John's Doctrine, Atheistical.

20. True Ministers were and are Instruments in the hand of the Lord, to bring
men to Righteousness, and Eternal Life, out of the Dungeon of Death, Darkness
and Unbelief, Acts 26.16, 17, 18. If they had stood in my Counsel, says the
Lord, and had caused my People to hear my Words, then they should have turned
them from their Evil Way, and from the Evil of their Doings, Jer. 23. But
Man-made Ministers, who creep into the Ministry without a divine Call, for
earthly Ends, through the strength of natural Abilities, they are like the
Mountains of Gilboa, without Dew and Rain; so barren and unfruitful, and cannot
enrich others, 2 Samuel 1.21. Yea, they are like the Cramp-fish, whose stupifying
and benumming Quality, say Naturalists, issues from the Fish, to the Hook, then
to the Line, then to the Angling-Rod, then to the Hand, then to the Body of the
Fisher, and so benums him, and takes away all use and feeling of his Limbs;
such like is the benumming, deadning and stupifying Quality of Man-made
Ministers; but such as come in the living virtue of Truth, they make alive unto
God, such as receive their Testimony, and bring them to have all their Senses
exercised, to the discerning of Good and Evil.

21. Such as are called of the Lord, in the influence of his Power, they are
carried on in the Performance of their Testimonies, contrary to the Stream and
Current of men's Wills; the Lord opens their Mouths, and Man cannot shut them;
they are not (...), Men-pleasers; God rather than men, is to be hearkened unto
and obeyed: But Man-made Ministers, who intrude into that Work, as a Trade, to
get a Living by, eyeing the Fleece more than the Flock, these have been and are
like dead Fish, driven on by the Stream and Current of humane Commands and
Appointments; as their Mouths are opened by man, so by the Injunctions of Man,
they are shut: Such as have been called of man, have done the Work of man,
hoisting up their Sails to every Wind, complying with every Power that came up,
bending unto the Forms of Worship by them appointed, as Records fully testify.

King Henry the 8th denying the Popes Supremacy, brought the Clergy of England
into a Praemunire, for their compliance with the Paepal Power; the Clergy in a
Convocation resolved upon a Humble Sumbmission in writing, and gave the King
one Hundred Thousand Pound for a Pardon, in which Submission they styled the
King, Supreme Head of the Church: Thus the Clergy being beheaded, got a new
Head, denying the Pope, acknowledged the King to be their Head, Bakers Chron.
Not long after the Clergy took an Oath, To Renounce the Pope and his Authority,
and to be true and loyal to the King, his Heirs and Successors; So God me help,
and all Saints, said they.

After him succeeded King Edward the sixth, in whose Reign the Book of
Common Prayer was commended to the Nation, and established, and received by the
Clergy instead of the Latin Mass: Now upon the Translating of the Latin
Mass Book into English, (in this Edwara's days) there was a Rising in
Devonshire; the King wrote in this manner, to quiet them; As for the Service in
the English Tongue; perhaps it seems to you a new Service, when indeed it is no
other but the old, the self-same Words in English which were in Latin, saving a
few things taken out so fond, that it had been a shame to have heard them in
English. Thus the Common Prayer came to be established, Histor. Magdiburg.

After him succeeded Queen Mary, who being a Papist, commanded the Mass to be
sung again in Latin, and to be used in all Churches, so called; The Kingdom was
absolved, and reconciled to the Church of Rome, by Cardinal Pool; Monasteries
were re-edified, first Fruits and Tenths were restored; to these things Priests
and People generally complied: they took an Oath, to be true to St. Peter, to
the Church of Rome, to the Pope their Holy Father, and to Persecute to their
power all Opposers; saying, So help me God, and the holy Evangelists.

Notwithstanding all these Oaths and Resolutions, in the Year 1559. Queen
Elizabeth coming to the Crown, she with her Parliament made an Act for
Uniformity of Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments; the Title of
Supreme Head of the Church, was confirmed to her, the Popes Supremacy denied;
and of the Number of above nine Thousand Priests, Bishops, Deans, Prebends,
Masters of Colleges, Archdeacons, Abbots, formerly sworn to Popery, not above
one Hundred and twenty refused to take an Oath against Popery; so turned from
their Religion to the Protestants Religion, because the Queen set it up:
notwithstanding in Queen Mary's days, they had burned some Hundreds for
resusing to bow to Popery.

After her King James confirmed the Common Prayer Book, putting out Canons and
Constitutions, for Fonts, Tables, Carpets of Silk, Pulpits, Copes, Surplices,
Hoods, Gowns with standing Collars, strait Sleeves, wide Sleeves, Tippets,
square Caps, that People might know such and such, and Honor them.

The long Parliament denied the Common Prayer, and by a Synod of Priests, set
out a Directory for public Worship, in the Year 1644. the generallity of
Ministers conformed, and inveighed against the Common Prayer Book as Popish,
calling it, Rags of Rome, dregs of the Whores Cup, the English Mass, etc.

In the Year 1653. Oliver Cromwell being made Protector, he made Provision for
the Clergy, for their recovering of Tithe and other Dues, as they pretend, upon
which they called him, A good Nursing Father.

In the Year 1658. Richard Cromwell was made Protecter; the Clergy in a
Petition called him their Joshua, Petitioning him to lead them into the
Promises Land; and what was that, but into rich Benefits and Augmentations?

The King being restored, the Directory cast out, as indirect, and the
Common Prayer enjoined; how generally entertained by the Clergy,
notwithstanding the grievous Reflections of many of them against it, I need not
mention.

Aencas Sylvius, a private Man, wrote many things against Popery, after being
made Pope, and called Pius, he undid what he had done, and wrote in the defense
of Popery; whereupon one taunted him with these Words, Quod Aeneas damnavit,
Pius probavit; that is, What Aencas disallowed of, Pius allowed of: So what
Man-made Ministers rejected as Heterodox, is at the pleasure and command of
Authority owned as Orthodox; but Truth, and the outgoings thereof are to be
embraced because of themselves, whether men fawn or frown.

Thus who are in their own Wills, out of the pure Worship of God, which is in
Spirit and in Truth, where true sense is and assurance of Divine Requirings,
such for Self Ends and Corporal ease, are carried about with every Wind of
Doctrine, at the Commands and Injunctions of men; against the unconstancy of
these, in such a weighty concern, dropped out this following Reflection: Away
with such, whose wily waxen Mind
Takes every Seal, and sails with every Wind;
Not out of Conscience, but of Carnal Motion,
Of Fear or Favor, Profit or Promotion.
And those Cham^^leons that consort their Crew,
In Turkey Turks; among the Jews a Jew;
In Spain as Spain; as Luther on the Rhine;
With Calvin here; and there with Bellarmine;
Loose with the Lewd; among the Gracious Grave;
With Saints a Saint; among the Knaves a Knave.


CAP. V. Of the Wage of the Ministers of Christ being Free and Voluntary, from
their Converts; and how it was continued in the Primitive Churches; and how the
Co-ercive Compulsive Maintenance by Tithe, and other unwarrantable Wages, being
the Maintenance of the Ministers of Antichrist, was introduced.
CHrist having called Disciples and influenced them for his Heavenly Saving
Work, said unto them, Freely ye have received, freely give, Matthew. 10.8. What
did they receive freely? Power to heal the Sick, and to Preach the Gospel; as
if he should have said, I have freely learned these things of my Father, ye
have also freely learned them of me; so in like manner teach others freely:
Whereby, says Poole on this place, he did not only forbid detestable Bargains
for their Ministry, but all manner of Gain, from such like things, or from
their Ministerial Labor; which thing was purely and Conscientiously observed
of the Apostles, and of their Successors, while the Primitive Faith and Order
was kept; among whom, as Tertullian says, Nulla res dei pretis constabat, that
is, Divine things were not bought and sold. Further, our Countryman Poole
says,

Paul and the Apostles obtained Necessaries for themselves, by their own Hands,
rather then they would be burdensome to the Poor and Indigent, or expose
themselves to the malicious Slanders of Evil-minded People. Further (says he)
Christ forbad his Disciples and Ministers to raise Gain, or hord up Money,
under pretense of their new and wonderful Doctrine.

No man (says Aug. Marl. on this place) can be a sound Minister of the Word,
nor a faithful Steward of Grace, but he that Preaches freely. Further he says,
"That all H^relings do unworthily Vitiate and Profane the holy Office of
Teaching.

Naaman being cured of his Leprosy by Elisha the Prophet, be offered him
Gifts, Elisha refused the same; showing forth another frame of Spirit then is
in Man-made Ministers now; but Gehazi the Servant of Elisha coveted after
Silver and changes of Garments, and received the same; to whom Elisha said, Is
it time to receive Money, Garments, Oliveyards, Vineyards, Sheep and Oxen? the
Leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and to thy Seed forever.
So he became Leprous, 2 Kings 5.

Now man-made Ministers, who run, uncalled of the Lord, for Tithe, filthy
Lucre, Earthly ends, Advantages and Preferments, they are in a Spiritual
Leprosy; and being strangers to receiving freely, and giving freely, they make
a distinction of Gifts: There are, say they,

1. Dona infusa, Gifts of God that are miraculous, as to heal, etc. 2. Dona
acquisita, acquired Gifts, as the knowledge of Preaching, not now had without
great Study, Labor and Cost; as this is not gotten freely, so neither is it to
be used without Recompense.
Who are of this mind, they exclude themselves from the true Ministry, which
acquired parts cannot bring unto; the Natural man, notwithstanding his
Accomplishments, Natural Tongues, Heathen Arts and Sciences, is a stranger to
the true Ministry, being the Gift of God, and peculiar to the New man, Wisdom,
Knowledge, Faith, Healing, Miracles, Prophecy, discerning of Spirits, etc. all
came from one and the same Spirit, as the true sighted Apostle Paul bare
Testimony, 1 Cor. 12. And this Distinction has not his allowance.

Further, as Christ called Disciples, and appointed them their Work, so he
appointed them their Wage also; he instructed them how to carry themselves both
to them that received them, and to them that received them not: Into whatsoever
House ye enter, says he, and they receive you, eat and drink such things as
they set before you, as they give you; for the Workman is worthy of his Meat,
the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, Mat. 10. Luke 10. Here a Wage, a Hire, a
Maintenance was allowed to them; they had Christ's Ordinance for it: Wherein
two things are to be considered.

1. That their Maintenance was Free and Voluntary. 2. That their Maintenance
arose from such as received them and their Doctrine: For the Disciples were
first to be received, before they received any thing; as undeniably arises from
the Words, Who so receive you, says Christ, eat and drink with such. Now by
the phrase of Eating and Drinking, the necessary Conveninencies of Life are
implied; as also by the phrase of Food and Raiment, 1 Timothy 6.8. 1 Cor. 9.14. It
cannot reasonably be thought, that Christ intended thereby to tie up his
Ministers to Meat and Drink only; but under that phrase the necessary
Conveniences of Life are intimated.
The Disciples, the Apostles of the Lamb, had his Ordinance for their
Maintenance, and of whom to receive it, and as they were taught (...), to
divide the Word aright: so they were taught (...), to Foot it aright; as to
Teach Well, so to Live Well: and how exactly they were observant of Christ's
Ordinance, for their Maintenance, may hereafter further appear.

The Disciples were sent out as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, without Money or
Brass in their Purses; upon their return, Christ asked them, saying, Lacked ye
any thing? They answered, No: Going in his heavenly Power and Virtue, their
Ministry was so effectual, prevalent and influential, as to open the Hearts of
People, to minister to their Necessities in the Work of the Gospel; so he who
sent them, maintained them in touching, influencing, and opening Hearts to
minister to their Necessities, according to Christ's Ordinance upon that
account, provided they sought no set annual Stipends, Salaries, Augmentations:
They desisted not from Preaching, for the want of a settled Maintenance, as
Man-made Ministers do, who when their Maintenance ceases, desist their
Preaching; fulfilling the old Proverb, No Penny, no Paternoster.

Again, as Christ instructed his Disciples how to carry and demean themselves
to them that received them, so he informed them how to carry and demean
themselves to them that received them not, saying, Whosoever shall not receive
you, nor hear your Words, when ye depart thence, shake off the Dust of your
Feet for a Testimony against them, Matthew. 10. Mark 6. Luke 9. This was all the
Extremity they were to use: he told them not they should apply themselves to
Magistrates, and force People to maintain them, whether they received them or
no; this is the Beasts Doctrine, and his unclean Flogs; The Apostles duly and
faithfully observed this Ordinance of Dust-shaking, Acts 13.51.

Now you Non-conformists, of what denomination soever, who make Conscience of
Noncompliance with the National public Ministers, and of not ministering
Carnal things unto them; it seems you are such as receive them not; Do they
observe Christ's Ordinance? Do they content themselves with shaking the Dust
off their Feet against you? My thinks I hear a general Answer in the Negative,
No, No, they Sue us in Courts of Judicature, at Courts, Assizes; they Imprison
us; they recover Treble damages of us, for very Trifles and inconsiderable
things, as Smoke-Pennys, Mortuaries, Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues, Popish
Inventions; they make Havoc and Spoil of our Goods. In thus doing, they
trangress Christ's Ordinance of Dust-shaking, which the Apostles were observant
of, who used no Weapon but what was Spiritual, no Sword but that of the Spirit.
Rev. 11.5. If any man hurt my Witnesses, Fire proceeds out of their Mouth, and
devoureth their Enemies. The Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, is the
Weapon of the Lords Witnesses, Gospel Ministers: but the Beast that ascends out
of the bottomless Pit, shall make War against the Witnesses, overcome them, and
Kill them, Rev. 11.

Now notwithstanding the specious pretenses of men, as of Religion, Ordinances,
Reformation, Antiquity; yet if Christ's Ordinance of Dust-shaking against such
as receive them not, be not observed, but a Co-ercive Power used, Tithe, and
other Maintenance forced, a procedure in Persecution, Imprisonments, Spoiling
of Goods, of such as for Conscience Sake cannot receive them; they that act
these things, are out of Christ's Doctrine, darkened by the Smoke of that Pit,
which the Beast ascended from, taking part with him, and not with the Lamb: So
that Man-made Ministers stand for another Call, Work, Wage and Weapons, than
Gospel Ministers contend for.

But to return to my Intention, which is, to show, That the Maintenance of the
Ministers of Christ in the primitive Times, was free and voluntary, and that
from such as received them.

Paul bare record unto the Elders of Ephesus, saying, I have coveted no man's
Silver, or Gold, or Apparel; yea, you know that these hands have ministered
unto my Necessities, and to them that were with me, Acts 20.33, 34. Whence we
gather (says Aug. Marl. on this place) that no man is a true Minister of the
Word, but he is also a Despiser of Money. Abraham of old showed a noble Mind,
in taking nothing of the Spoil got from his Enemies, Genesis 14. But says Poole,
Paul showed a far Nobler Mind, whenas he refused to take Necessaries for his
weighty and Salutiferous Labor, relieving his Necessities with his own hands.

In the ackowledgment of Christ's Doctrine to his Disciples, Paul said, Have we
not Power to eat and to drink? Yes, Paul had received Christ, the Power of God,
whose Ordinance to his Disciples was, To eat and to drink such things as were
set before them, by them that received them: He had power to eat, drink and
receive Necessaries from the Corinthians, who received him and his Message;
though he wrote not for such and such ends, judging it his reward to make the
Gospel without Charge, that he might not abuse his Power in the Gospel, 1 Cor.
9. This makes nothing for Manmade Ministers to force a Maintenance from such as
receive them not.

Man-made Ministers pursuing Tithes, and other Antichristian Wages, as the
Summum bonum, the chiefest good, thunder out the words of Paul: Who goes a
Warfare at any time at his own Charges? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not
of the Fruit thereof? Who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk thereof?

Answ. This contraries not Christ's Ordinance; but herein the Apostle shows by
three Arguments, That Gospel Ministers may with a good Conscience receive
Necessaries from such as receive them and their Doctrine. Aug. Marl. tell me
this; At whose Charge ought the Soldier to go, but at his, for whose Defense
and Security he fights? The Apostles of the Lamb were Warriors, harnessed out
of the Lord's Armory, fighting under the Banner of Christ, the Captain of their
Salvation; in whose hands they were Instruments to conquer many, to rescue them
from the Power of Satan, to reduce them into the Obedience of the Son of God,
that they might be eternally Happy: Thus Warring for the good, security and
defense of them, according to Christ's Ordinance, they might reap necessaries
from them. You that are made Ministers by the Will of man, this is no ground
for forcing Tithe, and other Dues, as you call them, from such as receive you
not; you war not for such, but against them, rendering them as Heretics,
persecuting and imprisoning them, stirring up Magistrates against them: Let
such as own you for their Warriors maintain you.

He that plants a Vineyard may eat of the Fruit of the Vineyard, which he has
planted; it is but Reason: Instruments in the hand of the Lord, of transplanting
others out of the wild Olive, into the good Olive, out of the putred stock, old
Adam, into the virtuous Root, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, may, by
virtue of the Lord's Ordinance, eat of the Fruit of their Plantation, their
Vineyard, eat and drink with, and receive Necessaries from such as they have
gathered, to be fruitful Branches, lively Plants in their Plantation: No ground
for Man-made Ministers to force a Maintenance from those that receive them not,
who are not of their Plantation, their Vineyard: Let your own Vineyards
maintain you.

He that feeds a Flock may eat of the Milk of the Flock; but it must be of the
Milk of that Flock, which he feeds: The Apostles and their Successors, in the
Word of Faith, Power and Reconciliation, gathered others into the Unity of
Faith, to the holy Hill of Sion; these were Flocks, as Flocks of Sheep which
come up from the Washing, whereof every one bears Twins, and none are barren;
these they feed with convenient Food: And let him that is taught in the Word,
communicate unto him that teaches in all good things, Gal. 6.6. This we own.
And the Apostle said, If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
thing, if we shall reap your carnal things? The Law commanded, Thou shall not
muzel the Mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, Deuteronomy. 25.4. The Equity of
the Law required, That the Ox that trod out the Corn, was not to be muzled, but
be fed by him whose Corn he trod out: And 'twas not agreeable to the Equity of
that Law, that while he trod out Corn for one man, another should be forced to
maintain him. 'Twas the Custom of the East, and of Grecce, to use Oxen to tread
out the Corn, before the Invention or Use of Flails: Niggards muzled them, that
they might not eat thereof; this the Law forbad: What implies all this? That
Gospel Ministers may expect, and according to Christ's Ordinance receive a
Gospel Maintenance, from such as receive them and their Doctrine; but not from
such as receive them not, nor their Ministry; that were all one, as if while
the Ox trod out the Corn for one man, another man should by Laws, Force,
Penalties, have been compelled to feed the same. The premises duly understood
and considered, aford no ground for Man-made Ministers to force Tithe, or other
Maintenance, from such as receive them not; such are not of their Flocks, such
receive not their Teaching, nor Sowing, nor Treading, as I may say; they come
in another Name, Power and Virtue, who separate and thresh out the pure Grain.
The Office of one truly called into the Ministry (says Aug. Marl.) is
expressed by threshing, that thou may not think that Ministers ought to live
in Idleness; and that thou may not judge, that the Church is bound to
maintain those that are idle, who do not profit the Church. So let your own
Flocks maintain you; Force not a Maintenance from such as receive you not, if
you do, you transgress Christ's Ordinance, and the Apostles Practice. Remember
the Saying of one; Id quod nostrum est, sine facto nostro avelli non potest:
that is, That which is our own may not be taken from us, without our own Act.

Paul writing to the Church at Corinth, said, I robbed other Churches, taking
Wages of them, to do you Service, 2 Cor. 11.8.

Though Paul had power to eat and to drink, to receive carnal things of the
Corinthians, seeing he had sown spiritual things unto them, yet he used not his
Power for some Reasons, but preached the Gospel Freely unto them, and had a
Free and Voluntary supply from the Brethren of Macedonia, while he was in the
Corinthian Service: Thus he received of the Macedonians, to whom he had
formerly preached, that he might not be chargeable to the Corinthians. This
proves not Tithes nor a forced Maintenance from those that received him not,
but quite the contrary: This proves receiving Freely of them to whom he had
preached Freely; When I was present with you, and wanted, says he, the
Brethren that came from Macedonia supplied me, verse. 9. And though he calls it
Robbery, yet he received nothing but from such as had received him and his
Doctrine; and in this he transgressed not Christ's Ordinance; for the
Maintenance of the Gospel Ministry, the Brethren of Macedonia, of Corinth, and
of all the gathered Churches, made up the Family of God; and for this Family to
minister carnal Things to them, from whom they reaped spiritual things; the
Royal Law requires it. Aug. Marl. said on this place, As Conquerers pillage
those whom they conquer, so whatsoever Paul received of the Churches, which he
had gained to Christ, it was the prey of his Conquests; although (says he)
Paul never received any thing but what they Freely ministered; and what they
Freely ministered, it was, as it were, a Due or Debt, by reason of his spiritual
Warfare. So Paul receiving Necessaries from those that received him, is no
ground for Man-made Ministers to force Tithe, and other Maintenance, from those
that receive him not; these Robbers are of another Nature than Paul was. Yea,
and this Self-denying Apostle said further to these Corinthians, That he would
not be burthensom unto them; for (says he) I seek not yours, but you, 2 Cor.
12. 'Twas their Souls, not their Wealth, their Salvation, not their Gold that
he sought after. Aug. Marl. said on this place, That it is the concern of a
true Teacher, not to seek Gain from his Sheep, but the Welfare of the Sheep.
But Man-made Ministers have not the Mind of Paul, regard the Fleece more than
the Flock.

A Cloud of Examples might be produced out of the Writings of the Apostles,
showing, their exact walking according to Christ's Command, in referance to
Free and Voluntary Contributions, practiced by the Primitive Churches.

Further, it is evident, that at Jerusalem, and thereabouts, Believers were so
influenced in the Apostles days, and such Openness and Unity was among them,
that all things were in Common; such as were Possessors of Lands or Houses,
sold them, and laid the Prices thereof at the Apostles Feet, Acts 4. For what
end was that done? Not to enrich the Apostles, but that Distribution might be
made to every man, according as he had need, that there might be no want in the
Family of God.

Jerome says, That the Church gathered at Alexandria in Egypt by Mark, follow
the same Rule as the Saints did at Jerusalem, through mutual Love established
in that Nearness, Openness and Unity, as to have all things Common, Hieron. in
vita Marc. The Apostles, and such as received them, through the Cross of Christ
grew up in the alforming Word of Life, they blustered not about Meum and Tuum,
earthly Things, as Worldlings do; they knew the End of the World, a blessed
Knowledge, surmounting the Knowledge of Spoiling Philosophers.

Philojudeus reports, That not only at Jerusalem, and there-abouts, and at
Alexandria, but in many other Provinces also, Christians lived together in
Societies.

Aug. Marl. entertaining a serious Consideration of the Primitive Unanimity,
Oneness of Mind, and of the great Degeneration of his Age, brake out into these
Expressions; Now our Hearts are harder then Iron, who are no more affected with
the reading of this History, than the faithful gave liberally of their own: We
at this day are not content niggardly to keep in what we have of our own, but
we cruelly greedy after other men's, In Acta 4.35. A Disease too Epidemical in
this Age.

Christ Jesus, as I said before, ordained a Maintenance for his Ministers,
which was Free and Voluntary, from such as received them; by his Ordinance,
they neither could, neither ever did, force a Maintenance from those that
received them not, Mat. 10. Luke 10.

Now Paul, who had the Mind of Christ, in pursuance of Christ's Ordinance,
seeing many convinced and converted, the Family of the Lord much increased,
through the Labor of true Witnesses, to the uttermost parts of the Earth; and
seeing Necessities arising, and through the Enmity of the Dragon, increasing,
he ordained a Weekly Collection; saying:

Now concerning the Collections for the Saints; as I have given order to the
Churches of Galatia, even so do ye; upon the First day of the Week, let every
one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered him, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
wherein every man was to give, according as he purposed in his Heart, 2 Cor.
9.1, 5, 7. And these Free and Voluntary Collections and Contributions were put
into the hands of the Deacons, men of honest Report, full of the holy Ghost,
and of Wisdom; who out of this Stock and Treasury, were to supply and relieve
the Necessities of all Indigent and Wanting Brethren: Hereby all the Services
and Necessities of the Church were supplied; Poole, Zegerus, Grotius.

Thus the Maintenance of the Gospel Ministry was Free and Voluntary, by such as
received them: And this was Christ's Ordinance by the Mouth of his chosen
Vessel Paul, for the Supply of poor and indigent Brethren, and other Uses and
Services of the Church, even of Paul, who had the Mind of Christ, who said to
the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, That he had kept nothing back that was
profitable to them; and that he had declared unto them the whole Counsel of
God: Yet no man reads that he ever taught or ordained any other Maintenance of
the Gospel Ministry and Indigent Brethren, than by Free, Spontaneous and
Voluntary Contribution; this he preached up, who kept back nothing profitable,
but declared the whole Counsel of God: So that he left no place of divine
Right, for any other Maintenance, than what he had already declared.

Now the Locusts crawling out of the Smoke of the Pit, Man-made Ministers
having nothing but natural Qualifications and Accomplishments, they account
this Gospel Maintenance, by Free and Voluntary Contribution, as Beggarly and
Base, as Contemptible and Dishonorable; so kicks Paul's Ordinance out of
place, and countenance, as I may say, and introduces and constitutes a more
Stately, Authorative, Commanding Ordinance of their own, exacting and extorting
a Maintenance by Compulsion, not sparing their own Flocks, nor others, contrary
to Christ's Doctrine.

Now, I am herein confident, and bold to affirm, That these taking away this
Ordinance of VOLUNTARY Contribution, and in the room thereof forcibly intruding
the Compulsive exaction of Tithes, and any other Anti-evangelical Maintenance,
are liable to the Curse pronounced by the Mouth of Paul, who said, If any man
preach any other Gospel, than that ye have received, let him be Anathema,
Accursed, Gal. 1.

Wilson, in his complete Christian-Dictionary, bears full, lively and pregnant
Evidence hereunto; saying, The Ministers of the primitive Church were
maintained by the Free and Voluntary Benevolence of the People, whose zeal and
love to the Gospel were so fervent, that they were ready to part with all, for
the Maintenance of it: But the zeal of these later days (says he) if any at
all, is so cold, that most men will not part with a Nut-shell unto the
Ministers, but what they are forced unto.

He bears a true Testimony to the primitive Practice and Institution; and
likewise implies, That the necessity of forcing a Maintenance is among such,
and only such, whose zeal and fervency to the Gospel is quenched, through the
prevailing power of Iniquity, streams of Babylon: Yet Man-made Ministers now
are so fired with the Love of the Wages of Unrighteousness, as that they
Dispute, Jangle and Contend against the primitive Ordinance of Free and
Voluntary Contribution, and corrupt Scriptures by the intermixture of their
carnal Reason, false Translations, Glosses, colorable and pleasant
Commentaries, manifold artificial Deceits, to defend a Co-ercive, Compulsive,
Forced Maintenance by Tithes, and other unwarrantable Wages.

King Agbarus (as Ecclesiastical Histories Report) being grievously diseased in
his Body, and incurable by the skill of man, was cured by Thadeus, one of
Christ's Disciples, without Medicine; for the which King Agbarus commanded Gold
coined and uncoyn'd to be given him; he refused it, saying, We that have
forsaken our own, how shall we receive other men's? Words savouring of
heavenly-mindedness; not like the Language of Man-made Ministers.

This primitive Institution and Practice of the First Daye's Free and Voluntary
Collections, for the general Necessities, Uses and Service of the Church
continued till about two Hundred Years after Christ, as Histories mention.

About two Hundred Years after Christ, Weekly Collections, ordained by Paul,
ceased, and Monthly Collections were introduced and instituted; but yet there
was no Degeneration from the Nature of the thing, as from Free and Voluntary
Contribution, to Co-ercive Exaction. Turtudian, a Latin Father, who lived about
that time, says thus; Modicam unusquisque stipem menscrua die, vel cum velit,
et si modo velit, et si modo possit, apponit, nam nemo compellitur, sed sponte
confert, haec quasi deposita, pietatis sunt, Apologet. Cap. 39. that is, Every
one Monthly, or when he pleases; and if he please, provided he be able, gives
a competent portion; for no man is compelled to this or that Quantity, but
gives of his own accord, etc. Poole on 1 Cor. 16. And these their Collections,
Contributions and Offerings, were put into the hands of Deacons, for the
aforesaid Christian Uses.

This Word, says Seldom, they borrowed from the Heathen, who called their
Collections for their Temples and Dieties, Stipes.

This same Turtullian upbraiding the Gentiles with the Piety and Devotion of
Christians, said in this manner; Whatsoever we have in the Treasury of our
Churches, it is not raised by Taxation, as though we put men to Ransom their
Religion; but every man once a Month, or when he pleases, bestows what he
thinks good, and not without he lists; for no man is compelled, but left Free
to his own Discretion: And what is thus given, is not bestowed in Vanity, but
in relieving the Poor, and Fatherless Children, and in maintaining of Aged and
Feeble Persons, and such as have suffered Shipwreck, and such as are condemned
to Mettal-Mines, banished into Islands, or cast into Prison for the Christian
Faith, Apologet. cap. 39.

Vrsin Bishop of Rome, about the Year 227. taught, That it was lawful for
Ministers to receive Possessions and Lands, offered by the truly Religious; not
for their particular use, but for the Common good, Polydor de Invent. The
Revenue of them was put in the Common Stock, out of which all Necessities, Uses
and Services of the Church were answered.

This way of Monthly Collections or Contributions, for the aforesaid Use and
Service of the Church, continued, as appears by the Writings of Eusebius,
Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, and others, till the great Persecution under
Maximinian and Diocletion, about the Year 304.

Urban, Bishop of Rome, declared, That the Church might receive Lands and
Possessions offered by the Faithful, but not to any Particular Man's Use or
Benefit; but that the Revenues thereof should be distributed as other
Offerings, as need required.

Origin said expressly, It is not lawful for any Minister of the Church, to
possess Lands given to the Church, to his own Use.

Further, he said to the Ministers, Let us depart from the Priests of Pharaoh,
who enjoy earthly Possessions, to the Priests of the Lord, who have no Portion
in the Earth.

Further, this Origin said in another place, It behooves us to be faithful in
disposing the Rents of the Church, that we our selves devour not those things
which belong to the Widows and the Poor; and let us be content with simple
Diet, and necessary Apparel, 16. Homil. on Genesis

Further, Origin speaking of those words, silver and gold have I none, said,
Behold the Riches of those who were Priests of Christ; but let us quickly apply
these things to our selves, who are prohibited by the Law of Christ, if we have
any regard thereunto, to have Possessions in the Country, and Houses in the
City; What do I say, Possessions or Houses? No, not to multiply Coats or Money;
if we have Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content, Orig. Hom. 15. on
Levit.

Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, about the year 250. testified, That the Church
maintained many Poor; and that her own Diet was sparing and plain, and all her
Expenses full of Frugality, Cypr. Epist 27, 34, 36.

Prosper testified further, That a Minister able to live of himself, ought not
to participate of the Goods of the Church; for (says he) they that have of
their own, and yet desire to have somewhat given them, do not receive it
without great Sin, Prosp. de vit. contemplat. lib. 21.

In these days all Necessities of Indigent Ministers, of the Poor, of the
Banished, of such as were condemned by the Heathen Emperors to work in
Mettal-Mines, etc. were supplied and relieved by Free and Voluntary
Contributions, distributed by the Deacons, for that end appointed.

The said Cyprian, about the Year 250. speaking familiarly of this thing,
called the Brethren that cast in their Monethly-Offerings, Fratres
Sportulantes, from the Word Sportulae, which the Heathen Romans used, for
Salaries, Wages, Fees for Judges and Ministers of Courts of Judicature; This
they borrowed from the Heathen Romans, and applied to their
Monethly-Collections; Seldom:

In the Apostles days Satan tried the Ship of the Church, Teachers and
Hearers, and as many as he found unsound, (Leeking, as I may say) he spouted
into their Hearts the stinking Stream of Covetousness: but in succeeding Ages
the Devil, that infernal Sea Monster, Physeter, swallowed up the Ship of the
Church, in the whirle-Pool of Apostasy, Ignorance, Pride, Covetousness, as the
Apostle foretold.

About the Year 310. one Lucina, a devout Maid of Rome, dying, made Marcellus
Bishop of Rome her Heir, and gave him all her great Substance; From that time
forth, says Polydor, lib. 6. the Bishops of Rome were greatly enriched, and
then came to be puffed up with Pride: Which Riches the Apostles denied.

Sylvester was Bishop of Rome about the Year 314. When Constantine (the first
Emperor that embraced the Christian Faith, the Son of Constantius and Helene)
offered him a Golden Scepter; he refused it as a thing not fit for a Priests
Function, Sabel. Eusebius. Chron.

While the Church was under Persecution by the Roman Emperors, it remained in
much Purity of Doctrine and Conversation; a time of Sufferings is a time of
Seriousness: But Constantine the Great embracing Christianity, his Empire
turned Christians by the Lump; whether Nominal or Real, let the Wise in Heart
judge; the Fan being over, Carnal security, Ease, Pride, Covetousness and
Ambition grew up in the Garden of the Church.

After the Church came under Christian Princes, (says Jerome) in Power indeed
and Riches, she became greater, but less in Virtue, Tom. 2. in vita Malchi.

Constantine (says Hospinian) gave great Gifts and Donations to Churches. Of
which thing Mantuan said;

Caesar hic in nostram gestaus pia pectora gentem
Immensas donavit opes, vasa aurea, fundos,
Vnde Sacerdotes magnis proventibus ancti.
Through Constantine the Clergy grew most Wealthy,
Possessing Lands, and Gold also in Plenty.
This Constantine gave to Sylvester Bishop of Rome, the City Rome, and great
Lands and Dominions thereabouts, also a Triple Crown, in token that he made him
Supreme Head over all Churches in Asia, Africa and Europe, as some of their own
Writers mention; though others question it. At the time of this Donation, a
Voice was heard from Heaven, Hodie venenum funditur in ecolesiam; This Day
Poison is poured into the Church, Hermannus Gigas, Napier, Bishop Jewel on Hag.
And the same Words were written in the presence of many upon a Wall in the
Lateran Palace; as says Maleolus, Nauclerus, Napier.

'Twas a true Saying of Aug. Marl. on Acts. 20.35. Religio peperit divitias, et
filia devoravit Matrem; that is, Religion brought forth Wealth, and the
Daughter devoured the Mother.

Sylvester was the first (if Histories may be credited) who let in a Deludge of
Mass-Priests, Orders, Ornaments, Temples, Singing-men, Sacrifices, Sanctuaries,
Vestiments, Ointments, Surplices, Miters, embroidered Garments, under this
pretense;

1. That Christian-Religion might not seem inferior to Heathenism, in outward
Luster and Pomp. 2. That the Pagans by the likeness of these Rites, with
theirs, might be the more easily drawn to Christianity. Pareus on Rev. 8. Must
Evil be done, that Good may come of it? Was letting in Streams of Babylon, the
Way to lead others out of Babylon? Had it not been more Christian-like, if he
had said, I must not go to them, they must come to us. Yet all was not hereby
quite spoiled; the Star, called Wormwood, fell but upon the third part of
Rivers and Fountains, Rev. 8. All were not Imbittered thereby nor Corrupted.
This Constantine the Great demolished Pagan Temples, caused Churches, so
called, to be built, enriched them with great Gifts and Possessions; and gave
to Sylvester, and to his Successors, as several testify, the City Rome, and
the Lordship of Italy, and translated his Imperial Seat to Bizantium, from his
Name, called Constantinople.

Sylvester advised that the Revenues of the Church should be divided into four
Parts, whereof one was to go to the Maintenance of the Bishop; the Second part
to the Priests, Deacons, and to the rest of the Clergy; the Third part to the
repairing of places of public Worship; the Fourth part to the Poor, Impotent
and Strangers: But in all this, there was no mention of Tithe, which the Clergy
now has seized on, and People are forced to maintain the Poor, and to
Contribute to Repair their Churches, so called; and upon denial, greatly Suffer
for the same.

Honest Wickliff having his Eyes in measure opened, to see the Evil that spread
as a Leprosy in the Church, through Constantines bounty, bare Testimony,
saying, Constantine the Emperor, and Bishop Sylvester committed great Error,
through their enriching the Church. For this and other Articles, the Council of
Constance, a City of Helvetia, under Pope John the Twenty fourth, pronounced
this Wickliff a Heretic, and commanded his Bones to be dug out of the Earth
and Burned, Sum. Conc. et Pontif.

Though in this Sylvester's Day, much was amiss in the Church, yet little in
comparison of after Ages; for the bottomless Pit was but (as I may say)
beginning to smoke; his Day was but as the drop of a Bucket to the main Ocean,
to ensuing Days, the Midnight of Apostasy, wherein Doctrinal Errors and
Covetous Practices darkened Sun and Air, spoiled the Glory of the Primitive
Church.

If I should Particularize what vast Sums of Money went out of England in the
Days of Popery, to the Sea of Rome, it would seem incredible: As,

First, By way of first Fruits, paid anciently to the Pope; but by a Statute of
Henry the Eighth wrested from the Pope, and given to the King, his Heirs and
Successors forever. Secondly, By Legative Levies, the Pope having, or
pretending need, vast sums of Money were exacted and levied through this whole
Kingdom, by Legates and Officers for that purpose, deputed by the Pope. Thirdly,
By Appeals to the Court of Rome, incredible sums were out of this Nation
exhausted. Fourthly, By Dispensations, vast sums of Money were drawn to Rome:
Fifthly, Indulgences and Pardons were of the like Magnetic faculty, to draw
Money to Rome. Sixthly, By Jubile's, Pilgrimages and Vows, etc. both at stated
and arbitrary times: So that one Adam Merrymouth called the English, the Popes
Asses, willing to bear unsufferable Burdens.
Mantuan, a Carmelite Friar, touched Rome to the quick in this manner, -- Heu!
Romae sola pecunia regnat, Exilium virtus patitur. -- Thus Englished,

Alas! at Rome now Wealth bears sway,
And Virtue Chaste is chased away.
But to return to the Primitive practice; though through Constantine and
Sylvester much Unsoundness crept into the Church, yet the Maintenance of
indigent Ministers, and the supply of the Churches-Necessities, by free and
voluntary Contribution, according to the Institution of Christ, and his chosen
Vessel Paul, was not lost.

Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea, in the days of Constantine, said, If thou do:
possess a Garment, or any other thing, more then extreme necessity does
require, and do not help the Needy, thou art a Thief and a Robber.

The Council at Antioch, in the Year 340. finding the Deacons very faulty,
ordained that the Bishops should distribute the Goods of the church, requiring
that they took not any part to themselves, nor to the Priests and Brethren that
lived with them, unless Necessity justly required it; alleging the Apostles
Words, Having Food and Raiment, be therewith content, Conc. Ant. Cap. 25.

Hitherto the Necessities of the Ministers, as of others, were supplied and
relieved by Free and Voluntary Contributions, and Offerings of Lands, Moneys,
Goods; and People were much pressed to bountiful Contribution for Holy and
Christian uses. Jerome, eminent in his day, about the Year 384. and Chrysostom
Bishop of Constantinople, about the year 398. labored much in that point, and
alleged the Jewish payment of Tithe, for an Example to Christians; below which
they would not have Christians to determine their Charity, not binding them to
this or that quantity, but persuading and pressing that they might not come
short of the Jews, in point of Charity; their Writings clearly and undeniably
hold out this thing; and this is the first mention of Tithe I read of, produced
only as an Example, to stir up the Sparks of Christian Charity.

Ambrose Bishop of Milan, and Augustine Bishop of Hippo, soon after, or about
the Year 400. screwed a Peg higher, from the Law given to the Israelites, for
the payment of Tithe, which Christ abolished, they imposed the payment thereof,
with heavy Penalties, for Holy uses, as the phrase then was: Augustine taught
that such as desired a Reward, or Pardon of Sins, they should pay Tithe; yet
consider to what end they required them, that the Poor might not want, saying,
God had reserved them for their use, Ambr. de penitent. August. in Sermon de
tempt.

Yet in the Sunshine of Primitive Purity, an Eternal reward and Remission of
Sins was witnessed, and the Poor were provided for, without recourse to the
Typical Levitical Maintenance by Tithe.

The Example of these two great Bishops, Ambrose and Augustine, and the
sweetness of the Morsel, fired Churchmen into that Doctrine; so that Leo, the
great Pope, about the Year 440. Severin about the Year 470. Gregory also, and
others, grounding their Doctrine on Moses's Law, stirred men up to the payment
of Tithe, to offer the same to the Church, Leo de jejun. dec. men's. et eleemos.
Greg. Hom. 16. in Evangel.

Notwithstanding the Example, Doctrine and Threats of the aforesaid, and
others, it was not a generally received Doctrine, that Tithe ought to be paid,
till about the Year 800. Agobard Bishop of Lions; Seldom of Tithe.

The Bishop for the most part in these Ages, lived in some Monastery, and his
Clergy with him, from whence he sent them into the Country within his Diocese
to Preach, and they brought all the Offerings they received into the Common
Treasury, out of which, the Necessities of the Bishops, Priests, Poor,
Distressed, Sick, Strangers, were supplied and relieved; places for public
Assemblies, called Churches, were built and repaired: the Priests then had not
such a particular Interest in the Free and Voluntary Offerings, as after they
usurped.

About the Year 800, 900, 1000. and after, Tithes were called the Lord's Goods,
the Patrimony of the Poor, Tributes of poor Souls, Stipends of the Poor, of
Strangers: Hereupon the Council at Nants declared, That the Clergy was not to
use them as their own, but as commended to their trust: And they were not then
given particularly to the Clergy, but for the use and relief of the Poor.

Bernard Abbot of Claravallis, who lived in the Year 1127. Contemporary with
Hugo de Sacro victore, bare Testimony to this purpose, in a Sermon upon Luke
the 17th, and inferred thus;

Truly the Goods of the Church, are the Patrimony of the Poor, and whatsoever
thing the Ministers and Stewards of the same do take unto themselves, more then
is sufficient for a competent Living, the same is taken away from the Poor by
Sacrilegious Cruelty.

In these Days People being brought to believe that their Tithe ought to be
given for the use of the Poor, as the the first Preachers up of Tithe held out,
they were more desirous to give them to the Poor, then to the Priest; at length
the foul and loathsome Leprosy of Covetousness so far infected the Clergy, as
that Priests (through the Auxiliaries, or Assistants of Popes and Councils)
quite shouldered out the Poor and Needy, and seized upon the Whole, as ravenous
Vulters seize on their Prey.

The Doctrine of Pope Innocent the Third, about the Year 1200. relating to
pluck the Bread out of the Mouth of the Poor, and to give it to the Priest,
sounded sweetly in the Priests Ears.

What was his Doctrine? say some.

I Answer; This Pope Innocent the third, preaching on the Charity of Zacheus,
said, Graviter peccant qui decimas et primitias non reddunt Sacerdotibus, sed
eas pro voluntate distribuunt indigentibus; that is, They are heinous
Offenders, who give Tithes and first Fruits to the Poor, and not to the
Priests. Certainly this Doctrine could not but astonish and amaze the People,
concluding them Heinous Offenders, for the observance of that which had for
Generations been Preached up as Meritorious: Is there not occasion given to cry
out, -- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
Auri sacra fames?
Golds Luster mortal men does so bewitch,
Leudly to act, in order to be Rich.


Further, a General Council held at Lions under Pope Gregory the Tenth, in the
Year 1274. Constituted, that thenceforth it should not be lawful for men to
give their Tithes where they would, as it had been before, but that they should
pay all their Tithes to the Mother Church: Hence it is evident that People might
dispose of their Tithes as they pleased, till they were restrained by Popes,
and Popish Councils.

The Council of Trent under Pope Pius the Fourth, about the Year 1560.
commanded, that all Men of what degree and condition soever, who were liable to
pay Tithes, should justly pay the same, after that time, to the Cathedral
Church, or to any other Church, or Person, to whom the same was of right due:
This is the Magna Charta, (as I may say) the great Decree, directly
constituting Tithes, all, or most of what was before supposed them as due by
some former right.

The Ecclesiastical state abroad, in order to Tithes, being in some measure
touched; some what concerning our own Nation may be spoken.

Philip the Apostle (as Histories report) sent Joseph of Arimathea, and others
with him, into this Nation, anciently called Britain, in the Reign of
Arviragus; they also tell us of King Lucius, Converted to the Christian Faith:
What Footing the Christian Religion had in the British days, among the
Britains, I forbear to touch, having never read any thing of their payment of
Tithes, or any other forced Maintenance: This Lucius was the first of the Kings
of Europe, (as it is said) whose Diadem was brightned with the Heavenly Gleames
of Christianity, Verst.

About the Year 290. in the Days of Dioclesian the Emperor, began the first
Persecution of Christians in Britain: There was one Alban, a British Pagan,
who received into his House one Amphibalus, a Christian, who fled from his
Persecutors; this Alban was convinced by the sweet Conversation of Amphibalus,
so was to be Beheaded; in going to the place of Execution, his intended
Executioner was smitten in his Conscience, and threw down his Sword at Albans
Feet, desiring to dye for him, or with him; he was put to death with Alban: the
manner of Alban's Death was Engraven upon a Marble Stone, and was set up in the
City Verulamium, or Verulam, for a terror to Christians; This City after was
ruined, and of the Ruins of it, a Town was built, to this very Day called St.
Albans, in memory of the Martyrdom of Alban in that place: not long after, the
same Romans caught Amphibalus, and put him to Death near the same place where
Alban had suffered: Of this Alban one wrote, Albanum egregium faecunda
Brittannia profert.

Britain fertile of all Good
Washed with glorious Alban's Blood.
The barbarous Saxons overran this British Nation, exercising Cruel
Persecutions upon them, till the very Name of Christian was blotted out; and
those Saxons erected a Heptarchy, that is, a seven fold Kingdom in this Land.

As they say, says Bid.
About the Year 600. or soon after one Gregory, Archdeacon of Rome, saw two
Northumbrian Youths exposed to be sold; he demanded, Whence they were? It was
answered by some by standers, That they were Angli, of the Province Deira,
called now Houlderness, and that they were Subjects of Alla, King of
Northumberland, and by Religion Pagans: Gregory framed this Allusion, that the
Angli, like unto Angels, should be snatched, Dei ira, from the Wrath of God, and
should be taught to sing Hallelujah, This Gregory obtaining License of Benedict
the Pope, resolved to come and Preach among the English; but the Romans through
their desire to his presence, recalled him from his Purpose and Journey.

This Gregory after succeeding in the Papal Seat, sent Abbot Augustine, and some
zealous Monks with him, to preach the Faith of Rome to the English Nation, who
safely arrived at the Isle Tanet; this Augustine sent a Message to Ethelbert a
Saxon, King of Kent, That he was come from Rome to proffer Heaven, upon their
reception of his Evangelical Message.

Ethelbert gave him and them a Meeting, who advanced for their Standard a
Silver Cross, and the painted Image of Christ, singing the solemn Litanies,
etc. Ethelbert said unto them, Fair and ample are the Promises which you bring;
yet such as being new and uncertain, I cannot hastily assent unto: Nevertheless
because you are Strangers, and are come afar to impart unto us the Knowledge of
things, which doubtless you judge the truest and best, we will not recompense
you with any Molestation, but will Friendly entertain you; nor do we forbid,
whom you can by Preaching, to gain to your Belief. He allotted them a Residance
in Canterbury, his chief City. Milton.

The Example of their Holy Life (says my Author) spent in Prayer, Fasting, and
continual Labor in the Preaching of the Gospel gained many, on whose Bounty
and the King's, receiving only what was necessary from those that received
them, they subsisted.

Pope Gregory clearly held out to Augustine, that he and his Assistants should
live according to the Primitive Order, among whom none said any thing was his
own, of the things he possessed, but all things were common among them: Where I
observe, that although they were almost smothered at Rome with the Smoke of the
Pit, yet they had a sight into the Primitive Order, as to live of the Free and
Voluntary bounty of such as received them; which Augustine at first observed.

Venerable Bede says, Th^^ Augustine and his Companions first coming to King
Ethelbert in Kent, began there to imitate the way and course of the primitive
Church, receiving only Necessaries from such as received them and their
Doctrine, Bed. Hist. Here was no preaching up of Tithes, no mention of a
Compulsive Maintenance: Now how long this course of living of the Free and
Voluntary Bounty of the People, according to the primitive Institution and
Practice continued, History gives me not much Satisfaction; yet Conjectures
there are from the Testimony of Bid, till the time of Henry the third, no
Tithes as Tithes, were generally paid; but only a Decree was made, That for
every twenty Shillings Rent, a Farthing a Sunday, so called, was to be paid,
which came to fifty two Farthings yearly: This was given by way of Offering,
but was supposed as Due; and the Tenth part of the yearly Rent of their Houses;
Bid, Lingwood.

Ethelbert, the King of Kent, being drawn by Augustine to embrace the Faith,
Doctrine and Worship of Papal Rome, multitudes of his Subjects framed a
Conformity thereunto: Upon this Augustine informed Pope Gregory of his Success;
whereupon Pope Gregory ordained him Archbishop of the English. Milton.

Pope Gregory sent others, as Melistus; Justus, Panlinus, Rufinian, and others,
who brought strange stuff with them into this our Nation, as Vessels,
Vestiments for the Altar, Coaps, Relics, and a Fall for Austin the
Archbishop to say Mass in. Milton.

A great part of the Nation being in a little time brought to the Romish Faith,
they began to withdraw from their Dependence and Reliance upon the Free and
Voluntary Contributions of their Converts, and began to preach up the old Roman
Doctrine; That Tithes ought to be paid, and that Pardon of Sins might be
merited, the Torments of Hell avoided by such good Works: Thus the Poor,
Depraved, Deluded, Seduced and Ignorant People, through the Sorceries of their
Pollitick Leaders, the Priests, were drawn to the Voluntary Contribution of
these Tithes, or of what portion thereof they pleased, to Monasteries,
Nunneries, Abbeys, Monks, Nuns, Abbots, Priors, Prioresses, Hospitals, Poor,
etc. Which Donations at length were confirmed by the Canon Law; and such as had
not Voluntarily bestowed their Tithe, they were forced thereunto by Laws and
Statutes; and a general Exaction thereof through the whole Kingdom was
established upon the Clergy.

In this Midnight of Popery, Tithe or Tenths were accounted the Souls Ransom,
and preached so to be by the covetous Clergy; so that in the Belief hereof,
People gave not only Tithes, but Lands also to Religious Houses, so called. Who
would deny the Soul's Ransom, Endless Life, if so to be purchased? In the
Belief of this Doctrine, the Clergy had almost gotten the third part of the
Land; and but that the Law against Mortmain prevented, might strangely have
prevailed by further Encroachments.

Now in order to owe People to be devout and exact in the Payment of Tithe,
they tell us a Miracle thereto, relating, how that Austin at a certain time
coming to a place called Cometon, to preach, the Priest of the place made
complaint against the Lord of the Manor, for detaining his Tithe; for which
thing Austin Excommunicated him; and saying Mass as the Altar, forbad
Excommunicated Persons to be present thereat: Presently a dead Corpse, buried
One Hundred and Seventy years before, arose out of his Grave, and stood afar
off, during the Celebrating of holy Mass. Austin asked him what he was? He
said, He was a man that in his Lifetime would never pay Tithe to the Priest,
so was excommunicated; and dying, went to Hell for that Crime. Austin raised
the dead Priest, who affirmed, That that man would never pay his Tithe. Austin
sent the live dead Corpse to his Grave again; saying, He had suffered long in
Hell, that is, in Purgatory. The Lord of the Manor seeing all this, was much
terrified, and fell at Austin 's feet, confessing his Fault; became a due Payer
of his Tithe all his Lifetime; John de Grand sono, Johan. Anglici Historia
Aurea.

Such Delusions as these, as also the Doctrine of Merits, and of Tithe being
the Souls Ransom, being received by the Credulous, Deluded Saxons, the Saxon
Kings in their respective Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, and in their respective
Reigns, made Laws and Decrees for the due Payment of Tithes.

Micah, a Seer of the Lord, in his day cried out, Will the Lord be pleased with
Thousands of Rams, or with ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil? Implying, He would
not, where Justice, Love of Mercy and Humility did not truly season and possess
the Inwards, Mic. 6. The true Church made up of living Stones, Elect and
Precious, witnessed Christ, the Amen, the true and faithful Witness, to be
their Ransom; their Redemption, their Redeemer from Death, Hell and the Grave:
But the Depraved and Misled Saxons, through the spiritual Enchantments of
their Teachers, were brought to account Tythe-giving, to be the Souls Ransom. I
could produce multitudes of their Donations, confirming what I say.

In the days of Henry the second, Nicholas Fitz Turold gave his Tithe in
Chiltune to that Monastery: The Form and Contents of his Donation was thus:

Be it known to those that are present, and to those that shall succeed, That I
Nicholas, the Son of Turold, for the Salvation of my Soul, and of my Parents,
etc. have granted to the aforesaid Church, to be held forever, the Tithes of my
Land, which I possess in the Village of Chiltune, etc.

I William de Albineio do grant unto God, and to St Andrew of Rochester, and to
the Monks, having Residence there, all my Tithes, etc. for the Soul of King
William, and for the Soul of King Henry, and for my own Soul, and for the Souls
of my Father and Mother, and of my Wife, and of my Brother Nigellus, and of my
Nephew Humphry, and for the Souls of my other Parents, alive and dead.

Know all men, That I Pain Sheriff of Surrey, do give and grant the Tithes of
Geddings, which my Ancestors gave to God, and to the Church of St Andrew of
Rochester, for the Soul of my Father, and of my Mother, and for me and my Wife,
and the same Church bath granted unto me, that after our Death, the Anniversary
of me, and of my Wife, shall yearly be performed forever. Thus a former Grant
was confirmed.

Richard Tresgoz confirmed to God, and to the Church of blessed Mary of
Boxgrave, and to the Monks there, serving God, for the Salvation of his Soul,
and of his Wife and Predecessors, and that Mass should be celebrated thrice a
Week in the aforesaid Church, for his Soul, and his Wive's Soul, and for the
Souls of his Father and Mother, and Ancestors, all the Donations which this
Father Philip had given, as well in Lands as in Tithes. Moreover, he gave all
the small Tithes of his Manor; of Lambs, Calves, Foals, Chickins, Piggs,
Wool, Cheese, Apples, Fruit; in a word, of whatever was Tytheable.

Out of a Charter of King Stephen, made to the Priory of Eye in Suffolk, this
following may be read.

I Stephen, by the Grace of God King of England, touched with the Love of God,
and for the Salvation of my Soul, and of my Father's Soul, and of my Mother's
Soul, and of my Ancestors, Kings, do give unto God, and to the Church of St
Peter of Eye, and to the Monks there serving God, that they may have all their
Profits quiet, and free from all Exaction, in Lands, Tithes, Churches,
Possessions, etc. Thus he confirmed former Grants, supposing them Due, Pious,
of good Effects and Consequences. Seldom.

Thus for the obtaining of Masses, Anniversaries, Remission of Sins, Salvation
of Souls, of the dead and of the living, and other Reasons, Papists gave Tithes
to Papists; these, or what portion thereof they pleased, were Voluntarily
bestowed on Monks and Monasteries, Nuns and Nunneries, Abbots and Abbeys,
Priors and Priories, Hospitals, on the Poor; at last all these Voluntary
Grants, to be held as pure and perpetual Alms, were confirmed by civil Laws,
and Episcopal; and such as had not Voluntarily bestowed them, were forced
thereto by Laws and Statutes.

About the Year 900. strict Examination was made at Shrifts, that is,
Confessions, in these words: Have thou at any time neglected to pay the Tenth
to God? If so, restore to God four fold; and then must thou suffer Penance
with Bread and Water Twenty Days. Seldom.

After it was determined by Laws, Canons and Decrees of Kings, Popes, Councils
and Bishops, That every man ought to pay Tithes; yet the Owner had Liberty to
confer it where he pleased; whereby Abbeys and Monasteries were wonderfully
enriched, till Pope Innocent the third, in or about the Year 1200.

Upon the aforesaid Consideration, this Innocent the third, by his Decetal
Epistle to the Bishop of Canterbury, commanded him, To enjoin every man to pay
his Temporal Goods to those that ministered Spiritual things to them; and the
same was enforced by Ecclesiastical Censures. And this was the Rise, Beginning
and Original of General parochial Payment of Tithes in England: This the Pope
enjoined, notwithstanding any Custom to the contrary. The Popes Decree is
recorded by Cook, in the second part of his Institutes.

After this Innocent the third, about the Year 1200. had restrained the Free
and Voluntary Distribution of Tithes, and settled a parochial Payment thereof;
in Pursuance and Confirmation thereof, Gregory the tenth, about the Year 1274.
ordained, That it should not be lawful for men to give their Tithes at their
own Pleasure, where they would, as it had been; but to pay all their Tithes to
the Mother Church, this says Cisterniensis. Thus the Pope prevailed with
People to pay their Tithes; and after screwing a Peg higher, limited People to
the Payment thereof, according to his Appointment.

CAP. VI. Of the Rise of first Fruits in Christian Churches.
ACcording to the Mosaical Dispensation, a portion of first ripe Fruits were
offered unto the Lord; and this did Sanctify the Remainder of Fruits; and by
these the Jews were raised up into hopes of enjoying their whole Crop in due
Season, Exodus 22.29. This was a Type fulfilled in the Substance, Christ Jesus,
the Glory of the Evangelical Dispensation. Paul having received Christ, the end
of all the Jewish Types, Figures, Shadows, Offerings, first Fruits, preached
not up the Jewish first Fruits, but Christ the end thereof, who Sanctifies all
that receive him, and raises in them Hope and strong Confidence for the
Fruition of the Crown of Life. Now (says Paul) Christ is risen from the dead,
and is become the first Fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. Yea, and the
Saints in Christ are the Evangelical first Fruits, taken out of the Residue of
men, as the Jewish first Fruits were taken out of the rest, an Offering unto
the Lord. Of his own Will begat he us (says James) by the Word of Truth, that
we should be a kind of first Fruits of his Creatures, Jam. 1.18. Yea, and John
called the Hundred Forty and Four Thousand, who stood on Mount Sion with the
Lamb, The first Fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, Rev. 14.4.

Thus in Gospel days, the Jewish first Fruits were not preached up, but Christ
the End thereof, the End of the first Covenant, first Priesthood, and its
Typical Appurtenances, even Christ, the Evangelical first Fruits. So who preach
up the Figure, the Substance being come, such are Antichrists.

Now after the rising of the Smoke of the Pit, darkning Sun and Air, spoiling
the Glory of the primitive Church, the Beast that had long plunged in the Sea,
was rifen out of the Sea, the Pope had gotten the Supremacy; he by color of
the Jewish Laws, which gave Tithes to the Levites, gained an Universal Payment
of Tithes to his Clergy; he as Successor of the Jewish High Priest, claimed to
himself first Fruits and Tenths, denying thereby Christ Jesus to be come in the
Flesh, the End of Types, Shadows and Figures: First Fruits and Tenths are but a
late Innovation, claimed by the Pope, as Successor to the Jewish High Priest,
as Cook, in the third part of his Institutes testifies.

Though it was long e're the Pope brought to pass his Attempt of Tenths to
himself, from all his inferior Priests in England, yet at last it was
effected: Yea, and the Laws of this Nation show, that there was no little
struggling by Kings and Commons in Parliament against first Fruits, calling the
same, An Horrible Mischief, and a Damnable Custom: Yet not so Horrible,
Mischievous or Damnable, but the Pope would receive them, and Man-made
Ministers preach them up.

The Payment of first Fruits and Tenths were continued to the Pope, as annexed
to his Chair, as Successor to the Jewish High Priest, Head of the Church, till
the days of Henry the 8th, who then denied the Popes Supremacy, and assumed it
to himself; and by Act of Parliament got first Fruits and Tenths annexed to his
Crown: Thus the Aaronical Types and Figures were received from hand to hand,
entertained among the Professors of Christianity; which thing being duly
considered, is Antichristian, a Denial of Christ to be come in the Flesh. This
being settled on King Henry and his Successors, through want of Consideration,
and of a divine Understanding; and being supposed a Due, is continued among
Protestants, pretending to be high Sharers in Reformation.

CAP. VII. Of the Rise of Mortuaries.
IN the Midnight of Popery, Priests begot in People a Belief, that their
Prayers, Mass-Services, Obits, etc. were wonderful effectual to bring the Souls
of the deceased out of Purgatory: So 'twas appointed, that the Relict, the Wife
of the Deceased, was to pay ten Shillings more or less to the Priest; and this
was called a Mortuary. And why must she pay so much to the Priest? That the
Priest might pray for the Soul of her Deceased Husband; and that some of their
Merits, which they had in store, might be shared out to him; pretending, They
had a stock of Merits to sell, to such as came with Money in their hands.

Seldom mentions a Synod in Ireland, wherein it appears, that a man might have
bequeathed his Burial to what Abbey he would; and that the Abbot thereof should
have his Apparel, his Horse and his Cow for a Mortuary, although he had before
bestowed all he had upon another Abbot.

Now the Pope being denied, and a Reformation intended, the Clergy concluded,
that it was gross and idolatrous to receive Mortuaries upon such a
Consideration; and yet unwilling to part with such a sweet Morsel, devised a
more plausible consideration, and that was, That Mortuaries should be given in
Recompense of Tithes, not duly paid in the Lifetime; not considering, that in
this very thing, they condemn all their Hearers, as Fraudulent and Deceitful,
so must have a Recompense for the Fraud, Guile, and Unjust detaining of
Church-dues in their Lifetime. The Apostles practiced no such thing, but bare
Testimony, That men should arise, stained with Covetous Practices. It Is a
shame, that Protestants, so called, from protesting to renounce Popery, should
be so defiled and contaminated with such Covetous Practices.

In the days of Henry the 8th, 'twas enacted, That the Bishops of Bangor,
Landaff, and St Assaph, and the Archdeacon of Chester, should take Mortuaries
of the Priests, within their Jurisdictions; as had been accustomed.

This Henry enacted, That no Mortuary should be demanded where the Goods of the
dead Person (Debts deducted) amount not to the value of ten Marks.

Nor above the Sum of three Shillings four Pence, when they exceed not thirty
pound.

Nor above six Shillings eight Pence, when they exceed thirty Pound but under
forty.

Nor above ten Shillings, when they amount to forty Pound, or above. Thus after
the primitive days, Christ the Lawgiver, to, of and in the Church, and his
Doctrine of Free and Voluntary Contribution was denied, and covetous Practices
commanded and allowed by men in the Apostasy, were entertained; and what spoil
and havoc has been, and is made upon the Deniers of these Selfish,
Idolatrous, Antichristian, Irreptitious Customs, who is ignorant?

CAP. VIII. Of the Statute against Mortmain.
MOrtmain is a French word, and signifies, a dead hand; it is in the common Law,
An Alienation of Lands or Tenements, to any Corporation, or Fraternity, and
their Successors, with the License of the King, and the Lord of the Manor
Lands (says a great Lawyer) were said to come to dead hands, to the Lords; for
that by Alienation in Mortmain, they lost wholly their Escheats, and in effect,
their Knight Service, for the Defense of the Realm, Wards, Marriages, Reliefs,
and the like, and therefore was called, a dead Hand; for that a dead hand
yields no Service, says Sr Thomas Ridley in his view of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law.

Austin the Monk brought the Religion and Doctrine of Papal Rome into this
Nation, to among the Saxons; by little and little strange things came to be
preached up, as, That the pardon of sins might be merited by good Works, the
Torments of Hell might be avoided; and that Tithe was the Souls Ransom; and
that whoever desired Forgiveness of Sins, and the Joys of Heaven, should
faithfully pay the same; and that without the payment thereof, these things
could not be had The Deluded and Depraved People receiving this as a heavenly
Oracle, gave not only their Tithes for the satisfaction of their Sins, to
maintain the Popish Clergy to say and sing Mass, to pray for their Souls, for
Obits and Anniversaries, but their Lands also: Hence Religious Houses (so
called) came to be built, and wonderfully enriched. By this Satanical Stratagem
and Delusion, almost a third part of the whole Land was hooked into the
aforesaid Houses and Clergy; and there was no cry heard among the Ravenous
Cormorants, It Is Enough, but rather the Horsleeches Language, Give, Give.

Now that all the Land might not be swallowed up in this unsatiable
Whirle-Pool, a Statute against Mortmain, that is, against the Alienation of
Lands, to such and such Uses was provided.

It was (says Andrew Willet, in his Synopsis of Popery) a common practice in
time of Popery, so the Priests might be enriched; they cared not greatly,
though all the Stock of the Patrons and Founders were undone, the Statute of
Mortmain, faith he, was made to restrain this, page 309.

King Henry the third, in his great Charter to all Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, etc. enacted thus: If any from
henceforth give his Lands to any Religious House, and thereupon be convict, the
Gift shall be utterly void, and the Land shall accur to the Lord of the Fee.
Edward the first enacted to the same purpose.

Henry the eighth confirmed this in the 23d year of his Reign, enacting, That
Assurances of Lands to Churches, Chapels, Churchwardens, Guilds,
Fraternities, Commonalties, etc. made of Devotion, as to the Uses and intents,
to have Obits perpetual, or a continual Service of a Priest forever, or for
sixty or eighty Years, were as Prejudicial to the Lords, as if they were
aliened in Mortmain, so to be void.

Further, this Henry enacted, That all Monasteries, Abbyes, Priories, and other
Religious Houses of Monks, Canons and Nuns, etc. with their Estates, should be
given to him and his Heirs forever, the Right of Founders, Patrons and Donors
being saved; as also all Lands, Tenements, Rents, and other Hereditaments,
given for the Maintenance of an Anniversary, or Obit, Light or Lamps in Church
or Chapel to continue forever. To say no more herein, that Statute against
Mortmain prevented the spreading of that foul Leprosy of Encroachments, and
stopped the heady Current of Idolatrous days in that point.

CAP. IX. Of Exemptions from the payment of Tithes.
THrough the Seed of Degeneration, Ministers in Christian Churches became
(...), lovers of filthy Lucre, Covetous, such the old Saxons called Gitsors;
that is, sore and eager getters; the Popes Doctrine being entertained into a
Nation, that Nation was divided into Bishoprics, Bishoprics into Parishes;
then the Pope having set up Parishes, he enjoined that a secular Priest
Canonically instituted, should attend the Service of each respective Parish:
and that where Tithes were not already settled; they should be paid to the
Parish Priest, notwithstanding any custom to the contrary.

After People were brought to believe that Tithe ought to be paid, they enjoyed
that liberty of bestowing the same where they would, and on whom they would,
till Pope Innocent the third, about the Year 1200. as has been touched. So
they were called Free Offerings, and Pure Alms; but it was no matter of
difficulty, having persuaded People to pay Tithes, to appoint the Receiver, the
Person or Persons to receive the same.

Now the Pope having brought in Tithes, and appointed the persons that should
receive them; notwithstanding his general Decree, yet he, in favor to his
chiefest Props and Cathedral Pillars, frequently granted Exemptions to such and
such Orders, whereby they became freed of the payment of Tithes, as to the
Templers, Cistercians, Hospitallers, and generally to all Lands held by
Religious Persons and Houses; upon this account, who have bought the Lands of
dissolved Monasteries, etc. their plea is, That their Lands are Tithe free.

This Immunity, so far as it concerned the rest of the Religious Persons, Pope
Adrian recalled, and limited it only to the Cistertians, Hospitallers,
Templers, and to the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, as faith Sr. Thomas Ridley
in his view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law.

It Is a pregnant proof (says one) that Tithes are of humane Institution, and
that from the Bishops of Rome also. Seeing their Exemptions are in force, and
observed to this day; yea, and as I may say, to aggravate the indignity of the
thing, among such as would be accounted to have come out of Italian Babylon,
and to be great sharers in Reformation.

Now for the satisfaction of such, who desire some account concering the
aforesaid Orders, this is:

Knights of the Temple, Knights Templers, was an Order of Knighthood erected by
Pope Gelasius, about the Year 1117. at first they dwelt not far from the
Sepulcher of Christ, entertained Christian Strangers and Pilgrims charitably;
and in their Armor led them (says my Author) thorough the Holy Land, to view
such things as were to be seen, and to defend them from the Infidels; at last
they grew very Vicious, and many of them fell from the Profession of
Christianity to the Saracens. Pope Clement the fifth suppressed the whole
Order, and their Substance was given to the Knights of Rhodes, and other
Religious Orders, says my Author.

Knights of the Order of St. John in Jerusalem was created for the defense of
Pilgrims; these Knights and Pilgrims were called Croises, from the Sign of the
Cross which they used to wear on their Garments: This Order was erected in or
about the Year 1120. and had their first Foundation and abode in Jerusalem,
after they had their residence at Rhodes, whence they were expelled by Solomon;
since their chief Seat has been at Malta, and have done, as it is said, great
Exploits against the Turk There was one General Prior that had the Government
of the whole Oder in England and Scotland; King Henry the eighth dissolved this
Corporation, the Prior and Confreres thereof were prohibited to wear their
accustomed Mark, the Sign of the Cross: The King also was to have their Houses,
Churches, Lands, Goods, Chattels, Debts, and all other things of theirs.

Hospitallers were certain Knights of an Order, so called, because they had the
Care of Hospitals, that is, Houses erected for the Relief of Pilgrims, and Poor
and impotent People.

Bernard, a learned Monk of Burgundy, entered into the Monastery of C^steaux;
hence an Order of Monks were called Bernardines, from this Bernard, the chief
of the Monastery; they were called also Ci^^ertian Monks.

Thus Tithes were settled in Apostatized Christendom by the Pope, (not by
Christ nor his Apostles) and in favor to his chief Props, such and such
Orders, etc. the Pope made all the Lands given unto them Tithe free, which so
remains to this Day, his Exemptions are in force. Now read your selves, you
that Glory in the Name of Protestants, and would be accounted eminent in
Reformation, from the dregs of Popery, as you say; See the Author of Tithes, in
Apostatized Christendom, and of the exemption of such and such Lands from the
payment thereof, the Pope, whom though you pretend to deny, yet plead for his
Provision; and refuse healing of your Leprosy in Spiritual Jordan, the River
of Judgment.

CAP X. Of Frank Almoigne.
LOcusts crawling out of the Smoke of the Pit, Teachers qualified only by Man,
says Gell on 2 Timothy 4. have a (...), that is, an itching in their Tongues,
desirous to teach others for Earthly ends, Earthly advantage, filthy Lucre, not
fervently desirous to bring them to Life; and the Hearers of such have (...),
an itching in their Ears, affecters of Novelties, Flesh pleasing Doctrines,
curious Speculations: It Is out of a Natural man's Sphere, to have Spiritual and
Heavenly aims, he is dead thereto, making Preaching as a Trade or Art to pick
a Living by: Such as are called of God they have better aims, of a more pure
and heavenly Nature: But to return, In the Apostasy the Clergy even spent
themselves in the pursuit of Earthly things, multiplying Inventions to settle
themselves in Pride, Fullness and Ease, and a Provision, Idolatrously,
Fraudulently, and upon groundless Supposition, formerly hooked in by the
Clergy: Man-made Ministers now, though pretending Reformation, allow of and
Dispute for the same.

A Tenant in Frank Almoigne, is where an Abbot, Prior, or any other man of
Religion, or of holy Church, as they say, holds of his Lord in Frank
Almoigne, that is to say, in free Alms; and this Tenure began first in Old
Time, when a man seized of Lands or Tenements, etc. and of the same enfeoffed
an Abbot, Prior, or any Ecclesiastical person, Seculer or Reguler, to have and
to hold to them and their Successors in Frank Almoigne, that is, pure or free
Alms, Cook upon Littletou sec. 133.

All Ecclesiastical persons might have held in Frank Almoigne, were they
Seculer or Reguler; but no Lay-person could hold in Frank Almoigne. A notable
piece of Policy to enrich the Clergy, none must partake of these Alms but the
Clergy; the Peoples Charity was limited by the grand Charter of the Clergies
Covetousness to themselves alone.

And they which held in Frank Almoigne, were bound of right before God, to make
Orisions, Prayers, Masses, and other divine Services, for the Soul of their
Grantor, or Feoffer, and for the Souls of their Heirs which were dead, and for
the prosperity, and good Life, and good Health of their Heirs which were alive;
Cook upon Littletou, Sec. 136.

Thus it is clear as the Day to the seeing Eye, what strange Superstitious,
Idolatrous Doctrines and Covetous Practices, foretold of by the Apostles, had a
rise in the Apostasy. Paul said in his Day, We are not as many, which corrupt
the Word of God, 2. Cor. 2.17. Former Translations rendered it, We are not as
many, making Merchandise of the Word. Which is very agreeable to the Greek
Copy, and touches the Practice of Man-made Ministers, who, as Merchants trade
with their Commodities, trade with their groundless Doctrines, Traditions,
irreptitious Customs, natural Gift, acquired Parts, Bargaining with People for
so much a Year, running from place to place, as further Advantage is offered;
yet pretending a Call thereto 'Twas the Judgment of Churchmen in former days,
that for a Bishop to remove from one place to another, was a bad Custom, and to
be rooted out, Summa Council. and Pontif. saying further, It Is very evident why
they do this thing, seeing no Bishop i^ found removing from a greater City to a
less; whereupon it is apparent (say they) that they are fired with Covetousness.

You that pretend Reformation, you have in your Mouths what was said of
Alexander the Sixth, that notable Merchant.

Vendit Alexander Cruces, Altaria, Christum,
Vendere jure potest, emerat ipse prius.
Alexander sells Crucifixes, Christ, and Altars high;
And Reason good he should do so, for first he did them buy.
And what Mantuan has said of Merchandising, apostatized Rome's selling of
Temples, Priests, Altars, Sacred things, Crowns, Fire, Frankincense, Relics,
Prayers, Heaven, and God himself: And cannot you see your selves? Does not your
taking of Tithes, Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues, as you call them. Money
for Marrying of People, for Burials, for opening of the Earth, for Funeral
Sermons, for Mortuaries, for Churching of Women, for Smoke passing up the
Chimney, Plough-Money, Garden-Money, Augmentations, bespeak you Merchants? The
Apostles acted no such things, were not found in the Co-ercive exaction of
Tithes, not forcing a Maintenance from such as received them not; Paul was no
such Merchant, he mingled not Wine and Water, as I may say, he was not (...), a
lover of filthy Lucre, but content with Gospel-Maintenance, which was Free and
Voluntary from such as received them and their Message. But such as are made
Ministers by the Will of Man, they apply themselves to man for Maintenance:
Cicero a Heathen, could say, That the Gains of Hirelings are sordid or base;
for their Wage is the Obligation of their Service, Tull. Offic. If Antichrist's
Maintenance were swept out, decry'd, and Gospel-Maintenance only allowed, then
'twould appear, whether the Number of Chemarims, that is, Black Coats,
increased or decreased: When Earthly Considerations opens the Mouth, those
being taken away, the Mouth is shut. This is no Reflection against the
Ministers of Christ, who propound to themselves Gospel ends, as good Stewards
faithfully dispensing the Word of Reconciliation, content with
Gospel-Maintenance; without recourse to Man, or Maintenance introduced by man,
contrary to what Christ and the Apostles taught and appointed.

We forbid, (says Cardinal Galo, the Pope's Legate) under the penalty of
Excommunication, that Priests and Clergymen, through the occasion of any
Custom, should presume to exact or extort any thing for Baptism, Burial, or any
other Sacrament, Sum. Council. and Pontif. Whether the Pope be obeyed in this,
as in other of his Ordinances, it is well known: but Ordinances of this Nature
and Tenure savor not well to the minds of Man-made Ministers.

CAP. XI. Of the Rise of Reek-penny, called also Smoke-Money, called also in
the Saxon Tongue, Romefeoh, that is, the Fee of Rome; and Romescot, that is,
Rome's-shor, or Rekoning; and Rome-penny, and Denary sancti Petri, that is,
Peter Pence; and Regis Eleemosyna, that is, the King's Alms.
EThelbert King of the East Angles, being persuaded by his Council to Marry
against his own inclination, went to Offa, in design to obtain his Daughter
Athelred to Wife; King Offa's Wife being averse to the Match, caused Ethelbert
to be slain, whereupon Offa, King of the Mercians, to expiate that horrid Act,
gave the Peter Pence to St Peter's Church in Rome: This Peter Pence was a Penny
for every House in which was twenty pennyworth of Goods, to be paid Yearly on
Lammas-Day; such strictness was required in the payment thereof, that in time
it was esteemed, Consuetudo quasi Apostolica, etc. A Custom as it were derived
from the Apostles, from which neither the King, nor the Archbishop, Abbot,
Prior, or any in the Kingdom was free, only the Monastery of St Albans, in
honor of Alban the Protomartyr, was by the Indulgence of King Offa exempted
from that Charge.

This Peter Pence, this Yearly Tribute, Ethelwoulph ordained to be paid Yearly
by every House in England; that kindled a Fire.

Ina King of the West- Saxons, as some say, was the first Donor of Peter Pence,
about the Year 720. being in Pilgrimage at Rome. Matthew Westminster
insinuates, that these being Kings of several Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchy,
each of them might be the first Donor within their respective Dominions.

Upon reasonable Compute, the Peter Pence could amount to no less then 7500.
pounds a Year, which payment continued till the reign of Henry the Eighth, who
totally took it away. Sleiden.

Pope Paul the fourth receiving the English Ambassadors which came from Queen
Mary, urged to them the necessity of the Restitution of all Revenues, that her
Father Henry the eighth had taken away from Rome; further pressing, That they
could not hope that Saint Peter would open the Gates of Heaven to them, so long
as they usurped his Goods on Earth. Strange Doctrine! As though Peter being
dead, in the fruition of Eternal Joy, should regard Money, which while upon
Earth he was redeemed from the love of. Hunting. Milton, Sleiden, Matthew. West.

Now you Protestants that pretend Reformation, do not you in your Words deny
the Pope and his Supremacy? Yes: Why then do your Ministers, Vicars and Parsons
receive his Tribute, of every House that kindles a Fire, viz. a Penny, called a
Reek-penny, Smoke penny or Hearth-penny? and Persecute such as deny to give
them the same; it is one of their covetous Practices, occasioned by Murder, in
the gloomy Night of Apostasy; Popery, through love of Money, continued a Dreg
of the Cup of Babylon.

Further, King Edgar enacted that Peter Pence, called commonly Hearth-penny,
imposed on every House, should be paid before the Feast of St Peter, and he
that paid not the same, should carry that Penny and Thirty other Pennies to
Rome, and pay one Hundred and twenty Shillings to the King. Further, if any
should not give the Peter-penny upon the second demand, he enacted that he
should carry that penny and thirty other pennies to Rome, and pay two Hundred
Shillings to the King: Upon refusal, after the third demand, he was to suffer
the loss of all he had. Here was Zeal, but without Knowledge; and though this
annual payment was from Papists to the Pope, to expiate the horrid act of
Murder; yet such as pretend Reformation are not ashamed of it, showing
themselves to be such as Peter spoke of, who should have Hearts exercised with
Covetous practices.

'Twas a noble saying and resolution of Abraham, that he would not take as much
as a Shoe-lachet of the King of Sodom, lest he should say, he had made Abraham
Rich. So you that profess Reformation, keep not a Rag of the Whore's Garment,
not one Patch of her Earthly Traditional groundless Ornament, that the Beast,
Lawgiver in spiritual Sodom, the apostatized Church, nor any of the Locusts
that arise out of the Smoke of the Pit, may not boast that you are enriched by
their Merehandize, and groundless Traditions relating to Doctrine, Worship or
Maintenance; as you would be accounted the Children of Abraham, do the Works of
Abram, show forth the Faith of Abram, which led him from Vz of the Caldees, by
Interpretation Fire, to the Land of Canaan, Genesis 11. Sons of Abram, Witnesses
of purifying, and Victory giving Faith, they read this thing.

CAP. XII. How Tithes came into Laymens Hands, Impropriators.
YOu that are, or would be accounted Gospel Ministers, and plead that Christ
has granted you Tithes for your Maintenance; yet can neither tell where nor
when. Let me tell you, if you have Christ's Ordinance and Institution for
Tithe, then no Custom, Usage, Prescription, privilege or Popish Dispensation,
can justly acquit any from the payment of the utmost penny of the tenth part;
for Ordinances and Doctrines of Christ are not to be made void by the
Injunctions of men: How comes Laymen, Impropriators to be such sharers in
Tithe, which is your right as Gospel Ministers, as you pretend? Are they not
Sacrilegious therein? And how come so many to be exempted from the payment of
Tithe? But all this is but a Covetous pretense, Christ put an End to that Law
which gave Tithe to the Levites, and established a Free and Voluntary
Maintenance for Gospel Ministers without Tithe: And Tithes came into Christian
Churches by the Pope, and all Exemptions from the payment of Tithes were by the
Pope's Indulgence. And now I shall declare what I have read concerning Tithes
in the possession of Laymen.

The Hunnes, Goths and Vandals invaded Italy under the Emperor Justinian, and
greatly persecuted all Religious men, overturned Churches, burnt Libraries,
overthrew Schools of Learning; these fierce and barbarous People about the Year
650. set their Faces against France; upon this Charles Martell the Father of
Pipin, after King of France, would not oppose himself against them, unless the
under Clergy of France would resign every man his Tithes into his Hands, that
thereby he might reward the Soldiers, and support the Charges of the War then
present; he solemnly promised that these Tithes should be restored to them at
the end of the War, with a further Gratuity for their good Will, the Clergy
driven thereto by the Exigences of that Age, and eminent Dangers, complied with
these motions: This Charles Martell having driven out and overthrown these
barbarous Nations, performed not his promise with the Clergy, but divided their
Benefices to such of the Nobility as had done Valiantly in that Enterprise, and
assured the same to them and their Heirs forever in Fee; The Example hereof
passed over the Alps into Italy, and mounted above the Pyrenean Hills into
Spain, and shortly failed over into England. Thus Tithes came out of the Hands
of the Clergy, and became the possession of the Laity. This Fact of Martellus
was committed about the Year 660. and for it is confidently Damned in the
Legend; the Story of his Damnation is fastened upon Euchere, Bishop of
Orleance, who is said, to have seen in a Vision this Martellus in Hells
Torment, and that Euchere might believe what he saw, an Angel instructed him to
seek for Martell in his Sepulcher; so he did, but found him not, but the place
he found all black, and instead of Martell a direful Serpent. This Story is to
be read in the Legend, and the whole passage is Recorded by Sr. Thomas Ridley,
in his view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law.

Further, how it came to pass, that Tithes appointed by man for the Maintenance
of the Clergy, for the use of the Poor, for the building and repairing of
places of public Worship, came into the Hands of Laymen, as they are called,
Albius Krantzius relates.

Carolus Magnus the Son of Pipin, and King of France, through his compliance
with the Sea of Rome, he first got the Title of Most Christian-King; he
Conquered the Saxons, and drew them from Gentilism to the Profession of
Christianity, and made Provision for the Clergy. But it is said (says this
Krantzius) that Tithe at first was not assigned to the Saxon Clergy, but to the
King's Lievetenants, that out of the same they might pay their Soldiers, and
answer the Charge of the frequent expeditions against that Nation. For this end
(says his Chronicle) in Saxony and other places, much Tithes were in the Hands
of Laymen.

This same Krantzius renders another Cause; the Clergy fearing that Princes
would not secure them in their Possession of Tithes, he supposes the Clergy
gave them part of Tithe, thereby to obliege them, to secure them in their
Possession of their respective parts, choosing rather to lose part thereof, then
the whole: and that the things are true which Krantzius relates, it is evident
from that Oration which Frederick the first Emperor made, saying, As touching
you, O Bishops, the Pope judges it an unfitting thing that Tithes which are
dedicated to Altars, and Churchmen, should be in the possession of Laymen;
neither will he understand, that Churches of Old suffering great afflictions,
were defended by Laymen; than Churchmen, as a recompense to Laymen, gave
them part of their large Possessions of Tithes. Kran. Lib. 1. and Lib. 6.
Novissima Polyanthea.

And in our Nation, King Henry the eighth shaking off the Pope, denying his
Supremacy, he dissolved many Monasteries, which had many Tithes and Rectories
appropriated unto them; so kept part in his own Hands, part he sold to others,
to be held as Lay-Possesssions; thus they dropped into Laymens hands, and these
Laymen having no Law to recover them; the Popes Law not reaching to
Lay-persons, so called, this Henry made new Laws in behalf of Laymen, that
they might be capacitated to enforce the aforesaid payment of Tithes. Thus it
appears what jumbling and Confusion has been in the Night of Apostasy to
introduce and continue Tithes, granted only to the Levites for their Service
under that Ministration; which Law, which Service, and which Maintenance
Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah put an end unto; and such as introduce
what he put an end unto; notwithstanding their gilded Colors and specious
Pretenses, being seen in Gods Eye, and weighed in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, they are found Antichristian.

Now you Teachers of what Denomination soever, who strive, struggle and
wrestle, to maintain a property in your delicate and dainty Morsel Tithes, and
that jure divino, aut humano, by divine or humane Right; give me leave soberly
and modestly to make trial of your Right to, or Property in the same, in your
most Foundamental pretenses: and to the end I may Methodize the ensuing
discourse, let me lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree, try your pretended Tenure
of right unto the exaction of Tithes, and that from a fourfold Authority,
Patriarchal, Mosaical, Evangelical and Humane; for all Grounds, Reasons and
Arguments that are, or can be alleged for the exaction of Tithes, are
naturally reducible to one or other of these four Sourses or Springings; and if
these main Pillars, Cathedral props, cannot bear up that Building of the
exaction of Tithes in Gospel Days, and that by Divine right, it will and ought
to tumble down, as the Reformation of the great Gospel-Reformer prevails in
Churches professing Christianity; and as you learn the sound, wholesome and
savoury Lesson of Self-denial, you will be glad and rejoice for the Reformation
of Christ, and for the increase of his Government; notwithstanding your loss of
Antichristian Provision.

CAP. XIII. The Clergies Patriarchal Claim of Tithes considered.
NOw you that say, That the Divine Right of Tithes is derived from Melchizedec,
and not from Levi.

To this I Answer; It Is then inquirable, whether or no Tithes were ever the due
and property of Melchizedec, that which could make them his Property must be a
Command; they were no more the property of the Levites, then of any other of
the Tribes, till there was an Assignation of them to the Levites, after the
command issued from the Court of Heaven, they became due, and while the command
stood in force, and the Law was unrepealed, 'twas a transgression of the divine
Law, to be found in non-payment thereof. Now where is the Command that Tithes
should be paid to Melchizedec? Where is the Law of the Assignation of them to
him? It Is not groundless Conjectures and Suppositions will serve the turn;
positive Precept is called for: No right could be derived from Melchizedec to
another, which was not first in Melchizedec himself; Vlpians Judgment is found:
Nemo plus juris ad alium transfer potest, quam ipse haberet, that is, No man
can make a better Title to another, then he himself has.

Obj. Tithes were paid to Melchizedec, after whose Order Christ was High Priest
forever, therefore due unto the Evangelical Order.

Answ. It Is neither said by Moses, nor by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, that Abram paid him Tithes, but that he gave him Tithes: and betwixt a
Payment and a Gift there is a difference, the one imports a Due or Debt, the
other a free and Voluntary Act. Now if Tithes had been properly due from Abram
to Melchizedec, it is not probable that both these holy men, who were (...),
divinely inspired, would have said, he gave, but he paid Tithes: The Geneva
notes on Heb. 7.5. say, The Levites had Commandment to receive that which Abram
gave freely to Melchizedes. What Abram did it was Free and Voluntary,
Melchizedec had no Law to require it, neither had Abram a Law enjoining him to
pay it; neither is it apparent that ever Abram gave the Tithe but this once,
upon this accidential or providential occasion, which may be taken for a
thankful acknowledgement, and a return of kindness to Melchizedec, who had
given him Bread and Wine for the Refreshment of him and his Soldiers after the
Fight: A voluntary Promise only binds the promiser; and the free Gift of one is
not obligatory to others, no binding Example for future Generations, a feeble
Ground for such as would be accounted Gospel Ministers to claim Tithe; if
Abram's free and voluntary Gift must be a binding Rule in Gospel-dayes, then
may every man require Bread and Wine of their Priest, for the refreshment of
themselves and Families, every Officer require the same for himself and
Soldiers; the one Example is as obligatory as the other in Gospel-Dayes, both
being Voluntary.

Again, let us consider what Abram gave him the Tenth of: Chederlaomer, and the
Kings with him, Conquered the King of Sodom, and took all the Goods of Sodom,
and took Lot, Abram's Brother's Son Prisoner; upon this Abram armed his traned
Servants, and pursued them, rescued Lot and the Goods; in his return
Melchizedeck met him, gave him Bread and Wine, as before, and blessed God for
his Success; then Abram gave him Tithes of all, Genesis 14. Of all what? Not of
the Increase of his Lands and Flocks; Abram did not carry every Tenth Sheaf,
Lambs, Piggs, Geese, Chickins with him, but rather Sword, Spear, Battle-Ax,
Battle-Bow, or such like Weapons of War; he had other things to carry with him,
than Tithe Corn, Hay, Lambs, Piggs, etc. Abram gave him Tithe of all: Of all
what? The Apostle answers thee: Consider how great this man was, unto whom even
the Patriarch Abram gave the Tenth of the Spoils, Heb. 7.4. So that of the
Goods belonging formerly to Sodom, plundered by Chederlaomer, rescued and
recovered by Abram, Abram gave to Melchizedec the Tenth thereof; And what if he
had given it all to him, seeing he was resolved not to keep the least of it for
his own use? Genesis 14.

Now, besides the Apostle, Erasmus, Crysostom, Jerome, upon several accounts, as
also our Countryman Poole, say expressly, That Abram gave him Tithes, not of
his own Lands and Flocks, but of the Spoils taken from the Enemy. Poole on Heb.
7.4. says, This place cannot be understood of all Abram's Possessions, but of
all the Spoil taken in that Battle. Abram was not then at Home, but in his
Journey in his return from the pursuit of his Enemy. Now if you will have Tithe
from this Example, you must go to the Soldiers, and make your claim after
Victories obtained; for Abram gave not the Tithes of his own Lands and Flocks,
nor ever, but this once, as far as appears. How then proves this a yearly
payment of Tithes to Gospel Ministers? And how can an annual payment be justly
derived to others from the free and voluntary Gift of one, and that but once?

Again, if from the Gift of Abram to Melchizedec, you will enforce any thing to
that Order; it can but be free Gift, which we deny not, in the Wisdom of God,
being ordained of Christ, practiced by the Apostles and Churches, while a pure
Virgin to Christ; so that your Antiquity of Tithes to the Gospel Ministry, is
vanished into the free Gift of the People.

Obj. To give and to pay is all one in this Case: So the Apostle not only said,
he gave the Tenth, Heb. 7.4. but also Levi paid Tithe in Abram, verse 9.

Answ. To give and to pay is not all one in this Case, the Apostle in the
Wisdom of God varied his Expression, according to the Persons he treated of,
and the different Times and Seasons he related to, speaking of Abram in the
Anti- Levitical days, before Tithes were commanded, in whom it was a free,
voluntary, spontaneous Act, Gift to Melchizedec; he says, He gave (but speaking
of Levi) of the Levitical Priesthood, who lived after Tithes were assigned and
commanded to be paid; he expresses himself by the word Paid, verse. 9. Abram
Gave, Levi Paid: That Abram came thither with an intention to Pay, or
Melchizedec with an expectation to receive Tithes, I cannot receive.

Now that Tithe was not Paid to Melchizedec, but Given, and that not Yearly,
but once, and that not of the Increase of his Lands and Flocks, but of the
Pillage of Sodom rescued and recovered from the Plunderers, the Fruits of
Warlike performances, it is very evident, the Scripture is not dubious, but
clear in this point; So they may be judged Irrational, who claim a property in,
and plead for Tithes upon such crazy and feeble grounds.

Jacob's Vow considered, Gen 28.22. being stoutly alleged for the continuance
of Tithes in Gospel-dayes.

Jacob in his Journey from Beersheba to Haran, tarried all Night in a certain
place, and laid down to sleep, with his Head upon a Pillow of Stones; and from
the Lords glorious appearance unto him, and sweet and comfortable Promise of
his presence with him, and preservation of him, and that in him and in his
Seed, all the Families of the Earth should be blessed, he called the Name of
that place Bethel, by Interpretation, The House of God; in the fence of these
things, and in confidence of the Lord's Promise and faithful performance, he
vowed, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go,
and will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on, etc. And this Stone which
I have set for a Pillar, shall be God's House, and of all that thou shall give
me, I will surely give the Tenth unto thee, Genesis 28. This Jacob performed after
twenty Years; as Josephus says in these Words, By Offering unto the Lord the
Tenth of all his Substance which he got at Haran. After that he returned unto
that place, where God's appearance unto him was.

This Vow of Jacob was Voluntary, in being unrequired: Let such as would
squeeze a Divine right to the exaction of Tithes from this, or from any
Ante-diluvian, or Post-diluvian Patriarch, show a command for the same, before
the Levitical Assignation; the known Maxim is, Affirmanti incumbit probatio;
that is, He that affirms, must prove, being Voluntary: It Is no binding Example
to future Generations; though it is true, Jacob's Vow was obligatory to him,
after he had vowed, but not to his Posterity; the eleaven Tribes paid not
Tithes to Levi, by reason of the Example of Abram and Jacobs voluntary Gifts,
but by virtue of the Lord's command thereunto enjoining: That the Patriarchal
Age was without a Divine command for the payment of Tithes; Pareus on the
aforesaid Scripture clearly demonstrates, showing, and saying, Decimae ante
legem liberae erant and arbitrariae, exemple Abrami and Jacobi, licebat dare
vovere, aut non; that is, Tithes before the Law were free and arbitrary, by the
example of Abram and Jacob; a man might give them, Vow them, or not, as he
pleased: Now if there had been a Command for the same, they ought to have been
paid, because commanded; and they could not have been detained without breach
of the Lord's command; Bernard touched this well, Non attendit vere pius, quale
sit illud, quod praecipitur, hoc Solo contentus quia praecipitur; that is, One
truly Godly heeds not, or disputes not, what like the thing is which is
commanded, acquiescing and contenting himself in that it is commanded.

Again, as Jacob's Vow was Voluntary, so it was conditional in depending on the
performance of Gods promise to him, if Tithes had been a divine Tribute,
commanded of God, there had been no necessity of Vowing to give them, he could
not have detained them, without the soul spot and sordid blemish of
Disobedience; neither could he have made his Obligation conditional; for Tithes
must have been paid, because commanded. So this free, voluntary and spontaneous
Vow conduces not to make up a Divine right to Tithes.

Now if you will claim property in, and right unto Tithes from the voluntary
Act of Abram and Jacob, why do you not use Circumcision, erect Altars, offer
Sacrifice? These things they did, and you have as much ground from their
Example to perpetuate the rest, as Tithes in Gospel-dayes; and if the Smoke of
(...), that is, Self-love, did not darken your understandings, you would see
Christ Jesus, the sum and substance of all Shadows, to have ended and fulfilled
the one as well as the other.

CAP. VX. The Clergies Mosaical Claim to Tithes examined.
OUt of the twelve Tribes of Israel, the Living God chose Aaron and his Sons
for the Office of the Priesthood, and the rest of the Tribe of Levi he chose
for the Service of the Tabernacle; he gave unto the Levites all the Tenth in
Israel for an Inheritance for their Service, and they were to have no
Inheritance among the Children of Israel.

The Levites out of their Tithes were to offer up an Heave Offering of it to
the Lord, even the tenth part of their Tithe, and give it unto Aaron the Priest
for himself and his Sons; and this was all the portion the Priest had in Tithe,
even the Tenth of the tenth from the Hands of the Levites; the Levites,
Strangers, Fatherless and Widows had the rest.

So the Lord Instituted Three Tenths.

1. The Tenths of the Levites, they had all the tenth in Israel for their
Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Numb. 18.21. 2dly, The Priests
Tenths, which was the tenths of the Levites tenths, by them given to the
Priest, to Aaron and his Sons; this was called a Heave Offering, Numb. 18.26.
etc. 3dly, The Poor man's Tithe at the end of three Years laid up within their
Gates, and this was for the Relief and Maintenance of the Fatherless, Widow and
Stranger, Deuteronomy. 14.27, 28.
The Tribe of Levi, as has been touched, had no more right unto, nor Title in
Tithes, then any of the other Tribes, till the Lord assigned the same to them;
upon the Command they became due, and not to be detained while the Law was in
force.

Now you that perochially Officiate as Ministers of Jesus Christ, and would be
so accounted, yet have recourse to the Authority of Meses for your Maintenance:
Let me know how Gospel Ordinances, peculiar to the Church of Christ, are to be
practiced, and to receive their Authority from a Mosaical Institution.

Seeing nothing can give privilege unto a Gospel property, but a Gospel
Authority, then why do you, pretending to be Ministers of Christ, impose upon
Christians the Bondage of a Mosaical Institution, to wit, the exaction of
Tithes, whose Institution and Being was from the Law of Moses, and terminated
with the Service it was given for?

Again, if a Gospel-Ordinance must be practiced from Mosaical Institutions; Is
not this to make the Gospel ineffectual, of less Authority then the Law, Christ
inferior to Moses, his Ordinances insufficient, and not obligatory, unless
strengthened by the Authority of Moses? Undoubtedly to demand Tithes under the
Gospel, by virtue of the Institution of Moses, cannot want foul Absurdities.

In Relation to Tithes several things are further to be considered.

1. They were commanded to be paid to the Levites for their Service of the
Tabernacle; no other Tribe could claim property in the same, because the
Command reached only unto Levi: and it is the command of God that gives a
Divine right unto a thing commanded. So if you will have Tithes from the
Mosaical Authority, you must prove your selves to be the very Persons to whom
they were commanded to be paid; you must prove your selves the Legitimate Sons
of, and lineally descended from Levi; and if you will have the Wage of the
Levites, you must do their Work, you must have an outward Tabernacle, and
Vessels thereto belonging, bear it, encamp about it, take it down, set it up;
For this and such like Work Tithe was given to the Levites, and none of you
must enter that Service till twenty five Years old, nor continue therein after
the Age of Fifty.

2. Tithes, according to the Institution of Moses, were to be paid by the
eleaven Tribes only, from their several Portions in the Land of Canaan, not any
other People, nor any other place were bound by the Law of Moses to the payment
thereof. Eusebius agrees with the Jewish Doctors and Rabbis herein, that
Tithes were only limited to Canaan, the Land of Israel; therefore if you will
have the Levites Wage, you must not only prove your selves Levites, and do
their Work, but you must go to Canaan, and call for Tithes of the eleven
Tribes; else prove England to be Canaan, and the Inhabitants thereof the eleven
Tribes, which will prove a matter of great difficulty: The Jewish Doctors
conclude that regularly, no Inhabitants but of the Land of Israel, were to pay
any by their Law: Where they live dispersed in strange Lands, they pay no
Tithes now, both for want of their Temple, Priesthood, as also for the
restrainment thereof to the Land of Canaan; and the Jews that live in Canaan
now pay none, for want of their Temple and Priesthood. But you pretending to be
Ministers of Christ, who put an end to that Service, for which they were given,
and to the Law which gave them; you, I say, being neither Jews, Levites, in the
Land of Canaan, nor have the Temple, nor the Priesthood, nor the Appurtenances
thereof; yet require them by that Law, which never gave them to any other, but
to the Levites for their Service, etc.

3. The Priesthood settled on Aaron and his Sons, received no Tithes of
Husbandmen, at the Hands of the eleven Tribes; all that they received was the
tenth of the Tenths from the Levites; this was called a Heave Offering: So the
Apostle said, And verily they that are the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office
of the Priesthood, have a Commandment to take Tithes of the People, according
to the Law, that is, of their Brethren; though they come out of the Loins of
Abraham, Heb. 7 5.

Now if you claim Tithes from the Aaronical Priesthood, as succeeding them, you
must do Aarons Work, have holy Garments, an outward Breast Plate, an Ephod, a
broidered Coat, a Mitre, two Onyx Stones, Vrim and Thumim; you must have the
Shoulder, the two Cheeks and the Maw, when an Ox or a Sheep is offered in
Sacrifice, which must be done: Such as claim the Wage of Aaron, they must do
the Work of Aaron; yet in so doing it were Antichristian, because Christ is
come, the end of the Law, the end of that Priesthood that received Tithes, the
end of the Heave Offering Tithe, as well as of the Meat Offering, Sin-Offering,
Burnt-Offering, Trepass Offering, Wave-Offering, Heb. 7.12. Heb. 10.10, 14.
Why were the Levitical Priests blamed, for that when any man offered Sacrifice,
their Servant came while the Flesh was in seething, with a three-toothed
Flesh-hook in his Hand, and stroke it into the Pan, Kettle, Cauldron or Pot,
and all that the Flesh-hook brought up, that was the Priests due? I Answer,
this was charged as a Fault upon them, because they did it without divine
Institution, 1 Samuel 2. Now if that Custom was blameworthy, which extended but
to the compass of a Pan, Kettle, Pot or Cauldron; Shall that be allowable which
reaches to the utmost corner of a Parish, if divine Institution minister not
allowance thereunto?

Obj The Heave Offering Tithes was given by a Statute forever; does not this
perpetuate the payment of Tithes in Gospel-Dayes? Is not the Evangelical
Dispensation comprehended within the Bounds of forever? Numb. 18.11, 19.

Answ. True it is, most of the Types and Shadows of Moses, as Circumcision,
Temple, Passover, Jewish Feasts, Offerings, the Trumpets of the Priests and
Levites, were called Statutes forever; whereupon the Jews stickle hard for the
perpetual and immutable Obligation of the Law of Moses for a perpetual and
immutable Dispensation; and thou that pleads for the continuance of Tithes,
from this, may by the same rule plead for the continuance of all, or most of
the Shadows of the Law, which were given by Statutes forever. Further, this
phrase (...) Forever, says Dr. Cave, in his Book called, Antiquitates
Apostolica: When it is applied unto God, it denotes Eternity; but when to other
things, it implies no more then a Periodical duration, limited according to
the mind of the Lawgiver. The Hebrew Servant was to have his Ear bored through
with an Awl, and he was to serve forever, Exodus 21.6. (which was but till the
end of his Life) Levit. 25.40.

Thus when Circumcision, Temple, Offerings, as other Ritual and Transient
Services of the Law, were called, Statutes forever; it is employed thereby, they
should be a long time obligatory, until the time of the Messiah, in whose days
the daily Sacrifices and Oblations were to be taken away, the Type giving place
to the thing typified, the Shadow to the Substance; then Paul preached against
Circumcision, the Passover outward; Stephen was stoned for bearing witness
against the Temple: Paul preached up Christ, the one Offering, the End and
Substance of all Jewish Offerings. Thus in the Life, Typical Shadows, though
called Statutes forever, were testified against; and Christ is the End of the
Heave-Offering-Tythe, as well as of all other typical and transient Offerings.

The Types of the Law (says Wilson, in his complete Christian-Dictionary) are
called Everlasting, because in Christ, the Antitype, the Substance of such
Types, they have a perpetual continuance. Thus the Types were commanded by an
Ordinance forever, to the Ever or Last Period of that transient Dispensation,
to give way to Christ, the Substance, in whom the thing signified by the Type
is continued, running parallel with the duration of the World.

4thly, The Levites were not to exact above the allowed Portion, the Levitical
Property and Right was bounded within a Levitical Compass; the Fatherless,
Widows and Strangers had a property in Tithes, as well as the Levites, Deuteronomy.
14. But now, Counterfeit Levites encroaching, and usurping the whole Tenths;
yea, all things considered, even the sixth or seventh part of the Kingdom; What
is this but grievous Oppression? An eating the Bread out of the Mouth of the
Fatherless, Widows and Strangers? A taking away the Sheaf from the Hungry? Job
24.10. Now if this Levitical order of Tything must continue, Why should not the
Fatherless, Widows and Strangers come in and claim their Right? If that
Inheritance, introduced in the Apostasy, must be continued, why should not the
Inheriters be thereto entitled? Why should the Right and Portion of
Fatherless, Widows and Strangers be devoured by ravenous Cormorants? Your
degeneration from the Levitical Institution is exceeding great: Many of you, I
say, not all, not only disdaining to be ranked with the Levitical Alms-men,
Fatherless, Widows and Strangers, and seizing upon their Property, but
extorting and exacting Dues, as you call them, from many that are Poor and
Indigent.

Ecclesiastical Histories sufficiently evidence, that after the falling away
from the primitive Faith, Purity and Order, Tithes came to be preached up, and
introduced under the specious pretenses of Charity, and Alms to the Poor: This
Doctrine being complied with, and people having liberty to bestow them where
and on whom they pleased, they were much disposed to give them to the Poor; at
which thing Pope Innocent the third, about the Year 1200. much stormed, and
greatly complained. Yea, and our English Parliaments being mindful of the Poor
and Indigent, for whose sakes Tithes were chiefly given, made diverse Laws in
the reign of Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, that a convenient
portion of the Tithes should be set a part for the Maintenance of the Poor of
the Parish forever: Yea, and Queen Elizabeth in the Year 1559. enjoined, That
all Parsons, Vicars, Pensionaries, Prebendaries, and other Beneficed men,
should distribute the fortieth part of their Benefices upon their poor
Parishioners.

Tithes formerly were accounted the Parish Goods, out of which the Priest was
to receive a moderate Maintenance for himself, then as a Steward faithfully to
distribute the rest to the Parish-poor, that Parishes might be exempted of
further Charge on that account: But selfish Priests, who under the specious
pretense of relieving the Poor, gradually wrought upon People to pay their
Tithes by little and little, to manifest their Bosom-intents, excluding the
Poor, and leaving them to the Mercy of the Parish, they seized on the whole for
their particular Uses, notwithstanding the Mosaical Institution, providing for
the Relief of Fatherless, Widows and Strangers, as well as for the Priest and
Levite, that the Husbandman might be at no further Charge on that account; and
notwithstanding our English Parliamentary Laws, the Poor have lost their
Property: The weakest (as the Proverb is) goes to the Wall.

Yet my intention is not by any thing here spoken, to justify the ritual
Observances of Moses in Gospel days, nor the Service and Maintenance of the
Jewish Priests and Levites; Perfection could not be by the Levitical
Priesthood, made by a Law, which because of its weakness and unprofitableness
was dissanulled, so to give way to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, whose
Priesthood is unchangeable, who perfects forever such as are sanctified; yea,
and the upholding of the first Priesthood, Work or Wage is Antichristian; but
something I have spoken to show how far they are from the Requirings of the
Levitical dispensation, though they run thither for shelter in the case of
Tithes, though in Gospel days.

CAP. XV. The Clergies Evangelical Title to their Exaction of Tithes, Examined
and Considered.
I Have formerly touched, that the Maintenance of the Gospel was free and
voluntary; and that neither Christ, who was Heir of all things, nor the
Apostles, who had his Mind, ever received Tithe, or taught the People to
receive the same; there was no mention thereof, while the primitive Church kept
the Faith, and the heavenly Doctrine received from his Mouth.

Antonius, the learned Bishop of Spalato, says, Christ himself, though Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and the fullness thereof, yet would not he be possessed of
great Lands and Incomes; he demanded not Tithes, though a Priest after the
order of Melchizedec, but while he went through Cities and Countries preaching
the Gospel, and his Disciples with him, several Woman that believed in him, as
Mary Magdalen, Joanna, Susanna, and others, did minister to him of their
Substance, Luke 8. And in sending out his Disciples, he bad them not to receive
Tithes, nor did he teach People to pay them, but he taught them to rely on
their Converts for necessary Supplies; saying, The Labourer is worthy of his
Meat, De Repub. Eccles. lib. 9. This Testimony is true and savoury.

Now, if you will have Tithes to be yours, jure divino, by divine Right, you
must prove your Authority from Christ, show a Gospel Ordinance for it; such as
pretend to be Ministers of Christ, ought to be content with what Christ
allotted his Ministers for their Service; if his Wages content you not, you are
not his Servants; you are his Servants, whose Wages you receive: If you receive
Moses Wages, you are Moses Servants, so must do his Work: Ministers of Christ
abide in the Doctrine of Christ; being Wisdom's Children, they justify Wisdom,
both her Call, Work and Wage; Christ, for Gospel Work, ordained a Gospel Wage;
he that will justly claim the one, must of necessity do the other; all Equity
to the Title of one, is founded in the Labor of the other.

He that pretends Title to an Estate, by virtue of a civil Qualification,
making his Claim from the Ground of Purchase, Heirship, Free-Gift,
Civil-Office, it is requisite, that he make good, prove, maintain his Claim by
Humane Laws, being suitable to the Nature of his Claim: So, you that make claim
to Tithes, by virtue of a spiritual Capacity, or religious Qualification, as
being Ministers of Christ Jesus, you ought to prove and maintain your Claim by
divine Laws, as being suitable to the Nature of your Claim. The Disciples,
Apostles, influenced from above, to the Discharge of their living Concern, were
to teach all that, and nothing but that which Christ commanded them, both in
Relation to the Call, Work and Maintenance, peculiar to the Gospel
Dispensation. So, prove Tithes, and your Co-ercive Settled Maintenance by the
Doctrine of Christ, else you transgress the royal Charter of Christ's
Commission to this Disciples, Apostles, etc.

Obj. Christ told the Scribes and Pharisees, That they ought to pay Tithes,
Mat. 23.23.

Answ. The Scribes and Pharisees were Jews, under the Levitical Ministration,
and they were bound to the payment thereof, while the Law that commanded the
same was in force; when Christ spoke that he was not then offered up, nor the
Handwriting of Ordinances blotted out, nor nailed to the Cross. Now to
entroduce to be read what Christ blotted out, or to go about to enliven what he
nailed to the Cross, it is Antichristian: When Christ was offered up, and the
Handwriting of Ordinances was blotted out, and he was revealed by his
spiritual appearance in his chosen Vessel Paul, this was his Doctrine; The
Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a Change also of the Law,
Heb. 7.12. Here is an express Repeal of that Law, by which the Assignation of
Tithes was made to the Priests and Levites. Further, Paul testified, saying,
There is verily a dissanulling of the Commandment going before, verse. 18. Here
it is evident, the Priesthood that took Tithes was changed, and the Law was
repealed, and the Commandment dissanulled, by which Tithes were assigned to
them, and by which they received them. Now it remains, that you that would be
accounted Gospel Ministers, do prove an Assignation of them by Christ, hic
labor, hoc opus est; do this, and the work is done.

In the mean time, consider the pregnant Testimony of Pareus on Genesis 28.22. who
having said, That Tithes before the Law were Free and Arbitrary; and that a man
might give them, vow them, or not, as he pleased; he added further, That Tithes
under the Law were commanded of God to be given to the Priests, Levites, and to
the Poor; therefore, faith he, the Levitical Priesthood ceasing, their Right to
Tithes ceased: Further, faith he, The Clergy now receive Tithes, not by a
divine, but by a humane Law: The same say we, that Tithes appertaining to the
Jewish Priesthood, ended with that Priesthood, as other its Appurtanances.
Tithes were proper and essential to the Tribe of Levi; so to assign them to the
Ministry of Christ, who sprang from ^udah, is to recall the Legal Service, and
in effect to make Christ of the Order of Aa^on.

The whole Tribe of Levi (says Aug. Marl. on the before alleged Scripture)
received no Possessions in the Land of Canaan, wherefore God ordained, that the
other Tribes should give them Tithes; therefore during their Service, the other
Tribes paid them Tithes, according to the Law; but that Priesthood being
changed, the Law was changed also: This said Aug. Marl. who taught that
necessaries should be ministered to all that were in need. The most candid
Writers have born testimony, that Tithes were proper and essential to the first
Priesthood, and ended with the same.

The Law forbad the outward Jew to wear a Garment mingled with Linen and
Woollen, Lev. 19. Now such as plead for Tithes in Gospel days, they confound
the Ordinances of the first and second Covenant together, not keeping Tithes
within the Bounds of its proper Ministration, but would have it in the second
Covenant, unto which it belongs not.

Obj. They which minister about holy things, that is, the Levites, live of the
things of the Temple, that is, of Tithes: And they which wait at the Altar,
that is, Jewish Priests, are partakers with the Altar, that is, Sacrifices and
Oblations; Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.

Answ. From this (EVEN SO) Tything-Ministers draw such a spurious Consequence,
as to squeeze out a Pariety or Identity of Maintenance between the Levitical
Priesthood and Gospel Ministers; that is, that Gospel Ministers were and are to
have the very same Maintenance, as by Tithes, etc. as the Jewish Priests and
Levites had; but these words clearly relate to the Maintenance which Christ had
ordained, not to the Jewish Way, Manner, Means or Mode of Maintenance; in
paraphrasing on these words, this clearly arises, that as the Jewish Priests
and Levites lived of the Maintenance allowed of God, and peculiar unto them for
their Service, so those that preach the Gospel must live of the Wage allowed of
by the Gospel, which was free and voluntary. Now such as plead for Tithes, such
would live of the Law, of the Maintenance of the Levites; so are not content
with Gospel Allowance: Neither Christ nor the Apostles looked back unto the
Levitical Wage.

Freely to receive what was Freely given, by those that received Christ's
Ministers and their Message, was the Provision that Christ assigned to his
Ministers, Luke 10.

In the Transfiguration of Christ Moses and Elias showed themselves; then the
Voice out of the Cloud was, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,
hear ye him, Mat. 17. Here they were taken from Moses and Elias, Law and
Prophets, to attend unto the Son; though Moses and Elias had allowed of a
Maintenance by Tithes, in their Day, in their respective Dispensations, yet the
Disciples were taken off Moses and Elias to hearken to the Son, who as he
called a Ministry, so he appointed them their Work, and assigned to them (...)
Wage, which was Free, Voluntary and Spontaneous from their Converts, from such
as received them and their Message, not by Tithe: Yea, and the Apostles stood
to Christ's Maintenance, oculo irretorto, with a chaste Eye, without looking
back unto the old transient Levitical Maintenance.

Again, If Gospel Ministers must live Even so, that is, have the same
Maintenance that the Jewish Priests and Levites had, then Ministers of the
Gospel must not have the Tenth, but the Tenth of the Tenth; they must also
bring in and plead for Jewish Oblations, Burnt Offerings, Bloody Sacrifices,
for even so the Jewish Priests lived, so deny Christ Jesus, the one Offering;
this unavoidably must be done, if this [Even So] imply an Identity or Pariety
of Maintenance between the Levitical Priesthood and Gospel Ministers, the which
I deny.

I remember Peter said unto Christ, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed
thee; What shall we have? Mat. 19.27. Christ answered him not, though there was
an occasion for it: If he either had or did intend to assign Tithes to his
Ministry, I say, he answered him not with an Even so as the Levitical
Priesthood had: He said not, Are you ignorant of this? as my Father assigned
Tithes to the Levites for their Service, so I assign them to you for your
Service; neither said he, You shall have Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues,
Mortuaries, Money for Funeral Sermons, for Marriages, for Burials, for Bread
and Wine, for Churching of Women, for Smoke passing up the Chimneys; he
assigned them no such Maintenance; but when the Curtain of Apostasy had
overspread Christendom, the Beast that had long plunged in the Sea, was risen
out of the Sea, the Man of Sin got into the Temple, he brought forth an
unwarrantable M^intenance, contrary to what Christ instituted; continued yet by
such as pretend Reformation.

Those that preach the Gospel must live of the Gospel, even so has the Lord
ordained; so that the Gospel Ministry is not without an Ordinance for their
Maintenance; and this Ordinance is of the Lord, excluding all Ordinances of
Apostatized men, of Popes and Earthly Powers; on that account, the Gospel
Ministry has an Ordinance for their Maintenance. Where is it? may some say. I
Answer; Christ sending out his Disciples, taught them to eat and drink such
things as their Converts set before them, saying, The Labourer is worthy of his
Hire: Here a Hire was appointed, free and voluntary from such as received them,
and here is an Ordinance for it. True it is, those that preach the Gospel must
live of the Gospel, on that Maintenance which has Gospel Allowance; living on
the Gospel is entailed on preaching the Gospel; no other Livelihood Wisdom's
Children justify, than what Christ ordained for his Ministers; and his
Ordinance was to eat and drink, receive Necessaries of their Converts. But
Man-made Ministers are for living of the Law, and of the Gifts, Grants and
Donations of Apostatized Powers, and of such as supposed or suppose the same
Due. To what has been spoken, I may add two or three Testimonies.

They do live of the Gospel (says Prosper) who will he Propriators of nothing,
who neither have, nor desire to have any thing, not possessing their own, but
the common Goods. What is it to live of the Gospel (says he) but that he who
labors should receive necessary Supplies by them among whom he labors,
without forcing any? Prosper de vitae Contemp. lib. 2. cap. 4.

Further, says he, Though Paul himself had Power, yet he would not make use of
it, lest he should create an Offense, but labored with his Hands, being a
Tent-maker, that he might not be burthensom to the Churches of Christ

Cyril of Alexandria speaking of that passage of Abram, Genesis 14.23. Who having
gained Victory over the King of Sodom's Enemies, and rescued Lot, the King
offered him part of the Spoil, he received nothing but a few Victuals, etc.
Though (says Cyril) the holy Teachers do War in the behalf of perishing
Mankind; yet do they not take any thing from the men of the World, neither do
they heap up Riches, lest the World should say, I have made you Rich: They only
ought to receive their Sustenance from the Hands of those whom they have
benefitted: For Christ commanded (says he) that he who Preaches the Gospel,
should live thereby, Cyril de Adorat. in Spir. and verit. Lib. 4.

They live of the Gospel, says Poole on this place, who live of that
Maintenance, which the Church gives to her Ministers, for their preaching of
the Gospel; they must not hord up Treasures, intimating that Superfluous things
are to be sought, and those things which tend to a vain Pomp and regal Excess.

When Paul avouched, that the Lord ordained that they that Preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel, he seems to have regard unto what the Lord said; The
Workman is worthy of his Meat, Aug. Marl.

Neither Christ nor the Apostles ever ordained any other Maintenance for
Gospel Ministers, then what was Free and Voluntary, and that from such as
received them and their Message: Now they who repeal this, and in the room
thereof violently intrude the compulsive exaction of Tithes, and that as well
from them that receive them not, as from those that receive them; such Preach
another Gospel, such Paul pronounced Anathema.

Obj. Here, that is in Gospel-dayes, Men that dye receive Tithes, but there he
receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives, Heb. 7.8.

Answ. In the Scripture the Word [Here] is abused and wrested, as the Words
[Even So] are abused and mis-interpreted by many; in this place the Apostle is
exalting the Priesthood of Christ above the Priesthood of Levi, showing that
Melchizedec was greater then Abram; here men that dye receive Tithes, this
relates to the Levites, who by the command of the Lord received Tithes, and
dyed; but there he receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives; this
relates to Melchizedec, who received Tithes of Abram, of whom it is written,
that He was without Father, without Mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of Days, nor end of Life, but made like unto the Son of God, abides
a Priest continually, Heb. 7.3. And Christ is a Priest forever after the Order
of Melchizedec. So that this place makes nothing for the continuance of Tithes
in Gospel-dayes, relating to Levi and Melchizedec.

Aug. Marl. touches this, saying, They, to whom the Law assigned Tithes, were
mortal men; and to whom did the Law assign Tithes? To the Levites. So when the
Apostle said, Here men that dye receive Tithes, he related to the Levites, to
that Priesthood that was to be abrogated, that a Priesthood of a higher Nature
might be established.

The Apostles sent by Christ, a Priest forever after the Order of Melshizedec,
who were to teach all Nations, to observe all that he commanded them; Mark, All
and every thing, and nothing else, according to my reading in Scripture, and
sound Ecclesiastical History, never taught any, that the Maintenance of the
Gospel Ministry was to be by way of Tithes; which may sufficiently evidence
that that Levitical course of Maintenance was not in the Charter of their
Embassage and Commission, to be perpetuated in Gospel days.

CAP. XVI. Tithes proved to be a Mosaical Shadow.
Obj. IF Christ put an and to Tithes, more then to any outward property, then
Tithe must be a peculiar Figure of something to come: If Tithe was a Type, what
was the Antitype thereof?

Answ. Nehemiah reforming Abuses in the Jewish Church, appointed;

1st, Treasuries, a figure of Jesus Christ that inexhaustible Treasury.

2dly, Tithe, as of Corn, Wine, Oil, was the Earthly Treasure brought into
Nehemiah's Treasuries; this earthy Treasure figured forth the Heavenly
Treasures in Christ Jesus; for in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge. So Tithe, the earthly Treasure, in the earthly Treasuries, pointed
at the heavenly Treasures in Christ Jesus the heavenly Treasury, in whom is
Corn, Bread that strengthens, Wine that comforts and refreshes, Oil that makes
truly glad.

3dly, Shelemiah, by Interpretation, The Peace of God; Zadock, that is, Just;
Pedaiah, that is, by Interpretation, The Lords Redeemer; These being made
Treasurers, distributed of Tithe, the earthly Treasures to their Brethren,
outward Jews: So Christ Jesus the Peace of God, the holy and just One, the
Redeemer of God, he distributes of the heavenly Treasures, Bread, Wine, Oil,
living Mercies, heavenly Blessings, to his little Flock, inward Jews, Nehem.
13. Who are of God they see Nehemiah's Treasuries, Treasures and Treasurers, to
be Shadows, Figures, Types, fulfilled in the Substance Christ Jesus, the second
Adam, a quickening Spirit, who said, He shall receive of mine, and show it unto
you, John the 16th. The true and faithful Remembrancer.

In the days of Malachi, the outward Jews had a Storehouse, into which Tithe
was to be brought, that there might be Meat in the Lord's House, Mal. 3. This
Storehouse, into which Tithe, the Earthly Store was brought, was a Figure, a
Type of Christ Jesus, the Substance, the Heavenly Storehouse, in whom all
fullness dwells, who distributes of heavenly Riches to the Israel of God, Col.
1.19.

Out of Tithes, the earthly Treasures, earthly Store, the Necessities of the
outward Jews, Levites, Fatherless, Widows and Strangers were answered and
supplied, Deuteronomy. 14. that there might be no Beggar in Israel, no Complaint of
want. So out of the heavenly Treasures, heavenly Store in Christ Jesus, the
Substance, the Necessities of all inward Jews are answered; so that among such
as have recourse to this Treasury, this Storehouse, there is no Complaint, no
Poverty, no Leanness of Soul; in him are Soul-enriching Treasures, John 14.2.
John 4.14.

Again, Paul spoke of Tithes in Abram's days, Heb. 7. And of Tithes in Levi's
days, of the Priesthood, Law, and Carnal Commandment; then says expressly,
That Christ Jesus the high Priest was the Sum of the things whereof they had
spoken, Heb. 8.1. If any should have enquired, What have you spoken of Paul? He
answers of Tithe in Abram's day, of Tithes in Levi's days, of the Priesthood,
Sacrifices for Sin, Carnal Commandment; and further says, that Christ is the
Sum of all this: Who are of God, they see Christ the Substance of the aforesaid.

Canaan, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, with pure Springs, Vineyards,
Oliveyards and Corn, was the Lord's, wherewith he fed the outward Israelites,
Levit. 25.23. So the Christ of God, his Flesh is Meat indeed, Blood Drink; he
has in his spiritual Storehouse heavenly Milk, Honey, hidden Manna Bread,
Water of Life, heavenly Grapes, Oil of gladness for his Spiritual Israelites,
Sons and Daughters of Abraham, and nourishes them to Eternal Life.

Melchizedec was but a Type of the everlasting Order, shadowing out the Eternal
high Priest, Christ Jesus; Christ was not the Melchizedec, but after the
Similitude of Melehizedec; if after the Similitude, Shadow or Type, then
Melchizedec could not be the Substance, the thing typified: for the thing
similating, cannot be the thing similated: So that Abram gave Tithe to
Melchizedec, made like unto the Son of God, a Figure, Shadow, Type. Now the
Priesthood of Christ must needs be the End, Sum, Substance of the Shadow; which
Substance being come, the Shadow with all its appurtenances, whereof Tithe was
one, must vanish and be of no longer force: The paying of that which was proper
and peculiar to the Similitude or Type, shows that the Similitude or Type is
still in force: So the Substance not come; for while the Shadow is in force,
there is no place for the Substance; therefore the exaction of Tithes for the
Ministers of the everlasting high Priest, is a denial of Christ come in the
Flesh.

Again, all the Tithe of the Land, whether of the Seed of the Land, or of the
Fruit of the Tree, it was the Lord's, it was Holy unto the Lord; hereby Priest,
Levite and the Poor were relieved, Levit. 27. A Type of Christ, the Substance,
who was called the Holy thing, in whom the Obedient are sanctified, nourished,
transformed by the renewing of their minds, a living Sacrifice unto God.

Again, Tithe, or at the least some part thereof, was an Heave Offering,
offered unto the Lord, Numb. 18. A Shadow, a Figure, (says Wilson in his
complete Christiain Dictionary) as other Oblations were. So that the pleading
for this Jewish Offering, is a denial of Christ to be come in the Flesh; and
you may as well plead for the Meat Offering, Sin-Offering, Burnt-Offering
Trepass Offering, Wave-Offering, as for the Heave Offering in Gospel-days.

I have showed my Judgment, that Tithe was a legal Type, Figure or Shadow,
peculiar unto the Ministration of Moses, and that it terminated with that
Ministration; I might add the Judgment of many, several of whom have been
eminent in the Protestant Church, who have spoken to the same purpose.

The payment of Tithes (says Fulke) as it was a Ceremonial duty, it is
abrogated with other Ceremonies by the Death of Christ. On Heb. 7.4.

Further, neither did Christ our high Priest ever make claim unto Tithes, nor
his Apostles, Minister of the Church, but only to a sufficient living by the
Gospel, to be allowed of their temporal Goods, to them from whom they had
received Spiritual things. Fulke on the same.

Walter Brute, a valiant opposer of Popery, showed that Tithes were Ceremonial,
and that the Law was abrogated, by which they were due to the Levites; his
Testimony is, I marvel that you learned Men do say, That Christian Folk are
bound to this small Ceremony of the payment of Tithes. For a Conclusion, he
says, Seeing that neither Christ nor any of the Apostles commanded to pay
Tithes, it is evident neither by the Law of Moses, nor by Christ's Law,
Christian People are bound to pay Tithes, but by the Tradition of Men they are
bound. Fox. Acts and Mon.

The Quota, or tenth part (says Melaneton) is founded on the Ceremonial and
Judicial Law, which Laws are proper to Moses Polity, and belong not to us,
seeing God has utterly destroyed it. De Lib. Christian. page 303.

Epiphanius, about the Year 380. intimated that Tithes and Circumcision were a
like Ceremonial: He mentions Tenths for one of his instances of legal Shadows,
making them equal with Circumcision. Lib. 1. Ord. 8.

Oecolampadius on Ezekiel. 44. ranks Sacrifices, first Fruits and Tithes
altogether, making them equal with Circumcision, and calls them expressly
Ceremonial.

The Bohemians, sound Protestants, in their Testimony against the Popish
Clergy, said thus, They receive Tithes of men, and preach, that men are bound
to pay them; but therein they say falsely, for they cannot prove by the New
Testament, that Jesus Christ commanded it, nor the Apostles, neither did they
receive them. This Precept of the Law (say they) had an end by Christ, as the
precept of Circumcision: Christ said, Give Alms of those things that remain;
but he said not, Give the Tenth of the Goods which ye possess. This is the sum
of their Testimony on that account.

Andrew Willet, a stout opposer of Popery, in the reign of King James, called
the Law of Tithes Ceremonial, acknowledging, That men are not necessarily bound
by the Law of God to pay Tithes now. Further, he says, That the payment of
Tithes was a wise and politic Constitution, and might conveniently be
retained; yet it is not now of necessity imposed upon Christians, as though no
other Provision for the Church could serve but that, Willets Synops. Papismi.
page 314, 315. He acknowledges Tithes to be Ceremonial, and proves them ended
with the legal Priesthood: So that, though Maintenance it self be Moral, yet
the mode or manner of that Maintenance, as by Sacrisices, Oblations, Tithes,
first Fruits, etc. may be Ceremonial, Hebrews 7.5; 12. An absolute Repeal of
that Law which gave Tithes, as of the Priesthood, to whom, by that Law they
were given.

To conclude, Hales, Aquinas, Henricus de Grandavo, R. de Media Villa, Cardinal
Cajetan, John Mayer, Suarez, Malder, and others said, That the tenth part paid
by the Tribes to Levi, was rather Ceremonial then Moral, and wherein the
Ceremoniality of it lies, the clearly seeing Eye cannot but discern.

CAP. XVII. Of the Clergies Humane Title unto the Exaction of Tithes.
THe Patriarchal, Levitical and Evangelical Claim not securing in order to the
property of Tithes, not a few betake themselves to a humane Claim, as unto an
impregnable Fortress, and such as have recourse unto man, for a ground to
justify them in the Possession thereof, their pleas are various.

Some plead the Decrees, Canons and Constitutions of General Councils, Popes,
Bishops, Convocations, saying, That Tithes are due, jure Eeclesiastico. Others
plead the Gifts of Kings and Princes. Others plead the temporal Laws of Kings,
Parliaments, etc. Others plead the perticluar Gifts, Appropriation or Donation
of the former Owners of the Land. Others plead a Right by purchase.

I Answer; These Claims have been perticularly answered, and that again and
again: So I say in the general, How can humane Laws made for the payment of
Tithes, since Christ came in the Flesh, bind the Conscience of any man? Seeing
the end, scope, purpose, intent and tendency of those Laws are for the
establishment of that which Christ put an End unto, whose prerogative it is, to
have Rule, Regiment, Government in all, where the Mystery of Faith is held in a
pure Conscience.

Gods own Law for the payment of Tithes to the Levites, being dissanulled by
Christ, and its burden of typical Appurtenances abolished: Who is Man that
makes a Law in that place, where God dissanulled his own? Who has empowered
man to raise a compulsary Maintenance, it being Christ's Maintenance? for his
Ministry was free and voluntary.

After Austin brought the Romish Faith and Doctrine into this Nation, upon what
strange accounts Tithes came to be set up and established, I have in some
measure touched, and further and.

Athelstane, King of the West- Saxons, about the Year 940 to pacify the Ghost
of his murdered Brother Edwin, to whose Death he is said to have consented,
underwent seven Years Penance, built certain Monasteries, and made a Law for
the payment of Tithes, hoping thereby to expiate his Sins. Fox Acts and Mon.

King Edgar, cruel to Citizens, a deflowrer of Virgins, concerned in the Act of
shedding the Blood of Earl Ethelwold, that he might enjoy Elfrida his Wife; to
expiate his Sins, about the Year 959. he confirmed the payment of Tithes, built
and prepared several Monasteries and Nunneries.

Canutus, the first Danish King, being guilty of the Blood of Edward and
Edmund, Sons of Ironfide, Heirs to the Crown, about the Year 10.6. confirmed
Tithes, and built the Abbey of St Bennet in Norfolk and in Suffolk, and the
Monastery of St Edmund, whom he dreadfully feared, being often affirighted by
the apparition of his Ghost; for which cause, as also to expiate the Sins of
his Fathers, he Confirmed Tithes. See Osburns Case of Tithes.

Upon such accounts as these, and other Idolatrous ends, the grand Oppression
and Antichristian exaction of Tithes, had entrance into our English Church,
professing Christianity; and such Donations as these are pleaded, yea, and by
such as would be accounted Reformers from the Delusions of mystical Babylon,
from the Dregs of the apostatized seven-hilled City, and her Adherents; yea,
and such Donors were and are reckoned as Nursing Fathers to the Christian
Church: And such as strengthen themselves for the maintaining of that grand
Oppression, have the Language of Peter in their Mouths, against such as are
Witnesses against the same; Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.

I Answer; If Obedience should have been given to all Ordinances of men without
limitation, Idolatrou^ Consequences would have followed, as Histories,
Ecclesiastical and Civil inform us.

Then had the Children of Israel been oftener found guilty of Idolatry, through
actual Obedience to the apostatized Kings of Israel and Judah.

Then had Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego forsaken the living God, and have
worshipped the Golden Image of Nebuchadnezzar.

Then had Daniel committed Idolatry in making his application to the Heathen
King Darius, instead of the living God.

Then had the pure Current of the everlasting Gospel been stopped: For the
Apostles were commanded not to teach in the Name of Jesus, Acts 4.

Then had not the Woman, that fate upon the Scarlet-colored Beast, been made
drunk with the Blood of Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: For
if these Saints and Martyrs had, and should yield actual Obedience to the
Ordinances of men, they had, and should cut off the occasion of Suffering for
their Testimonies.

Then had not the two Witnesses Prophesied one Thousand two Hundred and Sixty
Days clothed in Sackcloth.

I say, Obedience is to be given to those Ordinances of man for the Lords sake,
which are of a Civil nature and concern, for the punishment of Evildoers, and
for the Praise of them that do well; but when Civil Authority usurps the Power
of Christ, the Lawgiver, to, of, and in the Church, and imposes Laws and
Ordinances contrary to Truth and Conscience, herein not active, but passive
Obedience is to be yielded: The said Peter clears this point, who (the Rulers
commanding them not to teach in the Name of Jesus) answered boldly to this
purpose, They were to hearken to God rather then to men, Acts 4.

On this Scripture our Countryman Poele says well, We are bound by the
Command of God, to speak what we have seen and heard; yea, and the truly
re-born of Water, and of the Spirit are to contend for the Call, Work and Wage
of the Primitive Ministry, when men do, or would set up the contrary.

Polyearpus, in the Morning of Christianity, said, We have learned to give that
Honor to earthly Powers which is meet, and which hinders not our Salvation.

Musonius said well, If any one obey not his Father or his Prince, commanding
unlawful things, he is neither Disobedient, nor Injurous, nor a Sinner herein.

When Julian gave orders to his Soldiers, that were Christians, to take up
Arms against Christians, they would not obey, as Ambrose has related: Oh, that
the Professors of Christianity now would consider this! How far they are
degenerated; how the Spirit o^ Meekness, Love and Gentl^ness is dis-throned,
and the Spirit of Envy, Cruelty and Bloodshed is inthroned, wherein such as
profess Christianity, fall by the Hands of one another, as Leaves from Trees at
the approach of Autumn.

Now you that reject and dispute against the Evangelical Ordinance of free and
voluntary Contribution, and violently intrude the Co-ercive exaction of Tithes,
and other things, and that from the Laws, Canons, Decrees, Decretals and
Constitutions of men, let me in soberness Reason a little with you.

Jacob in the Word of Prophecy foretold of the coming of Shiloh, saying, Unto
him shall the gathering of the People be, Genesis 49.10. Or as some render it, To
him shall the Obedience of the People be. Or as the Septuagint renders it. He
shall be the expectation of the Nations. Now you that plead for Tithes in
Gospel-days, and that from the Ordinances of man, your gathering is not unto
Shiloh, nor your Obedience, neither is your reliance upon him; but your
gathering and obedience is unto man, your reliance is upon the Sons of men,
from whom you have your Tithes, Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues, Mortuaries,
Money for Funeral Sermons, Burials, Marriages, Churching of Women, Peter Pence,
now called, Reek-pennies, Smoke-pennies, etc.

Again, Moses the man of God Prophesied of the coming of the great Prophet,
saying, Unto him shall you hearken in all things, Deuteronomy. 18. who taught a free
and voluntary Maintenance. Now the beforementioned things show, that you
hearken not to him, but to the Canons, Constitutions, Decrees and Decretals of
men, from whom you have received your manner of Maintenance.

Again, Christ said, Learn of me, Matthew. 11. But he giving no Lessons for the
aforesaid, you have learned them of men, and plead for the same.

Again, Christ said of the Scribes and Pharisees, In vain they do worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men, Matthew. ^5.9. You are found in
their Steps, vain Worshippers, making void the Gospel-Ordinance, of free and
voluntary Contribution, preaching up the Commands, Canons, Decrees,
Constitutions of men, from which muddy Lake you derive your Tithes and
compulsary Maintenance.

Again, Christ sending forth his Disciples, said, Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, etc. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded
you, Matthew. 28. Consider this, they were to teach all that Christ commanded
them, and nothing else; not what apostatized Powers should command or impose:
Here the Decrees, Canons, Laws and Constitutions of men, setting up that which
Christ put an end unto, and forcing a Maintenance, are excluded.

Again, the Apostle Paul preached, that Christ should have Preeminence in all
things, Col. 1.18. If in all things, then in the concern of the Maintenance of
the Gospel Ministry. Now such as slight the free and voluntary Maintenance of
the Gospel, and plead for Tithes and a compulsary Maintenance, such would have
man to have Pre-eminence, such are Ministers of man. Christ said to the Jews,
If you were of Abraham, you would do the Works of Abraham. So may I say, If you
were of Christ, you would do the Works of Christ, and be content with his
allowance: John bare record, saying, Whosoever transgresses, and abides not
in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God, 2 John 9. And such as are without God,
they are Hetrodox, Heretical, yea, Atheistical; and such as stand to man's
Maintenance, and not Christ's, they are in Transgression.

Did not Christ say, that all Power in Heaven and in Earth was committed to
him? Is not he endued with Sovereign Power? Was not he appointed of the Father
to be Lawgiver to, of, and in the Church? Did not Paul foretell of a departure
from the Faith, an Apostasy? and that the man of Sin should be revealed, that
he should sit in the Temple of God, in the Church, and show himself to be God?
This is the great Antichrist. Now they that deny the Gospel-Ordinance, which
was free and voluntary, and plead for Tithes, and for a compulsary Maintenance
introduced by man, such deny Christ to be Lawgiver to, of, and in the Church:
And what is that Spirit that introduces a Maintenance contrary to the
Gospel-Maintenance? Of the man of Sin, of Antichrist, who is against Christ his
Call, Work and Wage, and has a Call, Work and Wage of his own.

Do not Protestant Writers say, That the Beast and his ten Horns is the Pope
and Popish Kings? And by what has been spoken, it may appear how Tithes came
into Churches professing Christianity, and a Compulsary Maintenance. Now is it
honorable for, or besseming such as pretend to be Ministers of Christ, to have
no Command nor Example from Christ for what they act, but from the Beast and
his Horns, the Pope and his Auxilliaries? Do they not offer great affront to
Christ, who establish that which he dissanulled? Now if every Ordinance of man,
of what Nature so ever, must be submitted to, strange Consequences might
follow; then if one and the same Individual Person should remove into twenty
several Nations of different Religions, he is bound to hoist up his Sails to
all these Winds, to comply with the Worship of every respective Nation, if the
Supreme Authority command it.

Having touched, that no Patriarchal Act, nor the Levitical, nor Evangelical
Dispensations, nor Ordinances of man, can assure Tithes to Gospel Ministers, as
truly such, I may subjoyn a few Testimonies of men eminent in the Church since
the Apostles days, who in their Respective Ages bare Testimony against the
grand Oppression of Tithes, and other things.

The Teachers of the Waldenses (says a certain Inquisitor) are Weavers,
Tailors; they increase not Riches, but are content with Necessaries, Usher de
Succes. Eeclesia. These Waldenses were a People of great Sincerity and Godly
Simplicity in their day, and endured fiery Trials, storms of Persecutions for
their Testimony against the Romish Faith.

Gildas speaking of the British Clergy being Locusts come out of the Smoke,
said, They are Pastors in name, but indeed Wolves; not called to, but seizing
on the Ministry as a Trade, not as a spiritual Charge, seeking after
Preferments and Degrees in the Church, more than after Heaven, and so gained;
make it their whole study to keep them by any Tyranny. And what sufferings are
in this our day for the Denial of Tithe, what Imprisonments, what Havoc and
Spoil is and has been made, I need say nothing; the Statute of T^ible Damage
has been leaned to, as if it were from Heaven, and not of men.

The Waldenses (says Bishop Usher) gave Testimony, That Ministers ought to be
poor, content with the free Benevolence of the People. The Papists (says this
Usher) judged this a pestilent and damnable Opinion. And many that would be
accounted Reformed Churches approve not of it; Primitive Christianity had other
thoughts of it, their Maintenance being free and voluntary.

These Waldenses, on a certain account testified, saying, We are not ashamed of
our Ministers, in that they labor with their hands, seeking a Maintenance
according to their Ability, because the Doctrine and Example of the Apostles
allows of this thing, Usher de Succes. Ecclesiae.

Further; this Usher affirms, That these Waldenses condemned all the Clergy,
because of their Idleness, saying, They ought to labor with their Hands, as
the Apostles did.

Robert Abbot of Molisme in Burgundy persuaded his own Disciples, To live with
their handy Labor, and to forsake Tithes and Oblations.

The Bohemians descended from the Waldenses, professed, That all Ministers
ought to be poor, and to be content with the Free Gift of the People, Aen. Syl.
in his Bohemian History.

The Dominicans and Franciscans taught, That Tithe was not due by Divine Right,
nor a necessary duty to Gospel Ministers; but that they might be detained and
disposed of at the Owners pleasure, especially if the Pastor did not well
perform his Office.

'Twas generally the judgment of the Wickliffians, as of the Waldenses and
Bohemians, being all Protestants, That Ministers ought to be poor, and content
with the free Gifts of the People, Aen. Syl. his Bohemian History.

John Wickliff, whose works are much esteemed by Protestants in England and
Bohemia, whose Bones were taken up and burnt by Papists forty one years after
his Death, gave Testimony in this manner: That,

Tithes were and are a free Gift, as among the Christians, and only pure Alms;
and that Parish oners might for the Offense of their Curates, detain and keep
them back, and bestow them upon others at their own Will and Pleasures, Fox
Acts and Mon.

John Hus burnt at Constance for his Testimony, said thus; The Clergy are not
Lords and Possessors of Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical Goods, which are
freely given, but only Stewards; and after the necessity of the Clergy is once
satisfied, they ought to be bestowed on the Poor: and if the Clergy do abuse
the same, they are Thieves, and Robbers, and Sacriledges Persons; and except
they do Repent by the just judgment of God, they are to be condemned, Fox Acts
and Mon.

At the Reformed Church in Geneva they live upon free Gifts, and Tithes of all
sorts are taken up for the use of the State, and said up for the public
Treasury.

William Thorp, Martyr, being complained of by the Popish Clergy, was brought
to Examination in the year 1407. being accused before Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of England, as against diverse other
abuses crept into the Church, so also against Tithes he gave faithful
Testimony, saying:

In the New Law, neither Christ nor his Apostles ever took Tithe of the People,
neither commanded they the People to pay Tithe: And Christ and his Apostles
preached the Word of God to the People, and lived of pure Alms, or free Gifts;
and after Christ's Assention, when the Apostles had received the Holy Spirit,
they traveled, laboring with their Hands, not to be Chargeable.

Further, says he, Tithes were given in the old Law to Levites and Priests,
but our Priests come not of Levi, ergo, by the Law our Priests cannot challenge
Tithes; for as the Priesthood is changed, so is the Law; but since Christ, in
the time of his Ministry, and also his Apostles, lived by pure Alms, or else by
the Labors of their Hands; for the Servant is not greater than his Lord. At
which words, the Bishop said unto him, God's Curse have you, and mine, for thus
teaching.

Further, William Thorp said, Those Priests that do take Tithes, they deny
Christ to be come in the Flesh. Further, bearing Testimony against the
Covetousness and Pride of the Priests: The Bishop answered, By God, I deem him
more meek that goes every day arrayed in his Scarlet Gewn, than thou in thy
Thredbare blew Gown: Language not savouring of a primitive Bishop, but of an
Apostate Lording Bishop, Fox Acts and Mon.

William Swinderby testified to this purpose, If Parishioners pay Tithes to
wicked Priests or Curats, they are guilty before God of upholding them in their
Sins and Evil Deeds. Further, says he, Christ's Law commands to minister freely
to the People; the Pope with his Law ^ells or Money: Christ's Law teaches his
Priests to be Poor; the Pope justifies and maintains Priests to be Lords, Fox
Acts and Mon.

Walter Brute testified, as appears by the Articles charged against him; 1st,
That no man is bound to pay Tithes in Gospel times. 2dly, If any Priest receive
any thing by way of Bargain or yearly Stipend, in so doing he is a Schismatic,
and accursed. 3dly, That if we be bound to pay Tithes in Gospel times, then are
we Debtors to keep the whole Law; for he that was the End of one part was the
end of the whole. 4thly, Seeing that neither Christ, nor any of his Apostles
commanded to pay Tithes, it is manifest and plain, that neither by the Law of
Moses, nor by the Law of Christ Christians are bound to pay Tithes, but by man's
Traditions, Fox Acts and Mon. A Sound Testimony and true, but opposed by Man
made Ministers.

About the year 1431. Lodovicus, a man much praised for Constaney and Wisdom,
said to the Clergy; If you were true Bishops and true Pastors of Souls, you
would not doubt to put your Lives in hazard for your Sheep, neither be afraid
to shed your Blood for the Church in the Cause of Christ; but at this present,
says he, it is too rare to find a Prelate which does not prefer his
Temporalities before his Spiritualities; with the Love whereof they are so
withdrawn, that they study rather to please Princes than God, etc. Aen. Syl.
his History of the Council of Basil.

Pareus speaking of the drying up the River Euphrates, brings in the judgment
of his Anonymus, that is, Nameless Author, which he approves of, which is:

That the preaching of the Gospel does and shall cause men to take away all
Temporal Things, that is, Possessions, and Earthly Dominion from the Clergy,
and they shall no more be given them. Herein I accord with him, that as far as
the Virtue and Power of the Gospel truly renews, transforms and changes men, so
far 2 Faithful and Living Testimony shall be born to the Free and Voluntary
Maintenance of the Gospel, and against the Antichristian Maintenance by Tithes,
and other Groundless, Scriptureless, Co-ercive Maintenance, Truth prevailing,
this shall be scoured away.

It is against the holy Scripture (says Wickliff) for Churchmen to have
Possessions.

Gerardus Sagarellus, who lived before Wickliff's time, denied a divine Right
to Tithes in Gospel days.

Erasmus boldly affirmed, That the common exacting of Tithes by the Clergy, in
his Time, was no better than Tyranny.

In Augustin's time it was no general Law nor Custom in the Church, that Tithes
should be paid; Willet's Synopsis of Popery.

When the Disciples (says Walter Brute) said to Christ, Behold, we have left
all, and have followed thee; what shall we have? He answered not thus, Tithes
shall be paid you; neither did he promise them a Temporal, but an Everlasting
Reward in Heaven; for Food and Apparel he taught his Disciples not to be
careful: Paul right-well remembering his Doctrine, gave Timothy this
Instruction; Having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content, Fox Acts and
Mon.

Primitive Non-payment of Tithes (says one) is a pregnant Argument, that they
did not understand Tithes to be appointed by Christ for his Ministers; He that
knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many Stripes.

Had it been (says Seldom of Tithes) the Apostles Ordinance, or the Use of the
Church in the Primitive Times, Origin, Tertullian and Cyprian could not have
been so silent in it.

Is it likely (says he) that all the old Councils, from thence, till near six
Hundred Years after Christ, which have special Canons for the Lands and Goods
possessed by the Church, etc. could have omitted the Name of Tenths, if either
such Use, or Apostolical Law had preceeded?

Some of the aforesaid, for their Testimony against Tithes, as against other
Errors, Heresies, Superstition and Idolatry of Italian Babylon, suffered in
Flames, as Histories demonstrate.

To draw to a Conclusion; By what has been said, it is apparent to all seeing
Eyes, that according to Christ's Doctrine, the Apostles were not to receive any
thing, but from such as received them, and their Doctrine, from such as reaped
their Spiritual Things. But now, all that are found within the Limits,
Precincts, Bounds of such or such a Parish, first set up by the Pope and his
Emissaries, after ratified by Earthly Princes, whether Believers or
Unbelievers, Profane, Schismatics, Heretics, Excommunicated Persons; yea,
such as they will Curse, and give up to Satan, of these they will have Tithes,
Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues, Mortuaries, Oblations, Smoke-Money, which
they claim as Due, being introduced by Apostatized men; bringing for a Cloak,
He that preaches the Gospel, must live of the Gospel; when as the Gospel
warrants no such thing. In the Apostles time they had places of Worshop, where
Jews gathered from Jewdaism, and Gentiles from Gentilism, met together to
Worship God in Spirit and in Truth; yet no man was limited to this or that
Place, nor to pay to such or such a Place, or minister so much per annum; these
Anti-evangelical, Antichristian Customs crawled out of the Apostolical Womb,
Honorius, who succeeded Austin at Canterbury, about the Year 630. divided his
Province into Parishes, as Seldom of Tithes, chap. 9. says.

THE END.

