THE ASCENT TO THE Mount of Uision; Where many Things were shown, CONCERNING I.
The First Resurrection; II. The State of Separated Souls; III. The Patriarchal
Life; IV. The Kingdom of CHRIST: With an Account of the Approaching Blessed
State of This Nation.

Prove. 29. 18. Where there is no Vision the People perish.

London, Printed in the Year, 1699.

THE PREFACE^
To the Holy Inspired Saints, who are made partakers of the Heavenly Gift and
Revelation of the Divine Mysteries.
TO you who under Wisdom's Discipline have been taught and exercised (more
principally) is this little Tract Commended; as knowing you are in a deeper
Capacity to receive, and take in, these weighty Treasures of the Kingdom; which
you will find have been broken up, in order to be a sure Foundation in this
latter Age. Wherein the Children of the Divine Mysteries shall have their first
admittance into this Holy Mount, where their Lot shall be to Inherit, and
Possess, those precious things contained therein. Which indeed are so Great, so
Rich, so Immense, as nothing less than God himself shall your All-filling
Substance be; still abounding in unmeasurable Degrees, as in passive Meekness
you do attend and wait in the inward Court: where new and fresh. Springs of
Revelation shall open, and make known the Wonders that are now approaching. In
order whereunto as a forerunner the Spirit of Prophecy has now gone forth, to
signifi there is a Call to the four Quarters of the Earth, the Gates of the
Everlasting Mount being set open, that whosoever can understand and discorn
this time, and day of God's great Love-Visitation, may now draw near and hear
what great Secrets are Published from this Mount of Vision, which will not fail
to have their fulfilling in, and upon, such who is the Spirit of Faith essenced
are; But unto others who are unbelieving, it is not to be marvelled at that they
excluded are from all these Royal Perogatives, and great Immunities relating to
Divine openings and Renemed Manifestations of what has hitherto reserved been
in the Wisdom and Counsel of God. Wherefore according to the experience of this
Author, Unmeasurable are the renewed Gifts and Powers hereof. And I can not
therefore but excite and persuade all into whose hands this may come, to keep
close to that Anointing which will be an Intelligencer, and Opener of the mind
of Eternal Wisdom. In which (as in a clear Glass) may be known, and seen, what
is expedient for some in every Age to be acquainted with; God not being limited
to those foregoing Ages of time, (in which his mind in the Truth of the Spirit
was made known:) but the line of his Spirit does still continue, and extend it
self to an unconfined length, till it have fathomed the deepest Deep, even GOD
himself.

Now I am not Ignorant of the many Censures that may be passed by the
Unlearned, who are altogether Strangers to the Spirits Ministration and divine
Revelation: from such I expect no better Treatment than to be Judged as one
gone from the Traditions generally received; especially in the part which
treats of the various Regions of Souls Departed, it seeming a new Discovery.
But as to this I shall give no other Satisfaction, than that it was discovered
from the Central Light, and Original Copy, wherein the mind of God was made
known unto me, in these things; which are now no longer to be concealed, or
shut up, but are to have their use and service throughout the whole Creation:
that so none may be disappointed or frustrated of what they expect in a Future
State, but may strive whilst in the Body to work out their Salvation with fear
and trembling.

As to the third Mystery unfolded in this Treatise, to wit, the Arrivement to
the Patriarchal Age, which was before the Flood, and is again to be renewed in
Righteousness: (as contrarily that was in Wickedness and Vanity of Mind) Christ
being to Revive in the Souls of such as shall be counted worthy to Personate
his Reign upon the Earth, in his own purity. For the attainment of which
perfect State i^ is necessary there should be length of Days. For as it is with
a Plant or Tree, if cut down before it come to its full growth, it cannot being
forth Fruit to ripeness; even so it is in the New Birth, if it reach not to
full Maturity or to the stature of a Man in Christ Jesus, there will then be a
suffering of loss, as to what may possibly be brought in time of this Life.
Wherefore its a great Privilege and Blessing to live to this Good Old Age: and
such a time as this is now approaching, which will figure out the true Bride
and Spouse of Christ, which shall reach unto a full growth, for a Celebration
of the Nuptial Day with her Bridegroom. Who cannot appear upon the Earth in his
Glorified Person, till she have thus put on her beautiful Ornaments, and made
her self ready for his Entertainment, that so she may ascend up with him into
his own Kingdom, and Father's Glory: Who will there present her without Spot or
Wrinckle.

These are the Great and Wonderful things the Spirit of Prophesy has renewed as
the ground of Faith and Hope, to the growing Plants of the New Paradisical
Earth, who shall grow and flourish, being circled with a Wall of Fire: So that
no prickling Briars, nor rending Thorns, which in the wild Forest of
degenerated Nature do put forth, shall have any power here to invade or break
in.

These are the divine weighty Treasures for a Motive and drawing of such who
shall be the first Fruits that are to be Redeemed from out of this vile and
worldly Principle, to stand with the Lamb in his Glorified State.

Now what have I more to present unto you, who in the same Lineage of Light,
and Love with me do stand, but to make known those great approaching Blessings
and Glories which are assigned to be your Portion and Dowry, from that great
Elohim. Who shall all these for you Command, as in the Patient Waiting you with
me stand, till Christ shall set on foot this his all powerful Reign: for which
let your Prayers with mine Jointly ascend, uncessantly in one band of Loves
Eternal Unity, in which I shall only desire to be known to you by a Newer Name,
than that of

Jane Lead.

The Ascent to the Mount of Vision.
May 24. School.
. I. A S I was recollecting, and casting up, in my mind the tribulated State of
the Nazarite Flock, belonging to the great Shepherd, I was put upon a
supplicating Inquiry, how long the Time of this Cloudy day might last? And it
was Ecchoed in me: turn thine Eye into that Central light, which may make some
discovery; by which the Redemption shall appear to be drawing near. Then
suddenly there descended to my Internal seeing, from an high and lofty Sphere,
a Mountain most Diaphanous, so great and large as to cover one quarter of the
Earth: And round about it were numberless little Hills, of a dark Opacous
substance, and (Lo) there was a great Shaking and Trembling, as if they were to
be moved out of their places.

. II. Then of a sudden came a Flaming Blast out of this lofty Mountain, which
enkindled some of these Hills, and from them ran circling about the rest, Which
made a great crackling noise among them: Then there was a Voice heard as out of
the Mountain: Thus a Consumption is determinated upon the dark and dead Mold.
Then were they changed into a pure white Earth, clear and transparent. And
after this, did the Glorified Jesus stand upon the top of this Mount, with
innumerable Attendants, and uttered a mighty Voice of Thunder, saying: Come,
behold and see, and rejoice, O ye Heavens, in what I am going to Create an New.
Then immediately did there spring up in the room of the little Hills, certain
figurative Bodies, first to the number Seven, and then (by the Multiplication
of these) to Seven times Seven. Then came there several rays of Light from the
Glorious Body, which did enter into these Figures; whereupon it was said, the
Lord from Heaven is now become a quickening Spirit. By which they did stand up
and move and walk.

. III. Then descended the bright Body from the Mountain, and became their
Leader, conducting them to one side of this Mountain, which had three Gates
with Inscriptions on each of them, directing the Inhabitants of the North, East
and West, to enter, that should flock hereunto. Then several Persons appeared,
that had past through this Transfiguration, and fiery Trial, being come out of
great Tribulation, some of which were known to me in Spirit, and were linked
together as so many precious Radiant Stones, which the Lord did wear about him
as his Girdle, and so he entered into a Vaulted place within the Mountain, all
compacted like unto a City: Where a great Body of Ancients did meet, and
Congratulate these Comers: and with the Angel Trumpeters, did give great
Acclamations, and prepared Festival entertainments for them. Now the fame of
this so went out into all parts of the World, that there was a very great
Flocking together, some out of good Will, Love and Zeal to get entrance here:
others out of envy and derision, to have disturbed this peaceable Region: upon
which the mighty Lord and King of this City, raised up a Flaming Wall for it is
defense, which many did attempt to break through, but none could, except such
as were refined as Gold, while others were smitten and driven back.

. IV. The Inscription upon this City was Salvation: For that Saviors it was
said were to come forth hence. Who were led out by the mighty Prince and
Savior, and stood with him upon this Mountain of Perazim. Then were given
Trumpets into the hands of these Saviors, to a certain Number, who were first
designed to go forth and to call in the Nations from the North, and East, and
West: Then was it queried by the Person, to whom this was revealed, whether
such Subordinate Saviors, under the great Savior should appear in this
present Generation, upon which there was shown me a Square Golden Table, in the
Hand of the great High Priest, which did contain the Record of so many Persons
(as Radiant Stones set in it) who were nominated hereunto. And it was expressed
that some of these were to be raised up before this Generation should pass
away, and others in the succeeding Generations. Moreover it was said, thereneed
to be no enquiry who they are, for they will be turned into another Spirit,
after the Similitude of their Head; and will be sufficiently manifested in
Purity and Power: And the Principal characters of these, because of the
deceivableness of the Times, will be the 7 flaming Eyes, which shall pierce so
deep as to see through all false coverings: and to make manifest Truth, and
soundness of Mind, standing clear from all mixtures. For it was said, this will
be the most necessary gift both in this present, and in the approaching Age:
Whereby they may sit as Judges from the Infallible Urim and Thummim. This I was
commanded to declare, and to make known the mind of the great King and Savior:
For that the time of his Kingdoms appearance is at Hand.

May. 25. School
. V. THis Morning the Mountain that descended was set before me again, and I
was brought in Spirit to the Southside of it, where were three Gates, at each
of which there stood an Angel, which gave a call to the Nazarite Flock to enter
into one of the Gates, which opened into the Paradisical Land: Which was Richly
replenisht with all that was pleasant and delightful, to satisfy all the
divine senses: Then it was Queried: Whether this might not be a place for
Spirits departed out of their gross Bodies? And it was answered by the Eternal
new Adam, that this was prepared for the Inhabitants, as yet bearing Corporeal
Figures, but perfectly refined in Spirit and Mind, for as there is a Paradise
in the Higher Sphere of the Heavens, so there is in this lower that answers to
it in a Mystical and Spiritual manner: where the offspring of a new Generation
shall multiply, herein from the Eternal Adam, and his Virgin Spouse, who will
have their Children, brought up in the Mysteries of all divine Sciences, which
shall make vastly to differ from the old Adam and Eve's Progeny, who are under
the Curse of Terrestrial Labor, Toil and Sorrow: from the which discharged
these redeemed ones shall be.

. VI. Furthermore, the Angel of the 2d. Gate, was commissioned to give a call
to those who had a desire to be made skillful in the Theosophical Science, and
to be exercised in the divine Magia: This was nominated to be the Principle of
the divine Sophia, who uttered her Voice and gave an Invitation to attend upon
her Discipline and Counsel, and as many as She should find willing and obedient
they should possess the Treasures of her Land, and thereby should become
Stewards to dispense out of that Stock and Store. Then through a Perspective
Glass, were shown me some Persons that did willingly comply, and offer
themselves to this Noble and Worthy Employ. Some of them (as Principal Stones)
were made known to me: To whom She did first give Rules of Faith, as the
Foundation they were to build upon; that so whatever they set their hands to,
whether it were in inward or in outward Nature, accordingly as they should hit
the Mark, by the Arrow of Faith, so the work should be perfectly consummated.
Motives were multiplied abundantly to those Magical Children; as that hereby
they would recover the lost Paradisical dominion, and all the Properties and
Immunities, that would set free the Imbondaged Captivity. A call there is for
this, to all that can make their escape out of the Worldly Principle, and can
pass through the Flaming Wall. Here the glorious Lord will his Banner of Power
and Strength spread over them; and all sorts of Provision shall meet them
Plentifully: their clothing shall be Munition-strength of everlasting
Righteousness.

. VII. Now further there was a Trumpet. Cry to the Adept Philosophers, that
have lain in obscurity in outward Nature, and are shut up in it, as having no
vent to show forth the Wonders of the Creator. To you this Message and Call
goes forth from the divine Imperial Wisdom, that you make no longer delay, nor
halts in your way: For know the time and season is come in which you are to be
made manifest, and joined to those who are internally taught the Theosophical
Art. For the Tree of Faith has spread forth its Branches, and is ready to cast
its Fruit, and does invite you thereof to come and Eat: And as divine Artists,
such a Composition make of the Leaves thereof, as may be for Medicine and
Healing, to all that Obnoxious to Corruption does lie.

. VIII. The last Gate of this side of the Mountain, was the Apostolical Gate,
which opens into that Center, where the Holy Ghost will rest upon such as are
Elected and Chosen hereunto; that shall revive the Ancient Miraculous Powers,
in such wise as they shall not be Transient, but go forward on to Fixation and
perpetual Duration.

. IX. Now the third side of the Mount that lay Eastward, was also described to
me by the Guardian Angel that kept the 3 Gates; that each Gate gave entrance
into three several Courts. The First was to be filled with Prophets and
Prophetesses, that were disciplined and trained up there, by the great Head
Prophet Christ Jesus. Who was accompanied with all the Ancient Prophets, as
with Moses and Samuel, Elias and all that were from the Foundation of the
World, to Christ's time. Who took a Golden Horn and poured forth a Rich Oily
Spikenard upon their Heads, that ran down to the Skirts of their Garments: of
which it was said; These are the Anointed of the Lord, that shall bear Witness
and Declare what is to be made manifest throughout all the approaching Ages of
Time, which relate to the Kingdom of the Emmanuel.

. X. The Second Court opened: and thereinto desconded the great Melchizedeck,
with his holy Order, Constituting and Ordaining a certain Number to enter upon
this Holy Priestly Profession; that were Dedicated, Consecrated, Inaugurated,
and made Ministers of this New erected Sanctuary, and most holy place: Where
the Essential Furniture (not the patterns only, but the very Heavenly things
themselves) did here open: and the Priestly intercessions did ascend up in a
most Harmonious Celebration of Joyful Acclamations passing through the high
Order, of the great Melchizedeck-Priesthood: Whose Ministration from Petition
was turned into a new Language of Triumph and Praises.

. XI. The Account given of the third Court was this. The Thrones out of the
Heavens descended here, and the King of Kings, and in the Splendour of his
Majesty with numerous Spirits that Crowned were to fill that Court with
Princely Powers, that were taken out of the two mentioned Courts, and certain
Numbers out of the two other sides of the Mountains, were taken out and
Crowned, and received Power and Dominion to Reign with Christ upon the Earth.
Thus shall the Kingdom of God in his Saints come to be made Manifest, and
Established, so as to overtop all the Kingdoms of the Earth. And this came as
an Exeitement to wait and Believe and be found in all readiness for the
Consummation of this Prophecy.

. XII. On the Fourth side of the Mountain, which lay Westward, was the great
Secrets of the Deceased, the various Regions that they were lodged in, and the
Glorious Mansions that did appertain to such as departed in a high degree of
Perfection; with all the great Wonders of the great Weight and Glories of
Eternity. It was told me, all of this was to be concealed yet, and shut up from
the Knowledge of the present Age of Time: And was but only peculiar to some
that should have a Light, and discovery of these Marvelous things, as they were
capable to take them in; Standing in the Passive meekness, and pure
Faith-expectation for the accomplishment of all what has been here declared:
For the time may be nearer, or further off, as we see the gathering into these
Holy Courts may be: so hasten then we may the Blessed approach of this Rising
blissful Day, as in the Golden knot of Love we tied and knit together are.

Amen.
May 26. School.
. XIII. THis great Mystery and Secret, of the various degrees of the Deceased,
and separated Souls, which opened on the fourth side of the Mountain, being
permitted me to disclose to the Worthy and Believing, that defires to have so
much of the Counsel of God made known, as has been revealed herein, to such as
are weaned from the Mothers Breast of Tradition: even to them, it is given
forth to know, what is reserved for the latter Ages of time. Now there were
shown to me seven States or Regions which were allotted to the Dead.

. XIV. The first Order I shall mention, is of those that have Lived and Died in
a most Wicked and Diabolical Spirit, without any Change or Repentance: Such as
Blasphemers, Contemners of God, Apostates, etc. These have their places in the
Tormenting, Anguishing Fire, of the dark Luciferian Kingdom, where they are to
be Punished till the decreed Ages of Ages are expired, within those Spears or
Circles: Which is dreadful enough to endure, to fright all from coming here.

. XV. The second is of those, that have lived in the outward Birth after the
Flesh, but known nothing of being Born again from out of the Dead and Earthly
Image: Cleaving to this Worldly Principle, and extend their delight and love,
no farther than to what is Temporary, living wholly as without God in the
World: These have their places in the lower and grosser part of the Airy
Region. Where tho'they have not much Torment, yet on the other hand they have
but little rest; and such lovers they are of their Bodies that many of them
visit their dead Corpse, and abide sometime with them, as finding more ease
there than in that other place allotted them.

. XVI. Now a third sort are of that Rank and Order, that have been believing in
God and Christ, and under Conviction of their lost State without him, and who
have made some progress in the Heavenly Warfare: Having gone so far as to live
a Sober Rational Life, but have come short of that more inward and Spiritual
work of Renovation, not having reached to Mortification and self Abnegation, but
dying much short of it. Yet their Mansion is more pleasant, being in the upper
part of the Airy Region, annexed to Paradise: Where they want not for Motives
and Stirrings up to go on, and recover what they omitted and lost, while living
in the Body.

. XVII. As these Centers were opened and past before me, it was much upon me to
be informed out of that depth of the Eternal Wisdom, that here opened it self,
what became of all the Children that died, either in Infancy or Minority. Then
the Vision opened, showing me a very pleasant Flowery and delightful Sphere,
with a wonderful bright Light, that covered it as a Firmament, and the word
said this is the Childrens Sphere and Kingdom. It appeared like a little World
filled up with them, from the Womb, to the Stature of about 12 Years. This was
inferior to Paradise, but was appropriated to Wisdom; to be under her
Government and Dominion, who appointed here several ministering Angels to
Discipline, and Educate them, in the Faith of Jesus: For being stained with
original Sin, they were to believe in, and receive the Lamb of God as their
Redeemer: And so, by Union with him, they become Virgins without Spot or
Blemish. Hereby it was said that Wisdom did make out her self, in the Fathers
new-created Wonders, in these Children being transplanted out from the Earthly,
into the Divine and Spiritual Orb of Light.

. XVIII. Now the Three other Regions, (to wit, Paradise, Mount-Sion, and the
New Jerusalem) I have already given an account of in the Book of the Eight
Worlds. I must pronounce, Happy and Blessed are they, that dye so fitly
qualified, as immediately to pass through all these beforementioned Regions,
that none of them may detain them, but that (as an Arrow) swiftly they may fly
into this more high degree of the Paradisical Sphere, for they shall not long
rest here, before their Ascension shall be; where they shall see the King of
Mount Sion, stretching out the Golden Cord, that shall draw them up to sit with
him upon his Throne, which he has prepared for them; and so to rise from one
Glory to another, till in the fullness of the Fathers Glory, Christ shall
install them, jointly with himself. The everlasting Gates of the New Jerusalem
here open, and wide do stand: Which properly does belong to the high and lofty
Majesty, as his Principal Seat or Manision-house. Which he will in the
concluding part of all Scenes make to descend, to fill the whole Creation, with
the Splendour of it is Glory: Even so, Amen.

. XIX. But for caution, let none think they can reach to these two last
degrees, at the passing out of the Body, but as Christ in them shall come to be
grown up in a perfect Stature, covering them all over with his divine Nature.
Which we hope and believe, may be wrought out effectually by the same Power
that gave a Resurrection to his dead Body, and an Ascension to Glorification:
in the Faith of which we wait and pray, for this perfect Day.

June 30. School.
XX. I was Considering and Recollecting with my self the manifold Mysteries,
that among the Dead lay yet hid, which in these Ages past were to be concealed
and shut up: but as the nearer approach is of the finishing of the fullness of
Redemption, the Word of the Eternal Wisdom has been pleased to make known, what
is beyond the present belief of the World: but to the Impartial seekers, and
Worthy inquirers the secrets that appertain to the States of separated Souls,
may be communicated.

. XXI. In the first place we are to consider how these three Ranks of such as
have departed this World, short of Redemption, shall come to recover the
Regeneration or Remaining part of the Work, which they might possibly have
attained in this Life; for which end the Mediatorship of Christ was established
by the Father, and continued in the Melchizedeck-Order. And as Souls are daily
Dying in this imperfect State, so Christ is daily renewing the Efficacy of his
Blood, that must still atone for them. It is also further made manifest, that
the great Saints that are made Kings and Priests, as they have Thrones, so they
have Seats of Judgment, and are also made Saviors with their high Prince and
Savior, being of the same Merciful, and meek Nature, as joined and made one
Spirit with him. And their intercession with him, is of acceptance and
efficacy, for these their fellow Members that have la^'d behind, and lost their
time, either in this Life or in other Centres: So that is laid for a
Foundation-truth that the great Saints may help the less, whether In the higher
World or the lower. Now as it was queried in my self, so it may be by others
how those that are departed, shall be brought to Repent and believe in Christ
for Salvation? It was here shown to me that there were There Prophets, Pastors
and Teachers, that did exercise their Function and Office, as well as in these
Regions below. For it is well to be understood, that this Converting and
Regenerating work is to go forward on, till that which is perfect do so enter
into every Member, that they come to be in Congruity with their perfect Head:
who must see the full Fruit of the Travail of his Soul, throughout the whole
Creation. For Christ the Head does not account himself perfect, till every
Member be co-joined with him. Therefore also the high Saints do Sympathize with
the groaning Creation, because till all are brought in, their Joy cannot be
full. If it be asked, What Scripture is there for this? I recommend the same
that was opened to me from the Revelstions, Chap. 5. 8. Where the 24 Elders
were in Office to receive the Golden Vials of the Prayers of the Saints, and to
pour them before the Throne. Whereby it is employed that the Prayers of the
Saints, of a lesser degree may pass through them that are of a higher. Then
another Scripture I shall superadd, is that, 1 Cor. 15. 29. Where you find the
Living, did enter into the Covenant of Baptism for the Dead; as being capable
of helping them forward in their Process to Christ, by Concurrence and Union of
Spirits with them. And had we more of this Concurrence of Spirits one with
another, the Kingdom of our Lord had not been so long detained and kept back;
but a quicker dispatch might have been made, but we are in hopes that as the
Day Star shall more Universally arise in Hearts, this Light shall so spread it
self, as that the knowledge of these great Mysteries shall find more kind
entertainment in the World, that lies Buried in so much Ignorance and Darkness.
Then there will be less to do in those other Regions, because there will not so
many dye in an imperfect State, and the Kingdom of Satan will be weakened and
diminisht thereby, who shall not be able to hold his Dominion, either in the
invisible dark Sphere or the visible Principle. I shall now conclude this Point
with this Acclamation, Rejoice ye Heavens and shout ye lower parts of the
Earth, for the Lord God Omnipotent is about to do Marvelous things, which shall
be seen and admired by such as do long for, and Love his Appearance: Which
approaching is still nearer and nearer. Even so come: Come, O Lord, in thy
Kingdom, Power, and Glory;

Amen.
July 10. School.
. XXII. II was further discovered that the Elders before the Throne, did
receive Commission from the Supreme King and Lord, as being his most near Privy
Counselors, for to put into Office and Government, such in the upper Worlds as
might be as the Nobles and Principalities of high degree, in the Heavenly
Court. these had Power and Command given them, to govern and manage the Affairs
of the lower Regions of the Deceased, who had reference to them on all
occasions. For these matters are transacted and agitated in various manners,
unknown to Mortals, according to the manifold Wisdom that is understood there.
For the increase and bringing all into Subjection and Obedience, for the
bringing in and perfecting of Christ's Kingdom There. For Christ must Reign
till all in those Centres be made to know his Superiority. Nay, the Extent of
this Government of the Saints, reaches to the Binding and Chaining up of
Lucifer, and those that are yet under his Jurisdiction. Otherwise they would
make strange disturbances and commotions, by invading of the Privileges which
are above his Sphere. This was made known to me, in order that I might
understand better what was the purpose and design of the great Jerusalem King,
as to the putting of this lower World into a new Model of Government; beyond
what has been since Christ's time. Hitherto the Diabolical Spirit and the
Worldly Spirit, have had the Superiority: but it has been signified to me that
the time of this Reign of the Beast and of the Dragon, is very near expiring:
When Christ will bring down his Court, and all Powerful Government, here upon
Earth. And it shall be managed by such as he shall Depute, by impowering with
his own Spirit, expressly by which he will act in them as if they stood in his
very Person. It was further proposed to me, that some who are alive in this
present Generation, should be Anointed and Sealed with Power here for, and
taken into his secret Counsel. At first a small known Number, but which should
dilate and increase till they were Numberless. Then was it pronounced in my
Ears from the Heavens, Blessed are those that are the first Fruits, that go
forth to enlighten and bear Rule over all the degenerated Plants, that are not
yet ingrafted into the true Vine.

. XXIII. Then was it queried in me, (because there was yet so little appearance
of this,) how long it might be, before This would come to effect? The soft
springing Word replied, that there was already a seed of Light sown, and an
united Golden Grain of Faith, which would assuredly put forth their Heads, that
the time of the Lily may be known. One full Circle of a thousand Years is
already run out, and when the full point of the seventh Hundred Year shall be
superadded to it, then the Thrones and Dominions here below shall begin to bow
and stoop to That Reign and Kingdom, which shall (by the Spirit in meek and
Holy Souls) be set afoot. For knowledge shall have a wonderful increase, so
that the Princes and Kings of the Earth shall be taken hold of thereby, to
promote the Reign of Christ; and to throw their Crown at His Feet. And a
Solomon's Heart shall revive again, whereby hands will be put to Build up such
a Temple, as shall never be made desolate.

. XXIV. As I was still considering of this great Revolution how it should be
brought about; there was a Lamp descended from the seven Lamps before the
Throne, and put into the Hand of a certain Person, which did at first sight
burn but dimly. Then came the Angel of the Love, that poured in a Golden Oil,
that sent forth a mighty strong Odor, which immediately made the Lamp burn
with such a Blaze, dropping Flakes of Light into the Oil, that caused many more
Lamps to spring; which made a good part of the Earth look as a bright Heaven.
Then was it said to me, This shall be the forerunner whereby the Foundation
shall be laid, for the bright Sun of Righteousness to appear and shine forth,
in his Temple Body, which is his Spouse and Bride; who shall not want to be
accomplished with all manner of Gifts and Powers, much more radiant and great
than whatever yet has been known and declared. All this is to confirm the
Vision of the Mountain of Perazim, that opened toward the four Corners of the
Earth, and though somewhat was for a time to be shut up from the Unworthy, yet as
this Blessed day shall approach nearer, permission is given to make the States
of the Deceased in the invisible Regions more publicly manifest: For the Seals
that are upon the Book of God's wonders must have their Day of breaking open.
For there is a wake full time, in which those that lie in a dead Sleep, shall
hear the Thunder-cries that are now upon their uttering forth: which shall
magnify the Powerful day of the Holy Ghost. The visitation of which has been
already known to some. Which is a binding Law for such as have received of this
Unction, to stand in a readiness all these Prophetical sayings to obey. From
which, O Lord, let not any of thy elected Stones herefrom Swerve. But that they
may hold fast their Crown in him, who is the Yea and

Amen.
July 21. School.
HEre follows another Manifestation given forth, which I did not apprehend at
the Writing of the former that it would be so fully and suddenly opened unto
me. But an occasion was given hereto by some Queries of a choice and elect
Stone sent to me concerning the swallowing up of Mortality in Immortality:
Whether or no such a time might not be expected, wherein this vile Body might
know a Translation even in this Life?

. XXV. Which gave me occasion to introvert and sink into the deep Center of
Wisdom, where I met with various Discoveries hereupon, from that Intelligence
that appeared to me in the Figure of a white and bright Dove, having three
Eyes, from each of which went forth sparkling Flames. They were placed one on
the Breast, and one under each Wing. Immediately this Word was given out,
Behold here is the triune Eye; Denominated from the Father, with the Eternal
Wisdom, and the Son concurring in the Holy Spirit. In whom has been treasured
up what is now to be opened and revealed, concerning the great things that are
to be brought forth in this latter Age of the World. For in whatever Heart and
Mind this holy Dove shall find entrance and reception, it shall be as the
Heavenly Court and Council wherein the divine Wisdom shall unfold the greatest
of Secrets, as upon the day approaching hereunto they shall be expedient to be
known. There was a Prophecy run through me in this sense: What is to be
established for the Foundation structure of the Temple Body, is to have each
Stone this threefold Eye of the Dove for their seeing and enlivening, so that
by sending forth these bright Rays, they may draw in such Stones, as lie yet
dead and Buried in the Earth. For the chief and elect Stones that are already
Cemanted together as in one accord they abide, shall generate and multiply
Spiritual live Stones numerously. So that herefrom may be expected the Reign of
our Emmanuel.

. XXVI. The beginning and method of which was thus platform'd out to me, as in
the Mount was seen in the threefold Court there; in Persons so endued and
qualified to be Prophets, Priests, and Kings; which are to be laid as the
Foundation of that ever Springing Creation, that are born into a State of
Eternal Generation. These shall know length of Days, as it was in the
Patriarchs before the Flood, even to Methusalah's Years. This good old Golden
Age will presage that Christ has set his Foot to Reign upon the Earth in his
Spirit, made manifest in his Temple-Body, whom he has espoused to himself as
his Bride. Who will rise and shine in her Ornamental Gifts and Powers, Clothed
with that flaming Robe that the Moth of Corruption cannot eat out.

XXVII. So in answer to the Query made by that worthy Person, the swallowing up
of the outward Body, into an immortal Figure of Glory for constant
manifestation and duration I do not expect to see, till the Lord of Glory
himself shall appear; then such as are alive at that day shall be transfigured
instantly, and be made like him, for they shall see him as he is. Not but that
there may be upon some extraordinary occasion, a Transfiguration for to give a
proof of the verity and possibility of it, as in the case of Christ himself,
but this only transient. And further we are to note, according as has been seen
in the clear Glass of divine Secrets; that such of the long-lived Stones as
shall reach to the Patriarchal Ages, will be found in a more fit capacity to
transcend all these Bounds and Limits of numbers of Years, by putting on of
that Glorified Figure which can never need to fear the diminution and
alteration of its Beauty and Perfection: as they shall bear up in the
unwavering Faith hereof they may hold out till the Personal Glory shall
descend; while others that may also be Spiritually united in the Temple-Body
through doubtfulness, and sensible feeling of infirmities; with other
temptations incident to the Corporeal State, may not be able to hold out beyond
the Mortal Life; but this will no way hinder but that they may maintain their
Spiritual Affinity and Fellowship with those others, that outlive them in the
Body: and shall be privileged more particularly to descend with Christ, and to
rejoice together with them in the Neptial Unity. Therefore counseled and
called upon, we are to keep up in the Faith and strive hard that so we may
attain the Prize, and reach the Crown Number, each one standing in their Lot as
it shall in divine Wisdom be decreed; and as the measuring Line of Life shall
be stretched out upon them: Having no more to do but to watch and wait each
one, in the inward Court of a pure Mind.

. XXVIII. For the confirmation of these Prophetical Openings there is a
Scripture-evidence, as a foregoing and more ancient Prophecy. As Isa. 65. 20
There shall be no more thence an Infant, nor an old Man that has not filled
his days: for the Child shall dye a Hundred years old, but the sinner being an
Hundred years old shall be accursed. Also verse 20. as the days of a Tree are
the days of my People, and mine Elect shall long enjoy the Work of their Hands.
And Isa. 25. 8. He will swallow up Death in Victory, and the Lord God shall
wipe away Tears from off all faces. And lastly, that place, Rev. 20. 6. Blessed
and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection: on such the second
Death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall
reign with him a thousand Years. These Scriptures are a plain and evident
proof, that such a State shall be within the Holy Mountain of the Lord, when it
comes to be established, as has by Vision and Prophecy been hereof declared.

. XXIX. Now it may be asked, by what means and after what manner shall this be
brought to pass, for in present view the highest Saints are subject to
Infirmities, Diseases and Death? True it is so, and may continue so to be, till
Christ who is the Tree of Life shall out of the Ground of renewed Nature
Spring: Which he will not fail to do in such as are weaned from that forbidden
Tree, from whence the Curse and Death has been drawn in, which is the old
poisoned Root, that can only be healed and recovered again to its own Original
purity, by the Juice and Sap that is offered most freely for an Effectual and
Wonderful Transformation; for you must know that till there be a perfect State
arrived to, these two Trees will both be growing in Natures Ground within us;
and as the Souls propension, and feeding is, such Fruits it will bring forth.
This runs Parallel with that Representation Christ gave of himself, as the Bread
of Life. John 6. 50. This is the Bread which comes down from Heaven, that a
Man may eat thereof, and not die: and more Emphatically in the next Verse,
Ifany Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever: So again Verse 58. Not as
your Fathers did eat Manna and are dead. Now what kind of Eating must this be,
but the very Quintessential Spirit of Christ, the true Tree of Life drawn into
the Soul by the strong attraction, of Faith and Love.

. XXX. Now in order to the true Participation hereof, and attaining to the
essentiality of the Resurrection-Life; There is a new Institution that has been
Commanded and given forth to some, that in the Faith and expectation of this
great Change have waiting been; the Practice hereof being but among a certain
Number that have had opened in them, the Mystery of Christ's Resurrection-Life.
That as hitherto the Solemnization of the dying Lord, has been observed under
the suffering State of the Church: So now upon the new Modification, as having
the Eye of Faith upon the Resurrection-mark, there is a particular
Commemoration likewise of his Resurrection, not only personally from the Grave,
but also of his rising in us out of our deadly Mold, Celebrating here withal
the Marriage-Union, as being risen with him from the Dead: And this Symbol, as
it is received Virtually and Powerfully, incorporates with and infuses by
degrees, That which is incorruptible into the outward Body also, to make it
hold out the Race that it is set to run, within the Circle-Reign of our great
Immanuel. The good influences of this Institution has been experienced in the
Partakers hereof, as greatly Advantageous for their growth, and flourishing
toward this translated Life: So that it may be well worth joining in a high
and holy Communion, in this true Love and Resurrection-Feast.

. XXXI. Now if it be inquired where this Reign of Christ, in such choice
Spirits will first appear: It is not limited or confined to any Nation or
Kingdom, but Persons out of all Ranks and Degrees, high or low, from the
Monarch to the meanest of States, may come to be Subjects of this Kingdom and
Dominion. It is not the Locality of the Place, or Difference of Degree, that
can hinder the Combination and Intercourse with the first Born from the Dead,
and with those that are in Ioint-Possession with him in his Kingdom. If so,
then it is no distance that can separate the Spirits of the Church of the first
Born here upon this visible Stage: But there will be a sense and knowledge, of
the State and Condition of each other, how far removed soever. Several
instances there are for it, both in Ancient Records and in present experience;
hence it is that St. Paul being absent, was present in Spirit to the
Corinthians beholding their Order. Nay, further when this Estate shall come to
its high Magnitude, that the Etherial Body shall penetrate through the Grosser
part, they may walk upon the Waters, or pass through the Doors, and be of that
swift flight, as to outrun the Chariots and Horsemen. But all of this we pass
over as not knowing the time when this high divine Magia shall be set a work.
For if the false and dark Magicians can do marvelous things out of their
Centres, much more then may the Wonders be brought forth out of the true
Original and Creating power, from the Abyssal Eternity. Which will have their
time of Reviving again in this new modeled Reign, as God shall move in Nature,
and Creature in this last Period of time.

. XXXII. Now it remains further to be considered, what are the Laws
appertaining to this new modeled State; which will not be after the manner of
the old Covenant, written in Tables of Stone, which gave not force nor power
for Obedience: for that Law being weak through the flesh, Christ became the end
of it, and so is become a fiery Law in the Spirit of Life, engraven upon the
Mind and Heart; there Springing and Rising according to the pure dictate of the
Holy Ghost. Having reference only to what shall be immediately taught from God,
as a Fountain still flowing in. Now as to the Particular Laws, I shall refer to
a Book put forth in the Year 1695. Entitled the Laws of Paradise. I shall
offer at present only what is the Sum of them, which is Love to God, and Faith
in him. For this new Creation-State and Life is all founded thereupon, and so
the Building must be carried on and supported by these two great Pillars, from
whence may be branched forth the manifold Wisdom, that will from the high and
Heavenly Court be given out. For as it is there, so it must be here: that the
principal Elders in the Love and Faith, as they are deputed to bear Rule and
Government here, so must they have recourse to the King of Kings and his Privy
Counselors, and so derive down and give forth what has been confirmed, and
sealed by Him unto those that are under their Jurisdiction. Thus it shall be
according to what is mentioned, Job 22. 28. Thou shall also decree a thing, and
it shall be Established to thee. That is, whatever they shall believe for, as
Springing from the rootlaw of Life, Christ in us, shall be fully accomplished
and made good. Otherwise there could be no maintaining this Sovereignty and
Power, over the contradictions of Spirits, that would still keep up and make
opposition by their Traditional Laws. Which must be subdued and brought under
to these high born Spirits, into whose hand the ruling Scepter is given. The
mighty God confiding in them, in their Humility, Meekness and great Wisdom, for
the management of this Trust reposed in them.

. XXXIII. It may further be asked, Whether these Children of the Kingdom shall
not stand in need of the outward Accommodations, as may be meet to supply and
support the outward State, and how they shall come by them? It is answered
there will be a requiring of these things, but with a very different use of
them; as in the degenerate Life, they take their pleasure and pride in the
abuse of them, making them as their Mammon God: which our Lord does caution us,
was not to be allowed in a Redeemed State, wherein they were to take no thought
for these things as the Gentiles did; but absolutely to pin our Faith upon the
All Sufficiency, who will give the Blessing of increase to such as shall make
them only as Steps, which they set their foot upon, that they may with greater
freedom be advancing to a higher Sphere; as having matters of greater
Consequence to mind, which are the manifold. Affairs that appertain to the
Government and Kingdom of Christ; which indeed is so considerable as will drink
up their whole time, so as they will have little leisure to mind Trivial and
Transitory things. And therefore it is not to be doubted, but such shall have
more than enough; so that they shall not have only for their own use, but also
as Stewards to dispense out of God's Stock and Store. For this we have not only
private experience in manifold. Instances hereof, for the Building upon this
Foundation of Faith, but also many Scripture Prophesies, that must have their
fulfilling, which is to be expected in such an Age of time, as this is which we
have been Treating of; which will be the true Solomon's Lily-Day. That in the
45 Psalm, verse 12. is so considerable, I cannot but mention it; And the
Daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, even the rich among the People
shall entreat thy favor. Such likewise is that Isa. 61. 5, 6. And strangers
shall stand and feed your stocks, and the Sons of the Alien shall be your
Plow-men; and your Vine-dresser. But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord:
Men shall call you the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the Riches of the
Gentiles, and in their Glory shall ye boast your selves. By all this you see
the high Prerogatives and great Immunities that do belong to the Royal seed and
Offspring, that into the Priestly Court are taken in, as the Anointed ones to
Minister in the Holy Tabernacle: whose Lot and Portion will not be among the
outward Tribes of the Earth, but out of the Treasure-house of Faith.

. XXXIV. The day is already come, wherein these Prophecies begin to be
fulfilled. For there shall be a bringing in from far: for it shall be as in
Solomon's time, Materials for the Temple-Glory of this day and the Magnificence
of it, shall be heaped up and given in, in all abundance. The Renown of which
shall go throughout all quarters of the Earth. So that as the Queen of Sheba
did then, now shall the Kings and Princes and great ones of the Earth both from
the East and West, North and South, come to the Mountain of the Lords House,
and bring their Glory and Honor into it; and highly favored they may reckon
themselves to hear this Joyful Sound; which many in former Ages have desired to
hear, but have not heard. Therefore this gracious Call is all worthy to be
taken hold of, that they may be Installed in that Dominion and Power, where
Mortality shall not supplant them of a true and unfadeable Felicity. For know
there is a new time approaching, such as never was: for the Kingdom and
Dominion of Christ, in Power and Authority has never yet had any establishment
upon the Earth, nor could indeed, because this long Life and Age was not yet to
be. For by this length of Days there will be time given for the finishing
Transgression and Sin, and bringing in that perfection of Righteousness that
shall have no end. As there was folly in not improving that long State of Life
by those before the Flood, for which end God allowed it them, to try if they
would recover their Angelical and Paradisical State, and remove the Curse from
the Earth, for which end his Spirit did strive with them, which being resisted,
God shortened their Days; So now the eternal Wisdom of God provokes for the
recovery of that lapsed Age again, that a second proving may be made in this
last Age of the World, having now the assistance of the Spirit of Christ, which
shall now be poured forth as a Flood of Flaming Love, to burn away all the
compacted Matter and Mould of the Earthly Image; so as in this day it shall be
said, Christ lives and walks upon the Earth in and among this selected Number,
upon whose Shoulders the Government of his Kingdom is to rest. For the Spirit
of God and of his Glorious Power shall rest upon them so evidently, that all
shall be forced to acknowledge that these are the Anointed ones, as bearing the
Royal Priestly Mark of their God and King. For upon them the Heavenly Power
shall descend, for the Heavens that have been shut so long, shall now open
stand for a free recourse to our mighty Redeemers Princely Court, that from
that upper Kingdom, Orders and Commissions may be brought down for the
management of these lower Regions; that they may run parallel with what is
transacted among the Saints in the higher. With whom in this State there will
be a great Freedom and Familiarity; so that a Council and Senate both of the
higher and lower Court, shall meet to determine what high Miraculous works
shall be expedient to be wrought.

. XXXV. Now it is already so far made manifest, that whereas the confusion of
Languages was a great Judgment and Witness of God's displeasure against that
Age of Time. So that it caused a scattering and loss of the one pure Language
of Nature. Which now in this new State and Kingdom will be restored again.
About which I had some inquiry in the Spirit of my mind, how and by what means
the Unity of Speech might be opned again; for as it is in Mount-Sion above,
where Christ Reigns personally, so it must be here on Earth, where he is now to
set, his Reign' up Spiritually. They all that are above do Harmonize together
in the pure Language of Nature. And thus it is expedient, that it should be in
Mount-Sion here below. For it was said this Gift should come upon such as were
Principal Stones and Builders of that new Jerusalem, the City wherein the Reign
of the mighty God and King may begin.

. XXXVI. While I was considering this thing, there was a sudden opening of the
Temple-Glory in the Heavens. Which drew away my Spirit thereunto. Where I did
see in the Hand of a bright Body, the Figure of a Heart clear as Crystal with
Strings or Veins of Gold; in the midst of which there was fixed a flaming Root,
from whence branched out Tongues as so many divided Flames: by which I was
answered that according to this figurative Representation it might be given me
to understand, that the Root of pure Speech must proceed from the pure Heart of
the Tri-une Deity, and so formed into Christ the Essential Word it self, first
going forth in pure Cogitation, without sound or Voice; whereby in this
internal stillness, God discourses with the Soul, and the Soul with God, out of
the Flaming Center of this Tri-une Heart; and from whence it may proceed and
form it self into outward Organical Speech. Which will carry Tuch a fiery
flaming Power and Efficacy, as shall beget the same Native Language in others,
and open the Centres that have been shut up them; that is to be understood of
those that prepared and qualified to receive it, through the Faith and
expectation of these Gifts. And it was said further, when ye see this great
gift put forth; it will be a certain sign that the gathering in of all Nations
from far will be; to the beholding and admiring of the first appearance of
Christ in his Kingdom and Reign. Through these impregnable and extraordinary
Gifts, the Holy Ghost will be made apparently manifest, that he is returned, in
order to restore and Build up what has been laid Wast and Desolate, here upon
the Earth.

. XXXVII. The next Gift that is to accompany this Blessed day, is to find out
and open the All-healing Pool, where the Corrupt and Putrifactious Matter, in
the Body Elementary may through the continual rising Spring of this Water of
Life, receive Clarifying and Healing. And wherever these Waters of the
Sanctuary do rise, there every thing shall be healed and maintained in Life,
according to that Scripture, Ezekiel. 47. 9. So that according to the long date of
Life designed for this State; this River for Life must never cease to run
through the Corporeal Forms. And whereas in the first appearances of this gift
of healing in the Elijah Spirit, as a Type fore-runing Christ, and in the
following Century of the Apostles, it was appropriated to them to convey virtue
out of themselves for healing; which they could not command at all times, for
then they would have conquered all Sickness and Death in themselves; But when
this mighty Gift shall be restored again, it shall go on to fixation and
Conquest of all Maladies. For the great evil of Sin will be taken out of the
way, and so the suffering must cease. For the Inhabitants that live in this new
planted Region shall not complain they are Sick: For they shall be forgiven
their Iniquity, Isa. 33. 24. So that where Sin is taken out of the way, Sorrow
and the Curse, which are the product of it, must needs cease. Also Zech. 3. 8,
9, 10. For behold I will, bring forth my Servant the Branch, etc. And I will
remove the Iniquity of that Land in one Day. In that day says the Lord, shall
ye call every Man his Neighbor under the Vine, and under the Fig Tree. For if
there should not be an Antidotal Medicine provided against all Corruptibility,
it would be rather a Punishment than a Pleasure, to live in such a Body as
should not be free from Infirmities, whereupon it was made manifest to be, that
each one who should be counted worthy to be numbered among the first Fruits of
the Resurrection-State, shall be as so many Trees of Life, that shall put forth
the Golden Leaves for Medicine to themselves. Which shall be as a constant
Imbalming to render their Bodies durable and Incorruptible. O Blessed and
highly Marvelous and Wonderful, will this great Appearance of Christ in his
Saints, be in its Time. For which it is only required of this Generation, that
they gird up in the Faith, and be found in waiting and Preparation for it.

. XXXVIII. Now I do see in Spirit some Footsteps are already taken, in order to
this translated State. An Election has been hereunto from the Eternal Court and
Council in the Heavens, for the gathering such as shall be steady Pillars to
bear up the Mountain of Holiness: upon which shall be written Emmanuel lives
and rests here. But let it be known that this Ascent to the height of this
Majestic Reign of Christ, and Arrival to this length of Days will not be all
at once, but rising by Degrees; There will be several Signs that will fore-run
it. The Messengers for this end must go forth to Preach up the Faith and to
draw forth an expectation of it, in such as shall be Selected hereunto: So that
there will be some Bright Stars that will rise, and go forth as Lightning upon
the Earth: receiving special Endowments and Spiritual gifts; and in an eminent
manner the Gift of discerning Spirits; piercing into the very thoughts and
intent of the Heart; As Peter perceived the perverse design of Ananias and
Sapphira, the Spirit of God within him opening it unto him. And so in the same
manner will these things be made manifest again. For as the World in Age grows
old, so the Mystery of iniquity will wax greater, by putting on and
Counterfeiting the very Robe of Christ's Innocence and Truth: and also by a
breaking forth of the dark Magic, as the more true and divine by way of
Miraculous Working is coming forth. Therefore the Tri une Council in Heaven
foreseeing this will raise up such as shall be of quicksight, and sound
Judgment to detect and countermine, what would make the true thing questioned
and invalued. Therefore the Lord will see it necessary to set his own Stamp,
first for Immaculate purity, and next for great Powerfulness, to do and act in
such a manner as none of the false Magicians shall be able to imitate, or stand
before them. Thus the Lord will move himself step by step. And for length of
Days, at first it may not arrive to above a Hundred Years, and so in every
Generation there will be an Increase, as they grow stronger in Spirit, and work
themselves more out of the Gross and Elementary Life; for there will be skill
and understanding given to draw in from the one pure Element. And there will
also be outward Medicines discovered that have not yet been; that will have a
wonderful Efficacy for the preserving and fortifying Nature, and recovering the
lost Paradisical Body. There is a Vein of Gold in Eternal Natures Garden, that
has not yet been pierced into: which, when the Divine Artists shall be sent
forth, shall be broken up and run most free, as the true Elixir appropriated
and reserved for this Age, and a Sovereign help and Blessing to the Inhabitants
of this new Kingdom. Now who would not rejoice to see the Dawnings and first
breakings forth of this most Wonderful time; for which end these Discoveries
and Manifestations of the approaching time, have been given out through one
that has been upon the Watchtower. Who has received Commission to declare what
is here Written: for inviting and exciting all the Unbelieving as well as the
Believing, the Ignorant as well as the Knowing, of what Name or Profession
soever they be; but especially the Philadelphian-Flock, that they may all take
good notice of the present Season, or the Beginning of the Love-Reign. Wherein
the true Philadelphian-State will be better understood, known and established.
The Foundation whereof is already laid, whereby as flaming Stones of Love, the
Fountain-Heart of God's love they will reach, to multiply therefrom as
numberless Golden Sands and Drops of Love, as Seeds to overspread the Earth.
For Lovesday shall now bear the Dominion over all the wrathful Properties,
which shall all sink away, as this day of the Lords shall in Mortals Reign.

. XXXIX. One considerable thing I have more to open, which is, concerning the
great Wonder seen in Heaven, (mentioned by St. John,) of the Woman Clothed
with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, of which there have gone forth many
Interpretations and Calculations, of the time of her Travail and bringing forth
the Man-Child. Now as to this, it is made manifest that her coming forth out of
the Wilderness, will signify this great day of Dominion and Power over the
Earth, as has been here made mention of. For there can be no Sovereignty of
Rule and Command, till she has brought forth that Man-Child that is to Rule the
Nations with a Rod of Iron. Now this Wilderness-State, (according to the
Spiritual and Mystical sense thereof) is to be understood of a quiet
Retirement, shelter and defense from the fury of the Dragon, where she is fed
and nourisht with the true Manna and Eternal Word of Life, having free
intercourse as St. John had in the Isle of Patmos, with the superior Heavens
for communications and discoveries, for such a time and season. As also that
holy Birth that has proceeded from her, is to remain in the Heavens till the
number of Time shall be finished. Who shall come forth in the Male strength of
a Godhead-might in some Persons both Males and Females, that shall be fitly
Qualified to bear rule and to manage the Rod of Power; according to that Type
of the Rod put into Moses hand, by which he did all those great Miracles. For
thus the Regency will be with a Superiority over all the outward
Constellations, and changeable motions of the Planets; all Sublunary things
being put under their Feet. For the united Number of these Highborn Spirits,
will have their clothing from that Sun, whose fixation is in the one
unchangeable Element, unto which all other Elements must bow and be made
Subject. Though there will not be wanting after all this attempts by the
Satanical Spirit and Kingdom; who will encompass and encamp against the Lamb
and his Bride. But this will be permitted for that end, that the Omnipotent Rod
put into their hands, may be more signally stretched out, to break all
Combinations, and bring to naught all that would deal Treacherously against
those, whose Persons the God-man has taken up to magnify his great Reign and
Power in over all Nations of the Earth. And so that saying may be made good;
Micah 4. 8. And thou O Tower of the Flock, the strong hold of the Daughter of
Sion, unto thee shall it come, even the first Dominion; the Kingdom shall come
to the Daughter of Jerusalem.

. XL. Now it is given me to declare, that this is not only in future
expectation, but that there has been already some consummation of this
Prophecy. For a true Travail has gone forth, not by one only in singularity,
but by many, who have been carried into the Spiritual Wilderness, in
Abstraction and Separation from all Worldly conversation, ascending upon the
Eagle-Wing so high, as to acquaint themselves with the high Throne Dominions in
the Heavenly places, that they might behold the patterns there that are to be
imitated here below. And in this present time it is to be understood, that
there is an earnest expectation and waiting for that Holy Birth that is
ascended for to descend, as a rising Star in the pure Virgin-Heart: which will
pass as Lightning from one to another in Wisdom, Power, and great Excellency,
dilating it self as well into what is Visible as Invisible. And thus shall the
Dominion be given to the Saints of the most High, according to that of Daniel,
Chap. 7. Verse 18. and 27.

. XLI. Now I shall conclude this Subject with that word of Love-Caution and
Command, which has been given to my self upon the opening of this
Manifestation; Which is, that ye to whose hands this shall come, do not put
this time and day afar off. But be found in such a Posture and Spiritual habit
of mind that you may be prepared, and have your Ear opened to hear the Voice
and Sound of the Seventh Angel, that goes forth to proclaim that the Kingdoms
of this World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ. Even so let
all Unite with me in Spirit, to intercede for the descending of this Holy and
pure Reign with Christ in Spirit; till he shall appear in his Glorified Person,
to consummate all that may make for the full Restoration of the whole
Creation: Even so says the Spirit and the Bride in him, who is the

Amen.
August 30. School.
. XLII. BEing awaked in the Morning, not only out of the Natural Sleep, but out
of that which was more internal, there opened in me an Expostulating Prayer,
with my Lord for the full Manifestation of that Spirit, that might bring forth
it self into a Working and Acting Power, for silencing of all carnal
Reasonings, which proceeded from the fleshly Birth. Still querying why this
Birth of Almighty Strength did stick in the place of breaking forth, seeing the
Age of time every where called for it. Then was it Answered me, there is That
wanting which has not been so clearly conceived and apprehended. Therefore in
regard of this diligent inquiry made, behold now and see both thine own State
and the State of others, that have travailed in a big Expectation with thee,
what is pourtraid before the deep discerning Eye, which is the divided Tree of
Good and Evil. The Root hereof was fixed in a twofold Soil, the one part of a
dark Earthly mold, the other Transparent. That which grew up from the former
was dead, dry, and withered, bearing no Fruit. In the other part one might see
through every Branch, springing upwards from the Root such a Crystalline water
of Life, as gave Nourishment to each part. Hence were sent forth heavy Groans,
because of being burdened with the Corrupt and Dead part. Then was figured out
the perfect Tree of Life, that fixed it self by this other. And the Fruits
thereof by an Angel-Officer were pressed into a large Vessel, and emptied forth
at the Root of the evil Part, which caused it to spring up in various fruitful
Powers, which put forth from the Root and Essence of the Godhead-being.

. XLIII. This was showed to me to figure out that in the Original State of
Mankind, there was nothing of the divided Property known; as after his
Deviation from the infinite being of Good: which followed the evil Essences of
Sin, that brought in Sorrow and Death, which could no way be cured but as the
Fountain of Love opened it self in that spark of God, which was yet left alive
in him, springing up with an Oily healing: Coagulating and mingling with that
Firelife, that did lie as smothered under the Earthly part. Which through a
warm breathing thereupon from the Tri-une being, gave a new Existency to a
Divine and Spiritual Life; which gradually put forth into every part
appertaining to the Soul, with it is Bodily Members, which is the true and full
Regeneration, that perfecteth and brings forth the new Creation, so that the
Mortality sinks away into it own Abyss, from whence by the Serpents Guile it
was stirred up and awakened. So from Christ the Tree of Life over-cloathing,
the Tree of Death must disappear; as the darkness is swallowed up in the Light,
so Death is swallowed up in Life. Fulfilling that saying, O Death where is thy
Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory? When the deadly Poison thereof shall be
extingushed, and the Lord who is the quickening Spirit enter into the Soul, and
raise himself up to be its transfigured Body. No less than this may be expected
when we shall be Glorified with the self same Glory, wherewith the Father has
Glorified him; having put Christ our Head into a Kingdom of all Power and
Dominion. For if the first Adam had this Prerogative given to him, much more
abundantly will the second, have it not only appropriated to himself singly,
but to all that are incorporated into his Life and Nature. This must have its
Birthday, brought forth into manifestation in its appointed Season. The signs
of the near approaching of this Time, will be known as a forerunner in the
holy Seed that is sensible of it is great Oppression, by the unutterable Groans
and Travailing in Pangs of Sorrow, till this mighty Lordly Birth of Power shall
stretch forth beyond all Weakness and Minority: And hereby come to understand
to what it is begotten again, and who is it is Father, as belonging to that
Heavenly Family and Progeny, to whom all Kingdoms and Worlds do belong. Which
being once made knowable for beliving in the truth hereof, it would call up
from all these Terrestrial and inconsiderable Objects and things, wherein
nothing but Mutation, Dissolution and Death can be hoped for. For it is the
policy of the Prince of Darkness, to keep Souls ignorant of their Purchased
Dowry and Crown. By presenting Terrene and Worldly things to baffle them out of
their true Original Pedigree, and Right unto the Tree of Life.

. XLIV. Against which a particular Alarm I have heard for Caution and Warning;
not only to my self, but to all those who would not lose that Right that
belongs to the Firstborn Heirs. Who are with me excited to make our Claim to
all that has been here mentioned of the Royal Immunities, which through
overcoming and Conquest gained over the Temptations and Insinuations of the
divided Tree, may each one come to be as Trees of Life, Springing from a new
Modelled Paradisical Ground. Then shall we know what it is to have an eternal
Life subsistency in our selves, with the true Antidote and all Sovereign
Medicine, that may run into every part of healing. So that while in visible
forms we yet appear, the Source from the God of Love will so diffuse himself as
to preserve Immortality of Life, whereby all the latter Age of Miraculous
Wonders and Amazing works shall put forth, as Bodily Vehicles are thus fitted
and Sanctified, by the residing of the Holy Ghost. O Blessed will those Souls
in a Thousand degrees be, that shall live this time to see, wherein Redemption
shall be completed fully. No Verbal Tongue, or Pen, can to the utmost
Everlasting bounds of this Glorious State, be able to express. This Watchword
I only give as it was Sounded in me. That we rouse up from out of the Sleepy
Earth; Girding up and stretching forth our Angelical Wings, with our Eyes fixed
upon the Heavens; that they may so open as we may behold and see our Glorious
Lord, who within that Sphere of Light, may descend into our own Essential
Heavens. By and through which sight we may become Metamorphosed into the self
same Glory, and with him of our lost Kingdom again be repossest; as our
Everlasting rest. So shall exulting Joy and Praise throughout all Heavens and
Earth be raised to him: Who was, and is, and shall be the Everlasting Elohim.

. XLV. As I was now much exercised in my Spirit, about the things relating to
the Kingdom of Emmanuel, which moved me to supplicate ardently for it is
appearance; a quiet stillness of my mind I did feel hereupon, and this Word
came to me, be not doubtful for in the Heavens there is a moving Power at hand,
for the bringing forth of a new Model, as it shall be seen according to the
similitude, presented to the deep seeing mind. To which appeared a vast tract
of enclosed Ground. The Walls thereof were very high and Splendorous in Light;
but the Earth at first sight seemed to be but dark Mold: but immediately there
did rise such a flow and inundation of Chrystalline Waters, that no more Earth
did appear, and in the midst thereof sprung up first a mighty Tree. And just at
the dividing of the Branches, there was a glorious Face transcending far the
brightness of the Sun, the Branches were laden with such oriental Fruit, that
shed and dispersed it self into this Crystalline Earth, which caused a springing
up of many Plants round about this Tree. And there was a Voice Sounded from
this Tree, saying, Come and see where your shelter and hiding may be. Then a
twoleaved Gate did open, and I with some others known to me, were by a
Guardian-Angel brought in, each one was to know their Lot wherein they were to
stand, and their proper Tree. For as these Plants did Spring and Flourish, so
it should be an Emblem of the new Created Form, which was Christ in us, whose
Name we are to bear: the Lord in Rightcousness Springs and Lives here. For
the overshadowing Tree in the midst, should them nourish and feed continually,
till unto a full grown Stature they should reach. This was said to be that
inward and secret Fold, that no devouring Beast, or any thing that was hurtful
should hereinto invade. For it is the Glorious Lebanon, which according to the
Prophecy shall have its day for all powerful Fruitfulness, each one sitting
under his own Tree shall Eat and abundantly be satisfied: So that there shall
be no occasion for wandering out. For a strong Enclosure here shall be for the
Elect Ones, to possess great Bliss and Felicity. Then it was further hinted to
me, that a new date of Life here should be known, different from those that
Scattered are, and have not found the way of entrance into this Fold.

. XLVI. The next Morning waiting and considering this Opening; it was showed to
me further, that all this did but make ready and prepare for Christ, to present
to his Father the First Fruits of such as he has fully Redeemed. Upon which
did open a further Mystery by way of Similitude: of a Rock all set with
Fire-sparkling Stones, by which all the whole Earth was enlightened with its
Glory. And it was signified to me, that the Plants I saw in the enclosed Ground
when to full Ripeness they did attain, they were to be delivered up to the
Father by the Lord Christ, to be fixed so in God as their Munition-Rock, as to
be in no danger of being shaken or shattered any more. All Empowered from this
Rock of Wonders these Stones shall be: so that the Worldly Inhabitants shall be
amazed and tremble for fear, at the brightness of their Appearance, as being
the first Fruits the Lamb has offered up to his Father. Blessed are those that
shall be counted worthy to be thus taken into God, who their Covering,
Strength, Power and Glory, to the rest of the Creation for Provocation and
Emulation evidenced shall be. That they may also know that they must first
become little Sprigs and Plants, to prepare them for this higher State. For
none can come here to be fixed, till to a Christed Stature they can reach. Thus
the Kingdom of Christ must have its beginning and increase upon the Earth;
which must be surrendered up to the Father, to make the new Creation complete.
In swallowing up all into his own Deified Being, and so out of his Eternal
Virgin-Womb which he has in himself, brings forth distinct Figures in the Image
of his own Glory, as so many bright numerous Stars out of the everlasting
Morning: in which there shall be no fear of any Mutation or Change, for God
will fix himself upon them in the All-fulness of his Deity, Creating new
Heavens for their Habitual Place of that God that shall never be defaced, this
will be exulting Joy, when all pure Spirits shall again return to their
Everlasting Rest, and Dwelling place which is God, All in All.

[One thing Omitted in the former part of this Vision, ( viz) That each Plant
had the face of the Person whom it was assigned for, which darted forth from
that Face which was fixed in the middle Tree, whereby each one might know their
own, and lay claim thereto.]

February 25. A Call to the Shunamite to put on the Armor of Light, with her
Shield of Faith.
. XLVII. AWake, Awake, O Shunamite, lead on, lead on the narrow Path of Faith:
a Track that few have understood, but now the Time and Age does require that
this hidden way should be made manifest, for great Conquests. No carnal Weapon
or outward Battelier can compare with these that are to be execised as Divine
Archers in the Faith: In the Lamb's Battles no noise is to be heard, but all
Softness and Meekness is, by which the Arrows do hit, and whereby the great
Goliath does fall; so that this Conquest shall appear not to be of Man, but God
shall here act from the stilness of his own Deep, wherein he will manifest
himself to be all in all.

. XLVIII. After this there appeared a strait Line of a Scarlet Color, which by
an Angel did seem to be fastened on the Top of our Habitation, and it reached
up to the Heavens. Then my Spirit asked what this meant, and it was answered,
It is a sign of the Covenant of Faith that is confirmed betwixt me and thee and
thy Household; that so ye may be saved from the Jericho Curse that will come
upon the Earth, which Curse is spread over all this outward Prnciple. For there
is Confusion and Distress to be read every where, and that not only among the
Earthly minded, but even among the more Enlightened and better Disciplined: all
which carries a direful Face, so that no Peace is to be found neither without
the Fold, or hardly within it, but Divisions in every place. Therefore this
Word of Advertisement is given from the true Natural Mother, cautioning you to
retire and keep out of both the Outward and the more Refined Societies of
Mortals, that are not yet redeemed out of the Animal and Sensitive Life. Then
further it was intimated that our Spirits should fly up by this Scarlet line of
Faith, which would direct us there where a Door of Heaven is open; through
which we should pass, and have an immediate access to the Father of of our
Spirits. And accordingly entrance was made by the Spirit's might, that did
Mount the Soul up, where was sitting the Glory of the Majesty, Co-mingled with
all variety of Glories, that is not to be discribed, with the Glorified Person
on one side of it, and the Princess Wisdom on the other; the Court being all
filled with Angelical Spirits: that waited in all obedience to receive their
Commands, and moved in and out in that Principle. Then was it said to my
Spirit, This is the Peaccable Region, which I know your Spirits do delight
greatly to be found in; for in the Mortal World, where your visible Figures do
stand, Wars and Confusions are apt to meet upon the outward Part: Therefore
here is prepared for you quiet Mansions in this City of Refuge, which is
allotted to be the Dwelling Place for your highborn Spirits to resort unto. And
know, that this Privilege you shall have above others, ascending out of Time
into Eternity, and descending out of Eternity into Time. Whereby ye shall know
and understand, what is expedient to be known that relates to you in your own
Native Kingdom; for ye are but Strangers in the Visible World, and are not
thence to regard at all that which lies in a Changeable State, but to trust and
confide for what your eternal Patronage shall from that upper World produce;
which will be Blessings of another kind then what the Earth can give, which ye
are to rejoice exceedingly in: Then said the true Mother of our Spirits, ye now
know full well where your Treasure is, to the which let your Hearts be evermore
ascending, and taking your residence in Heavenly places with your Jesus.

. XLIX. Then did I enquire, How was to be the conveyance of these Blessed
Heavenly Stores that so necessary is, to show forth from what descent we come
according to our Spiritual Birth? To which Answer was made, you know the way is
only by the Spirits Flight, which in the strong Power of Faith you must take
from the fullness of the Godhead, which dwells in your Christ, the manifold
Powers and Gifts, that may be for the adorning of that high and holy Calling.
Your Lord would not be spared in this matter, he grudgeth not to give
plenteously, because it makes for his Honor, that his Spouse and Bride,
especially such as do Represent her, should be extraordinarly Dignified and
Endowed. But the Way for this, is to be as a Bucket that goes down deep into a
Well, so the Spirit of Faith is to ascend into the Heights, and then to descend
down into the Deeps, whereout the excellency of all Massy Treasure must be
brought up. For it is expedient that when the Spirtual Births, are near to the
full Age grown up, they should come into some possession of the Revenues and
Dowries that are alloted to them: These are not to live so Poor and Mean, as
others that have not hereunto attained. Therefore ye of This Society are called
to be upon your Strict Watch, and gird up your strength of Faith hereunto; for
it is Spiritual Industry that must give the increase of these Celestial Riches:
consider therefore and know what is the Hope of your High-Calling hereunto, for
where God has given great manifestations of his Mind and Counsel, there he
expects they should accordingly pursue, to fetch out all of the Weighty Prize.

. L. Now this high Favor will not only be appropriated to a Peculiar Number,
but more generally will be extended even to the saving of Nations and Kingdoms,
from those Calamities and Judgments that might well be feared and expected, by
reason of the Violence and Oppressions every where, with the Abominations and
Spiritual Wickednesses. For what Cure else can now be prescribed for the
repairing of these Ruins, and making up of these Breaches, whether they be
Spiritual, or whether they be Carnal? Must it not be by the Rod which shall
strike the Rock, so that the Waters of the Spirit shall gush forth, and
overflow, for Healing? These Waters verily will be for destruction to all that
Springs out of the evil Ground of Nature, and will overwhelm and drown the
Briars and Thorns of the Wildernessed-Earth. So on the other side these Holy
Waters of the Spirit will Feed, Nourish, and Strengthen, every Birth of Life
that has been conceived by the Spirit; till it shall grow up to that Maturity,
as entrusted it may be with a Kingdom. And these are those that shall stand up
in this latter Day on the Earth, to bless the Nations with the good Things and
Treasures out of This Mountain, that stands open to all the four Quarters of
the Earth. To which there will be a flying as of swift Dromedaries from the
North, and from the South, and from the Rising of the Sun unto the going down
of the same. For reports will so sound forth every where of the great Powers,
Goodnesses, and Glories of the Majesty of Christ here appearing with his
Saints, that shall draw together the Scattered and Dispersed: that through all
the thick Clouds and Darknesses they may break away, and make their entrance
hereinto.

. LI. Then it was further showed to me concerning This Nation, that as Light
and Knowledge was breaking forth as a mighty Stream upon it, so it should still
go on further to increase and multiply, and many should now run to and fro
here, for the opening of the Fountains and Deeps of such Blessings, as
therewithal the whole Earth should be covered: and this Land become as a
Springing Paradise. And no devouring Beast, or Hurtful Thing shall abide in it:
but the Holy People shall be for Bulwarks, and a Flaming Wall of Defense to it.
Which Blessed Day is near at hand: for which upon our Watchtower we are all
charged to stand, and to be found in a Readiness to entertain this Joyful
Message, with all the Precious and Weighty things that therein are Prophesied
of. But here caution is given, that all do stand in a ready posture, yielding
to Wisdom's Divine Discipline, who well instructs her Children to be obedient
to the Law of Love, whereby they will be able to stop that Flying Roll of the
Curse which is going forth: and to open the Heavens, out of which may descend
Flying Angels, who will proclaim to this Island, and to all Nations and Tribes
of the Earth, the everlasting Gospel of Love, Good Will, and Peace; whereby all
Internal and External Wars may cease. Which will open a torrent of boundless
Blessings upon the World. In the assured Faith of this, and all the Prophesies
here mentioned, let us in Harmonious Concord and Unity wait and agree.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Sect. 1. A Prospect of the Holy Mountain of PERAZIM, and of the Great
Earthquake. 2. of the Succeeding Transfiguration. 3. A Description of the North
side of the Mountain, and of its Gates. 4. The City of SALVATION in the North.
5, 6, 7, 8. A Description of the South Side, and of its Gates. 9, 10, 11. A
Description of the East Side, and of its Courts. 12 to 20. A Description of the
West Side, and of the Mysteries of Separated Souls. 20, 21. Of Prophets and
Pastors in the Regions of the Dead. 22, 23, 24. The manner of CHRIST's
Deputation to his Nazarites, and the Entrance of the Kingdom of the LILY. 25,
26, 27, 28. The Restoration of the Patriarchal Longevity: and the First
Resurrection. 29 to 38. A Resolution concerning the Communion, Laws and Customs
of the Inhabitants of this Mountain: and of certain Miraculous Gifts and
Powers. 38, 39, 40, 41. The Present Preparations for this Kingdoms Appearance.
42, 43, and 44. The Great Angelical Medicine. 45. to the end. An Alarm to the
Children of the Kingdom, and the Covenant of Faith made with them, in order to
a Great and Glorious Revolution Approaching.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 16. for soundess read soundness. p 5 l 10 f impartial r Imperial.
p 7 l 10 after be add, l 18 f desires r desire. l 20 after Tradition add Colon.
l 24 f these r those. p 8 l 14 f last r lost. l 17 f Revolution r Renovation. p
10 l 29 f laid r lag'd. l 30 f that is, r that [it] is. p 11 l 4 f the r there.
p 12 l 4 f the r this. p 18 l 4 f Nature-Spring, r Nature spring. p 22 l 14 f
one r ones. p 25 l 1 f them r [in] them ibid f that r that [are].


