THE Lawyers Clarke TRAPPAND by the CRAFTY WHORE OF CANTERBURY.

OR, A true Relation of the whole Life of Mary Mauders the Daughter of Thomas
Manders a Fiddler in CANTERBURY.

Wherein is discovered, 1. How she married a Fiddler at Dover, and a Shoemaker
at the City of Canterbury. 2. How she cheated a Vintner of 60. pound, and was
committed to Newgate. 3. How she cheated a French Merchant of Rings, Jewels and
other Rich Commodities last March. 4. How she picked a Kentish Lords Pocket, at
Graves-end, of his Watch and Money. 5. How she made her escape, when sold and
shipped for the Barbados. 6. How she came to London to the Exchange Tavern,
naming her self Henretta Maria de Vulva the Daughter of a great Prince in
Germany, and married a Lawyers Clark on Easter Day last. 7. How she was
discovered by a Shoemaker, and carried before a Justice, who Committed her to
the Gate House, All her rich Jewels (which were valued at three thousand pound)
being broke and found Counterfeits.


LONDON, Printed for John Johnson. 1663.

THE Lawyers Clark Outwitted. OR, A true Relation of the whole Life of Mary
Mauders a Fiddlers Daughter in the City of CANTERBURY.
TO tell you all the pranks performed by this piece of impudence, were too much
to be contained in one sheet; but I shall give you an epitome of her Life and
actions as follows, viz.

Her birth and education was in Canterbury, her parents mean people, her own
Father being a Fiddler, named Thomas Mauders.

Her Father in Law is by name Mr. Foord, and is also of the same profession,
but keeps an Inn in Canterbury. She was formerly for a cheat committed to
Newgate, where she had a homely black jade attended her as a Maid servant, the
fact she then committed was thus. She coming to London with her maid waiting on
her, pretended to be a Lady of a great estate, and that she had store of money
coming up by the Carrier, which her made so cunningly averred, that for Wine
and other dainties she ran threescore pound in the Vintners debt, for which she
was committed, and being at liberty she followed picking of pockets, whoreing
and thieving; this was the life of this gallant Lady.

She also was well provided for Husbands having one a Fiddler at Dover, the
other a Shoe maker living in the City of Canterbury.

About two Months since, coming to London, she fell into the company of a
French Merchant, to whom she declard the greatness of her Birth and Parentage,
and of the great estate she should receive from the Lord ner father.

This declaration of her Ladyship seconded by her waiting, maid, took so much
with Mounsier that he furnished her fingers with gold Rings, cloths and
necessaries to a great value, and expecting the coming of her riches married
her, but at last discovering he was cheated, he appointed her to go to Deal to
a vessel he named (intending to sell her, and send her to the Barbados) she
went on her journey, he promising to come after her and to go with her.

In her journey coming to Graves-end, she went to an Inn, where a Ke^tish. Lord
was drinking, who inquiring what she was, by her deportment supposed her to he
some great Lady, which she sufficiently made out, so that he k^ndly welcomed
her in his company; but afterward repenced his bargain and would have given 5
pound to any one that should g^ve him notice where she was; for when she was
gone he found that she had taken his Watch and money to bear her company in her
journey.

From thence she came next to Canterbury and persuaded her sister Joane Mauders
to attend her as he^ maid to the Ship, which to credit her sister she willingly
performed; but when she came aboard, and understood the Vessel was bound for
the Barbados, she sent to Dover Castle to the Fiddler her Husband, who was a
Soldier there, and desired him to fetch her off.

Her Husband hearing of her riches in Rings and Jewels embraced that
opportunity, and went with a File of Soldiers to demand her (intending to get
the riches and be divorced from her) but was denied her by the owne^ of the
Ship.

Hereupon he went back, got a Note from the Castle, and came again to demand
her; they not da^ing to deny the writing, stripped of her rich Clothes, and took
away her rings and Jewels and turned her and her Sister ashore, so that the
poor man her Husband was not a penny the better, but yet gave her no
entertainment, so that she and Jone were forced in a poor Condition to return
to Canterbury.

Now to come to this last and grand cheat; after she had a little ^ec^uted her
self, and was in some handsome apparel, she came to London, and took her
lodging at the Exchange Tave^n near the Stocks, where she met with a Lawyers
Clark who she so sweetened on, that he soon became a suitor to her, she telling
him of her Birth and Pa^rentage.

First she acquainted him that her name was Henretta Mar^a Devulva, Daughter to
a great Prince in Germany, and that w^^n she was two years old, she was put in
a Nunnery, where she remained till now that she made her happy escape, where
she had left as many Clothes as was worth 3000 pound.

Thence she came to her own Country in Germany, and some of the Princes there
would have persuaded her to marry an Old Man, which she would not do, least her
Estate (if she dyed without Issue) should go to the Nunnery; from whence (to
prevent all danger) she came over into this Country, and had in her keeping as
many Jewels as were judged by a Goldsmiths (whom they sent for) to be worth
three thousand pound.

She also told him, that she had a Coach and six Flanders Mares coming over,
with store of Money, her Estate being ten or twelve thousand pounds per annum;
and the better to carry on her design, she said she had a Steward in Germany to
whom she framed a Letter which was sent by the Post, and an answer returned to
this effect, viz

Madam, The money you sent for is not yet ready, but I have gathered three
thousand pound which shall come by the next Ship, and also your Coach and six
Horses with it, which made the story so plain, as many wise heads (besides the
fresh water Lad) believed it to be truth.

Hereupon his friends made up the match, and upon Easter day their Nuptial was
solemnized of this young Lord and Lady; for which purpose a Gown was bought her
of fifty five pound besides other Necessaries, the young Lord having his
Lackey to wait on him, all things being performed in a noble manner, to the
admiration of all his old acquaintance.

The Wedding being done, they provided Coaches for their friends and went to
Barnet, where they continued making merry till Tuesday following; where they
spent in so high a nature as some will repent their acquaintance with this new
Germany Lady, who spoke Dutch so exactly that she deceived many, and but little
English and that in such a broken manner as they could hardly understand her

Tuesday she came back, the young Lord would have had her go to Court because
she pretended to have great friends there, but she refused that proposition
till her own Coach and Horses came.

Her deportment was very noble, and her heart open, for passing by Newgate
(the old Castle of her safety) she gave her Lackey half a Crown to put in the
Prisoners bag.

Since this, one Clark a Porter (who plyes at Warwick-Lane-end) carried her a
Letter, with which she gave order he should come up to her Bedchamber, where
she asked what he would have for the Letter, he desired eight pence, she told
him that was too little, and gave him a shilling, and asked him to drink her
Lords health, which he accepted of, upon which she called for a bottle of Sack,
and after he had drank that, made him drink her health till the bottle was out,
and the poor Porter went reeling home.

The Nuptial being past, and all things concluded, she was designed to make up
her pack and begone; but a Shooe-make comeing in, who had formerly wrought with
her Husband i^ Canter^u^y, seeing her, said to some of the House she was a
Whore, they replied he had best have a care what he said, for she was a person
of Honor, but he still persisted and ^a^d she was a Whore, and he would prove her
a Whore, with which b^^ng brought to the room, he looked in her face and said
she was the same person he took her for, and that he wrought with her Husband
who was a Shoemaker in Canterbury, and that she had another a Fiddler, who is
a Soldier in Dover Castle.

Hereupon she was carried before a Justice and examined, and her Jewels and
Rings were all found Cou^terfet, upon which she was committed to the
Gate House, from whence (if be first Husband appear, she will be transported to
her old quarters at Newgate, and finish her course at Paddington* if she do
not Cheat Squire Dun of his Right and Title, which is a just Doom for all such
Impudent pieces of Iniquity.

FINIS.

