A Pastoral Letter Of the Lord CARDINAL Le CAMUS, BISHOP and PRINCE OF GRENOBLE
To the CURATS of his DIOCESE; Touching the METHODS they ought to take, and in
what Manner they should behave Themselves toward Their NEW CONVERTS.

Faithfully Translated from the Original in French.

London, Printed by Nath. Thompson at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden
near Charing Cross. Anno Domini MDCLXXXVII.

ALthough I have already declared in Our last Synod, the Means you ought to
Use; and in what Manner you should treat the New Converts of my Diocese:
Nevertheless I have thought good to signify more particularly to you here, the
principal Things which will require your best Attention and most serious
Application.

I. LEt it be one part of your Duties, to Explicate every Sunday the Gospel, or
the Epistle of the Day; having first read it distinctly in French, out of the
time of Service: And that you may be the more able to Instruct them to their
Advantage, apply your selves earnestly to the Study of the Holy Scriptures,
making use of some good Commentary, that will Explicate the Text to you; both
in the Literal and the Moral Sense.

II. Make it your Business on Sundays and Holy Days to Catechize your
Parishoners by Question and Answer; Obliging your New-Converts to bring their
Children and Servants: And omit not to say Prayers in French, both Morning and
at Night on Sundays and Holy Days.

III. Have a Care you do not lessen, by a mistaken Condescension, the Holy
Doctrine of the Church, or disguise the Truths which She proposes to our
Belief, under the specious pretext of making the way Easier for the
New-Converts to enter into our Communion: On the other side, it must be your
equal Care to Teach them Nothing, but those Undoubted Truths which are of
Faith, and which the Holy Church has desided in the Council of Trent: You are
likewise to take heed, that you do not Mix or Confound the School Opinions,
with the real Doctrine of the Church.

IV. Endeavor to Vndeceive them of the many false Opinions and the Prejudices
they are possessed with against the Roman Catholic Church; by making them
Sensible, that We give to God only the Supreme Honor, of a True and Real
Adoration; and that We place all our Trust and Hopes solely in the Merits of
Jesus Christ, and not in any Pictures or Relics of Saints; and that it is no
part of our Faith, to believe there is any Inherent Virtue, or particular
Blessing annexed to those Pictures or Relics.

V. Suffer not any one to Preach Up, or Maintain in your Parishes, any Fabulous
or Groundless Miracles; or that they speak of Indulgences in any other Sense,
than the Council of Trent has declared them: Let nothing be Preached by your
selves, or others, but the Solid and Substantial Truths of the Gospel, in its
Natural and Original Purity; Expressing it still with all the Clearness, the
subject matter can possibly allow.

VI. Endeavor as much as in you lies, that every New-Convert perform his Duty
as a good Catholic ought to do: But be sure you avoid all manner of Violence
or Compulsion to them, since God admits to his Service only the free and
voluntary Acts of a willing Mind: Wherefore you must be very Careful you use no
Threats or Sharp Expressions in your Sermons or Discourses to them; when you
Exhort them to frequent your Churches, or Receive the Sacraments.

VII. Incline them all you can to assist daily at the Holy Sacrifice of the
Mass, but leave no Spie^ or Inspectors at the Church doors, to inform against
those that come not: And make not too severe and rigorous a Distinction,
betwixt those that have done their Duty, and those that have omitted it.

VIII. You are never to Administer the Sacraments to them, till you are
satisfied in your Conscience, that they are well disposed to receive them;
which can never be, till they have declared to you, that they do firmly believe
all that the Holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church Believes; and that
they will Live and Dye in the Communion of it: Therefore let no Humane
Consideration induce you to give them the Sacraments, till you find in them all
the Dispositions requisite to receive them Worthily.

IX. You must be very Cautious and Prudent in the manner of Examining your
Penitents, concerning the Sin of Impurity; Principally in the Confessions of
Women, to whom you must take Care to speak with so much Modesty, that you may
give them no occasion to believe, that Sensuality or Curiosity, has any share
in the Questions you ask them.

X. You may at first abate your New-Converts something of the Severity of those
Pennances, which otherwise their Sins might deserve, least too rigorous a
Behavior toward them, should make them stumble at the Threshhold, and so
Fright them out of the Way of their Salvation.

XI. Use no sort of Means to any one, either in Sickness or in Health, to
compel them to the Sacraments against their Wills Neither Threaten or Inform
against any body on ^^as occasion: Avoid likewise as much as you can, the
giving notice of them to those, who are appointed to Judge and Punish them for
their Failures on the score of Religion; But rest your self satisfied, in that
you have done your Duty, in Exhorting them to Theirs, in the presence of their
Neighbors; Make them sensible of the great Advantages they will reap by so
doing; engage their Relations and Friends to persuade them not to go out of
this World, without the Comfortable Help of the Holy Viaticum.

XII. In case any one Dye, having refused to receive the Blessed Sacrament, let
him not be Interred in Holy Ground, nor make any public Prayers for him after
his Death. Concern not your selves in what manner they use the Corpse, or where
they Bury it, leave That to the Kings Officers, whose Business it is to take
Care of it; Thrust not your selves into those Matters, or into any thing else
that may Alienate them from you, and so put you out of a Capacity, of doing
their Souls that Service your Function obliges you unto.

XIII. When they fail in sending their Children to School or Catechism; or when
they Eat Meat upon prohibited Days, tell them of it Charitably, but Privately,
as a good Pastor ought to do: And if by your Christian Care and good Advice
they mend not their Faults, do not therefore bring them publicly into Trouble,
or speak with Contempt or Aversion of them to their Neighbors, but content
your self, in giving us an account of those that have not Complied with their
Duties, that we may in due time apply such Remedies to them, as Charity shall
suggest, or the Holy Ghost shall inspire Us.

XIV. Pray to God Almighty, both in Private and in Public for their true and
sincere Conversion; Edify them by your good Examples, and by your Holy, Chaste,
Charitable, and Dis-interested way of Living; Feed them continually with the
wholesome Food of the Word of God; Oblige them with a Christian and Brotherly
Affection in all things, that they shall desire, and You can do for them,
either in Relation to their Spiritual or Temporal good.

This is the best way of Confirming them in our Communion, for as St. Augustine
says, Nothing contributes more to the knowledge of a True Church, than a real
practice of the Truths; The Evangelist teaches us, Ejus est Evangelium, ubi
vivitur secundum Evangelium.

XV. Put in practice the Advice the Prince of the Apostles gives to all
Pastors, which we may call the first Rule of Christianism, Feed the Flock of
God committed to your Care, watching over them; not by a forced Necessity, but
by an Affection truly Voluntary: Not by a shameful desire of Gain, but by a
Dis-interested Charity: And as St. Paul says, Receive and Use with Charity, him
that is yet weak in Faith, without running violently into Contests and
Disputations with him, 1 Peter, Romans 14.

XVI. Endeavor to follow the Way that St. Augustine prescribed to a Bishop of
Carthage, which was to Act in such like Circumstances, without Heat, Threats,
or Sharpness; and to persuade them in your Exhortations, to fear more the
Judgments of God, than the Power of Men: Non aspere quantum existimo, non
duriter, non modo imperioso ista Tollantur; sed magis docendo quam jubendo;
magis monendo quam minando; ne nos ^psi in nostra potestate and non Deus in suo
Sermon time^tur St. Aug. Epist. ad Aurel. Carth.

Remember that the Diseases of the Soul, are not to be Cured in a little time;
and when they are, it is never done by Constraint and Violence, but by the
Fervor of Prayers, and by a soft and gentle insinuation of Truth, mixed with
Charity; So that to gain their good Opinion of you, and to induce them to Love
the Holy Catholic Church; tell them what St. Augustine told the Manicheans, to
oblige them kindly to return to their Mother Church: Let those (says he) treat
you with Rigor, that know not how hard a thing it is, to find out Truth, and
to avoid Error: Let those use you with Rigor, that know not how hard it is to
overcome the prejudice of an Unhappy Education, and the wild Chimera 's of a
Mind pre-possess'd with Error: Let those treat you with Rigor, that know not
how hard it is, to clear the Eye of the Interior Man, and make him capable of
Discerning Truth, which is the Sun of the Soul: But let us not use at that rate
those that are separated from us, not by any Errors they have invented
themselves, but by those of their Forefathers: We therefore offer up our daily
Prayers to Almighty God, that being thoroughly convinced of the false Opinions,
your Ignorance rather then Malice engaged you in, he will be graciously pleased
to Inspire you with the Spirit of Peace, which will admit of no other
impressions, than those of Charity; of no other Interest, than that of Jesus
Christ, and of no other desires than those of your Salvation, St. Aug. contr.
Epist. fundum cha. 2.

Sir, I am ever, Your most Affectionate, The Cardinal le CAMVS.
At Grenoble the 28 April 1687

