OBSERVATIONS upon a Sermon Entitled, A Confutation of Atheism from the
Faculties of the Soul, alias, Matter and Motion cannot think: Preached April 4.
1692.
By way of REFUTATION.

THE whole Sermon is comprehended in 39 pages, the first 12 of which, or to
page 12, are employed as an Introduction or Apparatus to his Text and Design:
and page 12, the Preacher says, he intends to prove, that the Life, Motion,
Essence and Nature of Man is derived from God, and may direct Men to the
knowledge of him: but all this need not be proved to Men of my opinion, who do
willingly agree the Truth of his Assertion.

P. 13. he says he will prove, That there is an Immaterial Substance in Man,
which we call Soul and Spirit, essentially distinct from our Bodies. And this
if he shall substantially perform, it shall pass for heroic and above all
ordinary power; but presently he seeks to avoid and shift off his performance
of Proving, by saying, that the thing is evident in it self. But this I do
utterly deny, and think the contrary more evident, viz. That the humane Soul is
a material Spirit generated, growing, and falling with the Body, and rising
again with it at the sound of the voice of the Archangel, and the trump of God.
And upon this Difference between our Positions, the state of our present
Controversy will depend. I have denied this his Assertion, That the thing is
self-evident. Why, but says he, There is something in Man's Composition that
thinks, deliberates, consents and actuates all humane Sensations and Powers;
these Activities cannot come from nothing, therefore they come from an
immaterial Soul or Spirit in Man. To this I answer, his Consequence is not
good; viz. These Powers come from something, ergo, from an Immaterial Spirit:
for they may come from a Material Spirit. In proof whereof I argue a simili:
The Plants live, grow, flourish and fructify by a Material Spirit: The Insects
act admirably by a like Spirit: The Brutes act sensibly and knowingly by a like
Spirit: ergo, Man may perform all his natural Functions by the like means of a
Material Spirit, inspiring and acting the proper Organs which God has made apt
for such purposes. We see, in a Musical Organ, every Pipe has its proper Sound
and Function, and the same Breath acts them all; and therein appears a great
Effect and Power of Matter and Motion, rightly fabricated, and acted by the
hand of Artists: and what then may not God do with them and by them, when he
pleases?

I take a second Exception to his saying, there is something in Man's
Composition that thinks, argues, etc. He says there is no Man so skeptical as
to deny this, or to doubt of it; but his Mistake is great in it: for I do
believe, that there is not any particular thing in Man's composition that
thinks, argues, etc. but that it is the Man himself, viz. the whole Composition
of Soul and Body by a divine and admirable Contexture united, which thinks,
argues, and does all other natural things, which God has given him a Power and
Propensity to do. It is not the Preacher's something in Man that does all those
things which he mentions; but it is the Man that does them, not that something
which he will surmise to be the Soul, for that cannot act without the bodily
Organs, not think without the Brain, nor remember without the Organ of Memory,
any more than see without an Eye, or speak without a Tongue, or generate
without a proper Organ for that purpose.

And this needs be no news to our Preacher, for his Master Aristotle, in his
treatise of the Soul, lib. 2. cap. 5. counts it a great impropriety of speaking
to say, that the Soul is sorrowful, fearful, sensitive or rational, angry or
the like; and that one may say as properly, that the Soul weaves or builds; and
that it is not proper to say, the Soul learns or reasons, but the Man does so,
viz. the whole Compositum of Soul and Body does them: further he says there,
To love, hate, think, or use reason, are not properly Affections or Actions of
the Soul, but of him who has the Soul. In his 1. cap. dicti Lib. he questions
whether the Soul have any Affections or Actions, not communicated to the
Compositum or Person, but kept as peculiar to itself. Finally he says, It seems
to him, that the Soul has neither Desire, Anger, Fear, etc. nor can do or
suffer by them without the Body; nor that it can so much as perceive or be
sensible without it: the very Intellect, he thinks, either is the Fancy, or
cannot be acted without it, and then cannot the Soul use it without help of the
bodily Organs. Dicaearchus maintains his Master's doctrine in this point, and
Pliny in his Natural History, lib. 7. cap. 55. says the like, Show if you can,
says he, what is the Substance and Body of the Soul? (as it were) what kind of
Matter is it apart from the Body? where lies the Cogitation which she has?
how does she see or hear? what touches she? nay, what one thing does she? how
is she employed? or if there be none of all this in her, what good can be to
her without them? surely these are but Imaginations of Men, who fain would live
always. And there is the like Foolery in preserving of Men's Dead Bodies: yea,
such is the Folly and Vanity of Men, that they think the human Soul extends
[naturally] to future Ages; and that Ghosts separated from their Bodies have
Sense, and thereupon render Men them honor and worship; making a God of him
who is not so much as a Man; as if the manner of Men's Breathing differed from
that of other Creatures. These were all persons eminently learned, and yet they
denied that Man's Powers were acted by any particular or specifical something
that was in him; and affirmed (as I do) that all are Actions of the Compositum,
or the Man, a Contexture of Soul and Body; and by no means can our Preacher's
something perform such Offices, without the divine and admirable Contexture of
Soul and Body: for that the one of these without the other can do no such
things, nor can probably do or suffer anything at all.

P. 14. Our Preacher says, Such Powers and Actions must have an Efficient
Cause; and I grant it, and assign the Contexture of Soul and Body in Man, as
the Efficient and proper Cause of all such Actions. Then he says, that
Cogitation, Volition and Sensation are neither inherent in Matter as such, nor
acquirable to Matter by any Motion or Modification of it. To this I answer,
that Sensation and Perception are inherent in Man and Beast, and to each of
them belonging, as they are divine Compositions, or rather Contextures, of Soul
and Body. Genesis 2.7. says God formed Man of the dust of the ground; so c. 3. v.
19. God says to Man, out of the ground wast thou taken, for dust thou art and
to dust shall thou return. We know that human Arts have so far prevailed as to
communicate to dead and hard Matter a fixed and regular Motion: Witness
Architas his Dove, and Regiomontanus his Eagle, both made of Wood, and a Fly of
Iron made by the last, who all flew at their full liberty in the Air, to a
certain and considerable distance, and returned in a regular manner to the
places from whence they first set out; and this, Men would not then believe
could be done without an Immaterial Spirit; that these Engines therefore were
moved by Demons, and the Artists were Conjurers, was a common opinion of those
times, and hitherto Artists are with Difficulty defended from such Imputations.
Dr. Willis in his Anima Brutorum p. 40. De illis redarguendis solicitus non
sum, qui viventium sensus and facultates quascunque perceptivas, non nisi a
substantia immateriali immortalique obire posse contendunt; he says, He did not
think such Thinkers worthy of any answer; and this perhaps might be his reason
for it, he knew that our Preacher's Affertion was maintained by several learned
Men, but after a different mode of Argumentation: for when they were pressed by
the Argument taken from the Actions and Faculties of the Brutes, viz. that they
have and act as many Senses as Men have, and use them as perfectly, that they
have as strong and active Affections, Passions, Appetites and local Motions as
Men have; that they have Fancy, Memory and Perceivance, like those of Men,
tho in far lower degrees than those of Men are. Upon averment that all these
Faculties in the Brutes were acted by a material Spirit, and a demand why the
same might not be effected amongst Men: the Maintainers of Immateriality seem
much put to it for an answer to this Objection, and they are divided upon it:
some of them say, that Brutes have neither Senses, nor Affections, nor
Appetites, nor any sort of Perceivances at all, and that they know no more of
what they do, than the Organ-pipes know when they make Music, or a pair of
Bellows that they blow the Fire; whence they would infer, that they have not,
and need not, any sort of Soul, for that they neither use nor have any sensible
Faculty at all. But this Argument appears to me, as I suppose it did to Dr.
Willis, argumentum ducens ad absurdum, and therefore but a Fallacy. For what
can lightly appear more absurd to the common sense of Mankind, than boldly and
seriously to affirm that a Dog or a Horse does neither hear, see, smell, taste,
nor even feel, when they are whipped, spurred or beaten; and that Beasts have
neither Love, Wrath, Fear, Expectation or Desire; these Assertions appear so
contrary to Men's daily experience, and therefore so absurd as to make Dr.
Willis think such Arguers deserve no answer: and yet Des Carts and Sir K.
Digby profess to argue on that side, and thereby to support the necessary
Immateriality of a human Soul. Others there are who, to support the necessity
of such an Immateriality, take a quite different and even a contrary course;
for observing the infirmity and absurdity of the forecited Argument, they agree
and acknowledge, that Brutes have and use all their Senses, Affections,
Passions, Appetites and local Motions as Men use them; and that they have and
use Phanfie, Memory, Perceivance and Choice, like, but in a much lower degree
than those of Men: but, say they, the Brutes cannot thus act without the
assistance and guidance of Spirits or Souls; nay, and that it is not a Material
Soul which can serve for such purposes, but that Brutes must of necessity be
reputed to have Immaterial Souls, praeexistent before they came into their
brutal Bodies, and that shall subsist in a state of Separation after the death
of such brutal Bodies: And this they say and affirm, with design to persuade,
that there is an absolute necessity for Men to have Immaterial Souls; because,
say they, the very Brutes cannot act their Senses and Faculties without such
Souls. And these were such Arguers as Dr Willis thought not to deserve his
Answer: and yet Dr. More asserts this opinion in terminis; and Baxter follows
the same very near, although not altogether so fully. But they are all eagerly
bent to establish the Immateriality, and Immortality of Human Souls; for fear,
that otherwise there would not be a sufficient ground or foundation for the
expectation of Rewards and Punishments future to this Life; not enough
remembering or considering the Article of the Resurrection, and the last
Judgment, appointed by God for that very purpose of distributing Recompenses
according to the behavior which Men have used in passing through the Trials
and Temptations of this World.

Our Preacher insists, That if Sensation were inherent in Matter, Stocks and
Stones would be Percipient and Rational Creatures. To this, I say, that may be
competent to, and inherent in one sort of Matter, which is very incompetent to,
and incoherent with, another sort of Matter. But he seems to intend a
confounding all sorts of Matter together, as if Logs, Metals, and Stones, were
of the same nature with Flesh, Blood and Brain, or those of Water, Air and
Fire; amongst all which sorts of Matter, I say, there are very great
Differences; and some of these sorts of Matter are capable of such Effects and
Operations, as others of them are not.

P. 15. Aimed only against Atheists,, and such as deny there are any Spiritual
Substunces. I say thereunto, I am not of that Belief or Opinion.

P. 17. He says, Matter cannot acquire Motion of it self. This I deny: For I
say, that Wind and Fire are Matter, and yet Self-movers; nor do they, or can
they, ever lose their Motion, or cease moving so long as they continue to be
Wind or Fire. And if we shall consider the Dust of which Adam was made, we may
find that it may be so comminuted and refined, as when pounced through a fine
Searce, the smallest part of it will rise up again like a thin cloud, ascending
upwards of itself, and apt to be moved with every little Breath; resembling,
and fine as those Atoms which we call Motes in the Sun, and which of their own
nature maintain a perpetual Motion. It seems a Compositum of such active
Particles impregnated with rorid Steams and Juices apt to ascend by adhering to
any solid Body, are not apt alone for Motion, but that by the hand and skill of
a Divine Artist there may be made of such like Ingredients, a Cogitative
Matter. For an instance of which, we may propound the Insects, who have nothing
but mere earth and dust impregnated for their Originals, and yet act regularly,
and according to the Rules and Directions of Art and Science; witness the Bees,
the Ants, and the admirable Textures of the Spiders; God thereby revealing to
us, that he can, out of mere Matter, produce Arts and Sciences, and especially
for the preservation and benefit of his Creatures: but far beyond the Practice
or Knowledge of Men to perform, and even their Powers to conceive or apprehend
the true and next reasons or causes of such Performances: To such purpose Phil.
Melanchthon, lib. de anima, p. 20. He had just before recited, Certas
descriptiones Philisophicas, quae si de pecudis anima tantum quaereretur,
utcunque monstrarent, aliquid quod cogitari potest in materia fons esse
actionum: nondum tamen penitus haec perspicimus, and cur ita factum sit
sapientia est artificis, non nostra. Page 112. he says, Maxim admirandum est
cerebrum, quod est domicilium, ac officina cogitationum. And although we do not
thoroughly know the Substance and Operation of the Brain, nor the ubi or, quomodo
such things are wrought in it, but must leave such Knowledge to the Wisdom of
the Creator: Yet thus much, says he, Men may know of it; oriri ejus materiam a
subtilissima part seminis and plena spirituum, quae in formatione foetus; in
illam hominis arcem summam quasi exaestuat, cum epar, cor, and venulae
inchoantur. And this derivation of the Brain, and its daily and known
Performances, make it look very like a mat^ria Cogitativa; and as such it shall
be left here, notwithstanding our Author the Preachers pretenses to the
contrary.

In this page he handles Matter, as if three of the Elements, viz. Water, Air,
and Fire were no parts of Matter; which I pass for an apparent mistake: And he
says, Matter cannot acquire Motion of itself without thrusting of some other
Body, or intrinsical Motion of an immaterial Spirit. This is denied before, and
instances given of the Wind and Fire, which move themselves and other things
about them, during the whole continuance of their own being.

P. 18. He says, no parts of Matter, considered in themselves, are hot or cold,
white or black, bitter or sweet; and that they have neither light or color,
heat or sound; these are not, says he, in Bodies absolutely considered, but in
our Eyes, Ears, and other Organs of Sense. I answer, Quod non ego credulus
illi; I grant Men cannot perceive such qualities in Matter but by means of
their Senses, but withal do believe that there are Light, and Bodies
illuminating, tho Men should not see them; so Sounds not heard, so Heat without
Men's feeling it, discoverable enough by seeing it at a distance, consumption of
the fuel, and the scorcht blackness of such parts of the fuel as are left
after such a fire. But yet he will prove what he said to be true, by an
instance: For, says he, If glass that has no color at all, be broke and braid
into small parcels, those small parcels will look to be of a white color, and
yet truly they have no more color in them than they had before, and that truly
is none at all. I grant him there is in this instance a deceptio visus, and
that the thing appears otherwise than it is: Shall it be concluded, that
because our Senses are deceived in some things, therefore we cannot trust them
in any thing? there seems small foundation for such a conclusion. And I will
thereupon put him another instance, viz. Put a strait Stick into the water,
presently it will appear crooked, but take it out, and it will look strait
again, and was always so notwithstanding its appearance. He may as well pretend
to infer, that there are really no crooked sticks in Nature, as that Matter
has no real Qualities because Men are deceived, in thinking his bray'd-Glass
to be white. And yet he says, P. 19. That he has sufficiently proved his
Assertion: But I beg his pardon, for thinking he is mistaken. He says there,
That the Qualities in Bodies can no more be conceived to be real, than Roses or
Honey can be thought to smell and taste their own sweetness. Had he said, than
Roses have a sweet smell, or Honey a sweet taste, the saying might have been
both coherent and true; whereas now it seems to be neither.

P. 20. He pretends to believe, and persuade, that the Body of Man is a
Senseless piece of Matter, which has neither color, warmth, softness, etc. He
says, he has proved this, but I do not know where; and I beg his pardon for
not believing him; For I must adhere to Thomas Didymus against him, trusting my
own Senses in their healthy and sound Condition, to judge of their proper
Objects, placed at a reasonable distance, and the fitting Sphere of their
Activity, and assisted by the ordinary Powers of Human Perception or Judgment;
which easily discovers, that the Sight is deceived, when it takes his
bray'd-Glass to be really white, or my Stick in the water to be really crooked.
He says farther, It is not Blood and Bones that can judge, nor can the Head or
Brain do it, as being only Body, and not imaginative. P. 21. But, says he, Our
opposers may reply, [and so they do] That the Animal Spirits, and Insensible
Particles there residing, [viz. in the Head and Brain] do actuate the common
Sense, Fancy, Memory, Judgment and other Powers of the Understanding. To this
he replies, the thing cannot be so; for that their Spirits must have each a
determinate Figure, as Cubes, Spheres, Cones, etc. But this is not granted him;
for I say rather, that these Spirits in the Head are Particles of the purest
Blood Inflamed, glowing and lucid, irradiating the Brain, and all the
Ventricles or Concavities of it, with the appendances of Apprehension and
Memory thereunto belonging. He says, We do not grind inanimate Corn into Living
and Rational Meal: and that Nails, Hair, Horns and Hoofs, may bid as fair for
Understanding as the finest Animl Spirit of them all. To this I answer, That
the inflamed glowing Particles of Blood, called Spirits, are not in themselves
Sentient or Intelligent, but they are the Actus primus corporis Organici, viz.
The Active Principle of Life, Motion, Sense and Understanding in Man and Beast;
stimulating and acting every Part and Organ of the Body to the performance of
those Duties for which by the Great Creator they were intended and made. Those
Spirits therefore Act the Eye to see, the Ear to hear, the Tongue to speak, the
Liver to make blood, the Heart to purify and refine it, the Understanding or
Brain to apprehend, judge and remember: It cannot make one Organ perform the
Function of another Organ, but acts every Organ according to its proper Use and
natural Capacity, And therefore it is not the Soul or the Body that act,
enable, or govern the Man, but the Man, by the activity of his Soul, and the
aptitude of his bodily Organs, does all those things which we daily see are
done amongst us, not by Soul or Body singly, but by the Virtues and Contexture
of both together.

For his saying, that Men cannot grind Corn into Living and Rational Meal: If
it have a meaning, it seems to intend, that Corn cannot be so used as to effect
Life and Rationality in Men; and if it be taken in that sense, the opinion
seems to be a very clear mistake: For every days Experience shows, that Corn
ground and made into Bread is one of the strongest supports of Life, both for
Man and Beast; that concocted in the Stomach, is converted into Blood in the
Liver, purified in the Heart, sent thence by the Arteries into the Head and
Brain, where becoming a Spirit inflamed and lucid, it acts in all the Organs,
the Powers of Life, Motion, Senses, and Understanding. And if such Corn be
Brewed into Drink, we know it may be made so spirited, as a little of it will
very much revive, quicken and cherish the Natural Faculties of Man and Beast,
and particulary the discerning and rational Powers of Mankind, in increasing
activity and mettle both in Body and Soul. We say of Wine, Moderate sumptum
acuit ingenium. 1 Esdras 3. Wine makes the mind of a Beggar equal to that of a
King, and turns every thought into jollity. This grows from the subtilty and
activity of that Liquor, and the many and strong Spirits which are in it, apt
to take fire and be inflamed, and to burn till the whole Spirit of it be
consumed. And the Soul Material, is not only refreshed and strengthened by Corn
and Wine, as well as the Body; but the Soul generally of any sort, material or
immaterial, cannot live or continue in the Body without Breath, Blood, and
daily or sufficient Nourishment. For the Blood, Moses calls it, the life of the
creature; and says, the life is in the blood, and as the life it makes
atonement upon the Altar. As to the Breath, all Men know that if it be stopped
but for a few moments, the Soul, if Material, will be extinguished, and if
Immaterial, will be dislodged and driven away from its Body, not able to
subsist there (even for a short time) without breath; which, how it should be
so very needful for an Immaterial Soul I cannot conceive. Well, but farther,
the Man must have daily, or sufficient Nourishment, or else the Soul, as well
as the Body, will find want of it, and the Man will decay by degrees, till for
want of a supply, death and dissolution must follow, if a supply be not had in
time competent. We read 1 Samuel 30. that David at Ziklag found an Egyptian in
the field famished, for he had neither eaten nor drunk in three days and three
nights; but they gave him Fruit and Water, upon which the Man's Spirit came
again to him: so Judge. 15. Sampson ready to die for thirst, prayed, and God
clave a hollow place in the Jaw Bone, and there came water thereout, and when
Sampson had drunk, his Spirit came again and he revived. In both these cases,
if necessary Nourishment had not come in due time, the Persons had died: for
upon nourishment they revived, and Sampson's Spirit came again to him and he
revived. I demand what sort of Spirit was this which came again and revived
Sampson? it seems not one that was Immaterial, because that needs not, nor is
capable of nourishment: and therefore I conclude it was a Material Spirit,
which needed Nourishment, and was capable of being refreshed and revived by it,
as adding new Fuel for supporting the flame of Life almost extinguished for
want of needful Nourishment. And yet, upon this revival, we find the Egyptians
Understanding, Memory and Senses were presently recovered, of which before his
eating he had little or no use at all. Whence it appears, that rational Powers
are acted by this Spirit, which depends upon Nourishment, as failing and
reviving with it. And from all this, it seems one may venture to conclude that
Corn may be converted into a living and rational Activity, as being a proper
Nourishment for Man and Beast, and for their Bodies and Souls, one as well as
the other; as being so for the Man, who is a Contexture of both.

His six next Pages, viz. from 22 to 28, are intended to confute those who
affirm, that the great or little Worlds were not created by God, but that they
derive themselves from an accidental Concourse and Cohesion of Atoms. That all
were the Works of God, I am ready to grant, and to maintain, as well as he; but
in his design to prove God's Providence and Creation by the Immateriality of
human Souls, I judge he has taken a wrong Sow by the ear. The Creation of the
World by God, I grant to be true; that the human Soul is Immaterial, I hold not
to be true: and I can but be sorry to find our Preacher fallen into the
Inconvenience of endeavoring to prove that which is true, by that which
perhaps is not true.

P. 28. He says, Men will object, the Powers and Actions of some Brutes nearly
approaching to human Reason, and with some visible Glimpses of Understanding;
and say they, if these things can be performed by the pure Mechanism of their
Bodies, then it is but raising our Conceptions, and supposing Men to be Engines
of a finer make and contexture, and the business is done; for then the
Objectors will say, there needs no Immaterial Soul, nor any Soul at all, for
the acting of human Faculties, but the Mechanism of human Bodies should be
enough to act their Faculties, and perform all that by Men is usually and
naturally performed.

P. 29. He quotes the other Opinion, viz. That Brutes have degrees of Reason,
and their full Senses, and Affections, and Motions, and therefore have Souls,
and those Immaterial. Our Preacher passes over both these Opinions as very
indifferent things to him, which of them be true, or whether either or neither
of them be so. I have shown before that both these Opinions are erroneous,
which he thought not fit to assert here, where it seems he properly ought to
have done it, although I doubt not but that he believes them to be so. He says We
need not be concerned about the Truth in this point, viz. whether the Brutes
are Machines, or have Immortal Souls: but I say, if either of these Opinions be
true, the whole Fabric of Nature and Science would thereby be drawn into very
great Differences and Alterations, and the point is not indifferent to others,
whatsoever it be to him. Well, but, says he, if Men be Machines, they can have
neither Reason nor Sense. He should have gone on and said, but we know that Men
have Sense and Reason, and therefore they are not bare Machines (as some
pretend to make men believe:) but instead of that fairer and truer Inference,
it pleases him to deliver a Paradoxical and fallacious Axiom of his own,
uncoherently enough introduced, viz. Omnipotency it self cannot create
cogitative Body, because of an Incapacity in the Subject. I have before spoken
concerning Earth pulverized and rarefied into the tenuity of a Cloud,
impregnated with steams and juices no less, but more fine and active than the
Vegetable Souls or Spirits of Plants, mixed and irrigated, and, as it were,
steeped and soaked by and with innumerable Rivages and Sources, proceeding from
Fountains and Cisterns, with which the outward World daily communicates, for
supplying the daily Decays of them. I conceive Matter thus constituted,
impregnated, irrigated and enlivened, may, by Divine Power, be made cogitative.
That the Insects work according to Rules of Art and Science, I know none who
can observe them and deny it: that Brutes have their Senses, Affections,
Passions, Appetites and Motions, all Men do grant, but the most blind and
wilful among the Cartesians; also that they have Fancy, Memory and
Perceivances, acted in and by their Brains, and Dr. Willis dict. lib. p. 59.
says, in Hominibus and Brutis eadem prorsus est conformatio organorum
animalium. And the Evidences that Cogitation and all other rational Acts in
Men, depend upon the Brain, and are performed in it and by it, seem to me so
clear and undeniable, as that joined to the rest it may pass for a strong
Proof, that the Brain of Man is cogitative Matter, or very like it.

And as to his phrasing it, that Omnipotence it self cannot make cogitative
Body, there may be applied a Saying of Dr. Willis, p. 5. such Men it seems do
think, quod Deus nihil amplius fabricare valeat, quam quod homo possit
concipere aut effingere. Well, but our Preacher says, this cannot be done
because of the Incapacity of the Subject; to this I answer, that Aaron's Rod
laid upon the Tabernacle was dry Wood, and seemed to be under an incapacity of
bearing Fruit; and yet in the morning, by Divine Power, it had budded, and
brought forth Blossoms and yielded Almonds: the Red Sea stood like Walls, and
Jordan staid its Waters from running downwards: the Chaldean Fire forbore to
burn God's Servants, or so much as to singe their Cloths; all which are Acts
beyond the natural Capacities of the Agents of them: and so was the multiplying
of the Loaves and Fishes, under the Gospel: and what will our Preacher say to
Matthew. 19.24. Has a Camel the Capacity of going through the Eye of a needle?
Christ says, with Men this is impossible, but not with God, for with him all
things are possible; whence it seems possible with him to make cogitative Body,
notwithstanding our Preachers assurance to the contrary.

That the cogitative Power very much depends upon the good Disposition,
Soundness and Temperament of the Brain, is a thing so well known as it seems to
need very little confirmation. David, Psalm. 146.3. says, When the breath of man
goes forth he shall turn again to his earth, and then all his thoughts perish,
the new Translation reads, Man's breath goes forth, he returns to his earth,
and that very day his thoughts perish. The perishing of his Thoughts may be
expounded his Intentions or Designs; but more literally and fully, it seems to
intend the Man's power and faculty of Thinking, for the Man dead can think no
more. But what is it that dies? our Preacher will deny that his Soul dies; and
yet by Death the Man's Faculty of Thinking is certainly destroyed; viz. by
Death of the Body, and the Parts and Organs of it, ergo, the Body or some
Organs of it are materia cogitativa. And the same may be further proved ex
principiis: for during Childhood, and whilst the cogitative Parts and Organs
are immature, we think like Children, but grown to maturity we put away
childish Thoughts or modes of Thinking: and yet then, if the Brain happen to be
clouded with Fumes from the Spleen or other Distempers, or even by those from
Wine or Strong-drink, the Man cannot think orderly or rationally; and in
phrenetick Distempers Men's Thoughts rave and rove without Order or any
Coherence or Connection at all: in Diseases where the Head is stupefied, as
Apoplexies, the Man becomes temporally incapable of any Thoughts at all. From
all which I collect, that the Particles of Blood inflamed, ascending from the
Heart unto the Head, are there further rarefied, and made lucid, irradiating
the Brain, and the Ventricles thereof; and that to these Spirits and Organs God
has imparted a discerning Faculty or Power, and that when these Organs are
sound and perfect, and the flaming Particles clear, bright and lucid, they work
to a perfection of degrees in the Minds, Reason and Thoughts of Men; unto which
God adds, when he pleases, afflatum divini numinis, and that accumulates an
excellency of Perfection to Man, and in him, of thinking, inventing and
discerning.

P. 31. Our Preacher says, he has sufficiently shown that Sense and Perception
can never be the product of any kind of Matter or Motion. And if this be true,
let our Readers make themselves the Judges. Well, but, says he, if this cannot
be corporeal, it must come from an incorporeal Substance within us. If he will
take a material Spirit for an incorporeal Substance, we are agreed; but if he
will have this incorporeal Substance to be an immaterial, intelligent,
angelical Spirit, I answer, he has not proved the necessity of its being so,
nor that the thing is so; nay here he confesses, we cannot conceive the manner
of our Souls Action and Passion, nor what hold it can lay on the Body, when it
voluntarily moves it: this is what we cannot conceive of such a Soul. But I
desire him to tell us what he does conceive or know concerning such a Soul;
that he will evince to Reason, quod sit! quid sit? unde oritur? quando
ingreditur? ubi residet? quomodo operatur? an separatim subsistit? quo avolat
deficiente corpore? If he can teach scientifically concerning these Points, his
word will be better taken in many other things; and yet even then I could
hardly credit his next Assertion, viz. tho we cannot conceive the Soul nor its
Actings, yet we are as certain of them as of any Mathematical Truth whatsoever,
which I both can conceive, and may be easily demonstrated to me. The Truth and
Reasonableness of this Assertion shall be left to those who are at leisure to
consider of them.

P. 32. He confesses his Ignorance in causes of Men's Pleasure, Pain, Sleep,
Activity, he says, this Knowledge exceeds Man's narrow Faculties, and is out of
the reach of our Discovery: he discerns excellent Final Causes of the vital
Conjunction of Body and Soul, but the Instrumental he knows not, nor how they
are united or tied together; he resolves all into God's good Pleasure; but he
shows us no Evidence that it is, or ever was, his Pleasure, to inform Mankind
by an Immaterial, Intelligent Spirit, which is capable of living in a State of
Separation from the Body. And if Corporeal Powers be confessedly too hard for
him, it may seem strange he should attempt upon the Disquisition, concerning
the Being and Operations of an Immaterial Soul in Man, without so much as
offering to make any positive proof of the Thing, from the Grounds either of
Reason or Scripture. I am not able to credit his bare Word for it, nor his
negative proof, that it must be so, because he thinks it cannot be otherwise.
These persuasions seem of small force, with those who think the thing may be
otherwise, and is truly so.

P. 35. He thinks, that for Men to deny the Soul, because they cannot see, or
any ways perceive it, is not reasonable: and it seems to me full as
unreasonable to prove that man has an Immaterial Soul, because God cannot
create Cogitative Body.

P. 36. He says, He neither can, nor will command God to come from Heaven to
consume his opposers. It is well he owns the defect of his power, and it may
be, that therefore he will not do it: For that page 26. he says, Banging and
Buffeting into Reason is the most proper and effectual to be used against his
opposers: It is, says he, the vigorous Execution of good Laws, and not Rational
Discourses only, that must be used to reclaim such profane Persous. He means
Laws so good as to Establish his Opinion, and set sharp Penalties upon all
others who dare profess to believe otherwise. So did Saul, he haled Men and
Women and committed them to Prison, because they believed, and worshipped after a
way which he thought Heresy. So did the old Romans; and so do the Romanists,
the Turks, and the French King; are all of our Preachers mind, viz. The Opinion
which prevails and has most worldly Power shall do best, to make severe Laws
with sharp Penalties against their competitors; and this is all that Men can
do: And this our Preacher desires should be done on the behalf of his Opinion;
and this course detects first his own Inclination: and next, that he has no
great confidence in the force of his own Argument; seeing he says, Persecution
and Punishment are the only means likely to prevail for reducing his opposers
from their pernicious Errors, forgetting the old Observation, Hodie mihi, cras
tibi; the Opinion cried up to day, may fall to morrow: He who thinks he stands
may fall: and therefore our Lord's direction is wise and good, as ye would men
should do unto you, even so do ye unto them. And in Mistakes of the Judgmedt,
Men should remember, that none can come to Christ but whom the Father draws,
which it seems should pass for an Argument inducing Moderation and Forbearance
toward our mistaken, and therefore dissenting Brethren, in Opinions which do
not induce, or encourage to an ill Practice or Course of Life.

Thus have I traced our Preacher, and followed him with Observation through all
the Pages of his Sermon, which concern the Immateriality of a human Soul. His
Promise made P. 13. to prove there is an Immaterial Soul in Man, seems somewhat
unhappily performed, and very unsuccessfully; for he offers no positive Proof
at all, and his negative Proof seems very insufficient for the support of so
great a Stress and Burden as he has laid upon it. And it shall be left to the
Opinion of our Perusers whether he have well performed his bold Undertaking and
Promise or not. Ready however to accept of and to desire a future performance
of that which yet seems to be insufficiently attempted. He said, I will prove
there is an Immaterial Soul in Man. I think this Sermon to be no performance of
this Promise; and I do not believe that our Preacher has said all, nor the
best that he is able to speak to that purpose: he may consider an honest Man
ought to be as good as his word, and what he performs not at one time he will
endeavor to effect at another, as far as his Power or Talent can be extended.
What he has done to that purpose in this Sermon, seems to me very infirm and
little considerable, as depending upon Men's opinions what God is able to do.
Our Lord himself tells us, that with God all things are possible; and it seems
somewhat an odd Assertion, that the Incapacity of Matter should hinder God from
making what he will out of it; whereas it seems rather, that he who made Matter
out of nothing, can make any thing out of any Matter, and many other things
than Men can imagine; and the most Miracles are acted either contrary to, or
above and beyond the natural Capacities of the Agents therein employed. If the
thing which he promised to prove be really true, it seems he stands engaged for
the Proof of it, in the best manner and with the best strength he is able,
assisted by his Reading, Contemplation and Conference. The Point is of weighty
Consideration, and he has built upon it the Power and Providence of a Deity;
whence it seems he stands engaged to make good the Immateriality of a human
Soul, and its Subsistence in a separate state from the Body. This if
scientifically he can and does do, or with any apparent probability, he shall
be Magnus Apollo, and receive Commendations accordingly; and if he fail or fall
short in the Attempt, no more will be said by his present Opponent, than magnis
excidit ausis: as magnum, there is glory in the Undertaking, and that he may
not excidere ausis, his best Forces are to be employed in the performance of
that service to the Church and to the World. In this Sermon he has forborne the
Quotation of Scripture, as disputing with Persons who refused to accept the
Authority of it: but if he shall think fit to stick to his word, and to prove
or endeavor to prove, that the human Soul is an Immaterial, Intelligent
Spirit, he will therein have to do with some who are ready to submit to the
Rules and Authority of Scripture, and to be tried by them, as well as by the
Rules and Experiments extracted from Nature and Reason: he will then, I hope,
make use of that Holy Book to fortify his Tenet, and descendere in arenam,
armed with his best Forces drawn out of all Garrisons and Magazines, fit for
such a design; so may his Proof appear in the best manner that he can perform
it; and why not in the best manner, that the same can be performed? my desire
is to see it done in such manner; ready to submit to Truth made visible in any
intelligible manner whatsoever. We have learnt, that whatsoever does make
manifest is Light; the present Sermon seems to have little of that Light which
manifests; but I expect that when he shall undertake to write ex professo upon
this subject, and to make full proof of his Assertion according to his promise,
that then his Arguments shall place Truth in so good a Light, and set it out in
such natural and lively Colors, as thereby she may be easily discovered for
what she is. And upon such a Discovery, no Man well meaning and intelligent,
who dare trust his Faculties, but will be ready with open Arms to accept and
embrace her whom all profess to seek; tho too many, with Ixion's Fate, embrace
a Cloud instead of Juno. My Meaning is to confide, in some Measure, that he
will endeavor to perform his quoted Promise, in the best manner that he is
able; and thereupon my desire shall be, that Truth may be his Aim; and that she
may fulfill what Esdras declares of her, viz. That She may endure, be strong,
and live, and conquer for evermore.

FINIS.

