The Wonders OF GOD's Creation MANIFESTED, In the Variety OF EIGHT WORLDS; As
they were made known Experimentally to the Author

J. LEAD.

Heb. 1. 5. By whom he made the WORLDS.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court, in Gracious-(...)

Henri Lion.
THE EDITOR TO THE READER
WHAT is contained in this Treatise, the Subordinate Author is very sensible,
will appear more than ordinarily Strange, to the greatest part of those who
shall look upon it. But yet, it is not at least doubted, but it will carry
along with it, such a Living Testimony for the Confirmation of its Truth; not
only to those that are already Redeemed from the Earth, and do follow the Lamb
whither soever be goes, being set free from the Traditions, Rules, and
Manuductions of Men; but also to several who may be yet under the Name, Mark,
and Image of the Beast, and of this Worldly Principle; as may sufficiently
evince its Primary Author, and Demonstrate that the Great Shepherd of Israel is
not now wanting, to head his Sheep into Fresh Pastures. The Acc^ptation which
the former Books, that have through this Instrument been brought forth to the
Light, have found Ab^oad in o^h^r Nations, since the setting forth of the
Heavenly Cloud, and of the Revelation of Revelations in the High Dutch Tongue,
is certainly greater than can have proceeded from any Dead, or Lifel^ss
Testimony. To Relat^ how God has Blessed them, and does daily Bl^ss them, as it
appears from Letters contiunally coming from Foreign Parts, would b^ to write
an History. And if a Prophet be to so much Esteemed in his own, as in another
Country; this is no new thing, nor any m^re to be wondered at, than that our
Blessed Lo^d himself did there meet with the worst Entertainment, where he
ought to have found the best: and was, as to his Divine Power, more a Stranger,
and less believed in, by his own Town, than by any other.

The Wisdom of God is exceedingly wonderful in the Choice which he makes of
Instruments, to Manifest himself by; that os That may not be attributed to the
Creature, which only belongs to him. He takes up a Meek and Fearful Vessel, to
make the most haughty Powers to Tremble; the Youngest and most Despised Son of
a Shepherd, to make him a glorious Conquer our over many Potent Princes, and to
leave a Kingdom to his Posterity in Peace; an ordinary Plowman, to make him
mighty, to Command both Heaven and Earth, even to teach him to destroy his
Enemies, by an Invisible Power, and to raise up again the Dead to Life; a Woman
to be a Mother, and a Savior in Israel, when no Man was found; and a few
Fisherman to stand up against, and triumph over all the Strength and Policy of
the World. So that it must be said, this is verily the Lord's doing, and it is
wonderful in our Eyes.

There is certainly so far from being any thing of the Art of Man, in whatever
has passed through this Blessed Instrument, and such an Incapacity in the
Subject to make use of it; that as it cannot but give great effence to all that
seek for it; so to those who seek more for the Wisdom that is Above, than that
which is Below, there is a clear Demonstration from whence it must have
proceeded. And I have here leave to say, that whoever in the Meek and Sober
Spirit shall desire further Satisfaction in this Subject, here Treated on, the
Author will readily Answer to such Inquiring Minds, and Orally confer with
them, while remaining in this Outward Principle.

Thus much is Undeniable, that, however some may perhaps, think that there may
be somewhat here advanced, which will serve to render Souls more careless, as
to the Great Concern of their Future State, and to Adjourn their Provision for
it; there is yet not so much as any Possibility of Admission, even into the
Lowest Heavens, without the New Birth, according to the Foundation upon which
all this stands. Wherefore is Highly behooves every one to secure that, and to
press forward with the greatest earnestness, hat they get entirely out of the
Hellish Source, and the evil Nature, raising themselves up above wha^ever is
Elementary; that at their leaving this visible World, they may be found
clothed upon with the Holy One Element.

This that is here Revealed; might not have gone further, than among a few
Confiding Friends; but that the same Spirit who Revealed it, was pleased to
raise up in a wonderful manner, a Great and Princely Defender, and Protector of
these Divine Truths, and of the High Mystery of Faith, whose Name Shines
Gloriously in the Unscal'd Book of Life, to do all that is needful for the
Promulgation of the Glad Tidings of the Everlasting Covenant, and Kingdom of
God with Man, and for the Building of the Temple of Jerusalem, and the raising
the Tabernacle of David that is fallen. The Effect of which will be more
abundantly Manifested, by what shall be hereafter Published, through the
Assistance and Direction of the Great Master Builder, the LORD Blessed for ever.

THE CONTENTS
A Manifestation concerning the Eight Worlds, or Regions, Allotted to Human
Souls, etc.

A Further Manifestation concerning the Four Heavenly Worlds.

An Answer to a Question.

Henri Lion.
A MANIFESTATION Concerning the Eight WORLDS, OR REGIONS, Allotted to Human
Souls; According to their several Degrees of Ascent or Descent.
The Revelation of Jesus Christ now Glorified, who sends greeting by his
Spirit, to the Good-willers and Waiters for his Appearance.
. 1. WHEREAS it has been sounded in my Ears, that no New spring of Revelatino
from him who is ascended into the Heavens, does come down, Behold I JESUS the
Lord have given and raised up, and will yet more evidently give and raise up
Witnesses to contradict the Unbelieving: Who while they continue so, will be
excluded from this great and inestimable Privilege of taking from me; and
thereby of knowing the hidden secrets that lie in God the Fountain of Eternity.
Now then to thee, who have already born a true Witness for me, I do give a
further Commission to go sorth, from a Book within Unsealed; wherein thou shall
meet with an unmeasurable Deep of Revelation, to publish for the Universal
Enlightening of the Ignorant and Blind in Mind. For from this the Spirits Day
shall break up apace, that so it may be known, that God in his Christ, has not
forgotten to reveal himself to the Inhabitants of this lower World in truth and
righteousness: But together with this, there will be that which will take up a
false Covering of the Spirit. Therefore my LORD did say to me, that pure and
right Revelation should not go forth Naked, or only Literally, but clothed with
Power in the Number Seven, where the Strength of an Almightiness shall be a
guard upon its Testimony of Truth and Verity.

. 2. Now then I am to make report of some particulars revealed by the Spirit of
CHRIST: Of which the First was this, That the time was very near approaching,
in the which the Earth should cast forth the Dead, that have been buried in the
Body of Sin. For this end a terrible Blow and Stroke upon the Nations of the
Earth will fuddenly come. God says, he is wearied out with the Sinful
Abomination, of this World, to which he purposes shortly to put an end. For it
has accordingly been sounded in my inward Ear, that the Ends of all Sinful
Worlds, are by the great Creator of them now determined. Upon which saying, I
queried in Spirit with my LORD, in what other Worlds besides this Visible and
known World, the Evil of Sin did yet remain? Whereupon it was replied, that
such as go out of this World in their gross and unmortified Earthly Life,
without Clarification, obtained through the Water of Regeneration, and the
Blood of Christ shed in them, and so Attoning for Sin and Trespasses; (which
not being entirely done away before they go out of this Life, will still abide
with them in their nature and quality after Death;) do pass into such Worlds,
Stations or Centres, which are most agreeable and natural to them, and do
accordingly bear great varieties, and sundry degrees of Punishments,
proportioned to the Impurity that is left in them. For as much as Sin dies not
totally with the Body, except while in it there has been a Dying to it, by the
Spirit of Righteousness spreading over it. So that from hence a Cry does go
forth to all Nations, Peoples and Languages, to Purge out the corrupt Leaven of
Sin, that it may not go with them into that World, or Worlds, where their Lot
may be.

. 3. For it has been revealed unto me, that there are several Regions or
Worlds that do receive the Souls of all Degrees and Ranks, to the Number Eight.
The First of these is this Mortal Visible World: The Second is the Astral or
Aerial World: The Third is the Waterish Elementary World: And the Fourth is the
Fiery Dark World. These are all the Worlds where Sinful Lustings may be, with
Punishments answerable, till Sin shall expire therein, through the Meditorship
and Propitiatian of CHRIST the Almighty Redeemer. For into the next Four Worlds
nothing of Evil or Sin can enter, or in the Inhabitants of them dwell. The
First of these is the Paradisical World, being all Celestial, and a very
pleasant State, where there is a growing up to higher degrees of Perfection; to
complete us for the Kingdom of Mount Sion: Where Christ's the Lord's Kingdom is
in great Magnificence, with all the Angelical Principalities under him, and
with the Elders, as Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles. The Third Heavenly
World is the Royal and Principal Seat of God the Father, with the Eternal
Virgin Wisdom, and the Seven Spirits. This bears the Title of the Great City,
called the New Jerusalem, where the Glassy Sea does encompass about. Then above
this is that World called the Still Eternity: Out of which were generated all
of these Worlds abovementioned. Of all which I must give an account, according
as I have had them showed and opened, from the deep Center, and Original Being
of them. I did not know when I published my two last Treatises, that of the
Enochian Life, and the other of the Paradisical Laws, that my God would ever
have had made use of me any more in this kind; the Day of my Life being so far
spent, and growing to its evening Rest. But my LORD does still follow me with
fresh Revelations, and Inkindlings from his own immense Deep, which run as a
Fiery Stream through me, so that I find there is no resisting this all-driving
Power; by which hidden and unknown Worlds must be made manifest in this last
Age of Times.

. 4. But before I go upon this large and copious Matter, it will be proper to
Answer a grand Objection, that is expected to be cast in upon the Reading
hereof; Namely, Since the Holy Scripture makes no mention of such Variety of
Worlds, how shall we give credit hereunto? In Answer to this, it is given from
him, who Was, and Is, and Will be the true Inspirer, to open new Volumes of his
Mind, which are not to be less reputed and credited than the foregoing
Scriptures: The Old Testament having been appropriated to the Ministration of
the Father, the New to the Son; now the Third Day is come, in which the Holy
Ghost will have His, which will Excel all before it, to Unseal and Reveal what
yet never was known or understood, that will be communicated to, and by such as
are in an extraordinary manner sanctified and set a part for this holy
Function. For from this Spirits Day, must go forth a New Spring of things yet
to be revealed, both as to the Present and Future State, that has lain hid
within these mentioned Worlds. The Account of which I am more particularly to
give, according as it has been shown to me from the Spirit of Inspiration. For
I write here from no other Ground, than what the Spirit of CHRIST, in the Glass
of Wisdom, has presented to mine Inward Eye, which pierces into the Deep of
God's Mind. And which is no longer to be concealed; for the Holy Unction is
given for this end; to drop his golden Oil, which will dissolve all those
Seals, that have stood so long for an hiding, and shutting up of those
Mysterious Truths, that a Commission is now given to bring forth; in order to
their being proclaimed, and inscribed upon the Pillars and Temple of God's
House. Whether believed, or not, it must stand as the Engraving of God's Hand.

. 5. The First in Order is this Corporeal Visible World, in which we now live:
Where good and evil Births have been produced from Adam, and so still shall go
on to be procreated, till the Numbers shall be finished and filled up, that are
indeed as to us numberless, but numbered by God. Here is laid a Foundation for
his manifold Wisdom, in a wonderful way and manner, to be made manifest from
this first ground of Natural Generation. Which Births after a limited time must
pass through the Death of the Elementary Body, to such Regions as their Lot
will fall to.

. 6. As for such Ranks of Souls that do dye Unregenerated, these, having no
part in CHRIST, and having lived ignorant, and as without God in this present
World, do go to their own direful Place, within the Circumference of the Evil
Worlds; where they will be proved and tried, till the general Restitution of
all Lapsed Worlds, by the Mighty God and Savior shall come to be effected. But
of this we will not further now insist, having elsewhere more largely declared
it.

. 7. Now therefore beginning from below, I proceed to make known to the true
Simplified Inquirers, what the First and Lowest of these Worlds or Elements is:
This is entitled the Dark Hellish World, and by the only Supreme Creator and
Judge, is allotted a Receptacle for Lucifer, and the rest of the Apostatized
Angels of that Hierarchy. It may be also called the Direful and Black Kingdom,
over the which Lucifer is King, ruling there in the Pride of his Might in the
Wrathful Fire. Now from hence it is given given us to understand, that such
Souls as in the time of this Life are Infected, and deeply Essenced in this
Satanical Principle, being stained with all that is Diabolical, going hence
without being Renewed and Transformed in some degree, by the Love and Light
Principle, must when they die out of the Body, expect this Hellish World to be
their Habitation and Portion; with all those Punishments that the Evil Angels
will delight to inflict upon them. O that this dreadful Place and Company,
could warn and terrify all that of this Diabolical Spirit are! For who would
ever endure, were it but for a Year, or a few Years, such intolerable
Sufferings, if they might by any means be prevented? Which may be done, if in
holy Fear they do eschew all those Evils that do lead hereto. So having no more
to say to this Dark Kingdom, we must leave it to the Fiery Purgation, until the
Venom of Sin in every Evil Property, shall by the means of it expire, both as
to Angels of the Hellish source, and to such Souls as have been deceived and
captivated by them. For the Creating Fiat will move the Mystery yet once again,
for the making of all things New. Then shall the old things of Hell, Death,
Sorrow and Pain come no more into remembrance. God is said to be Everlasting
and Unchangable in Love, but not so to be in Anger and Wrath: For Love must
drown and swallow that up.

. 8. But now the Elementary Worlds, with their Peculiar Furniture or
Inhabitants severally allotted to them, are next to be searched into. Be it
then known, that each Element has a Spirit of another kind than what is known,
or can be seen amongst Mortals. The Fiery Region has a Spirit proper to it;
that is, of the only nature and quality of the Fire: The Water likewise, and
the Air each has its proper Spirit to inhabit therein: Which are to fill up
the Wonders of Gods Creation, having their several Offices known to the
Creator, the which are not yet manifest to Mortals. Only thus much is revealed,
and deserves to be known, that these Elementary Spirits do Cooperate and
Qualify with the Elementory Nature of Man, both for Good and Evil, according as
the Propensity of the Mind does either way incline. But we shall leave this
Mystery till the One Everlasting Element shall stand open, for unvailing these
Secrets; and so proceed to let you know the State of such as depart out of this
Body: Which I am to order according to their several Ranks and Degrees. The
First I have already mentioned, who depart out of the Body in the Diabolical
Spirit. The Second Sort is such as are Ignorant of God, and of their own
Eternal Being, looking no further than to an Earthly Animal, and Rational Life,
in which they are swallowed up; yet do darkly see something beyond, Believing
in God and Christ Historically, and are convinced by the Light of Nature that
they stand in need of a Savior, and so falsely do take hold of him. These when
they dye, pass no higher than the Airy Region, where they are to abide till
they receive power and strength to mount higher: For in these Elements, the
Proper rest is not Found. Now for the Third Degree of Souls, they are those
that are more knowing and believing in GOD, and CHRIST, who being truly
Convinced of their Depravity and lost Estate, and of the necessity of
Redemption, yet cannot come off clearly from the Worldly Principle, sticking in
the outward Birth, so as they cannot pass through the strait Gate of the New
Birth of Regeneration; and yet do notwithstanding entertain hopes of Salvation
through CHRIST, that at Death they may presently enter without more a do into
the Heavenly Kingdom. In which Millions of Souls are deceived: For they that
are of this Rank and Sort, have but some what an Higher Degree in the
Elementary Regions, where their Receptacle and Mansion must be, till time shall
wear out all of the gross matter of the Impure Elements. And as they feel not
much Pain, Agony, or Sorrow, so but little Pleasure or Joy; because they cannot
reach the Vision of God. But Redemption will operate in these, and and work
through great Compunction, and Reflection, for the lost time and opportunity
which has been missed to gain an higher State.

. 9. But here a Query may be put concerning the Fiery Soul that is Eternal, and
breathed forth from God, and found to lie hidden in the Unregenerated Persons:
For it may be asked, where this Divine and Pure Spirit does go upon their
Decease? In answer to this we give you to understand, according to what has
been in the Divine Magia made known, that the Supreme Spirit returns to God,
that introduced it into the Elementary Body. So that God takes that which is
his own to Himself. For this is an high graduated Spirit that does belong to
the Soul, and that being smothered and stifled by the contrary Principle, never
came into any Dominion to suppress and reign over the opposite Nature. And so
with relation to this God said of the old wicked World, that his Spirit should
no longer strive with Man. So that the Soul, which never was renewed and Born
again, may go into Deprivation and Suffering, together with the Astral and
Elementary Part, for a known and limited time; till that which is Elementary
shall be Refined and Transmuted. When therefore the set time shall come, for
God to move and Open the One Element, that shall transmute all Elements into it
self, then the New Creation of pure Celestial Bodies in every Region will be
made manifest. But here I must stop my Pen, for the Mystery of both Living and
Dead is so hidden, and deep, that the Holy Ghost brings to light a new
Record, which this present Age cannot well bear, or understand. Nor will it be,
until there come a breaking off from the old Traditional Knowledge, and a
weaning from the Breasts of a strange Mother; that so they, as new born
Spirits, may draw from the Eternal Word of Wisdom, fresh Unction, that gives
light unto the Understanding, and by which the Counsel of the Most High is made
known, and all the secrets that can be desired are manifested. Which leads on
to the Four Heavenly Worlds.

. 10. The first of these is the Paradisical World, the Inhabitants of which are
such as have attained to a good degree of Regeneration, being Born of the
Spirit, and as have been partakers of the Baptism of Water, Blood, and Spirit
for Renovation; that so thereby the Principle of the Paradisical World has
been opened in them, before they depart out of the Body of Mortality; which
gives them a swift passage to enter Paradise. Where as Plants they do spring
and grow for an higher Transplanting into the Kingdom of Mount Sion. For it is
very rare that any Souls do come up to be with CHRIST the Lord, immediately
upon the departing from the Body. Though I do not say but some may reach to
such a perfect degree of Christ likeness, as that when they Die, this Angelical
World may stand open to receive them; and so being admitted into that high
Glorification, may from Glory to Glory still be ascending, till at length they
arrive to the New Jerusalem State. And beyond this, there remains no more to
pass into, but the inmost Place of Purity, which bears the Title of the Still
Eternity; for that nothing but Everlasting Rest, Stilness, and Silence is to be
perceived here. Of each of which Worlds there are some Particulars to be at
this time declared, from the Faithful Witness, that it may be discerned who
they are that are made meet to inhabit them.

11. It ought then to be known, how that those Souls that are Born of God, and
so Renewed in every part, the whole Man being changed into a Deified Nature,
must needs enjoy, and know beforehand the Joys and Pleasures of these Worlds to
which they do belong, according to that degree which any in this Lifetime do
reach to. Such as are allotted for the Paradisical World when they Decease,
will have it at some time or other open, while in the Body. For the Spiritual
Property will qualify most interiourly; so as the true Mystical Paradise puts
forth its flowing Glory in the inward ground of a Renewed Mind. So that this
outward Principle, and evil World, preventeth not in the Holy and Heaven-born
Souls, those pleasant Golden Springs from running, to Circle and Water every
Plant, which by the Spirit of CHRIST has been renewed. Therefore the Holy
Trinity do delight often to manifest themselves in the Souls Paradisical Heart
and Mind, as well Now as Hereafter.

. 12. From hence it was given me to understand, that as the Mystical Paradise,
so also the Mystical Sion does therewith also stand open in the ground of this
pure Heart, gradually shooting forth, and revealing it self in it. And
concerning this more than Glorious World, the Kingdom of Christ, in which he
with his Perfected Saints does Reign, it is shown me how the same Light and
Pure Principle does open it self in those Souls, where the Paradisical, or
Angelical Life does spring Spiritually. For every World, or Principle, does
attract to it self its own, which belongs unto it: And the Powers and
Influences of each are sensibly felt, according to the Constellations that any
one is under. The vile and wicked sort are pulled and drawn by the Magic of
the Dark World: But the Heaven-born Souls are inspired and qualified by these
Upper Worlds, as by some is well known; so that Paradise, and the Mount Sion
World, are manifested in their own Original Light in the Center of the Soul.
From which I do give a Description of these Invisible Worlds, as they were
first opened within; from whence Love, Power, Joy and Peace do spring, which
makes Heaven to be the Souls present dwelling with Christ, and all the
Angelical Train, though not visibly seen, yet essentially enjoyed. But this is
only to be known by Spirits that are deeply introverted, and carried out and
beyond a Creaturely Life: And when any worthy ones in this Light Principle
shall be fixed, then expect we may, that the Eternal Powers will move and work
through such, to whom the Dominion of Christ's Kingdom here below will be
entrusted: For which we have many Scripture Prophesies, as in Isaiah, the
Revelations, and Daniel, that do abundantly declare how it must, and will be
given to the Saints of the Most High, to possess the Kingdom; of which there is
also a Confirmation by a Renewed Spirit of Prophecy, that does assure us, that
this Day is very nigh, and that it will be upon the World before they are aware
of it. For as the Man of the Earth has had his Ruling Day Universally, so
shall the Lord from Heaven descend in such a manner into his own prepared
Vessels here Below, in his Kingly and Priestly Power, as shall overturn and
bear down all Earthly Powers, but of this we shall speak farther in the next
Advance, or Remove up to the Third Court, or Principality of God the Father's
Majesty: That is,

13. The Jerusalem City, which is more Glorious and Magnificent than what has
yet been made mention of, far surpassing the Glories of the Two lower Blessed
Worlds. As to the Walls and Foundations of it, with the Gates that open into
it, they are all so Diaphonous and full of Splendorous Light, that it is
altogether impossible to make it out, even in any degree, according as it has
been exhibited and seen in the Spirit, in the Metaphorical Figure of it, which
yet represents it very much short of the Spiritual Substantiality of this City
which is God himself dilating an^ spreading forth his Godhead in suc^ Amazing
Varieties. This is a Principle and World which none bu^ CHRIST in his Glorified
Human^^ty, with such high Saints as ar^ Glorified with his Glory can have any
access to. Of which unconceivable abundance of Glory these d^ with Him
continually participat^ Ascending and Descending, as cau^^ requires. No pass
there is into this City but through the Gla^^ Sea, which Sea none do tread an^
stand upon, but such Spirits tha^ are qualified and clothed upon with the
self-same Matter, which is all Chrystalline Water and transparent Fire. O how
am I lost ou^ of my self while this Globe Ligh^ and all the Wonders therein do
open! For in this interim it wa^ said to me, Behold! all the Weights of Glory
have I prepared not only for Pleasure to my self, but for such as do love, and
put on their Lord CHRIST in Deiformity; and so as Conquerors pass through the
Glassy Sea, to enter through the Gates, having this City written upon their
Foreheads.

14. Now it remains to open the more Mystical Sense of the Invisible Eternity
of this Mother City, the New Jerusalem, that from the Father in Union with his
Virgin Wisdom does multiply, and so fill up that Principle with Virgin Spirits,
that are most perfectly Pure and Immaculate; whence it is that nothing beyond
this, can any of the Redeemed ever arrive unto. Mount Sion Kingdom is most
Great and Glorious, but yet inferior to this; because that is in the
Mediatorship of Christ, but in this World all is completed and finished. So
that when this New Jerusalem shall descend, it will soon put this old, sinful,
and impure World to an end. But being able to give no more than a short and
finite Description of this Infinite, Eternal and All-glorious World, I am led
on further to open the Mystery of it, so far as it relates to this present
Age, and to the Saints, who are to make up this City, and to bring their Glory
to shine in it.

15. Here now it may be questioned, Whether any Spirit or Person in this Mortal
World, can possibly be so clarified, as to become a part of that High Court of
Eternity; seeing none must come there, but what have passed through those two
Principles, namely Paradise and Mount Sion's Kingdom?

The Answer. This is granted that it must be so, yet this is no Impossibility
to the good-willing and obedient, into whom these Heavenly Worlds will come
down, and open, and diffuse their qualifying Powers, to make them meet to be
partakers of this Jerusalem-world, as to its Spiritual Substantiality; which
will enter Souls into a present most happy and blissful Fruition of GOD. This
is not spoken only by a Revealed Intelligence from the Heavens, which is
witness great enough to confirm the Truth of it; but there is yet a more
Evidence Where, and in Whom this City is already come down in its Purity and
Brightness, though veiled to the Mortals here below. The Splendorous Deity may
for a time under a shade of contemptible Humanity lie obscured; but Virgin
Wisdom's Day will, by her bright Star, through the dark Pitcher of this Earthly
Form shine forth; so as in this time of our Evening-tide her Morning Light
shall upon the Earth spread.

16. But, methinks; this Query meets me by the way, What is it that I mean by
this Virgin Wisdom, that is the true Mother of the Citizens of this Jerusalem,
and who is the Princess of this Kingdom? Of the which I doubt not but to give
to the impartial and pious Inquirer a true and right account, from the great
knowledge hereof, which has been freely communicated unto me, and of the which
I have therefore in some formerly The Revelation of Revelations, p. 39, to 56.
The Enochian Walks, p. 26. The Laws of Paradise, in the Preface, and p. II, 47.
Printed Books made mention, as also for that now, upon the opening of the Four
Heavenly Worlds, a fresh Stream of her Brightness has circulated about my
inward Mind; that so I might know and understand what in her secret Deep has
hitherto lain hid, that to light and manifestation is commanded to be brought
forth. The which Command for Publication I must obey, and all her Rules and
Methods observe. In the first place, we shall describe her Eternal Originality,
which is srom God the Tri. Un Deity, being a Virgin hid in Him from all
Eternity, but as to her Nativity brought forth in Time, now I shall not speak
in a Proverb, but plainly, as thus: God Created Adem at first to bear his own
Image and Figure, who was to represent God himself, the High and Divine
Masculine, Male and Female; so that Adam had his Virgin in himself in imitation
of his Creator, which in Time was brought forth in a distinct Figure, And this
was a Type of the Eternal Virgin Mother that lay hid in God, the Center and
Heart of Flaming Love; from whence the production of a Glorious Female Figure
was brought forth; that was so commixed and mingled with Deity, as she became
God's Spouse and Bride, being Spirit of his Spirit. Now be it known unto all,
that from this Eternal Virgin Wisdom a new Generation of Virgin Spirits shall
be Born to make up the Glory of the New Jerusalem, JESUS CHRIST being the Head,
and the Firstborn of this Royal and Princely Generation, who was after the way
and manner of Humane Nature conceived in the Womb of that Virgin Mary, that was
but a Type of the Eternal Virgin, who brought forth the Son of God before all
Time: But Mary's Womb was sanctified to bring forth in Time, that CHRIST who
was the Son of God before all Time. And so the Eternal Virgin Womb goes on
still according to Nature to bring forth Wisdom's Offspring, by the
overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, and the Qualifying Powers from the Jerusalem
World.

17. In the next place, I am to acquaint you what is the way of Bringing up,
and the manner of Education, in which Virgin Wisdom's Children are to be
Manured and Disciplined; that as their Birth is great and high, being Heirs to
the Father's Kingdom of Eternity, so they may have all those worthy
Accomplishments suiting to the same, which are required. The chiesest of which,
according as they have been revealed by the Spirit of Wisdom, shall be declared
and made known. This then is the first Proviso or Caution which is given, that
for as much as these holy Births are encompassed with an evil and sinful
Principle, wherein great Danger and Temptation does lie, to prevent and hold
down this Pure Thing from springing; therefore as soon as this Birth is, from
whence its descent is with all high Graduations, it must deny and despise the
Image of the Earthly sinful Birth, by which the Heaven-born Spirit will be
daily proved. For Christ the Lord was not exempted from Temptations, so Tried
in like manner all must be, until the Conquest be wrought out. Therefore we are
charged to forsake our sinful Native Country and People of that sort, with our
Father Adam and Eve's Family, and to return unto our first and ancient Degree,
as free Denizens of that City, of which God is the Light, and which Wisdom
through the Eternal Spirit does rule and govern in all Love-soveraignity. This
then being premised, I come to give the Particulars after what manner Wisdom's
Children are to be Educated. In the state of their Infancy and Minority, as
soon as they are Spiritually Born, care is to be taken that this holy Birth
draw the sustenance of Life from no other than its own Virgin Mother, whose
Breast must at all times satisfy and nourish it. For according to what it
sucks in of such a Kind, Nature and Quality the Birth is, for it draws in the
Spirit and Life of its Mother. Therefore watch to it, and hang not upon any
strange Breast.

Quest. Next it may be inquired, What kind of Clothing this Royal Birth must
have?

Ans. Though it be Born a pure Spirit, yet it must not be naked, and without a
Body, for clothing of such a sort as becomes the degree of Wisdom's Princely
Children. You will ask, What is that? I Answer, It is a pure and fine Robe made
up of a Diaphanous Matter, from the One Eternal and Unmixed Element which can
no more fade, as did the First Adam's Paradisical Body, that was, though
Celestial yet Alterable, whence that withdrawing it self he became Naked; for
he had then lost his Virgin Body, wherein his strength did lie. But now again
Care is taken in the New Creation, that a Body be firly prepared for the making
up the New Jerusalem Bride. But here it will be objected, that none so made
Meet and Rarefied in this Lifetime can expect to be, so long as they are
Clothed with the Body of the Four Elements. In Answer to this, be it said,
that the Corporeal Body is but an outside covering, as the Badgers Skin was a
covering upon the Tabernacle Glory. Yet I must distinguish betwixt who are
renewed and born into this Virgin Mind and Nature, and they who are Strangers
to it, and know nothing of it, albeit capable of it, but for want of searching
into their own Deep, where the Original Matter of it does lie, they may, and do
wear out their Clothes, and go naked away, without being Clothed upon with
this Spiritual Body. Without which there being no getting up so high as to face
the Throne Majesty, they must abide in Centres of low Degree, till they can put
on Christ's Resurrection Body. Which is the Royal Robe that the Virgin Bride
with all her Offspring do appear in at the Festival Day, in which the Marriage
shall be Solemnized. The First Fruits of it are given, as Tokens and Pledges to
Wisdom's Children, by CHRIST now in the time of his Betrothment unto the Pure
in Spirit, who keeps their Virgin Mind undefiled, who will as a most intimate
Lover make frequent Visits, bringing unto them choice and spiritual Food, that
the Espoused may Banquet with him; while the Cup of Love is still renewed, and
filled as fast as it is drunk in. O is not this Ravishing Love of our Immanuel,
that does make it out to this degree; considering that we are yet but in our
Minority, and carrying the mean appearance of a Mortal Shade? From out of which
such a Pull and Shake he will in his time give, as shall make the vile and
gross Image which we bear to be more fine than the Ophir Gold, by the means of
that Superior Element, that will with our Minds so Qualify, and Commingle, as
the Light, so as to arise thereby in a shining Luster, for to come up unto the
unity of the Lord's Glory.

18. Now having given you an Account of the Seven Worlds, with the Inhabitants
assigned to fill them up; I proceed on to the Eighth, which is the Beginning,
and the Highest of all Worlds, called the Still Eternity. This there is no way
possible for any one to describe, or give account of, but by being taken up
into it. From which there is a freedom to give a Description, according to what
has been seen in this World by a Spirit thither Translated. It may be most
properly entitled the Highest Court or Principality, of the Tri-Un Majesty. The
Situation of it is founded upon an Abyssal Deep, where from an inaccessible
Light does generate and spread it self without bounds, as a vast Globe of
Eternity. God is here to be known and understood abstractedly from Eternal
Nature, as abiding in his own Simplified Deity, before either the Angels or
other Creatures were Created. Here the Holy Trinity dwelt in the meek Stilness,
enjoying themselves, before they brought forth any Image, or Likeness to
themselves. For in this high and lofty Sphere no Figures of Glory could be
seen, though great Powers did move here, and variety of Wonders did appear,
sending forth a Majestic Awefulness.

19. Q. But it may be demanded, What the Wonders of this World are, since there
is nothing of Figure in it to be beheld; neither the Father, nor the Son. nor
the Holy Ghost, in any Distinction for to be known?

Ans. It is verily so; yet there is a Consubsisting of the Blessed Trinity in
each other. The Fullness of the Godhead dwells here Unbodily, with his Virgin
Wisdom, and the Seven Spirits: All which do here open themselves from an
Infinite Source; and from thence all the Creating Powers do flow forth. For
this is the Abyssal World, from whence all other Worlds were Created.

20. Q. It may be further Queried, What further Wonder did you here see?

Ans. A glorious and wonderful Element was seen with numberless Sparks of
Light: As this outward Air [or AEther] is full of Stars, so this Element was
bespangled with Lights. Upon the Inquiry of the Spirit that was there caught
up, what these might be? It was answered, That all these were Simplified
Spirits, that were ordained to garnish that Globe, and to attend there the
Tri-Un Deity, from whom they are Generated, evermore watching the Eye, to see
when it would send them forth to assume or take up Bodies; being all pure, meek
and mild Spirits, which do perfect whatsoever and wheresoever they enter. These
are the Spirits that will sublime, and make Bodies to become All-Divine.

21. Q. Then was it further asked, by this Translated Spirit, Whence their
Birth was?

Ans. It was Answered, From God the Father, in Conjunction with the Eternal
Virgin Wisdom who brought them forth. Upon this I was advised, how that these
Spirits are reserved in this High Globe, till Wisdom's Day upon this Visible
World should as the Morning Star break forth. Then are they to go forth to
multiply and make a Princely Host, God's Wonders throughout all Nations for to
display; that so this World of Misery and Mortauty may see a more Happy Day,
from the Operation of this Eternal and Meek Stilness, which will infuse their
Powers, and qualify with Souls, that from before all Worlds were preordained
to be Spirited after this kind, by the means of simple Abstraction; answerable
to the Production of these Pure and Eternal Spirits, that fill up this Globe of
the Majesty of the Tri-Un God, who generated them out of himself, before the
Creation of Angels, or of any other Beings. For these Spirits are the
Firstborn from out of the Womb of the Eternal Virgin, as hid in God, before
there was any Figurative Manifestation. They will enter therefore into holy
Souls with such penetrating Powers, as shall give another habit of Mind,
casting it into an Eternal Stilness, and quieting all the Working Properties in
the Region of Nature: No awakening or stirring up there shall then be of the
Soulish Essence from its Conjunction with the Body; for that the Property of
these Spirits is to do and act all in a still and silent way; and from thence
the greatest Power and Force shall most effectually go forth. For it was told
me that as these Spirits of Light, naked and unbodied, did fill up the Globe of
the Unbodily Majesty in Trinity, so it should come to pass in the full Age of
time, when Wisdom's Firstborn shall be made manifest, that this World, or
Globe, should then descend, and open in the Virgin Offspring of Wisdom. By
whom alone the mighty Deeds and Works will be made apparent, so that it may be
discerned that they are wrought in God only: All Counterfeit Actings of this
kind will fall down as Dagon before the Ark, so that no dark Magia shall be
able to stand. For in this Day all faces of a covering shall be rent away, that
so the true and right Acting Spirit may be known. Now in this new Modification,
(which is a Passiveness in Spirit, Soul and Body, so as no other motion of Life
may be but from the Tri-Unity, that may beget pure and simplified Spirits as
numberless as our Thoughts) these holy, mild, and all-quieting Spirits may
multiply in Souls accordingly prepared for them. For it has been further
showed to me, that the very Images of the Mind should be all of a Deified
Stamp, and of a most deep Engraving from the most High Majesty. Thus it is
given to let you understand, that as from the outward Mortal Eye that does
speculate the Objects and Things of this World, conspiring with the outward Ear
which hears and receives them, so Thoughts do arise and multiply, according
to Temporal Matters, and Concerns of that kind; so likewise as these Spirits do
proceed immediately from the Fountain Source of all Spirits, they seeing and
beholding their Original Being, can do no other but contemplate, and delight
themselves in, what the Eye of God does see in them, and his Ear does hear in
them, having no Organical Speech, but such only as is by pure Thought, whence
they do generate according to what they see and hear in that Globe of Eternity,
which fills them with exulting Joy. Now be it known that when by the Holy
Ghost the time shall be expired, for their descending into Corporeal Beings,
here, or elsewhere, in upper Mansions, their Eye shall become our Eye, their
Ear ours; so that we seeing and hearing in them, to whom do stand open all
Invisible Kingdoms and Worlds, with the great Varieties of Glories in these,
shall have Thoughts of a right kind to spring in our Minds; according to, and
agreeable with the Objects presented, in as much as it quite turns the
Stream, making that which was formerly Downward and Earthy, now to become
Upward and Heavenly. O Blessed Time and Day, when this Still Eternity shall
thus open, and be made manifest in Corporeities! The which is given me to know
will surely be. And it has been revealed, that when these Spirits shall
descend into Nature, a Transfiguration so continually impressing will be upon
the Mind, for an incessant Generating of high and holy Cogitations, that are no
less than the very Nature and Quality of these simplified Spirits themselves,
as we being admitted hereby to look always into the Orb of Light and Love, and
to fix there steddily the Eye of the Mind, Glorification may be brought down
upon the Visible Elementary Body, while remaining here, at certain Seasons and
Times of a more intimate Union and Commixture with these Powers of the manner
aforesaid, that so, as occasion may be, Mortality may be hid, or swallowed up
in Immortality; to make good that saying, We shall not all Die, but be Changed,
from Glory to Glory, by the bright influencing, namely, of these Spirits,
through the Father of Spirits.

22. Q But it may be here Queried, Is not the Holy Ghost assigned for this
great Change, and Work of Renovation? And where do we read in Scripture of such
a Globe, or World, having such Spirits to inhabit in it?

Ans. It is true, the Holy Ghost is sufficient, as being so deputed and
promised by the Lord CHRIST, for the perfecting of the Regeneration, or New
Creation. But what if it be the all-wise designation, and pleasure of God, and
his Eternal Wisdom, to separate such pure Spirits from his own Fountain-source;
thereby to effect the counsel of his Will, relating to his Lapsed Creation; and
to put a new face of Glory upon what is so deformed and vile, through the
variety of his operating Spirits and Powers, immediately proceeding from
himself? They are hence most meet to open the Depths, that lie deeper than
Nature and Creature; being brought forth before any Elements were in existence;
for procreation of the Inhabitants of the several Worlds: all of which, are to
give place to that Superstructure and Building, which will be GOD himself,
quite throughout his whole Creation. For although Seven Thousand Years may be
expired, in the Miseries and Temptations of an Elementary Life, in this
Outward, and other Invisible Regions, yet what are these to a God, who is an
Eternal Circle, which can never end? In the which Circle of a boundless
Eternity, the Infinite and All-powerful God has much more to do in all Worlds,
than what has been declared in Scripture, or yet by any other ways made known,
finding all Prophesies and Revelations in Scripture Records, do extend no
further than to the Limits of the Seventh Thousand Years Sabbath. What betwixt
this Age, and that great Jubilee, will be successively produced, both in this
our Visible, and in those Invisible Worlds that I have mentioned, cannot now be
particularized: But in short, there will be for certain, most strange and
wonderful Alterations, throughout the whole Globe of Eternity, for higher
Admiration, than is yet conspicuous. For GOD is so full of an infinite Store,
that he must bring forth himself in a perpetual variety of Wonders. Let none
therefore presume to set bounds to the Wisdom and Power of the Immense Being,
to shut him up to this or that Measure or Degree, Age or Time, who always
moves in Eternal Liberty; for the revealing, and making known the Counsel of
his Will, and does not pin up, or confine the worthy Inquirers and Seekers of
his Mind, from fathoming the Treasures of his Wisdom. Which are so manifold, as
they are still to be renewed in every Generation, according as I my self have
experienced in my Age of time, as the Volumes of my Writings do give witness
to, proving that Revelation has no cessation, but that it is daily Renewed in
Vessels, or Instruments, rightly qualified to receive it. Otherwise I could
never have known what is here written; neither have been able to give any
account of the several Worlds, Regions or Centres, had they not been shown to
me. Therefore this is much preffed upon me, not knowing but that it may be the
last Testimony that I have to leave behind me in this nature, to declare unto
such as would know the Mind and Secrets of GOD: That a special Charge is given
from the High Court of Eternity, that you do not stint your selves up to any
foregoing Dispensation or Revelation, no not to the Scripture Record it self:
which though truly Weighty, and worthy to be received, believed in, and
comformed unto; yet is not to be taken up in, and rested upon, as if there were
nothing more to be revealed, for the Benefit and Instruction of Mankind. Since
the same Spirit that did Heretofore inspire the Holy Men of God to record them,
is Now in this last Day more abundantly shed forth to multiply Volumes of
Scripture: For whatsoever is purely dictated by the Holy Ghost, may be called
by that Name; and so it was, before Christ's appearing in Flesh, by the
Patriarchs and Prophets; which was then succeeded by a Newer Ministration, the
former being fulfilled in Him. This He promised should excel all that went
before; for a more plentiful sowing of the sacred Unction, in the holy Ground
of pure Hearts. The Sower hereof is, according to his Promises, gone forth; but
where Stony, Thorny, and Unbelieving Ground is, it cannot enter so as to take
root; which has hitherto, for a long time, caused a great Scarcity, and Famine
of the Spirit, with all its fruitfulness. But now the Day of the Spirit is
arising, and its bright Sun will no more set, but multiply to its Sevenfold
Light.

. 22. Hear and Hearken, O England's Inhabitants, for unto you a great Light
has shined. O let it not cloud, and pass over you; but be ye wise in this your
Day to follow the Spirit's bright-guiding Star, which is arising amongst you. O
London, there is hid in thee them that have a true, and right Mission, from the
Munition Rock, to give out the Waters of the Spirit plenteously. For a Cry
there is gone forth, for persons to be Prepared and Sanctified, by this Water
of Life; that so they may receive of the Holy Ghost, and be witnesses of his
Power. Hear, and hearken in the Spirit: O hearken, and you will hear the
Seventh Trumpet sound, from the Seven Spirits that are before the Throne; that
do tell you, that the Mystery of time is now finishing; and that the
Everlasting Gospel of the Love is opening; and and that the Heavens are ready
to roll down, to open their Glory upthe Earth, that the Inhabitants thereof may
no longer lie buried in the Dark shade of an Earthly Life.

. 24. Over thee, O City of London! a Mighty Angel does fly, with this
Thundering Cry, saying, Do not despise Prophesy, neither decry down the Ark of
the Living Testimony; from which the Spirit, as a flowing Stream, must renew
Paradise upon the Earth. And this Warning is given to all, of what Ranks or
Degree soever, whether High or Low, whether in the outward Grandeur, or in the
private and inferious Means of this World: Even to you all; and every one, this
Call does reach;

Shake, shake your Earthly Dust (away,
For now it is the Spirit's Day,
That will admit of no Delay.
. 25. For Scepters and Crowns must be thrown down to the Lamb of God: He is, in
his Saints, come to Reign. Wherefore all Nations, and Languages, and Peoples,
not only here in this Dominion, but beyond the Seas, every where, must the
sound of this Trumpet hear. For a mighty CYRUS there is already raised, whom
the most High will in such a manner uphold, and endue with his Spirit, as he
shall be able to bring forth his Temple-Glory and Praise; that so out of all
Kingdoms, Countries, and Languages, there may be a Gathering, and that as
Eagles they may fly to that high Mountain, where the Olive Tree will drop the
Unctuous Oil most freely. This is the Oil that in Spirit I do see run: And I
see that some in all Nations will herewith be shortly sprinkled, to give
notice, that the Omnipotent KING is entering upon his Thousand Years Reign.

. 26. Thus having, in Answer to that Grand Objection, to wit, How there should
be any World, or Worlds, more than what the Scripture has made mention of,
demonstrated, that there is a succession of the Spirit of Revelation, that is
never to cease, but is more than ever to increase yet upon the Earth, as will
in this very Age be known, and be witnessed: I must now draw to the Conclusion
of this World, called the Still Eternity. Concerning which, I have this to
declare, from what I was, when taken up into it, admitted to the knowledge of:
I was then shown, and taught these three Particulars, worthy to be observed.
First, that no Entrance for Habitation is here found to any departed Spirit,
though arrived to never so high a Degree of Perfection. Nay it was said, that
CHRIST himself, as the Firstborn from the Dead, and as Glorified in our
Humanity, did not ascend up hither. The Unity in the Godhead is always here,
but not in his Personality. For this Globe and Inmost Court is reserved; for a
greater Mystery then what is yet, to be made known: Only thus much I was, with
respect to it, informed, that as out of this Still Eternity the Deity, in, and
through the Eternal dilating Eye, did speculate his own Working Properties; for
to manifest himself in Nature, and thereby generate out of the Eternal Meek
Stilness; the Creating Powers from the Trinity did go forth, to bring forth in
the first place the Angelical World, furnishing it with Angelical Spirits: and
so on did proceed to the rest of the abovementioned Worlds. The Second thing
we are to note is, that this shut-up Principle, and highest Court of the Tri-Un
God, and of his Virgin Wisdom, with her offspring of Simplified Spirits, is not
to be opened till the Will and Pleasure of God, the Creating Father shall be to
move himself, through these mild, and pure Spirits; for some New Manifestation,
and Modification upon what in the Created Worlds is found defective; that so,
by a Renewed, Creating Power going forth in this manner, out from the Still
Eternity; another face of more excellent Beauty, and more transcendent Glory,
may, for an everlasting Fixation, come over that which under a Lapse, and an
Apostasy has been. But how finite and short is all that can be said, or even
imagined, in comparison of those more amazing, and stupendous Charges, that
still add to the Glory of God's Workmanship, in his New Creation? As to the
Third particular that we are to take notice of, which is, the Order, Union, and
Equal Degree of these Spirits, in this Globe of Eternity, we can but just hint
at it. This Unity, and Coequality of theirs, is manifested by their Operations.
They are in their working Motion most Active; but all their Acts and Powers do
go forth in a most profound Stilness, the Deity cooperating through them; by
which an Influencing Stilness does from them pass forth to the Inhabitants of
the other Worlds. And yet these Spirits remain all the while unmovable, within
their own Principle and Center, moving according as the Deity glanceth forth in
them with the Governing Eye, which gives them their allseeing Commission, the
which, in a delightful Obedience, they never fail to execute; neither can they
do otherwise, being unalterably Fixed in the Moving Power of the Holy Ghost.

THE Conclusion.
HAving now given a faithful, and true Description of these Eight several
Worlds, not from History, but from the revealed Mystery, according to the
measure of the Communication of the Spirit of CHRIST; it remains to consider,
what Use and Application may be made, by the Readers of these deep and weighty
things, that have been here Unvailed. In the first place then, we are hereby
called upon to consider, with the deepest humility, the efficient Cause, and
Founder of these Worlds, that produced them all out of an Abyssal Deep, and an
Eternal Nothingness. Secondly, We are called upon to appropriate to God what is
more Immense than Immensity, and Greater than all Greatnesses, Higher than all
Heights, Deeper than all Depths, Perfecter than all Perfections; who makes his
dwelling in an Eternal Circle of Love, Power and Wisdom, filling all these
Worlds with the fullness of his Godhead, made manifest in the express Image of
his Glory, namely, in the Second Number of the Three that bear Record in
Heaven. Thirdly, we are excited to consider, what we Mortals are, from whom our
Descent is, and what manner of Spirit we consist of, and exist by. For until we
understand our own Eternal being, we cannot know God, the Being of all Being.
For as we are the inbreathed Soul from God, we live in his Effence. Which is
the Glass through which we may see and know the invisible Deity, and thereby
also know our selves, as we consist of the higher Principles, and Worlds above,
as likewise of those Below. For they all Qualify with the Immortal, and also
with the Elementary, Part in us, for most wise, and wonderful Ends. O how great
is the Mysterious Greatness of the Soul, that lies veiled, covered, and
unknown to it self? The Body of out ward sensibility thuts it up from
understanding its own Power, as it is an Essence derived from God, and an
out-flowing Breath from the Most High Majesty. The Earthy Life binds it down
in all Men, until Christ in Spirit do enter in to make it free in his own
Liberty, by quickening the Dead Effence of these Principles of Light, Love, and
Power. And by this the Soul is restored to its pre-existing and true Nativity
in God; which is apt to be forgotten, if not continually revived in the Mind.
In which being exercised, it will put, a check and awe upon it, from the
consideration of what it is, and to whom it must return, as to its Eternal
Center.

Being come to the Conclusion of this Subject, I must be permitted, what I am
in Commission for, from the High and Heavenly Court, to leave this word of
Caution and Exhortation to all them who would full Redemption see, and would be
glad to be set free from all fears, doubts, and concerns upon that account.
Watch against all Cavils, and Commotions that are apt to arise in the mind, by
way of opposition to the pure Inspiration of the Holy Spirit: O! grieve it not
either in your selves, or in any other; remembering that you have it for a
Counselor and Comforter, and for a Key to open the Heavenly Worlds unto you,
and to give you an inheritance in them. The assurance whereof will be perfect
Joy, Peace and Glory, as some do truly witness, and do give it forth their
experience; who do therefore advise and exhort all, to whomsoever this Treatise
may come, whether, in this Nation, or in any more remote Places, where God is
pleased to have it Published, that they seriously Study, and soberly Ponder,
upon what, by the Wisdom of God, has here been unvailed, and declared. For it
is a Seal broken up, that does belong to this present Age, wherein knowledge is
to increase, in order to prepare for the Great Day, that has been Prophesied
of, concerning the Daughter of Sion's Kingly Dominion.

O come forth! be no longer hid, ye precious Stones of Sion, whithersoever
scattered and dispersed: Whether near or far off, at Home or beyond the Seas,
wherever ye lie hid, come forth. To you the Golden Bells from the four
Eternal Worlds, do Sound out their Alarm, to draw you into them; where, as to
your own People, and Native Country, ye may to the Feasts of Tabernacles come,
sitting down together in Joy, and evermore celebrating this Marriage Feast, in
the Unity of Love, where the Author of this Treatise would in the Spirit meet,
and so never cease to congratulate you, as fellow Citizens, and there to eat
with you the Feast of Love.

A Further MANIFESTATION Concerning the Four HEAVENLY WORLDS; ACCORDING. To
the Experimental Process, that some have passed through.
I. OF PARADISE.
. 1 INTO Paradise my Spiritdoth first take its Flight, where all things are in
good Order, and the same flowing State, as before Adam had lost his Virgin
Mate. Paradise is now stocked again with such as have waded through the
floating Sea of Sin and Mortality, in order to the putting on that Image of
purity, which is to the Children of the Resurrection, given by JESUS. For not
the least Guile or Fault may be found in any of the Inhabitants of this place.
My Spirit does see here all in wonderful Harmony: And this Word was heard from
the High and Lofty one, saying, With the Risen from the Dead I will dwell;
though this Principle of Paradise be allotted to them for a certain time, to be
a separated Mansion, until all be gathered up into the superior Kingdom of
Mount Sion, and of the New Jerusalem. Thus did I hear the good news, that all
is Rich and flourishing within the Paradisical Kingdom: Nor is there any decay
since Adam's Day, but Increase and Augmentation is daily through the
Resurrection of the Spiritual Man.

. 2. After this, the Spirit of Wisdom said to me, These things, whereof an
account has been given to you, may be declared of the Local Place of Paradise:
Whereinto Spirits separated by Natural Death, putting off their Mortal Earthly
Bodies, do enter; and there put on their Virgin Body. Which does prepare them
to meet the Bridegroom, who from thence fetches them up to Mount Sion. These
are such, who in this very time, have fought the good Fight of Faith, and had
very near overcome this World. What is lacking to make them fully Perfect,, is
to be done in this Paradisical place; where they are appointed to stay till all
their Bridal Trimming be finished, and they find that they can pass the Way to
the Tree of Life, through the Flaming Cherub, who remains still a Guard upon
that Figurative Tree. In this place Holy Angels do also wait by their Course,
to Minister unto those who do come here, as the Designed Heirs of that more
Glorious State, which is revealed in Sion. This is some part of those good
things, which does belong to your Eternal Father; but now I shall open to thee
a further Mystery, which is, what may be entered upon in this very Life Time.
Laws of Parad. conclusion.
For there is a Mystical Paradise as well as a Local, which Springs
Metaphorically, opening from a pure Magical Center. This will amount to thy
present Peace and Joy. Wait, I say, to feel that now, that thy Spirit may give
a Seal with me, that thou have received the Anointing, and that thou do walk
with thy Spiritual Man in this Paradise; where thou often do hear the Echo
of thy Bridegroom's Voice, calling thee still, to have the getting on all that
which will make thee look Sweet and Amiable in his Eyes, and the obtaining of
the fragrant Sweets that may perfume and scent thee; that so all thy Garments
may smell of these Beds of Spices, upon which thou may stretch thy self.
Here a while confined be to dwell, after the manner of a Spirit in a Spiritual
Body, till thou shall all of this Visible Orb overcome, and much excel all
Creatures in it, as having the Tree of Life to live upon. Which is that which
will airify, and put upon thee a most Transparent Body; for they who do daily
feed upon it, shall be in good deed transmuted by it. Behold to thee this Gate
of Paradise does stand open, and whatsoever of the things of God is there, thou
have a right, not only to know, but them as thy own to Enjoy. But this word of
Caution to thee is given, that thou take heed unto the Laws of Paradise, which
have been in particular given to thee for this end. Observe them, and thy JESUS
will here frequently talk with thee, and show himself, according to the Loves
Betrothment, that is made afresh with thee in this Paradise. This is what many
Years ago was to me Communicated, and Recommended by the Spirit of Truth.

. 3. As I was, upon the Seventeenth of October, in this present Year 1695.
watching upon a Deceased Friends account, after some time, I found she had
passed through the Elementary Regions. Then Paradise being opened, I searched
for her, and after about two Hours, I found her in the Third Degree of this
Heavenly World, who appeared to me of a most Lively and Angelical Countenance.
As soon as I had met her, I congratulated her, and said, I have been a long
while seeking to find you. To which she Answered, very well you might; for I
have been so taken up with the Variety of the Pleasures of this Place, that I
had forgot all my Mortal Friends. Then she added, after a short pause, O my
Friend, the Death which I feared, and that kept me in Bondage all my Life long,
has been my Friend to set me free; and its Seeing that I dreaded, became nothing
less than a Living Balsam; by which now in Trumph I can say, Mortality is
swallowed up in Joy and Glory. To which I Replied, Did not I often tell you
this, and that I would venture my own Soul for yours, as to the Security of it?
Upon which she smiling said, Now I find it so to be. And so seeming to be
unwilling to entertain any further Discourse with me, as if thereby she was
held from a better Enjoyment, she left me.

. 4. Upon which, I was exercised in some Meditation, and it was thus concluded,
That Persons who did live very circumspectly and watchfully, in all Piety in
their Lifetime, as this Person had done, though void of all sensible
Assurance, and Comfort of God's Favor, while they live, as if they did not
live; but are estranged from this Elementary Body while they are in it; do,
when they pass out of it, obtain a swift passage through the Elements, which
are not able to cleave to, or detain them long, but are swallowed up, and
changed into the Paradisical Body. Which is a good Motive to incite all
Persons, to live above the Earthly Life; that so nothing may stick to them,
when they go out of this World.

II. MOUNT SION.
. 1. Now from hence the Spiritual Man must make another Remove, to see what
does lie for him beyond this Region or Principle, among the Precious Things
that do flow from that Rich Ocean, which is betwixt Paradise, Mount Sion, and
the New Jerusalem. This is that Glassy Sea, that is spoken of by the Beloved
John, upon which the Conquerors are seen Singing their Songs of Triumph; and it
does Compass round the City, where is the Residence of the Great King, the
Throne of the Lamb, and the Seven Sealing Powers, or Fountain-Spirits of God,
that do go forth from the most Holy One. Now this burning Sea is for Probation;
there being none able to pass it, but they who have gotten a full, perfect, and
thorough, Conquest over this Beast, and over his Image; so as they no thing
more of this Mark do bear. They, and they only, can stand here; because they
are Signatured from this flaming Glassy Sphere, that will make Bodies clear,
and shining, as terrible Crystal.

. 2. This Kingdom of Moun Sion, where is an Innumerable Company of Angels, with
the Church of the Firstborn, and in which are contained all the Originals, and
living Patterns of what was Copied out by Moses, who had a sight of them, must
open it self, and be Established, before the Kingdom of the New Jerusalem, can
come down, either Invisibly or Visibly. There is a necessity for the
Mediatorial and Priestly Kingdom to go before, and make way for that.

. 3. Yet there is such a near and intimate Correspondency between these two,
that they may in some sort bear the Name of One Kingdom. For that the Supreme
Majesty does often come down hither, and the whole Grand Assembly which is
here, do at certain seasons ascend up into the New Jerusalem; so that from the
strict Union that is betwixt them, it is not to be wondered at, if sometimes the
Name of the one be applied to the other.

III. The NEW JERUSALEM.
. 1. It was further declared to a Spirit caught up here, That in the Time of
the Accomplishment of the New Jerusalem Glory Below, there should be appointed
certain Keepers of the Everlasting Gates into it, most highly Spirited, to let
in, and shut out, according to the Laws of this Kingdom; and that every such
Angel of these Gates should sound forth his Trumpet. For the Holy Breath out of
this City, shall make them to Proclaim, and Sound forth to all parts of the
Earth, the Glory, and the Mighty Name of JEHOVAH SHAMMAH; which is the Name of
the City, that is to be written upon all those, who are to be admitted into it.
Therefore Arise, Arise, ye Virgin Daughters, and draw near, having this Name
inscribed upon you with the Finger of your God; and having your Twelve
Foundations, according to the number of the Precious Stones of the Holy Oracle,
made clear and sure in you; being all that which is to make up the Honor of
your Jerusalem: Glory: Draw near now, ye Virgin Daughters of Sion that lie hid,
and bring your Glory to this City;

At which all Gates shall open to you fly,
As soon as you can here, with this come nigh.
. 2. The Apostolical Name of the Lamb is here written upon every Gate, for the
surviving Number of Apostolical Spirits, to obtain admittance by. None can
enter through the Gates, but these Virgin Spirits, who have before stood upon
Mount Sion, and passed through the Sea of Glass; being the Living Jasper
Stones, that are all covered upon with the flaming of Colors the
Covenant-Rainbow. Such therefore must ye be, Oye Jerusalem-waiters, and
Children of Wisdom! And by her Stone within you, ye must come to be touched and
changed, rhat ye may be joined to all these Flaming Stones. Be of good cheer,
for this Ruby Stone is as a Cherub, at work in the Heavenly Spheres of some
that are known by Name, in order to this great and mighty Transmutation.
Wherefore it is given me to advise you, that you give way to this Live Goal
within you, that so it may burn away all the Dross and Tin, so as nothing but
the Golden Matter, for Coagulation with the Deity may remain upon this Almighty
and most Sublime Thing, that is concealed in your Inward Furnace. Do ye still
wait upon Ministering Fuel to it, that your Fire may never go out? Do ye still
take out from the Pool of Golden Oil; which will then make you come to that
Height, as even to a Perfect Jasper Purity; which will, whatever it touches,
turn into its own Source, Light, and Power? This is the White Stone, to which
the Bride of the New Jerusalem will be joined, and which will be hung in her
Crown. Therefore after nothing less, ye beloved ones, do ye aspire: And say not
in your Hearts, How can this be? Let that be cast upon your God's
All Sufficiency, that by Wisdom's Stone will do High, Mighty, and Marvelous
things, through them, with whom it shall be found, that only shall have the
honor of bringing the Jerusalem down, to be seen within this Orb. For in such
in whom the Stone of Wisdom is sown, and grown up, are the Lookers, and the
Expectors to see this wonderful Time. Others who believe nothing of it, will
stand without this City, amongst the Worshippers of the Beast; none of whom can
Traffic, or Merchandise amongst the precious Foundation Stones. Which are the
Purchase of the Lamb, for his Conquering Tribe, to follow after him, with Palms
of Victory over all fears and doubts, that spring from Unbelief; which has
kept numberless out, and stopped their Ascending up hither.

. 3. Now to you, who through the Agate Windows of this walled City are given to
look in, know that it is granted for no other end, but to take your Eye, and to
draw your whole Spiritual Body herein: It is not to Tantalize you, or to let
you see only the Tree of Virtue, and not hereof not touch, nor taste; but ye are
evermore to live upon it. When ye, as fixed Inhabitants, shall no more go out,
this Tree will be Food of most high Virtual Strength, Power, and Spirit. This
Word then I will only drop, and leave with you, to wait in pure Love Patience,
till for this last Remove, the Stone Within do Complete you, through its
All-Tincturing Power.

The STILL ETERNITY.
. 1. As I was considering the high and Sep. 13. 1695.
weighty Work, whereunto we are called, my Spirit was immediately caught up
into an High Region, that was all Calm and Still, where I saw no Figures or
Images: But there was a wonderful Light which Flowed into me like a River. Then
it was opened in me, that this was the Creating Light, from whence all Beings
did proceed; and that what was now expected as a New Creation, must be brought
forth from the Stilness of this Light, with which the Soul's Essence must be
Mingled: And that from this Union the Variety of the Wonders should be produced
in the World.

. 2. It was further said to me, that I had been long driven to hit the furthest
Center of all Centres, but the Plummet Line of my Spirit, was too short to
Fathom that deep Gulf, which was in a Visional Figure some Years ago shown to
me. This being led by the Spirit to call to mind, there came before mine
internal Eye a Deep Abyss, that opened it self, and Streamed forth, with such a
commixture in all variety of Colors, of Precious Stones, so dreadfully
Sparkling and Glorious, that no other, but a simple and abstracted Spirit,
could behold it, and much less enter into, and so be Mingled with it; according
as I was both times invited and called to.

. 3. This Second time it was renewed to me, by an Internal Opening; from which
it was given me to understand, that this God-head-Gulf, was now broken up, for
a Streaming forth with that high mixed Matter, which would Deify, and Tincture
the Soulish Essence that had been under the Depravity. Then it was said to me
by the Spirit, that this was the true and right Baptism, into the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; by which the Soul would return to its first
Original, and then would know it self to have Power in GOD, as his Virgin Heart
and Spouse, to do and act agreeable unto so high an Unity. This is the Summity
of all Depths that can be searched into. Do but study this, and the Eternal
Abyssal World will, from its Stilness, come to Qualify with, and Operate in
you, in order to the wished-for Transmutation. Hereby will you into all
Wisdoms's Treasures be admitted, and the Walls about your habitation shall be
the Rock of Fire-Stones, in which Munition Strength, your Hiding shall, be as
in God's ownSecrecy until you, go forth to Proclaim another Day of PENTECOST.

AN ANSWER TO A QUESTION, WHICH By a Noble and Worthy Inquirer was, upon his
own Experience, sent to be RESOLVED.
To Answer a Query, Why such Departed Souls that are detained in the Middle
Regions do often attract, and draw their near Relations and Friends to be with
them? This you must know, proceeds from a most intimate Unity that was betwixt
them while Living; whence not having Centered their Loves higher than what was
Elementary, the Deceased may have much power to draw away the Life of such out
of the Body: Of which kind some Instances have been known. Let this therefore
be a good Caution, to all dear, and near Relations, to carry up their Love to
one another, beyond what is but Creaturely. But this know, that no Departed
Spirit can have any force or power over the Living, without they be such as are
of Low Birth, under the Laws and Rudiments of this World; and the
Constellations of the Starry World: But as for them, who are got up higher, by
the supernatural Birth, they are out of danger to be reached by any Departed
Spirits; For such are above their Influence, as making GOD their Center only.

It has been showed to me also, that there is a great Congruity betwixt the
highest Degrees of Saints, departed into the Mount Sion, and Jerusalem
Principle; with such here as have attained to that high Birth, which can reach
their Principle. Now this sort act quite after another kind, they do not so
much covet to draw them out of the Body, as to Influence, and bring down their
Gifts and Powers into Manifestation, in, and through those whom they stand in
such Love-Unity with. These Perfect Spirits in the Separated order do well
know, and take notice, who are most fitly Qualified, though in Bodies
Elementary, for Immersement with them, and do thereby communicate, and
disperse the Light of New Revelations into this Lower Princiciple; that so the
Inhabitants herein may come hereby to Enlightened and Transformed. For these
Blessed ones above, do with much longing, wait for their Kingdom to be Opened,
and spread among Mortals, till Immortality shall swallow up all in its own
Everlasting Light and Life.

This I thought meet to superadd to the foregoing Subject, as the Opening
renewed in me from Wisdom's Center: As now being under a Commission to keep
nothing back, that may serve for the Information, or Satisfaction of Wisdom's
Meek and Lowly Children, who are restless Inquirers to learn and understand,
what in this Her Rising Day is to be Proclaimed to the whole Earth.

FINIS.

