TWO LETTERS FROM Vice Admiral John Lavvson, AND The Commanders of the Fleet,
to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councilmen of the City of London, Dated
the 13th of December, 1659. from the Downs; The Other the 21 Instant from
Gravesend.
James in the Downs, the 13 th of December, 1659. Right Honorable,
HAving heard of those great Distractions and Divisions amongst the good People
of our Nation by the late Breach betwixt the Parliament, and English Army, and
the Army under Genesis Monok and the great disturbance in the City and Countries,
and the said Desolation that is likely to ensue, if not by God's Mercy speedily
prevented by amicable Composure of these unhappy Differences. We have been
necessitated, according to our Judgment and Consciences, to declare to the
World, That we apprehend the only visible means of healing our Breaches, and
settling Us again in Peace, is, That there might be all Christian ways and
means used to reconcile the Differences betwixt the Parliament (interrupted the
13th of October last), and the Officers of the English Army; which we earnestly
entreat your Lordship, with your Honorable Brethren, the Aldermen and Common
Council, to use your utmost for the procuring and accomplishing of; and that
the Force, that is now put upon the Parliament, may be taken off, that they may
return with Freedom to the Exercise of their Trusts: But if it cannot be done
by Christian and friendly means, We are resolved, according to our Declaration
enclosed, (through the Lord's assistance) to use our utmost endeavor for the
Removal of that Force; in which we earnestly desire your Assistance and which
We doubt not but will be to the Glory of God, and the reviving the decayed
Trade of your City in particular, and the Nation in general, which is the
Desire of

Your Lordship's most humble Servant.


James, of Gravesend 21, December, 1659. Right Honorable,
THe above written is a Copy of our former out of the Downs, and since our
Arrival Here, having not received any Answer; We fear it came not to your Hand
so timely as We In^ended: We have therefore sent the Bearers, Captain Richard
Haddock, and Captain Mark Harrison, to give You the state of Affairs with Us,
and to acquaint You, That We are Resolved through the Lord'ds assistance to
stand to our Declaration, and with our utmost to Endeavor the Re-establishment
of the Parliament, Interrupted the 13th of October, 1659. To the Exercise of
their Trust; and We hope and doubt not, but We shall find the Concurrence and
Assistance in our Resolution, and, That You will discourage all Designs of
Charles Stuart, and His Adherents, or the Convening together of any Assembly in
the Name, or under the specious pretense, of a Free Parliament, according to
the Desires of some, which unavoydably must advance Charles Stuart His Interest;
and Endanger the Ruin of the Cause, and Interest of Christ and his People,
That has cost so much Blood and Treasure, and also the Destruction of the
Renowned City, and the Liberties of all good People, Civil and Religious: In
confidence of Your Compliance herein, We shall give all Assistance for the
Advancement of the Trade, Freedom and Safety of the City in Particular, and the
Nation in General: Your Answer unto This is Desired by

My Lord, Your very Humble Servants. John Lawson, Vice Admiral, Commander of
the James. George Dakins, Captain of the Bristoll. Philip Holland, Capt. of the
Assurance. Francis Allen, Capt. of the Advice. Nathaniel Brown, Capt. of the
Taunton. Thomas Penrose, Capt. of the Maidstone. Richard Rooth, Capt. of the
Dartmouth. Thomas Lardge, Capt. of the Lark. Richard Newbery, Capt. of the
Portland. Willowby Hannam, Cap^. of the Kent. Henry Fenn, Capt. of ^he
Hampshire. Samuel Higginson, Cap^. of the Selbe. Anthony Artchy, C^pt. of the
Forciter. Michael Natton, Capt^ of the Norwich. Thomas Traford, Lie^t. of the
Worcester. Captain Thomas Bowry, Captain of the -- Francis Park, Capt. of the
Centurion. Richard Haddock, Capt. of the Dragon. Mark Harrison, Capt. of the
Elias. John Coppin, Capt. of the Langport. Edward Nixon, Capt. of the Pearl.
John Bowry, Capt. of the Drake. Godfrey Read, Capt. of the --


To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of the City of London, also to be
Communicated to the Aldermen and Common Council.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, MDCLIX.


