A SOBER WARNING TO PEOPLE That they may Regard the WORK of the LORD.
The 28 th Day of the 7 th Month, 1696.
AS I was pondering in my Mind of the Work and Wonders of the Lord, and of his
great Power and Might, my Spirit was bowed, and my Heart was broken and
tendered within me, and I said in my self, Are the People so Blind! Are they
all so Dark and Ignorant and void of Understanding, that they cannot be
awakened, to see and behold the Works and Wonders of the Lord! Or do they see,
and are they not Affected therewith, nor Humbled therefore, nor Afflicted
thereunder, as my Spirit has been this Day: Considering how that the Lord does
seem, in diverse places, to take away the Fruits and Increase of the Earth; even
the staff of Bread, in some measure, the good and benefit thereof, by the
continued Rain, and unseasonable Weather in the time of Corn-harvest, and
gathering in of the Fruits and Increase of the Year, giving us to see with our
Eyes, and not to taste thereof, and how justly may he send want and scarcity,
and cleanness of Teeth, instead of plenty and fullness, because of the Waste,
Excess, and Abuse of his good Creatures, both by Rich and Poor. For how have
the Rich and Full wasted and destroyed them, in Eating and Drinking
Excessively; and, through the ill use of strong Drink, often abuse both
themselves and others also. And what Unthankfulness and Ingratitude has been
in many of the Poor unto God, for his Mercies and Blessings bestowed upon them?
And what Pride and High-mindedness has abounded in many places, seeking to
Exceed and Excel one another therein; as if this were their Crown and Glory,
setting up their Head-attires at such a height, as has not been understood
from former Ages, nor known in a great part of this Age, in the Country in
which we Live? And may we not truly say, See and behold the Crown of Pride,
exalted in a great Measure, above what heretofore, so that the next Generation
can scarcely exceed this, as these have done them that were before them; and
what Lightness and Vanity, Laughter and Unseasonable and Unprofitable Discourse
is used and practiced amongst Men, reputed Wise in the World, and how common
are Idle Words, and Evil Communication amongst the most of People, and what
frequent and customary taking God's Holy Name in vain, without all fear or
reverence; the seeing thereof many time is a grief and trouble to tender
Consciences. Oh! That People would be wise to consider their latter End, and
the shortness and uncertainty of their time here, and mind and consider the
Afflicting Hand of God upon some, and his severe Judgments upon others; and for
that several are taken away by short and sudden Death, as in a moment, in the
twinkling of an Eye; how should these things move and provoke People to fear
and dread the Lord that made them, and continually stand in awe of him; for
none of these things come to pass without him, either in doing of them, or in
suffering them to be done, and that in Judgment or in Mercy; in Judgment to the
Wicked and Rebellious that do not Repent and forsake their Evil ways and
doings; but in Mercy unto his Children and People that Love, Fear, and Serve
him in Sincerity, and with an upright Heart. O that People would be awakened,
and not spend their precious Time in Pride, Vanity, and Lightness, in Joaking
and Jesting, without Fear and without Understanding; Seeing the Fear of the
Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, and a good Understanding have all they that
depart from Evil, Job 28. and 28. which that many may so do, is the all-desire
of him, who is,

A Well-wisher to the whole Creation, and a Lover of Souls, Thomas Layths.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street,
1696.


