THE INWARD AND SPIRITUAL CHRISTIAN DISTINGUISHED From the Outward Nominal and
Notional.

AND A Generation of Men in these our Days, paralleled with the Scribes and
Pharisees of those Days that Profess, Say and Do not. That Persecute others
for Religion, but will not stand to it themselves.

WITH An EXHORTATION to People to come to the Spirit of God, and Truth in their
Hearts, that in it they may Worship the Living God that made them.

We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that
we know Him that is true: and we are in Him that is true, in His Son Jesus
Christ. This is the true God, and Eternal Life,

1 John 5.20. London, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXXIV.

The Inward and Spiritual Christian distinguished from the Outward Nominal and
Notional, etc.
AS I was deeply exercised in my Spirit upon the things of God, and His true
spiritual Worship, that place was brought to my remembrance in the 5th of John
40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life; it is Christ's Words unto
the Jews, which methinks does much resemble the state and condition of many of
the People of this Age in which we live; who, like the hard-hearted Jews, are
unwilling to come unto Christ, yet think themselves Christians, and would be
counted such; but how few do come to wait for His Spirit, that they may be led
and guided thereby, and worship God therein; out of which no other worship is
accepted with him. As Christ said to the Woman of Samaria, John 4. when she
spoke of worship in the Mount, and in Jerusalem, Ye worship ye know not what;
The hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father
in Spirit and in Truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth. O
how plain and undeniable are Christ's words here, if People were not wilfully
blind; but alas, how few do worship God thus, but rather in dead Forms and
outward Observations, out of the Power and Spirit of the living God, and in
bodily exercise that profits little. Nay, are there not too many do slight
the Spirit, and speak lightly of it; others limit it, and some are grown so
bold and impudent as to scoff thereat, as if no such thing were to be expected
in this Age we live in; and how far are such degenerated from the life and
practice of the Holy Men of old, that spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. and in Romans 8. how expressly there the Apostle says, If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His: and the Spirit helps
our infirmities with groanings that cannot be uttered. -- And let us but search
the Scriptures and we shall find how strict the Scribes and Pharisees were
about outward things, and outward worship; Christ's greatest enemies while he
was in the body, and how often were they ready to Judge him herein,
notwithstanding those many great and wonderful Miracles he did: in opening the
eyes of the Blind, and curing other Diseases and infirmities on the Sabbath
Day, yet, say the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he keeps not the
Sabbath; and how strict were they in paying Tithe of Mint, Annis and Cummin;
and yet omitted the weighty matters of the Law, as Judgment, Mercy and Faith,
and made clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, while within full of
Extortion and Excess. How many woes does Christ pronounce against them; read
Matthew. 23. And in that Day and Age how did the Lord raise up a poor despised
People to bear witness to his Truth, of whom the Pharisees say, Have any of the
Rulers believed in him; but a People that know not the Law are cursed. And what
great Persecutions, Imprisonments, and cruel Sufferings did they undergo for
their Testimony; as Christ himself had foretold them saying, They shall put you
out of the Synagogue, yea, the time comes, that he that kills you, will
think he does God Service; and how was this fulfilled after in his faithful
Followers; read the Acts at large; and these were they in that Age did often
meet together to wait upon and worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and were
separated from the World; the Worship Ministry and Temple, and did bear a
faithful Testimony against them. For which Testimony Stephen was stoned to
death, who testified saying, God dwells not in Temples made with Hands, neither
is worshipped with men's Hands. And after his Death most of Christ's Apostles
suffered Martyrdom, for their Testimony sealing it with their blood. According
to Christ's Example who was gone before them. And after the Apostles time how
valiant and noble were the ancient and Primitive Christians; and what great
Sufferings and cruel Deaths were they put to by the Heathen; in the first three
hundred years after Christ, for their confession to His Name. And since that
time for many years by the Papists and others for their Testimony; altogether
out of Christ's Spirit and Doctrine, who came not to destroy men's lives but to
save them. And as it has been in former Ages, so also in the Age of which we
live. -- Wherein God in his infinite Love and rich Mercy, has raised up a
People to bear a faithful Testimony for him against the Spirit of the World,
the Forms, Fashions and Customs thereof, their Worship, Ministry and
Maintenance by Tithes. And what imprisoning of Bodies and spoiling of Goods
has been these diverse years, and that for no other cause but peaceably Meeting
together, to wait upon and worship God in Spirit and in Truth. And bearing a
faithful Testimony for him, as he has persuaded our* hearts according to the
Ancient, Christian, Primitive practice, both in Christ's time, and in the
Apostles time, and since the Apostles time, until this Age, and in this Age in
which we live; and if for this good cause we suffer, we have no reason to be
discouraged, in that we suffer for righteousness sake. And sure the Lord will
take our part, and plead our innocent case with all our Adversaries. And of
late time, how much has been about Conformity to the Public Worship, and such
as could not Conform for Conscience sake; how liable are they to be made a prey
of by wicked and ungodly Informers, and such as regard no Religion at all, but
self ends and worldly interests; and such do Conform tho in Hypocrisy, how do
they escape. And tho we eat the bread of Adversity, and drink the water of
Affliction, yet the Lord our God, by his holy Spirit and Grace is become our
Teacher, and upon him do we wait, and in him only do we put our Trust, for he
has been our helper and deliverer in our greatest need.

And praises to the Lord that has appeared in the Assemblies of His People to
their great Joy and Peace, comfort and refreshment inwardly and spiritually,
and how has the Lord hereby engaged a little Remnant to follow him
whithersoever he goes, through good report and bad; and we cannot confess him
before men, and such will He confess before His Father which is in Heaven,
blessed be his Name for evermore.

And now all People come try and examine your selves, if ye be yet separated
from the World, their vain Fashions, Customs and worships thereof, and so come
to wait for the Spirit, and worship God in the Spirit and in the Truth. Come to
the Grace that ye may be taught thereby, which teaches to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present
world. And so the Law written in the heart, the New Covenant, and serve and
worship God in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter,
for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life. -- And now all you
Professors which have made so great a profession of God and Christ, Duties and
Ordinances, come ye unto Christ the ordained of God for Life and Salvation, and
join unto him with your whole hearts, and deny your selves, and take up his
Cross and follow him, without which none can be his Disciple; but how is your
Zeal and tenderness of conscience decayed in many of you, who once seemed
strict and zealous in your way, and constant in meeting together, to worship
and serve God according to your belief; but now how cold and conformable are
you grown, having forsaken the Assembling your selves together, and now observe
and practice what once you seemed to bear a Testimony against, using shifts,
evasions and excuses therefore, which will be a covering too narrow in the day
of the Lord. And how also have several of the Teachers and Leaders of the
People, some conformed, and others gone and left their Flocks upon the very
report of Persecution, before they suffered either Imprisonment or spoiling of
Goods; and thus they have dishonored themselves, and discovered great
Hypocrisy and dissimulation in their Profession. And may it not be rightly
said of such Teachers and People as the Prophet said of one, like People, like
Priest; But I will punish them for their ways, and reward them their doings,
says the Lord. And thus they have fled from the Cross they should have taken
up, and must be taken up before they be Christ's Disciples, and readily and
truly worship god in Spirit and in Truth.

And blessed be the God of Heaven that has raised up a seed in our day, that
cannot bow nor bend to any thing, but to the Name of Jesus only, to which let
every knee bow, and every tongue confess, who is the Rock of Ages, and the
Foundation of all the Generations of the righteous in all Ages: To whom with
God the Father be Glory and Honor, both now and for evermore. Amen.

Given forth in the fear and dread of the Lord, and in the travail of Spirit
for the sake of such, and in love to their Souls, as may have any true desires
after God and His Truth. From one who has Love and good will to all men,
Thomas Laythes.
From Dailehead in Cumberland, (83.)
THE END.

