THE HISTORY OF PHYSIC, Or, An Account of the Rise and Progress of the Art,
AND The Several Discoveries therein from Age to Age. With Remarks on the Lives
of the most Eminent Physicians.

Written Originally in French BY Daniel Le Clerc, M. D. AND Made English by Dr.
Drake, and Dr. Baden.

With Additional Notes and Sculptures.

LONDON, Printed for D. Brown without Templebar, A. Roper in Fleetstreet, T.
Leigh, and D. Midwinter in St Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

TO Sir Thomas Millington, Knight. President of the College of Physicians of
London, and Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty.
SIR,
THe Honorable Post, which you so worthily fill, gives a natural Title to your
Protection to this Piece, which is the History of the first Rise, and earliest
advances of that Faculty, which You so nobly defend in its declining Age. I
call tt the declining Age of Physic, not from any decay that I observe in its
Intellects, which perhaps are more vigorous and lively now than ever, but from
a formidable Conjunction, which seems at this time to threaten the Overthrow of
its Constitution, especially here in England. The Subversion of the College of
Physicians, the noblest Branch that ever Physic bore, has been attempted not
only by the open Assaults of its Professed Enemies, but likewise by the secret
Machinations of some of its treacherous corrupt Members, whose ungenerous
Designs have been mainly defeated by your Prudence, and unshaken Resolution.

Quacks have been coaevous to Physic itself; we meet with no Memoirs of a date
early enough to show us an Age unmolested with that rascally sort of Vermin.
But to prostitute a liberal Education to the basest of Submissions, and to
stoop an honorable Profession to disingenuous practices, only to gain the
favor and recommendation of a Pack of illiterate Mechanics, is an honor
reserved for our Age and Country, where Interest tyrannizes, and men are too
impatient to wait the slow advances of Honesty or Merit, to be rich or great.

It may seem strange to those that have not pierced to the bottom of this
Mystery, that men should endeavor to subvert the Honor, and trample upon the
Dignity of that Faculty, by the exercise of which they themselves aim to rise.
But there is no Riddle in the matter; They have found out a shorter cut to
Reputation than by Learning and Skill, which require Industry and Application;
they steer their course altogether by Craft and Intrigue. They are refining
upon the Policy of the Mountebanks; For they plainly see the Figure which the
Doctor makes with the People is owing to the interest of the Fool, that
recommends him. For this reason they endeavor to destroy a Society, whose Laws
and Constitutions are a severe curb to all such mean indirect Practices, and
which allow its Members no other methods of making their court to the world,
than those of Justice and Charity; which latter these men have as much as in
'em lay endeavored to obstruct. Of this the Office now erected at the College
for the relief of the Poor is a sufficient Evidence; and in spite of the
Malice of its Enemies, or the Iniquity of the Times, will, I hope, prove a
lasting Monument to your Honor, and procure you the hearty respect, and thanks
of all good men, as it does of,

SIR, Your most Obedient Servant, J. D.

TO THE READER.
THe work, by many so much wished for, and so long desired, is I hope by this
time pretty far advanced. Mr Le Clerc has in this first Volume, which is sent
to prepare us for a better reception of those that are to follow, given us such
a Specimen of his skill and exactness, that we have reason to expect with
Impatience the Accomplishment of his Promise. A work of this nature carries so
much difficulty, and so little Profit to the Undertaker, that few have the
Ability requisite for such a Task, and fewer the Courage to engage in a Service
so hard, for a Reward so small, and so precarious as Reputation. For, tho
Reputation be almost universally courted, it is for the sake of Popularity, and
Preferment, which are supposed to attend it.

For this reason perhaps it is, that the History of Physic has been so much
neglected in this Age, that has with such wonderful Industry and Success,
cultivated, and carried on this Science in all its Branches. The duty of a
Historian obliges him to be just to others, and to assert their honor who
deserve it, how contrary soever to his own Interest, or Inclinations, a thing
directly repugnant to the general humor of the World, who affect to found
their own Names upon the ruin of other men's, and think every one that hears
well in the opposite Scale to themselves, and consequently that their only way
to rise is by depressing others.

But whether this perverse, malevolent Temper, a disease as common to, and as
hard to be cured in Physicians as other men, indisposed 'em for a work so
ungrateful, as the recording the Merits and Services of others, without any
Prospect of reward to themselves for their labor: Or whether the general
Application to the Improvement of the Art or Science itself, might make 'em
neglect an enquiry, which they might think brought no real accession of
knowledge to it: Or lastly, whether the reasonable care which every man might
lawfully have of his own Interest, diverted 'em from a Study, which, giving no
reputation of Practical Skill, was not likely to be attended with Profit; this
useful enquiry lay dormant above fourteen hundred years, nothing considerable
having been done in it from the time of Galen to our Author, that I know of.

In the year 1611, Michael Doringius, a German Professor of Physic in the
University of Hesse, published a piece de Medicina and Medicis, in the first
part of which he treats expressly, Of the Rise, and Progress of Physic;
wherein he pretends to give an account of the Inventers and Improvers of
Physic, and the several Sects into which the Professors of it were split, and
subdivided. But as our Author in his Preface rightly observes, this Book does
by no means answer the Title. For, besides some general hints concerning the
Fabulous Age of Physic, loosely put together; and a very slender account of
the several sorts of Ancient Physicians incoherently patched up from Celsus and
Galen, he has very little to the purpose of his Title. His main aim was to curb
and refute the extravagancies of Paracelsus, whose hotheaded whimsical notions
began about that time to prevail very much in Germany. For Paracelsus, by his
application to Chemistry, (a study then not much in use) having made himself
Master of some considerable Remedies, had partly by his Cures, and partly by
his prodigious Boasting, gained such an Ascendant over the credulous Vulgar,
and with them some not unlearned men, that seeing something more than they
expected, they foolishly believ^d more than was possible of him. This Success,
in conjunction with his natural Vanity, blew the man up so excessively, that he
immediately laid claim to the Sovereignty of Physic and Philosophy, set up for
a new Hypothesis, and a new Sect, and with the true Spirit of an Enthusiastic
Reformer, very rudely and unjustly insulted and vilify'd all the great men that
preceded him in either Study, especially Aristotle and Galen. This Insolence
armed abundance of Volunteers against him, and engaged diverse learned Pens on
both sides in the Controversy, amongst whom Doringius made one, whose Book de
Medicina and Medicis, whether we consider the Matter, Method or Design of it,
must be accounted as it really is, a Polemical, not a Historical Piece. For
those few Historical Remarks which he premises, seem rather to serve as an
Introduction to his Argument, and to show the Antiquity and Excellence of the
Sect, which he undertakes the defense of, than to make any part of the Original
Design.

Neander of Bremen seems to promise something more perfect and complete, (as
our Author relates his design, or rather the Title of his Book.) But I have
never seen this Book, as our Author likewise confesses he never had when he
wrote his Preface, and therefore I can only observe concerning it, that this
Piece could afford our Author no Method, or Assistance in the prosecution of
his Excellent work hitherto.

After these, the learned Conringius, Professor at Helmstadt, fell upon much
the same Argument, which he treated of in several Lectures to his Scholars, and
promised to publish complete to the World, but was prevented by death. It was
afterward published in Quarto, under the Title of Hermanni Conringii
Introductio ad universam Medicinam, with tedious Notes by Christopher
Schelhammer, his Scholar, and afterward Professor in the same University,
which serve rather to swell the Bulk, than raise the Value of his Author; and
to make him more Voluminous, than Useful or Complete. The whole Work is divided
into several Chapters, or Lectures, concerning the Nature, Constitution, and
Invention of Medicine, or the Art of Physic, Of the Physic of the
Asclepiadean Family, and the several Ancient Schools of Physic, Of the several
Sects, and their Authors: The rest of his Chapters he bestows upon the several
Members of the Faculty, (viz.) Physiology, Pathology, Pharmaceuticks,
Semeioticks, Diaeteticks, Anatomy, Botany, etc. each apart, wherein after a few
slight hints of the use of 'em in general, he proceeds to ennumerate, and
censure the Authors that have written of 'em, whether Ancient or Modern

Had this design been rightly and exactly prosecuted, it is probable our Author
had been in great measure prevented. For tho the Method in which they proceed
be very different, yet the matter would have been in the main coincident. But
whether Conringius, who perhaps intended these Lectures only as private
directions to his own Scholars, for the choice of Authors in the course of
their studies, who therefore might rest satisfied in the single Authority of
their Master, did not think himself obliged to dilate on those matters, or
Authors, which he recommended to 'em, or cautioned 'em of; Or whether coming
out after his Death from the Notes taken by his Scholars during his Reading,
these Lectures were mutilated by a hasty transcription; Or, which at last it is
most reasonable to believe, that these Lectures were only Sketches of his
design, rough Draughts of a Piece, which would have made a very different
Figure, had the Author lived to have filled up his Design, and given the
Finishing Strokes; The view which he gives of the Physic of any Age or Persons
is very confused, short, and imperfect, His Characters of Authors superficial,
arbitrary, and sometimes unjust.

Nor is his Performance much mended by the hevy labors of his Disciple
Schelhammer, whose Partiality, and want of Judgment, absolutely incapacitate
him for the business of a Historian, or a Critic. His Passion for Aristotle
and Galen is most remarkable in him; they are his Spectacles of Philosophy and
Physic, without which the cannot see any thing, nor comprehend how others
should. Upon this account he bears an irreconcilable grudge to the English
Physicians, particularly to Dr Willis, for not submitting their Reason upon all
occasions to his two Oracles; and having used his own understanding to
leading-strings all his Life, he wonders at the Boldness and Presumption of any
one that dares trust his to its own Legs. I suppose, we need no other line to
fathom the depth of this Gentleman's capacity, and to assure us that no great
burdens of Learning are like to reach us that way. But if we consider his
Favorites, the Cobweb Spinners upon Aristotle and Galen; and the plundering
Compilers of tedious Dutch Systems of Practice, which he values by the Bulk, we
have no great reason to be ambitious of his Favor, but rather to take his
censure for a Complement, and be proud of being out of his good Graces.

Besides these, and the Chronology of Wolfgangus Justus, (which our Author says
he has not seen, tho in the fourth Book of this Volume in the Chapter of
Diocles Carystius, he taxes him with a considerable mistake) there are some
other small Pieces of Heurnius, Vanderlindan, etc. which afford some scattered
hints; but such as are no bar to our Author's pretensions, as the first that
has regularly trod this Path, in which no continued traces appear to guide him.

I shall not attempt to forestal the satisfaction of the Reader, with a tedious
account of our Author's Performance and Merit on this account. But I must be so
just to him, as without trespassing upon any man's patience to observe, that Mr
le Clerc is the first that has given us a distinct view of the state of Physic
in the fabulous Ages of the world. He has taken exact care to settle the age of
the several reputed Inventers of it, and from a confusion of Traditions,
absurd, fabulous or uncertain, so judiciously to extricate the truth, as with a
great measure of certainty to deliver to us no contemptible account of the
growth, and increase of Physic during those dark times. As his light
increases, his prospect clears up, and the second Book gives us a succinct, but
a well digested account of the Progress of the Science, under the management
and cultivation of the Philosophers, till the time of Hippocrates, whose
Reputation and Abilities grew to such a height, as to overtop and obscure all
that went before him, and even to cast a damp and a cloud upon the Merits of
all that have succeeded him for so many Ages to this day. His third Book is
entirely taken up with the History and Physic of Hippocrates, which he has so
far exhausted, that scarce the works of that great man himself, can give us so
just an Idea of his Merit and Abilities. He has with great accuracy and
diligence, distinguished the genuine Works of Hippocrates from the spurious,
and with as great Art and Judgment extracted a compendious System of the
Philosophy and Medicine of that Father of Physic. From whence, if we have not
the means of surveying minutely all the particular passages and beauties of it,
we have at least the advantage of a more entire and uniform View, and may make
a better Judgment of the whole. So that tho from thence we don't learn the
practice of Hippocrates, yet we may there see what occasion we have for it, and
be readily referred to any thing, which we shall think fit to examine more
minutely. If therefore a work of this nature does not immediately make us able
Physicians, it makes us better Critics, and consequently the other also, if we
will employ our Judgments for the enlargement of our Knowledge, and not
perversely abuse it to snarl at one another. The last Book of this Volume
contains the account of the State of Physic, from Hippocrates to the Age of
Alexander the Great, in which nothing of moment occurs, except some few
Innovations in Physiology by Plato, Aristotle and Theophrastus, no considerable
Memoirs remaining to us of the Practice or Opinions of the professed Physicians
after Polybus the Son-in-law of Hippocrates, till Chrysippus, who begins the
next Volume.

One thing I think my self obliged to acquaint the Reader with, that neither
the Author nor the other Gentlemen concerned in this version, may be held
responsible for errors, of which I perhaps alone am guilty; which is, that in
translating the first Book, I have taken the liberty to add some few Marginal
Notes, which I thought of use to the Illustration of that part of the History,
and which I have therefore caused to be distinguished from the Authors, which
are referred to by Letters, as mine, by these marks *.

It may perhaps be further expected that I should say something according to
custom for myself, and the Gentlemen concerned with me in this Version, and
apologize for what we have done. For my part, I see no reason for it; if we have
done our Author justice, an Apology is altogether unnecessary; if not, it is
insignificant. We have thrown away our pains, as the Reader will his; and
therefore I shall trust to the Merits of Mr Le Clerc, for an Excuse; if they
will not serve, I despair of any better, and shall shift without, as those
concerned with me must do likewise. If we give the Reader any satisfaction,
'twill be double to us, and we ask no more.

The Author's Preface.
^Ivers learned Men before me have designed (...) the History of Physic; but
none as yet put (...) execution, none at least that has come to my ^^^wledge.
Vossius intended it, and we find in (...) of his posthumous pieces entitled,
De Philo^^phia, several things concerning the Ancient ^^^sicians, the writings
left by 'em, and the time (...) which they lived; but it seems to be a Plan
only, (...) that a very defective one of a larger work; Cap. 2. paragraph.
ultimo.
(...) its Author in one place gives it the title of (...) History of Physic,
in express terms.

Meibomius and Reinesius, German Physi^ians, well known by their works, both
promised ^he same History, but were prevented by Death. At present I know no
man, that has any such de^^gn, the learned Monsieur Dodart excepted, a ^^mous
Physician of Paris, whose work upon this ^ubject is expected with impatience.
If that ap^^ars suddenly, whatever disadvantage I may ^eet with from this
clashing, I shall think it an honor to me, and esteem my self happy in jump^^g
with a Man of his merit, in the same design.

The late Monsieur Menage likewise wrote the History of the Ancient Physicians;
but there is abundance of difference between a History of Physic, that is, a
collection of all that relates to their ^ersons, the titles, and number of
their writings, and a History of Physic, that is, to set forth the ^p^^ions of
the Physicians, their Systems, and Me^^^ds and to trace step by step all their
discoveries. This was in my opinion not within the reach of Monsieur Menage,
who was no Physician; tho his great learning sufficiently warrants to me his
success in the other method. Tho yet I know not whether that were printed or
not.

Petrus Castellanus, Greek Professor at Louvain, published, before Monsieur
Menage, a small book, of the Lives of the Physicians, both ancient and modern,
printed in 1618, but he has omitted several both of the one, and the other, and
says very little of any in particular.

Neander, a Physician of Bremen, printed likewise in 1623, a book, wherein he
treats of the Origin of Physic, its Antiquity and Nobility, of the Sects of
its Professors, of its intervals, during which it was neglected, of its
Revivals, and of the Works of those Physicians, that contributed to it, in
which the Author has hit the true design of such a History, if he has not
contented himself with generalities too loose; as has Doringius, another German
Physician, who wrote a little Book, in 1611, concerning Physic and Physicians,
the Rise, and progress of their Art, etc. Scarce has this Author filled three
pages of a Book in Octavo in a large Letter with all that he says of
Hippocrates, by which we may judge, how his performance answers the title. I
have seen Doringius's Book, but could never see Neander's. Nor have I seen a
piece of Wolfgangus Justus called the Chronology of the Physicians, both
Ancients and Moderns, printed in the last Age.

Among those Authors that treat of matters relating to the History of Physic,
we ought to rank the famous Civilian Ti^aqueau. This learned Man in his thirty
first Chapter of his Book concerning Nobility, which alone would make a
reasonable Volume, takes occasion to start the question, Whether the Art of
Physic derogates from Nobility or not? Where, after determination for the
Negative, he shows, that Persons of the highest Rank have practiced this Art;
that a great many Physicians have been canonized for Saints, that several
Po^es, Emperors, and Kings have ^ractised Physic, as well as many Queens, and
other Ladies of great Quality; nay, and diverse Gods, and Goddesses, and almost
all the ancient Philosophers and Poets; and beside the particular List of the
Individuals of these several conditions, he gives at last a general Catalogue
of almost all the known Physicians, ranged Alphabetically.

All the aforecited Authors have written to the advantage of Physic, and left
the Ancients in peaceable possession of the honor they have acquired, and
maintained till th^se latter ages. Monsieur Lionardo de Capoa, a Neapolitan
Physician of great reputation, is the only one, who in a Book published by him,
wherein he treats of the Rise and Progress of Physic, made it his principal
aim to show the uncertainty of it, overthrowing the Systems of almost all,
particularly the Ancient Physicians; for amongst the Moderns he seems to side
with those, that espouse the Cartesian Philosophy, and Chemical Principles,
explained after his own Sense; at least he allows these two to be the
foundations of the true Physic, which ought to be established. But the
Physicians that ground their practice upon them, being very few, especially in
Italy, he concludes Physic to be to this day very uncertain.

We may allow Monsieur di Capoa to have prosecuted the History of Physic, so
far as he has traced the Rise and Progress of it. But besides that he loses the
Character of a Historian, choosing rather to combat as an Adversary the
opinions, he dislikes, than to set 'em in their full light, and spinning his
own reasonings to much greater length than those are of, which he opposes, he
omits abundance of things of great importance to the History, of which he
treats. The chief use of his Book is to disabuse those, that are prejudiced in
favor of the Ancients. Nor are this learned Man's works of small use,
especially in that Country, where every thing that is new, is indifferent^y
condemned for that reason.

It Is apparent from what has been said, that no body has yet written this
History, as I have already remarkt, and that the Piece I now send abroad, is
the first, that precisely handles this matter. This makes me hope, that the
World will give me some grains the more of allowance, and looking upon this
only as an Essay, will pardon more easily those faults, they may find in it.
Nor in reality do I offer it for any more than an Essay, my Subject yet, as I
may say, but putting forth its buds in this little Volume, which amounts not to
a sixth part of the whole, and which had not seen the light, but by this
Specimen to try the relish, and sound the opinions of my Judges, that I may
take my measures thereby in the Sequel.

This may suffice to stop the mouths of those that may object, that I promise
much, and perform little, that my Book does not make good its title, that the
Mountain is in labor of a Mouse. If I thought they were of that opinion, for
whose judgments I ought to have a deference, I would immediately resign to some
body else. But if they think more favorably of me, I shall persist in hopes to
improve, as I proceed, by the instructions I may receive. And I persuade my
self, that Greater Wits, instead of accusing me of presumption in attempting a
work, that requires more learning than I am Master of, will be fo just, as to
make some reckoning even of my weak endeavor; and treat me at least, as
Quintilian does a certain Author, whom he ranks among the indifferent ones.
Dignus vel hoc proposito ut ilium s^iss^ omnia illa credamus.
He deserves (says he) the credit of knowing all that he ought to have known,
for undertaking to write of so great variety of things, tho for no other
reason, than the boldness of the design.

I shall not amuse my self with the several uses that may be made of the
History of Physic, the title alone sufficiently shows, what is to be expected.
I shall only take notice, that one may see, (as twere) with the cast an Eye by
means of this History the prin^ipal Reasonings, and most considerable
Experiences that have been found out from the beginning of the World, either
for the prevention or cure of Diseases. The Books which Physicians daily write,
are filled with their own proper Experiences, or their particular Reasonings,
or those of others, to which, if they approve 'em, they endeavor to give a new
turn; but we seldom see there, those that are not for their Palate; or at least
we are not permitted to see the fairest side of 'em.

It Is not so with this History, which is obliged to penetrate into the very
soul of every age, and ev^ry Author; to relate faithfully and impartially the
thoughts of all, and to maintain every one in his right, not giving to the
Moderns what belongs to the Ancients, nor bestowing upon these latter what is
due to the former; leaving every body at liberty to make reflections for
himself upon the matters of Fact as they stand related.

This at least is my own Idea of the History in hand, and the end I proposed to
my self in writing of it. I have disengaged my self, as much as possible, from
all prejudice on this occasion, and have examined all the Authors that have
come to my hands, by their own writings, and not by any written or verbal
reports of 'em, or their works.

I am convinced, particularly in the case of Hippocrates, that it is dangerous
to rely upon the testimony of another. This ancient Physician having
deservedly, and upon many accounts gained the esteem of all the World, and
being look^d on as a complete Model, every Author has made him the complement
of his own discoveries; or if any one were so tenacious, as not to part with an
invention which he thought he had a just title to; he has immediately met with
crowds of Opponents, that have used their utmost efforts, to show, that
Hippocrates either said, or saw it before; a weakness not absolutely overcome
to this hour. I have declined taking any party, or declaring for, or against
the opinions I report; or if I have at any time taken more liberty it has been
very rarely.

As to the disposition of my work, the first part, as I have said, is the only
one I publish at present, which contains chiefly the Physic of Hippocrates,
that being of greatest importance in this Volume. The rest, which respects the
the State of Physic before him, and after him, not being so considerable, tho
all of use to the History.

The first part seems to contain nothing, but what is fabulous, or very
uncertain. Yet even there, among the Fables of Esculapius, and other deified
Physicians, amidst the weak Essays of the first Men to secure or disengage
themselves from distemper, we discover the tracks of Med^cines in in most
places yet esteemed the principal; such as Bleeding and Purging, the antiquity
of which is thereby established.

We may see likewise in the second Book, that it is not absolutely true, that
from Esculapius, or his Sons, to Hippocrates, there was a sort of interregnum
in Physic, and that the six or seven hundred Years intervening between these
two great Men were not time lost, as some pretend. On the contrary, it shows
that during this interval the Foundations of rational Physic were laid, the
Dissection of Animals introduced, and a new method of enquiry into the causes
of distempers brought into play, for all which we are obliged to the
Philosophers, Pythagoras, Alemaeon, Democritus, and others therein mentioned.

From Hippocrates to the Period that closes the 4th Book, which I call the
first History of Physic, we find nothing new, the term being very short. We
only observe that the Philosophers of that time, the chief of which were Plato,
Aristotle, and Theophrastus, pushed on a little further in imitation of their
Predecessors their Anatomical discoveries, especially Aristotle. The Practical
Foundation laid by Hippocrates, and his predecessors, remained very little
altered in all that Time.

There remains only the Physic of Hippocrates, which, as I have said, is the
most considerable part of this first Volume. What that is, may be seen in the
third Book. I shall only add, that, if any man objects, that I have not
exhausted this rich Fund, but have left much unsaid, I acknowledge it. But this
I assure him, that, to the best of my Judgment, I have made Hippocrates say
nothing, but what he really did say, and that I have omitted nothing, that I
thought very material, either in his reasonings, or his method.

I have one word more more to add concerning the Language in which I write. If
I had written in Latin, I might perhaps have had more Readers, and the faults
have been less visible; at least I might have hoped for as easy pardon as
abundance of other Authors, that have written lately in it, tho but indifferent
Masters of it. It Is pure humor, that made me write in French. If my Book be
worth the while, 'twill find Translators enough to make it of use to Strangers.
And for the French it is sufficient, if they understand me, without being
solicitous about the purity, or politeness of the Style, which seldom falls to
the share of those that are but borderers upon the Country.

THE HISTORY OF Physic.
PART I.
BOOK I. The Rise and Progress of Physic, from the beginning of the World, to
the time of the Trojan War inclusive.
CHAP. I. The Reasons that first put Men upon the Search after Medicine, and
their earliest proceedings therein.
COULD the Bodies of Men, and other Animals, persist always in their natural
state without any alteration, and every Part; whereof they are composed, do its
duty, we should enjoy a perpetual course of that, which we call Health, or
Life. But this admirable piece of Workman-ship, like all the rest, is submitted
at length to Dissolution: Not a moment pa^^es, which makes not some change,
sensible or insensible. The Springs which move our Bodies are framed of Matter
so tender, and so susceptible of all Foreign impressions, that no long time is
required to wear em out, and being extremely subtle and ^ine, must needs be
very brittle, and therefore frequently out of order: nor can it possibly last
long in comparison with more solid Bodies, and consequently Death, which
finally dissolves us; and the Distempers, which lead to it, are unavoidable.

Nor are we to be surpriz^d at Dying, since we have more reasonable cause of
wonder, that Diseases come not oftener, and Death sooner; which were inevitable,
if among the numberless Springs, that actuate our Machine, some were not less
necessary, others less nice. Some, like the main Spring of a VVatch, give the
motion, and set all the rest a going: Others, less essential, may receive great
damages, and stand still, without stopping the motion of the whole. The Errors
we commit in the use of those things, that are necessary for the maintenance of
this Engine, as Meat, Drink, Exercise, and Rest, etc. (which are those, that
usually produce the greatest alterations in the principal Parts) nor even the
violent impulses of other Bodies, tend not always to its entire destruction;
nay, often scarce cause a sensible disorder. But, if it so falls out, such is
the wonderful contrivance of this Machine, that it can frequently shake off,
unassisted, the Clogs that impede its motion, and recover its former state (or
very near it); for, we must confess, that these frequent shocks wear, and
destroy the Springs by insensible degrees.

But, when this disorder rises so high, that it cannot be surmounted by all the
force of the Machine in its ordinary course, that there is a necessity of
Foreign Aid; as there are about it some Bodies hurtful to, and entirely
destructive of it, so there are others helpful, and beneficial in its extremest
need. The Beasts, under the direction of their Senses only, know how to
refrain, and guard themselves from those; and to take the benefit of these. I
shall not here take into consideration, what is commonly reported of the
Instinct of Brutes; of that hereafter. It Is sufficient to take notice, that
Men, who have Reason, have not failed to make use of it on these occasions.

The kindness they have for their own Bodies has taught 'em, ever since the
beginning of the World, to distinguish carefully between what was useful for
the preservation of Life and Health, and what was destructive of 'em. They used
their utmost endeavor to avoid the latter, but finding all their caution
insufficient, and that it was not always in their power to avoid the Causes of
Diseases, their refuge was to observe nicely the conduct of those that were
fallen sick.

Finding therefore, that, in their opinion, such or such an Error had hastened
the death of some, and such and such Conduct the recovery of others, and that
then they made use of things, not used in time of health, to which they
attributed their recovery, they, for the future, avoided what they thought
hurtful to the former, and try^d upon other persons in like cases; those
things, which they thought so beneficial to the latter, and being confirmed by
repeated Successes, continued the use of 'em.

CHAP. II. Whether Medicine came immediately from God: And how the first
Remedies were found out.
WE have seen, what first induced Men to have recourse to Medicine, and what in
general their management must needs have been on that occasion. If it be asked,
Who taught Men to have recourse in their Sickness to things of which in Health
they made no use? Most believe, that Men owe their first knowledge of this kind
to Divine Inspiration, immediately, and by way of Revelation, or Instruction.

The Jewish, and many Christian Doctors, have inferr^d from Genesis, where it is
said, That God caus^d all the Creatures to pass before Adam, that he might give
em Names: That he, at the same time, received a perfect knowledge of all their
qualities, and of the rest of the Creation; and consequently, that he was not
ignorant of their Medical Virtues. Many yet are of another opinion: Of this
first Man we shall say somewhat more, when we treat of the Inventors of
Medicine. A second Argument to prove the celestial Origin of this Art, is
drawn from those passages of Ecclesiasticus; Cap. 38. Verse 1, 2, etc.
where he says, That God created the Physician, and the Physic, and that he
has given Science to Men, and that it is he that heals Man, etc.

All the ancient Pagans held their Gods to be the Authors of Med^cine. The Art
of Physic (says Deorum immortalium inve^ti^n^ consecrata est Ars Medica. Q^^^
Tusc. 3.
CICERO) is Sacred to the Invention of the Immortal Gods; that is to say, This
Art was looked on as Sacred, because invented by the Gods. The Author of a
Piece among the Works of Galen, Entitled, The Physician, or the Introduction,
tells us, That the Greeks ascrib^d the invention of Arts to the Sons of the
Gods, or others of their nearest Kindred, who were instructed (...) HIPPOCRATES
makes God the Inven^^r: De prise. Med.
They (says he) who first found the way of curing Distempers, thought it an Art
that deserved to be as^^^^d to the Gods (...) Artic. of Dem^c^i^us, l. 2.
; which (adds he) is the receiv^d Opinion.

D^^ primum inventores suos assig^avi^ Medicina, c^^^que dicavit. Plin. lib.
29. cap. 1.
They who were not precisely of this mind, yet ranked at least among their Gods
the Men that invented Arts, especially Physic; either out of admiration of the
Introducers of things so useful to Society, or as a public acknowledgment of
the benefits they had received. See the Articles of H^^^es, Osyris, Isis and
Esculapius.
We shall bring Authorities and Instances, in confirmation of what we have now
said, which will show in what manner the Heathens believed their Gods imparted
their Aid to the relief of Men's Maladies, and the light requir^d for the
practice of Physic.

The necessity of this Art once supposed, Reason, and Chance, might present Men
with the first Remedies they made use of: Though the most ancient Instances we
meet with, of the manner of discovering the Virtues of any Plants, render us
indebted to Chance alone.

There is a Fable, that H^^im lib (...) do^. lib. 3.
GLAUCUS Son of MINOS King of CRETE, as he was pla^ing, tumbled into a Vessel
of Honey, and abundance of time was spent in vain search after him. At length
one POLYIDUS, a Di^i^^r, was sent for from ARGOS, who disco^^^^d where he was.
MINOS finding him such a notable Fellow, presently concluded that he could
restore him to life too, and to compel ^i^ to it, caus^d him to be enclos^d in
the same Tomb. The Conjurer thus put to his trumps with the Ca^^^ss, spied a
Serpent making toward him, which h^ ^^^w. Presently after came another
Serpent, who ^^^ing the other dead immediately scamper^d, and return^d with a
certain Herb, with which he co^^^r^d the whole Body of the dead Serpent, and
brought him presently to life. POLYIDUS took the hint, and made the same
experiment upon GLAUCUS, with the same success; thereupon he called to so^^,
that p^ss^d by, who carried the news to the King, who presently set him at
liberty.

A les^ incredible Fable than this, is that of MELAMPVS and the Daughters of
PRAETVS. Melampus w^^ a Shepherd, who observing that his Goats purg^d as often
as they eat HELLEBORE, bethought himself to m^^e them ^at of it, and give their
Milk to the aforesaid Ladies, who through a Malady, of which the Physicians
give diverse examples, thought themselves turn^d into Cows, which the Fable
attributes to the wrath of Bacchus, or Juno, whom they pretended to surpass in
beauty; however, the Shepherd's experiment succeeded, and the Ladies fancies
were eased. MELAMPUS was Countryman to POLYIDVS. We shall have occasion to
speak of both hereafter.

If it be asked, Who raught Polyidus^s Serpent, or Melampus's Goats, the use of
those Herbs: Those, that believe, that God first taught Men Physic, wou^d
answer, That God has the same care of Brutes, and has given 'em Instinct in
lieu of Reason; of which they are destitute. But if this Instinct be real, it
should be something superior to Reason, since it reveals to Brutes directly
those things, which the other does not discover to Men, till after abundance of
turnings and windings. See the Article of Podalirius.
We shall have occasion hereafter to speak of Medicines discovered by Chance,
and what Brutes have contributed thereto, when we speak of Bleeding.

It may be objected, That I have attributed to Chance the discovery of certain
Remedies, upon the Authority of Fables. Most Fables of this kind are founded
upon true Histories, and I see no reason why this of Melampus may not be one of
them; but there is no need either of Fable, or History, to establish what has
been said of Chance. Every one is convinc^d, by the experience of himself, and
others, that we suffer, or are benefited daily, in point of health, by using
certain aliments, or taking certain things without consideration, which we do
not ordinarily use. If we must allow that Chance has made known to us several
Poisons, we must not deny, that the same Chance has made us acquainted with
variety of salutary things; upon the proof of which, I shall not insist any
longer.

Not that Reasoning has contributed less to the discovery of Remedies than
Chance; we must reason even upon what Chance presents us with, before we can
make a right use of it. But this is not the only service, that Reasoning does
us; if Chance alone has shown us the virtue of some Medicaments, Reason alone
guided the first Physicians to the knowledge of diverse others, without the
interposition of Chance: They need but compare the Distempers one with another,
and examine the nature of the Medicines in use, to find that way abundance of
others before unknown. We shall give some Examples of this Method of making
discoveries, when we come to examine the practice of the Cnidian Physicians,
who are the most ancient we know.

But how much soever of this nature we owe to Chance, or Reasoning, it excludes
not the concurrence of Providence. For it will be always true, That Physic is
the Gift of God, in the sense, that we derive all our other blessings from the
same source.

CHAP. III. How Physic was practiced among the most ancient People; and how,
what is said of the beginning, or invention of Physic, is to be understood.
AT first, in all probability, every body prescribed Physic, and it was a long
time before it became a distinct Profession. Whoever had gain^d any experience
upon himself, or others, repeated it upon the like occasion, and communicated
to his Friends and Neighbors. Herodotus tells us, That the Babylonians
continued that practice, even to his time. H^rod^t. lib. 6.
The Babylonians, says he, carry their Sick into the Market, (for they have no
Physicians) that all who pass by, and have ever had, or seen the like
Distemper, may give their Advice, and encourage 'em to try, what themselves, or
others, have us^^ with success in the like case. The same Author adds, That
they suffered no body to pass, till he had informed himself of the Sick Man's
case. lib. 16, etc.
Sirabo says the same, not only of the Babylonians, but of the Egyptians, and
Portugueses likewise. The PORTUGUESES (says he) according to the ancient Custom
of the Egyptians, bring their Sick into the Streets, and Highways, that all
Comers, who have had the same Malady, may give em their Advice.

If we consider the Antiquity of the Babylonians, or Assyrians, and Egyptians,
who were the first People of whom we have any Memoirs, their practice may be
quoted as an instance of the eldest Method of treating the Sick. The simplicity
of this Method, seems at least to be a proof of its Antiquity, as it is the most
natural beginning.

But as every one is not able to form a just Experience, yet all indifferently
clubb^d theirs to the public Stock; they became thereby so numerous, that the
care of distinguishing and selecting, must necessarily devolve upon some
particular Person* whose whole and sole business, and employment, it became.

In our enquiry into the birth, and beginning of Physic, we must distinguish
between Physic in Illud satis ^^t admo^cre, omnia qu^^^is consummarit a Natura
initia duxisse: a^t t^llatar Medicina, qu^ ^x observatione ^^lubrium atque
(...) cont^ario^^^n, reperta (...); atque ut (...) ousdam ^^^^et, tota ^^^stat
experimentis, Namque and vuinus deligavit aliquis, an^^quam haec Ars esset, and
sebrem quiet and abstinentia, non quia rationem videbat, sed quia ^^^aletudo
ipsa coe^erat* Quintilian. lib. 2. cap. 8.
the Natural State, as we suppose it to have been among the first Men, and as
it was among the Babylonians, and Physic after it became an Art. The first is
as ^id as Mankind, and has been in use in all times, and all Nations; that we
may say w^^h P^^^^, That if some Nations have made shift without Physicians,
yet none ever did without Physic. All the difficulty lies in assigning the
time, when the latter commenced; that is, when they had gathered a sufficient
collection of Observations, whereon to sound Rules to know, and distinguish
Diseases by; and Precepts for the choice, and administration of Remedies, and
for the regulation of Living, etc. Whether these Rules were true, or false, the
Precepts just, or unreasonable, is not the question: For if it be asked, when
this Art was brought to perfection? the true and ready answer is, That it is yet
a great way short of that. The question here is, When those Rules and Precepts
were first laid down, by which Physic became an Art?

When we read in history, or Fable, that See the Chap^er of Esculapius.
the Invention of Physic is ascribed to this or that particular person, we are
not to imagine him the first that ever gave a Medicine; what has been observed
concerning Natural Physic refutes that conceit. It Is more probable, that
those, to whom the Ancients gave the honor of the Invention of this A^^, were
Men that applied themselves more pe^^^^^ly to it, and distinguished themselves
by it; whether they were really the first that engag^d in it, or that excelling
in their Art, their greater luster ^^scur'd the dim Lights of those that
preceded 'em in it, and seem^d to have made some progress in the establishment
of that Art, of which these completed the System; or that, examining more
narrowly the Subject of it, that is, the Body, and enquiring more ^^^ely into
the Causes of Distempers, and of the E^^ects of Remedies, they first began to
give the Reasons of the Precepts of their Art. Experience alone was sufficient
for the Inventors of the first (...), they had no need of more refined
reasoning, than common sense furnished every Man with. The second were obliged
to carry their speculations a little farther, grounding still upon Experience
only. The third were obliged not only to Reason, but to join the study of
Natural Philosophy to that of Physic.

CHAP. IV. That Prometheus, by some reputed the first Inventor of Physic, is a
feigned Person. The first Man the first Physician.
OF all those that were accounted the Inventors of Physic by the Ancients,
Prometheus only seems to have been an Inventor of the first sort. Aeschylus
introduces him speaking thus of himself: You would be surpriz^d, if I should
tell you all the Artisices and Subtilties that I have invented. This is the
principal: If any one fell sick, and there was no relief for him, nothing that
he could eat, nothing that he could drink, nothing to anoint him with, he must
perish for want of Remedies, before I taught Men the use of sweetning
Medicines, with which they might cure all Discases. He had said before, That he
stole Fire from Heaven, which is the infuser of all Arts, that he might
communicate ^em to Men; That he had made them Understanding, and Wise; That he
had taught 'em to build Housek, that they mi^ht dwell no longer in Caves, as
they had done before; To distinguish the Seasons; and observe the rising and
setting of the Stars; To compose Letters, and form Words; To yoke Beasts, and
six 'em to the Chariot; To break Horses; To build Ships, and make Sails. He
adds, That he taught 'em to Divine; to explain Dreams and Oracles; to foretell
things by the flying of Birds, and the entrails of Beasts, and by the Signs
that appear in Heaven; to dig out of the Earth, Brass, Iron, Silver and Gold:
In short, that all Arts came from Prometheus.

PROMETHEVS has been taken for the same with MAGOG, from whom the Scythians
derive themselves. But it is easy to show, that the Prometheus of Aeschylus,
and the other Poets, is only an Emblem, or a Prosopopeia of the Wit and
Industry of Man, or of his Prudence, which assisted him to discover all that
was useful for Life and Society. I shall pursue this Subject no farther. I
shall only take notice, that if any one would know who was the first Physician,
or Patient, he shall find 'em both in the person of the first Man: The same Law
that subjected him to Death, submitting him likewise to Diseases, at least to
diverse infirmities inseparable from humane Nature, there is no doubt to be
made, but that he did all he could to secure himself against, or free himself
from 'em. Sacred Writ assures us, that he liv^d long enough to have gathered
abundance of Experience; but as the manner of living then was simple and
uniform, (such at least we usually suppose it) and the constitution of those
primitive Men so robust and hearty, that Distempers might be very rare, so that
it is not likely he should have had opportunity to carry Physic to any great
height, or reduce it to an Art. But since the Scripture is silent in the
point, I shall proceed to what Pagan Antiquity has handed down to us.

CHAP. V. HERMES, or MERCURY, or THOTH the Inventor of Physic, by some
confounded with MOSES.
THE most ancient of those that have had the honor of the Invention in the
second sense, (that is, to have reduced it to an Art) is HERMES, or MERCVRY,
Surnamed TRISME* GASTVS, supposed to be the same with Borrich. de ortu, and
progressu Chymiae, P. 63.
CANAAN Son of CHAM, as some learned Men think. Though their conjecture were so
far ill grounded, that HERMES and CANAAN should appear to have been different
persons, yet they lived at least at the same time, and HERMES must have been
the elder. One of the ablest Monsieur Eochart in his Phaleg.
Critics of this Age has proved, that CHRONOS, or SATVRN, was the same with
NOAH. Sancbhoniathon informs us, that HERMES, THOTH, or TAAVTVS, (as the
Phaenicians and Egyptians call him) was one of the Counselors of SATVRN.
Diodorus Siculus says, that HERMES was Secretary to OSYRIS and ISIS, the most
ancient King and Queen of Egypt, who both cal^d themselves Bibliotheque univ.
and Histor. de Monsieur le Clerc. Tom. 3.
Children, or Grandchildren of CHRONOS. Sancbhoniathon make; HERMES a
Phaenician, and Son of Misor, who liv^d also about the time we are speaking of.
De natura Deor.
^ice^o will have it, that there were five Men wh^^^^ ^e the Name of MERCVRY.
The fir^^ (...) ^e, was Son of CAELUS and DIES; (...) ^^^^toing not so cleanly
befell upon the sigh^ of PROSERPINE. The second, who was Son of VALENS and
PHORONIS, has hie abode under ground, and is the same with TROPH^^^US. The
third was Son of JUPITER and MAIA, by whom of PENELOPE PAN was begotten* The
fourth, whom the Egyptians make a scruple of ^aming, had NILUS for his Father.
The fifth, whom the Pheneates keep, and who sl^w ARGUS fled into Egypt for it,
where he taught ^em the use of Letters, and gave em Laws. The Egyptians, says
Cicero, call him THOTH, and name the first Month from him.

If Cicero had consulted the Tradition of the Egyptians, rather than that of
the Greeks, Atque haec quidem ex vetere Gr^^^^^ s^^a (...) sun. D^ (...) D^^r.
from whence he owns himself to have drawn all that he says on this (...)
^^^m'd have made THOTH the eldest of the MERCVRIES, or he would have made the
first, (...) he calls the Son of CAELVS, to have brought the knowledge of
Letters, and Laws, from Egypt into Greece, since if MERCVRY came to Egypt
from the Country of ARGVS, which was Greece, it wou^d follow, That the
Egyptians had learned of the Greeks, what on the contrary the Greeks learned
of the Egyptians, as their own Authors confess in a thousand places. This way
MERCVRY, or THOTH, will (...) ^e the Son of CHAM; for CAELVS is JVPITER, and
JVPITER the same with CHAM, or HAMMON, as the Greeks called him.

Praeparat. Evangel lib. 9.
We find in Eusebius a Quotation of Artabanus, that says, That MOSES having
taught the Egyptians to build Ships, and Machines for raising of great Stones
for (...); to make Aquaeducts, and Pumps to d^^^ Water; and diverse Instruments
of War: And especially, having invented Philosophy, drew the love of the people
so to him, that the Priests paid him Honors ca^al to those they paid to their
Gods. He adds, That the same Priests gave him the Name of HERMES, because he
understood the explication of their Mystical Writings.

That which made him believe that MOSES and HERMES were the same person, is,
that some Greek Authors have written that MOSES was contemporary to Inachus,
the Father of Io, who by some has been confounded with Isis, to whom HERMES was
Counselor, Artabanus finding so luckily to his purpose these two great Men,
MOSES and HERMES living together, of the two made one, for the greater honor
of the former.

But, if HERMES were the Inventor of Physic among the Egyptians, as we shall
see by and by, he must have lived a long time before MOSES: For MOSES himself
tells us, That there were Physicians in Egypt four hundred Years before his
time, in the days of Joseph, Praecipit Joseph ministris suis Medicis ut
conditent Patrem.
whose Corpse was Embalmed by the Physicians, according to the sacred Text.

But beside, that Eusebius himself acknowledges, that Inachus was some Ages
older than MOSES. The Scripture it self overthrows the position of Artabanus,
where it is said, Act. Apost. lib 7.
that MOSES understood all the Wisdom, and all the Learning of the Egyptians;
which shows, that he learned of them, not they of him.

De Vit Mos.
Philo the Jew, enumerating the Sciences, that MOSES had learned of the
Egyptians, mentions only Arithmetic, Geometry, Poetry, Music, and their
Symbolical Philosophy, which was written in Hieropliphick Characters. And he
adds, That the Greeks taught MOSES the rest of the Liberal Arts; that he
fetched from the Assyrians those who taught him their Learning, and from the
Chaldeans, of whom he learned the Astronomy.
Science of the Stars. Stromat. lib. 1.
But Clemens Alexandrinus says expressly, That MOSES was Instructed in Physic
by the Egyptians. Now tho the Error of Artabanus be very manifest, and this
therefore not the proper place to pursue the Discourse of MOSES any further,
yet that we may not be oblig^d again to resume it, I shall only hint in a few
words, that probably this Prophet was skilled in Physic. We have had the
testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus to the point, and we shall see in the sequel,
that the great Men of Egypt applied themselves to this Study, and that MOSES
might have learned it there. The Chemists Experience convinces us that this
cannot be true in fact under a miracle; and it cannot be any proof of his Skill
in Physic, since he must be supernaturally informed, if he foreknew the
effects of a supernatural production.
pretend, that his reducing to Ashes, or Calcining the Golden Calf, and
scattering the ashes in the Water, and giving the Israelites of it to drink, is
a sufficient proof that he perfectly understood their Art. This instance does
indeed, directly conclude him very expert in Metallicks, if we suppose no
Miracle in the case; but we shall, in the second Part of this History, show
that this is no proof of his having been a Physician, the difference according
to us being very great between Metallic, and Med'cinal Chemistry.

To return to THOTH, or the MERCVRY of the Egyptians, it is certain that the
Egyptians, and all the Heathens after 'em, believed him the Inventor of all
Arts, Sciences, Diodorus Siculus, lib. 1. Jul. Cas. de Bell. G^ll. lib. 6.
Iamblich. de M^st Egypt.
as the Authors here cited testify, of whom the G^den. Orat. suas. ad A^^i.
Ma^tian. Capell de Art. Gramma^. lib. 3 Clem. ^^x. Strom. lib. 6.
latter attribute to him the Invention of Physic in particular. And therefore
'twas undoubtedly, that the Ancients usually represented Mercury accompany^d by
the Goddess Hygicia, that is, Health, which he brought to Men by this Art.

We read in Antiq. Juda^^. lib. 1. c. 3.
Josephus, that the Sons of Seth understanding from Adam, that the World was to
perish by Water, and by Fire, to preserve their discoveries in Astrology,
contriv^d to build two Pillars, one of Brick, and the other of Stone, on which
they Engraved all that they knew considerable in that Science, thinking, that
if the Brick were destroyed by the Deluge, the Stone would remain. Josephus
adds, that the Pillar of Brick remained in Syria in his time.

Mercury took the same measures to transmit to Posterity the Monuments of his
Knowledge. Chronic. lib. 1.
Eusebius makes mention, upon on the credit of Manetho, an Egyptian Priest, of
certain Pillars on which THOTH, or the first MERCVRY, had written many things
in Hierogliphicks; adding, that AGATHODEMON, or the second MERCVRY, Father of
Tat, transcribed 'em in Greek after the Deluge, and composed of em Books in the
Sacred Characters, which were kept in the most secret places of the Temples of
Egypt. Thus far Manetho. To examine whether this second Mercury be different
from Cicero's or not, is not to our present purpose.

Iamblichus says also, De Myster. Egypt. lib. 1.
That there were Columns in Egypt, filled with Writings containing the
Doctrines of Mercury. The same Author remarks elsewhere, That Pythagoras and
Plato received abundance of light from what they read in Egypt upon the
Pillars of Mercury. Plato in Timao, and Critia. Galen. contra Jalian. lib. 1.
PLATO himself, in two places, speaks of Pillars upon which the Egyptians, and
other ancient People, writ their Laws, the History of their Times, and the most
remarkable things invented by 'em. What we shall say in the following Article
of the Pillar of Isis, will be a confirmation.

Whether all that has been related of these Columns, and the Extracts made from
'em, so much boasted of by the Egyptian Priests, were true or nor, the Fame of
em sufficed to bring forth aburdance of Writings, or Books, which pass^d for
Copies of these Extracts, and were taken for the legitimate Works of MERCVRY.
Iamblichus reckons The the Books of the Ancients were very short, yet the
number here is manifestly very much amplified. Some have reduced these Books to
so many lines, or short paragraphs.
6525 of these Books. Of some of these, there remains no more than the Title;
others have been preserved entire. There are yet some Manuscripts to be found
in curious Libraries, which treat of Chemistry; of which we shall have occasion
to take further notice, as likewise of the famous Table of Emerauld of Hermes,
in the Second Part of this History; in which we shall prove, That if HERMES
were the Inventor of Chemistry, 'twas not of Medical Chemistry.

Among the Books of Mercury, of which the Ancients make mention, and which
relate to Physic, there were some already suspected, even in the time of
Galen. De simplic. Medicam. facult. lib. 6. in principio.
Such was that, which he says was attributed to the Egyptian Mercury, which
contained the Thirty six Herbs of the Horoscopes. These, he says, were mere
trifles only, that amused the Reader to the loss of his time.

We have spoken before of the Hicrogliphical Books of MERCVRY, which the
Egyptians kept with so much care in their Temples. It was undoubtedly one of
these Books, which Diodorus calls, in the singular number, the Sacred-Book,
without naming the Author, by which all the Physicians of Egypt were obliged
to regulate their practice. So that observing the precepts of that Book, they
were justified, though the Patient died; but if they deviated from 'em never so
little, his death was imputed to 'em, and they punish^d as Murderers. Clemens
Alexandrinus goes farther, Stromat. lib. 6.
There are, says he, which are most considerable, two and forty Books of
HERMES; thirty six of which contain the Egyptian Philosophy, which they
obliged their SACRIFICERS, or PRIESTS and PROPHETS, to read. The other six they
caused their A sort of Priests* so called from their wearing l^ng Cl^aks; or
because they carried upon certain occasi^ns the B^d of Venus. These Pastophori
were th^^^ that practiced Physic in Egypt.
PASTOPHORI to learn, as belonging to Physic. The first of these, continues
he, treats of the STRUCTURE of the Body; the second of DISEASES; the third of
the INSTRUMENTS requird; the fourth of MEDICAMENTS; the fifth of the DISEASES
of the EYES; the sixth of WOMEN'S DISEASES.

If these Books were really MERCVRY^s, we cannot deny him to have reduc^d
Physic to in Art. He began with the Structure of the Body, or Anatomy,
supposing it most natural to begin with the knowledge of the subject upon which
we are to be employed. After this he described the maladies or changes which
^^sal this Body. The third and fourth Books (...) of the Instruments, and
Medicaments ne^^^sary for cure; that is, of Surgery, and Pharmacy. After these
he proceeded to the Eye in particular, whose diseases are very numerous, ^^d
require a peculiar care. Hence he treats ^^trately of those Distempers of
Women, that are distinct from those of Men, and require a different cure.

Nothing could be more exact; See Conringius de Medicin. Herm cap 3.
but there is great reason to suspect, that these Books were written many Ages
after HERMES, at a time when Physic had made great advances; and there is no
doubt to be made, but that the Egyptian Priests father^d upon their HERMES
some spurious piece of their own, or of (...) able Physician. If the matter did
not speak for it self, the aforecited Iamblichus starts the suspicion, by
telling us, That the Egyptian Writers being persuaded, that Mercury was the
Inventor of all things, usually gave him the honor of their own Productions,
or did themselves the grace to put his Name to their Books

At this time no track, or foot-step, remaining of those Books, of which
Clemens Alexandrinus makes mention; we know no more of the pretended Physic of
HERMES, than the generals already given. If some other Books ascrib^d to him,
which have remained to our days, were genuine, we might clearly from them
infer, that the Physic of HERMES was in great measure grounded on Astrology
and Magic.

See the passage corrected by Seldom (de diis Syris syntagm. 1.) Ita humanitas
semper memor humanae naturae and originis suae, in illa divinitatis imitatione
perseverat, ut sicut pater, ac dominus, ut sui similes esseut, Deos secit
aeternos, ita humanitas Deos s^os ex sui vultus similitudine sig raret. Asclep.
Statuas dicis o Trismegiste? Trismegist. statuas o Asclepividesue qa tenus tu
ipse diffidas? Statuas a^imatas, sensu, and Spiritu ple^^s, ^^^taque facientes,
and talia; Statuas futurorum prae^^^as, ea quae ^or^e omnis vates ignoret in
multis and var^is praedicentes imbeci^l tates hominibus facientes, easque
curantes tristitiam laet^tiamque prom^ritis, etc.
There is a passage, which justifies our assertion in the Book called Asclepius,
which was anciently taken for one of HERMES's, of which the Latin Version now
extant among us is imputed to Apuleius. This passage mentions certain Statues,
that gave, and cured Diseases, and told things to come; and did diverse other
prodigious things.

The Book of the thirty six sacred Herbs of the Horos^^pes, cited by Galen as
before, however supposititious, is at least a proof that it was the common
opinion, that MERCVRY did not confine himself to Physic, otherwise they would
never have fathered such Books upon him. The Title of this Book agrees very
well with what Origin writes, Contra Cells. lib. 8.
That the Egyptians say there are thirty six Damons, or Gods of the Air, which
divide the Body of man among 'em into so many parts: And adds, That the
Egyptians had in their Language names for all these Demons, and that invoking
any of 'em, according to the part affected, they were cured.

There are some other (...) Liber.
Books which bear the name of MERCVRY, which prove likewise, that Astrology
made a great part of his Physic. The Ancients were so strongly possess^d, that
Magic, and Astrology, made a part of Physic, that some would place Zoroaster,
an ancient King of Bactria, who is generally taken to be contemporary to Ninus
King of Assyria, or who, according to Berosus, was the same with Cham the Son
of Noah, among the Physicians, because he had the reputation of having been a
very great Magician, or the Inventor of Magic.

To conclude, it is probable Mercury might make use of some ordinary, or natural
Medicines, but Antiquity scarce affords us any proof of it. The Herb Vid. Ho^.
Odyss.
MOLY, that MERCVRY gave to Ulysses, as of force against the charms of Circe,
is in the number of superstitious Remedies, but that which bears his Name,
Mercurialis, or Mercury.
and which is in common use, seems to have been employed by its Inventor, as
now it is. To the Mercurialis we may add Coral, of which they say MERCVRY
taught the use against the bitings of Serpents, which was to drink it in pure
Wine. The Author of the Hymn to MERCVRY, which is fathered upon Orpheus, who
reports this of Coral, speaks of MERCVRY's Grot, where all sorts of good things
were hidden, where no diseases came, where remedy was to be had for the bitings
of Serpents, for Lunaticks and Lepers. So far Orpheus, but he does not tell the
means MERCVRY used on these occasions.

I find nothing more particular concerning the Physic of HERMES, than that the
ancient Egyptians derived from him in general, all that belong^d to that
Profession. Po^iti^ or. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Aristotle speaks of an ancient Law among the Egyptians, by which the
Physicians were forbidden to move the humors, (that is to purge) before the
fourth day, which if they did, it was at their own peril, and risque. This agrees
with what was said before of the sacred Books by which Physicians were obliged
to regulate their practice, and perhaps this Law might be contained in that
Book ascrib^d to MERCVRY. Diodorus takes notice, that the Egyptian Physic
consisted mainly of Abstinence, Clysters, and Vomitories, but we have no proof,
that this practice was established by HERMES.

We have nothing more on this subject, but that after his death he was
worshipped as a God; a practice that grew very frequent afterward, as may be
seen in the following Articles.

CHAP. VI. OSYRIS, or APIS, or SERAPIS, and ISIS, other Inventors of Physic.
Diodor. hb. 1.
There were anciently to be seen in the City of N^sa, which some place in
Arabia, others in Egypt, the following Inscriptions upon two Pillars in
Mystic Characters. The first says ^hus: My Father is CHRONOS the youngest of
the Gods. I am King OSYRIS, who have extended my Conquests over the whole
Earth, from the uninhabitable parts of the INDIES to those under the BEAR, to
the sources of the DANUBE, and thence to the OCEAN. I am the eldest Son of
CHRONOS, and have brought him a fair, and noble Race: I am Father of the Day;
there is no place in the World where I have not been, and I have filled the
Universe with my good Deeds.

The second was in these words: I am ISYS, Queen of all this Country, who have
been instructed by THOUT. No one can unbind, (...) I bind. I am the eldest
Daughter of CHRONOS, the youngest of the Gods; I am Wi^e, and S^^^er to King
OSYRIS. I am the first that t^^gh^ M^^ Agriculture; I am Mother to King HORUS.
It Is I that blaze in the Dog Star. I bui^^ the City of Buba^tus. Adieu, adieu,
(...), where I was bred. From these t^^ Ins^^^^ions we may infer, first, That
OSYRIS and ISIS, who have been taken for the most ancient King, and Queen of
Egypt, were contemporary to HERMES, or THOVT. If the conjecture advanced in
the Article precedent were well grounded, they would be of the same Family too.
Others aver that THOVT was Couns^ll^^ or Secretary to this King and Queen,
without taking notice of any relation between 'em.

We are told in the second place, by the Inscription of Osyris, That he had
filled the World with his benefits. The same Auth^r, that recites the
Inscriptions, tells us in the same Book, That the Egyptian Priests affirm
HERMES to be the Inventor of ARTS and SCIENCES in general, and that the Kings
(meaning the King OSYRIS, and Queen ISIS) had invented those which were
necessary to Life. Of these Arts, none is so useful as Agriculture; of which
ISIS boasts her self to be Inventress. The same invention is ascribed to
OSYRIS; nor is it the only* one they share in common betwixt 'em. They are
likewise said to have invented Physic, First it is said of OSYRIS, because it is
said of APIS, who appears to have been the same Plutarch. de I^^d. and O^y^id.
Person. APIS, says Clemens Alexandrinus, a Native of Egypt, invented Physic.

Cyril who was of the same City with Clemens, says likewise, That APIS an
Egyptian, one of the most considerable of those that served in their Temples,
and who understood natural Philosophy, was the first that invented the ART of
PHYSIC, and practiced it with greater success than any that preceded him,
teaching it afterward to ESCULAPIUS.

By this APIS, should not be the same with OSYRIS, who was King of Egypt,
whereas the other was but a Priest; but we may either suppose Cyril to be
mistaken, or that APIS was King and Priest at the same time. Be it as 'twill,
Plutarch assures us, That APIS and OSYRIS, according to the Tradition of the
Egyptians themselves, were but two different Names for the same person; which
Strabo confirms, as does also De cura affect. gentil.
Theodoret.

The same Author would have it likewise, that SERAPIS was a third name for
OSYRIS. Tacit. Hist. lib. 4.
Some ancient Authors maintain Serapis to have been the same with ESCVLAPIVS.
De Idolatr. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Vossius fancies that the Egyptians gave that name to Joseph, to whom they
paid Divine Honors, in acknowledgment of the benefits their Country received
from him; but if SERAPIS be the same with OSYRIS, he must be abundance older.
We shall speak of the Temple of Serapis, in the Article of Esculapius.

As for ISIS, Diodorus tells us, That the Egyptians affirm, that ISIS invented
diverse medicaments, and that she was very expert in Physic: For which, say
they, being already raised to be a Goddess, she still takes care of the health
of Men. Hence it is, that they, who implore her succor, find themselves
immediately relieved. They say, That the reputation of ISIS is not founded upon
vain Fables, like those of the Greeks, but upon evidence of Fact. That it is
supported by the testimony of almost all the Universe, who honor this Goddess
for the succor they find from her in Physic. ISIS, say they, reveals
Medicines to the sick by Dreams in their sleep, which never miss their effect;
so that instances are daily seen of those, that recover their health, even
after the Physicians have given 'em absolutely over.

This testimony of Diodorus is backed by diverse others. But whatever ISIS did
in Physic, we hear of no Books written by her as by HERMES. We have nothing
remaining of her, except Kerher. Oedip. Egypt. Borrich. de or^ and progres.
Chim.
ISIS's Table, a piece very curious, and (as they say) very ancient, written in
Egyptian Characters, and charged with Hieroglyphics; that is, with mystical
Figures, or Emblems, which is in the Closet of the Duke of Savoy, of which we
shall take further notice when we treat of the Table of HERMES,
beforementioned. There were in Galen's time certain Medicines, that bore the
name of Isis, which seem rather imposed upon em^^ raise their value, than drawn
from her invention.

OSYRIS and ISIS being dead, they w^^e numbered among the Gods, as well as
MERCVRY. If it be ask^d, Why the Ancients made Gods of those that were mortal,
and subjected to the same conditions with the rest of Mankind? Cicero De Not.
deor. lib. 2.
answers, That 'twas an established custom in the World to deifie those
persons, that did any considerable services to Mankind, as did HERCULES, CASTOR
and POLLUX, ESCULAPIUS, BACCHUS, etc. All these, whom Cicero here mentions, are
much later than OSYRIS and ISIS, who are the first that had this honor done
'em. We are informed at least, by Sancthoniathon, Eu^^b. praepar. Evang.
That the Phaenicians and Egyptians were the first, that held, as great Gods,
the Inventors of things necessary to Life, and those that were thought to have
done any mighty service to Mankind; and from them, says he, this custom has
been receiv^d by all the rest. Clemens Alexandrinus says likewise, That the
same practice was in use among the Chaldeans, and the Inhabitants of Arabia the
Happy, of Palestine, and of Persia, and all the Barbarians in general.

CHAP. VII. HORUS, APOLLO, or PAEON, another Inventor of Physic.
THE Invention of Physic has been given likewise to Horus, or Apollo, Son of
Isis. This Goddess, according to Diodorus, finding in the water her Son Horus,
who was slain by Titans, not only restored him to life, but made him immortal
also. He adds, That the name of Horus has been reader'd Apollo, and that he was
believed to have learned the Arts of Physic, and Divination, of his Mother
Isis, and that he was very useful to Men by his Oracles, and by his Remedies.
By what is past, Horus appears not to be the Inventor of Physic, having been
taught it by his Mother; but if he be the same with Apollo, the sequel will
prove him to have had the credit of inventing this Art himself.

Ci^^^, who as we have seen multiplied the Mercu^ies, will have it, that there
were De Not. d^or. lib. 3.
four Apollo's, amongst which Horus seems not to be included, unless we make
him the same whom he ca^^s the first of all the Apollo's, Son of Vulcan, and
Patron of Athens. If Mercury and Vulcan, (who according to Cicero were both
Sons of Cal^s) were ^^^^ntan and Misraim, Grandsons of No^^h, De or^. and
^rogr. Chi^^.
as B^rrichius fancies; and if Osyris and Is^^ liv^d about that time, Horus
their Son might be con^emp^^^ry to the Son of Vulcan. And if, with the Author
of the universal Biblio^heq^e, we sub^^^^te Osyris to Mercury, the Apollo of
D^odorus, and Cicero, will be, if not the same person, yet Brothers Children at
least.

If there were really any one of that name, that signaliz^^ himself by his
Physic, it must be the Son of Isis, though he were not the Apollo, whom Ovid
Inventum Medicina meum est Opi^erque per Orbe^^ Dicor and ^^^^um subj^ct^
potentia nobi^. Metamorph. lib. 1.
introduces laying claim to the Invention of Physic, and the Virtues of
Plants. We may pass the same censure upon the Apollo of Ovid, and the rest of
the Poets, as upon the Prometheus of Aeschylus, that he is a feign^d person, by
whom the Sun was sign^^^ed. To this Star they ascribed the rise of Physic, or
rather a power of Life and Death over Men, to cause Pestilences, and to
disperse em; for the Sun, or its hea^, were esteem^d the principle of
Generation, and Corruption in all things, upon whose peculiar influence upon
Animal Bodies, and those that surround 'em, Health and Diseases did immediately
depend.

Hyginus refines very much upon this, when he says, Fab. lib 1.
That Apollo was the first Oculist, alluding to the light of the Sun, and the
appellation given him by the Poets, the Eye of the World. For the same reason
he is said to be the God of Divination, because Light, or the Day, discovers
what was hidden in the Night. By this he became more famous than the others,
and his Temples were more frequented by those, that came to know their
Fortunes, than to cure their Distempers. Others have thought, that the Art of
Divination was join^d to Physic, upon the account of the Prognostics of
Physicians, This conjecture seems very natural, but I doubt the Art of
Divination will appear to have been separated from Physic before the latter
arrived at any great skill in the Pr^gnosticks, of which we find ^ot^ing before
Hippocrates, but what the Coacae Praenotiones c^ntain, which seem to be the
collective Body of the knowledge of his Predecessors (...) that ^ind. I rather
think, that the Priests, who were the first Pr^^es^ (...) introduc^d Divination
first into Physic, that they might supply their (...) in the latter by the
imaginary ^^^s of the f^rme^, and support their credit jointly by both, which
they could not by either apart.
by which they frequently foretell, what shall befall the Patient in the course
of his distemper; which is, what procures the greatest veneration for the
Profe^^ion.

It should seem by the Etymology of the word Apollo, which comes from a (...).
This etymology seems better grounded than that which deduces it from (...), to
expel; (...) quasi (...).
Greek word signifying to destroy, that the sick addressed themselves to him,
as much out of fear of mischief, as hope of benefit; as they raised Altars to
the Fever. Homer, where he once calls Apollo Savior of the People, says a
hundred times, that he wounds and smites afar off. He was Surnamed likewise
Alexicacos, the Chaser of Evil, but we find not that name in Homer.

He was called likewise Others fetch this word from (...), to cease, to put a
stop, or appease; because appeased Diseases.
Paeon, from a Verb, which signifies according to some to heal, but vulgarly to
strike. Iliad.
Eustathius takes notice that Homer's PAEON, the Physician of the Gods, was
Apollo himself. It was a common practice to give Apollo the Surname of Paean;
Io Paean was the burden of all the Hymns sung in his praise. Servius In Eneid.
12.
observes that Paean was a Dorick word, in which Dialect it usual is to turn o
into a, Paean for Paeon.

The Scholiast upon Nicander is of another mind; Paeon, Schol. in Nicand.
Theriac.
says he, is Esculapius. There is a passage likewise in the Plutus of
Aristophanes, where the Surname of (...). Finding favor with Esculapius Paeon,
or Esculapius the Physician, as some translate it. This ^p^thete might at first
belong properly to Apollo, but it has been bestowed upon his Son Esculapius
likewise, and after him upon all famous Physicians* whom they had a mind to do
honor to. In this sense perhaps it is, that Homer says, that Physicians are of
the race of Paeon. Hence come the words (...), medicabilis, curable; (...), the
hand of a Physician. And Servius in the place before cited says, upon these
words of Virgil, Paeonium in Morem, That Paeonius signifies Medicinalis, or
belonging to a Physician.
Paeon is given to Esculapius.

Parere del S. Leonardo di Capoa intorno la Medicina.
A Learned Italian, who writ some years since in refutation of the Scholiast
upon Nicander, alleges, That Esculapius was not yet Deify^d in the days of
Homer; but we shall see in the sequel, that his Apotheosis was passed long
before. We might support the Scholiast by the authority of Virgil, who
attributes the raising to life Hippolitus to the power of the Herbs of Paeon,
thereby plainly intending Esculapius, whom he presently after calls the Son of
Phoebus.

Artemidorus likewise confounds Esculapius with Paeon: De Somo. interpr^^. ^ib.
2. cap. 42.
If you dream, says he, that Esculapius removes, or comes to any place, or into
any House, it is a sign of the Plague, or other distemper; for it is on these
occasions Men have need of this God. But if the sick dream so, it is a sign of
recovery; for, adds he, this God is called (...).
PAEON. So far Artemidorus; but, here, it may be answered, that by Paeon is
meant no more than Physician.

Lucian, on the other hand, distinguishes formally between these two; for he
introduces Hercules threatening Esculapius to maul him so, that ^^alogues of the
Gods.
Paeon himself should not be able to cure him.

These different Authorities show us, that the Ancients were divided upon the
matter. At last, if Homer's PAEON, who was Physician to the Gods, was any other
than Apollo, or Esculapius, he not having informed us what Family he was of, we
need perplex our selves about the matter no farther.

CHAP. VIII. ARABUS another Inventor of Physic.
OF ARABVS I find nothing but these words in Pliny: Lib 7. cap. 18.
The Egyptians will have it, that Physic was invented among them; others
attribute the Invention to ARABUS, the Son of Babylone and Apollo.

CHAP. IX. ESCULAPIUS the most famous, or most generally known of the Inventors
of Physic; or of those that brought the Art to some degree of Perfection.
Wherein of CHIRON the CENTAUR, and the HEROES his Pupils; as also of MELAMPUS,
and POLYIDUS.
THE Egyptians, who attribute the invention of Medicine to Hermes, account
Esculapius his Pupil. The aforecited Book, entitled Asclepius, which is the
same name with Esculapius, introduces H^rmes and Esculapius talking together,
like Master and Scholar. And Julius Maternus Firmicus says, upon the tradition
of the Egyptians, Lib. 3. cap. 1. de ^^^siri and Nic^pso.
That the God Mercury communicated the sec^ets of Astrology, and Mathematics,
to Esculapius and Anubis; from whence we may infer, that he did not hide from
the former his Skill in Physic, which was his principal Study.

It Is the more probable, that Esculapius was instructed by Mercury, in that he
was his Kinsman. Sancthoniathon. 1. ap. Philon. 1.
Syd^c, or Sadoc, Brother of Misor Father of H^rmes, having first had seven
Sons called D^^scures, Cabires, or Corybantes, had an eighth, which was
Esculapius, whose Mother was one of the seven Sister Titans Daughters to Saturn
by his Wife Astarte. The Author from whom what is here said is drawn, adds,
That the Cabires had Children, who found out wholesome Herbs, and remedies for
the bitings of venomous Beasts, and that they made use of Enchantments.

This was the Tradition of the Egyptians and Phaenicians concerning
Esculapius, who, according to them, must have been of the same Age and Family
with the rest of the Inventors of Physic; of whom we have spoken already.
Clemens Alexandrinus alone, after having told us, that Esculapius was of
Memphis, and that he improved Physic, which Apis invented, seems to make him
later; for he says in another place, that he was Deify'd a little before the
Trojan War; by which he seems to have confounded Esculapius the Egyptian, with
Esculapius the Greek; of whom hereafter. But the Greeks make him not quite so
old, as we shall see. Cicero after them says, that there were three Esculapius
's; the first, whom the Arcadians worship, was the Son of Apollo. He invented
the Probe, to probe wounds with, and taught the use of Bandage. The second, was
Son of the second MERCURY, Thunderstruck by Jupiter, and buried at the
Cynosures. See the Chapter of Podal^rius.
The thi^d, who was Son of Arsippus and Arsinoe, invented Purga^^^n and
Tooth-drawing

If the first Esculapius of Cicero be the same of Pausanias, and Pindar speak,
who was Son of Apollo and Coronis, he cannot be very ancient, having been
educated by the Centaur CHIRON, who lived but just before the Trojan War, and
having had two Sons present at that Siege.

All these Esculapius's may, in my opinion, be reduced to See the Chapter of
the Wife and Daughters of Esculapius.
one, so that it there ever were any Esculapius, it is probable he was a
Phaenician, or an Egyptian; but he has been multiplied, as most of the rest
before him, by the slight of the Greeks, with whom it was custe mary to adopt
Egyptian Fables, that they might honor their own Country with the production
of any extraordinary Persons. Hence it is that their Esculapius is so recent,
their Annals not reaching much higher than the War of Troy.

Yet this way should there be but two Esculapius's, one Egyptian, and one
Greek; but the same motive, that prevailed upon the Country in general, to
naturalize this Physician, induced several Provinces, and Cities, to put in
their particular claim, each setting up a Title apart, exclusive of all the
rest.

The Greeks have been so unsuccessful in their attempts, to find an etymology
for the name in their Tongue, that it is alone a sufficient proof, that the word
is not originally Greek. The Reader may, in the (...), ab a privativo, and
(...), Siccari, quod impediret quo nitous ^omines siccarentur, vel more^^^tur.
Or, according to the Etymologicum magnum, (...). Or, according to Tzetzes,
because he cured Ascles Tyrant of Epidaurus, their names were compounded; and
he, instead ^f being called simply Hepius, or Apius, as before, was named
Asclepius.
Margin, see both theirs, and some etymologies drawn from the Bochart derives
Asclepius (whence the Latin Esculapius) from the Phaenician, Is Calabi, viz.
Caninus, upon the score of keeping Dogs in his Temples; of which, the reasons
hereafter. Others derive it from Ez, and Keleb, of which the latter signifies a
Dog, the other a Goat, because of a tradition, that he was suckled by a Goat,
and guarded by a Dog; of which more anon. Junius, Father-in-Law to Vossius,
derives Asclepius from Ascalaphus, which signifies to change; Vossius de
Philosophia. But in the same Tongue we find the words, Is Calaphot, A Man of
the Knife, which etymology appears the more just, in that it expresses
perfectly his Profession; his principal Talent being Surgery, as shall be shown.
Phaenician Language, and judge for himself. I shall here repeat, that it is
probable there was but one Esculapius, and he a Phaenician; or which is
tantamount, that if there was a Greek of the same name and reputation, that he
borrowed both of the former.

The Esculapius of the Cyrenians, was likewise unquestionably the same with the
Phaenician; but of him, a word or two hereafter.

However it be, Antiquity having left us nothing of the first, but the little
we have cited, we must stick to the account the Greeks give of theirs. Of him
by and by, but first a word or two concerning Chiron the Centaur, who was his
Master.

CHAP. X. The Centaur CHIRON, and the HEROES his Pupils in Physic.
THE Centaur CHIRON was Pindar. Pyth. Od. 6. Hygin. Fab. cap. 138. Apollo^.
Rhod. Argonaut. lib. 2. etc.
Son of Saturn and Philira; and the Fable tells us, that the reason, why he was
half Man, half Horse, (which the Poets call a Centaur) was, that Saturn, while
he was with Philira, apprehending a surprise from his Wife Rhea, turned himself
immediately into a Horse for a disguise. Others say, that Chiron was feigned to
be half Man half Beast, because he understood Physic for both kinds; and
Suidas says, that he wrote a Book called (...).
Horse-Med^cine. Perhaps the Fable has made a Centaur of him, because he was of
Thessaly, the Country of those fictitious Monsters; for Thessaly being the
place where they first began to back Horses, those that first, at a distance,
saw a Man on Horseback, made but one body of 'em.

German. Caesar. in Arat. Phaenom.
Some tell us simply, that Chiron invented Physic, without specifying any kind.
Galen. Introduct. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 46.
Others say, that he first found Herbs, and Medicaments for the cure of
Diseases, and particularly Wounds and Ulcers. Plutarch. Sympos. lib. 3. qu. 1.
The Magnesians, his Countrymen, offer to him, for this reason, the first
fruits of Herbs, or Plants; and say, that he was the first that wrote of
Physic. From him, it is said, that Centaury, a Plant well known, took its name,
as did also some others. They add, that Diana taught him the virtues of some
other Simples. Others, after all, make him the Hygin. cap 27.
Inventor of Manual Operation only. This conceit is founded upon the etymology
of his Name, which is plainly deriv^d from a Greek word, which signifies (...);
from whence Surgery, which signifies working with the Hand.
a Hand, and from which the name Surgery is likewise derived.

Surgery, or Physic, was not the only Science, of which Chiron was Master; he
understood likewise Philosophy, Astronomy, Music, Hunting, War, and other
Arts. His habitation was in a Cave of Mount Pelion, whither all the great Men
of his Time resorted for his instructions in these Arts and Sciences. The
Heroes, whom he educated, were Hercules, Theseus, Aristeas, Telamon, Teucer,
Jason, Peleus, Achilles, Patroclus, Palamedes, and Esculapius.

He taught Hercules not only the Art of War and Astronomy, but Physic also; in
which, according to Plutarch, this Hero excelled. Some interpret the passage of
Euripides, which says, That Hercules hearing that Alceste was to die for her
Husband Admetus, fought Death, and rescued her from him by force; after this
manner. Muret. Var. Lection.
Alcestis being so ill, that her recovery was despaired of, Hercules, by his
Medicines, restor^d her to health. It Is said, that he bore the Surname of
Expeller of Evil.
(...), as well as Apollo, and for the same reason, that is, because he
expell^d Diseases. But it is more probable he was so called, because he clear^d
the World of diverse Monsters, according to the Fable.

It Is argued likewise, that Hercules understood Physic, from the several
Medicinal Plants, that bears his name. Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and other
ancient Botanists, speak of a sort of Poppy, called Hercules^s Poppy. There was
also another Plant called Heracleum. The Nymphaea was likewise called Heraclea,
according to Pliny; who says, that it sprung upon the Tomb of a Nymph, who died
of Jealousy upon the account of Hercules, who had an Intrigue with another.
There is also a sort of Panax, and some other Plants, named from Hercules. Yet
to me it seems probable, that these names were given since his time, to denote
the extraordinary force of these Plants, which they compared to the strength of
Hercule^ For a like reason the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, was called the
Herculean Distemper, not that he was ever troubled with it, or knew how to cure
it, Or rather because the strength of Hercules is not sufficient to bear up
under it.
but because a power equal to that of Hercules is required to subdue so
difficult a Malady. Epistol. Abderit. ad Hippocrat. Justin. lib. 13. Schol.
(...) Apollon Rhod. Argonaut. lib. 2.
This Hero had a Daughter called Hepione, who understood Physic likewise. We
shall see by and by another Hepione, Wife to Esculapius.

Aristaeus King of Arcadia, and Son of Apollo and Cyrene, was by his Father
committed to the care of Chiron the Centaur, who taught him Med^cine and
Divination. He is said first to have taught Men to make Oil, and Arist^^^ is
said to have been the first that kept Bees, and to have produced ^em after a
strange manner. Virg. Georg. 4.
Honey, and Cheese-curds, and diverse other things useful to Society. To him is
ascribed the discovery of the virtues of Silphium or Laserpitium, whose Gum, or
Juice, inspissated, was very much in use among the Ancients; but Some conclude
it to be that kind of Ferula, which yields Asafoetida, and which by most modern
Bonatists is called Laserpitium.
at present, we either have it not, or don't certainly know it, as the sequel
will show.

Theseus had his education in the same School, and Theophrastus mentions a
Plant that bore his name; whence some infer, that he found out the virtue of
it, which was to loosen the Belly.

Telamon, and his Son Teucer, come in with these for an equal share of the
knowledge of Physic. Philostratus vouches for the Father. And the Germander.
Teucrium, a Plant which bears his name, and is very well known, is also,
according to the common tradition, an argument that he was the first discoverer
of it.

Jason had likewise the reputation of a great Physician, (...), medeor, to to
heal, or cure.
of which the etymology of his Name remains as a proof.

Peleus also was admitted to the same honor, as well as his Son Achilles. The
latter carried with him, to the Siege of Troy, a Lance given him by the
Centaur, which had the virtue of healing the wounds it made, which Telephus
experienc^d to his relief.

Lib. 25. cap 5.
Some, says Pliny, pretend, that Achilles cur^d TELEPHUS with the Herb
Achillea, which is a sort of a Yarrow, or Milfoil. Others say, That he found
out Some have (perhaps with equal reason) fancied Achilles the Inventor of
Weapon Salve, or that he was possessed of the secret, wherein, according to
them, consisted the virtue, supposed to have been in his Spear, of curing the
wounds it made.
Vert de Gris, which is of great use in Salves, and for that reason, say they,
Achilles is painted scraping the Verdigrise, which is the rust of Copper, from
the point of his Spear, and dropping it into Telephus 's wound.

Homer tells us, that Eurypylus being wounded, requested Patroclus, the friend
of Achilles, Iliad. 2. subs. fin.
to communicate to him some of those excellent Remedies he had learned of his
Hero Patroclus having been Companion, and fellow Pupil to Achilles under
Chiron, might reasonably have been thought not to have needed his Instructions.
the Disciple of Chiron, the justest of all the Centaurs.

To the authority of Homer we may join that of several other Poets,
Vindicianus, Sid^n. Apolhnari. Claudian. in Pan. de 3. con^ul. Honor. item ad
Hadrianum.
who all agree that Achilles learned Medicine of the Centaur Chiron.

Whether Patroclus understood Physic or not, and especially Surgery, after
what has been said, is scarce a question; for Eurypylus, in the afore-cited
place, desires him to make an Incision into his Thigh, and draw out the head of
the Arrow, with which he was wounded, and to wash the wound with water, and
apply something to assuage the pain.

Philostrat: in Heroicis.
Palamedes, by the instructions of Chiron, was no less a proficient in Medicine
than the rest; for by his advice, the Plague, that ravaged all the Cities of
the Hellespont, and even Troy it self, was stopped from coming into the
Grecian Camp, which lay before the Town in a very unhealthy place. His method
was to oblige 'em to a spare Diet, and much Exercise.

This is what is reported of these Heroes, as to Physic. I meet with no
particular cures of Chiron's making, except that of Phaenix Apollodor. lib. 3.
the Son of Amintor, to whom he restored his sight, after his Father, in a fit
of Jealousy, had put his Eyes out. Galen says, that the Greeks called
malignant Ulcers, which were in a manner incurable, Chironian, because Chiron
only could cure 'em; tho it seems more reasonable to think they were so called
for a quite contrary reason, that is, that Ulcers of that nature were despaired
of by that incomparable Surgeon.

Vide Ovid. Metam. lib. 2. Posse mori cupies tum, cum cruciabere dirae
Sangu^ne^ Serpentis per sancia memora recepto, etc.
The Fable informs us, That Hercules having unawares wounded Chiron with an
Arrow dipped in the blood of the Lernean Hydra, the pain was so insupportable,
that the Centaur's greatest trouble was, that being immortal he could not die
Whereupon Hercules, to make him all the amends he could, unbound Prometheus,
who consented to become immortal in the room of Chiron, who died according to
his desire, and was translated to a place among the Stars.

This Centaur had two Daughters; one of which made her self famous by her
predictions, and skill in Physic: Her name was Hippo. The other was called --
V^cavit Ocyroen. non haec arts contenta paternas Edidicisse fuit, etc. Ovid.
ibid.
Ocyroe, of whom Ovid testifies that she understood her Father Arts.

CHAP. XI. MELAMPUS and POLYIDUS: Wherein is the first example of Purgation,
and of a Mineral Remedy taken inwardly.
THEY were both of Argos. The first was Son of Amithaon, and Aglais, or of
Idomenca Daughter of Abas. He is one of the most ancient Poets known, of whom
Homer himself makes mention. He wrote several thousand Verses upon the
Lamentations of Ceres, for the Rape of her Daughter, upon the Mysteries of that
Goddess, and other subjects. He understood also the Art of Divination, and of
Physic, two Arts in those days inseparable. There are yet some Books remaining
under his name, which teach to tell Fortunes by Palpitations, by Moles, and
other Natural Marks on the Body, which Books are manifestly spurious.

We have already taken notice of the means Melampus used to cure the Daughters
of Praetus, that had lost her Wits; which was to purge 'em with Hellebore, or
with he Misk of his Goats, which had eaten it. Hence perhaps it was, that he
had a (...), Se^v^us in 3 Georg:
Surname given him, which seems to hint, that he was the first that used
purging Medicines; for it is certainly the oldest instance we have of the use of
See the Chapter of ^odalirius.
Purgation. But it is more probable, that he was so named, because he was the
first introducer of the pretended methods of Purgation; that is, by washing,
and pu^ifying those, that lay under any distemper e^^^er of Mind, or Body, or
that were foul with Crimes; which was not done by Medical Purgation, but by
superstitious Rites, such as pronouncing certain Verses, or Words, over the
Party, or to apply to 'em, or give 'em Herbs gathered at times, and after a
manner superstitious, or to wash 'em in Baths to that purpose.

Mela^^pus used all th^se means to the Daughters of Praecus. He not only gave
'em Hellebore, but he used also The wor^ Charm comes from the Latin C^^^^^,
which s^^^ (...) ^^^ong, Verse, w^^ther (...) ^^^try.
Verses, or Charms, and after caused 'em to bath in a certain Fountain in
Arc^^^a, called the C^^^ to qui^^^ (...) de f^^^e ^^arit, V^^^ ^ag^^. --
Ami^ha^^e nat^^^ ^^aeridas atton^^as postcu^^n per carmen and herb is Eripuit
fur^is; purgamina m^n^^^ in ^as Mi^^t aq^as: odjumque meri permanfit in undis.
Ovid. Me^am. lib 15.
Cliterian Fountain, where they finished their purification. The l^able tells
us, That from that time whoever tasted that Water, contracted an aversion to
Wine. Apollodor. lib. 2.
If this cure was extraordinary, the reward was no less considerable; for he
agreed with the Father of the Princesses, that he should give hi^ one third of
his Kingdom, another third to his Brother Bias, and to each of 'em one of the
Princesses to Wife.

Another cure we find reported of Melampus ^o less memorable than the former.
Idem, lib. 1.
Iphiclus Son of Philacus, being unable to get Children, Melampus was desir^d
^o find him a remedy for his impotence; which he did thus. He sacrificed two
Bulls, and cutting the en^^^^^ to pieces, he drew the Birds together, i^ ^^^der
to an Augury. Amongst the rest came a ^ul^ure, by whom he was informed,
M^lampas as an ^u^us, under^^ood the Language of Birds.
tha^ ^hylacus, formerly sacrificing some Rams, left the Knife, with which he
had cut their Throats, all bloody near his Son, who, being very young, was
frighted at it, and ran, and stuck it into a consecrated Chesnur-Tree, whose
Bark afterward covered it. The ^ulture added, That if Ip^^clus fetched that
Knife, and scraping off the Rust, drank it in Wine for ten days together, he
should soon be lusty and get Children. This counsel Melampus gave the young
Prince, who obey^d (...) ^^^cess.

This is the first instance of a Mineral Medicine taken inwardly. We shall see
in the second Part of this History, what advantages The rust of Iron being a
natural production, cannot be urged as an instance of Chemical Medicine,
whatsoever similitude the Chemists may pretend it to bear to their artificial
Crocus Martis.
the Chemical Physicians may draw from it. I cannot tell whether this Medicine
have any such essicacy, as is here ascribed to it; but Dioscorides employed it
to a purpose directly contrary. Dioscor. lib. 5.
The rust of Iron (says he) hinders Women from conceiving. But what is most
remarkable, is that Iphiclus himself took it, and not his Wife.

Virgil makes him contemporary with Chiron, who lived till the time of the
Trojan War, or very near. -- cessere magistri, Phyllyrides Chiron, Amy
thaoniusque Melampus, Georg. 3. de Peste.
Melampus lived two hundred years before the Siege of Troy. After his death he
was looked upon as a God, Temples were built in honor of him, and sacrifice
offered to him in several places of Greece. We have nothing to add to what was
said in the beginning of this History concerning Polyidus, than that Melampus
was his Great Uncle, if at least he be the same of whom Pausanias Pausan. lib.
1.
makes mention. What induces us to believe him to be so, is that he says that
Polyidus was sent for from Megara, to (...), Lustrare, to wash with Lustral
Water. A Water something like the Holy Water of the Roman Catholics of our
Times, but used with more ceremony.
purisie a Man that had committed Murder, which was the business of the
Diviners; of which sort Polyidus was.

CHAP. XII. The History of ESCULAPIUS continued: Wherein by the way of CADMUS
and BACCHUS, by some reputed the Inventors of Physic.
THE shifting the Country of Esculapius, brings us at one step some Ages
forwarder in the History of Physic. But though the Greeks had not purloyn'd him
from his Country, as we have shown, yet should we have been obliged to leap
from Egypt, or Phaenicia into Greece, and leave untouched this great interval,
for want of Memoirs of the state of Physic in those Countries during that time.

Or the Author of the B^ok, entitled, The Physician, which passes among his
W^rks, but is suppos^d t^ be written by another Physician named Herodotus.
Galen, supposing that Esculapius, that is, Esculapius of Greece, was the first
that brought Physic to perfection, will have it, that all those, that preceded
him in it, had no more than a bare Empirical knowledge of the virtues of some
Herbs, which they had experienced upon some occasions.

He was indeed forced to confess, that, before that, other Med^cines, besides
Herbs, were in use in Egypt, as Homer witnesses; and that their custom of
opening their dead, in order to embalm 'em, must needs have taught 'em diverse
things of use to Surgery in particular, but thinks all their knowledge owing to
Experience alone, without Reasoning; whereas, according to him Esculapius
completed Med^cine, whose Physic he calls Divine, supposing him to derive it
from his Father the God Apollo.

We shall see by and by, that Es;culapius himself did not know much more than
those Galen speaks of, who, in probability, are not much wrong^d by him. But,
whatever th^^ ^^owledge were, since Antiquity has left us nothing of it, let us
see what it has delivered concerning Esculapius.

He was (as has been said) Son of Apollo and Coronis; of his ^irth Pausanias
gives this account. In Laconic.
(...) ^^us, being great by Apollo, going with her F^^^^ Pelopo^csus, was
deliver^d of a Son up (...) Mountain in the Territories of Epi^au^us, where she
left him. A Goat-herd in the neighborhood, missing his Dog, and one of his
milch Goats, upon search found 'em both with the Child, the Goat giving him the
Breast, and the Dog standing Centry. He observing, besides this, that the Child
was surrounded with coelescial Fire, conceived a great veneration for him.
Others say, that he was the Son of Arsinoe, Daughter of Leucippus.

With Pindar ag^^^s Ovid in the main, ex cept that this latter ma^es Coronis to
ha^^ been of ^^^ssa, and her Lover of the same Country, and she slain by
Apollo's ^^n hand: Pulehior in t^^a quam Larissaea C^rouis non fuit Aemonia,
etc. Or. Metam. lib. 2.
Pythio^. Od. 3.
Pindar gives another account of the matter. Coronis (says he) being great with
Child, yet being lavish of her favors to Ischys, a young Arcadian, Apollo was
so provoked, that he sent the Goddess Diana, his Sister, to Laceria, a City in
Thessaly, where Coronis dwelt, to excite the Plague, whereof she died. But as
she was laid upon the Pile, the God, remembeing the burden of her Womb, came,
and snatch^d the Child out of the flames, and carried him to Chiron the Centaur
to be brought up.

He is by some reported to have been born at Or Tricca, thence called Tricca^^s.
Trica, a City of the same Province. ^e falls relig. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Lactantius says, That his Parents were uncertain, that he was exposed
immediately after his birth, and found by Hunters nursed by a Bitch, that he
was sent by the Hunters to Chiron, who taught him Physic. He adds, That he was
a Messenian, but had his abode at Epidaurus.

Others say, That Apollo himself taught him his Art. Be it as it may, he was so
good a proficient, that he cured, as Pindar says, all that applied themselves
to him, of all sorts of Ulcers, Wounds, Fevers, and Pains, by (...).
soft Incantations, by sweetning Potions, by Incisions, or Remedies externally
applied.

By Incantation here may be understood the power of Music, which in many cases
affords great relief. Apollo, the Father of Esculapius, being God of Music,
and Chiron, his Tutor, no less a Musician than a Physician, he could not but be
a great Master of both Arts. There is a passage in Galen, which may serve as a
Comment upon this of Pindar. De sanitat. tuend. lib. 1 cap. 8.
. I have cured (says he) several persons, whose passions of mind have rendered
their Bodies diseased, by calming the disorderly motions, and reducing their
minds to their natural state of composure. If authority were requir^d to
establish this method, I could cite a very considerable one, which is that of
Esculapius the God of my Country, who us^d to relieve those, whose violent
agitations of mind raised an intemperate heat in their Bodies, with Songs,
Farces, and Music.

CHAP. XIII. Of CHARMS, and the manner how they were introduced into Physic.
ESCULAPIUS used 'em, as did all the rest of the Ancients.
THat this way of curing Diseases is very ancient, is past doubt, and that it
was in use at this time we have the testimony of (...). Odyss. 19.
Homer, who tells us, That they stopped the bleeding of Ulysses, by means of
Incantations or Charms.

Esculapius joined this superstitious method of treating the Sick, to that was
usually practiced, which, according to Pindar, consisted of Potions, external
Remedies, and manual Operations.

It Is very probable, that at first they had recourse to these three ways only,
as the most simple, and natural. But finding them frequently ineffectual, they
betook themselves to superstitious Means, perhaps out of a consideration It is
more probable, that they were first introduced by their Priests, who were the
first practicers of Physic among the Ancients, and who being in other matters
used to practice upon the credulity of the people, made use of the same
artifice to maintain their reputation for Physic, a branch of their craft,
that procured 'em not the least veneration. Accordingly we find abundance of
supposititious Books, of this kind, fathered by 'em upon their Gods; a cheat
not impracticable to 'em, considering the manner of transmitting all knowledge
of this kind among the ancient Egyptians.
, that if they did no good, they did at least no harm. And though they might be
(as many now think 'em) vain, and ridiculous, yet 'twas sufficient to establish
the use of 'em, that several fancied themselves relieved by 'em. And as the
Imagination is not only contagious, but also very powerful in subjects where
it is strong and lively, things in themselves of no force or effect, might, by
the mediation of Fancy, produce very sensible effects, which those that saw
'em, expected from 'em again, indifferently, upon all occasions. The seeming
efficacy of 'em, in cases determining of themselves by a natural Crisis, might
contribute more than all the rest: For, in matters of Superstition among the
ignorant, one shadow of success prevails against a hundred manifest
contradictions, and encourages 'em against every days experience, as our
Astrologers ca^ witness.
Besides, this sort of Remedies being neither nauseous, nor painful, they were
submitted to with less reluctance; but if all these reasons were insufficient
to establish the credit of Superstitious Med^cines, the power Religion has over
the minds of Men, which is very great, was abusively employ^d to that purpose,
and finished their submission to em.

These are the arguments of those, that reject all charms as trifles; but the
more numerous are those, that believe the fact not impossible, though the manner
be inconceiveable: They bring the Holy Scripture to back their opinion. From
thence at least they gather, that there were Enchanters in the time of Moses,
and of the Apostles. It is said likewise in Vid Hierozoicon. Bochart. lib. 3.
cap. 6.
Psalm 58. That the Adder stops her ears, and refuses to hear the voice of
the Charmer. And the Prophet Jeremy threatens the Jews with the coming of
certain Serpents, upon whom Enchantments should have no power. I shall not
enlarge upon this subject, though I thought my self oblig^d to take notice of it
in my way.

However it were, Charms, or Enchantments, made their way so well in Physic,
that they have been practiced in all Nations of the World, time out of mind.
Nor is it among the simple, and illiterate only, that they have gained ground,
for the wisest have paid no less deference to 'em, as shall be shown.

CHAP. XIV. Of AMULETS, and other sorts of CHARMS.
DIseases were sometimes charmed by simple Words, or Magic Sentences, or
Verses pronounced in the Ear of the Patient, or at a distance, with an
intention of curing; which was accompanied with certain gestures, or motions of
the Body.

Of these there are man^ yet in request with many pe^^^^; one I met with in an
old (...) is much cried up by those that deal in 'em the words and form are
these. Inscribas chartae quod s^rib t^r Abracadabra. abracadabra abracadabr
abracadab abracada abracad abraca abrac abra abr ab a Some reverse this way of
writing.
Sometimes they wrote these Sentences upon certain things, and hung 'em about
the Body of the Patient. These are what the Latins called Amulets, Amuleta,
from the Verb amovere, to take away, or remove. They called 'em also Proebia,
or Proebra, from prohibere, to forbid, or keep off. The G^^ek in the same sense
called 'em Apotropeaa, Phylacteria, Amynteria, Alexiteria, Alexipharmaca,
because they believed that these things did not only preserve, and defend 'em
against all Incantations, or Charms, (to which they ascribed as much power to
cause Diseases, as the Counter-Charms had to cure 'em) but that they also
relieved 'em from Maladies arising from natural Causes.

The matter of these Amulets was taken from Stones, Metals, Simples, Animals,
and in general from any thing in the World. They engraved upon Stones, or
Metals, either Characters, Figures, or Words, which often signified nothing, or
were unintelligible to those that wrote 'em, and those that made use of 'em.
They wrote likewise these words upon Paper, or other matter whatsoever. Or if
they neither wrote, nor marked any thing upon matter proper for Amulets, they
used abundance of superstitious ceremonies in their preparation and
application; not to take notice of the pains they were at to watch a favorable
disposition of the Stars. The Arabians named this last sort of Amulets, which
derived their virtue chiefly from the influence of the Stars, Talismans, that
is, Images.

These Amulets were of all forms, and fastened to all parts of the Body; whence
they were called also Periapta and Periammata, from a Verb, which signifies to
put round about any thing. Some resembled a piece of Money, with a hole punch'd
in 'em, to hang by a Of this sort was the Gold given by our Kings, and the
Kings of France, to those whom they touched for Scrophulous Cases, vulgarly
called from thence the King's Evil.
string about the Neck. Others were made into Rings for the Finger, Bracelets
for the Arm, Collars for the Neck, Crowns for the Head, etc.

Of this sort are the Boodstone, the Snake-stone, the Eagle-stone, Moss of
(...) dead Man's Skull, Peony-Root, etc. to which mighty virtues are assigned
by some. Vide Boil of Specific Medicines, Philosphical Transact. etc.
Some Amulets there were, in which neither Charms, nor Superstition, had any
share; though no body could account for the effects attributed to 'em. This sort
of Amulets is yet approved by diverse Physicians, though others give no credit to
'em. We shall have occasion to speak again of these, and the rest, in the
sequel of this Work.

As for the Charms ESCVLAPIVS used, I cannot see why they should be charged as
matter of blame upon him, in an Age of the grossest Idolatry and Ignorance,
which are yet so much in use with diverse Christians, who ought to have an
abhorrence for such Remedies, or at least more wit than to conside in such
fooleries. Whether it were in imitation of Esculapius I cannot tell, that his
Countrymen, the Thessalians, have been so addicted to Incantations, that they
were peculiarly remarkable for it; witness Apuleius his golden Ass, and
abundance of other ancient Authors, who speak of Thessaly as the Country of
Sorcerers.

CHAP. XV. ESCULAPIUS embraced also the solid Physic, He is reputed the Author
of CLINICK Medicine: Wondrous Cures reported of him, as raising of the Dead.
CHarms were not the only Physic of ESCVLAPIVS; what has been said, shows that
he did not neglect the more substantial part of his Art. We shall see in the
sequel, whether he brought Physic to the height of perfection, that some
pretend, or not. Galen, in the place afore-cited, where he says, That
Esculapius cured Diseases by Music, etc. adds, That he ordered some to ride on
Horseback, others to exercise in Armor; that he prescribed to 'em their
several motions, and manner of arming. By this he should also be Author of the
Gymnastick Medicine; of which hereafter.

He had likewise the reputation of inventing Hygin. Fab.
Clinick Medicine, so called from a Greek word signifying a (...); hence (...),
an Epithet common both to the Physician and Patient, signifying as well him
that is confined to his Bed, as him that visits him there. For a third
signification, see Chap. of the Slaves Physicians.
Bed, to show that he was the first that visited the sick in their Beds; which
supposes, that the Physicians before him did not visit their Patients at their
Houses. This is confirmed by the practice of the Babylonians, who carried their
sick to the Cross-ways for the advice of those that passed by. Chiron, perhaps,
expected to be consulted at home. As for the Physicians of less note, it is
probable they kept the Fairs and Markets to sell their Medicines, as our
Mountebanks do now, without troubling themselves to repeat their visits, and
observe the changes that happened to their Patients, as they do now.

This custom introduced by Esculapius, became afterward a mark of distinction
between his Imitators, who were called Clinicks, and the Empiricks, or
Market-Hunters. His method succeeded so well for himself, that no Physic was
talk^d of but that of Esculapius. Castor and Pollux took him along with 'em, in
the famous Expedition of the Argonauts, where some surprising cures, done upon
Men given over for dead, got him the reputation of raising Men actually from
the Dead. Pindar: Pyth. Od. 3: Virgil. Aenead. 3.
The Fable adds, that, upon a complaint of Pluto, that, if he were suffer^d to
go on, no body would die, and Hell would become a Desert, Jupiter slew him with
Thunder, and with him Hippolitus, the Son of Theseus, whom he had restored to
Life; and, at the request of his Father Apollo, translated him to a place among
the Stars, under the name of Anguitenens, by some taken for Hercules, by others
for Esculapius. Vide Cir. de not. deor. lib. 2.
Ophiucus, a Constellation above Scorpio.

Pindar says, That Esculapius was prevailed upon to raise Hippolitus, by the
promise of a great Sum of Money; which gave occasion to Clem. Alexandr.
some to tax him with Covetousness: But Suidas refutes that scandal, and says,
That he would have done as much for Pauson, or Irus, or the veriest Beggar of
'em all; and it is but reasonable, that the Rich should make up the deficiencies
of the Poor. For, if at present we don't grudge the Physician his Fees, even
though he kills his Patient, I cannot see why Esculapius should raise Men from the
Dead gratis. Polyanthus Cyrenaeus de origin As^lepiadum. Voss. de Hist. Grae^.
Another Author says, That Esculapius was Thunderstruck for curing the
Daughters of Praetus, a Cure already ascribed to Melampus, and not for
restoring Hippolitus. But if we believe the Fable, not only Hippolitus received
that favor from him, but Capaneus, Lycurgus, Eriphilus, Tyndarus, Hymenaeus,
and even Glaucus the Son of Minos, of whom before with Polyidus.

CHAP. XVI. Farther Authorities to prove that all the Physic of ESCULAPIUS was
within a very little reducible to Surgery. PLATO's sense of his Physic.
WE have heard the Fabulous account of Esculapius; but Celsus and Suidas talk
more naturally of him. If we may credit the latter, Esculapius did not put
Jupiter to the expense of Thunder, (...).
dying of a Peripneumony; Human Physic, of which he was the Inventor, failing
him at his need. Celsus likewise tells us, That Esculapius came by his mighty
Fame much cheaper than is reported. Hae^ n^squam quidem non est. St. quidem
impertissimae gentes herbas, allaque prompta in auxilium valnerum morborumque
noverunt, etc. C^ls. Prasat.
There is no place, says he in his Preface, without Physic, for the most
unciviliz^d Nations have the use of Herbs, and other familiar Remedies, for
Wounds and Diseases. The Greeks, indeed, improved it farther than any other
Nation, yet, even they, not from the first Original, but a few Ages ago; for
Esculapius is the most ancient Author upon Record amongst 'em: Who, because he
refined this Science a little, which was before rude, and amongst the Vulgar,
was promoted to be a God. His two Sons, Podalirius and Machaon, followed
Agamemnon to the War of Troy, where they were very serviceable to their fellow
Soldiers; yet Homer does not mention any service they did in the Plague, or any
other distempers, only that they cured wounds by Incision, and Medicaments.
From whence it is plain, that they pretended to this part of Physic only, and
that this is the ancientest.

Lib. 29. cap. 1.
Pliny agrees with him; Physic, says he, has raised its Credit upon a Lie,
feigning that Esculapius was killed by Thunder, for restoring Life to the Son
of Tindarus, and others, which made a mighty noise about the Time of the Trojan
War; since which we have been better inform^d in the Historical Truth of Fact,
for all his skill lay in the cure of wounds.

We may urge likewise, that if Esculapius, or his Sons, had been Physicians,
they would have known how to Diet their Sick better, a principal part of a
Physicians skill: Athenaeus uses this instance as an argument of the temperance
of Homer's Heroes, which begat so good a Constitution, that tho^ wounded they
might drink Wine; (...), pernicious in inslamations, thick, and very
nourishing; and this Nestor, the wisest of the Greeks, advises Machaon, the
skilsullest in these Matters, to do every day, so long as he should be laid up.
From hence Athenaus infers, that 'twas not the practice of the great Men of
Times to drink Wine, but upon extraordinary occasions. But whether^ this Advice
was suitable to the Wisdom of Nestor, or the Skill of Machaon, I leaves the
learned Reader to judge. Vid. Athenaeum, lib. 1. p. 10.
They wou^d not have given Eurypylus, when wounded, Broth made with Wine, Meal
and Cheese ground in it; nor would Machaon himself, with a wound in his
shoulder, have drank Wine, which Physicians hold to be hurtful to wounds.

The answer Plato made to this objection, gives so particular an Idea of the
Physic of Esculapius and his Sons, that I cannot forbear citing it at length.
De Repub. Lib 3. This discourse is atridg'd by Maximus Tyrius, Sermon. 29.
It Is absurd, says he, that Men should want Physicians, not only for Wounds and
Diseases, arising from an ill disposition of the Air, and the uncertainty of
Weather, but from those too that spring from Sloth and Luxury, which, silling
em with Water and Wind, as if their Bodies were Lakes, or Sinks, have oblig^d
the Successors of Esculapius to invent new names of Flatus, and Defluxions, or
Catarrhs, never heard of before. What makes me conjecture at least, that these
Distempers were unknown in Esculapius's time, is, That his Sons, at the Siege
of Troy, did not forbid the Potion, that a Woman gave to Eurypylus, when he was
wounded, made of Cheese ground, and Meal sleep'd in Wine of Homer calls it
(...); The great variety of ancient conjectures about the derivation of the
name, shows the uncertainty of em; which, whoever is curious to know, may
consult the Scholia of D^^vious upon the 11th Book of the Ilias, and Athenaeus,
p. 30. N^^ is it less uncertain, what sort of Wine it was. Athenaeus gives us
two descriptions of it directl^ contrary one to a^^ther. For the first, see the
so e^^ing Note, the other we find page 30. (...) Here the Pramnian Wine is
neither thick (...) sweet, but a rough, hard, strong Wine. The testimony of
Aristophanes, which he immediately subjoyns, is to the same purpose, that the
Athenians neither loved harsh grating Poets nor crabbed Pramnian Wine, that
cortracted their Brows, and their Anus. The Reader may compare this passage
with that in the note immediately foregoing and as he pleases take or rejest
either.
Pramos; which are things that increase Phlegm. You will say, doubtless, that
the draught was ridiculous, and not at all proper for a wounded Man; but you
must know, that the Physicians that succeeded Esculapius, knew nothing of the
Physic, now in use, before Herodicus; who is, as it were, the So the Author
translates it, whose words I thought it best to stick to, not having at present
an opportunity of consulting the Original.
PAEDAGOGUE of DISEASES. He being Master of the Academy, where the Youth
exercis^d, and finding himself a Valetudinarian, contriv^d to make Gymnastick;
that is, the Art of Exercising the Body: a branch of Physic, which brought
both upon himself, and those that came after him, a great deal of trouble. How
so, you will say? Why he brought himself to a lingering death; for observing too
carefully a distemper in it self mortal, which of consequence he could not
cure, he gave himself so entirely to enquire after a remedy, that quitting all
other affairs, 'twas the business of his Life to torture his own Carcass; so
that, though the least deviation from his constant method of living, were a
disease to him, he arrived not at Health, but at Old Age, which we called the
PAEDAGOGUE, or if you please, the GOVERNESS, or NURSE of DISEASES, not of the
DISEAS^D. Oh! noble Fruit of his Art, yet such as the Man deserv^d, that did
not know, that 'twas not out' of Ignorance, or for want of Experience, that
Esculapius forbore to teach his Scholars so painful a method, but because he
was of opinion, That in all Cities, and well regulated Societies, where every
Man has his task assigned him, no Man can, or ought to have leisure to be a
Valetudinarian all his Life, and bestow his whole care upon his Carcass.

To be convinced of the Justice of Esculapius's proceedings, we need only to
reflect upon the different conduct of Laboring Men, and Gentlemen, in such
cases. If a Mason, or a Carpenter, falls sick, he desires his Physician to
expedite his Cure by VOMIT, or PURGE, or Manual Operation, either by Incision,
or Cautery. If he orders him a long course of Physic, he tells him, That he
has no leisure to be sick, that he cannot afford to protract a Life of misery,
and languish perpetually idle under the protection of Physic. He dismisses his
Physician, and returning to his usual course of Life, falls to work, and
recovers his health; or, if the Disease proves too mighty for him, he dies, and
is rid at once of Life, and the troubles of the World. I find our Masons, and
Carpenters, and all other Artificers, of another mind, as fond of Life upon any
terms, and as willing to be idle as ever a Gentleman of 'em all, and I doubt
they are so all the World over, whatever they might be in Plato's Commonwealth.
This no doubt is the true use, that all Mechanics ought to make of Physic,
to whom Work is so necessary, that when they can follow it no longer, Death is
a favor. But it may be objected, that with the Rich, that live upon their
Rents, the case alters, for they cannot be reduced to that hard choice of
Working or Dying. But consider, that whatsoever a Man's Condition, or
Profession be, the Public Good requires, that he should not be idle, but that
every one should be industrious in his station; which cant be while he is
wholly taken up about himself, and his solicitude for his health makes him
fancy himself continually sick. Thus this new Physic is not only injurious to
all the Individuals, but also to the Community in general. It Was upon conviction
of these Truths, that Esculapius limited his Instructions to the use of a sound
Constitution, and good Education, and was contented to teach the Method of
curing Diseases arising from external Causes, only by a few Remedies taken, or
Incision made, without changing their Planto in this place seems to contradict
Hoginus before cited, who makes Esculapius the Inventor of Clinick Medicine.
For if he was the first that confined the Sick to their Beds he was very far
from not altering their course of Living, and permitting 'em to follow their
ordinary occasions. But if what Plato ass^ms were in Fact the practice of
Esculasias I should, in spite of his Apology, suspect a less honorable reason
for it.
usual manner of living, or diverting them from their business. As for
Valetudinarians, whose decay is inward, he would not undertake 'em, nor attempt
to prolong their Lives, for fear, being enfeebled, and exhausted they should
beget Children as infirm as themselves, neither thinking it for the good of the
Valetudinarians themselves, nor of the Societies of which they were Members,
that Men should continue in the World, who could not live as others did. The
Sons of Esculapius cleans'd from the blood the wounds of Menelaus, wounded by
Pandarus, and applied asswaging Ointments, but they did not caution either him,
or Eurypylus, against eating or drinking of any kind, as thinking their
Medicines sufficient to cure the wounds of Men of good habit of Body, and that
were temperate, though they did drink Wine. As for Men, that were unhealthy,
either naturally, or through intemperance, they thought it not expedient,
either for themselves, or others, that they should live, and that Physic was
not made for 'em, and that it was not their duty to cure 'em, though they were as
rich as Midas.

There is a great Analogy between this way of treating the Sick, and the
management of new born Children among the Lacedaemonians, who used to plunge 'em
over Head and Ears in Wine, though they knew it caused those, that were of tender
constitutions, to die of Fits. They thought their pains ill bostow^d, upon any
but hardy, robust Children, the rest, in their opinion, were not worth the
rearing. Upon the same account, a sort of Robbers called Bohemians, bath their
Children as soon as born in the next Spring, to try, and season 'em for the
fatigue of their way of living. Durum a sti^^^ ^^^us natos^^ slumina primum
Deferimus sa voque golu duramus and undis. Aemid. lib. ^. (...) Galen. lib. 1.
de ^^^nda Sa^^tate.

This was the general Custom of the ancient Celtae, that lived near the Rhine;
They laid the Child, as soon was born, upon a sort of Shield (super scutum) and
put it afloat upon the Rhine; if it swam, the^ received it as legitimate,
otherwise they suffered it to perish as spurious. Hence Nazianzen, in an
elegant Greek Epigram says, They essay (...) the Rhine whether their Children
were adulterate, or not, as they do Gold by the Copper. This Custom abundance
of Authors take notice of, as Arist^^^. Polit. lib. 7. cap. 17. Claudian. 2
Ruffin. Nonnus Dionys. l. 23. Julian. Caes. Epist. ad Max. etc. Whether this
were a true test, their Women best could tell, who had better proof, and no
doubt laughed at the superstition of their Hasbands. But Calen gives us
likewise another reason, which was at first to season them for the Hardships
they were after to endure, as they harden Iron by plunging it red hot into cold
Water; but he questions whether the Roman Bodtes would bear such usage.

The like Custom is reported of several Nations in Africa to this day. How this
practice may agree with hot Regions I dare not undtake to ^^termine, but I am
confident 'twou'd be no test of the strength of their ^^nstitutions here, where
for many reasons I am apt to think, the l^s^iest Children would be the most
likely to perish by the experiment, when many more infirm might escape.


Virgil says the same of the ancient Latins.

At this rate the good Esculapius was no extraordinary Physician for Ladies, or
Hypochondriacks; but it is no Treason to doubt the Authority of Plato 's report.
In all appearance Esculapius and his Sons knew no better; and the sequel will
show, that at that time Diaetetick Medicine was absolutely unknown. With us,
the Country people in most p^^^to, that are r^^note from Cities and great
Traeus, give their Sick over, when they refuse to eat Beef, Bacon, etc.
Those Ancients were, in that respect, about the level of the Country people
with us now, who are yet so much strangers to a sick Diet, that if a Fever, or
other distemper, gives 'em an entire disgust to their usual Food, they eat
nothing at all.

Galen, or Herodotus the Physician, had much reason to tell us, that the
Physic of Esculapius was perfect, entirely consummate, and divine, for the Art
had made but very slender advances in his time; and his own, and his Sons skill
in it, were but very rude, as Qui, quoniam adhuc rudem and vulgarem hanc
scientiam paulo subtilius excoluit, in deorum ^umerum est receptus. Hujas
deinde duo filii Podal^r us, and Machaon, etc. Cells. Praefat. page 1.
Celsus takes notice. Their skill, says this Author, and with him Pliny, seems
not to have exceeded the limits of Surgery, as the etymology of the names See
Chap. the 9th and 10th.
Chiron and Esculapius seem to insinuate. The principal cure performed by the
latter, and which gave him the reputation of raising Men from the dead, was
evidently Chirurgical, being that of Hyppolitus, who was torn, or broken to
pieces by Horses; and we read not of any other, in which he used internal
Remedies.

These reasons, indeed, are not alone sufficient to exclude Esculapius, and his
Sons, from the number of Physicians, since they might have extended their
practice farther than we know. The argument drawn from Homer's silence of their
other cures, is no necessary proof that they cur^d nothing but wounds; the
gravity of Epick Poetry wou^d not suffer him to represent his Heroes pining
with the Cholick, or languishing under a Diarrhaea. Celsus in the passage above
cited, lays to great stress upon the silence of Homer, which in my opinion is
of (...) weight in this case. For besides the reasons here produced by the
Author against it, it may be observed, that the Plague he mentions, was the
grand Machine, upon which the whole Fable of the Iliad moves; Agamemnon had
taken away the Daughter of Chryses, Apollo's Priest. Apollo resents the
affront, and in revenge j^ne's a Plague among the Greeks; Chaleas their Augur
finds out the cause of it, and advises a Sacrifice to the God, and Restitution,
with a present to the Priest. Achilles insists violently to have this Advice
put in ^^^cation; Agamemnon complies, and in return seizes upon Achilles's
Mist^^^. Thence arises a quarrel between them two, which, with the consequences
of it, is the main design of the Iliad. Now if Podalirius, and Macha^n, ^^u'd
have ^ur'd this Plague, there had been no need of supplicating Apollo, and
consequently no occasion of quarrel betwixt the two Generals, which had
destroy^d the whole Fable. This may serve as a caution not to ground (...) much
in matters natural, or historical, upon the Authority of the Po^t^, much less
upon their silence; the want of which caution has led (...) great a Man as
Celsus (I cannot say positively into an error, but) manifestly into false
reas^ning.
Nor is it a wonder, that Homer takes no notice of any service done by
Podalirius and Machaon, to the Pestilentials of the Grecian Camp; for it may
be inferred, from what he says upon that subject, that those Ancients thought
the cure of that distemper much above the power of humane skill, and expected
no relief, but what came immediately from their Gods, whose wrath they esteem^d
the only cause of it.

But if we must not deny Esculapius, and his Sons, to have been Physicians,
because we find no instances of their undertaking inward Maladies, yet we ought
therefore certainly not to vouch 'em as such, without sufficient evidence. The
testimony of Galen, that he cured Diseases by Music, and Exercise on foot, and
Horseback, etc. may justly be suspected; for he, being of a Pergamus, where he
was worshipped, and had, a Temple no less famous than that at Epidaurus. Lucian
says that he had a Shop, and practiced Physic there. Vid. Lucian Iearomenip.
City consecrated to Esculapius, was obliged to speak advantageously of the God
of his Country, as himself calls him. The authority of Pindar, already cited,
and of other Poets, who mention him, is insufficient, exaggerations being
inseparable from Poetry. The almost universal consent of Antiquity, that
acknowledge^d him, as the Inventor of Physic in general, and sacrifie^d to him
as a God, that presided over the health of Men, is of much greater weight.

CHAP. XVII. The common Opinion, which makes ESCULAPIUS the Author of Physic
in general, reconcil^d to that which allows him the knowledge of Surgery only.
The Antiquity, and Necessity of this part of Physic is shown, and how far
ESCULAPIUS might carry it, is examined.
TO reconcile the general Opinion to that of Celsus, we must suppose, that in
the time of Chiron and Esculapius, Surgery was the part of Physic most in
request, or looked upon as most necessary; the other, perhaps, being exercis^d
indifferently by all sorts of persons, or not seeming to be of equal service:

Not that Men's Bodies were at that time differently made from ours now, or they
exempt from inward distempers, although supposed to be more robust, and less
subject to 'em, than we are; but when they were surpised (for instance) by a
Fever, or a Pleurisy, they waited with patience the motions of Nature: If they
took any thing, 'twas some Such as we call Kitchen Physic.
familiar Medicine, which their own, or their Neighbour^s experience, who made
no profession of Medicine, furnished 'em with.

These means often succeeded; but though this easy, common method, might be of
use in disorders of the humors, 'twas plain, it could be of no service to a
broken Arm, or Shoulder slipped, cases of this nature requiring a particular
experience, and dexterity of hand, which were not to be acquir^d under long
Practice: there was a necessity, that some should apply themselves more
particularly to it, to succeed the better in it; and thence, by way of
Excellence, they were called Physicians, because they cured Maladies, which
others could not. They might, perhaps, cure some inward Diseases, but the
fairest prospect of their Art lay not on that side. It Was, undoubtedly, for the
preceding reason, that Celsus esteem^d Surgery to be the most ancient part of
Physic; they could, in some measure, dispense with the other branch, but this
must needs come into play almost as soon as there were Men; for if the strength
of Constitution, and the simple and uniform manner of living, among the
primitive Men, render^d em less obnoxious to diseases, they became not thereby
invulnerable, nor excused from the accidents of breaking a Leg, or an Arm. If
therefore the strength of Nature was no protection from these misfortunes, they
must of necessity have recourse to other assistance. Those therefore, that
signaliz^d themselves by their address on these occasions, became very
considerable, and were very much respected among Men for the visible need they
had of ^em; which caused (...). Iliad. (...).
Hour to say, A Physician was worth more than abundance of other Men.

Add to the certain need Men had of Surgery, the manifest relief they found by
it, and the^e will no scruple remain, why this part of Physic should establish
it self in the World earlier than the rest. Estque ejus effectus inter omnes
Medicinae parts evidentissimus. Siquidem in morbis cum multum fortuna
conferat, ead^mque saepe sa^utaria, saepe vana sint; potest dubitali secunda
vale^udo medicinae, an corporis beneficio contigerit. In his quoque in quibus
medicamentis maxim utimur, quamvis pro^ectus evidentior est, tumen sanitatem
and per haec frustr^ quaeri, and sine his reddi saepe manifestum est. Sicut in
oculis q^^que deprehend^ p^^est; qui a medicis ^^u vexati, sine hi^ interd^m
sa^^s. unt. At in (...) pa^^e, quae manu ^urat, eviden^ est, ^^^^em profecrum,
^t aliquid ali ahis adjuvetur, hine tamen plurinum trahere, Cells pr^sat lib 7.
The effects of it (viz. Surgery) are the most evident of any in Physic (says
Celsus). In discases Fortune bears great sway; and the same things are
sometimes beneficial, sometimes ineffectual; so that it is doubtful, whether the
cure be owing to the goodness of the Remedy, or the Constitution even where
Medicines are most necessary; though their use be somewhat more evident, they
frequently fail of restoring health, which is often recovered without 'em. As
sore Eyes, after they have been long tormented in vain by Physicians, sometimes
do well when given over. But in cures by Manual Operation, though other things
may be of some help, yet the main success is owing to that.

Thus far Celsus. The immediate terror, and anxiety, that wounds and fractures
produced, either through great profusions of Blood, or agonies of Pain, procured
a great veneration for those that afforded any comfort or relief. Whereas the
advance of Diseases being less sensible, having seldom any thing of terror in
their approach, it is probable that most of 'em were little heeded, till they
were ready to determine by a natural Crisis, or were so radicated, that 'twas
past the power of Physic, especially in its infancy, to relieve 'em. As for
those acute distempers, that were of swifter execution, such as Pestilentials,
they were generally mortal; by which means, Physic made but very slow
advances, till after some Ages spent in collecting of Observations, it came to
the height of reputation under Hippocrates.
Such visible relief could not but make an impression upon the most stupid
people; an advantage the rest of Physic had not. Some have thought it a
trifle, that they might absolutely dispense with the want of: Others that could
not think so meanly of it, yet thought they need not be so solicitous about it,
every one being Physician enough for himself; at most, that 'twas sufficient to
consult his Neighbor. We see the Peasants, to this day, those especially that
live remote from great Towns, arrive at a considerable age, without once making
use of a Physician. With us the Country People, in all acute Cases, and even in
Chronical ones too, when they are so far gone that the symptoms begin to grow
urgent, and the danger appears, have recourse to some charitable Lady, or
skilful old Woman, that dispences Cordials, and other Medicines, from a
Receipt-Book, or to some confident Watercasting Quack, of which there are
swarms every where. So far are they from slighting inward Diseases, that they
catch at any the most delusive shadow of assistance. If they don't consult real
Physicians, it is because of the difficulty or charge, the Patient being
generally weak before he desires it, and unable to attend, or send for a
Physician; and those whom they depute for that purpose being usually persons
interested in the experce, content themselves with the cheapest, and easiest
means of showing their care, satisfying themselves with a seeming, or
superficial discharge of their daty. The same shifts are made in cases of
Surgery.
But if any accident happens that requires the assistance of a Surgeon, he is
presently sent for.

The Greeks at that time were much upon the same foot; the Surgeon was all the
Physician they had. It Is further probable, that the Surgery of Esculapius, and
his Son, was not arriv^d at the perfection it is now at, nor that Hippocrates
brought it to, the use of Incisions and Cauteries not having been then so
common as it has since been. These ancient Masters could Set broken Bones, and
reduce Joints dislocated; and if they had wounds under their care, contented
themselves barely to make the Incisions necessary to draw out an Arrow, or
Dart, from the part wounded, without extending that operation to the purposes
for which it is now in use. Much less did they use the Cautery, or Application
of Fire, as since; using only, on those occasions, a few (...). Ham. ^.
specisick Herbs, (...). Id.
or asswaging Remedies. This was the occasion that Chiron was reputed the
Inventor of the use of Herbs in Surgery. The reception that the Romans gave
their first Physician, that is, their first Surgeon, that came among em,
confirms this conjecture. The method he us^d, which was that then in practice
in Greece, where it was at that time pretty well improved, appeared to them so
cruel and barbarous, that they look^d upon him as the common Executioner. It Is
not probable that they were wholly without Surgery before the arrival of that
stranger, their continual Wars made that Art absolutely necessary to 'em; but
being used to a milder method, such as we suppose Esculapius's to have been.
the^ could not but think the new Surgery extremely harsh.

I doubt not but it appears strange thus to degrade Esculapius, and his Sons;
and it is hard to believe, that Men that knew, according to our supposition,
little more than any ordinary Bone-setter, or Country Surgeon, should carry the
honor of being the Inventors of Physic. But our surprise will cease, when we
consider that Surgery, being one of the principal parts of Physic, and
Esculapius and his Sons practicing at a time, when there were no Physicians,
but Surgeons, or who were also Surgeons, and were more considered upon that
score, they might naturally enough pass for Inventors of an Art in general, of
which they practiced the part most in request in their time. In the second
place we must take notice, that though Esculapius was more celebrated for his
Surgery than Physic, yet it does not follow from thence, that he concern^d
himself not at all with the latter. It Is likely, as we have said, that he
undertook inward Maladies as well as outward, and that he practiced all parts
of Physic, as did all that followed him, to Hippocrates, and long after him.
This, in my opinion, is the most reasonable explication of these passages of
Celsus and Pliny, and fittest to reconcile their opinion with that which is
vulgarly received.

CHAP. XVIII. Supposing there were two ESCULAPIUS's, one an Egyptian, the
other a Greek, we may thence infer, that the former had more knowledge than the
latter, or that they both were severally the Inventors of Physic, each in his
own Country: Wherein the manner, how this Art was transmitted from one Nation
to another, is occasionally examined.
MEntion having been made of another Esculapius, an Egyptian, and the Inventor
of Physic, any one might suppose him more skilful than the Greek, and that he
was Master of his profession in its utmost latitude. These two Esculapius's may
reasonably be reduced to one; but if there must needs be two, an Egyptian and
a Greek, it is possible that one might have a more extended knowledge than the
other; but finding no certain information thereof, we leave the Reader to
determine for himself. As to the latter, Surgery appears to have been his chief
talent.

Upon this a question may arise; Whether if there were two Esculapius's, each
were the Inventor of Physic in his own Country? To which it may be answered,
That we see nothing to the contrary, but that each might pass for such among
his Country Men.

Pluta^ch. Sympos. lib. 3. quaest. 1.
The Magnesians affirm, that Chiron was the first that wrote of Physic. The
Tyrians maintain the same of their King Cadmus, to whom they offered
first fruits of Plants, out of a persuasion that he first taught the use of ^em
in Diseases. Bacchus King of Assyria, Lybia, and India, was by those people
honored as the Author of Med^cine; whether it were because he discovered the
virtues of the Ivy, or because he taught the use of Wine, which has caused him
to be taken for Noah, they cannot all be in the right, all that we can from
thence infer is, that Chiron, Cadmus and Bacchus, were severally the first that
introduced the practice into their own Countries: the same might be the case
not only of the two Esculapius's, but of diverse others in distant parts of the
World, whether at the same, or different times.

It may be further question^d; Whether these Inventors, or reputed Inventors of
Physic, have not borr^w'd one from another? Every one, perhaps, might at first
make his own Experiments and Discoveries at home, without Foreign assistance,
by which they were bounded, while unacquainted with Commerce; but beginning,
one after another, to shake off their primitive Barbarity, and Traffic being
insensibly establish^d among 'em, their discoveries were at the same time
exchanged, every one being desirous to imitate, or introduce into his own
Country, what he found useful abroad. Thus Physic came to be establish^d and
perfected every where, as fast as they could unite, to their own, those Lights
which were reflected from abroad.

But, though the knowledge of these first beginners, in every place, were but
very mean, compared with that of those that came after 'em, yet, because they
laid the foundations, and were the most perfect of their Times, they were
honored, as if no possible improvements were to be made upon them.

This, in my mind, is the just Idea of these reputed Inventors of Physic. But
there is yet this difference between the first Esculapius, and the rest whom
the Greeks mention, That if he be as old as is pretended, he will appear not
only to have laid the first grounds of this Art in his own Country, as all the
rest in theirs, but to be the ancientest of all.

What we have just now said starts yet another question: Who were the first
People that cultivated Physic? There Is no question, but the Egyptians, or
Phaenicians, were the first, who are likewise the most ancient People known.
Egypt has been called, the Mother of Arts; and the Greeks themselves
acknowledge, that they borrowed their Religion, and almost all the Sciences,
and curious Arts. Phaenicia furnish^d 'em with the use of Letters; so that the
Greeks, in a manner, held of these People all that was nice among 'em, which
they received pretty late too; as did the Romans after them, who tarried a long
time ever they introduced into their State, what they in their turn derived
from the Greeks of this sort of knowledge.

CHAP. XIX. PODALIRIUS and MACHAON, Esculapius's two Sons, famous Physicians,
or Surgeons; their Wives and Families.
See Eustath. in Il^ad. 4.
SOme Ancients have believed, that the latter was only a Surgeon, but that the
former was a Physician. What has been said before of their Father, may
determine that point. That Machaon was the eldest, may be inferred from what Q.
Calaber makes Podalirius say upon the occasion of his death; That his dear
Brother had brought him up like a Son, after their Father was taken into
Heaven, and that he had taught him to cure Diseases.

(...).
Though Homer always names Podalirius first, when he mentions both Brothers
together, it is only for the convenience of his Meter. Machaon seems to have
been esteemed, and preferred before his Brother, by the great Men of the Army.
He dress^d Menalaus, wounded by Pandarus, wiping first the blood from the
wound, and not sucking it with his lips, (...), which Portus in his Latin
Version of the Iliad ^enders, Sa^^gut^^c exucto, Iliad.
as a certain learned Man, misled by the nearest signification of the word,
that Homer uses, has written. And after having cleans'd the wound, he applied
some softning Remedies, as his Father did. Tarda Philocte^ae ^sanavit cu^ra
Machaon. Prop. lib. 2. This, and V^^gd^'s T^stimony, that he was in laded in
the Wooden Horse, are dire^^ly r^pagnant to Pausanias, and Q. Ca^^^er, who say
that Machaon was slain before the Wa^l^ of Troy, by E^rypylus, in single that.
For the stratagem of the Wooden Horse decided the fate of Troy, and this cure
was made in his return. Vide infra.
Machaon likewise it was, that cured Philoctetes of a lameness, contracted by
letting an Arrow, dipped in the Gall of the Lerncan Hydra, a Legacy of Hereules
at his death, fall upon his foot. By this cure Machaon should have been a more
expert Surgeon than Chiron the Centaur, who could not cure himself of a wound
by the same Chap. 1^.
weapon. As for the rest, both the Brothers were as well Soldiers as
Physicians; and Machaon seems to have been very brave. Homer tells us of a
wound he received in the shoulder, in a sally of the Trojans. He was likewise
one of those that were enclosed in the Wooden Horse, that famous Machine by
which the Greeks took Troy. He lost his life in single Hygin. Fa^. lib. 1. cap.
81, 1^8, 113.
Duel with Nireus, or, as Pausan. Lacoa. Q. Calaber. lib. 6. and 7.
some others will have it, with Eurypylus Son of Telephus, during the Siege of
Troy. Both the Brothers are reckoned among the Gallants of Helen.

Pausan. in Messeniacis, St^^b. lib. 8.
Anticlea Wife to Machaon, was Daughter to Diocles King of Messenia: By her he
had two Sons, Nicomachus and Gorgasus, who resided at Pherae, and possessed the
Kingdom of their Grandfather, till the Heraclians, at their return from Troy,
made themselves Masters of Messenia, and the rest of Pelopernesus; from whence
they drove both them, and others. Pausanias mentions some other Sons of
Machaon, as Sphyrus, Alexanor, and Polemoer^tes. Whether This doubt is easily
resolved, ^or his Wise'^ Inheritance was Messenia in Peloponuesus, and his
Subjects, or Soldiers, were Thessalians, a^ Homer witnesses, of Trica, by some
said to be the place both of his Fathers and his Birth. (...). Iliad. D
Machaon were a King in his own Right, or in Right of his Wife only, is
uncertain; but Homer, in two or three several places, calls him (...). Iliad.
(...).
Pastor of the People, which is the Title he gives Agamemnon, and the rest of
the Kings. Pausanias adds, That he was buried in Messenia, whither Nestor had
caused his Bones to be conveyed from before Troy.

Podalirius, in his return from Troy, was cast upon the Coast of Caria by a
storm, where he was entertained by a Shepherd; who understanding that he was a
Physician, brought him to King Damathaeus, whose Daughter had got a fall from a
Housetop. Her he cured by letting her blood in both arms, which so affected
the King, that he gave her him for a (...) and with her the Not the Achaian
Peninsula, called Pelopou^^sus, lying between the Aegaean and Ponian Seas,
mentioned before as the Dower of (...) Brothers Wife, but the Thracian, between
the Propontis and the Eu^ing Se^^.
Chersonese, where he buil^ two Cities, Syrna so named from his Wife Syrna, and
Bybassus from the Shepherd, that received him after his Wreck.

He had, among other Children, a Son called Hippolochus, from whom Hippocrates
derived himself; as we shall see hereafter.

CHAP. XX. The first instance of PHLEBOTOMY; Reflections upon the Antiquity and
Invention of that Remedy, and of PURGATION; And, upon the opinion, that Brutes
taught Men the first use of diverse Medicines.
THis is what is related of the Sons of Esculapius: The latter having given us
the first instance of Blood-letting, it may deserve our further consideration.
Stephanus Byzantinus, from whom we have taken this relation, not telling us
where he had it, and being the only Evidence, the fact is yet very questionable.

Parere del S. Lionardo di Capo^ intorno la Mcdicina.
A modern Author, before cited, thinks the silence of Homer a sufficient
argument to prove that it was not known in his days; and that, if he had been
acquainted with a Remedy of that nature, he would sooner have taken notice of
it, than of a hundred other trifles with which he stuffs his Poem. But to this
we may answer, That Homer not writing of Physic, his silence is no argument on
either side in this case. If it be objected, that he has spoken largely of
Moly, and Nepenthe, it may be alleged that the Laws of Epick, and Sublime
Poetry, allow it. The Tho there be a Plart still known by the name of ^omer's
Moly, yet it may be looked upon as a Poctical Being, raised only to serve the
Poet's turn, as an under Machine in the corduct of h^^ ^oem, no such qualities
appearing, in reality, in the Plant that bears the name. Vide Odyff. K.
Moly being a sort of Counter-charm to Incantations, was as natural an
Instrument of this sort of Poetry, as Enchantments themselves. As for the The
same sentence may without temerity be pr^nouned upon Nepeuthe. It Is rather a
Machine than a Med^cine, and as such only ought to be considered by those that
criticize upon this passqge of Homer. Th^se that sancy it to have been Opium
must have very powerful imaginations to sind the Analogy between 'em. Homer's
was manifestly a Med^cine for the mind, that was to comfort, and raise the
Spiri^s of Yelemachus, who was dejected and desponding, upon the account of his
Father's absence, and his Mother's troubles. From one of the Epithets, which
Homer bestows upon it, the Proper name signifying its chief property is form^d.
Vid. Ody^ss^^.
Nepenthe, though it were only Opium, as some conjecture, as it is a Drug of
wonderful efficacy, Homer might very well give it a place, without derogating
from the dignity of his Poem; but, when he spoke of the Remedies that
Podalirius and Machaon used, in case of wounds, he contented himself with the
general name of Lenitive Medicines, without specifying 'em.

If this Author's Reasoning would hold good, we might as lawfully infer, that
Purging was not used in Homer's time, because he takes no notice of it; which,
in my opinion, is too improbable to be maintained.

A Second objection against the antiquity of Blood-letting may be raised upon
the authority of Cicero, who, when he reports the inventions of the first and
third Esculapius, takes no notice of it. Yet this hinders not, but that it
might be the invention of the second Esculapius, of whom Tully says nothing,
but that he was brother to the second Mercury, and slain by thunder.

What Diodorus, and Herodotus report of the Physic of the Egyptians, seems to
prove that it was not practiced by them; their prescriptions being confined
within the compass of Diet, Clysters, Purges, and Vomits. If Bloodletting had
been known to 'em, 'twas a remedy too considerable to have been forgotten. But
it may be answer^d, that these Authors speak only of the ordinary niethods,
that were practiced every day; as if we should say, the The Author see us to be
very much a stranger to the practice of the English Ph^sicians, who prescribe
Bleeding, as fr^quently perhaps as most in the world, tho not so indiffer^ntly
in all cases as in Spain, etc.
English use Vomits very much, the Germans, Sudorifies; which is no argument
that they do not sometimes let Blood, tho in truth they do it but very seldom,
especially the latter; and it is probable, Egypt being a Country much hotter
than Greece, that they let Blood much more rarely.

Of the time when Bloodletting was introduced we have nothing certain, nor of
those that first used it. Hippocrates, who is the antientest Author we have,
and the first that has mentioned Bleeding, convinces us that 'twas not a new
Remedy in his time, nor of late invention. For tho he brings no formal
arguments to the contrary, yet we may naturally infer so much; since in his
time they opened all the veins they do now, those of the Arms, the Feet, the
Forhead, the Nose, the Tongue, etc. They us^d likewise Cupping with
Scarification, and were grown bold enough to open the Arteries both by
Instruments and Fire. To arrive at all these different ways of letting Blood,
does necessarily, in my opinion, requiro a long experience in that practice, it
being impossible to advance so far at the first step, either in hardiness, or
ability.

As for Purgatives, Cicero, as we have seen, ascribes the invention of 'em to
the third Esculapius; but supposing that, as well as what Stephanus Byzantinus
reports of Podalirius's letting Blood, to be a Fiction, there are yet
convincing proofs enough of their antiquity behind. Herodotus the oldest Greek
Historian, and after him Diodorus, reports that 'twas usual with the Egyptians
to give a Medicine, that both purged and vomited. This is imagin^d to be a fort
of The Author ought either to have named some other Author of these
conjectures, or to have laid down his own reasons for 'em* since neither of the
Simples named by him, nor any sort of Beer in common use has the qualities of
the Egyptian Medicine. There is an herb in frequent use in many parts of
England, with the skilful old women in the Country, that has both, that is, the
L^urcola, or Spurge L^w^^l, which will (according to a vulgar error among 'em)
work ei^^er ^pwards, or downwards, as the Leaves, which the^ use, are shipped
from the Stalk; but in truth will do either or both, a^^^rding to the st^er^th
of the dose, and the Patients cons^^tation. Though I think we n^^d not be at much
pains in guessing at it, since almost all the Purging Med^^^nes most autiently
used had both faculties, (viz.) of moving to Stool, and V^mit, such were
Hellebore, Elaterium, Spurge, etc. This M^d'cine wa^ ^^ll^d (...), whence
(...), to purge, and (...), Purgation.
Rhadish, or an Herb resembling Seleri, or a composition like a sort of Beer.

The Antiquity of Purging may likewise be further supported by the reasons
already alleged in favor of Bloodletting; that is, by the variety of
Purgatives already in use in the time of Hippocrates, as Hellebore, Elaterium,
Peplium, Coloquintida, Scammony, and diverse others. It is not probable that all
these Med^cines were discovered at a time. As for Elaterium, there is no doubt
but it was known long before, having been in use among the Cnidian Physicians,
who preceeded Hippocrates. There is yet less reason to doubt the antiquity of
Hellebore, if the history of Melampus be not fabulous.

But waving all these proofs, I cannot help believing Purgation to be very
ancient, for a reason founded upon the necessary consequence of an experience,
which must needs be almost as old as Mankind. If the prin^tive mann^r of living
were such, as in the beginning of this Book, our Auth^r, and with him m^^^
learned men suppose it to have been; the simplicity of Men's diet, which
consisted chiefly, if not altogether of Herbs and F^uit, sh^^'d rather have
exposed 'em to Diarrhaea's, than Costiveness; and the Symptoms that generally
accompany the former, which are Gripes, and Fai^n^^^, being more immediate, and
terrible, than those of the lat^er, the obser^ation of their own Bodies should
rather have discourag^d the use of Purgers, had they known 'em, than promoted
an e^qutry after 'em. It Is probable, th^^ the Medical use of Pargers was not
known, till af^^^ a series of obs^^^^tions had introduced a regular diet, and
taught 'em in some m^asure to ^^^per it to their occasions. Then perhaps in
obstinate and dangero^s (...), they ^^^ght venture farther by degrees. But when
that happened is next to ^^up ^^ible to determine. As for the St^ries of
Brutes, they may all, as (...) of Melampus as the rest, be rejected as Fables.
Neither Hellebore, (...) other Parging ^^^t, that we know of, being so savoury,
as to (...) Brutes to eat. In these latter ages at least, they will starve
rather than be s^rc'd to it.
For it is impossible they should have been long without observing the mischief
of being costive, and the relief of evacuation either by Stool, or Vomit when
the Stomach was oppressed. This probably must make 'em inquisitive after means
to provoke Evacuations, when they were suppressed, or when they found
themselves overcharged. Or, perhaps, some body having without design eaten some
herb, that purg^d him, and finding himself better disposed, and more healthy
after it, made his use of this casual experiment, and afterward repeated it
upon himself, or others, that he thought had occasion; or, after all, some body
observing, that some diseases went off with Diarrhaeas, endeavored to imitate,
and assist Nature by such means, as chance had taught 'em, to loosen the Belly.

Some such reason as this apparently started the first hint of Bloodletting.
For the first men observing that loss of Blood often gave a check to violent
distempers; or that large Hemorrhages at the Nose relieved pains in the Head;
and that Women were out of order, when they wanted those evacuations, attempted
by Art to open a way for that Blood which could not make any for itself.

But tho some evacuations of Blood be frequently necessary, and of benefit in
distempers, it does not fellow, that men should as readily venture to imitate
Nature in this case, as in that of Purging. This latter voiding only excrements
by the natural way; whereas, Bleeding takes away a liquor, that appears so
necessary to the support of life, that we scarce part from it without some
horror, and that too is let out by an unusual way; besides, that Purgers were
found out by chance, and taken into the bodies of the first men as their Food,
which can^t be said for Blood-Letting.

It Is certain therefore, that Purging is much more naturally indicated, than
Blood Letting, and that more reasoning was requisite to induce Men to open a
Vein than to give a Purge, and for that reason I believe Purgation to be the
eldest.

Pliny, I know, tells us, that we are obliged to the Hippopotamus, or
Seahorse, who, being by over-feeding grown too fat, and heavy, pricks a
certain Vein in his Leg, upon the most pointed thorn he can find, and when he
has drawn Blood enough, stops the wound with Mud: whence Men had a precedent
for Bloodletting. We may tack this relation to another the same Author gives
us in his next Chapter, that the Ibis taught Men the use of Clysters, by
putting his bill full of Seawater into his Fundament.

Not but that Brutes might possibly teach men the use of diverse Remedies. But
'twas in them as well as men, an accidental experiment. So Vide Chap. 11.
Mclampus's Goats having eaten Hellebore more by chance, than by (what we call)
Instinct, and their Master taking notice of it, helped him to the discovery of
a great Medcine.

A more plausible story than any of these Virgil tells us of his Goats, Aencid.
xii. Dictamnum genetrix Cretea carpit ab Ida, Puberibus caulem Solus, and Flore
comantem Pu^pu^eo, non illa seres incognita ca^ris Gramina, cum stigo volucres
haesere sagitt^e. Whether this story be more admirable for the Sagacity
ascribed to those Brutes, or the power of the Herbs, I leave those to dispute
who have more leisure, but it has a great many Naturalist^ ^or Vouchers. (...).
They say that the Goats in Crete, when they are struck with an Arrow, eat
Dittany, and the Arrow immediate^^ ^^ops from 'em. Arist^^ (...). Id. Hist.
anim. lib. 9. Elian. Hist. Var. l (...) D^os^or. l. 3. c. 37. Val. Max. l. 1.
c. 8. Plutarch. de Solert. Ani^^^ (...) Gryl^o. Cic de Divin. 3. Issdor. etc.
Notwithstanding (...) great names, the Reader is left to believe as he pleases
of the ^ct.
The same may be said of what some Galen. Introduct.
Authors report that the way of Couching Cataracts, was learnt by observing
that Goats, that were troubled with 'em, recover^d their sight by having pricked
their Eyes with rushes, or thorns, as they brushed through the Woods. If this be
not as very a Fable, as those of the Hippopotamus, or Ibis, it is at most but a
lucky accident, of which good use has been made.

Perhaps likewise, even without the aid of chance, the first Men might
designedly try upon Brutes the effects of Simples unknown, before they ventured
on 'em themselves. This way too Brutes might teach the use of 'em, but not in
the Sense of the Naturalists. No body ventures to say, that ^^utes taught men
the use of poisons, drawn from the Bowels of the Earth, of which nevertheless
there are but too many.

CHAP. XXI. Epione, Wife to ESCULAPIUS; Hygiaea, Aegle, Panacaea, and Jaso his
Daughter.
THe Etymology of these names shows 'em to be mere creatures of a wanton
Pausan. in Achaic.
Fancy, and a continuation only of the Sun's being the Author of Physic, under
the name of Apollo. Esculapius is also taken for the Air. Hygiaea, that is
Health, is called his Daughter, because our health depends chiefly upon the
Air. Aegle, Light, or Sunshine, signifies that Air illuminated and purified by
the Sun is the best. Jaso, and Panacaea, which signify Healing, and an
universal Remedy, insinuate to us, that a good air cures all distempers. These
four Sisters are feigned to be daughters of the Air, to show that we are
beholding to the Air for Health, and all the blessings we are to hope from
Med^cine; this Air is supposed to be Son of the Sun, because to dispose it for
the advantage of Health it must be, as it were, animated by that Star, from
which it receives all its good qualities. To carry on the Allegory,
Esculapius's Wife is named (...), lenifying.
Hepione, as if she shared with her Husband the faculty of asswaging Pain.

This sham Esculapius, and his Fantastic Family confirm, what we advanced
before, that there never was any Esculapius of Greece. As for Podalirius, and
Machaon, who might perhaps be Men really present at the Siege of Troy in
quality of Physicians or Surgeons, The Poet probably in this consulted the
dignity of his Poem, as he did in those Epithets (...), and (...), which he in
diverse places bestows upon Machaon. Not perhaps that he was a King, as out
Author from this latter appellation argues. But in that he seems to me to inser
too much, Homer not restraining it to Kings only. For he gives Alexander and
others the same title, tho they were not crowned Heads.
the Poet, I suppose, made 'em Sons of Esculapius for the greaten grace of the
matter, as he says that Physicians in general are of the race of Paeon,
Physician to the Gods; of whom before.

CHAP. XXII. The History of ESCULAPIUS continued. Wherein, what is ascribed to
him in Physic by the Ancients after his being deified, is set forth.
WE have seen, what has been said of Esculapius consider^d as a Man. To
preserve the Chronological order, we should suspend the relation of what
concerns him in Physic after his deification, till the time in which it
happened. But to avoid digressions, we choose to finish at once his History,
Man or God.

Among those, says Clemens Alexandrinus, who were heretofore in Egypt, and who
were but Men, tho the superstition of the People has made Gods of 'em, were
Hermes of Thebes, and Esculapius of Memphis. This Author, who here makes
Esculapius an Egyptian, and joins him with Hermes, who lived in the time of
Noah, seems to make him much later, when he says, that he was deified but fifty
three years before the Siege of Troy, and makes him contempory to Hercules, and
companion to Castor and Pollux in their Voyage. We have already taken notice
that he did apparently confound the Egyptian Esculapius, with the Grecian.
Perhaps in this latter passage he has followed the Greeks, who believ^d their
Esculapius no older.

In Corinthiar.
Pausanias asserts of Esculapius, that from the very first he was none of
those, whose reputation grew by degrees; and endeavors to prove his assertion
by an expression in the Ilias, that calls Pausani^s wrests this authority of
Homer to a sense, that in probability the Poet never dreamt of. For Man, or
Mortal is a common Epithet in Homer, even where there is no suspicion of any
intended destincton of this nature.
(...). Iliad D
Machaon a Mortal, the Son of Esculapius, which with him is all one with a Man
Son of a God.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Temples built to ESCULAPIUS. In particular of that at
Epidaurus; and of the several different representations of Esculapius.
ESculapius being thus immortalized, Temples were built in diverse places, and
vows made, and Sacrifice offered to him, as the God of Health Pausan. in
Messen. and Corinthiac.
They erected likewise Temples to his Sons, and Grandsons. Among all that were
built in honor of Esculapius, that of Epidaurus was the most considerable.
This City was consecrated to him, either because he was born there, or because
he had his abode there. In this Temple, which was five miles from the City, was
his statue of Gold and Ivory, made by the famous Carver Thrasymedes. It was of
an extraordinary size, and represented the God sitting upon a Throne with a
Staff in one hand, and leaning with the other upon the head of a Dragon, with a
Dog at his feet.

Albrieus de deor. imaginibus.
Esculapius was otherwise represented with a He was sometimes represented as a
Child by an Image, of the height of a Cubit. Vide Pausan. Arcad^^a. page 5^8.
He was sometimes represented with a beard.
long beard, habited like a Physician, sitting with a box of Ointment, and the
necessary Instruments of his profession in his lap. In his right hand he held
his beard, in his left a Staff with a Serpent twined about it, to signify,
according to the explication of De natura d^orum.
Phornutius, that the sick for their cure, must renew their Bodies and slip
their Skins, as the Serpent does his. The Serpent, being likewise the Emblem of
Attention, signified that Physicians ought to be very attentive to what befell
their patients. The Staff signified, that those who recover^d of any distemper,
have need of much management, and good support to prevent a relapse. Others
say, that Esculapius's Staff was full of knots, to show the difficulties in the
study and practice of Physic. Festus, from whom this last remark is borrowed,
adds, that this God wore a wreath of Laurel, because this plant is of use in
diverse remedies.

CHAP. XXIV. How ESCULAPIUS is represented in some Medals. Of the figure of the
Telesphorus, which is joined in some of 'em
THere are yet some Medals of Esculapius remaining, The curious M^ Ch^lton
sh^w'd ^e an Abinus, which bore on the reverse an Esculapius standing ^are from
the Waste upwards, holding a Staff in his hand, with a Serpent twined about it.
The Inscription was Albin: CAES. R C. O S I I.
on which he is stamped at full length, with the Pallium after the Greek
fashion, which exposes the body naked to the view from the Girdle upwards,
leaning upon a Staff. In others he has a Cock at his feet, to insinuate that a
Physician ought to be vigilant. In some others we find an Owlet, to show that a
Physician ought to be as clear-fighted, and ready in the Night as the Day for
the service of their Patients.

In several Medals Esculapius is accompanied by a small figure, representing a
young Boy covered with a Cowl. Monsieur Spon will have this to be an emblem of
Sickness, the object of Medicine, because, among the Ancients, the Sick only
wore the Robe, and Bonnet, whereas those that were in health went bareheaded.
This Boy, or little Man, was called Telesphorus.

Monsieur Patin mentions a Medal coined in honor of the Emperor Adrian, which
bore on one side an Esculapius with his daughter Hygiaea; on the reverse a
Telesphorus, with this Inscription round it. (...). Near the Telesphorus were
these two letters OB. This learned Antiquary and Physician explains these words
thus; Pergamenorum sub Cephalione, adding in an Italick Character, Telesphorus.
He tells us, after Pausanias, that Telesphorus was a Deity of the Pergamenians,
so named by the command of the Oracle; and that some translate this word
Possessed.
Daemoniac, or One that speaks in the Belly.
Ventiloquus.

This application induces me to think, that Telesphorus and Ob signified the
same thing, finding elsewhere that this latter word is likewise rendered by
that of Demoniac, or Ventriloquous Spirit. So Seldom; De Diis Syris Syntagmat.
2.
The word Ob is usually translated by that of Python, or Magician. But Ob was a
Spirit, or Demon, that seemed to speak from within; sometimes from the Head,
and sometimes from the Armpit; but in a tone, whether of a Daemoniac, or of a
dead man, so low, that it seemed to come from some deep cavity in the Earth; so
that whoever consulted it, oftentimes heard it not, but made what construction
he pleased. Seldom adds immediately; see the History of Samuel, whose Figure
was raised to Saul by a Woman, from whose Pudenda Ob spoke, or was thought to
speak. The Scripture in the 28th Chapter of the 1st book of Samuel calls this
Pythonissa, or as the seventy translate this Ventriloqua, a Woman that had Ob;
whence Saul makes this request to her; Divine to me, I pray thee by Ob, which
the lxx render; (...).
Prophecy to me by the Ventriloquus. Ob therefore was a Ventriloquous Spirit.

This conjecture seemed to me well grounded. But Monsieur Patin, has done me
the favor to inform me that instead of OB, we should read T O B, this being
more frequent upon Medals. He is likewise of opinion, that the two first
Letters T O should be disjoined from the B, and read T O B, as two words, which
signify according to him a second time. This second time is, says he, capable
of variety of interpretation, either from the City where the Medal was coined,
or from the Praetor or Pontifex under whom it was coined. He further observes
this word, where the Telesphorus had nothing to no. If Monsieur Patin be not
mistaken, especially in this last particular, my conjecture is entirely
overthrown; for my part I readily submit to his authority in a matter, whereof
he is so great a Master.

Pausanias observes that what the Pergamenians called Telesporus, was called
Acesius at Epidaurus, and Evamerion in Messenia.

CHAP. XXIV. ESCULAPIUS appeared sometimes in the form of a Serpent. His Voyage
to Rome, to put a stop to the Plague: Of the Temple built for him in the Isle
of Tyber. Some particulars concerning the Temple, and the place where it was
erected.
THe Serpent was so dear to Esculapius, that his usual appearance was under
that Shape. In that he came to free Rome from the Plague, in its three hundred
and fiftieth year. The Romans, says Aurelius Victor, sent ten Deputies to
Epidaurus by the advice of the Oracle, to bring the God Esculapius to Rome. The
chief of them was Q. Ogulnius; these Deputies being arrived there, and admiring
the extraordinary size of the Statue, saw coming out of the Throne, on which he
sat, a Serpent, that struck into 'em an awe rather of veneration, then terror,
and traversing the City, through crowds of Spectators that were amazed at the
Prodigy, went on board the Romans Vessel to the Cabin of Ogulnius. The
Deputies, transported with joy of the Gods Company, arrived happily at Antium,
where they abode some time, the roughness of the Seas not permitting 'em to
pursue their Voyage. During this stay the Serpent conveyed himself into a
Neighboring Temple dedicated to Esculapius, and came aboard again some days
afterward, and they continued their course up the Tyber. Till arrived at this
Isle in the River he leaped ashore. In that place a Temple was erected to him,
and the Plague immediately ceased.

Festus Fancies, that the Temple of Esculapius was built in the middle of the
water, to signify the custom of Physicians, who cure their Patients by obliging
'em to drink water. Lib. 29. cap. 1.
Pliny pretends that this Temple was erected in the Isle of Tyber to avoid
receiving him into their Walls, so great was their aversion to the Art, over
which he presided. But it is not probable they would use a God so scurvily,
whose presence they had so earnestly desired, and who had taken the pains to
come so far to their relief. Quaest. Romans 94.
Plutarch seems to have hit the true reason of this conduct of the Romans, who
built him a Temple, without their City, in imitation of that at Epidaurus,
which was five miles out of the City. He adds, that this reason, why these
Temples were placed in the Country, was, that the Sick, who resorted to 'em, as
a sort of Hospitals, Or perhaps the Romans might fear to be frequently visited
with infectious diseases, from the great resort of the sick to such a Temple,
and therefore erected it at a distance, for the same reason that we build
Pesthouses at a distance from great Towns. Or perhaps the Priests, who were yet
but Novices at Rome, might fear too near an inspection into their juggling in
that great City, and therefore chose a place where none could have admittance
but those that came prepossessed in favor of the cheat.
might enjoy the benefit of the open Air.

If AURELIUS VICTOR's account been't a fiction, we may conclude that the
Serpents of Epidaurus, which were easily tamed, were trained to this sort of
juggling Pausan. in Corinthiac.
. Qui sont de couleur brune, says our Author, but Pausanias his words are,
(...), which seems to intimate that they were of a brighter yellow, than any
other Serpents, page 136.
All Dragons, or Serpents, says Pausanias are consecrated to Esculapius, but
especially a brown sort, which were very tame, and found only in the
Territories of Epidaurus Lucian affirms expressly that these Serpents are found
in Pella in Macedonia, and that the Impostor Alexander furnished himself with
one there. He further adds, that they would kiss the Women, suck their Breasts,
etc. which familiarity (says he) gave occasion to the story of Olympias, Mother
of Alexander the Great.
Vide Lucian. Pseudomant.
. It was one of these Serpents. which Alexander the famous Impostor made use
of, which he pretended to be Our Author here has made a mistake, for the
Impostor did not pretend the Serpent, but himself to be the Son of Podalirius,
and the Serpent Esculapius.
the Son of Podalirius.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Worship of ESCULAPIUS, which was every where the same,
except at Cyrene.
THe Rites observed at Epidaurus, were followed by all the Cities of Greece,
where his Temples were. Pausanias pretends, that even the Esculapius of (a)
Cyrene, was borrowed from thence, though he acknowledges this difference in their
Worship, that these sacrificed Goats to him, which they did not at Epidaurus.
But this Author being a Greek may be suspected of partiality to his own
Country, which it is easy upon other occasions to convict him of. It Is It Is more
likely that Cyrene, being a City of Lybia near Egypt, received from thence, the
knowledge and worship of Esculapius, before spoken of. It is not probable, that
the Cyrenians, if they had borrowed their Rites from Epidaurus, wou^d have
varied 'em so far, as to sacrifice an animal so different from that used in
Greece; which according to Festus was a Pullet, or a Cock according to Plato,
whose reason for it deserves our notice. The Ancients, says he, offer^d to
ESCULAPIUS the Physician, son of Phoebus, a Cock, which proclaims the approach
of day, and of the Sun, thereby acknowledging themselves obliged for the day,
or light of Life, to the Divine Bounty, which cures us of all evils.

Before we leave the Temple of Epidaurus, we must observe, that there were in
it several Pillars, whereon were engraved the names of those that were cured by
the Gods, the names of their distempers, and the method of cure, all in the
Dorick Dialect. Pausanias says, that six of these Pillars or Columns, were
remaining in his time; that there was one old Pillar remote from the rest, on
which was an Inscription that Hippolytus offered to Esculapius twenty horses in
acknowledgement for having been restored to Life by him.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the ESCULAPIUS of Pergamus.
PAusanias observes, that one Archias having been cured of some distemper at
Epidaurus, transported the Religion to Pergamus. This was the occasion of
building a Temple to this God there; and not because he had a Shop there, as
some learned Men, through misapprehension of a Passage in Lucian, have believed.
This witty Droll introduces Jupiter complaining that his Altars were deserted,
since Apollo set up his Oracle at Delphi, and Esculapius opened Shop at
Pergamus; by which Shop he meant his Temple, whither People repair^d for
Medicines, as to a common Apothecaries Shop.

One proof that this Temple was grown more famous than the former, is that
Lucian in the aforecited passage mentions this only, though the other were
remaining in his time, as we may infer from Pausanias, who was contemporary to
him, or lived after him, and speaks of the Temple of Epidaurus as having seen
it, adding that one Antoninus had built a House near it, to lodge Women in
labor, and dying Men, because no one was suffer^d to be delivered, or to dye
within the Verge of the Temple.

The Esculapius of Asia Minor seems to have been the most dexterous at culling
his Customers; for the Emperor Caracalla took a journey to Pergamus, to consult
him upon a distemper; and we find abundance of Medals of the Families of
Antoninus and Aurelius, on which Esculapius is impressed, all coined at
Pergamus. Perhaps the Priests at Pergamus had more address, than those at
Epidaurus, which as we shall see, was of great use to inveigle the Multitude.

CHAP. XXVII. Of ESCULAPIUS of Cos.
THere was likewise a famous Temple of Esculapius in the Isle of Cos, which was
burnt in the time of Hippocrates, after he had transcribed the remedies written
on the Tables, which those that receiv^d their cures, used to hang up in the
Temple as a public acknowledgment, and for the service of others in the same
case after 'em. Strabo speaks thus of the Temple. There is in the Suburbs of
the City of Cos, a celebrated Temple of Esculapius enrich^d with a great number
of presents and offerings, among the rest an Antigonus of Apelles 's hand, a
Venus rising out of the Sea, consecrated in our days to Julius Caesar by
Augustus, who dedicated to his Father the Foundress of his Family; It is
reported that for this Picture a hundred talents were abated of the annual
Tribute paid by those of Cos. It Is said likewise that Hippocrates practiced
Physic upon what he learnt from those consecrated Tables. Hippocrates, adds
he, was one of the most illustrious Persons of that City, as was also another
Physician named Simos or Simus. Our Author forgets that Pausanias, of whom he
makes so much use on this occasion, mentions that the Messenians, who contended
for his Birth, had in his Temple many great curiosities, as the Statues of the
Muses, of Apollo, of Hercules, and of Esculapius and his children; and
particucularly a sort of Family Piece of Painting, wherein was his Moth^r
Arsinoe, (according to the pretenses of the Messenians) himself, and his two
Sons, Machaon and Podalirius, drawn by Omphalion. And at Aegium a Statue was
made by Damophon, whose workmanship Pausanias every where sets a great value
upon. There were in other places abundance of other things very remarkable,
which wheever has the curiosity, may consult Pausanius for.
Nothing is said of the rest of the Temples of Esculapius, scattered in great
number up and down the world, especially in Greece.

CHAP. XXVIII. Four Oracles, or Prescriptions of ESCULAPIUS given to sick men,
engraved upon a Marble Table, found at Rome.
IT were to be wished, that the Ancient had taken the pains to collect all that
was written upon those Tables, or Pillars. Perhaps they might have done it, but
their works su^s viv'd not till our times.

Chance has preserved us one of these Tables found in the Isle of Tyber by
Rome, where was the Temple of Esculapius. This Table is of Marble, and now to
be seen in the Palace of Mapheo, on which is this inscription in Greek.

The God, at this time, gave the following Oracle to one Caius, who was blind;
That he should come to the sacred altar, and having kneeled should go from the
right side to the left, and lay his five singers upon the altar, and put that
hand upon his eyes. Which being done he saw very clearly, all the People being
present, and expressing their joy, that so great miracles were done under our
Emperor Antoninus.

Lucius, having a Pleurisy, and being given over by every body, received from
the God this Oracle. That he should come, and take the ashes off his altar, and
mixing em with Wine, apply 'em to his side. Which done he was cured, and
returned thanks to the God, and the People congratulated him upon his happy
recovery.

Julian vomiting blood, and his recovery being by every one despaired of, the
God by his Oracle gave him this answer; That he should come, and take the
Pine-apples upon his Altar, and eat of 'em three days with Honey, Which having
performed, he was well, and came to return his thanks to the God in the
presence of all the people.

The God gave this Oracle to a blind Soldier, named Valerius Aper; That he
should mingle the blood of a white Cock with Honey, and make a Collyrium, which
he should put upon his eyes three days together. After which he saw, and came
publicly to return his thanks.

The first of these remedies is purely superstitious, the rest are natural, and
not very unlike those in ordinary use with the Physicians, except the seasoning
of superstition, which to this day makes Medicines seem more effectual to the
greatest part of the World.

In probability the Priests of Esculapius did not deal much in cures of the
first sort; except when they had a mind to impose upon the people by some
Counterfeit, prepared to cheat 'em with a sham disease.

But when they had to do with men, that came to consult their God upon cases
that were curable, it was for their credit to order means that acted naturally,
which they might learn by the If Hippocrates became so famous by transcribing
what was inscribed upon the Tables hung up in the Temple at Cos (as some will
have it) what hinders but that the Priests themselves, who had much greater
advantages of that kind, should be so too. Besides, it is probable that they
neglected no means of enabling themselves to do all that was possible, who
pretended to so much more.
Study and Practice of Physic, or receive by tradition from their
Predecessors; without any such occasion for the Devil's assistance Observations
sur les fievres.
, as the late Monsieur Spon fancies they had.

Those that fancy that all the Heathen Oracles were nothing but mere tricks,
and roguery of their Priests, will be in no pain upon this subject.

It seems to have been very easy for these Priests, to make the sick believe
as they listed. And whereas these wretches were usually lodged for some days
together, and their imaginations being entirely possessed with the reports of the
Counsels, and Cures of Esculapius, they did not fail to dream at night, of what
their minds were so absolutely taken up with all the day, and to take their
dreams for the immediate inspiration of the God. It was not impossible, but
that, following his pretended advice, As sanciful men are naturally most
suporstitious, so I doubt not but the greatest and best part of Escalapius's
Customers were of that number, whose distempers being altogether imaginary,
'twas no hard matter to fit 'em with a cure as chime^ical. For even yet the
number of those, that labor under painful conceits, and are daily relieved by
the application of superstitious, insignificant remedies, in which they have a
strong faith, is very great. Of these I knew one, a person otherwise of very
good sense, that was cured, as he thought, of the Sciatica, by wearing about
his neck a piece of blank Paper, in which he was told there was a powerful
charm written, but was forbidden to break the Seal; which his curi^sity
tempting him to do, after his sancy had had three weeks respite, immediately
upon the disappointment he relapsed into the old complaint. But among the
Heathens, whose Credulity was backed and encouraged by their Religion, 'twas no
wonder to meet with shouls of easy Gulls, that crowded to be cheated. Not to
mention that many of these Cures were effected by confederacy, where the God,
or his Priest, and the Patient had a right understanding beforehand; like some
m^dern Miracle-mongers. As to the cure of real distempers by sancy, I shall
suspend my opinion, till I am satisfied of the truth of the fact, which yet I
declare I am not.
the force of Imagination, and the confidence they placed in the Oracle,
contributed very much to their cure, when it was naturally possible.

They were so obedient, and so exact in the execution of the orders they
received, whether by dream, or otherwise, that some have forborne to drink for
fifteen days together, being so enjoyn^d, Galen, who makes this observation,
complains, that his Patients were not by far so observant of his directions.

There is no doubt, but this Spirit of Bigottry that reigned among those that
had recourse to Esculapius, contributed very much to his establishment, how
little virtue soev^r his remedies, or rather those of his Priests had.

Suidas mentions a prescription of Esculapius of Athens, which is very odd. An
Athenian named Plutarch and one Domninus a Syrian Philosopher, contemporary to
Proclus, both consulted him upon different case, and were both ordered to eat
Pork. The first would not comply, but in raillery asking the God, what he would
have prescrib^d to a Jew in his case, oblig^d him to prescribe something else^
Domninus, who, as the Story tells us, was really a Jew, notwithstanding the Law
of his Nation against the eating of Swines-flesh, conform^d to the direction,
and found himself so well after it, that he eat it all the rest of his Life.
And found himself the worse for a single days abstinence from it. His disease
was a Spitting of Blood. This remedy appears extraordinary, but we shall see in
the sequel some Prescriptions of the same sort in the same case by Physicians.

Galen tells us also of some particular cures of his Esculapius. De subfigurat.
Empir^c. De simp. Medicam. facult. lib.
A certain rich man, having been brought by a dream, from the middle of Thrace
to Pergamus, he was advised by Esculapius to take a Medicine, whereof Vipers
were an ingredient, and to rub his Body externally with it* Shortly after this
Man becoming Leprous, his disease turning to a Leprosy, he was perfectly cured
by the use of the Medicine, the God had taught him.

This man perhaps had the Leprosy, before he came to Pergamus; but it being a
disease no one cares to publish, he chose rather to put it upon the God, as
sent by him, that he might signalize himself by the cure.

We may see by this sample, that the Priests of Pergamus were not unskilled in
Physic, this being a Medicine much esteemed by the Physicians in all ages in
cases of this Nature.

But it is something surprising, that Esculapius, who was so fond of Serpents,
that he often took their Shape, should order 'em to be killed to make
Med^cines; unless we suppose, that Vipers are very different from the Snakes of
Epidaurus, which were harmless, and were peculiarly sacred to him.

These cunning Priests undertook no one, that wou^d not be exactly regular, as
well in their Diet, as Physic, witness the Philostrat. Vita. Apollon. Tyanaet.
young Assyrian, who in a Dropsy, wou^d eat and drink to excess. He supplicated
and consulted the God, yet could not get so much as a Dream. At length, being
very much incensed against Esculapius, he fell asleep and dreamt, that he sent
him to Apollonius Tyanaeus. Being come to this Prophet, or Cheat, he complained
grievously of Esculapius to him, who answered that the God gave Health to those
only that were desirous of it, and not to those, that lived like him, as if
their disease were a Pleasure.

Galen says likewise, that one De different. Morbor.
Nicomachus of Smyrna, being grown so big, that he could not stir, was cur^d by
Esculapius, but he tells neither time, nor manner.

Hither we may bring the Miracle, which, as Tacitus relates, was done in the
temple of Serapis at Alexandria; Serapis and Esculapius being according to him
the same. Histor. l. 4.
Vespasian being at Alexandria, a man by the direction of Serapis threw himself
at his feet, and begged that he would anoint his cheeks and round his ^yes with
his Spittle. Another that had lost the use of his hand, begged by the same
direction that he wou^d set his foot upon his hand. Vespasian at first laughed
at 'em as banters; but being unwilling to be taken for a credulous man, yet
betwixt the importunity of some, and the slattery of others, he began to
entertain some hopes that the thing might succeed; and remitted 'em both to the
examination of Physicians, who sinding that the one had not absolutely lost his
sight, and that the other's all was but a simple dislocation, which might be
reduc^d, made their report, adding that perhaps the Gods had taken this matter
into their care, as they had done the Prince himself, who was chosen by their
means; that if the matter succeeded, the glory would be Caesar 's, and the
scorn would fall upon the wretches themselves if it miscarried. Hereupon
Vespasian set a good face upon the matter, ^ncouraging the spectators to put in
execution the orders of Serapis. Whereupon the lame man recovered the use of
his hand, and the blind man his sight: Those (says Tacitus) that were assistant
at both these events, affirm yet the truth of 'em, The man that has once
solemnly vouched a lie, upon whatever motive he does it, tho that showd cease,
is obliged afterward to maintain it for his own honor, if he has any; and if
he has not, he is not an Evidence to be regarded.
when a lie is no longer of service to 'em.

The Reader is at liberty to to make what reflections hereupon he pleases. We
shall only take notice in the close of this Article, that tho the Multitude
were grossly bigoted to this Superstition, yet there wanted not those among the
Pagans that saw through the cheat, and knew it to be an artifice by which the
Priests subsisted. This apparently was the sense of Philemon in Philostratus,
who dreaming, that Esculapius told him, that he must forbear drinking water if
he would be cured of the Gout, cried out as he waked, as if he had spoke to the
God, and what would you have prescribed if you had had an Ox in cure.

We need but observe how Aristophanes ridicules these Priests, and even their
God himself. In his first Comedy he introduces a Servant saying; The Priest of
Esculapius ha^ing put out the lights, bid us all go to sleep, saying, that if
a^y one heard a rustling, that he should not stir, for 'twas a sign of the
approach of the God; so we all laid our selves quietly down. I, for my part,
says the Slave, could not sleep a with for the smell of a Mess of Soup, which
an old Fellow had near me, and which assaulted my Nose most furiously. Being
therefore very des^rous to remove the offense, I listed my head softly up, and
perceived the Priest clearing the Sacred Table of the Cakes and Figs, and
making the tour about the several Altars, to see that nothing was left, and
stuffing whatever he found into a Wallet, I fancied it a very pious action, and
began in imitation to draw toward the Soup-dish. Then he, to whom the Slave
made the relation, asking, if, being about such an action, he was not afraid of
the God? He Answers, that he was really in some fear, but it was, lest he
should get at the dish before him; for says he, I found already by the Priest
what game he would be at. Presently after he salutes Esculapius by a very (...),
Merdivorus.
homely name.

But it will perhaps be objected, that Aristophanes was an Atheist; as well as
he whom Cicero makes to say, that the sick were more beholding to Hippocrates,
than Esculapius. In the same rank they would put the Dionysius, Tyrant of
Syracuse.
He robbed the same God of a golden Table at Syracuse, drinking first to him
the Poculum boni Daemonis; then ordering the Table to be taken away, jesting
upon the ancient custom of removing the Table.
Prince that cut off Esculapius of Epidaurus his golden beard, saying, that
'twas an absurd thing, that the Son should have such a long beard, and the
Father, (viz.) Apollo, (who was always represented as a young man) should have
none.

CHAP. XXIV. Japis, Linus, Orpheus, Musaeus, and Homer, Inventors of Physic,
or some of the ancientest Physicians.
THis may suffice on this subject. Let us now return to the time wherein
Esculapius lived, and see what passed then, or presently after in relation to
Physic. We have already spoken of the Heroes his contemporaries, the disciples
of Chiron, as likewise of his Sons.

The next we meet with after them, is Japis, whom Virgil introduces dressing
Eneas^s wounds, and says of him, that being very much beloved by Apollo, he
offered to teach him Augury to play on the Harp, and to draw the Bow well;
Scire potestates herbarum, u^umque medzudi Maluit, and mutas agitare ingl^^us
arts. Aeneid. lib. xii. Notwithstanding the several conjectures advanced by
the Commentators, this passage seems yet sufficiently obseure. De la Cerda
thinks the words Mutas arts to be directly meant of the sect of Physicians
that distinguish themselves by the name of Empericks, who putting themselves
only upon Fact and Experience, had no o^casion to talk in their Profession; and
that Japix is called inglorious, because those of that Sect, rejecting all
reasoning in their art, became scandalously ig^want of Letters, or because the
Physicians at Rome in Virgil's time were generally Slaves. But neither of these
conjectures can be good. First, because the Sect of the Empericks had no being
till several ages after the time of Japix. Secondly, because in the time of
Japix, who by Virgil^s accoun^ of him, must have been co^vous at least to the
Sons of Esculapms, Physic was no contemptible or inglorieus art, sense it
procured to it, Professors while living the highest veneration, and after death
divine honors. See the preceding part of this History. What our Author here
advances seems better grounded, but the sune objection lies against that
likewise, it not being an a^t of s^ell same or reputation, since it made those
that had any skill in it to pass for somewhat above humane condition.

I suppose this word mutas to be opposed to Citharam the Harp which Apollo gave
him, by which the Poet not only meant Music, but Poetry also, for which it is
frequently put; and that by the word inglorius he means no more than
unambitious; as one that for the practice of Physic neglected those other
Gifts, which the Poet, as such, was obliged to prefer before it. For this
reason he calls Physic Ars Muta, in opposition to Poetry and Masick, which
were properly Vocales.


but that he rather chose to be able to prolong his dying Father's Life, to
learn the virtues of herbs, and to cure distempers. (which Virgil calls a mute
Art) tho less glorious for him.

The Commentators upon him have been very much perplexed to know, why he calls
Physic so. Had Physic been in the time of Eneas, or even of Virgil, upon the
foot it now is, it had been a very improper Epithet. But we may see by the
method Esculapius, and his Sons took, that they left their cures to speak for
'em. In Virgil^s time the case was alter^d, and they reasoned too much. I
suppose the word mutas to relate rather to inglorius; and that Virgil would
thereby insinuate, that Physic was an Art that made no great noise in the
world, and brought its Professor's no great glory; especially compared with
Music, and those other Arts, that qualified 'em for entering the Lists, and
being crowned in their Public Games, which was the highest honor they could
anciently aspire to. The same may be said of Augury, which raised those that
professed it to a great height. We find nothing more concerning Japis.

Linus, one of the antientest Poets known, having written of Fruits and Trees,
is likewise rankt among the Physicians. He is pretended by some to have taught
Orpheus, and to have been no less a Musician than he.

Why our Author postpones Linus and Orpherus to Japis I cannot imagine, since
they were, according to all accounts, contemporaries to Hercules and Aristaeus,
and flourished 100 years before the War of Troy. Pausan. lib. 9. Tzetzes Hist.
399. Chil. xii. Virg. Georg. lib. 4.
Orpheus is so well known, that we shall not amuse our selves with the Fables
concerning him. The Greeks believed him to have been of Thrace, and give him a
character very like that of Hermes Trismegistus, that is, for an universal Man.
What is reported of his Music is well known. But what is more material to our
History, is, that they looked upon him, not only as Pausan Baeot.
a Physician, but as the Inventor of Physic, as one that first found the means
of appeasing the anger of the Gods, and the manner of expiating crimes.

There are yet some pieces of Poetry which bear his name, out of which we have
already cited some See the Chapter of Mercury.
passages relating to the virtues of certain Simples, and the cure of certain
Distempers. But these pieces have been a long time esteemed spurious, tho they
be very ancient; for they were ascribed to him even in the time of Cicero, who
says one Cercops was the Author.

Pliny observes, Primus ommum, guos memoria novit, Orpheus, ^uriosius de herbis
aliqua predidit. lib. 25. Cap. 2.
that Orpheus first wrote of Plants any thing curious, or something too
curious. For the Latin word signifies either. This may be construed of the
exactness of Orpheus's work upon that subject. But Pliny elsewhere shows that
by curiosity he there meant vanity, or superstition, to which the Genius of the
Ancient Times was extremely inclin^d; and we are informed by Pausan. Eliac.
another, that Orpheus passed for a great Magician.

D^ Antidot. lib. 2. c. 7.
Galen likewise mentions an Or^heus, to whom he gives the surname of Theologus,
who wrote of the manner of compounding diverse Poisons. This surname seems to
point out the Orpheus, whose History we are upon, whether these Books were
truly his, or, which is more likely, fathered falsely upon him.

Pausanias, amongst ^ther inventions, ascribes the invention of Remedies for
Diseases, and of certain Rites of Worship to him. But it is probable these
Romedies were a^ other than Charms, or superstitious Lustrations, and not such
as acted by natural means; he being as has been observed reputed a Magician by
the Ancients, and amongst the rest by Pausanias. Vide Baeotic.
Others have written that Orpheus was an Pausan E^^ac. posterior.
Egyptian, and in all appearance he was older than the Greeks imagine.

Musaeus, another ancient Poet, is supposed to have been his Scholar. Ranaz
act. iv. seen. ii.
Aristophanes ascribes to him the teaching men remedies for distempers. Pliny
joins him with Orpheus for the knowledge of Plants, but makes him the later
Writer. But Pausanias maintains, that those pieces which are imputed to
Musaeus, are the works of one Onomacritus.

Homer having the reputation of having laid down rules in all the principal
Arts, and in all the Sciences, could not fail of being dubbed a Physician.
First, he was thought to understand Surgery, because he specifies the chief
particulars of the method of dressing Wounds, as drawing out the heads of
Arrows, or Darts lodged in the Flesh by means of Incision, to stop the
bleeding, to wash and cleanse the Wound, and to apply Powders, or Med^cines,
that case pain. He was supposed likewise to be skilled in Anatomy, because he
spoke of most parts of the Body. So he is complemented with the knowledge of
Plants, for the mention of Moly, which served against enchantments, of the
leaves of Homer often mentions the manner of dressing and curing Wounds, but
seldom the means, yet we may guess by his Potions of Pramnian Wine, Goats Milk,
Cheese, Barley-meal, etc. at his skill in Physic, the absurdity of which
composition, especially in the case wherein it is prescrib^d, has already been
objected to Machaon. As for the Moly and Nepenthe, they being Fabulous
Med^cines, are not to be insisted upon. The mention of the Leaves of Savin seem
indeed to give some Countenance to their Opinion, who hold, that he understood
Physic. But even in the use of that he is mistaken; for Savin will not cause
Sterility, tho it too often procures abortion. As for the Plague's ceasing upon
the ninth day, I suppose it rather to have relation to the Magical Whimsies of
those times than any natural Observation or supposed.
Savin, which cause Barrenness, and some others. We have already taken notice
of his knowledge of Nepenthe, of which, a word or two in the following Chapter.
They make him descant upon diverse Medical Maxims, as when he observes that the
plague ceased upon the Ninth day, they suppose an allusion to the opinion of
those Physicians that hold that diseases terminate naturally upon odd days. He
gives likewise directions for health, or for the cure of certain diseases, as
when he introduces Thetis advising her Son Achilles to visit the Women, to draw
him out of his Melancholy.

CHAP. XXX. Diana, Latona, Pallas, Cybele, Angitia, Medea, Circe, Polydamna,
Agameda, or Perimeda, Helena, and Oenone.
Goddesses, or Heroines that contributed to the invention of Physic; or were
at least of the number of those, who had the earliest knowledge of that Art.
THe Women likewise put in for a share in the honor of inventing Physic, or
some particular Medicines at least. Diana appears at their head, and claims the
invention of some Herbs, of which number Artemisia, which Artemis.
bears her name makes one; and some add Apule^. Cell. de V^^b. Herb. cap 13.
that she taught Chiron the Centaur the use of it; tho others attribute the
discovery of this plant to Artemisia Queen of Caria, of whom more hereafter.

It is likewise inferred, that Diana understood Physic, from Homer's
introducing her dressing the wounds of Encas; besides 'twas natural for her to
know something of an Art, whereof Apollo her Brother was so great a Master,

Latona her Mother is allowed some skill likewise for the same reason; and
Homer joins her with Diana in the cure of Eneas.

Pallas, likewise is honored with the discovery of some Plants, one of which
is Parthenium or Feverfew, an herb of great use to Virgins, as Pallas was. Ovid
Fastor. lib. 3.
advises the Physicians to sacrifice her, that she may favor 'em with her
assistance; and there was at Athens a statue of Pallas with the surname of
Health.
Hygiaea, erected by the order of Plutarch. in vita Pericl.
Pericles, to whom she revealed the aforementioned herb in a dream, as a
remedy for one of his Slaves, who had got a Fall from the top of a Temple. She
was likewise surnamed Preserver, Savior.
Sotera.

Diodor. sic. lib. 4.
Cybele, Mother of the Gods, had likewise the reputation of Teaching remedies
for the Diseases of little Children.

Angitia Daughter of Aeta, King of Colchis, Sil. Ital. l 8.
was the first that discovered Poisonous Plants, or Poisons drawn from Plants.
Of her the Marsi, a People of Italy learnt to charm Serpents. She was otherwise
called Angerona. We sind at least an old Reins. Inscript. 138. Class. 1.
In scription, wherein this name is joined to Angitia, without any point
intermediate. Mac^ob. lib. 1. Cap. 10.
Some think she was called Angerona, because the Romans, being epidemically
afflicted with the Angina, or Quinsy, were delivered by means of vows made to
her. Verrius Flaccus gives a different reason for it.

Some make Angitia Daughter of the the Sun, and the same with Medea; who
according to others was her Sister. This latter lived in the time of the Heroes
Chiron's Pupils, and her adventures are pretty well known. Pala phat. Fab. lib.
1.
What she did was so surprising, that all the World believed her to be an
Enchantress. 'Twas said of her, that she made old Folks young again. The ground
of which was this, that she had a secret, that dyed white hair black. She was
the first that advised the use of hot Baths, to make the Body supple, and to
cure diverse distempers; which gave occasion to the People, who saw the
preparation of Caldrons, Water, and Fuel, and could not guess at the use of
'em, to report, that she boiled Men. Old Pelias, notwithstanding his great Age,
making trial of this new Method, and losing his Life by the experiment,
confirmed the Fable.

Diogen apad Stob^um.
There are yet others who agree, that Medea was no Sorceress, but they give
another account of the matter, they say, that she made the most tender,
effeminate bodies lusty and vigorous, by teaching em the use of certain
exercises, which made those that saw the change say, that she boiled their
Flesh to make 'em young.

Diodorus tells us further, that she cured by means of herbs the wounds of
Jason, Laertes, Atalanta, and the Thespiades.

Circe, a third Sister of Medea, and Angitia, is no less famous. Her skill in
herbs got her likewise the reputation of an Enchantress, as well as Medea.
Diodorus tells us, that Circe knew abundance of Plants good against Poison, She
gave her name to that, which is called E^chante^s Night Shade.
Circaea. Aulus Gel^us lib. 10. Cap. 2. (...) Cap. 8.
some Authors say, that she had a Son called Marsus, from whom the Marsi were
descended. Whatever she were the Ci^ero de Mat. Deor. lib. 3.
Circae ans looked upon her as their Patroness, and paid a religious worship to
her. Those, that would be more particularly informed, why Circe was reputed a
Magician by the Greeks, and that part of Latium, where she settled for the
Country of Poisons, and Enchantments, may consult Monsieur Bochart's Phaleg.

Polydamna, Wife to Thon, an Egyptian, is also of the number of those that
understood Physic, having had skill in the use of diverse remedies of the
product of her own Country, as Homer observes. We shall speak of some of 'em
under the head of Helen, who follows by and by.

The same Poet certifies for Agameda Wife of Mulius, that she knew allike
Med^cines, that the ^^eth yielded, Propert. lib. 2. Ele^. 2. (...). in T^^^.
she was also called Perimeda, Tiraquel. de Nobil.
some think her the same person, that Homer calls in another place Hecameda,
that washed Machaon's wounds with warm Water.

Helen, the beauteous Greek, so famous in Story, no less deserves a place here
for her knowledge of the Medicine, which Homer calls Nepenthe, which she had of
Polydamna. This Medicine as the Etymology of the From the Particle (...) and
(...), dolor.
name shows, was so admirable, that it eas^d all Griefs, and all Anger, and
caused 'em to forget all misfortunes. A man could not weep, says the Poet, the
day that he tasted it, tho he had lost his Father, or Mother, or the dearest
Friend in the World The properties of Nepenthe agree very well with those of
Opium; the only difficulty is, that Helen mixed it with the Wine, she gave
Menelaus's Guests to make 'em more gay, and not to stupify 'em. To this we may
answer, that Opium has either of those effects, on those, that are very much
used to it; and what is observable is this, that wonderful Drug comes from the
same Country from whence Helen had her Nepenthe, that is Egypt.

Oenone, Rival to the precedent, was no less skilful then she. Ipse ratus
dignam medicas mihi tra^dit arts, Admisitque meas ad sua dona manus.
Quaecunque herba patens ad opem radixque medendi
Vtilis in toto nascitur orb, mea est.
M^ miser am quod amor non est medicabilis herbis.
Destituor, prudens artis, ab art mea.
Epist. ad Parid.
(s) Apollo, says she, himself taught me Physic, and I know all the medical
Roots, and Herbs in the World.

We have already taken notice of some other Women, as the Daughters of Hercules
and Chiron, the Wife, and Daughters of Esculapius, who were of this number
likewise; and we shall have occasion to mention more hereafter.

CHAP. XXXI. Athotis, Thosothrus, Jachen, and Solomon.
Ancient Kings and Priests, that practiced Physic.
BEfore we examine the Progress of this Art, after the Siege of Troy, to which
the Grecian Esculapius brings us, and with which we close the first Epoch of
this history; we are obliged to re-ascend a little, and return into Egypt, the
Country of the first Esculapius.

Scaliger. Can^ Isagog. p. 222
We find there one Athotis,, second King of the first Dynasty of the Thinites,
who, according to Manetho, was very skilful in Physic, and wrote himself some
treatises of Anatomy The same Author joins with him one Thosothrus, a King of
the third Dynasty, no less expert.

Galen. Inroduct. seu Medic.
The custom of embalming their dead in use among the Egyptians, gave 'em more
convenience of learning Anatomy, than the Greeks had, who not daring to touch
dead Bodies, could only inform themselves by dissecting of Brutes, or when
chance presented to em unhappy wretches, whose wounds were large enough to
discover their Bowels.

These Kings undoubtedly imitated their Predecessor See the Chapt. of Osiris.
Osiris, who is said to have invented. Vide Strabon.
In this Country, the great Men were so far from thinking this Art any
diminution to their honor, that they engrossed it wholly to themselves,
forbididing under great penalties any of the People to presume to meddle
therein, under their Kings, Priests, and Grandees, to whom it was permitted.
Hist^ animal. lib. 2. c. 18
Elian says the same of the ancient Greece, that none but Princes practiced
Physic, meaning unquestionably the Princes, and Heroes beforementioned.

Jachen, was undoubtedly of no less quality. He was, says Suidas, a favorite
of the Gods, and very useful to Society, who lived in the time of Senyes King
of Egypt, and who wrote very well of remedies drawn from Amulets, and Charms.
Jachen, adds he, was very dextrous at curing diseases, and could stop the
course of the Plagne, and temper the sultry heat of the Dogstar; for this a
magnificent Tomb was raised to him, whither the Priests repaired in all
Epidemical Distempers, and after the usual Sacrifices, took Fire from his
Altar, with which they kindled Piles prepared in several parts of the City, and
thereby purged the Air of the Infection, and stopped the progress of the
distemper. When this King, and Physician lived is uncertain, but they were
apparently very ancient.

In imitation of the Kings of Egypt, their Neighbors the Kings of Judea
apply^d themselves sometimes to the study of Philosophy and Medcine; witness
their great King Solomon, of whom the Scripture says; that he wrote five
thousand Canticles, and pronounced three thousand Proverbs; that he knew from
the Cedar of Libanus to the Hyssop that grows upon the Wall, and that he wrote
of Ins^cts, of Fishes, of Birds, and all other animals.

Lib. 8. c. 2.
Josephus enlarging upon this, says, that God endued this Prince with such
understanding and wisdom, that no other through all antiquity was comparable to
him, that he surpassed abundantly the greatest, and most celebrated Egyptians.
He composed, adds he, five thousand Books of Songs and Verses, and three
thousand of Parables; he wrote of natural history from the Hyssop to the Cedar,
and continued it through all animals, as well Birds, as Fishes, and those that
live upon the Earth. For God had given him a perfect knowledge of their
Natures, which he exercised in making Med^cines for the benefit of Men, among
which were some, that had the virtue of casting out Devils, so effectually that
they dared not to return.

This way of casting 'em out, is yet much in use with our Nation, and I have
seen one Eleazar, a Jew, in presence of the Emperor Vespasian, his Sons,
Captains, and Soldiers, dispossess diverse. He hung at the nose of the Man
possessed a Ring in which was set a Root, which Solomon us^d to that purpose,
which as soon as the Devil smelt, he threw the Daemoniack to the ground, and
quitted him. He repeated afterward certain words, which Solomon left written,
and in his name forbad him to return. But to show the effect of his charm more
evidently, he silled a Pitcher of Water, and commanded the Devil to throw it
down, to demonstrate by that Sign, that he had quit^ed the possessed, which the
Devil obeyed. I tho^ght my self oblig^d, says the Author, to make this
relation, that no one might doubt the extraordinary knowledge, which God of his
special Grace gave to Solomon.

Vide lib. zeron. Hamor*
The Rabbis say, that Ezechias suppress^d those Books of Solomon, because
abundance put more trust in the power of the Herbs, than of God. Trithemius
mentions besides this three (...) Books of Ma^i^k Liber Lamene. 2. Penta^ulor^.
libe^ 3. De O^^i^us Spirit^um Albertus m^^n^s five m^re. 1 Liber Alme^^l. 2.
Liber nov^m ^^uni ruin. 3. De nov^m Candariis. 4. De tribus figuri^ Spirituum.
5. De Sigissis ad Dae noni^c^^, and se^^^al others, which (...) all d^^^^edly
(...).


The Book called Clavicula Solomonis, which is said to be an imaginary Book,
yet is much sought after by those, that are inquisitive after Magic, supposes
him to have written upon that subject. Sufficient Apology, has been made for
him; but this passage of Josephus, shows that the Jews were strongly possessed
with the opinion, that Solomon used Superstitions remedies in the cure of
diseases, as the reciting certain words, and applying a Ring, which was a sort
of Amulet, as we have before taken notice. It may perhaps be urg^d, that it is
not impossible, that God should have communicated this knowledge to Solomon;
but we find no examples of of any such cures in Holy Writ, and the words which
the Prophets and Apostles pronounced on the like occasions, were only to
signify their Commission, and Power received from God to cure all diseases, as
In the name of God, or of Jesus Christ be thou healed. If they employed any
matter, or made any application, it was of things common, and well known
without any manner of ceremony, that might savor of superstition, like the
application of the Ring, and Root, before spoken of. If Solomon did really
stuff his Books with such remedies, he had 'em not from Revelation, as Josephus
would insinuate, but from the correspondence he held with the learned Men of
Egypt. This Prince lived about a hundred and seventy years after the Siege of
Troy.

I had forgot another argument of Solomon's knowledge of Physic, or at least
of the constitution of a human Body, which is drawn from the following words of
the 12th Chapter of Ecclesiastes.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not, nor thy years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
While the Sun or the Light or the Stars be not darkened, nor the Clouds return
after the Rain. In the day when the keepers of the House shall tremble, and the
strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few,
and those that look out of the Windows be dark'ned; and the doors shall be shut
in the Streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at
the voice of the Bird, and all the Daughters of Music shall be brought low.
Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the
way, and the Almond Tree shall flourish, and the Grasshopper shall be a burden,
and desire shall fail, because man goes to his long home, and the mourners go
about the Streets; or ever the Silver cord be loosed, or the Golden Bowl be
broken, or the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain, or the Wheel broken at the
Cistern. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the Spirit
shall return unto God, who gave it.

It Is easy to find that this is a description of old age, managed after the
oriental manner, and of the several inconveniences that attend it, till they at
last are terminated by Death, or the dissolution of the humane Body. The Sun,
the Light, the Moon, and the Stars, denote the Wit, the Judgment, the Memory,
and the other faculties of the Soul which daily decay in old men. The Clouds
and the Rain are Catharr^s and Defluxions, familiar to this Age. The Keeper^s
of the House, and the Strong men are the Senses, the Muscles, and the Tendons.
The Grinders signify the Teeth. Those that look out of the Windows are the
Eyes. The Doors shut in the Streets and the sound of grinding become low,
signify the mouth which opens with pain to speak, and the necessity of eating
slowly and without noise. The voice of the Bird denotes the morning, which is
the time when old men get up, because they cannot sleep. The Daughters of
Music that are brought low, signify that men leave off Singing at that age,
and have no ^relish of Arts or Sciences. The fear and trembling of ancient
persons, and their difficulty of going, is represented by what follows
immediately after. The flourishing Almond tree is white hair. The Grasshopper
being a burden is the body, which from a light and slender one, as it was
before, is become gross and heavy. To conclude, the long home is the grave, and
those that go about the streets are the mourning men or women that made a trade
of waiting upon burials.

The rest of the Emblem or Enigm is more difficult to explain. To succeed in
such an attempt, a man ought to have the very same Idea of the parts of the
body, as Solomon had. This is certain, that the sacred Author designed under
these hidden terms to show the dissolution of our principal organs, and this is
all we can pretend to know. As for what has been written of the Silver cord,
which some interpret to be the Arteries, or the Spinal Marrow; of the golden
Bowl, which some take to be the the membranes of the Brain, the Liver, or the
Heart; of the Pitcher, which signifies the Skull, and the Wheel that denotes
the Lungs; all this, I say, is but a bare conjecture that has no solid
foundation.

Perhaps there may be something in the writings of the Rabbis, that may help
to interpret this passage. But if there is, I know nothing of it, and leave is
to others to find it out that understand them. To these curious Gentlemen I
likewise leave every thing else relating to Physic which it to be found in the
Books of the Jewish writers. The informations we receive from this quarter are
but very inconsiderable, if all the rest be of a piece, with the ridiculous
Fable of the bone, called Luz, which according to them is found in the
Backbone, which is the Root, and as it were the Basis of the whole frame of
the human Body; so that the Heart, the Liver, the Brains, and the Genitals
derive their original from this miraculous bone, which has this virtue or
privilege besides that it cannot be burnt, nor grownd, nor broke to pieces,
but continues still the same, being as it were the bud of the Resurrection from
which the whole Body of the animal shall shoot again, as Plants from their
Seeds.

Rilanus, from whom I have borrowed this passage, adds, that the Rabbis
reckoned two hundred forty eight bones, and three hundred sixty five veins or
ligaments in a man's body. Those that understand Anatomy will langh at this,
but as little skill as these Doctors show in this Science, it is probable that
they were not much better verst in it, in the time of Solomon, or those
Egyptian Kings, whom we mention in the beginning of this Chapter. Their
Superstition was no less then, than when the Rabbis flourish^d, who plam'd an
infinite number of Fables upon the world, as the account we have given of the
Physic of these ancient times suf^^ciently testi^ies,

THE HISTORY OF Physic.
PART I.
BOOK II.
By Mr. BROWN.
CHAP I. Of what happened to this Art from the time of the Trojan War, to that
of Peloponnesus.
WE have hitherto set down almost every thing, that the earliest times of
antiquity furnish us with, relating to Physic. If the Reader is surpiz'd to
see the account so uncertain and mixed with Fables, to the time of the Trojan
War, he will have more reason to be so, when he is informed that even after
this period, if we may believe Pliny, Sequentia ejus, (Medicina a Trojanis
temporibus) mirum dictu, in nocte dentissima latuere, usque and Peloponucsiacum
bellum. Tunc eam in lucem revocavit Hippocrates. lib. 19. Cap. 1.
Physic lay buried in a most profound darkness, till the Peloponnesian War
broke out, when Hippocrates as it were revived it, and brought it to light.

It Is at least the space of seven hundred years, from the first of these Wars
down to the second. Celsus does not descend altogether so low as Pliny; but we
want only about fourscore years, which distance of time there is between
Pythagoras and Hippocrates, the first having lived in the lxth Olympiad, and
the second in the lxxxth. Behold now after what manner he speaks of the latter.

Cells. Praefat.
After those whom I have mentioned (that is to say, the Sons of Aesculapius)
there was no person of reputation that practiced Physic, till such time as men
began to apply themselves more earnestly to the study of learning, which being
as prejudicial to the body, as it is serviceable to the mind, it so fell out,
that those who pursued it with the greatest application, having destroyed their
health with the perpetual Meditations, and Watchings, had more occasion for
Physic than other Men. For this reason the science of healing Maladies was at
first considered as a branch of Philosophy, so that we may justly affirm that
Physic and Philosophy were born together. This is the true cause why we find
several of the ancient Philosophers very well skilled in Physic, among whom we
may reckon Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Democritus, as the most considerable.

What this Author says here, viz. that Physic and Philosophy began together,
is only pursuant to what he had advanced before, and we have already observed,
that all the Physic of the Sons of Esculapius and of their contemporaries,
wholly consisted in healing of wounds.

If we must assign a reason for this great Vacuum which these Authors remark to
have happened here in the History of Physic, we may say that the knowledge of
those that practic^d it during this interval, being shut up within the narrow
bounds of Empiricism, men were content with knowing a few Remedies, which
experience had shown to be proper for certain Diseases, without reasoning
either upon the cause of the illness, or the operation of the remedies, so that
these remedies being handed down from Father to Son, and never going out of the
Family, there was no necessity to write upon this subject.

This being supposed, we are not to wonder that since these Physicians did not
make themselves known by their writings, which is one of the surest ways of
preserving our memories, their names are buried in oblivion. Another reason, no
less forcible than the former, is this, that those who succeeded Aesculapius
and his Son, how great soever their skill and experience might be, lived in a
fabulous age, and having no opportunity to assist at so celebrated a Siege as
that of Troy, they wanted a Homer to immortalize their names.

Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona
Multi, etc.
One might however have expected that the Historians would have done what we
could not hope from the Poets, but the History of these times is generally so
confused and defective, that the Physicians are not the only persons that have
reason to complain of it. We don't certainly know when Homer lived, but much
less the place where he was born.

Therefore tho we should allow with Celsus, that during this space of time,
there was no Physicians of any note, whose memory is preserved down to us, we
ought not to impute it to them, but to the Age wherein they lived, and it does
not follow that Med^cine was not cultivated before his time, whom he supposes
to be the restorer of it.

Isidore of Sevil more clearly discusses this question. Apollo passes among the
Greeks, says he, for the author and inventor of Physic. His Son Aesculapius
improved this Art, or at least had the reputation of doing it, but being killed
by a Thunderbolt, it is said that ever since that Physic was forbidden, and
that the art perished at the same moment with its Author; having been concealed
or buried for almost 500 years, till the Reign of Artaxerxes King of Persia,
when Hippocrates the Son of Asclepius of the Isle of Co, discovered it again to
the world.

If we were to believe the account this Author gives us, the reason of the
interruption of Physic is evident enough. After Esculapius's death, no mention
was made of this Art till the time of Hippocrates; but in all appearance he was
but ill informed of what happened during that period he sets down, as he was of
the true name of the Father of Hippocrates, whom he calls Asclepius by a gross
mistake, imagining, I suppose, that he was called Asclepiades, by the same
Analogy that Homer calls Achilles Peleiades, because Hippocrates was the Son of
Asclepius, just as Achilles was of Peleus: Whereas in truth, the name of
Asclepiades belonged in common to all the posterity of Esculapius, whom the
Greeks call Asclepius. What Isidore adds immediately after, about the three
Sects of Physic, is argument enough that he had taken no great pains to inform
himself sufficiently in this matter.

CHAP. II. Of the Asclepiadae, and the Schools which they erected.
THe descendants of Aesculapius, who are called Asclepiadae, have been believed
to preserve this Art in their family without interruption. We should be able to
say something more particularly to this point, if the writings of Eratosthenes,
Pherecides, Apollodorus, Arius of Tarsus, and Polyanthus of Cyrene were now
extant, who took care to compose the history of these Successors of Esculapius.
But although the Works of these Authors are lost, yet the names of some of the
Asclepiadae are still preserv^d, as appears by the list of the predecessors of
Hippocrates, who called himself the seventeenth in order of descent from
Esculapius.

Epist. Paeti ad Artaxerxem.
The Genealogy of this Physician is still remaining in the following manner.
Hippocrates, of whom we shall speak hereafter, was the Son of Heraclides, who
was the Son of another Hippocrates, the Son of Gnosidicus; the Son of Nebrus;
the Son of Sostratus the third; the Son of Theodore the second; the Son of
Crisamis the second; the Son of Lostratus the second; the Son of Theodore the
first; the Son of Crisamis the first Son of Cleomitides; the Son of Dardanus;
the Son of Sostratus the first; the Son of Hippolochus; the Son of Podalirius;
the Son of Esculapius. Stephanus Byzantinus bestows two Sons more upon
Gnosidicus, besides him already mentioned; the first of these two was called
Aenius, and the second Podalirius.

It may be said, perhaps, that this Genealogy is fabulous; but supposing some
mistake or interpolation in this succession of the Asclepiadae, it is at least
certain that there were several branches of the Family of Esculapius, besides
that from which Hippocrates was descended, which latter was distinguished by
the surname of Asclepiadae Nebrides, which was given it for the sake of one
Nebrus, who was very famous for his great skill in Physic, and to whom the
Priestess of Apollo gave a very advantageous character, according to the
Author's observation, whom we cited last. We shall take occasion to say
something hereafte^ of Gnosidicus, Heraclides, and the other Hippocrates, in
the following Book. As for those that came before them, we ingenuously own that
we know nothing of them.

CHAP. III. Of the several branches of the Asclepiadae, and the three different
Schools which they erected.
AS we have already observed, there were other branches of the Asclepiadae,
that were dispersed in several places. Galen. merhod. med. lib. 1.
We find mention of three celebrated Schools erected by them; the first was
that of Rhodes, which happened to fail first by the failing of this branch of
the Successors of Esculapius, which seems to have fallen out a long while
before Hippocrates, since he does not speak of it, as he does of that of
Cnidus, which was the third, and that of Co the second. These two last
flourished at the same time as as the School of Italy, wherein were those
Philosopher-Physicians of whom Celsus speaks, although the Grecian Schools were
more ancient. These three Schools, that were the only ones that made any
figure, by a Spirit of Emulation perpetually contended among themselves, who
should make the greatest progress in Physic. However, Galen assigns the first
place to that of Co, since it produced the greatest number of excellent
disciples; that of Cnidus held the second rank, and that of Italy the third.

Herodotus also makes mention of a School of Physicians that was in Cyrene,
where, as we have taken notice already, there was a Temple of Esculapius, whose
worship was different from that of the Grecians. From whence it may be
conjectured, that there were likewise Asclepiadae of another sort.

The same lib. 3.
Historian mentions likewise another School of Physic, that was at Crotona,
the Country of Democedes a famous Physician, contemporary with Pythagoras,
which Physician, as Herodotus informs us, being ejected out of his City, by the
severity of his Father Calliphon, came first to Aegina, and afterward to
Athens, where he lived in great repute. From thence he went to Samos, where he
had an opportunity to heal Polycrates, the King of that Island of a troublesome
distemper, which was worth him two talents of Gold. Some time after this, being
taken prisoner by the Persians, he conceal^d his profession, but upon a
discovery was obliged to undertake the cure of Darius who had dislocated his
Foot, and of his Q^^tossa, who had a Cancer i^ her Breast This Historian adds,
that Democedes succeeding in these two cures, obtained so great a reputa-with
the King, that he made him dine at his own Table; however he could not be
induced to take up his abode there, for finding an opportunity to return to
Greece, under the disguise of a Spy, he performed it accordingly, despising all
the Honors that were shown him in Persia, and putting a trick upon those that
had given him this Commission. After this he mar^ied, and took to Wife a
Daughter of the famous Milo his Countryman.

CHAP. IV. Of the School of Cnidus in particular.
WE know no other particulars of the Physic of Democedes, nor of that of
Crotona. Neither have we better Memoirs of the School of Rhodes. As for that of
Cnidus, we may judge of the method of was followed there by some fragments
still extant in Hippocrates. De ratione virtuus in acutis lib. 1.
Those, says this Author, who compiled the Cnidian Sentences or Observations,
have exactly observed all the Symptoms of every distemper, and how some of them
took them: in a word, all that any person, who knows nothing of Physic, wou^d
write after he had informed himself by the Sick of all that they had suffered.
But, continues he, they have forgot the greatest part of those things which a
Physician ought to know without hearing the relation of the sick party.

The same Author has likewise observed, that the Cnidians used very few
Medicaments, and that Elaterium, (which is a Purgative made of the juice of a
wild Cucumber) Milk and Whey, were in a manner all the Medicines they used.

We may infer from what Hippocrates h^s said in this place, first that these
Physicians contented themselves to make an exact ennumeration or description of
the accidents that attend a distemper, without reasoning upon the causes, and
tying themselves to the prognostics. In the second place we may gather that
they used but a very small number of remedies, which themselves, and their
predecessors had tried. These two remarks are enough to let us see, that the
Cnidians were purely Empirics, or at least that their chief perfection was not
that of exact reasoning.

They departed the farthest from this method, when they ventured to compare
diseases, or remedies together, which by them was called Analogism. The
Cnidians, says Galen, used to cure those that had an abscess in their lungs,
after this manner. Having observed that a Cough threw up all that lay upon the
lungs, they drew out the tongues of those that were troubled with the above
mentioned distemper, and endeavored to pour some drops of water down the
aspera arteria, on purpose to raise a violent Cough by these means, which would
make them discharge all the purulent matter in their Chest.

CHAP. V. Of the Physicians of Cos. Reflections upon their Physic, and that of
the Cnidians.
AS for what relates to the Physicians of Cos, we may likewise assert, that if
the Coan prenotions, that are to be found among the works of Hippocrates, are
nothing but a collection of the Practitioners of Cos, as several persons have
believed, that they were none of the nicest reasoners, nay, we may say, that
they did not take the least care to give an account of their Prognostics.

From what has been said it will appear, that it is not altogether true that
Pliny and Celsus have advanced, viz. that we meet with nothing of the history
of Physic in so long an interval, but much less that Physic and Philosophy
began together, as the latter asserts, unless he is to be understood about
Rational Physic, that is to say, about that which is peculiarly employed in
finding out the hidden causes of diseases, and assigning reasons for the
operation of remedies; for it is certain, that this latter could not begin but
with the study of Learning and the Sciences. It will be objected to me without
question, that I have here forgotten to speak of a thing, for which the
Asclepiadae deserved most reputation, and which overthrows all that I have said
about their manner of practice, which I maintained to be almost wholly
empirical, viz. of their passing in the World for great Anatomists. It Is
certain that Galen is of this opinion. At that time, says he, that Physic, was
wholly confined within the family of the Asclepiadae, the Fathers taught their
Children Anatomy, and accustomed them from their infancy to dissect Animals, so
that this being handed down from Father to Son, it was needless to set down in
writing, how every thing was done, since it was full as impossible for them to
forget this, as the Alphabet which they learnt at the same time.

Several other passages we meet in this Author, by which we may see, that he
really believed that the Asclepiadae were perfectly well skilled in Anatomy.
But we may confront the authority of this Physician with that of the ancient
Commentator upon Plato, who expressly says that the Philosopher Alcmaeon, of
whom we shall have occasion to talk in the following Chapter was the first that
dissected any Animal; which destroys all that Galen has advanced about the
Asclepiadae, at least those of them that preceeded Alcmaeon, with whom alone we
are concerned, here for as for those that followed him, they were either
contemporaries with Hippocrates, or else came after him.

Tho we were destitute of the testimony of this Author, yet by the little
progress, that was made in Anatony even in the time of Hippocrates himself, it
seems at least probable, that men had examined the bodies of Animals but very
superficially, which is remote enough from what Galen asserts, that Anatomy was
in its perfection in the time of the Asclepiadae. And as for what he adds about
a certain interval, which he pretends to have been between the most ancient
Asclepiadae and Hippocrates, during which he would needs persuade us that
Anatomy was neglected, the Reader will find in the Chapter of Erasistratus,
what judgment he is to pass upon that matter.

I would not be supposed to affirm, that the Asclepiadae had no manner of
knowledge of the parts of bodies. It would be a great absurdity to maintain it,
for without this knowledge they could neither practice Physic in general, nor
Surgery in particular. Without doubt they knew very well, as for instance,
the Bones, their Situation, Figure, Articulation, and all that depends upon
them; for otherwise they could not have set them when they were broken or
dislocated. Neither could they be ignorant of the Situation of the most
considerable Vessels. It is likewise necessary, that they should understand
where the Veins and Arteries lie, because they opened and burnt them
continually; for we have already observed in the Chapter of Podalirius, that
these operations were very common even in the first age of Physic. Besides, it
was highly requisite, that they should very well know the places where the
profoundest Vessels meet, to avoid the loss of blood, when they made any
incisions, or when they cut off any of the members. In short, they were obliged
to know several places, where there were Tendons and Ligaments, and some
considerable Nerves; although they confounded these three different parts, and
knew very little of the last, as we shall show hereafter. Besides this, they
knew something in general of the chief Intestins, as the Stomach, the Guts, the
Liver, the Spleen, the Kidneys, the Bladder, the Matrix, the Diaphragm, the
Heart, the Lungs, the Brain; as well as the most sensible humors, such as the
Blood, Cholar, Melancholy, Phlegm, the Serosities, or Waters, and all the
different sort of excrements that proceed from several parts of our body.

It appears at first Sight, that the Asclepiadae, could not know all this
without being Anatomists, or at least without having dissected Animals; but
it is easy to demonstrate, that they might attain to the knowledge of these
things without it. The first and most familiar instruction they had came from
their Butchers, and their Sacrifices, and as for what relates to to a human
body in particular, they were glad of any opportunity to instruct themselves,
when they found any bones in the Fields, that were stripped of the Flesh either
by Beasts, or the length of time, that these bodies had been exposed to the
air, or when they found in some by places the carcass of some unfortunate
Traveller, that had been murdered by Robbers, or the bodies of Soldiers, that
died of the great wounds of they receiv^d in Battle. They considered them
without giving themselves the trouble to make any other Preparation, besides
what they found ready made to their hands, and took no notice of that scruple,
which forbad them to touch any dead body which they found by accident. This was
so great a scruple among the Ancients, that it appears from a passage in
Aristotle, which we shall cite hereafter, that in his time there was no
dissection of human bodies. Now this Philosopher lived above fourscore years
after Hippocrates. It Is true indeed, that the Egyptians, as we have already
taken notice, having been accustomed of old to embalm dead bodies, were
furnish^d by this means with an opportunity to know the true disposition of
some parts of the body, which they must needs lay open, when they separated
them from others to preserve the rest; and it might so happen, that the
Asclepiadae reapt some advantage by these discoveries of the Egyptians, but as
the chief intention of the latter was the preserving of Bodies, so they scarce
proceeded much farther, than it was necessary for them to go on with their
design.

I have thus recounted the several means by which these ancient Physicians
discovered the structure of bodies after the Death of the animal; but the best
School they had, and indeed that which instructed them better than any of the
rest, was the Practice of their Profession, which daily gave them an
opportunity, to see in living bodies what they were not able to discover in the
dead, when they dress^d Wounds, Ulcers, Tumors, Fractures, Dislocations, and
performed other Chyrurgical operations. And as Physic was preserved in the
Family of the Asclepiadae for several Ages, where it pass^d from Father to Son,
so the traditions and observations of their Fathers and Ancestors supplied the
want of experience in each particular man. This last opportunity joined with
the former, has made several Physicians, who liv^d a long while after them, and
of whom we shall make mention hereafter, to call it an easy and natural, tho a
long way, to gain the knowledge of the humane Body: maintaining, that this way
alone was sufficient for practice. We shall find in the Fifth Book, what were
the reasons that induced them to this, as likewise what other Physicians had to
say upon this occasion.

CHAP. VI. Of those Physicians that were Philosophers, and first of Pythagoras,
and Xamolxis his Slave.
HItherto, as we have observed, it does not appear that Reason had been very
much consulted in Physic, the whole knowledge of which Art seems to have
totally consisted in discerning and knowing Diseases rather by their signs than
by their causes, and using a few simple Medicaments, that were almost all taken
from Herbs, or the practice of some magical or superstitious Remedies. The
Philosophers were the first that interloping in this Art, at the same time
introduced the fashion of reasoning into it These Gentlemen added to it that
part which is called Physiology, and considers a humane body, which is the
subject of Physic, such as it is in its natural state, and endeavors to
assign reasons for its functions and operations, in examining the parts
thereof, and all that belongs to it, by Anatomy, and the principles of Physic.
Not that it appears by any of their writings, or by the Titles of their Books
that they had ever been what we call Practitioners. Empedocles, of whom we
shall talk hereafter, is the only man among them who is reported to have
performed a cure. All the rest appear to have devoted themselves rather to the
Theory than Practice of Physic.

Pythagoras, who lived about the lx Olympiad, and founded the Italick School,
is the most ancient we know of those that began to take this Art into their
consideration. This Pihlosopher neglected no means nor opportunity to render
his knowledge universal. With this design he traveled into Egypt, which was
the Country of Arts and Sciences, and learnt all their curiosities. It Is very
probable he borrowed all the knowledge he had in Physic from thence, of which
we have nothing remaining but a few small fragments, which however sufficiently
discover a Spirit of superstition so remarkable in the preceding Physicians,
as we have already observed, that which relates to Physiology being very
inconsiderable. Diogen. Laert. Hist. Philos. Galen.
He believed that at the time of Conception, a certain substance descended from
the Brain, which contained a warm vapor, from whence the Soul and all the
Senses derived their original, while the Flesh, the Nerves, or Tendons, the
Bones, the Hair, and all the Body in general, was made of the Blood, and other
Humors that meet in the Matrix. He added, that the Body of the Infant was
formed, and became solid in forty days; but that eleven, or nine, or more
generally, ten months according to the rules of harmony, were requisite to make
him entirely complete; that all that happened to him during the whole course of
his life, was then regulated, and that he carried it along with him in a Series
or Chain, proportioned to the Laws of the same harmony abovementioned, every
thing falling out afterward necessarily in its own time. At the end of this
Chapter we shall examine what he meant by this. He likewise asserted, that the
Veins, the Arteries, the Nerves, are the cords of the Soul. According to him
the Soul spreads itself from the Heart to the Brain, and that part of it which
is in the Heart, is the same from whence the passions proceed, whereas Reason
and the Understanding reside in the Brain. This opinion, which belongs in
common to him and the sacred Writers, perhaps came first from the Caldeans,
with whom he had conversed.

As for the causes of Distempers, he had learnt without question all that was
believed concerning them in the same School, and in that of the Magicians, whom
he had likewise consulted. The Air, said he, is all filled with Souls, or
Demons and Heroes, that send dreams, and signs, and diseases to men, and even
to beasts, and it is for these Demons or Spirits for whom Se^ the Chapt. of
Melam^as and Polyidus.
lustrations and expiations are performed; and in short, all that the
Southsayers and men of the like profession do upon these occasions.

From the same place he has borrowed all that he has written concerning the
Magical virtues of Plants, of which he composed a Book, which some ascribe to a
Physician, whose name was Cleemporus. As for what regards their natural
qualities, Pliny only informs us that Pythagoras had a particular esteem for
Cabbage. We shall see hereafter that he was not the only man among the Ancients
that set a value upon this Herb, and looked upon it as a good remedy in case of
several distempers.

There are still remaining some precepts which he gave, relating to a man's
managing of himself to preserve his health. He said, that a man ought to
accustom himself to the most simple diet, and that which may be had in all
places. ^or this reason he would eat no flesh, and lived only upon Herbs and
Water. He likewise prohibited the eating of Beans, either because they make the
blood gross, or for some other mysterious reasons mention^d by the Ancients.
Living after this manner, it was an easy matter for him to follow the advice
which he gave, viz. not to have any thing to do with women, but when we have a
mind to become weak. Lastly, it was a saying of his, that a man ought never to
be immoderate in any thing that relates either to business or nourishment.

He makes health to consist in a sort of harmony, but does not descend into the
particulars of it. He said the same thing of virtue, of all that is Good in
whatsoever respect, and of God himself, so by this harmony he meant the
relation or just proportion, which all parts ought to have together, or the
natural order of all things. But what has been said already of this same
harmony which Pythagoras observed in order of things that happen to every
individual man in his life time, makes it credible that there was some greater
mystery conceal^d within.

This mystery, perhaps, might be much of the same nature with that which this
Philosopher found out in numbers, each of which, according to him, have
somewhat remarkable in them, some of them being a great deal more perfect than
others. The odd numbers, for instance, were more considerable, and had more
force in them than the even numbers; the first representing the Male, and the
second the Female. But the number of seven was the most perfect of all.

The Reader may find in ^ib. Cap. 6.
Macrobius, and (...)
Aulus Gellius, wherein this perfection consists. To this opinion chiefly is
owing the Doctrine of Climacteric years, the discovery whereof is attributed to
the Caldeans, from whom Pythagoras perhaps borrow^d them. Each seventh year of
a man's life is called by this name, and it is the receiv^d opinion that at this
time a man runs the greatest risque in relation to his life, or health, or what
they call the goods of fortune, by reason of the alterations and changes that
happen at these years.

Lib. 3 C. 4.
Upon the same opinion, according to Celsus, is founded the belief of some
Physicians about the force of the seventh number in diseases, and the
difference they made between odd and even days, as we shall see hereafter.

Those that have said that Pythagoras left nothing behind him in writing, and
that all we know of his opinions is only taken out of the Books of his
disciples, may perhaps deny that this Philosopher maintained such assertions.
De dieb decretor. lib 3. cap. 8. etc.
Galen, who is of opinion for other reasons than those that are drawn from the
force of numbers considered in themselves, that a due regard ought to be had of
the numerus Septenarius, and even, and odd days, seems to question whether
Pythagoras held that opinion. It Is so easy, says he, to discover the absurdity
and vanity of what is pretended concerning the virtue of numbers, that it is
strange how Pythagoras, so discreet and wise a man, could attribute so much
power to numbers. This Philosopher had time to examine them, and to admire the
result of their combinations, since History reports him to have been well
versed in Arithmetic and Geometry, but these Sciences ought rather to have
given him an aversion for such wretched trifles.

Zamolxis, whom the Getae adored as a God, is generally said to have been a
Slave of Pythagoras, although others suppose him to have been much more ancient.
He passes for one that had great skill in Physic, but all the particulars we
know of him, are that he used to say, that a man could not heal the eyes
without healing the head, nor the head without the rest of the body, nor the
body without the soul, and he pretended the that Greek Philosophers being
ignorant of this Maxim, for that very reason failed in the cure of most
diseases. The remedy that he used to heal or cure the Soul, was that of
Enchantments, not such as Esculapius used, if we may take Plato's word for it.
The Enchantments which Xamolxis meant, says this Philosopher, were nothing else
but virtuous discourses and conversations, which, as he adds, produce wisdom in
the Soul, and that being once acquired, it is an easy matter to procure health
to the head and to the rest of the body. But by what some Herodotus and Strabo.
others have written concerning the means which Xamolxi^ used to make himself
pass for a God, we may find, that he was capable of using Enchantments, even in
the proper and common sense.

CHAP VII. Empedocles, Alcmaeon, Epicharmus, and Eudoxus, the Disciples or
Followers of Pythagoras.
Empedocles was one of the most celebrated disciples of Pythagoras. It Is
believed that like his Master, he joined Magic to Physic: or that his Physic
was Magical. But in some places he lets us see that sometimes at least he
applies himself to natural agents, where he tells us, that the Pestilence and
Famine that ravaged Sicily his native Country so often, are occasioned by a
South wind, which finding a passage through certain holes in the mountains,
made great destruction in the plains: So he advised them to stop up these
holes, after which the Country was free from these two cruel persecutors. He
gave another testimony of his great knowledge, in remedying the stench of a
river that infected the air in a certain Province, which he brought about by
digging Canals, by which he brought two other rivers into the bed of the first.

If this Philosopher got so much reputation by these Contrivances, he was no
less famou^ for the extraordinary cures he performed. Diogenes Laertius tells
us, that he was particularly admired for healing a woman, who was looked upon
to be dead, finding it was occasion^d by a suffocation of the Vterus. He named
this malady from a Greek word, which signifies without respiration. He
pretended that one might live in such a condition the space of thirty days. He
gave out that he had infallible remedies for all sorts of diseases, and for old
age, nay that he was able to raise the dead.

He had a very singular opinion about the manner of the formation of Animals.
Galen. de Semin. lib 2. Cap. 3.
He believ^d that some parts of their bodies were contained in the seed of the
male, and others in that of the female, and that the Venereal appetite in both
Sexes proceeds from this desire that the disunited and separated parts have to
be rejoyn^d.

As for Id de Hist. Philosoph.
Respiration, he supposed it to be performed after this manner. As soon as the
humidity, which at the beginning of the formation of the Foetus was very
plentiful, begins to lessen, the air succeeds it, insinuates it self through
the pores, after which the natural heat endeavoring to get loose, it casts the
air without, and when the heat reenters, the air follows it again. The first,
continues he, is called inspiration, and the second expiration. The Foetus or
Infant in the mothers womb, according to him, has the use of respiration.

Hearing is perform^d by the means of the air, that strikes the interior part
of the ear, which winding in the form of a Cockle-shell, and being joynd to the
highest part of the body like a little Bell, discerns all the impulsions of the
air that enter into it.

The Fl^s^^ is compo^^d of an equal proportion of each of the four Elements;
the Nerves of fire, earth, and two parts of water; the Nails are made of Nerves
condensed by the contact of the air. The Bones seem to be compos^d of equal
parts of water and earth, but for all this they were made of the four Elements,
among which the water and earth were predominant. Sweat and Tears proceed from
the thinner particles of blood

The Seeds of Plants are as it were their Eggs, which fall from them when they
are ripe.

Empedocles writ concerning Phy^i^^^m Verse, and compos^d six thousand, (...)
upon th^^ argument. He had so great an esteem for this art, that he pretended
that Physicians (to whom he joined Southsayers and Poets) had much the
pre-eminence before other men, and came near the immortal Gods. He had a
disciple called Pausanias, who was likewise a Physician.

Empedocles was born at Agrigentum, a City of Sicily, and according to Diogenes
Laertius, flourished about the 84th Olympiad. Suidas pretends that he followed
the profession of a Sophist at Athens. His death was extraordinary. Some say,
that being desirous to examine the fire of Aetna with too much curiosity, he
came so near that he was consumed by them. Others have affirmed that this was
an effect of his vanity, and that he was ambitious of dying thus, that
disappearing all of a sudden, he might be taken for a God.

Alemaeon, another disciple of Pythagoras, was of Crotona; he particularly
applied himself to the study of Physic. His name deserves to be preserved to
all posterity, if what a Chalcid^^ in Platou^s ^imaum.
Commentator upon Plato tells of him be true, viz. that he was the first that
anatomized Animals, to instruct himself in the several parts of their bodies.

The Reader will be surpised that it was so long before Anatomy was introduc^d
into Physic, and will hardly conceive how they came to bestow the name of
Physicians, or even of Chyrurgeons, upon men that under stood nothing of it.
But this wonder will vanish, when he considers that I have already said upon
this subject in the Chapt of the Asclepiadae.

As Alcmaeon's Writings have had the ill fate to be destroyed by time, we know
but little of his Anatomy, but what we find in Galen, which indeed more
properly belongs to Physiology. He supposed that the Hearing was performed by
the ear, being hollow within, as we find all hollow places refound when the
voice penetrates them. As for Smelling, he pretended that the Soul, whose chief
seat, according to him, was in the brain, received all odours by attracting
them in respiration. He imagined that the Tongue distinguished tastes by its
humidity, by its moderate heat, and its softness. The Seed, according to him,
was a particle of the brain. The Foetus was nourished in the womb by drawing
nourishment on all sides of its Body, which is like a Sponge.

Health, according to its Hypothesis, depends upon the equal mixture of heat,
dryness, cold, and moisture, nay, even of sweet and bitter, and other things.
On the other hand, diseases arise when one of these predominates over the rest,
and by that means destroys their union and society.

Epicharmus of the Isle of Cos, was likewise a hearer of Pythagoras. He writ of
natural Philosophy and Physic, and is frequently quoted by Pliny, when he
describes the virtues of any simple. Tiraquell. de Nobilitate cap. 31.
It Is reported, that his Writings are still to be seen in the Vatican Library.

Eudoxus received his instruction from Archytas, a famous Pythagorean. He lived
somewhat later than the abovementioned. See the Chapt. of Chrysippus.
We shall have occasion to speak of him hereafter.

CHAP. VIII. Of Heraclitus, Democritus, and some other Physicians that were
Philosophers.
THe Pythagorean Philosophers were not the only persons that concerned
themselves with Physic. Heraclitus the Ephesian (who lived in the 69th
Olympiad, that is to say, about the same time with Pythagoras, and had a
Philosophy peculiar to himself) applied himself likewise to the study of
Physic.

History informs us, that this Philosopher, pushed on by his morose austere
humor, which occasioned the report that he always wept, retiring into a
solitary place to avoid the conversation of mankind, and living only upon water
and herbs, fell into a Dropsy. This obblig'd him, to repair to inhabited places
to find better conveniences of being cur^d; not that he did it to have the
advice of the Physicians, for instead of following their direction, he was in
hopes to expose their ignorance to the world, by making them witnesses of the
cure which he expected to work upon himself.

He once demanded of them in obscure terms, as his manner, Diogenes Laeat.
if of rainy weather they could make dry, which not being understood by the
Physicians, he dismissed them, and shut himself up in a Stable, where he
covered all his body with dung, hoping by that means, to consume or drain the
superfluous moisture that was in his entrails, but he did not succeed in his
design, for he died of this disease soon after. Heraclitus^s aim in putting
this question to the Physicians, was to instruct them that they ought to
endeavor to cure distempers as God cures those of the great bodies that
compose the world, by balancing their inequalities, and setting contraries in
opposition one to another. For, said he, all things go in our bodies after the
same rate as they do in the world; Urine is formed in the bladder like rain in
the second region of the air, and as the rain proceeds from Vapors that arise
from the earth, and being condensed produce clouds, so urine is produc^d from
exhalations arising from the aliments that find their passage into the bladder.

Others relate, that Heraclitus put this question to the Physicians, whether it
were possible to press the bowels of any one so as to get out all the water
that was contained in them, which the Physicians affirming to be impossible, he
exposed, himself naked to the Sun, and afterward managed himself in the
Stable, as is related above; the consequence of which was, that he was devoured
by Dogs as he lay in the dung, being so weak, that he was not able to help
himself. In short, others have delivered this story otherwise, and affirm that
Heraclitus was cured of this swelling, and died long after this of another
distemper. The most remarkable opinion he held, I mean that relates to
Philosophy, was this, that Fire was the beginning of all things, that every
thing came from Fire, and that every thing is done by Fire. We shall have
occasion hereafter to make some reflections upon this opinion. He is reported
to be the author of this Sentence, Vide At^e^^um.
that there were no such blockheads and fools in the world as Grammarians,
except Physicians.

Democritus was born in the 77th Olympiad. He applied himself to Physic, as he
did to all other Sciences, and was so desirous to become learned, that he spent
all his patrimony in traveling to see the most celebrated and famous men
abroad. He had been in Egypt, Persia, Babylon, and the Indies, where he
conversed with Philosophers, Geometricians, Physicians, Priests, Magicians, and
Gymnosophists.

Diogenes Laertius has given us the Titles of several Books written by
Demceritus concerning Philosophy in general, and Geometry. He likewise composed
some about Physic in particular; the first is intitul'd Of the nature of man,
or of the Flesh, which in all probability is the same that we find under the
same title, among the works of Hippocrates. He writ another Treatise about
Plagues, which is cited by Aul' Gellius under this title Of the plague and
pestilential diseases. A third treated of Prognostics, a fourth of Diet, or the
method of regulating nourishment; a fifth of the Causes of distempers, and of
things that were proper or contrary to the body, by considering the time. In
some other Books he endeavored to find out the causes of Seeds, of Trees, of
Fruits, and of Animals. There is, in short, another which is entitled (...)
Se^ the Chapter of Theophratius, lib. 4.
about the Stone, that is to say, according to the Chemists about the
Philosophers Stone. Some Greek Books that treat of Chemistry are still
remaining, which carry his name, and are many-scripts in the Library of the
Louvre But learned men look upon them to be spurious, as we shall see more
largely hereafter.

Pliny likewise cites in abundance of places Democritus^s Books concerning
Plants, in which he seems to have principally consider^d their Magical or
Supernatural Virtues. Democritus, says this Author, who was more devoted to the
Magicians than any one since Pythagoras, relates more incredible and monstrous
Stories, than even he did. The Reader may consult the 17th Chapter of the 24th
Book of Pliny, to see more of this. Among other things we may find there a
remedy or composition to have sine Children. This composition is made of
Pine-apples bruis^d with honey, myrrh, saffron, and palm tree wine, adding to
this a drug, or simple, called by him Theombrotion, and milk. According to this
Author^s direction a man must drink of this immediately before he goes to his
Wife, and she likewise must drink of it as soon as she is derivered, and all
the while she suckles her Child.

Pliny speaks in the same place of an herb, which Democritus called by a Greek
name, that signifies (...).
bashful, and contracts its leaves when a man touches it. Throphrastus likewise
makes mention of this plant, which is the same with what we now call the
sensitive plant, which is very well well known. If there was no more
superstition or Magic in the other places of Democritus than there is in this,
Pliny wronged him when he accus^d him of it. But it is evident from what this
Author adds, that the Books of Democritus were full of these trifles, and
Tatian a Christian Rhetorician, and disciple of Justin Martyr, has likewise
observed, that Democritus writ nothing but fabulous stuff.

Lib. 11. cap. 3.
Columella cites two Books of Democritus, one of which was intitul'd of
Agriculture, and the other of things that have an Antipathy to one another. One
may judge of the contents of this latter Book by the following citation.
Democritus, says Columella, affirms that Caterpillars and other insects that
destroy the greens in gardens, d^e immediately if a woman that has her menses
walks two or three ^^^ns over the bods, with her f^^t ba^^, and ^air
disheveled. But it must be observed that the same Columella (...).
elsewhere tells us, that the Books, that in his time were attributed to
Democritus, were written by one Dolus or Bolus Mendesius, an Egyptian, and who
perhaps is the same with him whom Lib ^ c. 7.
Galen calls Horus Mendesius. (...).
Celius Aurelianus makes mention of two other Books, that went under
Democritus's name, but he looked upon them to be spurious. One treated of
Convulsive diseases, and the other of the Elephantiasis. In the former of these
Books we meet with a remedy against madness, which consisted in a decoction
(...) Origarum, that was to be drunk out of a round ^up fashion^d like a Bowl.
In the second he advises to bleed those that are infected with an
Elephantiasis, and give them of a certain herb, which he does not name.

We shall conceive a more advantageous Idea of Democritus, by what remains to
be told of him. The same thing in a manner happened to this Philosopher, which
befell Heraclitus. He retired like him to a solitary place, that he might be
more at liberty, but there was this remarkable difference between them, that
whereas the former wept continually at the follies of mankind, the other laughed
incessantly. See the Letters at the end of Hippocrates's works.
This strange behavior made his Countrymen of Abdera take him for a fool, so
they sent to Hippocrates, desiring him to come and cure him. This Physician
arriving there, found him employ^d in dissecting of Animals, and enquiring the
reason of it, he told him, 'twas to discover the effect of folly, which he
looked upon to be the cause of the bile. By this Hippocrates discovered that the
world was exceedingly mistaken in their opinion of him, and after a long
conversation, wherein among other things Democritus told him, that the madness
and folly of Mankind was the cause of his perpetual laughter; he took his leave
of them very well satisfy^d, and assured the people, that this Philosopher was
so far from being a fool, that on the other hand he was the wisest of men.

Diogen. ^aert.
It Is likewise reported, that in the presence of the same Hippocrates,
Democritus was able to distinguish the Milk they brought to him, telling them
it was of a black She-goat, which never had but one Kid, and that by only
looking upon a certain woman, he knew that she had been deflower'd the night
before.

After this interview, these two great men entertained a very high esteem for
each other, and kept a mutual correspondence. Var. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 20.
Aellan observes that Hippocrates writ all his Books in the Ionic Language for
the sake of Democritus, although that famous Physician was a Native of the Isle of
Co, where the Doric Dialect was in request. If this were true, a man might
gather that Democritus was born at Miletus, as Lacrtius tells us, and not at
Abdera, since the first of these Cities is in Ionia, but the other in Thrace.

However, Tune qu^que inat^^iam rijus inven^t ad ^mnes ^^curjus h^nunum, cujus
prudentia menstrat. Sammo^ posse viros, and magna exempla daturos.
V^^v^^^m ^n pa^zia, crass^que sub aere nasci.
^id^^^^ curas, ne^ n^n and g^adia vulg^,
Int^^^^n and lacrimas cum fortunae ipse min^^^.
Man^^et la^ueum, mediumque ostenderet unguem.
Sat. X.
Juvenal was of opinion that he belonged rather to Abdera than Milctus, and
from his Birth in so stupid and brutal a Country, makes this reflection, that
great men may be born under the grossest air.

If we may believe Petronius, Democritus drew juices from all manner of herbs,
and spent most of his Life in making experiments upon Stones and Plants, but
perhaps these experiments considered the several natural curiosities more, or
at least as much as the practice of Physic. What we find in Seneca, that
Democritus had found out the secret to soften Ivory, and to make Emeralds of
boiled Flint stones, and whoever considers that they had the trick in former
ages, to make a past for the counterfeiting precious Stones, is a su^^^cient
proof of what I have already asserted, or of the use that Democritus made of
his discoveries.

He likewise believed that we were so far from having any signs, by which we
could form a certain judgment that a man would shortly dye, that we wanted
indications sure enough for a Physician to rely upon that a man was dead.
Celsus who cites this passage, calls Democritus, Vir jure magni nominis, a
person that had deserv'dly a great reputation.

This Philosopher died when he was above a hundred years old. Di^g^^ La^^^
It Is reported of him that being weary of his Life he daily retrenched some
part of the food, but his Sister desiring him not to dye, till a festival which
drew nigh was over, that she might not lose the pleasure of being at 'em, he
commanded some hot bread to be brought to him, and lived several days with only
smelling to it. Athenaeus lib. 2. cap. 7.
Others say it was the smell of Honey which produced this effect. It has been
likewise affirmed that he made himself blind, that he might be less distracted
in his meditations. Tertullian pretends the reason of this was, because he
could not behold the Sex without emotion. But it is much more probable that he
became blind by accident, or by old Age. But after whatsoever manner it
happen^d, Quest. Puse. 5.
Cicero observes that this Philosopher easily comforted himself for the loss of
his sight, that if he was not able to distinguish black from white, yet he
could perfectly well discern good from bad, justice from injustice, etc.
judging himself to be happy, tho deprived of the pleasure which the variety of
colors affords.

CHAP. IX. An explicati^n of some of the Philosophical opinions of Democritus,
which seem not to have been rightly explained.
THis is not a proper place to treat of the opinions of Democritus, as they
have a respect to Philosophy. But I cannot forbear to explain a passage of
Diogenes Laertius, and another of H^sychius Milefius upon this subject, which
may give the Reader some difficulty. Democritus, according to the latter of
these authors, supposed that Atoms and a Vacuum were the principle of all
things, and that all the rest depended upon opinion or judgment.

To understand his meaning aright, 'twill be necessary to cite this passage, as
it is in the original. (...), the Latin Interpreter has thus translated; rerum
primordia atomos and inane esse censuit, caetera omnia ex opinione statui posse
dixit. We meet with the same words in Diogenes Laertius, with this difference,
that he adds to the end the word (...), which is not in the former; (...), and
they are thus Translated, Caetera omnia legitimum esse opinari, which either
signifies just nothing, or at best must be thus understood, as if the Author
when he said that a man was at liberty to believe what he pleased of the rest,
we ought to understand it of what immediately follows, that there are an
infinite number of worlds, etc.

However, this is not the true meaning of Democritus, if we may be determined
by a certain passage in Galen, and it is probable that the DEMOCRITVS
word (...) which is synonimous to the former, was set down to explain it, and
crept out of the Margin into the Text. The passage I am speaking of will help
to explain two other. Democritus, as De Ele. mends lib. ^ cap. ^.
Galen informs us, held that his Atoms, which were indivisible, unalierable
bodies, were neither while, nor black, nor any other color; that they were
neither sweet nor bitter, nor hot nor cold; in short, that they participated of
no other quality whatever. He added, that the aforesaid qualities existed only
in relation to us that perceiv^d them, and that they varied according to the
different manner that the Atoms met or united themselves in, so that if we
consider these things barely in themselves, nothing can be said to be white or
black, or sweet or bitter, or cold or hot, but all these qualities purely
depend upon the opinion of men or their judgment. He affirm^d, I say, that the
Atoms and the Vacuum was all that was real in the world, but that the rest
solely subsisted upon the opinion or fancy. In the first proposition he makes
use of the word (...) that signifies true or real; and in the latter he employs
the (...) which signifies a Law or Custom, but is sometimes also taken for an
Opinion, at least in the language of Democritus. So upon this foot he asserted
that Atoms were (...) real; but that white for example was white (...), that
is to say, by Opinion, and after this manner he talked of the other qualities.
This last word is used in the same sense in the Book de natura humana, (b) See
lib. ^^ cap. ^ and (...). 3. Chap. of the Anatomy of Hippocrates.
(which is among the works of Hippocrates, but is by some attributed to
Democritus) where (...) according to nature, is opposed to (...) according to
opinion. (...) Galen thus explains, according as men judge or think. We here
find the two Verbs (...) and (...) joyn^d, and explain^d one by the other,
which shows that Laertius had forgot to put them together.

The learned Gassend. lib. 10 Diogen. Laert. tit. Unde qualitates rerum
concretart.
Gassendus had carefully examined this passage of Democritus, and thus explains
it: Democritus was of opinion that all the several qualities we find in things,
such as color, heat, etc. only existed (...), lege, dependant upon a certain
law; not that they depend upon any institution of men, as the Interpreters
understand the place; but this Philosopher employs upon this occasion a word
proper to his own Country or Province, and at the same time makes use of a
Metaphor; to show, that as the justice or injustice, the honesty or dishonesty,
the merit or infamy of humane actions depends upon what the Laws have
established, so likewise that whiteness or blackness, sweetness or bitterness,
etc. in natural things, depended upon the disposition or different situation of
Atoms. This learned man was much in the right, when he observed that Democritus
had made use of a word that was particular to his own Country, but he is
mistaken in what he says afterward. To conclude, I have not remarked that some
Philosophers of a more modern date than Gassendus, and who come very near the
opinion of Democritus, have ascribed the honout of it to him.

CHAP. X. Of some Physicians who were contemporaries of the preceding
Philosophers, and first of Acron, reputed to be the chief of the Empirics.
THere was a famous Physician contemporary with Empedocles, whose name was
Acron, born likewise at Agrigentum as well as that Philosopher. Lib. 29. Cap. 1^
Acron, says Pliny, was author of a Sect in Physic which was called the
Empiric sect, a name formed from a Greek word which signifies experience,
because this Sect rejected reasonings upon things, and kept wholly to
experience. This Author adds, that Acron had been recommended by Empedocles the
Physician, who had a great repute among the people.

Casaubon was of opinion that when Pliny writ this Passage, he thought of
Acron's Epitaph compos^d by Empedocles, and mentioned by Laertius, (...).
Acron of Agrigentum the most eminent of Physicians, the Son of an eminent
Father lies interred in this craggy rock, in the most eminent place of his
eminent Country.

But it is evident from the Cacaphony which the Letter r makes in the Greek,
where it is to be found in every word, that it is nothing but raillery, as (...).
Suidas has well observed. Empedocles perhaps composed this Epitaph, with a
design to ridicule the vanity of the man, who, by a dull allusion to his own
name, called himself (...).
the most excellent of Physicians. To confirm this opinion, Diogenes Laertius
informs us a little before, that this Philosopher hindered Acron from obtaining
a certain place, which he would have begg^d to build his own Tomb in (...).
because he is, said he, a Physician of the first rank; and that Empedocles
having made a discourse about equality, perhaps to prove that all men were
equal, turned himself toward Acron and asked him what Epitaph would you have
engraved upon your Tomb! what think you of this Acron of Agrigentum, etc.

This raillery perhaps was occasioned by the jealousy of this Philosopher, who
was concerned to see Acron considered as the chief man of that Art to which he
pretended himself, upon which I have a reflection to make of some importance to
the history of Physic, which is, that the ambition of Acron, or the good
opinion he had of himself, entirely destroys the abovementioned Hypothesis of
Celsus, concerning the birth or beginning of Physic; for if this art owed its
original to Philosophy, and there was no knowledge of it before the
Philosophers, it is not probable that Acron, who came after them, or at least
after Phythagoras, should be so bold, as to pretend to the first place among
the Physicians to their prejudice. It Is certain that there were Physicians
before Philosophers, but their Physic, as we have observed, was wholly
empirical like that of Acron.

It Is not improbable, that the reason why this Physician passed for the chief
of the empiric sect, was because he attempted to maintain that ancient way of
practicing Physic, against that which the Philosophers his contemporaries
affected to introduce.

The above cited Passage of Pliny seems to favor this conjecture, but it is
probable that author was mistaken. That empiric Sect, which Pliny speaks of,
did not begin till long after Acron; it is agreed that he was an Empiric also,
but after the manner of the Asclepiadae, and all the other Physicians that
preceeded him; that is to say, his Physic wholly turned upon Experience,
without much reasoning; but for all that he was not of the Empiric Sect, for
the first Physicians could not properly be called Sectaries, if we may be
allowed to use this term upon this occasion. We shall consider below what this
Sect was, and who were the founders of it.

I can^t tell whether Suidas was not likewise mistaken, or did not confound
Acron the Empiric with another, where he says that Acron exercis^d the
profession of a Sophist at Athens, as well as Empedocles. It Is not to be
doubted but that he speaks of the former, because he joins him with Empedocles,
and adds that Acron writ in the Doric Dialect (which was spoken in Sicily) a
Book intitul'd, Tke Art of Physic, and another which treated of the manner of
living in Health. If our Acron was a Sophist, he did not confound this
profession with that of a Physician, otherwise he had not passed for an Empiric.

We find in Plutarch that Acron was in Athens in the time of a great Plague,
which happen^d at the beginning of the Peloponnesian war, and he ascribes to
him the advice of the lighting of great fires in all the Streets, with an
intent to purify the air.

CHAP. XI. Of Herodicus, the Inventor of Gymnastick Physic.
De iis qui lero a Numine corripiuntur.
WE shall conclude this Book with the history of Herodicus, of whom we had
occasion to speak, when we deliver^d Plato^s opinion of Esculapius's Physic.
He was born at Selymbra a City of Thrace, as This word u^deriv^d from a Greek
Verb, signifying to exercise.
Plutarch affirms, or rather at Lentini in Sicily, and was brother to the
famous Rhetorician and Philosopher Gorgias He liv^d in the time of the latter
Philosophers abovemention^d. He was a Physician, and Master of an Academy
besides, where the youth came to exercise themselves, which gave him an
opportunity to introduce Gymnastic, that is to say, the art of exercising the
body into Physic, having himself by the help of exercise, if not wholly cured,
yet stopped the farther progress of a Ptisick, under which he labored; so that
this troublesome disease did not hinder him from arriving to a very advanced age.

Galen seems to make Esculapius the author of Gymnastic, as well as the other
branches of Physic, where he says that Esculapius ordered some to ride on
Horseback, and to exercise themselves in their arms, and that he showed them
the several sorts of motions they were to express, and after what manner they
were to be armed. Medea likewise, as we have already observed, practiced
something of this nature, but although we should grant that they already knew the
great advantages of exercise, and prescribed certain rules upon this head, yet
it is probable that Herodicus went much farther, and that he was the first man
that improved it into an art, which he called the Art of Gymnastic Physic, or
the art of exercising one self for his Health.

Long before the time of Herodicus several sorts of exercises were used in
their public sports, that were celebrated in many places of Greece with
solemnity. The institutors of these Games proposed hereby to divert the people,
and to make men's bodies more active, vigorous, and fit for war, as also to
obtain the favor of their God, in the honor of whom they were kept. The end
of those that were personally engaged in these sports, was to carry off the
rewards that were allotted to the Conquerors. The same thing was practiced in
their Academies, which they called Gymnasia and Palaestrae, i. e. places proper
for one to exercise himself in. We cannot precisely tell the time when these
sorts of Academies were first begun to be erected; what we know for certain is,
that the Greeks were always looked upon to be the first inventors of them. The
Reader may consult Hieron Mercurialis, for his farther satisfaction upon this
subject. Herodicus who was Master of one of these Academies, having observed,
that the young People that were under his conduct, and learnt their exercises,
were very healthful for the most part, imputed this immediately to the
continual use of them, and afterward carrying this first reflection farther,
which was natural enough, he came to be of the opinion, that mighty advantages
might be drawn from exercise, if instead of the above mentioned ends, the
principal aim a man proposed to himself by it, was the acquiring or preserving
of his health; so that he need have recourse to no other Physic than this.

Having foreseen that Gymnastic might be divided into three sorts; The military
Gymnastick was that which the youth practiced to harden, instruct, and f^t
themselves for the Art Military. The Athletick looked upon as vicious, because
thereby they proposed no other end but to win the prize a^ the Public Games,
without making themselves serviceable any other way to the Public; and took
care only of their Bodies, totally neglecting their Minds. Quod corpora in
fagina, ani^^^n marie and veterno erant; says Seneca.
the Military, the Athletick, and the Medicinal; he left the two first to apply
himself to the latter, and prescribe rules to be observed in it, according to
the difference of persons, Temperaments, Ages, Climates, Seasons, Distempers,
etc. setting down exactly the diet, the sorts of habits, and the particular
exercises that would best suit with them according to the respective
circumstances above-mention^d.

I don't know whether he succeeded so happily in this project, as the
experiment made upon himself, of which History makes mention, would induce us
to believe. Hippocrates, who had been his Disciple, does not give him an
advantageous character upon this account, where he says, that Herodicus killed
several that were ill of Fevers, with too much walking, and wrestling, and
fomentations; nothing being so prejudicial to persons in such cases, as hunger,
wrestling, running, rubbing, etc. Herodicus, (adds Hippocrates) pretending to
overcome the fatigue occasioned by sickness with another fatigue, drew upon his
Patients sometimes inflammations, sometimes pains on their side, etc. and made
them pale, livid, and wholly out of order.

However this censure of Hippocrates did not hinder him from making use of some
Gymnastick on some occasions, although he did not look upon it to be good in the
cases abovementioned, and most of the Physicians that came after Herodicus
took so great a fancy to this sort of Physic, that they have always considered
it as an essential part of their profession. We have lost the writings which
Diocles, Praxagoras, Philotimus, Erasistratus, Herophilus, Asclepiades, Theon,
Diotimus, and several others composed upon that subject; but by the fragments
that are still remaining in Galen, or other Authors that have cited them, we
may easily know in what esteem Gymnastick was among the Ancients.

The Physicians were not the only persons that recommended it. The generality
of men were so fully convinced of the great advantages, and also the pleasure
that accompanied it, that abundance of people spent the greatest part of their
lives in places appointed on purpose to exercise in, that were afterward
erected in all the Cities of Greece.

It Is true, these Buildings that went under the name of Gymnasia,, were not
solely applied to Gymnastick Physic, for at the same time they were put to
several other uses. They contain^d several Apartments for several purposes,
large Squares, and great Portico's, or cover^d Allies of a vast length, fit for
to walk or run in. There was a particular place for the Philosophers, the
Rhetoricians, and men of Learning, where they assembled and disputed. Thus the
Academy and Lyceum, two places of exercise in Athens became famous, one of them
being chosen by Plato, and the other by Aristotle, to teach Philosophy in. This
separate place for the Philosophers was called Exedra, which in Greek signifies
a Seat, because there are benches in it for this purpose.

There were other Apartments set aside for the young men, that came to exercise
themselves under Masters called Gymnastae, who had some Servants under them
that were called Paedotribae. The Wrestlers likewise met there. The exercises
performed were chiefly playing at quoits, throwing the dart, or certain heavy
machines that were called balteres, shooting out of a bow, playing at ball,
wrestling, cuffing, leaping, dancing, running, riding, etc.

Part of these exercises were also practiced indifferently by all sorts of
persons for their health, but the Apartments that were more peculiarly applied
to this last use, were the bathing rooms, those where they were undressed, or
where they ordered themselves to be rubb^d, anointed, etc. Every one used these
exercises as he thought convenient. Some went no farther than one, while others
applied themselves successively to more. Men of learning began with hearing the
Philosophers, and other Virtuosi; after this they played at Ball, or employed
themselves in any other exercise, and at last went to the Bath.

One may wonder, and reasonably enough, how Plato comes to inveigh so furiously
against Gymnastic, and the inventor of it. Nothing appears to be more natural
than this sort of Physic, which every man of good sense ought to prefer to the
use of Medicaments, that are infinitely more troublesome and dangerous. But we
must know that when this Philosopher declaimed so powerfully against Gymnastic,
he had his head full of the Idea^s of his Republic, wherein laying it down for
a rule, that every man should contribute to the public Good, he looked upon
those that minded nothing but their health, to be a sort of unprofitable
persons that were only good to themselves.

And although he has recommended exercise in general, yet he blam^d Gymnastic,
consider^d as an Art, and particularly as it comprehended the Dietetic, or that
part of Physic which regulates our food, because it was too long and tedious a
course, and those persons, that would exactly follow the rules of it, were
obliged to live in too confined and strict a manner, and indeed to practice a
sort of continual Physic, which almost wholly turned them aside from those
occupations for which they were designed.

Plato has another observation about Herodicus or his Maxims as they relate to
Gymnastic, which is very particular. He tells us then, that this Ph^sician
advised some Plat. Phaed. in princip.
to walk from Athens to Megara, which is twenty five miles, and as soon as they
had touched the Walls of that City, to come back the same way, without stopping
a moment. In all appearance this is a calumny upon him, and perhaps such
stories as these were told at Athens to ridicule the Physicians that follow^d
the rules of Gymnastic.

The Romans did not begin to build those places of exercise, till long after
the Greeks, but when they once took a fancy for them, they infinitely surpassed
them both in the number and magnificence of these buildings, as we may judge by
the noble ruins that are yet remaining. Nay, they doted upon them at Rome to
such a degree, that according to Vix C^is (...) 2.
Varro's remark, tho almost every man had one to himself, yet they were scarce
content.

Those that wou^d be thoroughly instructed in all that rela^es to Medicinal
Gymnastic, may consult the learn^d Mercurialis, who has gone to the bottom of
this subject. Besides, the Reader will find in the continuation of this
History, several things relating to this occasion, and also concerning
Herodicus, by which he will more plainly and fully discover the use of
Gymnastic in ancient Physic.

CHAP XII. Reflections upon what has been said before.
THis is the sum of what we could meet with most considerable, in that
interval which may be called the first age of Physic. We have in a manner
fetched all our materials from Greece, for want of monuments to instruct us
what past in other Nations; and for the future we shall more seldom leave that
Country, since the Greeks cultivated Physic as well as they did the other
arts, with more care and application in the succeeding times, and indeed
communicated them to almost all the world besides.

One would be apt to imagine, at first sight, that all we can find of the
progress of Physic in the first and second period of time, which we have ran
over, is very inconsiderable. Every thing in this compass appears either
fabulous, or uncertain, and at least excremely confused, and the discoveries
that were made in it are but few in number, and very superficial, if compared
to those that have been made since.

Nevertheless, if Physic rather consists in effects than in discourses, and if
the invention of remedies is of greater importance than all the reasonings that
can be made upon diseases, as we shall see hereafter, we shall be satisfied
that these first Physicians knew almost every thing that was essential to
Physic, or at least passes for such now in most parts of Europe^^ and that
they used in a manner all the fundamental remedies, and those that are most
depended upon. All Physicians, if we except a f^w out of the number, look upon
bleeding and purging to be most universal remedies: Now it is certain, by the
proofs that we have brought, that they were used in the abovementioned times.

Neither were they defective in other the most ordinary practices of Physic.
They knew how to make use of Milk, Whey, and Baths, that are to this day the
principal arms of the Physicians, against the most stubborn and obstinate
diseases. Neither were they unacquainted with the Sea the head of Hippocrates.
Poppy, and even with See the Chapt. of Helen and Polydamna.
Opium, that great and universal anodyne.

In short, it is very probable that they were masters of several Vid. lib. 5
Specisics, and perhaps more than we have, since the principal bent of their
studies carried them that way.

This was it, without dispute, which occasioned De Prisca Med.
Hippocrates to say, that the whole circle of Physic has been established long
ago, and that the world had found out the way to make abundance of discoveries,
which wou^d serve to make new ones, provided that the party who went upon the
search was fit for such an undertaking, and being acquainted with all that was
already discovered, would follow the same track, The man, continues he, who
rejecting this counsel, takes another road, and pretends to have discovered
some new track, not only imposes upon himself, but the rest of the world. This
old way was that of observation and experiments; from which the following ages
deviated too much.

But I foresee that the stiff asserters of the Antiquity of Chemistry, will not
fail to object that I have forgotten that, which in their opinion; does the
greatest honor to ancient Physic, viz. the knowledge of that Art. If I had
been of their opinion, I had found an opportunity to have defended it, when I
was upon the History of Hermes Trismegistus, whom they pretend to be the
Inventor of Alchymy. But for me, I ingenuously own, that my eyes are not
quick-sighted enough to discover the least footsteps of this Art in these
ancient times. I shall endeavor to answer the arguments of those that maintain
the contrary in the second part of this work. But that they may not be
prepossessed against me, before they have heard what I have to say for my self,
I must tell them before hand, that we ought carefully to distinguish between
Alchymy, which pretends to the melioration or transmutation of Metals, or the
way of making Gold and Silver out of any other matter, and Chemistry, which
proposes for its only end, the preparation of medicaments, and the preserving
of health. The former perhaps is of great antiquity, the love of riches being
as old as the world, and in all appearance men try^d all manners of ways to get
money ever since the beginning. But we shall satisfy the Reader that the latter
was invented but a few years ago.

HIPPOCRATES.


THE HISTORY OF Physic.
PART I.
BOOK III.
CHAP I. How far Hippocrates carried this Art.
WE have already seen that Physic, which at first was practiced either by all
sorts of persons indifferently, or by some particular men, who made it their
sole profession, fell at last into the hands of the Philosophers about the lx
Olympiad, whether because they had more occasion for the assistance of this Art
for the reasons alleged by (...)
Celsus, or because professing to study nature, they believed that a knowledge
of the humane Body, which (...) most admirable of all her works, was absolutely
necessary to such a design. But Philosophy and Physic happening to be much
enlarged and cultivated afterward, for the space of about 80 years, men were
forced to separate these two professions, since either of them was enough to
employ a man's time entirely.

Demo^riti autem (ut quidam crediderunt) discipulus Hippocr^es Cous, primus
quidem ex omnibus memoria dig nis, ab studio sapientiae disciplinam hanc
(medicinam) separavit, Vi^ and art and facundia infignis Cells. Praefat. lib. 1.
Hippocrates was the first that undertook to make this separation. He had not
strictly addicted himself to that sort of Physic, that was hereditary in his
Family, but made as great advances into Philosophy, as any man of his age, but
believing that the speculations of this latter Science were not so useful to
Society, as the practice of the former, he retained so much Philosophy as would
enable him to reason justly in Physic, which he made his principal, or rather
his only study.

Soranus pretends that Hippocrates was born in the Isle of Co, in the first
year of the 80th Olympiad, but others make him older, as we see below. His
Fathers name was Heraclides, his Mothers Phaenarete or Praxithea. We have
already seen, when we had occasion to speak of the Asclepiadae, that on his
Fathers side he pretended to be the 17th in order of descent from Esculapius;
nor was he less noble by the mothers side, as being the 19th descendant from
Hercules.

He was not content with learning Physic under his Father; he had Herodicus
abovementioned for his Master in that faculty. He was likewise the disciple of
Gorgias the Sophist, Brother to that Physician, and according to some, of
Democritus the Philosopher, as we gather from the above cited passage of
Celsus. But if he learnt any thing of this latter it was in all probability, by
the conversations chiefly which he had with him, when he was entreated by the
Abderites to come and cure this Philosopher. It is likewise credible, that he
was a follower of Heraclitus, as we shall see hereafter.

If Hippocrates was not looked upon to be the first inventor, yet all antiquity
gives him this honor at least, of being the first that re-established it after
Esculapius and his Sons. It may also be affirm^d, that by the great reputation
he acquired he has effaced the glory of all that preceeded him, except the God
of Physic himself; so that in the History of Physic, we cannot conveniently
stop any where between the God and him, or make any considerable Epoch, but in
passing all at once from one to the other, although there was above seven hundred
years difference between them.

Pliny makes Hippocrates the author of Clinic Physic, which we have ascribed
to Esculapius, for it is not probable, that it was so long before the custom
began of visiting the Sick in their bed; but what distinguishes this Physician
so eminently from those that came before, is, that according to the observation
of the same author Primus Hippocrates medendi praecepta clarissime tradidit.
lib. 26. cap. 2:
he is the first that clearly laid down the precepts of Physic, reaping great
advantage from the knowledge of the age he lived in, and making Philosophy
servicable to Physic, and Physic to Philosophy. Lib. de decenti habitu.
We ought to join, says the same Author, Philosophy with Physic, and Physic
with Philosophy, for a Physician that is a Philosopher is equal to a God.

Upon this account the The Greeks called 'em (...), and (...), from (...),
Reason, or Ratiocination, and (...), Opinion or doctrine. The Emp^i al
Ph^sician^ (...) claim to him likewise.
Dogmatick, or Reasoning Physicians, called so in opposition to the Empirics,
have unanimously owned him for their head, as being the first that assisted
reason with experience in the practice of Physic. The Philosophers mentioned
by us in the preceding Book, were well enough versed in the art of reasoning,
but wanted experience or practice. Hippocrates is the first person who
possessed both one and the other.

This may seem to contradict what I have already advanced upon the credit of
Celsus, viz. that Hippocrates separated Physic from Philosophy. For a Salvo to
this seeming contradiction, we need only suppose, that Hippocrates, who was
descended of a Family, where he as it were sucked in Physic with his Milk,
finding this Art in the hands of Philosophers, who had lately engrossed it to
the prejudice of the Asclepiadae, thought there was no better way to support
the declining honor of his house, than by using his utmost efforts, besides
the knowledge derived to him by tradition, to acquire all that learning which
gave these new Physicians so great a reputation in the world. But after he had
made himself Master of it, he openly declared, that although the lights of
Philosophy were very serviceable to give a man a just Idea of things, and to
conduct methodically and in the right way such as designed to carry arts to
perfection; yet however that Philosophy was not sufficient of itself to perfect
a man for all professions, if he did not descend to the particulars, which did
not belong to its jurisdiction; that Philosophy had nature in general for its
object, but that Physic in a special manner applies itself to nature as it had
a relation to man, whom she considered under the different circumstances of
health and sickness; that it did not follow that a man must be a Physician
because he was a Philosopher, unless he had studied humane body in particular,
and instructed himself in the several changes that befall it, and in the proper
methods to preserve or restore; that since it is impossible to acquire this
knowledge without long experience, he ought to employ his whole time this way,
and quit the general name of a Philosopher for that of a Physician, tho this
obliged him by no means to forbear Philosophizing in his profession. And this
is what Hippocrates meant by joining Philosophy with Physic, and Physic with
Philosophy.

CHAP. II. Of the Philosophy of Hippocrates.
IF we may believe De Not* Facult. lib. 1.8 2. De deecret. Hipp. 5. Meth^d.
med. lib. ^e Element 9.
Galen, Hippocrates no less deserved the first place among the Philosophers,
than the Physicians. He likewise affirms that Plato has rejected none of
Hippocrates's opinions, that the writings of Aristotle are only a Comment upon
the Physiology of the latter, and that Aristotle is nothing but the interpreter
of Hippocrates and Plato, from whom he borrowed his Doctrine of the first
qualities, ^ot, cold, dry, and moist. It Is true, Hippocrates seems in some
places to declare for the four Elements, air, water, fire, and earth. This at
least must be acknowledged that in his Book of the nature of man, he opposes
those Philosophers who only maintain one. But he establishes another system in
his first Book of Diet, where he makes mention of no more than two principles,
fire and water, one of which gives motion to all things, and the other
nourishment and increase. These contradictions, with some others that we shall
take notice of hereafter, proceed from the many interpolations in the works of
Hippocrates. The passage we cited last, is one of those, which anciently were
supposed to belong to another Author.

What is more certain, and of greater importance to the business in hand,
Hippocrates makes it appear in most of his Writings, that he acknowledges a
general principle, which he called nature, to which he ascribed a mighty power.
Nature is of it self sufficient to every animal, and that in all respects. She
performs every thing that is necessary to them, without needing the (...)
instruction from any one how to do it. Upon this foot, as if nature had been a
principle endued with knowledge, he gives her the title of just, he ascribes a
(...). For Power, Faculty, or Virtue. It is sometimes employed to signify the
height of 'em.
virtue, or virtues to her that are as it were her Servants. Lib. de alimento.
There is, says he, one only faculty, and there are more than one. It Is by
these faculties, that all operations are performed in the bodies of animals.
They distribute the blood* the spirits, and heat through all parts, which by this
means receive life and sensation. He affirms elsewhere, that it is this faculty
which gives nourishment, preservation and growth to all things.

The manner wherein nature acts, or its most sensible administration by the
means of the faculties, according to him consists on one side in attracting
what is good and agreeable to each species, and in retaining, preparing, or
changing it, and on the other side in rejecting whatever is superfluous or
hurtful, after she has separated it from the good. The Physic of Hippocrates
generally turns upon this hinge, as also upon that inclination, which, as he
supposes, every thing has to be joyn^d with what agrees with it, and to remove
from all that is contrary to it self supposing first an affinity between the
several parts of the body, which is the reason that they sympathize
reciprocally in the ills they suffer, as they share the good that arrives to
them in common; according to the great Maxim which he establishes (...).
that every thing concurs, consents, and conspires together in the body, with
relation to the animal O Economy, as we shall find more particularly in the
following Chapter.

Thus I have shown what it is that Hippocrates calls nature. He no otherwise
describes this principle of so many surprising operations, unless it be that he
seems to compare it to a certain heat whereof he speaks after this manner. De
Car^^bus.
What we call heat or hot, seems to me to have something of immortal in it,
that understands all, that sees and knows as well what is present, as what is
to come. At least we find a great resemblance between the effects which he
ascribes to that heat, of which more hereafter, and those which he attributes
to nature.

As for the rest, although Hippocrates acknowledges in some places, fire, water,
air, and earth, or fire and water in particular, to be the first elements of
the bodies, yet he seems in others to admit three different principles, the
solid, the liquid, or the humid; and the Spirits, which he explains otherwise
(...). Equidem lib. vi sect. viii.
by the container, the contained, and that which gives motion. But as he
particularly made use of these principles to explain all the accidents of
humane body, we shall forbear to give his meaning of them, till we come to that
Chapter.

In one of Hippocrates's Books, which is entitled, of Flesh, (...), the latter
is more natural, and answers the subject of the Book better.
according to others of principles, we find something very singular concerning
the formation of the universal world, and of Animals in particular. He at first
supposes that the production of man, or his being, that he has a Soul, that he
is in health or that he is sick, all his good and ill fortune in the world,
that he is born or dies to proceed from things (...).
elevated and above us, or the celestial bodies. By this we may understand the
Stars, the influences of which, according to this Author, have no small power
over humane bodies. But he explains himself, when he ascribes all the
abovementioned things to that immortal heat, of which above, that is generally
supposed to be the same thing with what he calls nature in other places.

The greatest part of the heat, continues he, that I have described, having
gain^d the highest place, at the time of the Chaos, formed that which the
ancients called the Ether, another part of this heat, or the greatest part of
the heat which remained, continuing in the lowest space, which is called Earth,
there was a meeting of Cold and Dry there, and a great disposition to motion. A
third part keeping the middle space between the Ether and the Earth, made what
we call the Air, which is likewise somewhat hot. At last, a fourth part, that
lay nearest to the Earth, and was the thickest and most humid of all, formed
what we call water. All these things having been jumbled together by a circular
motion, at the time of the abovementioned Chaos, that portion of heat which
continued in the earth, being dispersed into several places, and divided into
several parts, in one place more, and less in another, the earth was dried up
by this means, and formed as it were (...).
membranes or tunicles, in which the matter growing hot, as it were by a sort
of fermentation, that which was most oily and least moist, was quickly burnt,
and so formed the Bones, but that which was more viscid, and in some measure
cold, not being combustible, formed the Nerves, or rather the Tendons and
Ligaments which are hard and solid. As for the Veins, they were formed of the
coldest and most viscid parts, the more glutionous parts being dried by the
heat, and from thence came the Membranes and Skins, of which they are composed.
The cold particles which had nothing in them oleous or viscid, being dissolved,
produced the humor or liquor which these Membranes enclose. The Bladder with
its contents were formed after the same manner, as were also all the other
cavities.

In those parts, continues Hippocrates, where the glutinous exceeds the fat,
the Membranes are made, and in those where the fat is stronger than the
glutinous, Bones are produced. The Brain ^^ing the (...), the Capital City.
seat or proper place of cold and glutinous, which the heat could neither
dissolve not burn, it is first of all formed of the membranes in its supers^^e,
and afterward of bones, by the means of a small portion of fat, which the heat
had roasted, the marrow of the backbone is made after the same manner, being
cold and glutinous like the brain, and consequently very different from the
marrow of the bones, which being only fat is not covered with any membranes.
The heart having likewise a great deal of glutinous matter in it, became hand
and glutinous flesh, enclosed in a membrane, and hollow. The Lungs being near
the heart are thus formed. The heart by its own heat presently dries up the
most viscid part of the moisture, makes a sort of scumm full of Pipes and
Channels, being likewise filled with diverse little veins. The Liver is made of
a great quantity of moist and hot, that has nothing fat or viscid in it, so
that the cold being too strong for the hot, the humid is coagulated or
thickened.

Upon the same foot Hippocrates reasons about the production of the Spleen, the
Reins, and some other parts. What we have already cited may serve to give a
Specimen of his manner of Philosophizing. Upon which I make this reflection,
that this System of Hippocrates seems to be not very different from that of
Heraclitus; the heat by which the former supposes all things to have been
produced, being very near the same thing with fire, which according to the
latter was the origin or principle of all Bodies, as we have observed above in
the Chapter of that Philosopher. Several passages may be taken out of the first
Book of Diet to confirm what we have advanced. In a word, says he in one place
of this Book the Fire has dispos^d all things in the body in imitation of the
Universe, etc.

But while we are upon the Philosophy of Hippocrates, lest the Alchymists
should take it ill at our hands, we must by no means omit this passage in the
first Book abovementioned, viz. that those that work in Gold, beat it, wash
it, and melt it by a gentle Fire, because a violent fire is not proper for such
a business. It Is pretended that Hippocrates here, had an Eye on the mystery of
the Philosophers Stone, of which we shall have occasion to speak in the second
part of this History.

And this may suffice for his Philosophy. Let us now descend from the general
principles of bodies, to the particular principles of the human body, and
leaving all Philosophical reflections, let us see what observations we can find
in Anatomy there, for those properly belong to the History of Physic. Those
that are minded to see more particularly how far Hippocrates carried his
Philosophy, may consult the Books de Flatibus, de natura hominis, the first de
natura pueri, de dieta, and some others. But the Reader ought to be informed,
that the abovementioned treatises are suspected to be spurious, and not to
belong to him. His opinion concerning the seat of the Soul is to be found in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the Anatomy of Hippocrates.
It Is a difficult matter to give a just extract of the Anatomy of Hippocrates,
for three things hinder us from knowing so much of this subject as it is
necessary we should. In the first place we find several contradictions in the
writings of Hippocrates, or rather in those that are ascribed to him. Secondly,
tho we should heap together all that he says of each part, 'twould be an
imperfect account, and not very coherent, Lastly, tho so many faults had not
crept into the Text as there have, or there were less disagreement in the
original MSS. yet his style is so concise, and there are some places in him so
obscure, as being frequently expressed in terms peculiar to himself, that are
not to be found elsewhere, that it is extremely difficult for one to understand
him aright, tho he is never so great a master of the Greek Language.

For this reason we should very much regret the loss of one of Galen's Books,
entitled, The Anatomy of Hippocrates, if we had not just reason to suspect
this Author of partiality, when he engages for the interests of this ancient
Physician, sufficient proofs whereof we shall see below that purely belong to
Anatomy.

The helps that a man might expect to find upon this occasion from the modern
Commentators, is but inconsiderable. If any light is to be had from them, we
ought rather to trust the ancient interpreters than those of our Age: because
it is to be feared, that the latter, full of their new discoveries, imagine
they see them every where, like those that can discover in Homer the most
hidden mysteries of all Arts and Sciences; or those quick-sighted Genelemen,
that can find the Philosophers Stone, in all Books whatever, let the matter
they treat of be what it will.

That we may not be charged with being guilty of this prepossession, which we
have condemned our selves, we will faithfully set down all that we could find
relating to this argument in the works of Hippocrates, and take particular care
not to omit the least thing about which the Anatomists of the following ages
have had different opinions, or pretended to make any discovery, that so we may
give every man his due, and rob none of the praise that really belongs to them.

I will not pretend to confine my self to a certain order, but indifferently
set down every thing as it comes to hand, and refer the Reader, that expects a
continued description, or a greater insight into the nature, connection,
situation of the parts of the body, to a full treatise of Anatomy, which he
will find in the Chapter of Galen.

De locis in homine.
The nature of the Body, (says Hippocrates) is the principle or foundation on
which all the reasoning of Physic is built. One would be apt to infer from
hence, that he had a mind to recommend Anatomy as one of the principal means by
which we may discover the nature of the body. What helps to confirm this
conjecture, we find that immediately after he teaches what is the situation,
composition, and use of the several parts. It Is undeniable, that Hippocrates
would have us study the nature of the body, but we may discover by some other
places, that he thought we could arrive to the knowledge of it no way so well,
as in the practice of Physic, for he laughs at those who fancied themselves to
be great Physicians, because they knew something in Anatomy. De Prisc. med^cin.
Some Physiciansiand Philosophers, says he, pretend that a man cannot understand
the art of Physic, unless he knows what man is, what is his first formation,
and after what manner his Body is made. But for my part I am of opinion that
all that has been said or written about nature by these people belongs more to
the art of Painting than it does to Physic, and am persuaded that a man cannot
know nature clearly, but by the means of Physic, as those that are well
skilled in that art, will soon perceive. Here he seems to address himself to
the Philosophers that preceeded him, and to these of his own time, who, as we
have observed, had thrust themselves into this profession, and were the first
that began to instruct themselves in Anatomy. It has been remarked above that
the Asclepiadae, the Predecessors of Hippocrates, had other helps of knowing
the humane body besides Anatomy. As for Hippocrates, it is probable that he did
not neglect this latter way, as being related to Philosophy, which he had
carefully studied. There would not be the least pretense to doubt of this, if
the little Book or fragment attributed to him and entitled little Book or
fragment attributed to him and entitled Anatomy, was really of his writing,
but this is not certain, since Erotiam who has given us a Catalogue of
Hippocrates's Books, makes no mention of it. Be it as it will, we shall see
anon how far he advanced in this Science, either by Anatomy, or any other
method which we have touched upon in the Chapter of Asclepiadae.

Hippocrates owns in one place that the Lib. de Aliment.
Veins come from the Liver, which is the origin and fountain of them, as the
Heart is of the Arteries. In another place he maintains that the Veins and
Arteries proceed equally from the Heart. Lib. de Carnibus.
There are two hollow Veins that come from the Heart, one of which is called
the Artery, and the other the Vena Cava. At that time all the Blood Vessels
were indifferently called Veins, and the word Artery properly signified the
(...).
aspera arteria, or the Windpipe. Nay, Hippocrates gives the name of Veins to
the Ureters, and seems to bestow the same appellation upon the Nerves, as we
shall take notice below; besides there are but few places where he formally
distinguishes the Arteries from the Veins, and where he calls them Arteries,
which may render the credit of those books, or at least of those passages
suspicious, where this distinction is to be found.

The Artery, adds he, immediately after, contains more heat than the Vena Cava,
and is the receptacle of the Spirits. There are other Veins in the Body besides
these two. As for that which is reported to be the largest of all, and next to
the heart, it runs through the Belly and the Diaphragm, and dividing itself into
two streams, visits either Kidney toward the Loins. Above the heart this Vein
divides to the right and to the left, and ascending to the head, distributes
itself to either Temple. We may, continues he, join the other Veins to this
that are also very large, but to speak all in a word, all the Veins that are
dispersed through the whole Body, come from the Vena Cava, and the Artery.

Here are already two opinions concerning the Origin of the Veins and Arteries:
There is a third likewise to be found in two several passages in Hippocrates,
whether in respect of the Origin of the Veins, or in respect of your
distribution. Lib. de Ossium natura and de Nature. humana.
The largest veins of the Body, are, says he, disposed after this manner. There
are in all four pair; the first pair come out behind the head, and descending
down the back part of the neek, on each side of the spine, come to the Hips and
Thighs, pass on through the Legs to the outside of each Foot. For this reason, in
all pains of the Back and Hips, bleeding in the veins of the Hams and external
Ancles, are of great relief; the second pair coming likewise from the Head, run
behind the Ears down the Neck; they are called the Jugulars, and run within the
Spine down the Loins, where they divide on either side toward the Testicles
and Thighs, and the inside of the Hams, from thence through the inward Ancles
to the inside of the foot. For this cause, in all pains of the Testicles and
Loins, bleeding in the veins of the Hams and internal Ancles is very
serviceable. The third pair come out of the Temples, and run along the Neck
toward the Shoulders and Lungs, from thence one turning from the right a
little toward the left, runs under the Breast, to the Spleen and Kidneys, the
other likewise turning from the left to the right, runs under the Breast to the
Liver and Kidney. And these two branches terminate in the Rectum. The fourth
part coming out of the fore part of the Head and Eyes, run under the Lungs and
the Clavicles, and from thence through the upper part of the Arm, pass over the
bending of the Elbow, to the back of the Hands and Fingers, and thence they
return again through the palm of the Hand, on the inside of the Elbow, and under
the Arm to the Armpits, and upon the surface of the side, one to the Spleen
and the other to the Liver. At length both branches running over the Belly,
terminate in the privities.

To salve the contradiction between these two last passages, it may be urged
that the Book of the nature of the Bones, from whence this latter is drawn, is
not Hippocrates's, but Polybius, his Son-in-Law's. Neither Galen nor Erotian
take notice of this Book among the works of Hippocrates. They have not so much
as taken notice of the name, tho they seem to have explained certain words
found in it.

There is a passage of De Generat. Anim. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Aristotle, wherein this Philosopher speaking of the Origin and destribution of
the Veins, and relating the several sentiments of the Physicians thereupon,
cites these very words of this Book of the nature of the Bones, which we have
translated, and cites them as Polybius's. This proof were sufficient, but it
removes not all the difficulty; for we read the very same words in the Book of
Human Nature, which Galen maintains strongly to be Hippocrates's, pretending to
prove it by the Authority of Platon. Phaedr.
Plato, who, as he says, has quoted a passage out of it, tho others have
ascribed this Book to Democritus. Nevertheless Galen himself De Hippocrat. and
Platon. decre^. l. 6. c. 3. But Pelops. Galen's Master, was of another mind,
maintaining, that Hippocrates held, as himself also did, that the Veins and
Arteries, as well as Nerves, had their Origin from the Brain.
denies this later opinion touching the origin and destribution of the Veins,
to be Hippocrates's, or even Polybius's; but affirms that it must have been
foysted surreptitiously into the Text. But this is not probable, for we find
the same opinion in the Book de locis in Homine.

There is another difficulty relating to the Book of the flesh or of the
principles, from whence was taken what we said in the first place, that the
Veins and Arteries came out of the Heart. Aristotle in the afore-cited passage,
after having remarked that almost all the Physicians consented with Polybius to
bring the veins from the Head, concludes they were all in an error, not knowing
that they came from the Heart, and not from the Head. If Hippocrates be the
Author of that Book of the Flesh, wherein this opinion of Aristotle is plainly
laid down, how is it likely this Philosopher should not know it? Why should he
not as well have read the Writings of Hippocrates, as those of Polybius?

From hence we may infer, that this Book is no more Hippocrates's, than that of
the Nature of the Bones: Perhaps Aristotle chose rather in this place to cite
Polybius or Synnesis of Cyprus, and Diogenes Apolloniates, Physicians of small
reputation in comparison of Hippocrates, than to cite Hippocrates himself,
whose Name we sind but in Polit^c. li. 7. cap. 4.
one place of his Works, and there mentioned only en passant; perhaps, I say,
he has omitted to quote him out of malice or envy.

Plato showed more honor, having made honorable mention of him in several
places. Perhaps the Book in question was not Hippocrates's, for neither do we
find the Title of it in the List that Erotian gives of his Works.

Of the description of the HEART.
Amongst the Anatomical Books ascribed to Hippocrates, there is none written
with more exactness than that of the Heart, which being very short, we give you
here the entire Translation of it.

The Heart, says the Author of this Book, is of a Pyramidal figure, its color
is a deep red. It is encompassed on all sides with a closed Membrane, in which
is a small quantity of moisture like Urine; so that the Heart is as it were in
a sort of Bladder. It was formed after this manner, in a Case, for its better
defense. Of the Liquor, there is but just as much as is necessary for the
refreshment of the Heart, and to preserve it from being overheated. It distills
from the Heart, which draws to it part of the moisture, which the Lungs reserve
from the Drink. For when any one drinks most of it falls into the Stomach, the
OEsophagus The Gullet.
being as it were a Tunnel which receives what we swallow whether Liquid or
Solid. But the The upperpart of the Windpipe.
Pharynx draws a little of the Liquor into its cleft, the Epiglottis, which is
as it were the lid of the Pharynx, hindering the greatest part of it from
falling into it. As a proof of this, if we make any Animal whatsoever,
especially a Hog, drink Water tinged with blue or red, and cut his throat while
he is drinking, we shall find this water charged with the Tincture. But every
one is not fit to make this experiment. We are not to make any difficulty of
believing that part of the drink slips into the Aspera Arteria. But it may be
asked how comes it then to pass, that in drinking too swift, the Water getting
into the cleft of the Pharynx, raises a violent Cough. It is because the
quantity of the Water being too great, opposes directly the return of the Air
from the Lungs in expiration. Whereas when a little slips in at the clift,
slipping gently down the sides of the Aspera Artiria, it hinders not the Air
from Rising. But on the contrary facilitates the passage by moistening the
Windpipe.
Aspera Arteria.

The Heart draws the moisture from the Lungs at the time of inspiration, and
after the Air has serv^d the use of the Heart, it returns by the way it came.
But the Heart sucks up a part of the moisture which passes into its Bag,
letting the rest return with the Air.

This Air being returned as far as the Palate. (...).
escapes through a double passage, and it is necessary that it should go out and
the moisture also, they being of no use to the nourishment of the Body. How can
Wind and Crude water serve for the nourishment to a man, not but that one and
the other have their use, for they serve to fortify the Heart against the Evil
it is naturally afflicted with, that is excessive heat.

The Heart is a very strong Muscle, not for its Tendons, but for the hardness
and compactness of the Flesh. It has two distinct Ventricles in one enclosure,
E. v (...).
one on one side, and the other on the other, which are not like to one another;
the one is on the right-side, at the mouth of the great Vein, and the other on
the left, and they take up almost the whole Heart. The cavity of the first is
greater than that of the latter, and is more soft, but it extends not quite to
the point of the Heart, the extremity of which is solid, it appears as if it
were sewed or fixed to the Heart. The Left Ventricle is situated directly under
the Left Nipple, to which it answers in a right Line, and where its pulsation
or beating may be felt. Its sides are thick, and it has a cavity like that of a
(...).
Mortar, which answers to the Lungs, which moderate by their nearness the
excessive heat of this Ventricle; for the Lungs are naturally cold, and receive
a further refreshment by the inspiration of the Air. Both these Ventricles are
rough, and as it were coroded within, especially the Left. (...).
The natural fire or heat which is born with us, has not its Seat in the Right,
and it is something wondrous that the Left, which receives from the Lungs an
Air, which is not tempered or mixed, should be the most rugged; it was likewise
made thicker than the other, for the better preservation of the aforesaid heat.
The Orifices of these Ventricles are not visible, till the Ears of the heart be
first opened or cut off, and its head or basis: When they are cut off, we find
two Orifices in either Ventricle, but the Vena Cava which comes out of one of
them, is not seen after it is cut. These are the Fountains of Human Nature, and
from hence flow those Springs that serve the whole body. These are the streams
that give life to Man, and when they dry up he dies.

At the Exit of these Veins (the Vena Cava, and great Artery) and all round the
mouth of these Ventricles, there are certain soft and hollow bodies called the
Ears of the heart; they have not, however, any perforations like the Ears, nor
do they serve to hear sounds, but they are the Instruments by which Nature
draws the Air, and show themselves the Work of an Ingenious Workman, who
considering the Heart ought to be very The Author says this place is very
obscure, that he has translated it as well as he could; that if he has not
succeeded extraordinarily in it, that he has for his comfort the company of the
rest of the Interpreters in his misfortune.
solid, as being formed of blood coagulated or thickened at the mouth of the
veins, and that it ought to have likewise the faculty of drawing, has fixed
Bellows to it as Smiths do to their Forges, that it might draw the Air by this
means. In confirmation of this, we see the Heart in one part continually
agitating it self, and the Ears in particular to dilate and subside in their
turns. I am likewise of opinion, (...).
the small veins draw the Air in the Left Ventricle, and the Artery in the
Right. I say likewise, that that which is soft, is most proper to draw and to
be inflated, and that it was necessary that (...), by which the Author supposes
the right Ventricle of the Heart to be meant.
But I rather think, that the Auricles were still intended, as by comparing
them with the precedent and subsequent expressions will appear.
what was fixed to the Heart should be refreshed, since it partakes of the
heat; but the Engine which draws the Air ought not to be so large, lest it
should overcome the heat.

I ought likewise, says Hippocrates, to describe the hidden Membranes of the
Heart, (...).
which are an admirable Work; some are spread within the ventricles of the
Heart like Spiders Webs, they close the Orifices of the ventricles of the
Heart, and send their threads into the substance of the Heart. They seem to me
to be See the Chapter of the Nerves.
the Nerves or the Tendons of this Entrail, and the Origin or Place from whence
they spring T^^ Aorta signifies the great Artery only in all the succeeding
Anatomists, h^^ Hippocrates, under that name, comprehends the Vena Arteriosa
also.
the Aortae. These Membranes are disposed by pairs; for to every Orifice,
Nature has framed three, which are round above in the form of a Semicircle.
Those that know these Membranes, wonder how they can shut the Aortae.

And if any one (...). Which words Foesius translates thus: Siquis veteris
instituti probe gnarus, mortui animalis cord exempto, hanc quidem demat, illam
vero reclinet, neque aqua in cor penetrare, nec; Flatus emitti poterit. And
Cornarius, much after the same manner. Siquis veteris, eximendi cor mortui,
moris goarus, aliam auferat aliam reclinet, neque aqua, etc. Why these
Translators render the word (...), by that of Mos, or Institutum, which it does
not signify, is a mystery to me; it ought to be translared Ordo, with relation
to the Membranes: (...), according to Erotian, is an Attick Word, signis^ing
(...), or Order. I explain als^ the Word (...) Ancient, by the term Natural,
(...), Ordo vetus, seu naturalis. (...), says Erotian, (...), for (...)
auferat, I read (...) firmet, which I suppose to be the true reading, but that
the former crept into its place through the error of the Copists, misled by
affinity of the sound of those two Words.


who understands the ancient Order (or the natural Order and Disposition of
this Membrane) takes out one rank (or keeps one rank stretched) and closes the
other, neither water nor wind can get into the Heart. These Membranes are
disposed with more Art, or more Exactness, on the Left-side than the Right. The
reason of this is, because the Soul of Man, or the Reasonable Soul, which is
above the other Soul, has its Seat in the Left ventricle of the Heart. This
Soul has not its nourishment from the Meat which comes from the Belly, but from
a pure luminous Matter separated from the Blood. This Matter which serves for
Aliment to the Soul, is abundantly furnished from the neighboring Receptacle
of the Blood, and casts its Rays round, as the Natural nourishment, which comes
from the Intestines and Belly, is distributed into all parts; and for fear,
lest that which is contained in the Artery, should hinder the course of the
nourishment of the Soul, and give a check to its motion, the Orifice of this
Artery is closed as aforesaid, for the great Artery is nourished from the belly
and intestines, and not by this first or principal nourishment. But the great
Artery is not nourished by the blood, which we see, as is manifest by opening
the left ventricle of any Animal, for we find it quite empty, or find nothing
in it but serous humor, or a little Bile, and the aforesaid Membranes, but the
Artery is never without blood, nor the right ventricle. This Vessel therefore
gave occasion to the making of those Membranes for the passage out of the right
ventricle, is likewise furnished with Membranes, but the blood moves upon that
side but feebly. This way is open on the side, to carry the blood thither for
its nourishment, but it is shut toward the heart; so that way is left for the
air to pass insensibly from the lungs to the heart, not in great quantities,
for the heat which in this part is but feeble, would be overpowered by the
cold, the blood not being naturally warm, no more than water which receives its
heat from elsewhere, tho most believe it is hot in its own nature.

This Book of the Heart will give us the greatest Idea of the Anatomy of
Hippocrates and his exactness, but it is one of those that is not acknowledg^d,
either by Erotian or Galen. What the Author says in the beginning of this Book,
of the passage of one part of the drink into the Lungs, being a very ancient
Opinion, and maintained by Plato, who must have it from the Physicians that
preceded him, of which Hippocrates was most considerable; we might infer, that
the Book in which this Opinion is maintained is his: but those who forged this
Book, might on purpose insert this opinion to warrant its antiquity. We shall
see hereafter further proofs that it is spurious, in the Chapters of Aristotle
and Erasistratus. This opinion is repeated in the Book of the Nature of the
Bones. It is indeed amply refuted in the fourth book of Diseases, but most
Authors agree this later book not to be Hippocrates's. We shall find something
more of importance in the Chapters of the Fibers.

We have seen already three different Opinions taken from the Writings of
Hippocrates, concerning the Origin of the Veins; there is yet a fourth, and
what is more particular. This later opinion is to be found in the same book
with the third; I mean the book of the Nature of the Bones, in which the Veins
are derived from the Head. The passage is this: The veins which are spread
through the body, and which give it See the Chapter of the Nerves.
the spirit, the flux and the motion, are all branches of one Vein; whence it
draws its Origin, or it terminates, I know not, but supposing a Circle a
beginning is not to be found.

Something like this is what we read in De locis in hom. sub initia.
another place. There is no origin or beginning in the body, but the parts are
equally both beginning and end, for in a Circle there is no beginning. There
are some other passages parallel to these. Lib. de Al^men.
The nourishment comes from the inward parts to the hair, nails, and outward
superficies. It goes likewise from the external parts and superficies, to the
internal. All agree, consent and conspire together in the body. And a little
after: Ibid.
The great Principle reaches to the extremities, and the extremities to the
great Principle. Ibid.
The Milk and the Blood come from the superfluity of the nourishment, or are
the remainder of the nourishment of the body. (...). The same word is to be
found in the first book of Diet. We find there likewise these following words:
(...), to turn about, (...) gyration, or turning round; (...), terms used by
Hippocrates, to signify the Mechanism of our bodies, by an allusion to the
methods used by Artificers of all sorts in their Shops.
The Circulations go a great way in relation to the Faetus, and to the
nourishment; after the nourishment is performed, what remains returns and turns
to Milk, and becomes nourishment to the Mother, and afterward to the Faetus.
And again, the same way which leads upwards, leads also downwards; or, there is
but one way which goes both upwards and downwards.

De Loc. in Hom.
All the Veins communicate, and run one into another; for some are joined
immediately together, others communicate by small veins, which run from the
Trunk of one to another, and which serve to nourish the flesh.

De Nature. hom.
There are a great number of different veins which come from (...). So read all
the MSS. says Foesius. Yet Galen reads (...), from the Vena Cava.
the Ventricle or Belly, by which the nourishment is conveyed into all the
parts of the body. The same nourishment passes also from the great veins, as
well internal as external, to the belly, and the rest of the body. These veins
supply one another reciprocally with nourishment, those without to those
within, and those within to those without.

(...) Epidem. lib 6. sect. 6.
The flesh draws from the belly, and likewise from without; and our senses
discover to us, that all the body is transpirable, from within to without, and
from without to within. Hippocrates speaks in another place of the (...) De
Diet. acut. See the whole passage at length in the Chapter of Blood letting.
rest of the blood and spirits in the Vessels, which supposes a precedent
motion.

We have both related and rendered as exactly as possible, the foregoing
passages concerning the motion of the blood, spirits, and nourishments in the
body, because they seem to point at the most considerable Anatomical
discoveries of our Age. Hippocrates did unquestionably acknowledge a sort of
circulation of the blood and humors: the aforecited passages are in express
words. He uses also in another place, a term by which the Greeks used to
signify (...), lib. de humor. in prin.
the reflux of the Sea, to express the return of the humors from the skin to
the center of the body.

It is necessary here, to avoid a fallacy, in giving to Hippocrates the honor
of a discovery reserved to our Age, to make the following Remarks. It is
apparent that this ancient Physician held this flux and reflux, or this
circulation, to be made through the same Vessels which carried and brought back
indifferently from the Center to the Circumference, and from the Circumference
to the Center again. As for what escaped the known Vessels, it passed according
to him De morb. lib. 4.
through insensible channels, and ways undiscoverable, which yet were open as long
as the Animal lived, according to the principles laid down by him and related
by us, that all consents, conspires and agrees together in the body, or that
all is transpirable from within to without, and from without to within.

If these Principles served his turn in this case, the attraction spoken of
before, and the faculties subservient to Nature, brought him off easily for the
rest; that is, that the motions of the blood and humors were usually
determined by necessity and attraction. De Not. ^uer.
The blood, says he, which by the order of nature descends but once a month to
the Womb, flows thither every day while the (...).
Seed or Faetus therein contained, draws what is necessary for it, according to
its strength, and has its respiration greater or less. at first, the
respiration of the Faetus being very small, little blood comes from the Womb;
but as by this respiration increases the Faetus draws more blood. and it
descends in greater quantities into the Womb.

Nor does the Faetus only draw, but all the parts likewise. De Morb. lib. 4.
The Ventricle or Stomach, says Hipporates elsewhere, is a fountain which
furnishes all the body when it is full; but when it is empty, it draws in its
turn from the body which exhausted it. The Heart, the Spleen, the Liver, and
the Head, are the fountains which supply the other parts, and in their turns
draw from them. There are in Hippocrates a hundred passages like these, some of
which we shall take notice of in the sequel. The Office of Nature, or the
Faculties, is, according to him, to regulate the attraction, and provide for
all the necessities of the Animal; Nature, as we have observed, or its
Faculties, nourish, and make every thing to grow and increase.

We shall add but a word or two more upon the subject of the motion of the
blood in the Veins and Arteries, by which we may judge of the Idea Hippocratet
has had of it. There are, says he, De loc. in Hom. This Book is by universal
consent agreed to be genuine.
two other By this name Hippocrates understands as well the Arteries as Veins.
veins which beat continually; these veins are the only ones in the body that
contain no blood, for the blood turns from 'em. Now that which turns away, or
returns, is a contrary motion to that which comes forward on that side; so that
the first retiring, or withdrawing from these veins, and that which comes from
above, endeavoring to descend, they do not agree, but push one another by
turns, and mix and circulate one with another, which produces the pulsation or
beating of these veins.

We say nothing at present of the extraordinary motions of the blood and
humors; we reserve them for the next Chapter. I know that some of the greatest
Riolan. and several others.
Anatomists and Physicians of the Age, Men very learned in the Languages, and
all sorts of Literature, have done, and yet do believe, that the aforecited
passages go abundance further. We shall have occasion to examine their Opinion
in the Second Part of this History.

Of the BRAIN.
Lib. de Gland. Galen supposes this Book to be spurious.
The Brain is reckoned by Hippocrates among the Glands, because it appeared to
him of the same nature, being white, fryalble and spungy as they were. And he
believed, that the Brain sucked up the superfluous humors of the body like the
other Glands, which being all of a spungy nature, imbibe, says he, moisture
easily.

But there is this further of the Brain; That the Head being hollow and round,
draws incessantly, like a sort of Cupping-glass, the moisture from the rest of
the body, which rises in the form of a vapor; after which, it being
overcharged, it sends it down to the lower parts, especially the Glands, from
whence come Defluxions and Catarrhs.

Hippocrates in some other places, makes the Brain Lib. de Morb. sacro.
the Seat of Wisdom and Understanding, although, as we have seen before, he
lodges the Lib. de Cord.
Soul, which is the same thing with the (...).
Understanding in the Left Ventricle of the Heart. Hippocrates takes notice
elsewhere, that the Brain was De loc. in hom.
clothed with two Membranes, the one thick and the other thin. We shall have
further occasion to speak of the Brain and its Membranes, when we speak of the
Senses and their Organs.

Of the NERVES.
If Hippocrates's Anatomy of the Brain be very scanty, he has yet less of the
Nerves. To understand rightly the following Remarks, we must take notice that
the Greek Anatomists that came after Hippocrates, distinguished three sorts of
parts which were before confounded; the Nerves called (...), which are the
passages of the Animal Spirits, which communicates sense and motion to all the
parts of the Body, the Tendons, (...), which come from the Muscles, and serve
to contract or extend the Members and the Ligaments, (...), which serve
peculiarly to strengthen the Articulations of the Bones. Hippocrates has given
the first of these names indifferently to all the three parts; so that (...),
Nerve, did as well and as often signify in him a Tendon and a Ligament. He
seems sometimes to mean by it a Nerve, though, according to Galen, Hippocrates
uses generally the word (...) in that signification.

There is a passage in the pre-notions of Cos, where he speaks of (...).
internal Nerves and slender Nerves, by which may be understood the Nerves
properly so called.

There is likewise another passage, wherein those names seem to be given to the
true Nerves. Lib. de Oss. Not.
The Rise or Origin of these Nerves, says Hippocrates, is from the back part of
the Head, continuing along the Spine of the Back to the Ischium; whence come
the Nerves which go to the Privities, to the Thighs, the Legs, the Feet, and
the Hands, and distribute themselves even to the Arms, one part going into the
Flesh, the other along the Bone, (...).
Perone to the Thumb, while it traverses the flesh to the rest of the Fingers.
It goes also to the Blades of the Shoulders, to the Breast, and to the Belly,
through the Bones, and through the Ligaments. There come also others from the
Privities, which taking their course by the Anus, tend toward the cavity of the
Hips, proceeding afterward part upon the upper part of the Thigh, and part
under the Knees; they continue to the Tendon and Bone of the Heel, to the Feet,
and some to the Perone, and some others to the Reins.

Hippocrates seems here to speak of real Nerves, yet when he comes in the same
Book, to assign the use of the Nerves, which he designs by the same name, he
confounds them with the Tendons. The Nerves, says he, serve to bend, to
contract, and extend the Members.

In this later place, the word (...).
Nerve may perhaps signify a Tendon, whereas in the former it signifies a
Nerve. But if Hippocrates knew the Nerves, he seems to have been a stranger to
their use, for in the same passage he gives there the proper Office to the
veins. By the whole passage we may see what he thought of the uses of some
other parts: The Bones, says he; give the form to the Body, and support it. The
Nerves bind, contract and extend the Members. The flesh and the skin unite all
the parts together. The veins which are spread through the whole body carry (...)
the Spirit, the flood or facility of flowing, and the motion. By these veins
which carry the Spirit, etc. we are to understand the Arteries, by what has
been before observed of the Office Hippocrates allots them. There is yet
another passage in the fourth Book of Diet, where he speaks of the passage of
the spirits through the veins and through the blood; and observes, that it is
their natural way. Convulsions, the Palsy, sudden Speechlesness and Vertigoes,
are there taken notice of as effects of the interception of the spirits in the
veins; and the Apoplexy seems to be intended by the name of (...).
Interception of the veins. See anon the passage at length, in the Chapter of
Blood-letting.

As for the word (...), which as we have said generally signified a Nerve, we
must examine the principal passages wherein it is found, that we may give the
truer judgment of it. The following are the most considerable passages. We
shall first propose one, wherein Hippocrates, after having laid down some of
the Symptoms that accompany a dislocation of the Thigh bone forward, adds, Lib.
de Artic.
That in such a dislocation they feel abundance of pain, and that there is a
suppression of Urine, because the head of that bone presses upon very
considerable Nerves, so that it causes a Tumor in the Groin. Galen, upon this
passage says, In Lib. de Artic. Comment. 3.
That by these considerable Nerves Hippocrates meant the Nerves which go along
with the Vein and Artery through the Groin, which are call d (...).
considerable, or of great power, because they are near the spinal Marrow, and
come out at the same place with those that go to the bladder. Hence it is, that
the head of the Thigh Bone being displaced this way, the bladder it self
suffers, and such an inflammation arises, that no Urine can pass. It sometimes
also happens as Galen says, That the Urine is stopp^d with the greatness of the
inflammation, which reaches to the neck of the bladder and the sphincter Muscle,
and stops by that means the passage.

If the suppression of Urine spoken of, arises from the compression of the
Nerves designed by Galen, we should rather attribute this symptom to a
Stupifaction, or a sort of Palsy of the bladder, than to an inflammation of it,
an inflammation being not so natural a consequence of the compression of the
Nerves as numbness; but Hippocrates himself seems to acknowledge, that this
inflammation is the effect of the pain preceding, and this makes me suspect,
that by these Nerves he meant no more than the Fibrous and Tendinous parts of
the Muscles of the bladder, or near it.

We find in the same Book another passage, wherein Hippocrates seems to design
the Nerves by the name (...). If you would, says he, cauterize or burn the skin
under the Armpits, you must take care of going too forward, or taking too much,
for fear of hurting some considerable Nerves, which are near the Glands of that
part. Galen would have it, that Hippocrates here points at the Nerves that come
from the spinal Marrow to the Arms; and, indeed, it seems as if he could mean
nothing else. Nevertheless, what Hippocrates adds presently after, persuades me
that he designs nothing but the Tendons of the Muscles which draw the Arm
downwards. You must know, says he, that when you have lifted up the Arm very
high, you cannot lay hold on the skin of the Arm-pit, at least not so as to
extend it; the Arm being lifted up, the skin which was under the Arm-pit
disappears, or cannot be pinched: And you must further take care of the Nerves,
which in this posture advance, and are extended very much, which must in no
manner be hurt. He uses also in this place the same name (...).

The same Book likewise furnishes us with a third passage, wherein we meet the
word (...), repeated several times it is in speaking of the Articulations of
the Vertebrae; but all that he says there, seems better explicable of the
Ligaments than of the Nerves properly so called.

We find likewise in another De Morb. vulgar. lib. 2. sect. 4.
Book of Hippocrates the following passage: There are two Nerves, (...), which
come from the Brain, which passing behind the great Vertebrae, draw sidewards
from above toward the Gullet or Oesophagus, and touching the Artery on both
sides, join again as if there were but one, and terminate where the Vertebrae
and the Diaphragma take their Origin, or are joined. Some have supposed that
these Nerves parting in this place, tended toward the Liver and toward the
Spleen. There is another Nerve which proceeds from each side the Vertebrae
along the Spine, and passing obliquely over the Vertebrae, disperses it self
into the sides. And these Nerves, as well as the Veins, (of which I spoke
before) seem to traverse the Diaphragm, and terminate in the Mesentery: These
Nerves re-joining again at the place where the Diaphragm takes its Origin, and
passing through the middle below the Artery return to the Vertebrae, and at
last lose themselves in the Os Sacrum.

It is impossible to translate this passage well by reason of its obscurity; it
is taken from a fragment of Anatomy in the Book before cited, which appears to
be out of its place, having no coherence with any thing, either antecedent or
consequent, yet Galen has commented upon this Book of Hippocrates, Comment, in
lib. de arti^.
for he relates some of the first words of the passage we have translated,
which proves that the fragment from whence it was taken, was inserted even in
his time in the place where we now find it. Galen contents himself to insinuate
in two words, that this passage treats of real Nerves, without giving himself
the trouble to explain it entire; and perceiving that this passage was little
for the honor of Hippocrates, he goes about to excuse him, saying, What he
writ was only for a (...).
Memorandum for himself, and not to treat exactly to the bottom of this matter.
And to give the more credit to it, he adds, That the first and third Books of
his Epidemicks were the only Books which Hippocrates finished, or that he wrote
with any design of publishing. The passage here meant being taken out of the
second, which, according to Galen, was but a sort of Meddly which the Author
had not digested; this may be so, but he ought to have shown that Hippocrates
had elsewhere spoken better, or more clearer, on this head.

It is to no purpose to perplex our selves to find in an Author what he has
not; if we should allow that this ancient Physician, and the Asclepiades his
predecessors, knew or had seen some considerable Trunk of Nerves, as it was
hard if the practice of Surgery gave them no occasion, they appear not to
have distinguished them well from Tendons or Ligaments, nor to have known the
true use of them.

See the Chapter of Blood-letting.
The forecited passage, in which Hippocrates assigns to the Veins and Arteries
the Office of the Nerves, is a convincing proof of his Ignorance on that
subject; but there cannot be a better proof than we find in the Writings of
this Physician, and the manner of his reasoning with Vid. lib. ^.
Alcmaeon, and other Philosophers of his time, about Hearing, Smelling, and the
rest of the Senses; therein we do not see that either one o^t other so much as
suspected the share the Nerves have in Sensation.

Of the Organs of SENSE.
We have seen before Alcmaeon's Opinion: The following descriptions of the
Organs of Sense are taken from Hippocrates. Lib. de Carn.
The Ears, sa's he, have a hole which butts upon a bone as hard and dry as a
stone, to which is joined a Fistulous cavity, or a sort of passage oblique and
narrow, at the entry of which there is a Membrane extremely fine and dry, whose
dryness, as well as that of the bone, produces the sound, the Air being
reflected by this bone and by this membrane. After which, without mentioning
the Nerves, he endeavors to prove that whatever is dry sounds most. In another
place he says, De Loc. in Hom.
That the cavities which are about the Ears are made only for the better
hearing of noises and sounds. And he adds, That whatever comes to the Brain by
the Membrane (which encompasses it) is distinctly heard, that for that reason
there is but one passage which pierces in this place to the Membrane which is
spread over the Brain.

As for the Smelling he says, The brain being moist, has the faculty of
scenting or smelling, by drawing in the odor of dry things with the air, which
runs a-thwart (...) Lib. de Carnib. 4.
certain dry bodies. The Brain, adds he, reaches even into the cavity of the
Nose; in this place there is no bone between them, but only a soft cartilage
like a Sponge, which can neither be called bone nor flesh.

He describes the Eye after this manner: There are, says he, some small veins
extremely slender, which go (...), into the sight or eye. Lib. de loc. in hom.
into the eye through the Membrane which incloses the Brain. These veins nourish
the sight of the eye with a Liquor extremely pure, which comes from the brain,
in which the Images of things appear to the eyes; the same veins, if they dry
up, extinguish the sight. There are also three Membranes which encompass the
eye, of which the first is the thickest, the second is thinner, the third is
extremely fine, which preserves the liquor or humor of the eye. The first
being hurt, the eye is out of order: The second being broken, puts it in great
danger, that it puffs outward like a bladder: But the third, which preserves
the humor, is that whose breaking is of worst consequence.

What follows we find in another Lib. de Carn.
Book. We see for this reason, or after this manner, vision is made.

There is a vein which runs from the Membrane of the Brain, which passing through
the bone, enters into each eye. By these two veins, the most subtle part of the
viscid humor of the brain distills as it were through a Streiner, and forms round
about it a Membrane like to that which is transparent in the eye, which is
exposed to the air and winds, which is formed much after the same manner that
other Membranes are; but there are several Membranes about the eye, which are
like to that which is transparent within. In this transparent, the light and
luminous bodies are (...).
reflected, and by this reflection vision is made. Vision is not made by what
is not Diaphanous, and does not reflect. The rest of the white about the eye is
a sort of flesh, and what we call the sight appears black because it is deep.
The Tunicles which are about it are black for the same reason. We call, says
he, a Membrane or Tunicle, that which is like a skin, which is no way black of
it self, but white and transparent. As for the moisture which is in the eyes,
it is something viscid, for we have sometimes seen, after the breaking of the
eye, that there came out a thick humor, which is liquid while it is warm, but
solid as Incense when it is cold.

Those that think that Hippocrates knew as much as we do now, may say that he
called the Optic Nerves veins. It Is true this name signifies variety of things
in this Author, for he gave it not only to the Arteries, but likewise to the
Vessels which contained no blood, such as the Ureters, because they are round,
long, hollow and white, like veins. He does indeed sometimes distinguish
certain veins by the Epithet of (...).
veins that hold blood, but it is not in opposition to the Nerves, but to
certain Vessels which he calls (...), lib de Ossium Not.
veins that are very slender, and contain but little blood. He talks also of a
Nerve full of blood, which according to Erotian should be a vein, though others
understand by it the Panniculus Carnosus. A learned Interpreter of Hippocrates
pretends that he gave to some veins the Epithet of hollow, to distinguish them
from veins that were (...), vid. Foesii O^comom. Hipp^c. invoce (...).
solid; but I find not this later word in Hippocrates, tho the hollow veins
there cited might be meant of the veins and arteries in general, which are both
hollow Vessels. The same Interpreter says elsewhere Id. in voce (...).
that Hippocrates in one place, comprehends under the name of Veins, Nerves,
Tendons and Ligaments, which he appears not to me to prove. Rusus Ephesius
tells us, That the most ancient Greeks call the Arteries Nerves; if it be true
that Hippocrates called the Optic Nerves veins, he ought to have said that the
Ancients reciprocally called the Nerves by the names of Arteries and Veins.

All that we can gather from all this is, that the inaccurateness of
Hippocrates, and other Authors of those Times, in distinguishing different
Vessels by different names, shows that they had but a very superficial
knowledge of them. Perhaps the word (...).
Vein was a term as general amongst them as (...).
that of Vessel amongst the Anatomists since, which signifies indifferently a
Vein, Artery or Nerve, or even the Vreters, or any other parts that serve for
the conveyance of Liquors or Spirits. If it were so, the Ancients run no risque
when they call all the Vessels veins without distinction.

Of the FIBERS.
Before we quit the Nerves, we must examine the Greek word (...), whose plural
makes (...), by which it is pretended that Hippocrates signified equally a
Fiber and a Nerve. Some says Erotian will have this word to signify a Nerve,
others explain it only of the Fibers, whereof the Nerves are composed. The
Greek Authors that have written of Plants, have called by this name the Nerves
or Strings which appear on the back of Leaves, and the strings at the end of
Roots. The Anatomists have given the same name to the small strings which are
in the flesh, and other parts; and the Latins have translated it Fibrae.
Hippocrates has undeniably used the word in that sense; as when he observes,
that the Spleen is full of strings or fibers. He takes notice also of the
Fibers in the blood; but it is pretended likewise, that he signified the Nerves
by it. To prove it, a passage is cited, where he says, De Ossi^m Nature.
That the heart has Nerves or Fibers which come from all the Body.

He uses there the word (...), which we find no where else; but Foesius reads
(...). This latter word may as well be rendered Fiber as Nerve; that which
inclines us to the later signification, is what he adds as a proof, That the
Seat of Thought is rather about the Thorax than any other place of the body,
because this agrees with the opinion of those who bring the Nerves from the
Heart, as we shall see hereafter: But, perhaps, neither the common reading, nor
that of Foesius, are true. And we ought to read with Cornarius (...). habenas,
the Reins changing one letter it alters not the pronunciation. This Author
translates this passage thus. The Heart is situated as in the Streights of a
passage, that it may hold the Reins for the guidance of the whole Body. For
this reason Thought has its Seat about the Thorax or Breast, rather than any
other part. The changes of color also are produced by the opening and shutting
of the veins by the Heart; when it opens them it looks fresh and lively, when
it shuts them we become pale and wan.

Of the MUSCLES.
There is little more to be found in Hippocrates concerning their Muscles than
their name. The following passage is the first that takes notice of them, Lib.
de Art.
The parts whose flesh is turned round, which is what we call a Mu^s.
Muscle, have all a belly or a cavity. (...).
For all that is not composed of parts of a different nature, whether it be
covered with a Membrane, or whether the flesh covers it, all that is hollow,
and while it is well, it is full of spirit, but when it is diseased it is
fill^d with a sort of water, or corrupted blood. The Arms have flesh of this
sort, the Thighs and the Legs the same, as well as the most meagre and
fleshless parts.

We find in another place the word De Off. Not.
(...), which can be nothing but an Adjective to (...), which is understood,
(...), Musculi adductores, or adstrictores: The Muscles which serve to draw
back or gather together. He speaks there of the Anus. I know not whether there
be any other particular wherein the action of the Muscle is touched. As for the
names, the succeeding Anatomists distinguished the Muscles; he has spoken in
one place of the Muscle called Lib de Artic.
Psoas.

Of the Oesophagus; of the Stomach or Ventricle; and of the Guts.
Lib. de Anatom.
The Oesophagus, according to Hippocrates, is a Tunnel which reaches from the
Tongue to the Stomach, which is the place where the Meat it putrified, or is
concocted. We find both these expressions in Hippocrates: He calls the Stomach,
in the passage we have cited, the putrefying Belly, ((...).) Lib. de Aliment.
He uses elsewhere the word (...), that is which begins to putrify, speaking
of the nourishment or food in the stomach. But we find much oftener the words
(...) Coction, and (...), to Concoct. This digestion, according to him, is made
by the heat of the Stomach, which he calls a part all Nervous, which joins to
the Liver on the Concave-side.

We must further take notice, that the words (...) and (...), signify the same
thing in our Author. The latter signifies often in Hippocrates the Orifice, or
mouth of any Vessel or part whatsoever, as of the Bladder, of Gall, the Matrix,
etc.

Lib. de Anatom.
Hippocrates seems not to distinguish more than two Guts, one which is
straight, about the length of a dozen Cubits, being afterward full of folds;
some, says he, call it Colon. And he observes in another place, De Morb. Epidem.
This Gut in a Man is like that of a Dog, but that in a Man it is bigger. This
Gut is suspended by, or fastened to a part which he calls Mesocolon, that is
the middle of the Colon, and that part it self is fastened to the Nerves which
come from the spine of the back, and pass under the belly. The second named
(...), is furnished with abundance of flesh all round, and ends in the Anus.
Elsewhere he says, This latter Gut is Porous, and adds some particulars
concerning the Intestines, which shall be remembered when we come to the Reins.

Of the LIVER.
Hippocrates says of the Liver, that it abounds more with blood than the rest
of the Bowels, and that there are in it two eminencies which they call Ports.

He says further, That the Liver has five Lobes, or is divided into five Parts.
We have seen before, that he has made in another place the Origin of the Veins.
He observes that several Bronchiae pass from the Heart to the Liver; and with
these Bronchiae, the great vein by which the whole body is nourished. He
elsewhere calls this vein (...).
the Liver-vein; he assigns to the Liver the Office of separating the Bile,
which it does by the means of its veins, which draw whatever is Bilious, or
proper to make Bile in the Aliment.

Of the SPLEEN.
The Spleen beginning from the last of the short Ribs on the Left-side,
stretches its self out like the print of a Man^s foot; it receives one vein
that divides it self into an infinite number of strings like the threads of a
Spiders web, which are full of blood, and diffused through its whole substance.
It is fastened, or hangs to the Omentum, which it furnishes with blood by
diverse small veins. Hippocrates says in one place, that the Spleen is (...).
Fibrous. He says also, that it is soft and spungy, and by that means draws
from the Ventricle which it is near to, part of the moisture which comes from
the drink, the rest being afterward suck^d up by the Bladder of Urine.

Of the LUNGS.
The Lungs have, according to Hippocrates, five Lobes like the Liver; they are
cavernous, rare, and pierced with diverse holes like Spunges. De prise. Med.
For this reason it draws from the neighboring parts the moistures they
contain.

Of the Membrane which separates the Belly from the Breast.
The name which Hippocrates gives to this Membrane, which separates the Belly
from the Breast, is the same by which the Greeks signified (...).
the Mind or Understanding. The most ancient Physicians called it so, out of a
persuasion that it was the Seat of the Understanding, making it to divide the
function attributed, as we have seen before, to the Heart, which is near it.

Not that this was the generally received opinion; it was believed false, even
in the time of Hippocrates. If the book of the Falling Sickness be his, the
Author of this book expresses himself thus: The Part which is called Phrenes,
is falsely so called and at random. This name is grounded upon an (b) opinion,
and not upon any thing real; for I sce not how this part contributes to
Prudence or Understanding. All that it does is, that when any one is surprised
with any great and sudden joy or grief, it beats, and causes thereby a sort of
uneasiness or pain; for it is sine, and more strongly upon the stretch than any
other part of the body, having no belly or cavity to receive what is good or
what is bad, but being alike encumbred with one or the other. This part, says he,
perceives, or has sense, but it is not the Seat of Wisdom no more than the
Heart; wherefore the name of this is as improper as that of the Ears of the
Heart, which have no hearing.

In another place Hippocrates says of this Membrane, That it has its Origin
near the Backbone behind the Liver; and in one, that it is nervous and strong.
He says yet in another place, That this Membrane causes madness and folly when
the blood stagnates there, or moves too slowly.

Of the Reins, the Ureters, and Bladder of Urine.
Our Author speaking of De Off. Not.
the Reins, numbers them amongst the Glands, or at least he seems to think that
they have Glands, and those more gross than the rest of the body; but it seems
more probable that he meant the Glands near them, whatever they were, than
those of this part.

He had said a little before to the same purpose: That the Intestines had the
biggest of all, which drew the moisture therein contained. He believed, That
the Reins drew likewise the moisture from the nearest Glands, and sent it to
the Bladder* He supposed in another place, That this moisture came from the
drink; and that the Reins, by a faculty peculiar to themselves, having sucked a
part from the veins near which they are situated, it filtred, or run through
the substance of ^em like water, and descended into the bladder by the veins
which lead thither, while the rest of the drink soaked immediately through the
Intestines into the same bladder, the Intestines or Intestine, being very
spungy and porous in the part contiguous to it.

Of the Organs, and manner of Generation.
We find in Hippocrates, the names of the principal parts distinguishing the
b^xes, but he says nothing of their structure. He has this only concerning the
Vesiculae Seminales, That there are on either side the Bladder, little bodies
like ^oney combs, in which the seed is contained. He believed that it came from
all parts of the body, but particularly from the Head, descending by the veins
behind the Ears down the spinal Marrow, and into the Reins. As for the manner
of Conception, and the formation of the Faetus in the Womb, he pretends that
the Seed both of the Male and Female being mingled in the Womb, grow thick and
hot, or spirituous; after which, the Spirit contained in their Center expandy
it self, and draws a part of the Air which the Mother breathes; by means of
which mixture, these two Seeds in receiving refreshment, are nourished or
inflated, till it forms about it self a small Pellicule, which afterward
contains others under it, which are all fixed together.

At this time the blood of the Mother flowing into the Womb, and fixing there,
produces a sort of flesh; from the middle of which shoots the Navel, which is a
Pipe hanging down from these Pellicules, by which the Faetus breathes, is
nourished and increases. That the Faetus is nourished by the Navel, is repeated
De Not. Puer.
in more than one place, yet notwithstanding this, Hippocrates elsewhere
affirms, De Carnib.
That it is nourished by sucking at the Mouth, that otherwise it could not have
excrements when it came into the World in its Guts, and would not so readily
suck at the Breast if it had not before done something like it.

Hippocrates continuing to speak of the formation of the Child, says, That the
flesh before spoken of being formed, the blood of the Mother, which is drawn
every day in greater quantity into the Womb, by this flesh which breathes,
causes the Pellicules to swell, and that it causes foldings in the outward
ones, which filling themselves with this blood, produce what is called the
Chorion. Afterward as the flesh grows, the spirit distinguishes or
disentangles the parts, every one going toward its like, the thick to the
thick, the clearer or thin to the thin, the moist to the moist, every thing
repairing to its proper place, or to the quarters of those of the same nature,
from whence they had their Origin; so that what comes from the thick remains
thick, and the moist, and the rest accordingly, the heat after all bringing the
bones to the hardness they are of. After this, the extremities of the body
shoot outward like the branches of a Tree; the Parts, as well internal as
external, are better distinguished, the Head erects it self above the
Shoulders, the Arms separate themselves from the Sides, and the Legs spread
themselves out; the Nerves or Ligaments go to the Joints, the Mouth opens, the
Nose and Ears shoot out of the Head and are perfected, the Eyes are fill^d with
a pure humor, and the distinctions of Sex appear; the Entrails are
distinguished and ranged, the Infant begins to breathe by the Mouth and by the
Nose, the Belly is filled with Spirit or Air, as are the Guts also, and the Air
comes to them likewise by the Navel. At length the Guts and Belly open so, that
a passage is made to the Anus, and another from the Bladder outward.
Hippocrates, or the Author of this Book, having reasoned thus of the formation
of the body of a Child, shows that Plants are produced after the same manner,
and explains their growth from Seeds by the same principles. He hints likewise,
that Birds in the Egg have the same formation, but inlarges not much thereupon.
The yolk of the Egg is, according to him, the matter of which they are
produced, and the white their nourishment. From all which he concludes, That
Nature is the same, and acts after a uniform manner, in the generation of Men
and Plants, and whatsoever springs from the earth; in which, his opinion is the
same with that of See the Chapter of Empedocles.
Empedocles.

What Hippocrates says of the manner of his discovery, that the mixture of the
Seeds in the Womb is soon covered with a skin, is pretty remarkable: He had
opportunity to inform himself therein, by means of the advice he gave a
Musicianess Slave, who being gone six days, to the great prejudice of her
Voice, and her Masters profit, to leap several times upon the ground; which she
having done, the Seed came away with noise. It was like, says he, to a raw Egg
without a shell, the liquor of which was very transparent. He saw there very
fine white Fibers upon the Membrane, which contained this liquor, which being
mixed with a thick blackish red Matter, which made the whole Membrane appear
red, there was in the middle of this Membrane something very fine, which he
took for the Navel, and it was about the beginning of the place of the Origin
of the Membrane.

The Author continuing to examine what happens to the Embryo in the Womb, from
the time that its body is formed, to the time of its birth, says, That the body
of a Female has all its Parts distinct, at the end of forty days at farthest,
and the Male at thirty. For which he gives this reason, That the Seed which
produces a Female is more feeble and moist than that which produces a Male. He
gives also another reason drawn from the time of Women's evacuations after
Labor, which for brevity sake we shall omit here. He adds, for the difference
of Sexes, That Males are begotten when the Seed of both Male and Female is
vigorous; and Females, when their Seed is weaker or moister, and has less heat.
He observes, That the Males come from the right side of the Womb, which is
stronger and hotter, and the Females from the left.

The Body of the Infant being thus rough drawn, grows continually, drawing to
it self the most Oily part of the blood of the Mother, which makes its bones
become more hard, the fingers part, and nails come upon their ends, hair upon
their heads, and other parts of their bodies. After three months the Male
begins to stir, and the Female generally after four; though there may be
sometimes some variation. The Infant being come to its just growth and bulk,
and not finding any longer sufficient nourishment from the Mother, begins to
stir violently, and breaks the Membranes in which it was wrapped, and so
procures its exclusion, which happens usually in the tenth month. Being born,
it is nourished with the Milk of its Mother, or a Nurse. The matter of which
this Milk is composed, is the most fat and oily part of the Aliment, after this
manner. The Womb, as it grows big, presses the Omentum and Belly, and by that
compression obliges 'em to discharge their fat, which is presently sucked into
their Breasts; the veins of which dilate themselves afterward more and more,
by the sucking of the Infants.

This, according to our Author, is the manner of the formation, and increase of
Infants in the Womb, and of their coming into the World; which is to be
understood of ordinary cases, which exclude not the extraordinary ones, whereof
in some Books written for that purpose, Hippocrates gives a particular Account.

Of the seventh and eighth Months Birth.
There are two Books, one Entitled, The seventh Months Birth; and the other,
The eighth Months Birth. The first of these Children may live, and arrive at a
good Age, but not the second; which, according to our Author, must necessarily
die in its entrance into the World, or presently after. The reason that he
gives of this difference is, That seven months after conception the Child in
the Womb being perfectly formed, and already pretty strong, although it has some
time to grow, moves very vigorously, which causes the Membranes, in which it is
involved, to stretch a little, as we see the Ears of Corn open some time before
the Grain is ripe. It happens sometimes that this distention being greater than
the Membranes can bear, they break and the birth must follow. This Birth being
too early, most of them that are born at that time die immediately. But as we
have observed, the Infant having at that time his body completely formed, some
however escape with due care.

As for those that remain longer in the Womb, after the relaxation of the
Membranes, Hippocrates supposes that the strong efforts they have made, renders
them weak and sick for forty days; so that if they are born in that time, the
fresh efforts which they are obliged to make to force their way into the World,
quite ruins their strength, and certainly kills them, whereas those that
out-stay the term, especially those that have forty days more to recover in,
being born in full strength, easily survive.

These two forty days are the last of seven, which Hippocrates supposes to pass
between the time of the conception and the birth of Children, who come
according to the ordinary course of Nature.

He supposes at least, that if the Child does not stay the full seven times
forty days, which carries the time of birth ten days over nine months,
reckoning as he does thirty days to a month, it ought at least to be entered
into the last forty days; as those are that are born between the beginning and
end of the ninth month.

He thought likewise that it was sufficient for Children, that came in the
seventh month, that they were entered into the seventh. For which reason, he
puts those that are born at the end of one hundred and eighty two days, and a
small part of a day, in the number of those Children that comes at seven months
complete, though this number of days, after his way of reckoning, makes but six
months and two days, and wants eighteen days to complete the fifth forty.

That which persuaded Hippocrates that Children born at seven months were more
likely to live than those born at eight; and that seven times forty days were
required between conception and a mature birth, was, That he supposed the
number seven to be the most perfect of all numbers, and to have a mighty
influence not only in the formation and birth of Children, but even over the
life, death, and distempers of Men; according to which he says in one place,
Lib. de Carn.
That the Age or Life of Man is of seven days, or is governed by the number
seven; that all that befalls him, or all that respects the Economy of his body,
is regulated by the number seven by Septenary periods. In which he follow^d the
opinion of Pythagoras, acknowledging with him certain Laws De partu septimes
and Epidem. lib. 2. sect. 6.
of Harmony, by which the whole Universe is governed, which consists in the
conjunction or union of certain Numbers, of which seven is the most powerful.
But whatever was Hippocrates's reason for assigning these positive times of
birth, it is very remarkable that the whole World has submitted to his Decision,
and his Authority alone has been the Rule and Standard to all the Septimo mense
nasci perfectum partum receptum est propter autoritatem doctissimi viri
Hippocratis. Paulus lib. 7. de statu hominum. He is cited upon the same account
by diverse other Lawyers.
Lawyers and Emperors of Rome in their Laws upon this subject.

We shall close the Account of his Anatomy with this digression, taking notice
only, that there are in the Writings of Hippocrates many things concerning the
Bones, their number, figure and contexture; and that it is the part of Anatomy
in which he is of all the most exact, as being the most necessary to the
practice of Surgery, particularly that which relates to Fractures and
Dislocations, which he understood excellently well, as we shall show in proper
place: However, we thought not fit to take further notice of it here, because
it is a part of Anatomy least disputed in aftertimes, and because we shall give
a complete System of Anatomy, wherein the Osteology will be comprised in the
Chapter of Galen.

This is what we would observe of the Anatomy of Hippocrates: We shall find
something relating to it in the next Chapter, and after in that of Erasistratus.

Of the Causes of Health, and of Diseases; their subject and principal
differences.

Hippocrates, as we have shown, laid down three Principles, the Solid, the
Liquid, and the Spirits, which he sometimes explains (...).
by that which contains, and that which is contained, and that which gives the
motion.

He seems to lay down these Principles only to Animal Bodies, and that he
designed by 'em the three principal substances whereof they are composed.

By that which contains, we may understand the solid Parts, as the Bones, the
Nerves, or the Tendons and Ligaments, the Cartilages, the Membranes, the
Fibers, and other like Parts.

By that which is contained, Hippocrates particularly meant four sorts of
Humors, or liquid Matter, De Not. hom.
found in the body: The Blood, the Pituita or Phlegm, the yellow Bile, and the
melancholy or black Bile, of which we may make two sorts of different humors,
as we shall see by and by.

By that which gives the movement, he designed what is otherwise called Spirit,
which according to him is a substance like Air, from whence it is drawn, and is
diffused through the whole body.

Hippocrates says, That the blood is naturally hot and moist, of color red,
and sweet to the taste: The Phlegm is cold and moist, white, viscid and saltish;
the Bile yellow, dry, viscid and bitter, and drawn from the fat part of the
blood or aliments; the melancholy, black, cold and dry, very viscid, windy, and
very fermentative.

The Body of Man is composed of four Substances; De not. hom.
on these depend health and sickness. Men are well when these humors are in
their natural state, or while they balance one another in quality, quantity and
mixture. On the contrary, they are sick when the quantity of any of these is
less or greater than it ought to be, or when it is discharged from the rest
upon any particular part of the body, and especially when they are not mixed
together as they ought to be. We must define health and sickness from what we
have said of 'em: Hippocrate^ himself has given no express definition, except
of sickness, in one place, which he calls (...). Lib. de Flatib.
all that incommodes Man; but this is too general.

He thought that the blood, in good condition, nourished; and that it was the
fountain of the vital heat; that it caused a fresh color and good health. That
the yellow Bile preserved the body in its natural state, hindering the small
Vessels, and secret Passages, from being stopped, and keeping open the Drain of
the Excrements. He thought it actuated the Senses, and helped to the concoction
of the Aliment. The black Bile was a sort of Ground, which served as a support
and foundation for other humors. The Phlegm serv^d to supple and facilitate the
motion of the Nerves, Membranes, Cartilages, Joints and Tongue, and other Parts.

Besides the four first qualities which Hippocrates attributed to the Humors,
as moisture, dryness, heat and cold, it is apparent that he believed they had,
or might have abundance of others, which all had their use, and were never
hurtful but when one prevailed over the rest, or was separated from them. Take
his own words: De pris^. Med. and lib. 2. in the Chapter of Alcmaeon.
The Ancients, says he, did not believe that the dry, the cold, the hot, or the
moist, nor any other like quality, incommoded a Man, but that whatever
exceeded, or prevailed, of any of these qualities, and which Nature could not
overcome, was that which incommoded the Man, and that which they endeavored to
take away or correct; so of the sweet, the most sweet was the strongest, as of
the bitter or sour, that which was most bitter and most sour; in short, the
highest degree of every thing. These are, says Hippocrates, the latest
discoveries of the Ancients in the body of Man, and which were hurtful. There
are really in our bodies, bitter, sweet, sour, salt, rough, and insipid, and
abundance of others which have different faculties, according to their quantity
or quality. These different qualities are insensible, and do not hurt so long
as they are in due mixture; but if these humors separate, and lodge apart,
then their qualities become at once both sensible and inconvenient. From what
Hippocrates has here said we may gather, that he did not suppose the Matters we
have spoken of to act only by what the Philosophers called first qualities; so
far from that, that he says a little after, That it is not the hot that is of
any mighty power, but the sour, the insipid, etc. whether within a Man, or
without a Man, whether in regard of what he cats, or what he drinks, or what he
applies outwardly, in what manner soever, concluding that of all the faculties,
there are none less active than heat and cold.

What we have said of the separation of the humors from one another, relate to
what Hippocrates says in diverse places, that the humors move. This motion,
which is the cause of several distempers, expresses sometimes by a term, it
signifies (...), impe^^ (...), ^^^dine incenli.
a Fury, like that of some Animals that grow Lustful at certain times.

There are other passages by which Hippocrates seems to impute Diseases, Lib.
de affect^ nib. and lib (...) de Morb.
to two of these humors only, the Bile and Pituita, as they offered either in
quantity or quality, or place. But as he speaks elsewhere of two sorts of Bile,
these two humors may be split into three, and with the blood make four.

Lib. 4. de Morb.
In some other passages he adds a fifth, which is Water, of which he supposes
the Spleen to be the Spring, as the Liver and the Brain are of the Blood, the
Bile and the Pituita. Some of his Commentators make this Water the same with
the Melancholy, to which Hippocrates seems to substitute it. I cannot see how
to reconcile their opinion with the Idea he had of that humor; he looked
upon it, as we have said before, as a sort of Lee of the rest of the humors,
which will by no means agree with water. Nor are they nearer their point for
making two sorts of Melancholy, one of which we have been speaking, and another
which ought rather to be called black Bile, which is only the yellow Bile
turned black, as he supposed, by being overheated and burnt, this having
nothing in common with water. The only support of the opinion in question, is,
that he says in the same passage, that this water is the heaviest of all the
humors: I see no reason why we should not object that this is another System,
It is ascribed to Polyblus his Son-i^-^aw. See Book 4. Chapter 1.
since it has been always suspected that Hippocrates was not the Author of that
Book. This water might be something like what Hippocrates elsewhere calls
Ichor, by which he meant any sort of clear, thin Liquor, formed in the body of
a Man, whether sound or unsound. So he calls by this name what runs from a
malignant Ulcer, and speaks in several places of sharp and bilious Ichors, and
burning Ichors.

(...), and (...).
We find yet a third System of the Causes of Diseases in another book,
Entitled, Of Winds or Spirits, which is mix^d with the Works of Hippocrates,
but most suppose it not to be his. The Author of this book uses sometimes the
word Wind, sometimes Spirit, with this difference, That the latter signifies
the Spirits or Air, and Wind enclosed in the body, but the former the Wind
without; from whence nevertheless, he derives that within by means of the Air
drawn by respiration, and the Air contained in the Food we take. This book upon
reading, seems to be one of the most rational and coherent of all Hippocrates's
Works. He looks upon the Air and the Spirits to be the true Causes of health
and of diseases, even in preference to the humors, which here are only
collateral Causes, as the Spirits mix with 'em. But this later opinion may be
reconciled with that which we have before allowed to be Hippocrates's,
concerning the effects of the humors; only alleging, that all that has been
attributed to them, in relation to health or sickness, supposes an impulse of
the Spirits as the first movers, and that therefore Hippocrates named them, as
we have said before, that which gives the motion.

There is, according to Hippocrates, as great a variety of external Causes of
health and diseases, as there is of things without the body of Man which may
act upon him, as there is of diversity in his Conduct, and of accidents in the
course of his Life.

From this Hypothesis, it is plain that Health and Sickness in general depend
upon the following Causes: On the Air which surrounds us, what we eat and
drink, sleep, watching, exercise; what goes out of our bodies, and what is kept
in, and upon the Passions. In this number likewise, are ranked those foreign
bodies which occur, and are sometimes useful, yet may often dissolve, cut or
break the union of the Parts of ours. Poisons and venomous Animals are likewise
reckoned among these later Causes.

We shall not engage any further in the Causes of Distempers in particular,
that would lead us too far out of our way: And we may the more easily be
dispensed with, because we shall have occasion to take notice of all that is
proper here in the Article of Galen, whose System is more clear and methodical
than that of Hippocrates, whose Principles he follows in almost every thing.

We shall take notice only of two things; first, the Relation that Hippocrates
finds between some of the external and internal Causes. For example, he
compares the four Humors with the four Ages of Man, with the four Seasons of
the Year, and with the Climates: Infancy, the Spring and temperate Countries,
ought, according to him, to produce blood, and by consequence more sanguine
Distempers than Bilious, Pituitous, or Melancholic.

Youth, Summer, and hot and dry Countries, produce Bile, and all the maladies
which spring from it. Middle Age, Autumn, and Places of a heavy unequal Air,
cause Melancholy and melancholic distempers. Old Age, Winter, and cold moist
Countries produce Phlegm and phlegmatic Distempers.

He carefully examines what sorts of Food produce blood, ^ile, etc. It treats
also the effects of sleeps, watchings, exercise and rest, and other external
Causes aforementioned, and all the benefit or mischief we may receive from
them. In the second place, we shall take notice, that of all the Causes
Hippocrates makes mention of, the two most general are Diet and Air, which he
examines with all the care possible. First, he has composed several books upon
the subject of Diet only; he has taken exact care to distinguish what is good
and what is bad, for the condition the Person is in. And he was so much the
more obliged to it, because his method of Practice turned almost wholly upon
it; that is to say, upon the choice of a certain Diet, whether in respect of
(...). Lib. de Alimento.
quality or (...). Lib. de Alimento.
quantity, or time, and the proper seasons of giving it, as we shall see anon.

He considered also the Air very much, and all that depended on it. We have
seen in the Lump what he thought of the four Seasons, and several Climates. He
examined likewise what Winds ordinarily blew, or extraordinarily: The
irregularity of the Seasons, and even the rising and setting of Lib. de D^^t.
lib. de acre, etc. lib. de humor. lib. 4. de Morb. Aphorism. 1. lib. 3.
Stars, or the time of certain Constellations; as of the Dog Star, the
North-Bear, and the Pleiades; as also the time of the Solstices, and of the
Equinoxes, these days in his opinion producing great alterations in distempers,
of which he has not explained the manner.

From hence may be inferred, that Hippocrates looked upon the knowledge of
Astronomy as necessary to a Physician, and that he believed that the Stars had
some influence over our Bodies. With this agrees, what he elsewhere says of the
things of (...).
Heaven, which he numbers amongst the Causes of distempers, and with what we
have taken notice of before, page the 9th, That according to Hippocrates, our
health, our life, our death, and all that respects our being, depends upon
things raised above us. And it seems likely, that he meant something like this,
when he talked of something Prognost. lib de Not. Mul^ebr. lib. de Morb. Sact.
Divine in the Causes of distempers. Some of his ancient Commentators believed,
that when he spoke after this manner, he alluded to what was upon these
occasions said by What Galen means by saving, That those that ascribe the
Diseases to the Gods, cite the Authority of those that wrote, what they call
Histories, is hard to be unde^stood. (...).
the Poets, especially Homer, who attributes to the wrath of the Gods the
Diseases that befall Men. But Galen is not of their mind, and he has reason to
give them this reprimand, In lib. Progn. com. 1.
That they that Comment upon, or Interpret an Author, ought not to say whatever
themselves think true, or what they think the Author ought to have believed,
but what is really his opinion, whether true or false. Galen maintains, That
Hippocrates no where attributes to the Gods the Cause of Distempers; and he
proves that Hippocrates was not of that opinion: first, for the reason he gives
of some Symptoms of a particular distemper, which he describes, and of the name
he gave that distemper. He called those which were seized by it, by a name
which signifies (...), lib. deratione vict. in acut.
stricken, undoubtedly from the vulgar opinion, that those that were taken with
it were in some manner struck by some This must be the consequence of Galen's
reasoning, which otherwise is worth nothing.
Deity as it were by Thunder. But Hippocrates expressly takes notice, that the
Ancients gave it this name, because those that died of it, had, after their
death, their sides livid and mortified, as if they had received blows. He
proves it in the second place, from one of the Books of Hippocrates, inscribed
De Morbo Sacro; that is, of the Falling Sickness, wherein the Author endeavors
to root out the vulgar prejudice that the Gods sent certain Distempers among
Men. These Arguments of Galen may be supported by what Hippocrates says Lib. de
aere aqua, and locis.
elsewhere of a distemper peculiar to the Scythians, which passed for Divine;
of which we shall speak hereafter.

To return to the signification of what Hippocrates called Divine in Diseases,
Galen concludes that he meant no more than the Constitution of the Atmosphere,
which is equivocal, because the Air may be disposed in so particular a manner,
that we may acknowledge something in it Supernatural. This Sense, followed by
some of the Modern Gor^haeus, Fernel.
Commentators, who think that the Divine of Hippocrates depended upon the
qualities of the Air; but upon such qualities as they called occult or hidden,
because they had no relation with the ordinary, or those which were called
first, that is, hot and cold, dry and moist, nor with any other known quality.
Yet this is not the meaning of Galen in this place, nor of Hippocrates himself,
who seems to express himself in favor of the former opinion, when he says in
the Book cited last save one, That the Disease called Sacred rises from the
same causes that other distempers do; that is, from the things which go and
come, or which are subject to change, such as the Sun, the Cold, the Winds,
which suffer perpetual vicissitudes. Now though these things, says he, be Divine,
we are not to imagine this disease any more Divine than the rest, but all
diseases ought to be looked upon as Humane and Divine at once.

It may perhaps be objected, That it is doubtful who is the Author of this
Book, but if we observe the constant Custom of Hippocrates to take exact notice
of the Seasons, in which, or after which, the Diseases that he would describe
appeared, we shall see, that whatever distemper he speaks of, even the Plague
it self, he mentions nothing but the ordinary changes of the Air, as hot or
cold, or moist or dry. For example; That a rainy Spring was preceded by a moist
Winter, or followed by a scorching Summer, that such and such Winds blew, etc.
without saying one single word of the particular and hidden qualities of the
Air, which are supposed to produce extraordinary distempers.

It Is true there are some passages in his Writings, on which they pretend to
found the occult qualities aforesaid, which Galen admitted as well as the
Modern Authors before cited We find there, first, the very word (...) lib. de
Aliment.
hidden Cause. Galen affirms, that when Hippocrates speaks of Epidemical
Distempers, which he says come from the Air, or that which we breathe, which is
charged with (...), which Galen renders (...).
an unwholesome vapor, or a vapor proper to breed Diseases, that this
unwholesome vapor did not act according to the ordinary qualities, but by an
occult property absolutely inexplicable.

Yet I don't see that Hippocrates has explained himself concerning the nature
of this Vapor, nor the influence of the Stars, or their manner of acting upon
inferior Bodies, though he supposes their action. This vapor seems what he in
another passage calls (...), inquinamenta, lib. de Flat.
Impurities or Infections of the Air; but he says not wherein this infection
^onsists. We shall close what relates to the Causes of Distempers with this
Remark, That in the same place where Hippocrates derives all Epidemical
distempers from the Air, he endeavors to prove that they do not come from the
Aliments like ordinary distempers; where we see, that according to him, the Air
is the most general Cause of all Diseases.

The Humors and Spirits being, as we have seen, the Causes of Health and
Sickness, the solid or containing Parts, which are the third sort of substance
in the composition of Animal Bodies, must be the subject of them, because they
are sound or unsound, according to the good or ill disposition which the
humors and spirits produce in them, and as the impressions made upon them by
foreign bodies, and those things that are without them, are beneficial (...)
mischievous. This consequence may be justly drawn from several passages of
Hippocrates, such as the two following: De Not. hum.
When, says he, any of the humors is separated from the rest, and lodges
apart, the place from whence it came must be out of order, and likewise that
where it is lodged in too great quantity, suffers sickness and pain. The second
passage is this: Ibid.
That the Diseases which come from any part of the body, that is considerable,
are the most dangerous; for, says he, if the disease (...).
must rest, that is to say, l^dge in the place where it began, when a Part that
is of great importance suffers, the whole body must suffer.

We find no Train, nothing prosecuted far, concerning the difference of
Distempers, in Hippocrates; all that we can gather is, That the different
Causes of which we have spoken, and the different Parts of the Body, produce as
great a variety of Distempers; according to this passage, Lib. de Aliment.
the differences of Diseases arise from the following things: From the
nourishment, the heat, the blood, the phlegm, the bile, and all the humors. As
likewise from the flesh, the fat, the veins, the arteries, the nerves, the
muscles, the membranes, the bones, the brain, the spinal marrow, the mouth, the
tongue, the throat, the stomach, the intestines, the diaphragm, the belly, the
liver, the spleen, the reins, the bladder, the womb, and the skin. Some of
these distempers Hippocrates held to be the mortal, others dangerous, the rest
easily curable, according to the Cause from whence they sprung, and the Parts
upon which they fell. He distinguishes likewise Diseases in several places,
from the time of their duration, into (...).
acute, or short, and (...).
chronical, or long; this likewise is referred to the different Causes
beforementioned, acute Diseases being caught by the bile and the blood, in the
flower of Man's age, or in Spring time, and Summer. The Chronical, on the
contrary, are produced by the phlegm, or the melancholy, in old Age, and in the
Winter. Of these distempers, some are more acute than others; the like of the
Chronical. We shall see in the sequel the duration of one as well as the other.

Hippocrates distinguishes distempers likewise by the particular Places where
they are prevailed, whether ordinary or extraordinary. The first, that is those
that are frequent and familiar to certain Places, he called (...), or (...).
Endemick Diseases; and the latter, which ravaged extraordinarily, sometimes in
one place, sometimes in another, with which at certain times numbers were
seized at once, he called Epidemick, that is Popular Diseases, as the Plague,
the most terrible of all. He made likewise a third, opposed to the former,
which he called (...).
straggling distempers, including all the different sorts of distempers which
invade at any one season; in a word, those distempers, some of one sort, and
some of another. He distinguished those which were born with us, or were (...).
hereditary, from those that were contracted afterward. He made a difference
likewise, betwixt those of (...).
a kindly nature, and those of a malignant; the first of those, which are
easily cured and frequently; the second, those which give the Physicians a
great deal of trouble, and are seldom overcome by all their care.

Of the remarkable Changes that happen in Diseases, particularly of the Crises;
and Critical days.

Hippocrates made four Stages in Distempers; the (...).
beginning of the Disease, its augmentation, its state or height, and its
declination. These last are Diseases that end happily, for in others Death
supplies the place of the declination. In the third Stage, therefore the change
is most considerable, for it determines the fate of the sick Person, which is
usually, or oftenest done, by means of a Crisis.

Hippocrates called Crisis, that is, Judgment, any sudden mutation in sickness,
whether for the better or the worse, whether health or death immediately
succeed.

This change, according to him, is made by Nature, at that time Absolving or
Condemning a Patient. To apprehend his meaning aright, we must recollect his
Idea of Nature, which he represents as the Directress of the whole Animal
Economy.

If therefore Diseases be only a disturbance of this Economy, as we may
conclude from what he has said before of their Causes, Nature and Diseases,
must be at eternal opposition; but as in the conflict, or difference betwixt
'em, Nature is, as it were, both Judge and Party, she ought generally to have
the better, for this reason the word Crisis is taken for a favorable Judgment,
which terminates happily the diseases.

Nature's way of acting in such cases to destroy her enemy, is to reduce those
humors, whose discord occasions that of the whole body, to their usual state,
whether in relation to their quantity or quality, mixture, motion, the places
they are possessed of, or any other manner, by which they become offensive.
Amongst the means which Nature imploys to this end, Hippocrates insists more
particularly upon what he calls (...) or (...), and (...). De rat. vict. in
acut.
Concoction of the humors. This is her first aim: By means of this Coction she
makes her self Mistress, and brings us things to a good Crisis. The humors
being brought to this pass, whatever is superfluous and hurtful empties it self
presently, or at least, it is very easy to evacuate them by such means, as we
shall speak of when we speak of the Cure of distempers, or of the assistance
which the Physicians give to Nature upon these occasions, what is superfluous
being evacuated, which is done either by Bleeding, by Stool, by Vomit, by
Sweat, by Urine, by Tumors or Abscesses, by Scabs, (...).
Pimples, Spots, and other things; Nature easily reduces the rest to the
condition they were in before the accession of the disease.

But we must take notice, that these Evacuations are not looked upon as the
effects of a true Crisis, unless it be in Considerable quantity, small
discharges not being sufficient to make a Crisis. On the contrary, they are a
sign that Nature is depressed by the load of humors, and that she lets them go
through weakness and continual irritation. What comes forth thus is crude,
because the distemper is yet too strong; while things remain so, none but a bad
or imperfect Crisis is to be expected, which signifies that the distemper
triumphs, or at least is of equal strength with Nature, which is attended by
death, or a prolongation of the disease, during which Nature often has leisure
to attempt a new Crisis, more happy than the former, after having made fresh
efforts to advance the concoction of the humors. We shall speak of the signs
of Concoction or Crudity, and some other marks of the Crisis, in the following
Chapter.

What is chiefly to be observed here, is, That concoction cannot be made but in
a certain term, as every fruit has a limited time to ripen; for he compares the
humors, which Nature has digested, to Fruits come to maturity.

The time required for this depends upon the differences of distempers, touched
on in the preceding Chapter. In those which Hippocrates calls very acute, the
Digestion or Crisis happens the fourth day; and those which are only acute upon
the seventh or the eleventh, Aphor. 23. Sect. 2.
or the fourteenth, which is the longest term that Hippocrates allows in
distempers that are really acute, though in some places he seems to stretch to
Lib. de Crisib.
the twentieth and one and twentieth days; nay, even to De dieb. cri^ie.
the fortieth and sixtieth days.

All diseases that exceed this latter term are counted Chronical; and whereas
in those that exceed fourteen, or at most twenty days, every To made this
Account come right, the fourth day must be counted twice in the midd^e of e^ry
sennight, and twice also at the beginning of the third. We shall see the
progression of these numbers as they lie in Hippocrates.
fourth day is a Critical day, or at least a Remarkable day, by which they may
judge whether the Crisis, upon the following fourth day, will be favorable or
not In those which come from twenty to forty, he reckons only the sevenths; and
those that exceed forty, he begins to reckon by twenties, as appears by the
progression following, which contain the days particularly marked by
Hippocrates, the first of which is the fourth, from thence he goes to the
seventh, the eleventh, the fourteenth, the seventeenth, the twentieth, the
seven and twentieth, the thirty fourth, the fortieth, the sixtieth, the
eightieth, the hundredth, the hundred and twentieth; beyond which, the number
of days has no power over the Crises, which are referr^d to the general changes
of the Seasons, some determining about the Equinoxes, others about the
Solstices, others about the rising or setting of certain Stars or
Constellations; or if numbers have yet any place, they reckon by Months, or
whole Years. So Hippocrates will have it, that certain diseases in Children are
Aphorism. 28. Sect. 3.
judged in the seventh month after their Birth; others in their seventh, or
even their fourteenth year.

I have yet one Observation to make concerning the twentieth and one and
twentieth days, that both of them are equally set down as Critical days in
different places Lib. de Cris. de di^b. Crit. Apho. 36. Sect. etc.
of the Works of Hippocrates. The reason which he gives in one of these places,
why he prefers the former of these days before the latter, which would make up
their Account the three Septenaries complete, is because that the days of
sickness ought not to ^e reckoned entire, Lib. de partu Septimest.
the years and months being not composed of entire days.

Nevertheless, this reason does not hinder him from putting down the one and
twentieth day for the true Critical day, as almost all the other odd days, to
which he appears so strangely affected in the case of Crises, that he says, in
one of his Aphorisms, That the sweats that come upon the 3d, the 5th, the 7th,
the 9th, the 11th, the 14th, the 17th, the 21th, the 27th, the 31th, or 34th
days, are beneficial; but those that come upon other days, signify that the
sick shall be brought very low, that his disease shall be very tedious, and he
subject to relapses. He says further expressly, in another Aphorism, Aphorism.
61. Sect. 4.
That the Fever which leaves the Sick upon any but an odd day, is usually apt
to relapse. Galen explaining this passage, pretends that we ought to read a
critical day instead of an odd day; but he gives himself a needless trouble,
the same thing occurring in diverse places, as in the second Book of his
Epidemicks, where there is a passage parallel to the afore-cited, and another
which says, That those that die, die of necessity upon an odd day, if the
distemper be long upon an odd Month or Year. More of this subject may be found
in his fourth Book De Morbis, where what has been said of odd days is looked
upon as the received Opinion of all the World; so that though it should be
objected that this Book is not Hippocrates^s, but his Son-in-Law Polibius's,
the proof will yet remain in full strength, for this Author does not lay this
down as his opinion only, but as a notion generally established.

Galen was obliged to declare against odd days, for the same reasons he rejects
the dignity of the number seven, and other numbers, which by the Pythagoreans
were esteemed to have a certain virtue in themselves, as being more perfect
than the rest; and although he allows that the Crisis falls out upon the seventh
days, yet he does not impute this effect to the power of the number, but to the
Moon, which governs the Weeks which consists of seven da^s, whether Hippocrates
thought of the Moon's influence upon this occasion, but he talks in one of his
Books before-cited; D^ partu Septimest.
of a harmony resulting from the union of certain numbers more entire and
certain than the rest, it shows plainly that he meant in the sense of
Pythagoras, which Celsus takes notice of when he says, Verum in his quidem
antiquos, ^u^c celebre^ admodum Pyth^go^ici numeri fefellerunt, lib 3. cap. 4.
That the Pythagorean numbers, which were very much in vogue at that time; that
is, in the time of Hippocrates, mislead the ancient Physicians into Error.

But whatever was Hippocrates's opinion of the power of his odd, and other
Critical days, he confesses that it falls out otherwise sometimes; and he gives
an instance of a salutary Crisis coming upon the sixth day, and the like upon
the fifteenth, but these are very rare instances, and therefore don^t overthrow
the General Rule.

Before we quit this head, we must take notice, that besides the changes which
determine the fate of the Patient, Hippocrates speaks often of another sort of
a change, which is when the disease, instead of terminating, changes (...), or
(...)
the Species, as when a Pleurisy turns to an inflammation of the Lungs, a
Vertigo to an Epilepsie, a Tertian Fever to a Quartane, or a continual, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of other accidents or symptoms that accompany Diseases, and those
that happen before or after them. Of the signs by which Hippocrates
distinguish^d one from the other, and knew beforehand what would be the
success, or future event.
THE vast esteem Hippocrates gained is chiefly owing to his great Industry, in
strictly observing the most minute circumstances of Diseases, and his exact
care in nicely describing every thing that happen^d before, and every accident
that appear^d at the same time with them; as also what gave ease, and what
increased the malady, which is what we call the method of writing the History
of a disease.

By these means, he not only understood how to distinguish one disease from
another, by the signs which properly belonged to each, but by comparing the
same sort of distemper, which happened to several persons, and the accidents
which usually appear^d before and after, he could easily foretell a disease
before it came, and afterward give a right judgment of the success and event
of it.

He seems also in Lib. 1. d^ diaeta, sub princip.
a certain place, as if he would insinuate that he is the greatest Physician
that can put this in practice, or can teach a method how to tell the Patient
beforehand, what shall happen to him in the course of his distemper, which is
what we call giving the Prognostics of a disease.

It Was by this way of prognosticating that he came to be so much admired by all
the Ancients, who, without doubt, were thoroughly convinced of that Maxim, which
he owes to himself, viz. Lib. praenotion. in princip.
That that Physician, who upon the appearance of some certain signs in a
disease, can tell his Patient what he has hitherto suffered, and what will
happen to him every day; and after having received information from him, he not
only speaks further of those things he omitted before, but also lays down
beforehand what will come to pass, it is he shall have the reputation of knowing
perfectly the condition of the Patient, and make him entirely resign himself to
his management. And as it is not always in the power of the Physician to save
the Lives of the sick, for that reason Prognostics will be serviceable in some
measure to secure him from reproach.

Hippocrates understood so well the Doctrine of Sign^, that it may very well be
said to be his Masterpiece; and Celsus makes this remark, B^^^nsio^^^ (...):
Medi^i, quamvis in curatio^ibus mu^^^nt, ta^^en ^^^c Hipp^c^at^m optime
p^^^agisse ^a^e^ur, Lib. 2. praf^^.
That the Physicians that lived after him, though they found out several new
things, relating to the management of diseases, yet they were oblig^d to the
Writings of Hippocrates for what they knew of Signs.

You find a vast number of these Signs almost every where in his Writings, but
they are particularly collected in his Book of Aphorisms, and three other
Books, that treat of nothing but that subject alone; the Prenotions or
Prognostics, the Predictions, and the Coacae Praenotiones.

Galen, because they were very faulty, would not allow the two last to be of
Hippocrates's writing, He adds further, That what is valuable in them is taken
out of the two first, and from the Books of Epidemical Diseases;
notwithstanding, many Learned Men, both Ancient and Modern, have writ
Commentaries upon them, and had 'em in great esteem.

To be able to make a tolerable guess from a Prognostic, that is to say, to be
capable to tell beforehand, that, from the appearance of such and such a thing,
this or that shall necessarily follow, the observation ought to be made from
its seldom or never-failing; one Experience alone, or even 2 or 3 being not
sufficient to give an Authority; which cannot be said of all the Prognostics
of Hippocrates in general. As to some of them, one would rather judge they were
Remarks made in particular cases, by those that exactly observed what happen^d
to every Patient, from the beginning to the end of his distemper; and who, by
comparing what they saw first with what followed after, thence concluded good
or ill success.

This is what Galen hints at, when he tells you, that one part of these
Prognostics were abstracted from the Books of Epidemical Diseases. He adds,
That if any one design^d to make himself Master of the Art of Prognosticating
the success of Diseases, he thought that the best means to succeed wou^d be to
look into the Histories of them, delivered to us by the most learned of the
Faculty, and from thence draw conclusions suitable to his intent. This method
in effect wou^d prove very good; but to avoid the danger of being mistaken,
it would be necessary to collect an infinite number of Observations on all
distempers, of what nature soever they are, to be able to find out amongst them
a sufficient number of cases exactly alike in every sort of disease, so that he
might speak for certain, that in such a disease, when such a sign, or rather
such and such signs appear, the Patient shall die; and on the contrary, when he
sees other signs, the Patient shall escape.

For example, if of twenty Patients that in continual Fevers have bled several
drops of blood at the Nose, or that have but gently sweated in the head or
breast, fifteen or eighteen of them die; and if of twenty that have bled in
abundance, and have also sweat all over the body, as many of them have escaped
as of the others died, one may generally infer that the first accident is of
fatal consequence, and the second a good Prognostic. But it does not at all
appear, that those that have collected these Prognostics, and particularly the
Prenotions of Cos, have always taken care to have as many examples of every
case as they propose would be necessary to put a confidence in. The life of Man
is too short for that, it^s what Hippocrates himself has confess^d, as you will
see further in what follows. The advantage which this ancient Physician gained
to himself in this point, is, That he could supply the defect of his own
experience in the service and assistance he might receive from that of his
Predecessors the Sons of Aesculapius, supposing them to be Men of capacity
sufficient for experiences, which to produce as they ought to be, Hippocrates
has also owned to be very difficult. He was so thoroughly convinced of it, that
he made no difficulty to acknowledge, that one might easily be deceived,
particularly in what relates to Prognostics. Predictions, says he, in cases of
acute diseases, are uncertain, and no one can justly tell whether the Patient
will live or die. In the following account you will see further proofs of the
modesty and sincerity of this Author.

'Twas not only from the composition of Man that Hippocrates drew signs, to
know and foresee diseases and the consequences of 'em. The natural functions,
the actions and manners of every particular person, their behavior, their
constant way of living; in a word, all the circumstances that have any relation
to the customs and habits of Men, and what happens whether before, or at the
same time, with the distemper, by our own fault, or the indiscretion of others,
by the internal disposition of our body, or as it is in relation to things
external which influence it; all this, I say, furnished this Father of Physic
with signs, by which he judg^d of the state of body they were in, in relation
to distempers present or to come.

The first thing Hippocrates considered, particularly when he was concerned in
an acute disease, was the looks of the Patient. It Is a good sign with him for a
Patient to have the visage of one in health, and the same which the Patient
himself had when-he was well; as it varied from this, so much greater the
danger was apprehended to be. This is the description which Hippocrates gives
of the looks of a dying Man: When a Patient, says he, has his Nose sharp, his
Eyes sunk, his Temples hollow, his Ears cold and contracted, the skin of his
Forehead tense and dry, and the color of his Face tending to a pale green, or
Lead color, one may give out for certain that Death is very near at hand;
unless, as he adds further, the strength of the Patient has been exhausted all
at once by long watchings, or by a looseness, or being a long time without
eating The Physicians have called it the Hippocratick Face, to denote that they
have taken this observation from Hippocrates. The lips hanging relax^d and
cold, are likewise look^d upon by this Author as a confirmation of the
foregoing Prognostic.

He also took several of his signs from the disposition of the Eyes in
particular. When a Patient cannot bear the light, when he sheds tears
involuntarily, when in sleeping some part of the white of the eyes is seen,
unless he usually sleeps after that manner, or has a looseness upon him, this
sign, as well as the precedent ones, prognosticate ill. The^e is deaden'd (as
it were with a mist spread over them, their brightness lost) likewise presage
death, or is a sign of great weakness. The eyes sparkling, fixed and fierce,
denotes the Patient to be delirious, and that he is already, or soon will be
seiz^d with a Frenzy* When a Patient sees (...)
any thing red, and like sparks of fire and lightning pass before his eyes, you
may expect an Hemorrhage; and this often happens before those Crisis^s which
are to be by a loss of blood.

The posture in Bed shows also the condition of the Patient. If you find him
lying on one side; his Body, Neck, Legs and Arms a little contracted, which is
the posture of a Man in health, it is a good sign. On the contrary, if he lies
on his back, his arms stretch^d out, and his legs hanging down, it^s a sign of
great weakness, and particularly when the Patient slides, or lets himself fall
down toward the feet, which denotes the heaviness of his body, and approaching
death. When he lies on his belly, unless it be customary to him, it is an
indication of his being delirious, or that he is gripped.

When a Patient in a burning Fever is continually (...).
feeling about with his hands and fingers, and moves them up before his face or
eyes, as if he was going to take away something that passed before them; or on
his Bed and Covering, as if he was picking or searching for little Straws, or
taking away some filth, or drawing out little flocks of Wool, all this is a
sign that he is delirious, and will die. Amongst the other signs of a present
or approaching delirium, he adds also this: When a Patient that naturally
speaks little, begins to talk more than he us^d to do; or when one that talks
much becomes silent, this change is to be reckoned a sort of delirium, or is a
sign that the Patient will soon fall into one. The frequent trembling or
leaping up of the Tendons of the Wrist, presage likewise a delirium. As to the
different sorts of them, Hippocrates is much more afraid of those that run upon
doleful, or dismal subjects, than those that ramble upon matter of diversion,
accompanied with gaity and pleasant humor.

When the Patient breathes fast, and is oppressed, it is a sign that he is in
pain, and that the Parts above the Diaphragme are inflamed. Breathing long, or
when the Patient is a great while in taking breath, shows him to be delirious;
but easy and natural respiration is always a very good Prognostic in acute
Diseases. It appeared that Hippocrates depended much on respiration in matter
of signs, by the care he took in several places to describe the different
manner of a Patient's breathing, respiration oppressed, rare, great, little,
that which is great or long outward; that is to say, in the time of expiration;
that which is little or short within, that is, when you draw in your breath;
that which is as it were doubled, etc. Continual watchings in the same diseases
are a sign either of present pain, or a delirium near at hand.

All Excrements, of what nature soever, that are separated from the body of
Man, furnished also Hippocrates with signs, from which he drew many
consequences. He made no difficulty at all in examining into the Urine, the
Stools, the Wind, the Sweat, the Hawkings and Spittings, the Mucus of the Nose,
the Tears, the filth of the Ears, the purulent Matter of Ulcers, etc. as
materials from whence he drew signs, that gave him the greatest certainty in
relation to the quality of the humors.

But for all that, we must not believe what a Modern Cae^ius R^^^^, in. in
antiq^^ection.
Author says of Hippocrates, That he was so hot in seeking all occasions of
improving himself in the knowledge of his Profession, that he was not asham^d
to taste even of the very Excrements. If any one writ this of him before this
Author, perhaps 'twas only in raillery, who to put the ridicule on this famous
Physician, applied to him the Epithet which Aristophanes gives to Aesculapius,
which we have mentioned in the first Book; it is what the Author we have quoted
seems to acknowledge himself, when he adds further, That others attribute the
same to Aesculapius.

It must be owned Hippocrates inquired into all these things, according to
their several qualities; that is to say, to their color, smell and
consistence, in relation to the Heterogeneous Matter, or what he found out of
the common course of nature, according to its heat, coldness acrimony, etc as
well as in regard to its quantity; to the Parts from whence it issued, the time
of its continuance, the manner, and other circumstances of its issuing out. No
one can deny but that there were some of the things they have mentioned, which
he judged of by the taste, they had; not that the judgment was made from his
own, but the taste of the Patient. For example, He drew some certain signs from
the Lib. de humoribus.
Spittle being salt or sweet, and from sweat, or from tears, or the excrements
of the Nose, which had a saltness or sharpness. There is only the experiment of
the wax of the Ears, which according to him is Epidem. lib. 6. sect. 5.
sweet in dying Persons, or those that will die of such a distemper, and bitter
in those that will live. I say there is only this experiment, which seems to be
out of the power of the Patient to make; but there is no reason why the
Physician should not, if he thinks convenient, have it done by those that
attend the sick, or by persons that are every day employed in the most vile
Offices.

There Is another passage where Hippocrates, speaking of the Excrements of the
Belly, says, That in some certain cases they are (...) Coac. Praenot. verse. 641.
saltish. There Is also another place, where he makes mention of a sort of a
Fever which he calls a salt Fever, on which Galen makes this remark: That although
saltness commonly shows it self by the taste, and not by the touch, yet we
ought to explain what Hippocrates says here, in relation to touching and
feeling; that it is not meant of the Patients, but of the Physicians, who in
feeling his Pulse perceives something rough or poignant, as if he touched salt
flesh, or that had been laid in Brine. I believe that one may, in effect, judge
of a certain sort of saltness by the touch, and that that of the Excrements,
which is mentioned in the first passage that was quoted, may be known by the
manner of their pricking the Anus at their coming out; but in this case it is
the Patient, and not the Physician that can judge of it.

Amongst all the Excrements, the Urine and Stools, were what furnished
Hippocrates with most of the signs, which served for almost all distempers. I
give you here the chiefest of his Observations concerning Urine. The Patient's
Urine is, in his opinion, best, when the sediment, that is to say, the thick
part, or that which falls to the bottom, is white, soft to the touch, and of an
equal consistence. If it continues so during the course of the distemper, and
till the time of the Sea the precedent Article.
Crisis, the Patient is in no danger, and will soon be well. This is what
Hippocrates called concocted Urine, or what denotes the concoction of the
humors. And he observed, that this concoction of Urine seldom appeared
thoroughly so but in the days of the Crisis, which happily put an end to the
distemper. Lib. de Crisibus.
We ought, said Hippocrates, to compare the Urine with the purulent Matter that
issues from Ulcers. As the Pus, which is white, and of the same quality with
the sediment of Urine, we are now speaking of, is a sign that the Ulcer is on
the point of closing, or being healed up; whereas that which is (...) See
before in the Chapter of the Causes of distempers.
clear, and of another color besides white, and of an ill smell, is a sign
that the Ulcer is (...).
virulent, and by consequence difficult to be cured. So the Urines, which are
like this we have described, are only those which may be named good, all
the^est are ill, and differ from one another only in the degree of more or
less. The first never appear but when Nature has overcome the Disease, and are
a sign of the concoction of humors, without which you cannot hope for a certain
cure, as we have observ^d in the precedent Article. On the contrary, the last
are made as long as the crudity remains, and the humors continue unconcocted.
Amongst the Urines of this last sort, the best are reddish, with a sediment
that is soft and of an equal consistence; which denote that the disease will be
somewhat tedious, but without danger. The worst are those which are very red,
that are made at the same time clear, and without sediment, or that are muddy
and troubled in the making. In Urine there is oftentimes a sort of a (...).
cloud that is hanging in the Vessel where it is received, the higher it rises,
or the farther distant it is from the bottom, or different from the color we
have described, when we spoke of sediments, the more there is of crudity. That
which is white, and clear as water, is also a sign of great crudity, and
sometimes of Bile being carried to the Brain. Th^^ which is yellow, or of a
sandy color, denotes abundance of Bile. That that is black is the worst,
especially if it has an ill smell, and is either altogether muddy, or
altogether clear. That whose sediment is like to large ground Wheat, or to
little flakes or scales spread one upon another, or to Bran, presages but ill,
especially the last. The Fat or Oil that swims sometimes upon Urine, and
appears in a form something like a Spiders web, is a sign of a consumption of
the flesh and solid parts. The making of a great quantity of Urine is a sign of
a Crisis, and sometimes the quality of it shows particularly how the Bladder
stands affected.

In fine, we ought to observe that Hippocrates compared the disposition of the
Tongue with that of Urine: That is to say, when the Tongue was yellow, and
charg^d with choler, the Urine of course must be of the same color. And on the
contrary, when it was red and moist, the Urine was accordingly of its natural
color.

The Excrements by Stool that are soft, yellowish, of some consistence, and not
of an extraordinary ill smell, that answers to the quantity of what is taken
inwardly, and that are voided at the usual hours, are the best sort of all.
They ought also to be of a thicker consistence, when the distemper is near the
Crisis, and it ought to be taken for a good prognostic, when some Worms round
and long are evacuated at the same time with 'em. But though the Matter excreted
be thin and liquid, yet notwithstanding it may give some comfortable hopes,
provided it makes not too much noise in coming out, and the evacuation be not
in a small quantity, nor too often, nor in so great abundance, nor so often,
that the Patient is faint with it. All Matter that is watery, white, of a pale
green, or red, or frothy and viscous, is bad. That that is black, like grease,
and that that is livid like the color of Verd-de-gris, are the most pernicious.
That that is pure black, and is nothing else but a discharge of Choler adust, or
black Bile, always prognosticates very ill, this humor, from what part soever
it comes, never appearing, but it shows at the same time the ill disposition of
the Intestines.

The Matter that is of several different colors, denotes the length of a
distemper, and at the same time that it may be of dangerous consequence.
Hippocrates places in the same Class the Matter that is bilious, or yellow, and
mixed with blood, or green and black, or like the dregs or scrapings of the
Guts. The Stools that consisted of pure Bile, or of all Phlegm, he also looked
upon as bad.

Matter cast up by Vomiting ought to be mixed with choler and phlegm; where you
see but one of these humors alone, it is worse. That that is black, livid,
green, or of the color of a Leek, is of dismal consequence. That that smells
very ill is so likewise; and if at the same time it be livid, death is not far
off. The vomiting of blood is very often mortal.

The spittings that give ease in diseases of the Lungs, and in Pleurisies, are
those that come up readily, and without difficulty; and it is good, if they are
mixed at the first beginning with a great deal of yellow; but if they appear of
the same color, or are red, a great while after the beginning of the
distemper, and are salt and acrimonious, and cause violent Coughings, they are
not good. Spittings purely yellow are bad; and those that are white, viscous
and frothy, give no ease. Whiteness is a tolerable good sign of concoction in
regard to Spittings, but they ought not at all to be viscous, nor too thick,
nor too clear. One may make the same judgment of the Excrements of the Nose,
according to their concoction and crudity: Spittings that are black, green, or
red, are of very sad consequence. In inflammations of the Lungs, those that are
mixed with choler and blood presage well, if they appear at the beginning, but
are bad if they arise not till about the seventh day. But the worst of all the
signs in these distempers, is, when there is no expectoration at all, and the
too great quantity of Matter that is ready to be discharged this way, makes a
rattling in the throat or breast. After spitting blood, next follows the
discharge of purulent Matter, which is the cause of a Consumption, and at the
end death.

A kind good sweat, is that which arises in the day of the Crisis, and is
discharged in abundance all over the body, and at the same time from all the
parts of the body, and carries off the Fever. A cold sweat is bad, especially
in acute Fevers, for in others it^s only a sign of long continuance. When the
Patient sweats no where but in the head and neck, it is a sign the disease will
be long and dangerous. A gentle sweat or moistness of some Part; for example,
of the head or breast, gives no relief, but denotes the seat of the distemper,
or the weakness of the part. Hippocrates called this sort of sweat Ephidrosis.

As long as there is a collection of purulent Matter in some part of the body,
the Patient is in pain, and the Fever abates not, but when the Pus is
concocted, both Pain and Fever goes off. The qualities of good and bad purulent
Matter you have seen described before, when we spoke of those that related to
Urine.

The (...). That is to say, the Parts under the short-ribs. These Parts are
chiefly the Liver, the Spleen, the Stomach, the Gut called Duodenum, and part
of the Colon.
Hypochondria, or the Abdomen in general, ought always to be soft and even, as
well on the right side as the left. When there is any hardness or unevenness in
those Parts, or heat or swelling, or when one cannot endure to have it touched,
it^s a sign the Intestines are indisposed.

Hippocrates also inquired into the state of the Pulse, or the beating of the
Arteries. He is, according to Galen's observation, the first of all Physicians
we have knowledge of, that made use of the word (...) Gal. de differ. and
gener. pulls.
Pulse in the sense it is now commonly taken; that is to say, for the natural
and ordinary beating of the Arteries. For you must know, that the most ancient
Physicians, and Hippocrates himself, for a great while, understood by this word
the extraordinary pulsation, or the violent beating that is felt in a Part
inflamed, without putting your ^^ngers there to feel it too.

But the same Galen that gives this account of Hippocrates, fails not to
observe in another place, that the business of the Pulse is the only thing in
all Physic that this Physician has so slightly touched upon. Some Greek
Theophil. Protospathar. lib. de Urin. and Pulls.
Authors more modern than Galen, have also made the same remark; nevertheless,
one may collect from the Writings of Hippocrates, several Instructions upon
this subject. As when he says, That in Epidem. lib. 4.
Fevers very acute, the pulse is very fast and very great; and when he makes
mention in the same place of trembling pulses, and those that beat slowly; and
when he observes, in speaking of the white flowings of Women, that the pulse
that strikes the fingers faintly, and in a languishing manner, is a sign of
approaching death. He remarks also in the Coacae praenotiones, that Lethargick
persons have their Pulse languid and slow. He says also in another place,
Epidem. lib. 6.
That he whose vein, that is to say, Artery of the Elbow beats, is just going
to run mad; or else, that the person is in a very great passion of anger.

These Quotations make it appear, that Hippocrates was not wholly ignorant of
the signs taken from pulses. But it must be own^d, if he has given us some
Instructions on this subject, that it did not appear that he made any use of
them himself, or reduced them to practice. We find little or nothing of it in
his Books of Epidemical Diseases, except the two passages we have quoted, though
these Books are a sort of a Journal, where he mentions a great number of
Histories of Diseases that he has manag^d. It Is surprising, that in other
respects he should be so exact in his Observations, even to the most minute
signs and circumstances of a disease, yet say nothing of the pulse of the
Patients. How could one judge that he knew, whether they had a Fever or not? Or
that he distinguished the different degrees of it, when he spoke nothing of the
pulse? It Is probable he did not depend much on this sign; I Will tell you what I
think furnished him with the knowledge of the pulse. Perhaps the different
degrees of heat or cold, which the Patients endured in their Fevers, the
greater or less want of rest, and particularly their manner of breathing, which
he commonly observed with care, was what he thought of greater importance to be
taken notice of, or at least what informed him whether they had a Fever or not,
and whether this Fever required consideration, or was of little consequence.

We might add a great many remarks to the precedent ones, if one wou^d exhaust
all the matter relating to signs Those we have touched upon, have relation
chiefly to Prognostics. We^ll speak of others, that serve to distinguish and
give us knowledge of distempers, when we make an enquiry into each particular.

If Hippocrates hit right in his Prognostics, 'twas the effect of his
judgment, his exactness, and the particular attendance he gave in every case
that presented it self, which was the occasion of what^s justly said in Galen,
That Dedifficult respir. lib. 2.
Hippocrates of all Physicians was the most diligent and industrious.
Application to observe every thing that happened to a Patient, seem^d to be so
proper to his Character, that you never see, so great a Philosopher as he was,
that he was near so much taken up with reasoning on the accidents of Diseases,
as in faithfully reporting them. He was content to observe well what these
accidents were, to distinguish Diseases by them, and to judge of the event of
those that he had actually in hand, by comparing them with the like which he
had had before in his management; and he did not commonly give himself the
trouble, to give a reason why such a thing happening such other would
necessarily follow. The Empiricks, which were a Sect of Physicians that arose
after him, and of whom we shall speak in the following discourse, for this
reason disputed with the Dogmatical or Reasoning Physicians, maintaining they
had the advantage to have this Father of Physic on their side, pretending that
his method was not different from that of his Predecessors the Asclepiades,
which was also the same these Empiricks followed, and looking upon Hippocrates
as one of the Authors of their side.

Galen had some reason to exclaim against them in this point, and there is no
doubt but that Hippocrates reasoned, and also sometimes philosophis'd in his
profession, as you have seen before. But the Empiricks had not been altogether
in the wrong, if they had plainly said that Hippocrate's Philosophy was none of
the best, and that they preferred the descriptions all naked as they are, which
he gives of Diseases and their Accidents, and his Instructions or Remarks on
the manner of managing them to all the Reasonings they can find any where in
his Works, on the Causes of the same distempers. It Is certain at least, that
it is chiefly on this account, I would say, on that which the Empiricks looked
upon as the most advantageous, that Hippocrates has recommended Physic to
posterity, and gained admiration even from those, that otherwise did not
consent with him to his principles, as we have already observed, and as you^ll
afterward see. We may also add, That the Books of Hippocrates, that consist
most of Reasoning, or that contain most Philosophy, are those which are
attributed to other Authors; as the Book of the Nature of Man; that of the
Nature of an Infant; that of Winds; the first of Diet; and some others.

As to what remains, we ought to make this Remark, That the Skill of
Hippocrates, and of all the Physicians that came after him, and that imitated
him in relation to Prognostics, made the people, that knew not how far their
knowledge could extend in this matter, look upon them as Prophets, and require
of them things that were above their power. Some of them were glad to amuse the
Vulgar, and keep them in this opinion, for the profit they hoped to gain from
it, saying, Since the People are willing to be deceived, so let them be.

That that puts several of our Physicians now upon the pursuit of this
uncharitable and dishonorable Maxim, is their observation, That in effect the
World will be deceived; and that they often see Physicians, that thinking
themselves other ways qualified enough to satisfy reasonable Patients, will
not become Conjurers and Mountebanks, are those that have the least business,
or that quit it: And what do they quit it for? To insinuate themselves amongst
a wretched sort of People, that sometimes can neither write nor read; and that
some may come seeking for them a great way off, to know of them, upon the sight
of a glass of Urine, what distemper they discover, which if the Patient was
present they could know nothing at all of. When I talk here of the People, I
would not have it meant simply what they call the Mob or Dregs of the People;
the Vulgar, or People, which I mean; meet equally in all conditions, and always
makes the greatest number in all Societies. It happens also, I know not how,
that some Men, that in other things have good Sense and Knowledge, and are very
skilful in other matters, seem to be wholly deprived of their Understanding and
Judgment, when it acts concerning these pretended Prophets, from whom they
receive as great impressions as the meanest of the people.

To return to Hippocrates; it is a thing very remarkable, and that which adds
very much to his Merit and Reputation, that having lived in an Age when Physic
was, as you have seen, altogether Superstitious, yet suffered not himself to be
carried down the Torrent with the rest; so that neither his Reasonings, or his
Observations, nor his Remedies, have the least mixture of this weakness, so
common in those Times, and yet common still even amongst some Physicians. We
don't see that his Prognostics had any other foundation than from the pure
nature of things. It^s true, in his Book of Dreams, he talks of some Sacrifices
or Ceremonies which ought to be performed to some certain Deities, according to
the nature of the Dreams we dreamt. But these were only Duties, which Religion
necessarily engaged Men to. His good sense appeared in another place,
particularly when in the same Book he solves Dreams, by what has been said or
done in the day time; from whence he draws consequences to judge of the
condition of the body, according as it is charged with Choler, Phlegm, Blood,
etc. which he brings in as the Causes on which depends the difference of
Dreams, and the circumstances that accompany them. We'll speak one word more of
the aversion he had to superstition, in what related to Remedies, and the cure
of Diseases, when we come to the Chapter of Purgation.

CHAP. V. Of the sorts of Diseases that Hippocrates knew, gave names to, or
described.
THE particular Diseases, which are mentioned in the Writings of Hippocrates,
may be reduc^d to five different Classes. The first is of distempers, whose
names have been never changed, and that have been known ever since to the Greek
Physicians, by the same names and signs as they were distinguished by this
ancient Physician. This first Class is the most considerable, and contains
alone a much greater number of distempers, than the four following put all
together. The second includes those which have not preserved their names,
although they have been known and distinguished by the accidents which
Hippocrates attributed to them. I put in the third Class some distempers which
he gave no name to, but only a simple description of. And in the fourth, those,
that though they are named and described exactly in the Works that are allowed to
be his, yet notwithstanding have not been known since that time, either by
their names, which were grown out of use, or by the description the Author
gives of them. The fifth and last Class, is of those that have names which were
no longer known, and that at the same time there were no descriptions of; so
that we can speak almost nothing of them but by conjecture.

CHAP. VI. A Catalogue of the Diseases of the first Class, or of those whose
Greek Names are preserved, and have always continued very near the same.
WE'll rank every one of these Diseases in an Alphabetical order, according to
their English Names, which are partly derived from the Greek, which we'll put
at the bottom of the page.

A (...).
ABscesse or Aposthume. (...).
Alphus, a cutaneous distemper (...).
Alopecy, a disease of the head, when the hair falls off, or is thin in several
places. (...). These are the common names to the part and its diseases.
Almonds, diseases of this part, inflammation, suppuration, ulceration. (...).
Anus, the falling down, relaxation, or invertion of it. Vid. Hemorrhoids,
inflammation of the Anus. (...).
Ancyle or Ancylosis, a contraction of the Joints. (...).
Aphony, loss of voice. (...).
Apthae, Ulcers of the mouth. (...). Those that were taken with this disease
were called (...), that is to say struck, v Thunder struck and Pleurisy.
Hippocrates also confounds sometimes Apoplexy with Palsy, where he gives the
first of these Names to both Discases.
Apoplexy, a sudden privation of sense and motion. Appetite, loss of Appetite;
v. Loathing. Appetite deprav^d of those that eat earth and stones, v Color,
and the distemper of Women with Child. (...).
Afterbirth retained. (...).
Asthma, a sort of difficulty of breathing; v. Dispnea. (...). This last word
signifies the action of miscarrying.
Abortion. (...), Weasels Arms. It Is the name that Hippocrates gives to those
that have such arms.
Arms shorter, and of a less proportion than they ought to be. B (...). This
last word signifies also Bunch backed.
BOunch-back'd. (...).
Branchus, a sort of a defluxion, hoarseness. (...); a common name to the
Glands of the Groin, and their Diseases.
Buboes, swellings of the Glands in general, and particularly those of the
Groin. Brain inflamed, v. Inflammation. Brain gangrened, v. Sphacclus. Brain
moved, v. commotion. Brain dropsical, v. Dropsy. (...)
Blood-shot of the Eyes. (...).
A dry Blood-shot. (...).
Baldness. (...), corpulent.
The body torpid or languid. (...).
Blood, vomiting of blood; great loss of blood by Stool in a burning Fever.
Loss of blood, v. Haemorrhage. (...), barren Women.
Barrenness, v. Womb. (k) The Bladder closed or stopped, v. Urine. Tubercule of
the Bladder, v. Tubercule. Stone of the Bladder, v. Stone. C (...).
CAchexy: An ill habit of the fleshy parts of the body, caused by the
corruption and abundance of humors. (...).
Cancer, a sort of a Tumor. (...).
An outward Cancer. (...).
An inward Cancer. (...).
An hereditary Cancer, or that is born with one. Cancer of the Throat, of the
Breast, of the Womb, and of other parts; a Cancerous Ulcer. (...).
Cardialgy, pain of the Stomach, Heart burning. (...).
Carry. (...).
Carus, a sort of a dead sleep, and out of which there is no raising the
Patient. (...).
Cataphora, another sort of extraordinary dead sleep. (...)
Catarrh, or defluxion upon some part, v. Rheum. (...).
A salt Catarrh, nitrous, acrid, and hot. (...).
Catarrhs that kill suddenly. (...).
Catochus, A Disease, in which the Patient continues inflexible, with his eyes
open, without knowledge or motion. (...).
Carbuncle, a sort of Tumor. Causus, v. Fever. (...).
Cholera, a sudden discharge of humors upward and downward. (...).
A wet Cholera; a dry Cholera. Chordapsus, v. Ileus. (...).
Coma, a sort of a dead deep sleep. (...).
Coma watching, a sort of dead sleep, or sleeping with one's eyes open. (...).
Contusion or Bruis. (...).
Convulsions, involuntary contractions of the Muscles. (...).
Coryza, a sort of Catarrh, a heaviness of the head, with a Rheum. (...).
An ill color, paleness or greenness of look, in persons that have a depraved
appetite, and eat earth or stone. (...), v. Rupture.
The chapping of the Tongue or Lips. (...).
Commotion or Concussion of the Brain. (...).
Cold in the extreme, which is felt in certain Fevers, and can scarce be taken
off. (...).
Chilblains. (...).
Cough. D. (...).
DElirium. (...).
Diarrhaea, Looseness. (...).
Dysentery, violent pains in the Bowels, accompanied often with a flux of
blood. (...).
Dispnaea, difficulty of breathing in general. (...).
Disury, a difficulty of making Water, with pains. v. Strangury, and Urine
suppress^d. (...).
Distortions, v. Luxations. (...) de (...). water.
Dropsies of many sorts; general and particular. (...); that is to say, that
comes under or between the fleshy parts.
Dropsy called Hyposarcidios. (...).
Dropsy called Leucophlegmatia. (...).
Dropsy caused by Wind. (...).
Dropsy dry. (...), etc.
Dropsy of the Lungs. (mm) Dropsy of the Breast, caused by the breaking of
the Pustules rising on the Lungs: Dropsy of the Eesticules, of the Womb, of
the Head. Vid. lib. 2. de morb. and lib. de internis aff^c^^^nib.
Disease, called Sacred; the Disease of Hercules; the great Disease:
Falling Sickness, v. Epilepsie. The dry Disease, the belching Disease, the
Disease of the hollow veins, the Disease of the Hypochondra, the putrefying
Disease, the gross Disease, the Disease of the Scythians, the black and blue
Disease, the black Disease, the Disease called Cura, the Phaenician Disease:
See the Diseases of the following Classes. The Disease of Virgins, v. Virgins.
Diseases of Women with Child, that have their Appetitites depraved, v.
Appetite. (...).
Deafness, v. Ear, hearing. E. (...).
EMphrosthotonos; a sort of Convulsion, where the Body is forced to bend
forward. (...). This name is given to all sorts of Imposthumes by Hippocrates,
who in other places by (...), purulent Lungs, means sometimes this distemper,
or another that comes very near it, and calls those that are subject to it
(...).
Empyema; a collection of purulent Matter in the Thorax. Ephelides, v. Spots.
(...)
Epilepsie; Falling Sickness, Passio Sacra, Morbus Comitialis, the Disease of
Hercules, etc. (...).
Epilepsie of Infants. (...).
Epinyctides, a sort of Pustules. Hippocrates means those that have this
impotence by (...).
Erection hindered, or want of Erection. (...).
Erysipelas, a sort of Tumor, St. Anthony's Fire; Erysip* of all the Parts of
the Body, of the Face, of the Lungs, of the Womb: Erysipelas, with Ulcers
malignant, with corruption, and falling of the hair. See this underneath, in
the Diseases of the third Class. (...).
Exanthemata, o^ ^^^sings on the skin, the different sorts are these: Exanth.
accompanied with an itching and heat, as if ^hey were on fire Exanth. or little
spots round and red. Exanth. like spots that remain after the stinging of
Gnats. Exanth. which resemble the wheals left after whipping. Exanth. where the
skin appears as if it was torn. (...).
Ecstasy, a Trance, being ravished, or forgetting ones self. (...).
Ecstasy with Melancholy. (...).
Extension violent of the Fibers, v. Distortion. (...).
Ears, swellings behind the ears, v. Parotides. (...).
Ears moist in little Children. (...).
Pains in the Ear. (...).
Noise and singing in the Ears. (...).
Push or Pimple on the Eyelid. (...).
Eyelids sore, scabby. (...).
Eyelids beset inside and outside with Excrescences of flesh, in the form of
Figs or Warts. Tubercle, or a little swelling of the Eyelids, v. Wart. (...).
Inversion of the Eyelids. (...).
Eyelids when the hair is turn^d inward. (...).
Eyelids joined or clung together. (...).
Eyes across, as your Squint-eyed persons have. (...).
Clouds or Mists appearing before the eyes. Speck and Scars, some white, some
of other colors, that hinder sight, v. Pupil. (...).
Cataract in the eye. (...).
Ulcer of the eye. (...).
Eye burst, v. Pupil. Eyes inflam^d, v. Opthalmy. Eyes clung together, v.
Eyelids. F. (...).
FLesh superfluous, or Excrescence of the flesh, v. Pudenda: Falling away of
the flesh, v. Erysi^elas. (...).
Face awry, without any other illness. (...).
Fire, v. Fever. (...).
Wildsire, a sort of Tetter or Ring-worm. (...).
Fever. (...).
F. Intermittent. (...).
F. continual. (...).
F. Quotidian. (...).
F. Tertian. (...).
Hemitritus, or Tertian and half. (...).
F. Quartan. (...), etc.
Fever of five, of seven, of nine days each. (...)and (...).
F. of a day. (...).
F. of a night. (...).
F. burning, otherwise called Causus. (...).
F burning, called fire. (...).
F. kind. (...).
F. malignant. (...).
Fever that has exacerbations. (...).
F. burning. (...).
F. cold. (...).
F. Lipy^y; or the outward Parts cold, while the inwards are burning. (...)
F. moist (...).
Fever dry. (...).
F. salt. (...).
F. windy. (...).
F. red. (...).
F. livid. (...).
F. pale. (...).
F. restless. (...).
Fever inconstant. (...).
F. long and slow. (...).
A little continual Fever. (...).
F. errant. (...).
F. acute. (...).
F. terrible to the sight. (...).
F. whose heat is soft or rough to the hand. (...).
F. killing. (...).
F. soft or gentle. (...).
F. accompanied with the Hickup. (...).
F. where the light is dim. (...).
Fever laborious or tiresome. (...).
F. moderate in its heat. (...).
Fever irregular. (...).
Fever vertiginous. (...).
Fever that has the appearance of a Tertian. (...).
F. viscous. (...).
Fever caus^d by pure Bile. (...).
F. of the Winter. (...).
Fistula a sort of Ulcer. (b) Fistula in Ano, v. Tubercule. (...) The first is
also meant sometimes in Hippocrates for the Months.
Flux or loss of blood of Women that continues much longer than their Months,
and whose color is sometimes red, now and then white, sometimes yellowish,
etc. See a little further in the cure of the Diseases of Women, v. Months.
(...).
Fluxion, v. Catarrh, Rheum, Branchus, Corysa. (...). You find also the word
(...), which answers to the English word stupid, and signifies foolish,
senseless, (...)
Folly, Thunderstruck, a distemper where one is deprived of all sense on a
sudden as if struck with Lightning, v. Apoplexy. Another disease, where they
have after death their sides black and blue, as if they were murdered, or
bruised with Lightning, v. Pleurisy. (...).
Fractures of the bones. (...).
Frica Rigor, shaking with the cold. (...).
A Fellon or Bile: Flowings of Women, v. Flux. (...).
Fear in sleeping, the distemper of little Children. G. (...).
COntinual Gaping. (...).
Gripes. (...); that is to say, black and dry corruption; (...) corruption;
(...).
Gangrene. (...).
Gums; the itching of the Gums of Infants. (...).
Gums full of round Carbuncles, or little black and blue swellings. (...).
Black Gums; Impostumation of the Gums. Glands, v. Bubo's, scrophulous humors.
(...).
Glaucosis or Glaucoma, distemper of the eye. (...).
Gongronae swellings, a disease of the Neck. (...).
Gout. (...).
Gout, with hard stony Matter in the Joints, v. Tubercules. (l) Gravel, v.
Stone, Kidneys. (m) Gut, the great Gut inflamed. The falling down of the great
Gut, v. Anus. Gripes, v. Dysentery. H. (...).
HOarsness, v. Branchus. (...).
Hunger. (...).
Hemorrhage; loss of blood in general. (...).
Hemorrhoids; swellings of the Anus. Hemorrhoids, with the falling down of the
Anus, v. Anus. (...).
Herpes, swellings ulcerated that run farther and farther. (...).
Hickup. (...).
Hypochondra; ('it is the name which Hippocrates gives to the Parts that are
immediately under the short Ribs) swollen, tense, with rumblings, etc. These are
the different dispositions of the Parts, and the Accidents or Signs that
precede or follow certain Diseases; the disease of the Hypochondra, v. in the
distempers of the second Class. (...).
Hypoglossis; a swelling under the Tongue. (...).
Hearing; hardness of hearing, v. Deafness. (...).
Hair; the disease when the hair falls off from all Parts of the Body, v.
Alopecy, baldness. (...) it is the name of those that have their heads of this
shape.
Head sharp like a Sugar Loaf. (...).
Pain in the head. (...).
Heaviness of the head. (...), etc.
Pain of the head, with purulent Matter running from the Nose. (p) Pain of the
head, caused by water enclosed in the Brain, or within the Skull, v. Dropsy.
I. (...).
ITch. (...).
Jaundice, or Icterus, a Disease of the skin; the yellow or pale Jaundice
arising from the Liver; black Jaundice from the Spleen; other sorts of this
disease, v. Ileus. (...), v. further on in the Article of Diocles.
Ileus, a distemper of the Guts, one within the other, that the Excrements
cannot pass. (...).
Ileus accompanied with the Jaundice. (...).
Ileus bloody. (...).
Inflammation; such a disposition of Parts, that you feel an extraordinary heat
and burning, whether there be a swelling or not. Inflammation of the Lungs, v.
Peripneumony. (...). Epidem lib. 5. sect. 7.
Jaw mortified, fallen after a pain in the Teeth; and after having had
Excrescences of flesh upon it. K. (...).
KIngs Evil; distemper of the Glands. (b) Kidneys, Reins, v. Nephritis. L.
(...).
HArd Labor, v. Purgations and Afterbirth. (...); prorrhetic. lib. 2.
Lameness, settled Lameness. (...); Those that had this distemper were called
(...), a name common to all those that had their Livers indisposed.
Liver, inflammation and pain in the Liver; Liver inflated hard, and
Impostumated. (...).
Leprosy, a distemper of the skin. (...).
Lethargy, a sort of sleepiness, with a Fever, and memory failing: A sort of
Lethargy where the Lungs are affected. (...).
Leuca, a distemper of the skin, that becomes white in some places. Lips,
Ulcers of the Lips, v. Apthae. Lichon. v. Tetter. (...).
Lientery, a disease when you void by Excrement your Food the same you took it
in, or but a little changed. (...).
Loins, pain in the Back or Loins. (...).
Luxations or distortions. Lungs inflamed, v. Peripneumony. (...).
Lobes of the Lungs convulsed. Dropsy of the Lungs, v. Dropsy. Little
swellings or knobs of the Lungs, v. Wart. Swellings of the veins in the Lungs,
v. Varix. M. (...).
MOuth; the ill smell of the mouth. (...).
Wry mouths, Ulcers of the mouth, v. Apthae. (...).
Madness, v. Folly. (...).
Raving madness. (...)
Melancholy, or melancholy distempers. (...).
Months in too great a quantity. (...).
Months in too small a quantity. (...).
Months without color. (...).
Months without mixture (...).
Months stopped. (...), etc.
Months purulent, like pieces of Membrances, or Spiders Web, consisting of
phlegm, matter, black, grumous, acrid, bilious, salt, etc. Months that ascend
toward the breasts, etc. v Flux and Purgations. (...).
Mola, a lump of flesh growing in the Womb. N. (...); they are so named that
have their necks awry.
NEck awry. (...).
Nauseating of Victuals common to Women with Child, and accompanied with an
inclination to vomit. (...).
Nephritis; a disease of the Kidneys, accompanied with pains, suppression of
Urine, and other symptoms, v. Stone. Nose, more than ordinary moistness of the
Nose; a sort of defluxion, v. Coryza. (...), etc.
Navil inflamed, ulcerated, and open from the birth. (...); it is so they are
called by Hippocrates, that have this distemper, which he gives no name to as
such.
Nyctalopy, a distemper of those that see better in the night than in the day.
O. (...).
OIdema; swellings and tumors in general, v. Tumor. Omentum, or the Caul; the
falling down of it into the Groin, v. Tumor. (...).
Opthalmy, or inflarnation of the eyes, moist and dry (...).
Opisthotonos, a sort of Convulsion, where the body bends backward. (...).
Orthopny, a sort of difficulty of breathing, that the Patient can^t lie down
in his Bed, v. Dispnea, Asthma. P. We find this case at the beginning of the
fourth and sixth Poo^ of the ^p demie^s.
PAlate; Imposthumations and Ulcers corroding the Palate. The falling or
separation of the bone of the Palate and the Teeth, from whence follows the
sinking of the Nose. (...).
Palpitation of the Heart; Palpitation of the flesh in all parts of the body;
Palpitation between the Navel and the Cartilage, that^s toward the stomach.
(...); this name in common in Hippocrates both to Apoplexy and Palsy; (...);
some part of the body that is become Paralyti^n, or that has lost its sense and
motion You find there also the word (...), to relax in speaking of the Parts
that are Paralytick. become they are re^ax^d and loose, without s^ren th^^^
^up^^rt th^^. It Is from this Verb that the word (...) ^^der^v'd Palsy, but I do
not find it in Hippocrates. He means in another place by the word (...) in a
species of this distemper.
Palsy, a privation of sense and motion, universal and particular (...).
Paronychia or Panaris, a Whitlow, or sore under the nails that is very painful.
(...); he speaks also of a distemper of little Children, that he calls (...),
which seems to be the same; and he explains this word in another place by
(...), swellings that rise behind the Ears as the Satyrs have; or rather, which
makes 'em resemble Satyrs, which are painted with ears standing up, ^s those
have that are troubled with swellings behind 'em. He also calls the same
swellings (...), because the Satyrs were called (...) by the Ionians. You Will
see in another place another signification of the word Satyriasmus.
Parotides, swellings of the Glands behind the Ears. (...).
Pudenda, excrescence of flesh at the entrance of the secret parts of Women,
the rotting and falling off of the hairs of those parts, v. Eresypelas. (...).
Peripneumony, inflammation of the Lungs. (...).
Perirrhaea, a great discharge of humors, particularly by Urine. (...).
Plague and Pestilential distempers. Phagedaena, v Ulcer. White phlegm, v.
Leucophlegmaty. Phlegmon, v. Inflammation. (...).
Phlyctenae, a sort of pimples and risings on the skin, like those that come
after a burn. (...); This word comes from (...), which is the name the Ancients
gave to the Diaphragm, and signifies also the Soul or Mind, because they
believed the Soul had its seat in the Diaphragm.
Phrenesis, an acute Fever, with a strong delirium. (...), de (...), to
consume, and (...) to melt.
Phthisis, a disease when the body consumes away (...).
Phthisis of the back. (...).
Phthisis nephritick, or that comes from the Reins. (...).
Phthisis from the Hips. (...).
Phthisis, from the general habit of body; that is, from the flesh. (...), etc.
Prickings all over the body, and in particular at the end of the tongue. (...).
Pityriasis, a disease when the hairs fall off, and Scurf or Scales rise on the
skin of the head. Pleurisy, a pain in the side, with a continual Fever. (...).
Pleurisy moist, when the Patient expectorates. (...).
Pleurisy dry, when he does not spit at all. For this reason, those that were
in this oondition were called (...), that is to say struck, as well as those
that fell into an Apoplexy. See before Apoplexy.
Pleurisy, in which after death the sides are black and blue, like those that
have been struck with Thunder. (...).
Pollutions Nocturnal, v. Seed. (...).
Polypus, an excrescence of the flesh in the Nose. (...). Well describe it more
particularly in the diseases of the third Class.
Putrefaction of the flesh of the Pudenda. Putrefaction, v. Gangrene. (...).
The Pupil of the eye spoil^d. (...), v. Glaucoma.
The Pupil of the eye whitish, of a silver color, of the color of Seawater,
of a Sky-colour. (...).
The Pupil out of its place. (...).
The Pupil appearing less or greater, and angular. (...).
The standing out of the Pupil, when the eyes burst. (...).
A Scar on the Pupil. (...).
Ulcer of the Pupil, v. Sight and Eyes. Pulsation of the Hypochondra, v.
Palpitation. (...), etc.
Purgations, that follow the suppression of the Lochia Purgations, (...).
or the matter of them ascending even to the Lungs and Head, and issuing out of
the Nose and Mouth, etc. Pustules, pimples or risings on the skin of several
sorts, v. Exanthemata, Terminthi, Epinyctides. (...).
Pustules arising from sweat that is acrimonious, with a corroding salt that
ulcerates the skin. Q. (...), and (...), these are two different sorts.
QUinsie, a distemper of the Throat. (...).
Quinsie, extending it self, or throwing it self on the Lungs. Quinsie,
following an inward luxation of the vertebrae of the Neck, and which ends in a
Palsy. R. (...).
RIsings on the skin, or pimples, v. Exanthemata. (...).
Restlesness of Patients impossiblity to continue in one place. v. Dispnaea.
Respiration hindered, v. Dispnaea, Orthopnaea; Asthma, Rheum, v. Defluxion.
(...). We know not precisely what Hippocrates meant by (...), it seems it is
that part of the back which is just against the Diaphragm, which we said was
what we called (...).
Rupture of the breast or back. (...): from thence comes the word (...). It Is
so Hippocrates calls those that have any Vessel broke in their body, or any
Imposthume that is open, v. Chapping.
Rupture, or breaking of some Vessel or Imposthume within the body. S. (...).
Tuttering, v. Tongue-ty'd. Stone, or the (...).
Stone in the Kid^^ies and Bladder. (...).
Spitting blood; Skull when its bones separate one from another, v. Sphacelus.
(...).
Swooning, Swelling, v. Oidema (...).
Stupefaction. (...).
Spine of the back bent inwardly. (...).
Spine of the back that goes awry, or that bends to right or left. (...).
Sudden surprise or stupefaction. (...).
Scab, skin (...).
rising up in Scales. (...).
Snoring. (...).
Spleen, inflammation of the Spleen. (...).
Spleen swollen. (...).
A great Spleen, Sporting, v. Snoring. (...).
Frequent Salivation, Sa^^ri^smus, v. Parotides. (...).
Sciatick, Scrotum, v. Tumors. To (...).
Seed, involuntary flux of Seed, v* Pollutions. Deep sleep, v. Carus, Catochus,
Coma, Lethargy Sphacelus, a sort of Gangrene, v* Gangrene. (...).
Strangury, Urine coming out drop by drop with pain, v. Dysury. Suffocation of
the Womb, v. Womb. (...).
Superfetation. (...).
Spots on the Legs by being too near the fire. (...).
Spots on the face by being too much in the Sun White specks in the eyes, v.
Eyes. (...).
Stones big or swollen. Varices, and other swellings of the Stones, v. Tumors.
(...).
Sight, dimness of sight; the sight of those that see better in the night than
in the day, v. Nyc^alopy. (...).
Loss of sight, blindness, v. Pupil, Eyelids, Eyes. T. (...).
TEtters. (...).
Teeth; pains in the Teeth. (...).
Teeth benumbed. (...).
Grinding of the Teeth. (...).
Teeth gnash'd one against the other. Rotten Teeth, v. Sphacelus. The falling
out of the Teeth, falling down of the Jaw, and of the Palate, v. Jaws, Palate.
(...).
Tongue-ty'd, that causes an hesitation in speaking. Those that have this
imperfection are called (...).
Too great a volubility of the Tongue, that occasions stammering. (...).
Tenesmus, or pain in going to Stool. (...).
Terminthi, a sort of Pustules. (...).
Tetanus, a sort of Convulsion, where all the Muscles are extended, and the
Body straight. (...).
Trembling. (...).
Tubercules, or little swellings of diverse sorts. Tubercule behind the Ears, v.
Parotides. Tubercule on the Gums, v. Gums. (...).
Tubercule crude in the Lungs. (...).
Tuberc about the Bladder. (...).
Tuberc. in the Vrethra. (...).
Tubercules, or little hard swellings rising in the face. (...).
Tuberc. hard and stony of the joints of gouty persons, and that oftentimes
come on the Tongue. (...).
Tuberc. hard about the Anus, whence follows an Abscesse, and at last a
Fistula, or a fistulous Ulcer that perforates the Gut. (...).
Tumors and swellings in general, v. Oidema. (...).
Hard Tumors (...).
Scrophulous Tumors, v. King's Evil. (...). It Is the general name thut
Hippocrates gives th^s. Tumors, and mentions the several species of them,
which. we have taken notice of.
Tumors of the Groin, of the Scrotum, of the Testicules caused by the falling
down of the Omentum, or the Intestines; or by the Varices of the Testicules; or
by water collected in the Scrotum. (...).
Typhomany, v. the distempers of the fifth Class. Typhus, v. those of the
fourth. U. (...).
UVula relaxed. (...).
Uvula contracted. (...).
Uvula as it were dissolved or corrupted. (...).
Varices; veins swollen, or very much dilated: Varix of the Lungs. (...).
Veins obstructed, that hinder the motion of the blood. (...).
Veins throwing out blood upon the brain, v. in the following Classes. This
disease is describ^d by Hippocrates, but he gave it no particular name.
Virgins, the Diseases of Virgins. (...).
Ulcers. (...). Erotian.
Ulcers of the head, with a running humor like honey. (...); those which he
calls (...), that is to say, that eat and corrode; there are several sorts of
'em.
Ulcers malignant and corroding. (...).
Fistulous Ulcers, v. Fistula. (...).
Scrophulous Ulcers, v. Kings Evil and Tumors. (...).
Urine stopped; difficulty of making water: Urine coming out drop by drop, v.
Dysury, Strangury W. (...); it^s a common name to all distempers of the Womb,
but it signifies also in particular the suffocation of the Womb.
WOmb; several distempers of it. (...).
Its being out of its proper place. (...).
The falling down of the Womb. (...).
Suffocation of the Womb and Mother. The swelling of the Womb, caused by water
or wind, v. Dropsy. Excrescence of flesh growing at the entrance of the
outward neck of the Womb, v. Pudenda; swelling and hardness of the orifice of
the Womb. The closing of it, causing barrenness or suppression of the Months.
The folding or twisting of the orifice. The orifice too much open. Womb
putrified, inflam^d, full of phlegm, ulcerated, cancerated, etc. v. further on
the cure of the Diseases of Women. (...).
A Wart, Tubercule, or little swelling on the Eyelids. (...).
Wounds. (...).
Warts. (...).
Worms. (...).
Worms round and long. (...).
Large and smooth. (...).
Worms called Ascarides, which are about the Anus, and sometimes in the Pudenda
of Women. (...).
Vertigo. (...).
Vertigo, with a mist over the eyes.
You see what are the Diseases of the first Class, which we leave at the
present, with a design to give the definition, or the more exact description of
them, and to observe some other circumstances relating to their Nature, Signs
and Causes, in the Chapter of Galen.

CHAP. VII. The distempers of the second Class, or that have not preserved the
names which Hippocrates gives them, though they have been known by the accidents
or symptoms that he ascrib^d to them.
THis is the description that Hippocrates gives of a disease he calls (...)
the drying or dry disease: These, says he, that are seized with it, can
neither be without eating, nor can their stomachs bear or digest what they have
eaten. When they don't eat, their Guts rumble and make a noise, and they feel a
pain in the orifice of their stomach; they vomit sometimes one sort of humor,
sometimes another. They throw up Bile, Spittle, Phlegm, and acrid Matter; and
after they have vomited, they think themselves a little better. But when they
have taken any nourishment, they are troubled with belchings, their face looks
red, and they burn like fire. They think they have a great occasion to go to
Scool, and when they come there, oftentimes nothing but wind comes from them.
They have pains in their head, and feel prickings all over their body,
sometimes in one part, sometimes in another, as if they were prick^d with
Needles. Their L^gs are heavy and feeble, they consume away, and grow weak by
little and little. He adds further, This distemper is of long continuance, and
does not leave the Patient till hes old, supposing he does not die before that
time.

This description agrees pretty well with a disease which is called in the
following discourse the Disease of the Hypochondra: That which Hippocrates
calls the Belching Disease; that is to say, where they belch frequently, is a
species or branch of the same, as well as the black distemper he speaks of a
little after.

As to the disease which he names (...) Care a grievous disease.
Care, that according to his report is very dismal, you may place it under the
melancholy distempers, of which Hippocrates himself speaks in another place,
and which we have put amongst those of the precedent Class. In this distemper,
says he, you feel something like a thorn pricking your entrails. Those that are
taken with it are extremely restless and unquiet, they avoid the light and
company, they are pleased with darkness, and are afraid of every thing; the
Membrane that parts the Abdomen from the Breast swells out. When you touch them
they fell pain, and are very much afraid of being hurt; they dream horrid
dreams, and think they see of a sudden frightful Objects, or dead Bodies.

CHAP. VIII. The Diseases of the third Class, which are those which Hippocrates
gave no name to, but which we may, or think we may, know by the description he
gives of them.
HIppocrates speaking of the accidents that happen to those that have a large
Spleen, says, That their Prorrhetic. lib. 2.
gums are corrupted, and their breath smells ill He adds, That if they have not
some Hemorrhage, and the mouth does not smell ill, they are troubled with
Ulcers and Cicatrice's, or black spots on their Legs. Some pretend it is the
distemper which Pliny speaks of, and is at this time very common amongst the
Northern People.

Hippocrates in another place giving an exact relation of several accidents
that accompanied a distemper that was become Epidemick, and of which he
observes more died than lived after it, says, That the accidents or symptoms
were reduced to these, Epidem. lib. 3. sect. 3.
Erysipelas's or malignant Tetters, sore Throat with hoarsness, a burning Fever
with a delirium, corroding Ulcers in the mouth, swellings on the Pudenda,
inflammations of the Eyes, Carbuncles, disorders in the Bowels, great loss of
Appetite, troubled Urine, and in large quantities, sometimes doziness, and at
another time watchings, no entire or perfect ceasing of these disorders so as
for the better, or to be term^d a happy conclusion of them, but a change that
produced Dropsies and Consumptions.

After having begun in this manner, he adds, That in several of these Patients,
the very small Ulcers degenerated into Tetters, or Erysipelas's, which spread
themselves in all Parts of the body, and came particularly about the head to
Men of sixty years of age, upon the least neglect of their distemper. At the
same time, says he, further, That they actually applied remedies, of a sudden
there arose Inflammations and Tetters, which spread themselves all about. When
these Tetters came to suppuration, you might see flesh and Tendons fall off
from several, and their bones come away from them; and that which runs from
these Ulcers, was not like to purulent Matter, but was a particular sort of
corruption of several colors, and in great abundance. Those also that
happen^d to have the same about the Head, lost their hair from the Part; as
also from the Chin, the bones were seen altogether waked, and some of them
dropped off. These symptoms were sometimes with a Fever, sometimes without, and
commonly they were in greater fear than danger, at least those, when in the
distemper, the Matter came to a good digestion and suppuration, for they most
of them, escaped. But those whose Erysipelas, or Inflammation, did not
suppurate, almost all of them died, in whatever Part the Erysipelas came, the
same thing happened. From one a whole Arm wou^d fall off; that is to say, it
would iutirely loose all the flesh that covered it. With another, the sides, or
any part of the body, before or behind, were expos^d to the same danger. And it
sometimes happen^d, that the whole Hip, Leg or Foot, were left altogether
naked, without any flesh; but those whose Abdomen, or Privy Parts, were touched
with it, suffer^d more than all the rest.

I have drawn at length the description of this distemper, that we may compare
it with that of some others, which we shall speak of in the sequel of this
History, and which have been look^d upon by the greatest part of Physicians as
new, and not known in the time of Hippocrates, nor a long time after him,
although they are found accompanied with symptoms which have a relation with some
of those we have touch^d upon. You Will find also other examples of diseases,
which have been thought new in regard to those that are found described in
Hippocrates, or which they pretend had their beginning at a certain time. It Is
what we^ll inquire into as opportunity shall offer it self; and 'twas chiefly
in regard to this, that I thought my self obliged at least to give an account
of the Names of the diseases this ancient Physician had knowledge of; that, as
we have already said, we might compare his descriptions with those that follow.

We may put in this Class the distemper peculiar to the Scythians, which
Herodotus makes mention of, and attributes to the anger of Venus Urania, whose
Temple was pillaged by them. This is what Hippocrates has writ of it: Many,
says he, among the Scythians become Eunuchs, do every thing that Women are
accustomed to do, and talk or discourse as if they were so; from whence they
are called Effeminate. The Inhabitants of the Country, that impute the Cause of
this distemper to God, or the Deity, have a great veneration for those that are
seiz^d with it, and in a manner worship them, for fear the same thing should
happen to themselves. For my part, continues Hippocrates, I believe truly, that
these sorts of distempers are Divine as well as others, and that there is no
distemper more Divine or Humane one than another, but that they are all Divine;
that every one has its particular nature, and that there is never a one where
Nature has not its part. I Will tell you then from whence I think this malady
comes. The Scythians are subject to certain Rheumatisms on the Joints, which
are very stubborn, and continue a long time; which happens to them, because
they are continually on Horseback, and their Legs hanging down. When this
distemper has had its period they become Lame, by reason of the contraction of
their Thighs, and the manner of their management is this. At the beginning of
this distemper, they open the veins behind the Ears, and being weaken^d and
dispirited by the loss of a great quantity of blood they fall asleep; and some
of them, when they awake, find themselves well. In my opinion, they ruin
themselves by this manner of management, for those that have their veins behind
their Ears open^d, become incapable of generation; and that is their misfortune.
When they come to their Wives and find they are not fit for enjoyment, they are
not immediately much concern^d, but when they find they continue impotent, then
they imagine they have offended the God, or the Divinity to whom they ascribe
the cause of their disgrace. After which they take the habit of a Woman, and
publicly declare they are no longer Men; they converse with the Women, and
appear in all respects as such. We must observe, that there are none but the
richest of the Scythians, or those of the greatest quality, that are subject to
this disease, and that the poor are never seized with it; without doubt, the
reason of it is, because the first are almost always on Horseback, and the
latter but seldom. If this disease was more divine than others, it ought not to
attack the wealthiest, and the greatest Men only, but be equally common to all.
It should rather happen, that the poor People should be more exposed than the
rich, especially if the Gods take pleasure that Men should admire and adore
them, and for that reason bestow their benefits on them. For the rich offer
Sacrifices and Oblations to 'em, serve 'em, and erect Statues oftener than the
poor, because they have wherewithal to do it; whereas the other have not, and
instead of adoration oftentimes curse the Gods, that they have not given them
Plenty and Riches. So that it wou^d be more agreeable to reason, that the poor
and needy should be punished with this disease, for their wickedness, rather
than the rich. This distemper then is truly Divine, as I said at first, but all
others are so too, and come naturally at the same time to all People.

The opinion of Hippocrates, concerning the distinction that the Gods ought to
make between the Rich and the Poor, in relation to Sacrifices, might give an
occasion to some to accuse him of taking too great a liberty in Matters of
Religion; but they might as well, and with the same reason, blame Homer, when
in several places he introduces Jupiter laying aside all business, to go and
take part of a Collation; that is to say, to sup up the smoke of a Sacrifice of
the Ethiopians, with all the Train of Gods after him. It appears also, by what
Hippocrates says relating to the cause of this distemper, that he was not at
all superstitious, as we have observed before, and his thoughts on this subject
are very well worthy of the Age in which Socrates lived, with whom he was
almost contemporary. It seems probable to others, that this distemper of the
Scythians fell upon the Rich oftener than the Poor, by the same reason that we
see every day, that Persons of Estates are more subject to the Hypochondriack
Affection, than those of meaner Fortunes, which you^ll easily find to be true.

CHAP. IX. Diseases of the fourth Class, that have not been known to the
Physicians that lived since Hippocrates. neither by the description he has
given of them, nor by the names he gives them, which have not been in use since.
AMongst the distempers of this Class, which are not many in number, no more
than those of the two precedent ones, the most remarkable are these two; the
(...).
Typhus, and (...).
the thick or gross disease: these are the names which Hippocrates gives them.
Some of his Commentators were of opinion, that the first of these was a sort of
a burning Fever, which caused a delirium with stupefaction. You Will see by the
description whether they have hit right.

According to our Author, there are five sorts of Typhus's: The first is really
a continual Fever, that takes away all the strength of the Patient, accompanied
with pains in the belly, and a heat or inflammation in the eyes, that he cannot
look steady upon any thing; besides, not being able to answer to any that is
asked him, by reason of the great pain he lies under, unless when he is just
dying, then he talks, and looks stern and bold.

The second sort begins with a Tertian or Quartan Ague, and after that come
pains in the head. The Patient spits in abundance, and throws up some Worms by
the Mouth; his eyes are painful to him, his visage looks pale, he has a tumor
or soft swelling in his feet, and sometimes all over the body; sometime his
breast and back pain him, his belly rumbles and makes a noise, his eyes look
fierce, he hauks and spits much, and his spittle sticks to his Throat, that
makes his voice squeak.

The third sort distinguishes it self from the rest, by the mighty quick sharp
pains in the joints, and sometimes all over the body. The blood corrupted by
the Bile stops, and is coagulated about the Hips; and the Bile detain^d in the
joints growing hard like a gravel stone, the Patient becomes lame.

The fourth sort is known by the great tenseness, rising up, and heat of the
belly; after which follows a Looseness, which sometimes leads the way to a
Dropsy, and is also accompanied sometimes with a Fever.

The fifth and last has for its signs, a paleness and transparency of the whole
body, like that of a bladder full of water, yet without any swelling; on the
contrary, the body is extenuated, dry and feeble, especially toward the
neck-bones and the face; the eyes are very much sunk in, and the body also is
sometimes black. The Patient seldom winks with his eyes, he feels about with
his hands upon the Covering of the Bed, as if he wou^d pick Wool or Straws. He
finds himself more charged and fuller after eating, than when he was well; he
loves the smell of a Lamp put out; he has oftentimes pullutions when he sleeps,
and the same thing happens to him when awake.

So much for the Typhus; the thick or gross disease is no less particular, and
there is more than one sort of it. The first is caused by phlegm and choler,
which discharge themselves in the Abdomen and inflate it, and are evacuated up
and down like a Torrent. The Patient is taken with a shivering and fever; the
pain passes from the Abdomen to the Head, and when it descends to the entrails
it causes a Suffocation. Sometimes the Patient vomits sour phlegm, and
sometimes salt; after vomiting he has a bitterness in his mouth, red heats
appear on his side, and he stoops in the back; he cannot endure to be touch^d
in any part; and the pain that he feels is so violent, that there is a sort of
palpitation or pulse in the flesh; his Testicules are contracted, the heat and
pain is continued at the same time, even to the Anus and Bladder. He makes
thick water, like that of those that are dropsical; the hair falls off from his
head, his feet are always cold. At last the pain fixes particularly on the
sides, back, and nape of the Neck; and it seems to the Patient, as if something
creep'd, or run all about his skin. Sometimes there is a remission of the
distemper, other times there is nothing at all of it. The skin of the head
becomes red and thick. This distemper continues six years, sometimes ten.
Toward the end the Patient sweats in abundance, and the sweat is of a very ill
smell. He has oftentimes pollutions in his sleep, and the seed he ejects is
bloody, and of a livid color. It seems at first as if he was describing the
Cholera Morbus, or some sort of Cholick, but that which comes after has no
great relation to that.

The second sort of the thick distempers, is caused by bile alone, that
discharges it self on the Liver and Head. The Liver swells up and presses upon
the Diaphragm. The Head, and particularly the Temples, are immediately seized
with pain. The Patient is not right in his understanding, and sometimes he sees
but very little; an Ague and Fever succeed after the foregoing symptoms. This
comes at the beginning of the disease, and then you have by times great
remissions, at other times but small ones. The longer the malady continues, the
pain grows greater, the Pupils of the eyes are dilated, and the Patient sees
not a jot; that though you put your finger before his eyes he perceives nothing,
and does not so much as wink. But if he has some little sight remaining, he is
continually pulling out with his fingers the little flocks of Wool from the
Covering, thinking they are lice or nastiness. But when the Liver extends it
self further toward the Diaphragm, the Patient raves, and fancies he has
before his eyes all sorts of creeping things, or wild Beasts, or armed Men; he
would fight with them all, and talks and acts as if he was in an engagement. If
you don't give him liberty he threatens, and if you let him go he falls down.
He has always his feet cold; if he sleeps it is with continual tossing; he is
scared with frightful dreams, and when he awakes relates all he has done or
seen. At other times, he lies a whole day and night without speaking a word,
breathing with a great deal of difficulty. He is delirious by intervals; he
comes to himself, answers to all questions that are asked him, understands
every thing that is read to him, but a little while after relapses to his
former condition. This disease, says our Author further, falls chiefly on
Travelers, or those that passing through uninhabited places, have been
frightened with the sight of some Spectre or other.

The third sort is occasioned by phlegm, which appears by the circumstances the
Patient is in, who has a taste as if he had eaten Radishes. This distemper, or
the pain that accompanies it, begins in the Legs, from whence it rises to the
belly, and diffusing it self in the Intestines, makes a great noise there;
after which the Patient vomits up sour putrid phlegm, but this evacuation
gives him no ease; on the contrary, he falls into a delirium, and feels a pain
so troublesome and uneasy in his bowels, and by times a pain in his head so
violent and fix^d, that he has neither his Understanding nor his Sight, but
very confusedly; he sweats plentifully, and his sweat smells ill, but it gives
him ease. The color of the Patient is the same as in a Jaundice; and this
distemper is not so mortal oftentimes as the precedent one.

The fourth sort takes its rise from You Will see in the Catalogue of the common
dist^mpers at the end of this Chapter, what Hippocrates understood by white
phlegm.
white phlegm, and comes after Fevers that have continued a long time. This
distemper begins with a swelling in the face, it tends afterward to the
Abdomen, which swells also. The Patient has a pain upon him like that after
hard Exercise, and his belly feels sore, as if it was pressed with a great
burden: The feet swell also. If Rain falls on the ground, he cannot bear the
smell of it; and if by chance he is exposed to the Rain, and smells this smell
of the ground, he immediately falls. This distemper has some intermissions, but
lasts longer than the precedent one; its continuance is for six years.

We don't find that our Modern Practisers, nor even those amongst the Ancients,
that came after Hippocrates, have described any particular distemper attended
with so many accidents or symptoms all at once; and we must confess, those we
are come to specify are so many in number, that one would think it impossible
for all to happen in one and the same disease. And that that is yet more
particular in it is, that Hippocrates, or the Author of the Book we have
quoted, makes four or five sorts of each of these distempers, which appear so
different one from the other, that we cannot apprehend why they are ranked
under the same general name.

It Is that is the reason that the Physicians of After-Ages, that easily knew a
Dropsy, for example, a Consumption, a Pleurisy, by the Characters which
Hippocrates gave of each, yet knew nothing of the two diseases in question. We
may infer from thence, either that the Typhus, and thick disease, are no longer
in being, and that no body now is affected with them, or that no body at all
ever was, and that they are feigned distempers, and only described to please a
humor or fancy. We ought not to rest satisfied with the first conjecture, though
it is not impossible that some diseases may cease to be, as well as they pretend
new ones arise: This question shall be treated of hereafter.

There Is rather a probability, that those that described this distemper did it
to deceive us. You shall see after what manner one may presume the thing came
to pas^.

First, We must know that the Prosper Ma^^a^^^, a Roman ^hysici^^, that writ a
Comm^nta^y on Hipp^crates, about the beginning of this Age, is almost the only
person of another opinion.
greatest part of the Authors, as well Ancient as Modern, do agree, That the
Book wherein these diseases are described is not of Hippocrates's writing, but
belongs to some of the Works of the Cnidien Physicians, who are mentioned in
the foregoing Book. That which confirms this opinion, is what Galen
particularly remarks, viz. That these Physicians reckoned up four sorts of
Jaundices, three sorts of Consumptions, different from those that are specified
in the Catalogue of the diseases of the first Class, and that they multiplied
after the same manner the sorts of several other distempers, without reason or
necessity. It Is then in the same Book that we find all these distinctions, which
is an argument that it was after their usual manner of writing. Hippocrates was
so far from using the same way, that he De diaeta in ac^tis, lib. 4.
himself has blamed 'em for making too nice a distinction of Diseases, as if a
distemper ought always to be called by a different name, because it differs
from another in a little trivial thing, when it is the same as to the Essentials
or Charactaristicks, by which the genus and species of them are really
distinguished. It Is the same mistake that Galen found fault with the Empiricks
for, who for want of method, had a greater regard to the symptoms or accidents,
of which there might be an infinite variety, than to the distemper it self;
whence it came that they multiplied diseases ad insinitum.

The same defect in method, which was the cause that the Cnidiens made
distinctions when there was no necessity for it, produced that disorder and
confusion you find in the description of the Typhus and thick Disease.

In one word, the fault of these Physicians lay in this, That they joined the
symptoms of many diseases to one alone, not distinguishing those that were
proper to certain particular distempers, and inseparable from them, from those
which are common to many.

Lastly, It may be that the fault was in the Copiers, and that these ancient
Pieces having passed through an infinite number of hands, have been confusedly
mixed with observations different from them, without the Authors having any
share in the disorder.

We may add to these distempers, that that is called the great distemper of the
hollow veins, and that that is named the vomiting of the veins on the Brain;
these names which were ill imposed, or that did depend on the particular Idea
which these ancient Physicians had of the Body, having been neither better
retained, nor known, than those mentioned before.

CHAP. X. Distempers of the fifth Class, or which have names that are no longer
known, and at the same time have no description given of them, which is the
reason we can speak nothing of them but by conjecture.
HIppocrates makes mention of a distemper, which he calls the Pro^^^^tic. lib.
2 sub^s^nem.
Pthinick Discase. The likeness between the words Pthinick and Pthisick, has
given occasion to some Interpreters to believe that he treated of a Consumption
in this place: But the more Learned agree, that there is a fault in the Greek
Text, and that instead of (...), we ought to read (...), The Phaenician
Disease. Their opinion is founded upon this, viz. That they find this last word
in the Commentators of Hippocrates, who add, That he understood by it a
distemper common in Phaenicia, and in other Eastern Countries, which seems to
be nothing else but an Elephantiasis. That which confirms this Explanation is,
That Hippocrates treats in the same place of distempers, that have a near
relation to it; such are the Leprosy, Tetters, and the distemper called Leuce.
I Will only make this remark, viz. That Galen, who is the Author of a Commentary,
might be deceived in this, only because he thinks that the distemper of
Phaenicia is precisely the same that is called Elephantiasis, whereas it may be
it had only a bare relation to it; and that by this distemper of Phaenicia,
Hippocrates had understood the Sea the Commentary (...) Mr. Le Clear on
Leviticus.
Leprosy of the Jews, that was a sort of a Leuce, that might have some symptom
common with an Elephantiasis, without being the same.

The Commentaries of Hippocrates, which we'll speak of hereafter, furnished us
with other examples of distempers, which we can have no knowledge of further
than by conjecture, because their names are no longer in use, and besides
there^s no description given of them. Such is the disease which Hippocrates
calls (...), Epidem. lib. 1.
Tangae, which is thought to be a sort of a Tumor. Such is also that that is
called (...), Epidem. lib. 7.
Hippouris, whereby it is guessed that he means a certain defluxion, which
throws it self on the genital Parts of those that ride too often, or sit too
long on Horseback, and is obstinate, and continues a long time, or a weakness,
or some indisposition of the same Parts, arising from the same Cause. And that
which he calls (...), ibid.
Anemie, that is thought to be a swelling of the veins, caused by windy blood,
which puts them in danger of being broke. You may put in the same rank the
(...), Epi^em. lib. 4.
Typhomany, which thought to be a swelling is taken for a disease that is part
Lethargy and part Frenzy, and that that is called (...), Epidem. lib. 6. Sect
3. See above in the distempers of the first Class, at the word Parotides.
Pherea.

CHAP. XI. Of the means to preserve Health.
AFter having seen in what Health and Sickness consists, what the subject of
them is, and what are the causes and differences; in the next place, we ought
to speak a word or two of the Advice that Hippocrates gave to those that were
in health; after which, we'll inquire into the means he made use of to cure
those that were sick.

One of his principal Maxims was this: (...). Epidem. lib. 6. ect 4. Aphor. 20.
That to preserve health, we ought not to overcharge our selves with too much
Eating, nor neglect the use of Exercise, nor avoid Labor. He said in the
second place, That we ought by no means to accustom our selves to too nice and
exact a method of Living, because, said he further, those that have once begun
to act by this Rule, if they vary the least from it, find themselves very ill,
which does not happen to those that take a little more liberty, and live
somewhat more irregularly.

Notwithstanding this, he does not neglect to make a diligent enquiry into what
those that were in health made use of for nourishment in those times. Upon
which, I cannot forbear making this observation, That in those days they were
not so delicate by much, as we are now, which appears by the care Hippocrates
takes to tell what is the quality of the flesh of a Dog, of a Fox, of an Horse,
of an Ass, which he would not have done, if at that time they had not been us^d
for Eatables, at least by the common People. We will not relate here what
Hippocrates has writ concerning other sorts of Provisions, it is sufficient to
know that he examines all those that are now in use. For example; Sallads,
Milk, Whey, Cheese, Flesh as well of Birds as of four footed Beasts; fresh and
salt Fish, Eggs, and all manner of Pulse, and the different sorts of Grain we
feed on, as well as the different sorts of Bread that are made of it. He also
speaks very often of a sort of liquid Food or Broth made of Barley-Meal, or
some other Grain, which they steeped for some time, and boiled with water; but
as this has a regard more particularly to the manner of Dieting the Sick, we'll
speak a little more of it in the following Chapter.

Hippocrates is full as nice on the subject of Drink; he takes a great deal of
pains to distinguish the good waters from those that are bad. The best, in his
opinion, ought to be clear, light, without smell or taste, and taken out of
Fountains that turn toward the East. The salt waters, and those that he calls
hard, that is in my opinion heavy, or that overcharge the stomach, and those
that rise out of Fenny ground, are the worst of all; as also those that come
from melted Snow. But though Hippocrates makes all these distinctions, yet he
advises those that are in health to drink of the first water that comes in
their way, which agrees with the Advice he gave before, not to be too exact in
the manner of living. He speaks also, but it is but two words, of Alom Waters,
or that partake of the nature of Alom, and of those that are hot, without
enlarging further on their qualities or use; we only perceive by it, that he
had a knowledge of Mineral Waters.

As to what relates to Wine, he advises in some places to mix it with an equal
quantity of water; and Galen observes, that Hippocrates regulates by that the
just proportion we ought to keep in this mixture: So that, says he, the Wine by
its power might drive out what is hurtful to the body, and the water serve to
temper the acrimony of the humors. But my thoughts are, that he does not treat
in those places but of particular cases, that are there stated; and perhaps it
was from the vast quantity of Wine they drank in those times, where they almost
never drank it pure. You may see also, that Hippocrates regulating the quantity
of the Wine which ought to be drank according to the different Seasons of the
Year, says, That in the Summer time you ought to mix a great deal of Water with
the Wine, in the Spring and Autumn a little less quantity, and in the Winter
(...); that is to say, Wine more pure, or less mixed, which is opposite to
(...), Wine very much mixed.
less than in any other time, which supposes that in all times you ought to
drink a mixture. Besides, he gives a distinct account of several sorts of Wines
then in use, exactly describing their qualities.

Exercise, which Hippocrates advises to those that are in health, as well as to
those that are infirm, ought to be used according to the Rules, and with the
Precautions he has set forth, which are the same we touched upon en passant in
the foregoing Book, upon the occasion concerning Herodicus, who we said was the
Author of the Gymnastick, or the Art of Exercising, for health. On which we
must observe, that Hippocrates himself, in the three Books entitled, Of Diet,
and in the Book of Dreams, which is the sequel of the precedent ones, pretends
that it is to him the obligation's due for the same thing; that is, for the
invention of the Art of Exercise, which compleats Diet; but these Books have
been look^d upon ever since, from the time of Galen, to be of another writing,
and were then attributed, according to the said Galen's remark, to Eurypheus,
Phaon, Philistion, Ariston, or to some other Physician, that liv^d just about
the same time that Hippocrates did. If I durst give my opinion with the rest, I
should say that the Books in question might be of Herodicus's writing, who has
passed by the consent of all the Ancients for the Inventor of the Gymnastick.
However it is, the Advices of the Author of these Books, in relation to the Art
we are going to speak of, depend upon the different times one ought to take to
walk in, and on the condition the person ought to be in before he does it;
whether it ought to be fasting, or after eating somewhat, in the morning or
evening, in the Air, the Sunshine, or Shade; whether he ought to be naked or
clothed; when he ought to walk slowly, and when it is necessary to run; all
this in respect to different ages and temperaments, and with the design of
bringing the body down, of dissipating humors, or of gaining some other
advantage from it.

Wrestling, though it be a violent Exercise, was numbered with the rest. There Is
also mention made in the same place, of a Play of the hands and fingers, which
was thought good for health, and called Chironomie; and of an Exercise, which
was performed round a sort of a Ball hung up, which they called Corycus, which
they struck forward with all the strength they had with their hands. You may
consult the abovementioned Mercurialis, that searches to the bottom of these
things.

And as you have seen in the Chapter concerning Herodicus, that Baths were
included in the Gymnastick, as well as the custom of rubbing and anointing ones
self, you^ll find several directions in this Author upon all this. But Galen
observes, in relation to Baths. that they were not ^et common in the time of
Hippocrates himself, which he gathers from a passage of this ancient Physician;
where he says, De Diaeta in acutis.
That there are few Houses, where you find things necessary for a convenient
Bath. You Will see in the next Chapter, what Hippocrates thought of Baths, and
the benefits that might be expected from them.

As to what remains, seeing health does not depend solely on the good use, and
regular management of Diet, nor on Exercise or Ease; and that besides, it is of
importance to be regular in other things we have mentioned before, when we
treated of the Causes of Health, such are sleep, and watchings, the air, and
other bodies which are about us; that which ought to be separated from our
Bodies, or retained there; and lastly, the Passions. I say, the preservation of
our Health depending on all these Causes, Hippocrates has not fail^d to give us
Rules for all.

To begin with those things which ought to be separated from our Bodies, or
there retained, he would have us take great care not to load our selves with
Excrements, or keep them in too long; and besides, the Exercise we are speaking
of, which carries of one part of em, and which he prescribed chiefly on this
account, he would have us excite or rouse up Nature when it flagg'd, and
endeavored not to expel the rest, or take off those impediments which resisted
its efforts. 'Twas for that principally he made use of Meats proper to loosen
the body; and when those means were not sufficient, he would have us have
recourse to Clysters and Suppositories.

The composition of Clysters for persons that were thin and emaciated,
consisted of Milk, and oily unctuous substances, which they mix^d with a
decoction of Chick Pease; but for those that were Plethorick, they only made
use of Salt or Seawater. You Will see in the Chapter of Purgatives, which you will
come to presently, other compositions of Clysters, and other particular
circumstances relating to this remedy; we shall also speak there concerning
Suppositories, and the manner of preparing them.

Hippocrates also advised Vomitives as a great preservative against distempers,
which he caused to be taken once or twice a Month, during the Winter and
Springtime. The most simple of them were made of a decoction of Hyssop, with
an addition of a little Vinegar and Salt. He made those that were of a strong
and vigorous Constitution, take this Liquor fasting, whereas those that were
thin and weakly took it after Supper. But as Vomits are remedies which are used
also in distempers, we^ll speak of them likewise at the same time we do of
Purgatives.

Coition is wholesome in Hippocrates opinion, provided you consult your
strength, and do not pursue it to an excess, which he always finds fault with
upon all accounts, and wou^d have it also avoided in relation to sleep and
watching. You find also in his Writings, several remarks concerning good or
bad. Air; and he makes it appear, that the good or bad disposition of it does
not depend solely on the difference of the Climate, but on the situation of
every Place in particular, which, in regard to this, he carefully examines
into, not to insinuate, that you ought to be too scrupulous on this point, or
to oblige any one to quit his Native Country, or the place where one's fixed,
to seek a better, which would disturb Society, but to let the Physicians know
what sorts of distempers are apt to reign in one place more than another, that
they may endeavor to prevent them, or make it their study to get a proper
remedy; and from the effects of the different situation of Places, compare
things in relation to Health and Sickness. Lastly, Hippocrates knew the good
and bad effects of the Passions, and would have us, in regard to them, use a
great deal of moderation.

CHAP. XII. The Practice of Hippocrates, or his manner of managing distempers.
General Maxims on which this practice is founded.
IF we reflect on what was said before of the power which Hippocrates
attributed to Nature, in relation to the Animal Economy, and to Distempers, in
particular, of which Nature, according to him, is the Arbiter and Judge,
determining them in a certain limited time, and by regular movements, as we
remarked when we spoke of Crises's, we'll immediately infer, that this opinion
must carry him so far, as to be contented, for the most part, in being a
Spectator of what the strength of Nature performs, without doing any thing on
his side on this occasion.

We shall also be confirm^d in this opinion, if we consult the Books,
entitled, Of Epidemical Distempers, which are, as it were, Journals of the
Practice of Hippocrates; for you will find from thence, that this ancient
Physician does very often nothing more than describe the symptoms of a
distemper, and what has happen^d to the Patient day after day, even to his
death or recovery, without speaking of any remedy. It Is not nevertheless
absolutely true, that he never did it, as you^ll see by the sequel, but we must
agree that he did it but very little, in respect of what has been practiced in
the succeeding Ages. We'll see presently what these remedies are, after we have
given an abridgment of the principal Maxims on which they are founded.

Hippocrates said in the first place, That Contraries or Opposites are the
Remedies of their Opposites. That is, supposing that some certain things were
opposed one to the other, we ought to use them one against the other. He
explains this Maxim in the Aphorism, where he says, That evacuation cures those
distempers which come from repletion, and repletion those that are caused by
evacuation. So heat destroys cold, and cold heat, etc.

Secondly he said, That Physic is an addition of what is wanting, and a
substraction or retrenchment of what is superfluous; an Axiom which you also
find explain^d by this, That there are some juices or humors, which in
particular cases ought to be evacuated or drove out of the body, or be dried
up; and some others that you ought to restore to the body, or cause to be
produc^d there again.

As to the method you should take in it, for addition or retrenchment, he gives
this general caution, That you ought to take care how you evacuate or fill up
all at once, or too quick, or too much; and that it is equally dangerous to heat
or cool again on a sudden; or rather, you ought not to do it, every thing that
runs to an excess being an enemy to Nature.

Hippocrates allowed in the fourth place, That we ought sometimes to dilate,
and sometimes to lock up; to dilate or open the (...).
passages by which the humors are voided naturally, when they are not
sufficiently opened, or when they are closed; and, on the contrary, to lock up
or streighten the passages that are relaxed, when the juices that pass there
ought not to do it, or when there passes too much of them. He adds, That we
ought sometimes to smooth, and sometimes to make rough to the touch; sometimes
harden, and sometimes soften again; sometimes to make more fine or supple;
sometimes to thicken; sometimes to excite or rouse up; and at other times, to
stupify or take away the sense, all in relation to the solid Parts of the Body,
or to the Humors.

He gives this fifth Lesson, That we ought to have regard to the course the
humors take, from whence they come, and whether they go; and in consequence of
that, when they go where they ought not, that we make them take a (...),
Derivare.
turn about, or carry them another way, almost like turning the course of a
River. Or upon other occasions, that we endeavor, if possible, to (...),
Revellere.
recall, or make the same humors return back again, drawing upward those which
tend downward, and downward those which tend upward.

He remarks also, That we ought to carry off, by convenient ways, that that is
necessary to be carried off, and not let the humors, once evacuated, enter
into the Vessels again.

He gives also this following Instruction; That when we do any thing according
to Reason, though the success be not answerable, we ought not easily, or too
hastily, alter the manner of acting, as long as the Reasons we had for it are
yet good. But seeing this Maxim might sometimes deceive, here is another of them
that serves for a corrective or limitation. We ought, says our Author, to mind
with a great deal of attention, what (...).
gives ease, and what creates pain; what is easily supported, and what cannot be
endured.

The Lesson that follows is one of the most important; Epidem. lib. 6.
We ought not, said he, to do any thing rashly: We ought to pause, or wait,
without doing any thing; this way if you do the Patient no good, at least
you will do him no hurt.

In extreme illness, we ought, in his opinion, to use Remedies of the same
nature; that which Medicines cure not, the Sword does; what the Sword does not,
the Fire cures; but what the Fire cannot cure, ought to be looked upon as
incurable. Lastly, He cautions us not to undertake desperate Diseases, which
are beyond the power of Physic.

These are the principal and most general Maxims of the Practice of
Hippocrates, all which suppose this Principle which he has laid down at the
beginning, That Nature it self cures Diseases. We shall see more of the
particulars in the following Chapters, as we examine the Remedies he made use
of.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Remedies which Hippocrates made use of; and first of all of
Diet, and of a regular method of Living.
DIET was the first, the principal, and oftentimes the only Remedy, that
Hippocrates made use of, to satisfy the greatest part of the intentions we
have touched upon: By these means he opposed moist to dry, hot to cold; he
added or supplied what was deficient, and took off from what was superfluous,
etc. and that that was to him the most considerable point he supported Nature,
and assisted it to overcome the cause of the Malady; and, in a word, put it in
a condition to do of it self what was necessary for the cure of Distempers.

The Diet of the Sick is a Remedy that is so much Hippocrates's own, that he
was as desirous to pass for the Author of it, as of that of Persons in health,
which we have treated of before. And the better to make it appear that it is a
new remedy, he says expressly, That the Ancients, that is to say, the Physicians
that were before him, had writ almost nothing concerning the Diet of the Sick,
having omitted this point, though it was one of the most essential parts of the
Art. The method we have seen Aesculapius and his Sons make use of, in their
management of the Sick, in relation to that, is a proof that Hippocrates spoke
truth: To his testimony we may join that of Plato's, who endeavors even to
justify, in this respect, the conduct of these first Physicians, as we
remarked in the same place. So that what Pliny has said, that Hippocrates was
the Inventor of the Sea above in the beginning of the Chapter concerning
Hippocrates.
Clinick Physic, may be made appear, or said with a more just Title, of
Diaetetick Physic, the name which was given to the most noble part of all the
Art, after the division of it some Ages after, as you will see in its place;
which shows how much they depended, in those ancient Times, on the benefit
which Patients received from a good conduct, in relation to eating and drinking.

In Chronical distempers, Hippocrates Dieted his Patients one way, and in Acute
another. In these last, which are those that require more particularly an
exactness in relation to Diet, he preferred liquid food to that that was solid,
especially in Fevers; for that he made use of a sort of Broths made of Barley
that was cleansed to which he gave the name of (...) de (...), which signifies
to bray or take off the busk.
Ptisane, which was a common name as well to these Broths, as to the flower of
the Grain, of which they were made. See after what manner the Ancients prepared
a Ptisane: They first steeped the Barley in Water till it was plump'd up, and
afterward they dried it in the Sun, and beat it to take off the husk. After
that they ground it, and then having let the flower boil a long time in the
Water, they put it out into the Sun, and when it was dry they pressed it close.
It Is properly this flower, so prepared, that is called Ptisane. They did almost
the same thing with Wheat, Rice, Lentils, and other Grain, but they gave these
Ptisanes the same name with the Grain, Ptisane of Lentils, Rice, etc. whereas
the Ptisane of Barley was called simply Ptisane for the excellency of it. When
they had a mind to use it, they boiled one part of it in ten or fifteen parts
of Water; and when it began to plump in boiling, they added a drop of Vinegar,
and ever so small a quantity of Anise, or Leek, to keep it from clogging, and
filling the stomach with wind. Hippocrates prescribes this Broth for Women that
have pains in their Belly, after being brought to Bed. Boil some of this
Ptisane, says he, with some Leek, and the fat of a Goat, and give it to the
Woman in Bed. You will not find this Ragou very odd, if you reflect on what he has
said before of the manner of Living at that time. He preferred the Ptisane to
all other food in Fevers, because it softened and moistened much, besides that
it was of easy digestion. If he was concerned in a continual Fever, he would
have the Patient begin with a Ptisane of an indifferent thick consistence, and
go on by little and little, in lessening the quantity of Barley-flower,
according as the days drew nearer, when the distemper was to be at its highest
pitch; so that then he did not feed the Patient, but with what he called (...).
In this time also they made use of for nourishment, Broths made of a sort of
grain, or flower made into little grains, which they called in Greek (...) that
is to say Grain, and in Latin Alica. You Will see more particularl what it was in
the Chapter of Galen, or in that of Dioscorides.
the juice of the Ptisane; that is, the Ptisane strained, where there was but
very little of the flower remaining, to the end that Nature being discharged in
part, from the care of digesting the Aliments, it might the more easily hold
out to the end, and overcome the distemper, or the cause of it.

As to what belongs to the quantity of Aliment, and the time of giving it, he
caused the Ptisane to be taken twice a day by Patients that in their health
used to eat two Meals a day, not thinking it convenient that those that were
sick, should eat oftener than when they were well. He also durst not allow
eating twice a day to those that fed but once when in health, but was willing
they might come to it by little and little. In the Fit of a Fever he gave
nothing at all; and in all distempers where there are exacerbations, he forbid
nourishment whilst they continued. He let Children eat more; and those that
were become Men, or Old, less, giving nevertheless a great deal of allowance to
the Custom of every particular person, or to that of the Country.

And though he was of the opinion that too much ought not to be allowed to the
sick, for fear of nourishing their distemper, yet we must observe, that he was
not of the judgment of some of the Physicians of his time, who prescribed them
long Abstinence, especially at the beginning of a Fever. The reason he produced
for it was, they weakened the Patients extremely the first days of the
distemper, which obliged them afterward to give them more nourishment in the
height of their illness; which was the time, in his judgment, when they ought
to give the least. He blamed the Physicians for using them after this manner,
He called it (...). He also described too great abstinence by the terms of
(...) and (...), from (...), hunger, and (...), to kill, to strangle.
That they dried up their Patients like Herrings, before there was any occasion
for it, and destroyed them for want of nourishment. Besides, in acute
distempers, and particularly Fevers, Hippocrates made choice of nourishment
that was refreshing and moistening; and he proposed, amongst others, Spinach,
Gourd, Orage, Melon and Dock. He gave this sort of nourishment to those that
were in condition to eat, or could take something more than a Ptisane.

The ordinary drink that he most commonly gave to his Patients, was made of
They called this drink in Greek (...), and in Latin Mulsa.
eight parts Water and one Honey. In some certain distempers they added a
little When there was some Vinegar in it they called it Oxymel.
Vinegar. They had also another sort of drink, like that we spoke of before,
which one of the Sons of Aesculapius drank when he was wounded. They called
this drink (...), mixture.
This drink was more or less mixed, and differently made up, according as the
distempers were. You find one Hippoc. lib de Intern. affect lonibus.
prescription of it designed for a consumptive Person; the ingredients consist
of Rue, Anise, Selery, Coriander, juice of Pomegranate, the roughest red Wine,
Water, flower of Wheat and Barley, with old Cheese made of Goats Milk.

Hippocrates did not approve of giving nothing but Water to the Sick; and though
he prescribed them oftentimes the drinks we are now speaking of, for all that
he did not entirely forbid See further on in the cure of Diseases, upon
occasion of the Pleurisy.
Wine even in acute Distempers and Fevers, provided they were not delirious,
nor had pains in the head. The quantity of water he would have them put in it in
health, made him judge that it wou^d not be hurtful to those that were sick, if
taken after the same manner. Besides, he took care to distinguish the Wines
proper in these cases, preferring to all other sorts White Wind, that is clear,
that has a great deal of water in it, and has neither sweetness nor flavor.

This is the Diet that was used in acute distempers. As to that in Chronical
Diseases, you will see how it differed from the first by the examples we shall
bring of the cures of them. We'll only remark beforehand, that Milk and Whey
were very much made use of on this account, whether in lieu of nourishment, or
that Hippocrates looked upon them as Medicines.

We have seen before, that Baths and Exercise were part of the Diet of Persons
in health, it was also of those that were sick. There were many Diseases which
Hippocrates judged the Bath necessary for the cure of; and he shows all the
conditions requisite to receive advantage from it, amongst which these are the
principal: That the Patient that bathes keep himself still and quiet in his
place, without speaking, and let those be doing that bath him, either by
throwing water over the head, or by wiping him dry; and that they keep for this
last purpose Sponges, instead of the Instrument which the Ancients called
Strigil, which served to rub off from the skin the dirt and nastiness which the
Oils or Unguents they anointed themselves with left upon it. That they take
care beforehand not to catch cold. That they do not bath themselves
immediately after eating or drinking; and that they abstain also from eating
and drinking immediately after they come out of the Bath. That regard ought to
be had, whether the Patient has accustomed himself to bath in his health, and
whether it did him good or hurt. Lastly, That they abstain from bathing, when
the body is too open or too costive, or if they have not discharged before, or
are too weak; if they have inclinations to Vomit, or a great loss of Appetite,
or that they bleed at Nose. The advantage you receive from the Bath, and the
good it does, according to Hippocrates, consists in moistening and refreshing,
in taking away weariness, in making the skin soft, and the joints pliant; in
provoking Urine, and in making the Nostrils moist, and other Pipes open. He
goes as far as two Baths a day in his allowance, to those that are accustomed
to it in their health. We'll speak afterward of a sort of particular Bath, or
half Bath, in the Chapter concerning external Remedies.

As to the Exercise of the Sick, Hippocrates approved of it very much in
Chronical distempers, as you will see by some examples of Cures which we'll speak
of hereafter; though he thought it not convenient in acute distempers, and openly
blamed his Master Herodicus, who fatigued even those that were in Fevers with
violent Exercises, as we have observ^d in the precedent Book. It Is not that he
thought a Patient ought always to lie a Bed, he did not at all commend laziness
or the faint heart of those that could not leave their Bed; or rather would
not, though they were able. Epidem. lib. 6.
We ought, says he, sometimes to push the timorous out of Bed, and rouse up the
lazy.

CHAP. XIV. Of Purgation; under which are comprehended all the ways of
emptying, or discharging the Bowels and Stomach.
WHEN Hippocrates saw that Diet was not sufficient to ease Nature of the
burden of humors, that were too abundant, or corrupted, he made use of other
means to evacuate them, and to satisfy one of the intentions we have touched
upon before, which is to diminish, or to take away what is superfluous. These
ways were first of all (...) de (...), to purge, to cleanse; (...) de (...);
that si^^ifies also to purge, to eva^uate. He makes use of the wo^d (...) de
(...), a Medicin^. You Will see further in the Chapter of Herophilus, and in that
of Asclepiades, the reason wherefore the word Medicine signified a purging
Medicine, and other significations of the same word.
Purgation, which comprehends all the contrivances that are us^d to discharge
the Stomach and Bowels. Tho this word signifies also in particular, the
evacuation of the Excrements of the Belly, and other humors, that come from
all parts of the Body, which is made by Stool, after having taken some Medicine
by the Mouth; on which we must not forget to remark, after what manner
Hippocrates conceived this Medicine to operate. He imagined, that a purgative
Medicine, after it was in the body, first evacuated the humor that agreed most
with its nature; after which, it attracted and purged the other also. De not.
hom.
Just after the same manner, said he, as every Plant attracts from the earth
first of all the juice that is agreeable to its nature, and afterward juices
that are different, so a Medicine that ought to purge the Bile, first attracts
the Bile; but if it be too strong, or its operation continues too long, when it
finds no more Bile, it then purges Phlegm, and after Phlegm the black Bile, and
last of all the Blood. This opinion agrees with what has been said in the
Chapter of the Philosophy of Hippocrates concerning Attraction; by means of
which, this Physician would have most things performed that relate to the
Animal Economy.

The purgatives which they us^d in his time, had most of them their purging and
vomiting quality from the salts in them; or if they had not always the latter
effect, at least they purg^d almost every body violently.

These Medicines are white and black Hellebore; the first of which, is one of
the most violent Vomits that can be given. The Cnidien Berries, which are
nothing else but the Seeds of Thymelaea; Cneorum, which is also a Medicine
taken from Thymelaea or Chamelaea. Peplium, which is a sort of a Milk Thistle,
or Tithymallus, as well as Peplus. Thapsia, the juice of Hippophaes, a sort of
Rhamnus. Elaterium, which is also the juice of a wild Cucumber. The Flowers of
Brass. Coloquintida, Scammony; the Magnesian Stone, which is a sort of
Lodestone.

Hippocrates speaks also of Cnicus, which is taken for Carthamus; and of a sort
of Poppy, which he calls Lib. 3. de morbis. See further in the Chapter of
Remedies that cause sleep.
white Poppy, and puts it in the rank of Purgatives. But we ought to take care,
not to confound it with the white Poppy now daily us^d.

As these Purgatives were for the most part very brisk, this ancient Physician
accordingly was mighty cautions when he had a mind to use them; he did not
prescribe 'em in the Dog Days; he never purg^d Women with Child, and seldom
Children and old People. The principal or most frequent use he then made of
Purgatives was in Chronical Distempers; in acute ones he was much more wary in
this respect. Of all the Patients in Fevers, or others in acute Distempers,
which he gives the History of in his Books, entitled, Of Epidemical
Distempers, which we said were as it were Journals of his Practice, there are
very few of them in which he says he has given Purgative Medicines. He also
takes notice expressly in the same Books, Vide historiam Scomphi pleuritici,
Epidem. lib. 5: in princip. historiam Scamandri and alias sequentes.
that these Medicines having been given in certain cases in the Diseases which
he was treating of, had produced very bad effects.

One would think we might conclude from thence, that Hippocrates absolutely
rejected the use of Purgatives in these distempers, but it^s plain from other
places that he was not of this opinion. He actually gave Purgatives in Acute
Diseases as well as Chronical, but not fo often, as we have already remarked.

He was of opinion, for example, De ratione victus in acutis.
that purging was good in a Pleurisy, when the pain was below the Diaphragm,
giving in this case black Hellebore, or some Peplium mixed with the juice of
Laserpitium, which was our Assa faetida, as you will see in the Chapter of
Dioscorides. He declares besides, in several places, that you may give
Purgatives in acute distempers, setting forth the precautions requisite for it,
as you will see by what follows.

The principal Rule Hippocrates gives relating to Purgation is this: That you
ought only to purge off the humors that are concocted, and not those that are
yet crude, taking particular care not to do it at the beginning of the
distemper, lest the humors should be stirred up, or very much (...), nisi
turgeant. We do not well know what he means by turgere (...), which is a term
that expresses properly the motions of Animals. The greatest part of the
Commentators are of opinion, that his meaning was to describe a sudden motion
of the humors, which swell up and endeavor to discharge themselves of some
side, or throw themselves on some part. Aphor. 22. Sect. 1.
disturbed, which happens pretty often. The understanding of this Axiom depends
on what has been said before of the concoction of humors in the Chapter of
Crisis's. By the beginning of a distemper, Hippocrates meant all the time that
passed from the first day to the fourth complete. He was not the first that
made remark, that it would be of ill consequence to stir the humors, or purge
before that time; we have seen, in the first Book of this History, that the
Egyptian Physicians had already made this observation, Hippocrates might have
learn^d it from Democritus, who had continued a long time in that Country, or
he might have traveled there himself, supposing that the Asclepiades, his
Predecessors, had not also made this discovery themselves.

There is another Aphorism, which appears diametrically opposite to the
precedent one; it is that, where it is said, That in the beginning of distempers
we ought to stir the humors: that is to say, to purge what we think we ought
to be stirred. This Aphorism has given a great deal of trouble to the
Physicians of the succeeding Ages, who have endeavored to reconcile it with
the first. Galen has got off from the matter on this occasion, by explaining
the word to stir up, to signify using all the Remedies that are necessary for
the ease of the Patient; amongst which, he reckons particularly bleeding and
purging. So that the stirring up, which Hippocrates advises in this Aphorism,
in his opinion is performed by the first of these Remedies, rather than by the
last; that is to say, Purgation might be admitted sometimes at the beginning of
distempers, but very rarely. But a third Aphorism, which explains that which we
are going to quote, appears contrary to the sense of Galen, it is the
twenty-fourth of the first Section, which says, That we ought seldom to purge
in acute distempers, and do it in the beginning, after having carefully
examined if the case requires it. Galen salves the apparent contradiction
between this Aphorism and the first, by saying that it is in distempers that
continue a long time, that we ought always to wait the concoction before we
purge, but that in acute ones we may do it at the beginning when the humors
are turgid. And he adds, that the case being rare, it is what obliges
Hippocrates to caution, that you examine well into all things on this occasion,
before you use this Medicine.

It actually appears, that Hippocrates purged sometimes at the beginning of
acute distempers; and besides the Aphorism we have just now read, he says in
another place in express terms, That we ought to purge at that time in Fevers,
when the Urine of the Patient is troubled, but we ought to abstain from it if
it be clear. Nevertheless, we must agree, that he did it rarely as matters
went. That which has been said at the beginning, that amongst a great number of
persons sick of these distempers, which he speaks of in the Books we have
quoted, he finds but very few of them to whom he has given Purgatives, is at
least a proof of it.

Besides, he gives this important Advertisement, which has some relation with
the first Aphorism, De ratione victus in acut.
That those that endeavor to take off inflammations in a part by purging
Remedies, draw nothing from the Part where the inflammation is, by reason of the
great tenseness of it, and because the distemper is yet crude; on the contrary
it dissolves, or corrupts that that remained found in the Part, and that held
out against the distemper.

We must also observe, that Hippocrates, Aphor. 9. Sect. 2.
before he Purged any one, would have them make their body or their humors
fluid; that is, that they would dilute them sufficiently, to the end they might
be more easily evacuated.

Lastly, he said, That we ought to give to the Choleric, or in choleric
distempers, Medicines to purge choler; in Phlegmatic, those that purge phlegm;
in Melancholic, those that purge melancholy, or black choler; and in the
Dropsy in particular, those that purge the Waters.

He added, That we knew if a Purgative had drawn from the body what was fit to
be evacuated, according as we found our selves well or ill upon it. If we found
our selves well, 'twas a sign the Medicine had effectually expelled the humor
that offended. On the contrary, if we were ill, Hippocrates pretended, whatever
quantity of humors were come away, that the humor that was the cause of the
illness was not, not judging of the goodness or badness of a Purge by the
quantity of Matters that were voided by it, but by their quality, and the
effect that follow^d after it.

(...) de (...), to vomit; from whence comes the word Emetick, which signifies
vomitive.
Vomiting is also a manner of Purgation, which operates upwards, and draws up
also further than from the stomach, if it be a little strong. We have seen
before what were the Vomitives Hippocrates prescrib^d by way of precaution to
persons in health.

In regard to the sick, he advised them sometimes the like, when his intention
was only to cleanse the stomach. But when he had a mind to recall the humors
from the most hidden recesses of the body, he made use of brisker Remedies; and
white Hellebore, which we placed amongst the Purgatives, was one of those he
used oftenest for this effect. Particularly, he made the Melancholy and De
Diaeta liber primus.
Mad folks take it; and it is from the great use all the Ancients made of this
Remedy in the like cases, that it is become a Proverb, To have need of
Hellebore: as much as to say, To have lost ones senses.

He gave it also in defluxions, which come according to him from the Brain, and
throw themselves on the Nostrils or Ears, or that fill the Mouth with Spittle,
or that cause stubborn pains in the Head, or a weariness, and an extraordinary
heaviness, or a weakness of the knees, or a swelling all over the body. He gave
it also to De morb: lib. 1. and de intern. affect.
consumptive persons in Broth made of Lentils, to those that were ill of the
Dropsy called Leucophlegmatia, and in other chronical distempers; but we do
not find that he made use of it in acute distempers, unless in the Epidem. lib.
5.
Cholera Morbus, where he says he has used it with benefit, though in this
distemper they had vomited but too much already, but in this case vomiting was
cured by a vomit. Some took this Medicine fasting, but most took it after
Supper, after the same manner we said was practiced in regard to vomits, that
were ordered to be taken by way of precaution. The reason why he gave this
Medicine most commonly after eating, was, That in mixing with the victuals, it
might loose a little of its acrimony, and operate with less violence on the
Membranes of the stomach. He gave also sometimes of a Plant called Sesamoides,
with the same intention to cause vomiting; and sometimes he mixed it with
Hellebore. Lastly, We ought to observe, that he gave in some certain cases
Hellebore, which he called (...).
soft or sweet, which had some relation to the quality of this Remedy, or to
the quantity that he gave of it, which might be less on this last occasion.

When Hippocrates had a mind simply to keep the body open, or make an
evacuation of the Excrements contained in the Intestines, without drawing from
too far, he made use of Simples chiefly to produce this effect; for example, of
the Herb Mercury, or of Cabbage, the juice and decoction of which he ordered to
be drank. He used Whey for the same effect, and also Cows or Asses Milk, adding
a little salt to it, and letting it boil sometimes. Or if he gave Asses Milk
alone, he caused so great a quantity of it to be taken, that it must of
necessity loosen the body. He prescribes De ration. victus in acutis.
in one place even sixteen hemines of it, and every hemine contained nine
Italian Ounces of liquor. I know not whether there be a fault in this passage
or not; we find in the seventh Book of Epidemical Distempers, an example of a
young Man, to whom he gave nine hemines in two days, which is much less. We
might also say, that the time necessary to take this quantity of Milk in, being
not specified in the first passage, nothing hinders but that we understand,
that it ought to be taken in more than a days time. As to what remains, I know
not whether, when Hippocrates makes mention of certain Demi-purgatives, or of a
manner of (...). Subpurgare, lib. de vict. ratione in acutis dum de pleuritide.
purging, that is in the middle between Clysters and Purgatives, properly so
called. I know not, say I, whether he means the juice of Mercury, of Cabbage,
and other Remedies, we have been speaking of, or whether he had other
Medicines. Or lastly, Whether his ordinary Purgatives, taken in a less Dose,
would not produce this effect.

He made use also of (...).
Suppositories and (...), de (...), to cleanse. The word (...), from whence is
derived that of Clyster, signifies in Hippocrates the Instrument with which
they gave the Clyster.
Clysters, with the same intention to loosen the body. Suppositories were
compounded of Honey, the juice of Herb Mercury, of Salt of Nitre, of Powder of
Coloquintida, and other sharp ingredients, to irritate the Anus, which they put
into a round form like a Ball, or round and long, of the shape and length of a
finger. You have already seen before, what were the Clysters which Hippocrates
prescribed to persons in health; those which he made up for the sick were
sometimes of the same composition. At other times he took the decoction of
Blits, or other Simples, in which he dissolved some Nitre and Honey, and
diluted it with Oil, or some other ingredients, according as he had a mind to
attract, to wash, irritate or soften; or according to the distempers he had to
engage withal. The quantity of the liquor came to about four hemines, that is
thirty six Italian Ounces; which seems to make it plain, and that he did not
order it to be taken all at once, but at several times.

CHAP. XV. Of the Purgation of the Head, and that of the Lungs in particular.
HIppocrates also proposed to himself sometimes to (...).
purge the Head alone. He put in practice this Remedy, after he had purged the
rest of the body, in an Apoplexy, in inveterate pains of the Head, in a certain
sort of Jaundice; in a Consumption, and in the greatest part of Chronical
Distempers. For that he made use of juices of several Plants; as for example,
the juice of Selery, to which he added sometimes Aromatic Drugs, making them
snuff up this mixture into their Nostrils. He used also Powders compounded of
Myrrh, the flowers of Brass, and white Hellebore, which he also made them put
up into the Nose to make them sneeze, and to draw the Phlegm from the Brain
through this part. He also made use of, for this effect, an Instrument or a
Drogue, which he calls Tetragonon; that is to say, that that has four Angles,
but we know not what he understood by it. They did not know it even in the time
of Galen, who guestes it to be See the Commentaries on Hippocrates in Galen.
Antimony, or certain tables or flakes that you find in Antimony.

He undertook also to purge or cleanse the Lungs, or the Breast in particular,
in the distemper called Empyema. On this intent, he commanded the Patient to
draw in his Tongue as much as he was able, and when that was done, he
endeavored to put into the hollow of the Lungs a Liquor that irritated the
part, which raising a violent cough, forc^d the Lungs to discharge the purulent
Matter which was contained in them. The materials that he used for it were of
different sorts; sometimes he took the Root of Arum, which he ordered to be
boiled with a grain of Salt, in a sufficient quantity of Water and Oil,
dissolving a little Honey in it. At other times, when he intended to purge more
strongly, he took the flower of Copper and Hellebore: after that he shook the
Patient violently by the shoulders, the better to loosen the Pus. This Remedy,
which is found in De morbis lib. 2 and de internis affectionibus.
two places of the Works of Hippocrates, is attributed by Galen to the Cnidien
Physicians, which we have spoke of in the precedent Book. The Physicians of the
succeeding Ages have practiced it no more, whether they had no Patients that
would suffer it, or whether they thought it of no benefit, which is most
probable. These ancient Physicians invented this Remedy to raise a cough upon
what they observed, that it was the only means by which the Pus could be
naturally evacuated from the Breast, and be as it were pumped out of the Lungs.

CHAP. XVI. Whether Hippocrates made use of Purgations or Superstitious
Purifications, which we spoke of above.
WE have seen in the first Book of our History, that Melampus and Polyides used
certain Purgations or Expiations, which had regard to Crimes as well as
Distempers. It seems Hippocrates also approved of this practice, when he says,
(...). Lib. de decenti habitu.
That a Physician ought to have knowledge of the Purgatives or Purifications
beneficial to life. A Modern Translator of Hippocrates.
Cornarius has understood it this way; and, in effect, we cannot explain this
passage or word otherwise, for he does not treat here of the Purgations that we
spoke of in the foregoing Chapter: And the other Interpreters or Commentators
on Hippocrates, that have taken it in this latter sense, are mistaken.

But we may say, That seeing he meets with variations in the Original Some
Manuscripts read (...) in the singular, which entirely alters the sense, and
that signifies nothing if you don't refer it to the follewing word, which is
also very obscure.
Manuscripts, in relation to the word in question, and that all this passage,
there being comprised in it, that which immediately follows, is but obscure,
perhaps Hippocrates meant to speak quite another thing. (...).
A freedom from Superstition, which is one of the qualities he requires in a
Physician, in the same place where he makes a parallel betwixt a Philosopher
and one of this Profession, appears contrary to it. For how indeed does the
necessity which he would impose on a Physician to understand purifications,
which consisted of some superstitious ceremonies, agree with the freedom from
every thing that is superstitious. It Is true, that another translator of
Hippocrates's reads this last word otherwise, and takes it Calvus translates as
if ^e had read (...)
in the contrary sense. But the inclining to superstition, or a superstitious
fear of the Gods, is not that which they have accused the Philosophers of no
more than the Physicians, between whom, they say, Hippocrates endeavors to
make a comparison in this passage.

We have nothing to do besides but to read the Book entitled of the Sacred
Distemper, to see how Hippocrates openly laughs at all the ridiculous
ceremonies they practiced in his time to cure this distemper, and in particular
the expiations and purifications they performed on this occasion. We will not
relate any thing he has said above, to avoid being tedious: we'll only remark,
that he puts those that meddled with expiations, Magicians, Mountebanks, and
impudent Boasters, that promise more than they mean, and have nothing to
perform. We^ll remark, I say, that he puts all these sorts of fellows in the
same rank, ending a long discourse, which he makes on this subject, with these
words, more worthy of a Christian, than a Pagan, as he was. It is, says he, the
Deity that purifies us, and washes us from our greatest sins, and from our most
enormous crimes. It is the Divinity which protects us, and it is only in the
Temples, which are the habitations of the Gods, that we ought to seek to
purisie ourselves of what^s unclean.

I know this Book to be supposed to belong to some other Author: But however it
be, that Hippocrates used only remedies purely natural, and never proposed any
superstitious ones, is an Argument he was never for them. We may see further
how he elsewhere Lib. de his quae ad virginem spectaut.
rallies the women of his time that were troubled with the Mother, for offering
to Diana rich Garments. He does not stick to say, that the Priests who advised
these poor women thus, abused them wretchedly.

CHAP. XVII. Of Blood-letting, and of the Application of Cupping-Glasses.
BLood-letting was another method of evacuating or taking away the superfluity
of what was in the Vessels and parts, which Hippocrates used. Another aim he
had in it was to divert or recall the course of the Blood, which was going
where it ought not to be. A third end of bleeding was to procure a free motion
of the Blood and Spirits, as we may gather from the following passage.

(...). He says elsewhere in the same sense (...); the Bladder slopt.
When any one becomes speechless of a sudden, Hippocrates says it is caused by
the shutting of the Veins, especially when it happens to a person otherwise in
good health, without any outward violence. In this case the inward vein of the
right Arm must be opened, and more or less blood taken away, according to the
age and constitution of the Patient. Those that lose their Speech thus, have
great flushings in the face, their Eyes are stiff, their Arms are distended,
their Teeth gnash, they have palpitations of the Arteries, they cannot open
their Jaws, the Extremities are cold, (...). Interceptiones Spirituum in venis.
and the Spirits are intercepted in the Veins. If pain ensues, it is by the
accession of the black Bile and sharp humors. For the Internal parts being
vellicated or irritated by these humors, suffer very much, and the Veins being
also irritated and dried, distend themselves extraordinarily, and are inflamed,
and draw all that can flow to them, so that the Blood corrupting, and the
Spirits not being able to pass through the Blood (...). their natural passages.
by their ordinary passages, the parts grow cold, by reason of this Stagnation
of the Spirits. Hence comes giddiness, loss of speech, and convulsions. If this
disorder reaches to the Heart, the Liver, or to (...) It ought to be observed
that he makes no mention here of the brain, nor of the nerves.
the great Veins. From hence come also Epilepsies, and Palsies, if the
defluxions fall upon the parties named, and that they dry up, because the
Spirits are denied a passage through them. In this case, after Fomentation a Vein
must be opened, while the Spirits and Humors are yet (...).
suspended or unsettled.

Hippocrates had also a fourth intention in bleeding, which was for
refreshment. So in the De morb. lib. 3. Th^s is one ^f these Books that are
attributed to Polybius.
Iliac passion he orders bleeding in the Arm, and in the Head; to the end, says
he, that the superior Venture (or the Breast) may cease to be overheated. The
particular intentions which Hippocrates might further have in the use of this
remedy will appear in the examination of the particular cases wherein he
thought it necessary. We shall see at the same time the caution he used in
these occasions, what Veins he opened, what quantity of Blood he took, and
circumstances relating to bleeding.

We must here take notice, that his conduct was much the same in Bleeding as
Purging, in respect of time and persons. We ought, says he, to let blood in
acute diseases, when they are violent, and if the party be lusty, and in the
flower of his Age. Hence it follows, first, that he let blood neither infants
nor old persons; and I was surpised at a consequence which Callimedontis puero
propter in^erculum ad collum, secta Vena. Epidem. lib. 5. and 7. Nota, sars
Riolanus, puero detractum sanguinem. Now in the Greek it is (...), filio
Callimedontis, and not puero, as Cornarius has translated it, which led
Riolanus into this mistake, who did not take the pains to consult the Greek
Text, which he understood perfectly well, and which would have shown him that
this Son of Callimedon might be in the flower of his age, or at least above
that of an Infant. De Circul. Sang. cap. 3.
Riolanus draws from one passage of our Author, or by which he pretends to
prove that he sometimes took blood from Children, because in the passage cited,
the persons Age who is spoken of is not determined.

Hippocrates elsewhere insinuates, that we ought to have regard to the time,
both in respect of the disease, and of the season when we let blood.

He adds in the passage first cited, by way of explication of what he means by
distempers both acute and violent De rati^ne victu^ ^n a^^^.
: That blood ought to be let in great pains, and particularly in inflammations.
Amongst which he reckons those which fall upon the principal Viscera, as the
Liver, the Lungs, and the Spleen; as likewise the Quinzy and the Pleurisy, if
the pain be above the Diaphragm. In these cases he would have them bleed till
they faint, especially if the pain be very acute, rather he advises that the
Vein should not be closed till the color of the Blood alters, that from livid
it turns red, or from red livid. In the Quinzy he blooded in both Arms at a
time. Difficulty of breathing is also reckoned among the distempers that
require bleeding; Hippocrates mentions also another sort of inflammation of the
Lungs, which he calls a swelling or Tumors of the Lungs arising from heat, in
which case he advises to bleed in all parts of the body, and directs
particularly to the Arms, the Tongue, and the Nostrils.

To make bleeding the more useful in all pains, he directed Epidemic. lib. 6.
sect. 6.
to the Vein nearest the part afflicted; and he gives particular direction in a
Pleurisy Lib. de ratim. victus in acutis.
to open the inward Vein of the Arm on that side on which the pain is. For the
same reason, in pains of the Head he opened the Veins of the Nose and of the
Forehead. Upon the same account he blooded an Idumaean Slave in the Foot, for a
great pain in the Hips and Leg, which put her into convulsions, contracted
after Lying in.

When the plain was not urgent, and bleeding was advised for prevention, he
directed De natura hominis.
to the parts farthest off, with intention insensibly to divert the blood from
the seat of pain.

The highest Burning Fevers, which show neither signs of inflammation nor pain,
are not ranked by Hippocrates among the acute distempers that requir^d
bleeding. On the contrary, he maintains, that a Fever it self is in some cases
a reason against bleeding. Epidem. lib 2. sect 6.
If any one, says he, has an Ulcer in the Head he must bleed, unless he has a
Fever. Ibidem.
He says farther, Those that lose their speech of a sudden must be blooded,
unless they have a Fever.

Perhaps he was afraid of bleeding in Fevers, because he supposes, as it
appears by some passages, that Fevers were produced by the Bile and the
Pituita, which grew hot, and afterward heated the whole body, which is, says
he, what we call a Fever, and which in his opinion could not be evacuated by
bleeding. He looks elsewhere upon the presence or abundance of Bile as an
objection against bleeding. And he orders, Epidemic. lib 6. sect. 3.
to forbear bleeding even in spitting of blood, tho in a Pleurisy if there be
Bile, that is, I suppose, in a Bilious Pleurisy, which is not accompanied with
violent pain.

To this we must add, that Hippocrates distinguished very much between a Fever
which followed no other distemper, but was itself the original Malady, and a
Fever which came upon inflammation. In these times, as Galen observes, the first
sort only were properly called Fevers, the other took their names from the
parts affected, as Pleurisy, Peripneumonie, Hepatitis, Nephritis, etc. which
names signify that the Pleura, the Lungs, the Liver, and the Kidneys are
diseased, but do not intimate the Fever which accompanies their disease. In
this later sort of Fever, Hippocrates constantly ordered bleeding, but not in
the former.

We are not therefore to be surprised, if in all his Book of epidemical
distempers we find but few directions for bleeding in the acute distempers, and
particularly in the great number of continual and burning Fevers there treated
of.

In the first and third Book, which are the most finished of all, we find but
one single instance, and that in a Pleurisy, in which two he staid till the
eigthth day of the distemper.

Galen accounts otherwise for his Conduct in this case, In lib. 2. Epidemic. 3.
Comm. 1.
Hippocrates having said nothing of bleeding, not only in the case of Pythion,
but likewise of several other Patients who seemed according to his own
principles to want bleeding, as far as we can judge of them by his writings; We
must necessarily conclude, either that he did not bleed them at all, or that he
omitted the mention of it in the History which he gives of their Cases. Now it
is not likely that he omitted bleeding when the case required it, this great
man being so fond of that Remedy, as appears by those Works of his, which are
acknowledged by all the World to be Genuine, such as the Aphorisms, the method
of Diet in acute distempers, and that we have now in hand, where he says thus;
I opened a Vein in the Arm upon the eighth day, and let out abundance of blood,
as was necessary: If he blooded upon the eighth day in the case here mentioned,
we have still more reason to believe he did it in the preceding. On the other
side, it is not probable that he should forget to mention it, in a case wherein
it was his ordinary practice, especially when he puts down Remedies of much
less importance, not omitting so much as a Suppositor. Since therefore, says
Galen, there lies some difficulty upon either of these opinions, we ought to
determine for that which has least. This being supposed, I am of opinion that it
was used to several of these Patients, but that the mention of it was omitted
in the History of their cases, as a thing supposed of course. And I rather
subscribe to this Opinion, because Hippocrates himself takes express notice of
bleeding on the eighth day, which I imagine he peculiarly remarked, because it
was a thing against the usual practice, supposing the mention of bleeding the
preceding days, as being the common methods.

Most of the modern Commentators upon Hippocrates are of Galen's opinion: But
to this it may be answered, that Hippocrates being very exact, as Galen himself
acknowledges, even in the relation of the most Minute Medicines he used, such
as Suppositors; it is hard to think in this case he would omit the most
considerable. To this we may add, that Galen himself maintains elsewhere, that
Erasistratus, of whom we shall speak hereafter, never blooded any body, only
for this reason, that in ennumerating the Medicines he made use of in several
occasions, he makes no mention of bleeding. If this Argument will hold against
Erasistratus, it will against Hippocrates. Besides, it was altogether of as
great importance, that we should be informed of the Remedies, as of the Process
of the distempers. The symptoms which arise, depending as much upon the
practice of the Physician himself, as upon the nature of the distemper.

In all probability where Hippocrates omits the mention of bleeding in any
case, he did not use it, nor is this so much against his principles, as Galen
would insinuate. On the contrary, he follows him therein precisely, as appears
by what has been said already.

If Hippocrates had blooded his Patients plentifully in Fevers in the beginning
of their illness, as Galen pretends, he would not perhaps have had the
opportunity of seeing so many Fevers terminate by Crisis, that is, by natural
Evacuation, which come of themselves in certain days.

This Ancient Physician laid so much weight upon the assistance of Nature and
the method of Diet, which was his favorite Medicine, that he thought if they
took care to diet the Patients beforementioned according to rule, they might
leave the rest to nature. These are his true principles, from which he never
deviates, so that his pieces of e^idemical diseases, seem to have been composed
only with an intention to leave to posterity, an exact model of management in
pursuance of these principles.

To return to the Rules that Hippocrates prescribes for bleeding, Galen
Comment^on Aphor. 6. lib 6.
it is observable in all diseases which have their seat above the Liver, he
bleeds in the Arm, or some of the upper parts of the Body, but for those that
were below it, he opened the Veins below, as of the Foot, the Ankle, or the
Ham. De ratione victus in ^cu^^s sub ^in^m.
If the Belly was too Laxative, and bleeding was thought necessary, Hippocrates
ordered the Looseness to be stopped before bleeding.

Almost all these instances hitherto regard scarce any thing but acute
distempers. We find several concerning chronical diseases. A young man
complaining of a great pain of his Belly, with a great rumbling while he was
fasting, which ceased after eating: This pain and noise continuing his meat did
him no good; but on the contrary, he daily wasted, and grew lean. Several
Medicines, as well Purgers as Vomiters were in vain given him. At length it was
resolved to bleed him by intervals first in one Arm and then the other, (...),
till he was without blood. Epidemic. lib. 5. sub Principio.
till he had scarce any blood left, which perfectly cured him.

Hippocrates let blood also in the Dropsy, and even in a Tympany; in both
these cases he prescribes bleeding in the Arm De affection^^.
. In a disease arising from an overgrown Spleen, which is attended by diverse
other symptoms, he proposes bleeding several times repeated at a Vein of the
Arm which he calls the Splenatick Vein. We shall speak more of this Vein
hereafter.

He proposes in another place De Morbis lib. 2.
bleeding under the Tongue in a sort of Jaundice. This perhaps was an Empirical
Medicine grounded only upon experience, for the use of which he could give no
good reason; and what confirms me in this opinion, is, that the Book wherein
this remedy is mentioned is supposed to have been written by the Cnidian
Physicians, who, as we have said before, were Empiricks. Or perhaps it might be
grounded upon some reason which is lost to us, because we have not the same
Idea of the disposition of the Veins, and their sympathy with the several parts
of the body, that the Ancients had. What Hippocrates advances elsewhere, that
if we burn in any one the Veins or Arteries of the Temples, he can never
procreate after, seems to be founded upon no better reason. We have as much
reason to ask what particular communication there is between the Veins of the
Temples, and the Organs of Generation, as between the Liver and the Spleen,
which are the parts affected in the Jaundice, and the Veins of the Tongue. This
difficulty would lie as heavy upon us as the other, if Hippocrates himself his
not inform us See for this the Chapter of the Anatomy of Hippocrates
, that the Seed which comes from all parts of the body, and particularly from
the Head, passes or descends by the Veins of the Temples, or behind the Ears;
so that when one burns those Veins, one intercepts the passage of the Seed.

See the list of diseases known to Hippocrates.
This opening of the Veins behind the Ears was, as we have showed before, a
familiar practice among the Scythians, by which they cur^d themselves of a
certain sort of a Sciatica. There is no doubt, but that bleeding, as well as
purging, which are two Medicines whose effects are not easily to be accounted
for, must in many cases be Empirical remedies. It was sufficient for
Hippocrates and the rest of the ancient Physicians, to know that they were
serviceable in certain cases, to induce them to the use of them in those cases,
tho ignorant of the reasons of their operations.

We see by what has been said concerning bleeding, that there were some
occasions, in which he did not only bleed once in the course of a distemper,
but that he did it very largely, continuing it sometimes even to swooning.
Sometimes he blooded in both Arms at a time, in others he did it several times,
and in several parts of the body, but he does not put down the quantity took at
a time. The Veins which he opened were those of the Arm, By the word (...),
hand, the Greeks often understood all the arm; so that when they only meant the
hand they said (...), the extremity of the hand, or of the arm. Hippocrates
makes particular mention of two veins of the arm, or of the hand, one of which
he calls Hepatitis, and the other Splenitis, supposing that the first came from
the Liver, and the other from the Spleen.
the Hands, the Ankles on both sides, the Hams, the Forehead, behind the Head,
the Tongue, the Nose, behind the Ears, under the Breasts, and those of the
Arms; not reckoning those he burnt, and the Arteries he opened, of which we
shall speak under the head of his Surgery.

Hippocrates likewise used Cupping-vessels, with intent to recall and withdraw
the humors which fell upon any part. He contented himself sometimes with the
bare attraction made by the Cupping-vessels, sometimes he scarified also, that
is to say, he slasht or pricked diverse holes on the place where the
Cupping-vessel had been. We shall see more at large in the Sea below in the
Chapter of Celsus.
sequel the several sorts of Cupping-vessels in use amongst the Ancients, and
the manner of applying of them. We shall speak likewise of their Cauteries, in
the Surgery of Hippocrates.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Diuretic and Sudorifick Remedies.
WHen bleeding and purging, which were the principal and most general means
which Hippocrates used to take off a Plethora of the Blood or humors, were
insufficient, he had recourse to Diuretics and Sudorificks. Which he
insinuates in this passage, wherein nevertheless he makes mention of bleeding.
De ratione victus in morbis acutis p. m 403.
All diseases, says he, are determined or cured by evacuations by the mouth, by
stool, by urine, or some other such way, but sweating is common to all, that
is, takes off all alike.

(...) from (...), to urine^
Diuretic Medicines were of different sorts, according to the disposition of
persons; sometimes Baths, and sometimes Sweet Wine, provoke urine; sometimes
the nourishment which we take contributes to it: and amongst those Herbs which
are commonly eaten, Hippocrates recommends Garlic, Leeks, Onions, Cucumbers,
Melons, Gourds, Fennel, and all the biting things which have a brisksmell. With
these he numbers Honey, mixed with Water or Vinegar, and all Salt Meats. But
when he would drive it more forcibly, he took four Cantharides, and taking off
their Wings and their Feet, gave them in Wine and Honey. He gave these several
Medicines in variety of Cronical distempers after Purging, when he thought that
(...). See the Chapter of the Causes of D^seases.
the Blood was over-charg'd with a sort of moisture, which he calls Ichor, or
in suppressions of urine; and when it was made in less quantity than it ought.

Hippocrates used also sudorifick or sweating Medicines. There are also some
cases wherein he would force sweat (...). Satius urinam and sudorem provocare.
De morb. mulier. 1.
as well as urine, but he does not tell what is to be taken for that purpose.
He says in another place, De Morb. Epidemic. lib. 6. sect. 2.
that good care ought to be taken when sweat is provoked, both how and when,
but he tells not the means. There is only a single passage that I know of,
wherein he mentions Ibid. lib. 2. sect. 6. Vid. and Aphorism. 42. l. 7.
sweating, by pouring upon the Head a great quantity of hot Water till the Feet
sweat, that is, till the sweat diffuses itself over the whole Body, running
from the Head to the Foot. After which he would have them eat boyld Meat and
drink thereupon pure Wine, and being well covered with clothes, lay themselves
to rest. What he adds immediately after, that they should eat two or three
heads of Daffodills, does not seem to me at all to relate to the provoking of
sweat, Daffodills being reckoned by Dioscorides among the Vomitories.
Hippocrates perhaps puts the Patient to his choice, whether to sweat or vomit.
Perhaps the Narcissus of Hippocrates was not known afterward by the same name,
which has been the fortune of several other Simples whose names have been
changed. I do not find any other sudorifick Medicines taken at the mouth in
Hippocrates.

The Disease for which he proposes the aforesaid Remedies is a Fever, which is
not, according to him, produced either by the Bile or the Pituita, but from
mere Lassitude, or some other like cause. By this we see that Hippocrates did
not approve of Sweating in any other Fever than here pointed at.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Simple Mediicines which change the disposition of the body
and humors, as to their sensible qualities, without making any sensible
Evacuation.
De affect. p. m 515, This Book has been attributed to Polybius. Upon this see
what is remarked of refreshing remedies, below in the Chapter of acute Diseases.
THese Medicines, says Hippocrates, which Purge neither Bile nor Phlegm, that is
to say, which are not at all purgative, act by cooling, or heating, by drying,
or moistning, or by (...). The first signifies to close, to thicken; the second
to resolve, to dissipate.
closing and thickning, resolving and dissipating. To these remedies he joins
those which procure sleep; but he does not say what are those remedies which
cool and moisten; and it is probable, that what he calls Medicine in this place,
served likewise for Food: Which he seems to insinuate a little after, when he
says, that the Meat and Drink which men use in their health, ought to serve
them when they are sick, choosing or preparing them according to the present
occasion, of cooling or moistning, drying or heating.

As this relates to the Diet of the sick, we may consult what has been before
said upon that Head. Hippocrates used those Medicines which thickened, or
resolved and dissipated, as well externally as internally, as well to draw the
matter of an Abscess to the Head, as to resolve and dissipate a Tumor, or to
thicken a sharp and thin Humor, or to attenuate or subtilize thick viscid
uses. Of these more under the Chapter of his Pharmacy.

CHAP. XX. Of Hipnotic or Sleep-procuring Medicines.
HIppocrates speaking in the aforesaid passage of Remedies We have observed in
the preceding Chap. that the Book from whence this passage is taken, has been
ascribed to Polybius, who, as we shall see below, was a greater reasoner than
Hippocrates.
which procure sleep, says they produce this effect, (...).
by calming or giving rest to the blood, neither does he tell us what these
Medicines are. He speaks in several other places of a Plant which he calls
(...).
Mecon, which is the name the Greeks call the Poppy by. But it is remarkable
that he generally attributes to this Plant a purgative quality; which makes it
plain, that he did not mean the Poppy by it. De Simplic. Medicater. facultat.
lib. 2.
Galen tells us that some took the Peplus which we have ranked before amongst
the Purgatives, and Spatling Poppy for the same Plant; and in his Glosses upon
Hippocrates he says, that Meconium and Peplus signified frequently the same
thing in him. I suppose we ought to read Mecon, and not Meconium, Pliny taking
notice that the Tithymale which is the same with the Peplus, was otherwise
called Mecon, or at least Galen ought to have said that the Meconium was the
Juice of the Peplus, and not the Peplus itself.

We find notwithstanding in Hippocrates, some passages in which these two words
Mecon and Meconium are taken in the same sense, in which the Greeks of the
following Ages constantly used them, that is, the first signified Poppy, and
the latter the Juice of it; which shows that in Hippocrates's time, two very
different things were called by the same name; the Peplus which is a purging
Tithymale, and the Poppy which is Astringent and Somniferous. He speaks
likewise of a third sort of Meconium drawn from the Excrements, which name has
been since given to the Excrements first voided by a Child newly born. In the
second Book of Women's distempers, he proposes (...), from the word (...),
juice, is formed that of (...), or Opium in Latin. We may find in Dioscorides
the difference between Opium, and Meconium.
the Juice of Poppy for a distemper of the Matrix, and as a proof that he meant
the Juice of Poppy, which causes sleep, he calls it within a few lines after
the (...).
Hipnotic Meconium, to distinguish it from the other.

From hence it is apparent that he knew the virtue of the Poppy, but it is
observable that he used it very seldom; and I do not find that he proposes this
Remedy in the cases to which it has been since applied, that is, in wakings,
and especially in pains. We shall have occasion to say more of this Remedy, See
below in the Chapt. of Heraclides Tarentum.
in the sequel, and of the use the Ancients made, and the doubts they had of it.

There is another passage in Hippocrates, wherein he mentions the white and
black Poppy De vict. rat. lib 2.
in these words. The Poppy says he, is Astringent, the black more than the
white, yet the white is so likewise, (...).
but it nourishes and is of great force. Dioscorides and Galen inform us, that
the Ancients put Poppy-seeds in their Cakes, which they made of Meal and Honey,
and sometime even into their Bread, as it is not likely they did it for
nourishment. Perhaps there may be some fault in the Text of Hippocrates.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Specific Remedies of the several distempers, whose
operations are not accounted for.
THe Medicines hitherto spoke of act after a sensible manner, and it was by
their means that Hippocrates answered the general intentions which he proposed
in the cure of diseases. There were other Medicines which he made use of for no
other reason but the known success of them in several particular cases. His own
experience, and that of his predecessors, was sufficient to establish the use
of them, tho he could not rationally account for their effects.

We shall give some instances of these remedies in the account of Hippocrates's
method of curing some particular diseases. But we must not forget here that
these remedies were chiefly such as he inherited from his predecessors the
Asclepiades, who being Empiricks, did not much trouble themselves how their
Medicines operated, so the Patients were cured. Tho Hippocrates relied very
much upon the former sort of Medicines, yet he did not neglect these, for
almost all the Physicians after him continued the use of both sorts in their
practice, the one supplying the defects of the other.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Remedies applied externally to diverse parts of the Body.
Of Compound Medicines in general, and of the Pharmacy of Hippocrates.
AMongst the Remedies externally applied, (...); from (...), which signifies
Fire; and (...), to warm; (...), from (...) to heat. This last word seems
common to Fomentations, Cataplasms, and all exterior applications of Oils, and
Unguents, which are used as lentfiers. In Latin Fomentum from Fovere.
Fomentations were the chief. These were a peculiar sort of Bath which
Hippocrates used very often, and which was made several ways. The first was
that, wherein the Patient This sort of Fomentation was called (...), from
(...), to sit within. Lib. de Superfatat. de ratione victus in acutis, de morb.
3.
sat in a Vessel, in a decoction of Herbs or Simples, appropriate to his
Malady, so that the part agrieved was soaked in the decoction. This was chiefly
used in distempers of the Womb, of the Arms, the Bladder, the Reins, and
generally all the parts below the Diaphragm. This Remedy might be referred to
the Chapter of Baths, of which it is a kind.

The second way of Fomenting, was to take warm Water, and put it into a Skin or
Bladder, or even into a Copper or Earthen Vessel, and to apply it to the part
affected; as for example, upon the side in a Pleurisy. They use likewise a
large Sponge, which they dipped in the water or other hot Liquor, and squeezed
out part of the water before they apply^d it. The same use they made of Barley,
or Vetches, or Bran; which was boiled in some proper liquor, and apply^d in a
linen bag. These Fomentations were called moist Fomentations.

He used also dry ones made of Salt or Millet, made very hot, and applied in
bags upon the part.

The last sort of Fomentations was by way of Vapor, which steam'd from some
hot Liquor. We find an instance of this sort of Fomentations in the first Book
of Women's distempers. He cast at several times bits of red hot Iron into urine,
and covering the Patient close upwards, caused her to receive the steam below.
His design in these Fomentations, was to warm the part, to resolve or
dissipate, and draw out the peccant matter, if any where, to mollify and
assuage pain, to open the passages or even to shut them, according as the
Fomentations were Emollient or Astringent.

(...).
Fumigations were likewise very much used by Hippocrates for the following
intentions. De Morb. lib. 3.
In the Quinzy he burnt Hysop, with Sulphur and Pitch, and caused the Smoke to
be drawn into the Throat through a Tunnel, which brought away abundance of Phlegm
through the Mouth, and through the Nose, or else he took to the same purpose, De
morb. lib. 1.
Nitre, Marjerom, and Cressseeds, which he boiled in Water, Vinegar and Oil,
and while it was on the Fire, caused the steam to be drawn in by a Pipe. We
find, particularly in Hippocrates, a great number of Fumigants for the
distempers of Women, to provoke their Menses, and to check them, to help
conception, and to ease pains in the Matrix, and the suffocation of it. He used
on these occasions, such Aromaticks as were then known, as Cinnamon, Cassia,
Myrrh, and several Odoriferous Plants, as likewise some Minerals, such as
Niter, Sulphur, and Pitch, and caus^d them to receive the vapors into the
Matrix, by means of a Tunnel.

(...). and (...).
Gargles, which are likewise a sort of Fomentations for the Mouth and Throat,
were also known to Hippocrates. He used in the Quinzy, a Gargle made of
Marjerom, Savory, Selery, Mint and Nitre, boiled with Water and a little
Vinegar. When this was strained, they added Honey to it, and washed their
Mouths frequently with it.

They made likewise very great use of (...). These three words Hippocrates uses
to signify all that is proper to anoint.
Oils and Ointments, in order to mollify and to abate pain, to ripen Boils, to
resolve Tumors, to refresh after weariness, to make the body supple, and
diverse others particular intentions. We shall (...) occasion to speak further
of Ointments and Liquid Perfumes hereafter, in the Chapter of Prodicus, one of
Hippocrates's Scholars. Hippocrates used sometimes Oil of Olives neat,
sometimes he infused some Simple into it, as the leaves of Myrtle or Roses;
this latter Oil was in great request amongst the Ancients.

There were other sorts of Oils more compounded. Hippocrates speaks of an Oil
or Unguent called See Dioscorides.
Susinum, which was made of the Flowers of the Iris, of some Aromaticks, of an
Ointment of Narcissus made with the Flowers of Narcissus, and Aromaticks
infused in Oil. But the most considerable or the most compound Ointment that he
mentions, is that which he calls Netopum, which he prepared particularly for
Women. Hesychius tells us, that it was an Ointment consisting of a great number
of Ingredients. Hippocrates speaks likewise of an Oil or Ointment of Egypt,
which was compounded as it is elsewhere, of abundance of Aromaticks, which
seems to be the same with the Netopum, or as Dioscorides calls it, Metopium. As
for another Oil, which was called the white Oil of Egypt, Galen says De simpl.
Medicam. facu^^^b. lib 2.
in one place, that it was only very fine Oil of Olives; In glossis Hippocratis.
but in another place he tells us, that it was the same Oil or Ointment that
was otherwise called Mendesium.

Hippocrates used also a sort of Ointment which he called (...).
Ceratum, which consisted chiefly of Oil and Wax, which gave name to the
Medicine. The Composition of one Ceratum, which he recommends for the softning
of a Tumor, and cleansing of a Wound, was this. Take the quantity of a Nut of
the Marrow or Fat of a Sheep, of Mastick or Turpentine the quantity of a Bean,
and as much Wax, melt these over a Fire with Oil of Roses, for a Ceratum.

Sometimes he added mixed Pitch and Wax, and putting a quantum sufficit of Oil,
made a composition of greater consistence than the former, which he called
(...).
Ceropissus.

(...).
Cataplasms were a sort of Medicament of less consistence than the two former.
They consisted of Powders or Herbs steeped or boyl^d in water, or some other
liquor, to which they sometimes put Oil. In the Quinzy, Hippocrates orders a
Cataplasm made of Barly-meal boil^d in Wine and Oil. Cataplasms were used with
intention of softning, lenifying, or resolving Tumors, or ripning of the
Abscesses like the Cerata; they had also cooling Cataplasms made of the Leaves
of Beets or Olive, Fig or Oak Leaves boiled in Water.

Hippocrates used also a sort of Medicines called a (...). De morb. muli^r.
lib. 3.
Collyrium. It was compounded of Powders, to which was added a small quantity
of some Ointment or Juice of a Plant, to make a solid dry Mass, the form of
which was round and long, which was kept for use.

Another Composition not much different from the other, but in the form, the
Ingredients being much of the same nature, was a sort of (...), (...) which
(...), because (...) and (...) li^e a (...) cake. (...), (...) weight of a
D^am. D^ morb. (...) ^ib ^.
Lozange, of the bigness of a small piece of Money, which was used to be burnt
upon Coals for a perfume, and to be powdered for other uses, as we shall see
more particularly hereafter. We find likewise in Hippocrates^s Descriptions for
Powders, for several uses to take off Fungous flesh, and to blow into the Eyes
in Opthalmies, etc.

These are almost all the Medicines used externally. We shall have occasion to
take notice of a certain Composition of this nature, in the Chapter of Women's
distempers. As for the Compound Medicines taken inwardly, they were either
Liquid or Solid. (...).
Those which were in a Liquid form, were prepared either by decoction, or
infusion in a proper Liquor, which, when strained, was kept for use, or by
macerating certain Powders in such Liquors, and so taking them together, or by
mixing diverse Liquors together. See the Chapter of ^he Diet of the Sick.
We have given before the preparation of a Potion, called Cyceon, and some
others. The Medicines in (...) from (...) to swallow something that is solid.
Solid form, consisted of Juices, inspissated, of Gums, Rosins or Powder made
up with them, or with Honey, or something proper to give the necessary
consistence to the Medicine. These were made up in a form and quantity fit to
be swallowed with ease.

Amongst the solid Medicines may be ranked that which is delivered in the first
Book of Women's distempers, under the Title of (...). The Vatican Copies read
it, (...) of several ingredients.
the Salt Medicine.

There was a third sort of Medicine, which was betwixt Liquid and Solid, which
was a sort of Lambitive, which they were forced to keep some time to dissolve
in the Mouth, that they might swallow it leisurely. This Remedy was used to
take off the Acrimony of those Humors which falls sometimes upon this part,
which provoke Coughing, and other inconveniences. Honey was the Basis of it,
as we shall see in some descriptions to come, in the relation of some instances
of distempers, cured by Hippocrates's method.

By all this we may see what sort of Compound Medicines Hippocrates used. If
the Book De Affectionibus be his, we may infer from thence, that he wrote
particularly upon this subject. The Author in that Book quoting others which
treat of Medicaments only. These Books bore the title of Pharmaca; and
Pharmacitis, says our Author, ut Scriptum est in Pharmacis, that is, in Libris
De Pharmacis Agentibus. The word Pharmacitis is an Adjective, to which the
Substantive Liber, which is understood, must be joined. Pharmacitis Liber, the
Book of Medicines. But this Book has been ascribed to Polybius, Son-in-law to
Hippocrates; and it is remarkable that these Books, or this Book of
Medicaments, is cited no where else by Hippocrates. Galen observes, that those
sort of Books were very rare in those days, because the Ancient Physicians used
to give a Receipt of the Medicines they used, with the History of the distemper
they used them for.

Another thing which is worth our Observation is, that the compound Medicines
of Hippocrates were but very few, and consisted of very few Simples, four or
five at most. We find indeed in Actuarius the description of a very compounded
Antidote, which he calls Hippocrates's Antidote, for which he says, the
Athenians presented him with a Crown. But this is plainly a fiction, and one of
the specious Titles the Greeks used to give to their Medicines, to promote the
sale, of which we shall see more examples hereafter.

Here we must take notice, that Hippocrates understood Pharmacy, or the Art of
Compounding or Preparing Medicines. Lib. de Theriaca ad Pison.
This Galen endeavors to prove from a passage of the second Book of the
Epidemicks, where he introduces Hippocrates speaking after this manner. This
passage is very obscure, as we find it in Hippocrates; and Galen, or the Author
of the Book cited by us, give^ it us very different from what it is in our
Originaly.
We know the nature of Medicines, whereof so many different things are
compounded, for all are not compounded alike, but some after one manner, and
others after another. Some simples ought to be boyl^d quick, others slowly*
They are likewise differently prepared. Some are dried, some are stamped, some
are boiled, etc.

The last observation we shall make upon the Pharmacy of Hippocrates is, that
he not only understood the preparation of Medicines, but that he prepared them
himself, or in his own House by his Servants, after his own directions This was
the practice of the Physicians of those times, when neither Pharmacy nor
Surgery were become particular professions.

CHAP. XXIII. A List of the Simples used by Hippocrates,
A
AGnus Castus. Alica. Alom, Alom of Egypt, Scissil Al^m. Burnt Alom. Almonds.
Amomum. * Anagallis. Anagyris. Alkanet. * Ammoniac. Gum. Aneth. Anise.
Anthemus, or Anthemis. Asparagus. Afterbirth humane. Asphodil. Atriplex. *
Amber Ass its D^ng. Ash-tree, Apples.
B
Brass, and its Rust, Filings, Scales, and Calx. Birthwort. Baccharis. *
Butter. Blites. Bulbus albus. Bulbus parvus growing among the Corn. Bembylium,
a sort of Melissa. Erot. Bryony. Buprestis, the name both of a Plant, and an
Animal. Beetles. Beans. Basil. Barley. Achilles's Barley. Bramble. Bulls Gall,
Liver, and Urine.
C
CLivers, Goosegrass. Cachrys. Calamint. Calamus aromaticus. Cantharides. *
Capers. Cardamomes. Casia. Castor. Cedar, and its Rosin. Centaury. Chalcitis
Chamaeleon. Chondrus. Coleworts. Chrethmus. Chrysocolla. Chrysitis. Cinnamon.
Cneorum. Cnidia Grana. Cnicus. Colocynthis. Cucumbers Garden and wild. Conyza.
Coriander. Crateogonon. Cresses. Cumine, vulgar, and Ethiopian. Cyclamen.
Cyperus. Cypress. Cytisus. Cravfish. Cheese. Clary. Carrots Cinquefoil.
Cuttle-fish, its Bones, and Eggs. Chalk
D
DOg. Daphnoides. Daucus. Dittany. Dittany of Crete. Dracontium Dracuncunculus.
Docks.
E
EBony. Elaterium. Epipetrum. Erviolum. Ervum. Erysinum. Evanthemum Eggs.
Elder.
F
FRankincense. Frankincense granulated. Flower, or Meal of several sorts of
Grain, fine and course. Fenugreek. Fennel. Ferula. Fig Tree, Garden and wild,
its Leaves, Wood and Fruit, etc. Frogs. Feverfew. Fox Dung.
G
Garlic. Goose Grass. Clivers. Goat, the Milk, Dung, Excrements of the Skin,
Fat, and Horns. Gourds. Gall of Oxen, Swine, Sea Scorpion, etc. Galba number.
Galls Nuts Glans Egyptia. Grapes, and the mass of 'em after pressing.
H
HEmlock. Horns of Oxen, Goats, and Deer, rasp'd, and burnt. Hellebore, white
and black. Heath. Herb Charien. Hedgehog. Sea Hedgehog. Hippomarathrum.
Hippophae. Holoconitis. Hyssop vulgar, and Cilician. Hare's Wool. Hemp. Honey.
Honey of Cedar.
I
JUncus odoratus Iris. Isatis or Wood. Ivy.
L
LOadstone. Lettice. Lagopyrus. Laserpitium. Laurel. Lentills. Lentiscus. Lees
of Wine Lees of Wine burnt Lotus. Lupines. Lapis Cyanaeus Magnesius.
Leeks.
M
MArsh Mallow Mugwort. Mushromes. Milk, Asses, Cows, Mares, Bitches. Mastick
Tree. Mastick Malicorium. Mandrake. Mallow. Meconitis. (a) Meconium purgans.
Meconium somniferum. Meconium, an excrement. Melanthium. Melilot. Mint. Mercury
the Herb. Mulberries. Millet. Minium. Misy. Modus, a root. Molybdaena. Moss.
Mustard. Mules Dung. Myrica. Myrrh. Myrrha Stacte. Myrtle. Myrtidanum.
N
NArcissus. Nardus. Nitre. Nitre red. Nuts Thasian. Nettle. Navelwort.
O
ONions. Orache. Oats. Oak. Oil. Oenanthe. Oesype. Olive, Wood, Leaves, Gall,
Fruit, Stones, and Oil. Origanum. Orobus. Orpiment. Orpine.
P
PImpernel Parsley Bastard. Pomegranate. Pepper. Panax. (b) Poppy. Peplium.
Peplus. Pompions. Parsley. Parsley curled. Pencedanum. Poplar. Phaseolus.
Philistium. Pine, and its Kernel. Peony. Pears. Pease, and dry. Purslan. Pitch.
Prassium. Pseudodictamnus. Pennyroyal.
Q
QUick Lime.
R
RAisins Rhadish. Ranunculus. Root white. Resine. Rhamus. Rhus. Ricinus.
Rocket. Rose. Rosemary. Rubia. Rue.
S
SOthernwood. Silver, and its Flower. Spices of all sorts. Stag its horns, etc.
Services, or Sorb Apples. Sea water. Succory yellow Sheeps Fat, Marrow, and
Dung Saffron. Sagapenum. Sandarach, Gum. Savoury. Savin. Sage. S^^mmony.
Squills. Scolopendrium Salt. Sa^^ ^f Thebes. Seseri Sesamum. Sesamoides.
Spodium. Sulphur. Stavesacre. Staebe. Struthium. Stybis. Styrax. Soot. Sea
Calves Lungs. Spelt.
T
THorn white. Thorn Egyptian. Turnep. Turpentine. Teda Terra Aegyptiaca. Terra
nigra Samia. Thapsia. Thlapsi. Time. Thymbra. Tithymalus. Tithymalis. Torpedo.
Tortoise. Tragus. Tribulus. Trefoil. Trigonum.
V
VIper. Verbascum. Verdegrise. Verjus. Vine, it is Wood, Leaves, and Tendrels.
Vinegar. Violets white. blue.
Urine.
W
WOrmwood Wax, white Wax Wheat. Whey. Worms. Wine, of several sorts.
X
XAnthium.
Z
ZEa.
These are the names that occur in Hippocrates, except perhaps a very few,
which may have escaped our notice. The Greek, like most other Languages, having
suffered great alteration, and the names of diverse Plants being changed, it
became within 2 or 3 Ages different to determine what Plants Hippocrates
designed by some of 'em; but the number of 'em is so small that the loss is not
very considerable.

CHAP. XXIV. Some instances of particular Cures of some Diseases, both Acute
and Chronical.
WE shall find here, besides the practice of the general rules before laid
down, several particular Medicines of which no mention has been made. We have
already seen Hippocrates's distinction between Fevers that were not
symptomatical, but were of themselves the original distemper, and those which
attended inflammations. We have observed, that in the first sort of Fevers Diet
was the only Medicine, he not thinking it necessary neither to bleed or purge,
or do any thing more than nurse them after the manner below laid down.

We have seen likewise the use he made of bleeding and purging in inflammations,
such as the Pleurisy and Peripneumonie, and his cautions in the use of them.

In the first of these distempers he attempted to abate the pain of the side,
or to dissipate the peccant matter, by applying Fomentations upon the part. In
the case of the man that was not blooded till the eighth day of his Pleurisy,
he takes express notice that the Fomentations had not at all abated the pain,
which supposes him to have begun with them. Fomentations were, and have been a
long time, almost an universal Remedy, and the use of Oils, Ointments,
Cataplasms, and other external Medicines was near as common, as the sequel will
show. Hippocrates did not only apply these Medicines to the part affected in
the Pleurisy, whose seat is in the side: De dlaeta in acutis.
He caused almost all the body, and particularly the Loins and Thighs to be
anointed. Of those remedies which he gave inwardly in this distemper, he
appears to have relied most upon those which promoted De locis in hom
spitting. He proposes also the following remedy. Diaeta acutis.
Take, says he, Sothernwood, Pepper, and black Hellebore, boil them in Vinegar
and Honey, and give it in the beginning of the distemper, if the pain be
urgent. He prescribes in the same case, as also in inflammations of the Liver,
and pains about the Diaphragm, Panax boiled in the same Liquor; and intimates
that these Medicines serve to loosen the Belly, and so provoke urine; so that
black Hellebore ordered in the first prescription, must not be taken for a true
purgative, because it would have been against his principles, but for a
Medicine that only loosens the Belly gently, and was about the strength of a
Clyster. In another place he allows urine See the Chapter of Diet.
to his Pleuriticks, so it be not a strong Wine, and it be well diluted. He
allows it likewise in a sort of inflammation of the Lungs and in a Lethargy,
which makes me the less surprised at his ordering Pepper in a Pleurisy; and
which is an argument that the intention of cooling, or the fear of heating,
were not the strongest considerations upon which Hippocrates acted in the cure
of acute distempers; although he recommends elsewhere to Pleuriticks, a drink
made of Water and Vinegar, into which he sometimes put a little Honey, with an
intention to moisten and expectorate. Perhaps this Pepper Medicine was one of
the empirical Remedies before spoken of, the experience whereof he had without
the reason.

In a Peripneumonie, or inflammation of the Lungs, his practice was much the
same, as in a Pleurisy. We have seen before that he let blood frequently. We
shall only take notice here, that he endeavored to clear the Lungs by
Medicines, that attenuated or incided viscid matter, and helped expectoration.
He particularly for this purpose, directs an See the preceding Chapter.
Electuary composed of Pine-apples, Galbanum, and Attick Honey.

We have seen that he ordered bleeding for those that suddenly lost their
Speech, or who had any sumptoms of an Apoplexy, Palsy, or Convulsions, and
other distempers of the like nature. After this he orders vomiting, and a purge
of a great quantity To the quantity of a dozen, and sometimes of sixteen
heminae. See the Chapter of Purgers.
of Asses Milk. But this latter Remedy seems rather designed for those that
were recovered of these distempers, or had overcome the first fit. The
Fomentations likewise must have been used in the beginning.

For Convulsions in particular he gave Pepper, and black Hellebore in Chicken
Broth. He made them sneeze, bath, foment and anoint continually. De locis in
homine.
In another place he orders a fire to be made on both sides the patients bed,
and gave him Mandiake Root in a small quantity, and applied Bags very hot to
the Tendons behind, without specifying what Tendons he means.

In a Quinzy he opened the Veins of the Arm, and under the Tongue and Breasts.
He gave Lambitives and Gargles, which they were to use hot, and used
Fumigations as we have taken notice already. He advises shaving the Head, and
to lay a Plaster to it, as likewise the Neck, which was also to be fomented
and covered with Wool. lib. 3.
(h) In great peril of suffocation he pierced the Windpipe, and put a Reed or
Pipe into it. When the disease began to abate, he purged with Elaterium, to
prevent a relapse. He began the cure of an Ileos by Vomiting also; tho in this
distemper they vomit of themselves too much, as we have observed that he did in
a Cholera, See the Chap. of Vomitives.
which is likewise a disease whose chief symptom is vomiting. Afterward he let
blood from the Veins of the Arm and of the Head, and cooled all the Diaphragm,
not the Heart excepted; and warmed all those below See the Chapter of outward
Remedies.
, by placing the patient in a vessel of warm water, and afterward anointing him
continually with Oils, or applying Cataplasms as hot as might be endured. He
used also upon these occasions Suppositors eight inches long, made with Honey
only, and rubbed at the end with Bulls Gall. This Suppositor having drawn away
the nearest excrements, he gave a Clyster. But if the Suppository had no
effect, he thrust up the Anus the snowt of a pair of Bellows, and having blown
up the Belly and Intestines, he drew the Bellows and gave the Clyster. He gives
a caution that this Clyster be made of things which do not heat very much, but
such as dissolve the excrements: and after it is taken, he orders the Anus to
be stopped with a Sponge, and the Patient be put into warm water, and keep the
Clyster as long as possible.

He begins his Cronical distempers with the Exsiccating disease described
before, and taken notice of as a kind of a Hypochondriacal affection. For the
cure of this evil, Hippocrates proposed first walking and exercise; and in case
of weakness, to make use of some carriage, and to make short Journeys. He adds,
that they ought to take vomits and purges frequently, to use cold Bathing in
Summer and to anoint in Autumn and Winter, with Oils; to drink Asses Milk or
Whey, to abstain from meats, either sweet or oily, and to use cooling things,
and such as keep the Belly loose, and to take Clysters. He mentions Epidem l.
5. sub p^in^. See the Chapter of ble^ding.
the case of a young man, something like the distemper we are speaking of, thas
was cured by repeated Bleeding.

His Pthysical patients he first purged with pretty violent purges, such as the
Berries of Thymelaea or Spurge. After which he gave them Asses Milk or Cows
Milk, mixed with a third part of Water and Honey, and afterward all sorts of
Milk, whether Cows, Asses, Goats, or Mares, either pure, or mingled as before,
to which he added a little Salt, when he had a mind to make it purgative. See
the Chapter of the Surgery of Hippocrates.
He burnt them likewise in the Back, and the Breast in several places, and kept
the Ulcers open for some time. At last he had recourse to purging the head, See
the Chapter of Purgatives.
the manner of which has been given before. He dieted them in this distemper
sometimes with Goats flesh, and sometimes with Swines, which was the advice of
Esculapius, in the same case as we have seen before. He ordered likewise to
those that could not easily expectorate the matter with which their Lungs were
stuffed, to eat very fat salt Meats, in order to discharge the purulent matter,
and cleanse the Lungs. He allow^d them the use of Wine in small quantities, so
it were not black and rough, but such as that which was an ingredient of the Sea the Chapter of Diet.
Cyceon before mentioned, which was a potion he ordered in this case. He
advised, in short, moderate exercising, and particularly walking.

In an Empyema, which is a Disease akin to the Pthysis, caused by a Collection
of purulent matter between the Lungs and the Pleura, which often comes upon
Pleurisies, He proposes See the Chapter of Cnidian Physicians, lib. 2. and in
the same Book the Chapter of Purging.
purging of the Breast, of which before. He has yet another cure by means of
Surgery, of which hereafter. He cured pains in the Head by first washing or
fomenting it a long time with warm water, and afterward causing sneezing, by
that means drawing away the Pituita, which he called purging the Head. He
forbad Wine, and recommended moistning. If these were insufficient, he opened
the veins of the Nose and of the Forehead, and if still the distemper
continued obstinate, he made See the Chapter of Surgery below.
incisions upon the head, or De locis in homine.
cauterized the veins in several parts of it, as we shall see hereafter. He
cured the Intumescence, or the over-growth of the Spleen, which comes upon
Fevers, by giving Hydragogues, and a Diet proper to diminish or purge phlegm. If
this were not sufficient, he ordered burning in several places about the Navel,
to draw out the water that way. (...). See the Oonomy of Foesius upon the word
(...) What that Author says there is better than his translation of this
passage.
In another distemper of the Spleen he advises to cleave Wood, and to use
abundance of Exercise. Amongst the diet he orders in this case Dogs flesh.

For the Dropsy he prescribed first a diet which tended wholly to dry the
body, and to discharge the superfluous humors. (s) To this end, he orders them
to walk, and use as much exercise as possible, to do laborious work, sweat
much, and sleep upon it. As for their diet, he advised them to eat things dry
and sharp, De ratione victus in acutis, and Epidem. lib. 5. v. 69.
which is the way to make much water; and to be strong, that they should eat
Toste steept in Black Wine, and Oil and Swines flesh boiled in Vinegar,
drinking otherwise but very little, and then of thin small White wine at first;
but when the distemper grew upon them, strong black Wine. If it happens, says
he, that the Patient has a difficulty of breathing, in case it be Summer time,
or he in the flower of his Age and lusty, he ought to be blooded in the Arm. In
the place where Hippocrates gives these directions, he seems to confound the
cure of the Dropsy called Hyposarcidios, with that species that is occasioned
by, or accompanied with Wind, which are the two kinds of this distemper
mentioned in this place.

There are, says he, two sorts of Dropsies, one called Hyposarcidios, which is
not to be avoided when it is coming, the other which is with wind, which is not
to be cured but by great luck, See the list of Diseases known. to Hippocrates
above.
which requires abundance of exercise, hard labor, and fomentations, and that
they live very temperately and sparingly, that they eat things dry and sharp,
etc. as before. I suppose the cure of the first sort of the Dropsy to commence
at these last words, that what he said before in short of exercise,
fomentations and temperance, respects the latter, at least, if the same method
is designed for both.

Besides these Remedies, Hippocrates proposes in other places Purgers that
carry off Water and Phlegm, and not Bile. And again, De intern. affect. This
Book is ascribed to Cnidian Physicians.
he elsewhere distinguishes a Dropsy proceeding from the Liver, from that
which arises from the Spleen. He orders in the former of these distempers, a
Medicine composed with Marjerom boiled in Wine, and Laserpitium to the quantity
of a Tare. This potion was succeeded by Goats Milk, of which four Heminae were
to be taken with a third of Water and Honey. He ordered abstinence from solid
nourishment for the first ten days, in which time he discovered whether the
Diseases were mortal or not, and during that time a Ptisan boiled with Honey,
and strained, and to drink a sort of White Wine which he specifies, and was not
very strong. The ten days over, he allowed them to eat a Cock roasted, which
they were to eat hot, and See thereupon the Chapter of Diet.
Puppies, and a certain sort of Fish which he named, with the aforesaid Wine,
but when the Water began to come to the Belly, he came to the Remedies
beforementioned, to the black rough Wine, to exercise, etc. For the Dropsy
which came from the Spleen, he gave at first Hellebore in order to vomit, and
afterward he purged with (x) Cneorum, Juice of Hippophae, or Cnidian Grains,
after which came Asses Milk to the quantity of eight Heminae, sweetened with a
little Honey. If these Remedies failed, he had recourse to Surgery, as we shall
see anon.

De morb. lib. 2.
For the Cure of a Quartan Ague, Hippocrates began with purging downward, which
was succeeded with purging the head, after which he purged once again as
before. And if the Ague continued, he let slip the time of two Fits, and then
bathed them in warm water, and at coming out of the Bath gave him of the seeds
of I suppose there may be some mistake in the D^se of these Medicaments.
Henbane and Mandrake, the quantity of a grain of Millet each, Lasserpitium and
Trefoil, each the quantity of three Beans, all infused in pure Wine. If the
parts were otherwise lusty and healthful, and if a Fever came upon being over
tired with a Journey, and afterward turned to a Quartan Ague, he began with
Fomentations, and afterward gave a mixture of Garlic and Honey and Lentile
Broth, in which was Honey and Vinegar. When the sick man had taken this Mess,
he made him vomit; and after having bathed in a hot Bath, as soon as he was
cool, he drank Ciceon with water, and in the evening was permitted to eat light
victuals as much as he could. In the following Fit he bathed hot; and after
being covered with abundance of Clothes forced sweat, and drank a potion made
with the Roots of white Hellebore of the length of three fingers, a Dragm of
Trefoil, Juice of Laserpitium the weight of two Beans, with pure Wine; and if
he had an inclination to vomit he vomited, if not, a vomit was given after
purging the Head. At other times he should use a light sharp Diet, and if the
Fit took him fasting, the vomiting Medicine was omitted.

In a Diarrhaea and Dysentery, with gripes and swelling of the Feet,
Hippocrates observes, that Meal boiled in Milk, that is, Milk-Porridge, was
more serviceable than Goats Whey, which he made use of before. He adds, that
another person sick of the same distemper, did well upon eating boiled Asses
Milk. He had before observed, (...). We may see in this instance, which is in
the beginning of the above mentioned Book, several other ways of using milk.
that Whey and Milk, in which red hot Flints had been quenched, had relieved a
person in the same case, by which we may see that Hippocrates made use of any
thing but Milk to these distempers. In another place he proposes for the same
distemper Beans boiled with Rubia Tinctorum, in fat Broth. There is yet another
very peculiar Remedy for a Dysentery, in the Chapter of the Writings of
Hippocrates.

CHAP XXIV. Of Women's Distempers.
THe body of Women being made otherwise than that of Men, as likewise its
peculiar distempers; these depend chiefly upon the Matrix, and are very
numerous, as we may see by the list before given. Hippocrates has attributed a
great number of these to the displacing of the part aforesaid, which he
supposes might not only be relaxed, and hang out, but that it might likewise be
retracted as far as the Liver or Heart, and even to the Head, or turn Its
Orifice to the right or left, or backwards or forwards. Of all these motions,
that according to Hippocrates, which was accompanied with the most dismal
symptoms, was the retraction of it, whereby it ascended and pressed the Liver,
the Head, and the upper parts; this producing in Women a sudden change of
Color, grating of the Teeth, and other symptoms like Epileptick, a difficulty
of breathing even to absolute suffocation, a privation of sense, and an
universal cold, like death.

To remedy this, Hippocrates ordered the upper part of Belly to be swathed,
pressing the Matrix gently downwards, and forcing open their Mouths, poured
down the richest Wine, and after they were come to themselves, gave them a
purge, and after that Asses Milk. If the disease was obstinate, after having
reduced the Matrix to its place, he gave them a decoction, in which was Castor,
Conyza, Rue, Cummin of Ethiopia, Rhadish-Seeds, Sulphur and Myrrh. He burnt
under their Noses likewise stinking things, such as Wool, Pitch, Castor,
Brimstone, Leather, Horns, and Feathers, and the snuff of a Lamp just
extinguished, with intention to fetch them to themselves, to make them sweat,
and to restore the Matrix. In the mean time he anointed below with sweet Oils,
and Liquid Perfumes, such as that which he called See the Chapter of exterior
Reme. dies.
Netopum. He likewise used diverse other Remedies both internal and external,
amongst which we must not forget the Pessaries. These were a sort of
Suppositors to thrust up the Neck of the Matrix; (...).
they were made of Wool or Lint, mixed with diverse other things, Oil, Wax,
Powder, etc. it was made round and like a finger. In the disease before
mentioned, Hippocrates made Pessaries made with Castor, Myrrh, Peucedanum,
Pitch, Melanthium, and sometimes even A sort of a Fly resembling Cantharides.
There was likewise an Herb of this name.
the Bruprestis, and Cantharides, mixing all these with Ointments and Wool.

It is observable, that the use of Pessaries was very common among the
Ancients, and that it was almost the universal Medicine in Women's cases. They
used it almost for all intentions, to relax, to lenifie, to draw, to irritate,
to cleanse, and dry the Matrix, etc. using sometimes Oils and Fat, sometimes
the juice of Herbs, sometimes things very irritative, as Nitre, Scammony,
Tithimale, Garlic, Cummin, Cantharides, and the like, and sometimes
restringents, as the Rind and Flower of Pomgranates, Sumach, and sometime
Aromaticks, and Plants of sweet Smell.

Nor was it in the suffocation of the Matrix only that these Pessaries were in
use, but in all other distempers of that part. They were employed to provoke or
check the Menses, against Relaxations, superfluity of Humors, Ulcerations, and
Inflammations, the Dropsy, Fluor Albus and Sterility; they procured Abortions
and brought away dead Children, and the Secundines, and promoted the purgations
of Women after Labor, etc.

Hippocrates used yet other Medicines in the cure of the aforesaid distempers.
We shall examine his method of treating two opposite distempers, the
suppression of the Menses, and the too great quantity or too frequent returns
of them. The first of these he cured De mo^b. mul^er lib. 1. and de natura
mulieb^i.
by purgers and vomits. And after the use of sharp Pessaries, Perfumes,
Fomentations, and hot Baths twice a day, he gave inwardly several Medicines
which experience had taught him to be very powerfully moving that way. He used
sometimes upon this occasion Cr^thmus or Sampier boiled in Wine, made of the
Tree called Taeda, the Herb Mercury and Chiches. But if these Remedies were too
weak, he prepared a drink, in which were five Cantharides without heads, wings,
or feet; Water-caltrops, Anthemus, Smallage-seeds, and fifteen dried eggs
infused in sweet Wine. To the same intention he gave likewise the leaves and
flowers of Ranunculus, infused in the same Wine, Dittany of Crete, Hogs Fenel,
Panax, Peonis Roots, Seeds of white Violets, the Juice of Colworts of
Laserpitium to the quantity of a Verch, and Cress-seeds, these two latter
infused in Wine or Bitch's Milk. Hippocrates used likewise diverse other Simples
not mentioned here.

In an immoderate Flux, he charges to abstain from Lib. de lo^^ (...) h^min^.
Bathing, and any thing that may heat, from all Diuretic Medicines or
Laxative, and to make the Bed highest at the feet, and to use restringent
Pessaries. De morb. mul. lib. 2.
He ordered the Belly and lower parts to be fomented with a Sponge, or Cloths
dipped in cold Water, or to drink a composition of Parsly-seeds dried at the
fire, and sifted, and the seed of Hedge Mustard prepared the same way; Peplium
or Poppy-seeds, sifted with course Flower; Nettle-seeds, Moss of the Wild,
Olive, Gauls, Rue, Marjorum, Pennyroyal, Barly-meal, Wheat Flour, Goats Milk,
Cheese, all made into a kind of See the Chap. of Diet
Ciceon. Besides these Remedies which Hippocrates used in the beginning of the
distemper, he applied likewise under the Breasts a large Aphorism. 50. Sect. 5.
Cupping Vessel; but when the Flux of blood began to diminish and stop
entirely, he used the following Remedies. He gave purges and vomits, and used
lenifying and restringent Fomentations below, which was succeeded by a
Cataplasm made of the Meal of Spelt, with the Bran of Wild Figs and Olive
Leaves. After this he came to Cows Milk, either raw or boiled, according to the
condition of the Patient. Further he recommends the seeds of Erisimum, parched
and drank with Wine, Perfume consisting of Vinegar, Sulphur, Spelt, Myrrh,
(...). This last in my opinion was the name of some Plant.
and the fruit of the Serpent. These latter Remedies relate to a particular
sort of bleeding, which he says come from the places below the (...). This word
signifies several things in Hippocrates, and it is not always cas^e to guess what
he means by it. See the word ^ungs in the List of Diseases.
Articulations. In another place he reckons hemlock among those inward
Medicines: Take says he, as much hemlock as you can with three fingers, and
drink it with water. We shall make some reflections upon these Medicines, in
the Chapter of Heraclides of Tarentum.

Those fluxes of blood, which were accompanied with an ill smell, sharpness,
pain, and other symptoms, were cured much after the same manner. He gave white
Hellebore, and afterward some other purge, and then used the same astringents
and lenifiers as before. We must not here forget, besides the Fomentations, he
recommends the use of Clysters or Injections for the Matrix, in case of Ulcers
and some other disorders of that part; these consisting of the same ingredients
with the Cataplasms, Fomentations, and Pessaries. He used also in this cure
Asses Milk, advising also by way of Diet, Herbs that were not biting, clammy
Fish boiled with Onions and Corriander-seeds, in sweet oily pickle, Swines
Flesh, Lamb or Mutton, rather boiled than roasted, to drink small White Wine
with a little Honey, not to use too much nor too hot bathing. The Matrix at
length being sufficiently moistened, and the Acrimony of the humors taken off,
he forbad bleeding absolutely, and closed all with a course of restringent
Medicines, such as beforementioned.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Chyrurgery of Hippocrates.
See m^re of this in the general M^xims of the practice of Hippocrates.
WHere Medicines failed, he had recourse to the Knife, and where the Knife was
unserviceable, he sought Remedies from Fire. Hippocrates had from Chyrurgery
these two last Remedies, or the manner of using them, and several other ways of
relieving men against their distempers. He practiced Pharmacy by Chyrurgery.
The same person in those days exercised all parts of Physic in general; and he
that advised a Medicine, or an Operation, prepared and performed them himself,
or at least caused them to be prepared or performed by his Servants, that
worked immediately under his eye and direction. This Galen takes notice of, and
it is apparent from the bare reading the works of Hippocrates. In the Oath
which he exacts of his Scholars, he obliges them not to Cut for the Stone, but
to leave that operation to those who made a particular profession of it; which
supposes that the exercise of all other branches of Surgery was allowed of. One
of his Books likewise treating only of things relating to Surgery, is called
the (...), See below, toward the end of the first Book of the second part.
Physicians repository, and not the Surgeons, which ought to have been the
Title, if Surgery in those days had been a distinct Art from that of Physic.
But instead of that, We often find in Hippocrates the following words, (...),
which somewhat resemble that of (...), but don't exactly signify the same
thing; the first of which words are used by our Author to signify the action or
manner of operating, whereas the latter* although as we have observed before in
the Chapter of Chiron, it signifies in strictness operation of the hand, yet
has been given to the art itself, which teaches the manner of operating, and
not to the action or operation itself.
Surgery had not so much as a particular name, or at least was not known by
that name, nor is it to be found any where in the Works of Hippocrates, nor did
begin to be in use, till the time of the division of Physic, of which we shall
speak hereafter.

But names altering not the nature of things, however the Art which teaches to
cure distempers by Manual Operations, was called, Hippocrates unquestionably
was Master of it, and it made up a great part of his practice in general.

We have seen before that he burnt or cauterized the Breast and Back of
Pthisical men, and those whose Spleen was overgrown. The Instruments he made
use of for this end, were sometimes (...) i. e. an Instrument proper to burn.
red hot Irons, sometimes Spindles of Box, steept in boiled Oil, sometimes a
sort of Mushrooms, which be burnt upon the part, and sometimes what he called
Linum Crudum. He made great use of all those ways of burning in all fixed pains
settled in a particular part. As for instance, in the Gout or Sciatica he burnt
the Toes, Fingers, and Hips, with Linum Crudum. A famous Doctor Sydenham.
English Physician not long since dead, compared this way of cauterizing to
that of the Indians, with a sort of Moss called Moxa, but he was mistaken in
it. He was led into this error by the ordinary interpreters of Hippocrates,
who by the word (...) Linum Crudum understand Flax, whereas the Greek word
signifies, Cloth made of Flax, which has never been whitened. The learned See
the sixth Book of the Varia Lectiones of Mercurialis, Chapter 2 Athenaeus lib. 9.
Eustathius in Odyss. lib. 5. Hesychius, Phavorinus, and other Lexicographers.
Mercurialis, who was was no stranger to this latter signification, did
nevertheless believe that in this place by burning with Linum Crudum,
Hippocrates meant with Stupes or sine Flax; but it is more probable that the
Ancient way of cauterizing with Linum Crudum, or rather with new flaxen Cloth
was the same with that in practice at present in Egypt. De Medicin. Egypt.
lib. 3. cap. 12.
The Egyptians, says Prosper Alpinus, Rolled a little Cotton in a piece of
Linen in the form of a Pyramid, and setting fire to the Cone of the Pyramid,
applied the bases upon the place to be cauterized. In this operation it is not
the fire only which burns the Caustic Oil, which distills along the Linen,
contributes very much to it.

Cauterizing was so familiar an operation to Hippocrates, that there is scarce
any Chronical distemper wherein he does not propose it. In the approach of a
Dropsy he cauterized the Belly in eight places about the Liver. In pains also
of the Head he applied eight Cauteries upon that, two about the Ears, two
behind the Head, two in the Neck, and two near the corners of the Eyes. When
Cauteries were ineffectual, he made an incision all round the Forehead in form
of a Crown, keeping the Lips of the wound open and supported by putting Lint
between them, to give a vent to the blood and humors.

The same incisions he practiced in Rheums which fall upon the Eyes, and used
them as well in the back as the head.

Those that consider the violence and obstinacy of these sorts of distempers,
especially they that are subject to them ought not to wonder if he has gone
about to cure them by means as rigorous and severe; nor is it to be wondered
at, that abundance of these distempers are reckoned now almost incurable, the
aversion or horror for Remedies of that nature, being so much greater than it
formerly was, when they were not acquainted with these gentle methods of
Physics in use now adays.

They made so little scruple of cauterizing or burning any part, that it was
done even where there was no distemper. The Scythian Nomades caused themselves
to be burnt in the Shoulders, the Arms, the Breast, the Thighs, and the Loins,
to render their Bodies and Joints more lusty and strong, and to consume the
superfluous moisture of the Flesh, which made them less able, as they supposed,
to draw their Bows, and to dart their Javelins. They burnt also the Arteries of
the Temples, and behind the Ears, to prevent a See above in the Disease^ of the
third Class.
defluxion upon their Hips, usual amongst them from too much Riding. To these
Scythians we may add the Sarmatians, whose Women, according to Lib. de Acre
aquis, and locis.
Hippocrates, ride on Horseback, use the Bow and Javeling, while they are Maids
go to War, and are not permitted to marry, till they have slain three Enemies,
and sacrificed to their Divinity, according to the custom of their Country;
after they are married, they are exempted from War, except upon urgent
occasions. Their right Breast is burnt in their infancy, with a red hot Iron,
to hinder it from growing, and to transfer the strength entire to the Shoulder
and Arm of the same side. For this reason they were called Amazons, that is to
say, without Breasts. Their History, whether true or false, is to be found more
at large in Justin, Strabo, and others.

Hippocrates used also in a pain of the head, arising according to him from a
Water in the Brain, or between the Skull and the Brain, a Remedy yet more
formidable than the former. He opened the Skull sometimes with an instrument
that carried away a piece of the Bone, which was called (...) or (...), An
instrument for boring.
Trepanning, from the Greek name of the Instrument. This operation was chiefly
invented for fractures of the Skull, to draw out by the hole small pointed
ragged pieces of Bones, which in these cases pricked the membranes of the
Brain, or to evacuate extravasated blood, or purulent matter, which caused
several little symptoms, or to raise the Skull when it was depressed.

If Hippocrates used these sort of Remedies for pains of the Head, or
defluxions upon the Eyes, it is no wonder that he made use of Surgery in
Diseases of more danger. He boldly opened the Breasts of those that were
troubled with an See above in the Cure of Chronical Diseases.
Empyema, when the gentlest Remedies proved insufficient. Fifteen days after he
supposed the Pus to be formed or extravasated in the Breast of those that had a
Pleurisy or Peripneumony, he put them into a warm Bath, and setting them upon
a Stool, shook their Shoulders, and laying his Ear to their Breast, listened if
he heard any noise, and on each side. This noise according to him was of least
danger when on the Left side, and the incision made there with more safety. if
the thickness of the Flesh, and the quantity of the Pus, hinderd him from
hearing the noise, he chose that side on which the inflammation and pain had
been greatest: he made his incision rather behind than before, and as low as he
could: and having first opened the skin between two Ribs with a large Razor,
and afterward taking one more narrow and pointed, he wrapped a Rag or something
about it, so that nothing appeared but the point, so that it appeared only
about the length of the Thumb-nail, and thrust it into that depth. The Pus
being by this means drawn away in sufficient quantity, he stopped the Wound with
a Tent of Linen fastened to a string, and for ten days together drew every day
some Pus. The Pus being almost all drawn out, he syringed the Wound with Wine
and Oil, and let it out about a dozen hours after. When the Pus began to be
clear like Water, and a little thick, he put into the VVound a Tin Pipe, and as
the humor spent itself, he lessened the Pipe, and suffered the Wound by
degrees to heal up.

The same operation he us^d Lib. d^ affectionibus
in a Dropsy in the Belly, making the incision near the Navel or behind near
the Hips, and drawing off the Water contained; but he takes express notice that
but very few are cured this way. In another place he gives this caution, that
this operation ought to be used betimes, before the distemper got too much
ground, and that care ought to be taken not to draw away all the Water at once,
because those that lose all the Pus or Water at a time, infallibly dye.

Lib. de (...) affec^
In a Dropsy of the Breast, after having prepared the Patient as in an Empyema,
he lay^d bare the third Rib, counting from the last; and having bored it with a
sort of Tropanum, he drew off a small quantity of Water, and stopped the Wound
with a Tent of Linum Crudum, and having laid a soft Sponge upon it, he swathed
the part, for fear the Tent should tumble out. For twelve days together he
continued to draw, after that he drew as long as it would run, endeavoring
likewise to dry the Breasts by Medicines, and a particular method of Diet.

In inflammations of the Thighs, Legs, and Scrotum, he orders boldly to (...)
scarrisie the parts, or to prick them in several places (...)
with a sharp Lancet. Hippocrates upon several occasions used the boldest and
most difficult operations of Surgery. He opened the Back to discharge an
abscess of the Kidneys; he drew dead Children out of the Womb, with hooks, or a
hook to which he gave the name of a Claw, beeause it was like the Pounce of a
Bird of Prey. He drew 'em out piecemeals when he could do no otherwise. But he
gave particular proof of his address, in the cure of a distemper which he
called Trichosis, which is, when the hair of the De victratione in acutis. This
place seems to me somewhat hard to be understood. I have endeavored to
translate it word for word. We shall see below the different ways of performing
this operation.
Eyelids turn inwards, which cause prickings, with intolerable pain. He took
a Needle and Thread which he past through the upper and most distended part of
the Eyelids downwards; he past another below the place where the first was,
afterward sowing and tying these two Threads together till the Hairs fell out.
They cut for the Stone likewise in this time, but Hippocrates seems not to
meddle with it himself, that practice being already become a separate business,
as it appears by the Oath he gives his Disciples, that they should not cut for
the Stone, but leave it to those whose particular profession it was.

Hippocrates practiced all other parts of Surgery. He reduced broken or
dislocated Bones very well; The Book entitled, The Physicians Shop, that of
Articulartions, and that of Fractures.
and the instruction contained in his Books upon that subject, are followed to
this day, as well as what regards the knowledge and distinctions of the
different sorts of fractures and dislocations, as in what relates to the proper
Remedies for them. We shall not here particularize his rules upon this subject,
whether concerning the extension which ought to be made before the reduction of
the Bone to its place, or concerning the Instruments necessary to that purpose,
or concerning the manner of bandage and situation of the parts after Reduction.

Nor shall we lay down all that he relates concerning the cure of Wounds and
Ulcers, how to stop the blood by Astringents, Ligature, or Cauterizing of the
largest Vessels, to unite the Lips of a Wound by Sature, or otherwise, and to
consolidate it; how to deterge or cleanse an Ulcer, to dry it, or to cause the
Flesh to grow, and at last to Cicatrize it.

We shall refer this to the Chapter of Celsus, who has given us a complete
system of Surgery, taken in great measure out of Hippocrates, of which we shall
give an extract. We shall only take notice, that the Powders, Olys, and
Ointments which Hippocrates used in Surgery, were not drawn from Herbs only, as
we supposed them to have been in the time of Chiron, Esculapius or his Sons. We
find already in the time of Hippocrates, several sorts of Minerals in use, as
Nitre, Ailom, Verdigriese, Flower of Brass, burnt Copper, Lead, Spodium,
Chalcitis, and others of the like nature.

Besides the great variety of useful Maxims which Hippocrates delivers in
Surgery, we find in his works some particular cases very instructive to a
Surgeon, to caution him not to slight the minutest Wounds. To this end he
relates Epidem. lib. 7.
several instances of persons that died of very slight Wounds in the Forehead,
the Bone of which was a little laid bare; in some others a simple Wound of the
Finger or Foot has caused Convulsions, and been mortal to some; a bruise of the
Finger, and to others a blow of the Hand upon the fore part of the Head given
in play, has proved fatal.

Ibid lib 1.
Others after violent pain in the great Toe, and a few black spots coming
suddenly upon a Tumor of the Heel, have died in two days.

CHAP. XXVI. Opinions and Maxims of Hippocrates, concerning Physic, and
Physicians in general.
De prisca medicina.
ALL Physic has been long since established, and the method and way of
discovering, as they have already done, several excellent things which assist
to discover several others, if the Inquirer be fitted for it; and being
acquainted with the former discoveries, follows the old tract: he that rejects
all that has been done before, and takes another road in his Enquiries, boasts
of finding out of new things, but deceives himself and others with him.

Lex.
Physic is the noblest of all Arts, but the ignorance of those that practice
it, and those that judge rashly of it, make it the least respected. What is
further mischievous to Physicians, is, that it is the only Art, that there is no
other punishment allotted for those that abuse it by evil practice, than shame
or dishonor, of which such sort of men are insensible. They are a sort of
Players that represent the persons that they are not; for there are abundance
of Physicians by profession, but few in reality, whose works justify their
pretenses.

De prisca Medicina.
Physic, like other Arts, has its good and bad Workmen. Aphorism. 1. lib. 1.
The Art is of great extent, life short, opportunity ^lippery, experience
falacious, and judgment difficult. It is not enough that the Physician does his
duty, the Patient and those about him must do theirs, and things about him must
be in convenient order.

Lex.
To arrive at any considerable degree of knowledge in Physic, the following
conditions are nec^ssarily required. First a natural aptness. means of
instruction, study and application from the Youth, a docil and sagacious wit,
diligence, and long observation.

Praeceptiones.
A Physician ought not to be ashamed to inform himself, tho by the meanest
people, of Remedies confirmed by experience. By this means, in my opinion, the
Art of Physic grew up by degrees, that is by amassing and collecting
observations of the several particular cases one by one, which being all put
together, make one entire body.

De art.
Some make it their business to decry others, without gaining any other
advantages themselves, and showing a vain Ostentation of their Learning. In my
opinion there is more wit in inventing and finding out things useful, which is
Physic, and in perfecting what is not yet so, than to lay our selves out in
disingenous discourses, to destroy amongst the ignorant and unexperienced,
those things that have been delivered by men of ability, and established by
experience.

Ibidem.
Those that attack Physic upon pretense, that many dye under the hands of the
Physicians, have generally as much reason to blame the Conduct of the Patient
as of the Physician. As if the latter could not but order amiss, and the former
could never be irregular, which is but too frequent. But why should not they
rather impute the death of the Patient to the incurableness of his distemper,
than the unskilfulness of the Physician that had the care of him.

De ^^ise^ medi^ina.
Not that Physicians never are in fault; those that are least so, ought to be
least esteemed so, but it is hard to find one so judicious as is requisite.

Epidem. lib. 6.
The ablest Physicians sometimes are deceived by cases like one another.

Lib de flatibus.
Obscure and doubtful distempers are judg^d more by conjecture than Art, tho in
this case those that have experience are preferrable to those that have not.

De victus ratione in acutis.
One Physician often approves what another does not. This exposes their Art to
the calumny of the people, who therefore imagining it to be altogether vain,
compare it to that of the Augurs, of whom one says of the same Bird, that if it
appears on the Left side it is a good omen, if on the Right a bad one, and
others the quite contrary.

Praeceptiones.
We ought never to warrant the success of a Medicine, for the minutest
circumstances cause the distemper to vary, and make 'em sometimes more tedious
and dangerous than we expected.

Lib de art
The end of Physic is absolutely to cure Diseases, or at least to abate their
violence; but those that are desperate, ought never to be undertaken, that is,
where the distemper is of it self incurable, or become so by the total
destruction of the Organs; for Physic reaches not so far.

Lib. de decenti habitu.
A Physician ought to visit his Patients frequently, and to be very attentive to
every thing.

Lib de medico.
It Is requisite for the credit of a Physician, that he should have a healthy
look, and a good complexion; for men are apt to suspect, that he that has not
his own health, can scarce be instrumental to procure it to another in the same
case.

Ibid and de decent habitu.
A Physician ought to be decent in his habit, grave in his manners, moderate in
all his actions, chaste and modest in the conversation he is oblig^d to have
with Women; no loiterer, ready to answer every body with candor; sober,
patient, ready to do his duty without disturbing himself.

^^^^ceptiones.
It Is no dishonor to a Physician, when he is in doubt about the method of
treating his Patient in any case, to call in other Physicians, and to consult
with them, what is to be done to the benefit of the Patient.

Ibidem.
In point of Fees, a Physician ought to be honest, and good natured, and to have
a regard to the ability of the Patient. On some occasions he ought neither to
ask nor expect a Fee, especially if the Patient be a poor man, or a stranger,
whom he is obliged to relieve.

There are other occasions wherein the Physician may agree with his Patient
before hand for his reward, that the Patient may with more confidence commit
himself to his care, and be assur^d that he will not desert him.

D^prisca medicina.
Those that thought Physic an invention, that deserved to be attributed to the
Gods, have not only followed the common opinion, but in my mind right reason
also.

This is what Hippocrates says of Physic in general. From whence we may draw
two inferences of importance to our History. First, That there were a great
number of Physicians in his time, although but few good ones. Secondly, That
the use of Consultations was also then established. And lastly, That Physic
was even then expos^d to detraction and calumny, as well as since.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Writings of Hippocrates.
COncerning the Writings of this Ancient Physician, there are three things
chiefly to be observed. First, The esteem they have always met with. Secondly,
The distinction between those Writings which are legitimate, and those that are
supposititious. Thirdly, His Language and Style. In the first place the
Writings of Hippocrates have been always had in particular veneration. Galen
says, that what Hippocrates has delivered has always been esteemed as the word
of a God, and assures us, that if what he writ be a little obscure through his
brevity, or if he seems in certain places to have omitted some little things,
he has nevertheless written nothing which was not very much to the purpose. The
Works of Hippocrates, says Suidas, are very well known to all that study
Physic; we have such a respect for them, that they think what he has said, to
come out of a Divine Mouth, and not a Human.

A plain mark of the esteem that all Ages have had for the Writings of
Hippocrates is, that there is scarce any Author who has had so many
Commentators. Amongst the most Ancient of them, Galen speaks of one
Asclepiades, Rufus Ephesius, Sabinus, Metrodorus, Satyrus, Heraclides,
Tarentinus, Heraclides Erythraeus, and one Zeuxis, to whom we may add Galen
himself, and Celsus, who have often translated him word for word.

We shall mention another party of these Authors in the sequel. He has had
undoubtedly several others among the Ancients, without reckoning those that
explained his obscure words, as we shall see by and by And the number of the
Moderns is greater, as we shall show in its proper place.

To come to the distinction of the true Writings of Hippocrates from the
spurious, we shall begin with a List given by Erotian.

This Author, who lived under Nero, distinguishing the Books of Hippocrates, or
those which past for such in his time, according to the subject of which they
treated, ennumerates the following. The Books, says he, which relates to the
Doctrine of signs, are the Book called the Prognostic, two Books of
Predictions, (which two latter are not Hippocrates 's, as we shall show
hereafter,) and the Book of the Humors. The Books which relate to Physic, and
which are the most rational, are the Book of the winds, of the Nature of Man,
of the Epilepsie, of the Nature of Children, of times and seasons. The Books
concerning the manner of treating distempers, are the Book of fractures, of the
articulations, of ulcers, of wounds, and darts of wounds, of the head, of the
Physicians repository, that called Mochlicus of the Emeroides and Fistula's, of
diet, two of diseases, of Ptisan, of the laces or parts in man, two Books of
Women's distempers, one of barren Women, one of Nourishment, and one of Waters.
The Aphorisms and six Books of Epidemick diseases, treat of mixed matters. Those
which follow concern the Art in general; the Book entitled the Oath, that
called the Law, and that of the Ancient Physic. As for his Ambassadors Speech
and the Speech at the Altar, they serve only to prove the kindness of
Hippocrates to his Country, but concern not Physic at all. Galen speaks of one
Artemidorus Capito, and one Dioscorides, both of Alexandria, who collected and
published the works of Hippocrates together.

He adds, that this Edition had the approbation of the Emperor Adrian, under
whom they liv^d, and who had a great affection for Physic. However, Gal^z
taxes them with taking too much liberty, and changing several words of the
Text, which they did not understand. We don't certainly know whether the
Catalogue of the Books of Hippocrates, published by these Authors, were greater
than that which Erotian gives us, but it is probable it was, since Galen, who
followed them very near, mentions several Books of Hippocrates's, or that past
for his, whose names are not met with in Erotian^s Catalogue.

T^ese Books are, that of Affections and other of internal Affections, and two
others of Diseases Besides those mentioned by Erotian. Galen speaks also of an
Addition to the Book called Mochlicus, which is the Book we now have of the
nature of the Bones. He saw likewise the Title of the Book of the Glands, which
past for Hippocrates's, though Galen thought it spurious. He acknowledged
likewise the Book, entitled, Tht Seven Months Birth, the following, which is,
of the Eighth Months Birth, being but a part of the former. Galen seems also to
speak of several Books of Diet, whereas Erotian quotes but one. And although
that he believed not that the prenotions of Cos were Hippocrates's, it is
apparent that they passed commonly for such in his time, and that the seventh
Book of Epidemick diseases, was likewise generally received, tho Galen looked
upon it as manifestly spurious.

Suidas, the latest Greek Author, speaks this of the books of Hippocrates, at
the end of the passage before cited. The first, says he, of the books of
Hippocrates contains the Oath, the second his Predictions, the third the
Aphorisms, a work above human capacity. The fourth contains that admirable
collection which goes by the name of Hexecontabiblos, that is to say,
consisting of sixty Books, which contain all the rest that relates to Physic
and Philosophy.

We have yet remaining as many as Suidas reckons, those whose Titles are found
neither in Erotian, nor that I know of in Galen, are the following. The Book of
the Nature of a Woman, of what relates to Virgins, of the Seed, of the flesh,
of Superfaetation, of the time of Childrens breeding of teeth, of the Heart, of
the Sight, of the Eye, of Anatomy, of the manner of drawing dead Children out
of the womb, of the Physician, of decent habit, and of Precepts.

We find at the end of the Collection of Hippocrates's works certain pieces
under the name of (...).
strange pieces. These consist of Letters, supposed to have been sent or
received by Hippocrates, or written upon his account, of an Act of the Senate
of the Athenians in his favor; two discourses mentioned by Erotian by the name
of the Speech of the Embassy, or Deputation, and of the Speech before the
Altar, of which the first is attributed to Thessalus, the Son of Hippocrates,
the sccond to Hippocrates himself; of his Life and Genealogy written by
Soranus, of a little book of Purgers, and another of the manner of giving
Hellebore.

We shall not trouble the Reader with all the Critics have said concerning the
distinction of the true Writings of Hippocrates from the counterfeit, or
supposititious. We shall only take notice that several were already suspected
in the time of Galen, and Erotian himself, amongst those which they give us the
list of. Some of these Books have been ascribed to the Sons of Hippocrates;
others to his Son-in-Law, or to his Grandsons, or to his Disciples, or to his
Predecessors, as the book of Articulations, and of Fractures, which some have
thought to have been writ by his Grandfather, who was of the same name, tho
others have maintained that this first Hippocrates wrote nothing. They have
likewise ascribed them to other Physicians, who lived either before, or at the
same time with him, and to the Philosophers, as Democritus, who is supposed to
be Author of the book of the nature of man. Galen, with abundance of reason,
imputes this fathering of Books and Titles, so frequent among the Ancients, to
the Covetousness of the first Copyers, and he tells us that the considerable
sums, which the Kings Attalus and Ptolomy, who vied who should have the finest
Library, gave to those that brought them the writings of great men, gave
occasion to this falsifying of Names and Authors, and to the confusion we find
in the disposition of ancient works.

As we have said we shall not amuse ourselves with the judgment of the
Critics. Those that have a mind may consult Mercurialis, who has written
particularly upon that subject.

It will be of use however to take notice that to those suppositions which we
have spoken of must be attributed the contradictions found in some of the
opinions of Hippocrates, some being directly opposite to others.

In the second place we observe that See the Chapter of the signs of Diseases.
these books of Hippocrates which are of the best reasoning are the most
suspected.

We must further take notice, that those pieces before called Strange, which
are annexed to the works of Hippocrates, are most part of them, and perhaps all
of them spurious, as we shall show more particularly in the following Chapter.

As for the Style and Language of Hippocrates, which is the third thing to be
examined, we must not wonder that Capito and Dioscorides did not always
understand Hippocrates, tho they were native Greeks. Erotian, who lived under
Nero, had composed a Glossary, that is, a Dictionary of the Obscure and
Obsolete words used by him, or ^at least of those which had not been of a long
time in use in the Greek tongue.

By this Glossary, which is yet extant, we are informed that several Authors
had employed themselves upon the same subject before him, amongst which he
names the following Xenocritus, a Grammarian, who he says was the first that
wrote upon that subject: Callimachus, disciple of Herophilus; Bacchius;
Philinus an Empirick; Apollonius Cittiaeus; Apollonius Ophis; Dioscorides
Phocas, or rather Phacas; Glaucius another Empirick; Lysimachus of Cos;
Euphorion; Aristarchus (this was in all probability the famous Grammarian)
Aristocles; Aristopeas; Antigonus and Dydymus; both of Alexandria, the later
also a Grammarian; Epicles* Lycus Neapolitanus; Strato; and Mnestheus. To these
we ought also to add Galen, whose Glossary is yet remaining.

We have See the Chapter of the Anatomy of Hippocrates at the beginning.
already observed that the Style of Hippocrates is very concise, which makes it
frequently difficult to understand him. To this may be added, that it is
otherwise very grave, and Erotian observes (...).
, that the Phrase of Hippocrates is the same with Homer ^s.

His language seems to be properly Ionique; and Aelian pretends, as we have
seen See Book the Chapter of Democritus.
before, that Hippocrates used this Dialect, in Favor of Democritus; whereas
being himself of Cos, his Dialect should have been the Dorick. But Galen
observes In lib. Hippocrat. de fractur. Comment. 1.
, that the language of Hippocrates inclines somewhat toward the Attick; and he
adds that some have said that he writ in old Attick.

Be it how it will, it appears that there was a considerable change in the
Greek Tongue, during the space of four hundred years, which might have elapsed
between Hippocrates and the first that wrote a Gloss upon him, by the
difficulty these Authors met with, although they were Greeks as well as himself,
to understand what he meant by such and such a word. We have already seen an
example of this kind in the word See the Chapter of the purging of the Brain.
Tetragonon, which some took for a drug, others for an instrument, proper to
purge the Head. For other words of this nature, Erotian and Galen may be
consulted

But it is further remarkable, that besides the obscurity which comes from the
difficulty of the words in Hippocrates, there is another which comes from the
faults crept into, and the different reading found in the Original Manuscripts
of this Author, in which the works of Hippocrates shared the common fate of all
the ancient pieces that past through abundance of hands.

We shall bring only one instance of the Variation before spoken of, and we
shall find one word which is not explained in any of the Glossaries, nor by any
of the Lexicographers, or Dictionary writers. We read in the second book of his
Epidemick Diseases, toward the end, the following words, (...). Fabius Calvus,
a Physician of Ravenna, who first translated Hippocrates into Latin, from a
Greek Manuscript of the Vatican, by the order of Clement the seventh,
translates this passage as if he had read (...), meretrix, a Whore, instead of
(...), scortatio, fornication; and taking the following word for the name of a
woman, he translates the whole passage thus, Meretrix Achromos Dysenteriae
Medela, as if there had been in Hippocrates's time a Courtezan named Achromos,
that cured the Dysentery.

Cornarius and Foesius, more Modern interpreters of Hippocrates, Translate the
same passage thus, Scortatio impudens vel turpis Dysenteriae Medela. Tetrabibl.
Sermon. 3. Cap. 8.
Aetius and Lib. 1. c. 35.
Paulus Aegineta affirm, that Coition sometimes cures old Diarrhaea's, and
perhaps they allude to this passage. Supposing then we ought to read with
Cornarius and Foesius, (...) and not (...), as perhaps we ought, the difficulty
will rest only upon the word We might, if it were wor^^ the while, derive it
from (...) usque and (...) humerus, or if we write it with a (...), not with a
(...), from (...), summus elatus, sublimis; as if Hippocrates meant
Scortationem, qua and ipsi humeri sublimes fiunt, id est, quae ad ex-, tremum
usque ut cu^n Satyrico loquamur, anhelatur; and (...) proprium sit verburn
(...), vei sine aspiratione (...), summis humeris luctet, ait idem
Hipprocrates, de alia lucta loquens. Lib. de intern. affect. Edit. Foes p. 549.
dum de lienis morbo.
(...) which, as we said before, is not be found in the Dictionaries.

Those that take what Hippocrates here says for his advice, do him wrong, it is
a simple note of fact which happened to some person in that case.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Letters of Hippocrates, and other pieces annexed to his
works, wherein are diverse circumstances touching his Life and death, and the
chief occasions he had to show himself in the exercise of his profession.
AFter having spoken of the Writings of Hippocrates in general, we ought to
examine those pieces which are tackt to them, and which, as we have said, appear
under the title of Aliens. We have already seen wherein they have consisted,
and shall begin with the two discourses mentioned by Erotian, as being the most
Ancient. That which Hippocrates spoke at the Altar of Minerva, is addressed to
the Communities and Cities of Thessaly, to whom he complains, that the
Athenians had a design to reduce the Isle of Cos to their subjection, and prays
their succor in that pressing danger. His discourse is very short. That of
Thessalus on the other side is very long. It is addressed to the Athenians, and
puts them in mind of the services they had received from the Predecessors of
Hippocrates for a long time, and likewise from Hippocrates himself, and from
his Family. The obligation which the Athenians are suppos^d to have had to
these later, were first, that the Father refused to go to the Illyrians and
Paeons, who had desired him and offered him great sums to come and free them
from the Plague, which Ravaged their Countries; and having foreseen by the
Course of Winds, that this disease would reach Greece, he sent his Sons, his
Son-in-law, and his Scholars through all the Provinces, to give them necessary
instructions to prevent taking the infection and went himself into Thessaly,
and a little time after to Athens, where he did them great service, which the
Athenians so far acknowledged, that they presented Hippocrates with a Crown of
Gold, and initiated him and his Son, who speaks in the Mysteries of Ceres and
Proserpine.

He remonstrates to the Athenians, that they were further obliged to
Hippocrates, and to Thessalus himself, in that this latter by the command of
his Father, followed the Fleet of Alcibiades into Sicily, in quality of
Physician, making all necessary preparations for the Voyage at his own charges,
and refusing the Salary that was offered him.

These are the Principal Articles by which Thessalus endeavors to make the
Athenians sensible how much they were obliged to his Family. We shall examine
only that of the Plague, which Hippocrates foresaw coming upon Greece, in which
there is this difficulty. First, the time is not fixed, and we find nothing in
other Authors concerning any Plague coming from the side of Illyria.

Aetius indeed takes notice that Hippocrates being at Athens at the time of a
Plague, advised them to light great Fires in the Streets to purify the Air,
and make it more dry. Galen also reports the same of Hippocrates upon the like
occasions, saying, that he ordered great Fires to be made in diverse parts of
every City in Greece, in which they were to cast Flowers, Herbs and Drugs of
sweet scent. But herein there is this Essential difference, that he brings the
Plague which he speaks of from Ethiopia, indicating thereby the great Plague so
well described by Thucidides, which he says precisely came from the same part.
But Ethiopia is directly opposite to Illyria, one being on the South of Greece,
and the other on the North.

It may perhaps be alleged, that there might be a mistake in the place from
whence the Plague came, the thing yet being the same in fact. But if we will
have this Harangue of Thessalus to speak of the great Plague of Athens, two
great difficulties will arise upon it. The first is, that the Author last
cited, who deserves to be credited, takes notice that the Plague was so
furious, especially at Athens, that there was no great reason to brag of the
Assistance of Physic. On the contrary, he assures us, that the Physicians
themselves were puzzled, and they died indifferently with a Physician or
without, that the Physicians themselves died faster than others, as conversing
more with the Sick In this case I do not see what honor Hippocrates should
gain.

The second difficulty is that, if Hippocrates were at Athens at that time he
must be born long before the Eightieth Olympiad, which is the time of his Birth
according to Soranus, by which account he must be but thirty year old, in the
second year of the Peloponessian War, and of the Eighty seventh Olympiad the
time of that Plague, and consequently he could not have Sons old enough to
practice Physics, and a Daughter married to a Physician his Scholar.

To come nearer to the matter, we must follow the account of Eusebius, who says
that Hippocrates flourished in the eighty sixth Olympiad; or of Aulus Gellius,
who ranks him with Sophocles, Euripides, and Democritus; who, according to him,
were a little older than Socrates. All Authors agree, that Socrates was born
about the end of the seventy seventh Olympiad. Democritus was but a year older,
but Euripides was born the seventy fifth Olympiad, and Sophocles the seventy
third Olympiad. We ought therefore to make Hippocrates at least as old as the
Tragic Poet, that what is said of him concerning the Plague of Athens may be
true; for by this account he would be fifty years old, and consequently it was
not impossible for him to have Sons that practiced Physic. But it is more
likely, that what Aetius and Galen, or the Author of the book concerning the
Theriaca, which is amongst his Works, deliver, is false; and that they impute
to Hippocrates, what See above Book. 2. p. 225.
Plutarch, with more appearance of truth, ascribes to Acron, who lived long
before Hippocrates If there were any other Plague which came from the side of
Illyria, we know nothing of it.

However it were, the Decree of the Senate of Athens, another piece of the same
nature of the former, but more recent, speaks of a Plague which came into
Greece, out of the Barbarous Countries, wherein Hippocrates and his Scholars
did very great service; and it is added therein, that the King of Persia
sending for him into his Dominions, which were infected with the same disease,
and promising to load him with Honors and Riches; he despised his offers, and
refused to go, looking upon him as Barbarian and an enemy to Greece, whereupon
the Athenians in recompense of the useful advice he had given them, and of his
Affection for Greece in general, honored him with an initiation in the grand
Mysteries as they had done Hercules before, gave him a Crown weighing a
thousand pieces of gold, the freedom of Athens, and the right of being
maintained all his life at the public expense in the Prytaneum, granting
further to all the youth of the Isle of Cos the liberty of coming to Athens,
and being brought up and instructed with the youth of that City.

This was the purport of the decree of the Senate of Athens. What relates to
the measures taken to invite Hippocrates into Persia, is supposed by the
testimony of diverse letters, which are pretended to be written upon that
subject by the Ministers of Artaxerxes King of Persia, to inform him of the
great reputation of Hippocrates, and to advise him to send for him, and by
Artaxerxes himself, in pursuance of this counsel, or by Hippocrates, who
answers haughtily to all the promises that are made him, that he has in his own
Country whereupon to live, that he was not allowed to possess the riches and
grandeur of the Persians, nor to cure Barbarians that were enemies to Greece.
There are also other letters expressing Artaxerxes his resentments of
Hippocrates's conduct, and terrible menaces to the Inhabitants of the Isle of
Cos, in case they refused to send Hippocrates to him to be chastized; and the
answer of those generous Islanders, who were not at all frighted at them,
protested they would not deliver up their Citizen whatever might happen.

What makes the credit of these letters still more to be suspected is, that
Thessalus when in his speech he upbraids the Athenians with the obligations the
Greeks had to his father, would undoubtedly not have failed to have turned
these letters to his honor, if there had been any truth in them. But allowing
some show of truth to those pieces which we have here examined, we must not
pass the same judgment upon the other letters, supposed to be written or
received by Hippocrates or others upon his account. They are certainly the work
of some half-learned Greek, composed out of wantonness, or out of design to get
money. Some of these, to whom Hippocrates writ were Philopaemen, Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, Cratevas, Damagetas, King Demetrius, and King Perdiccas, without
reckoning Democritus and Phessalus the son of Hippocrates. As for Philopaemen,
'twould be hard to think that he meant the famous General of Achaia, because he
was not born till about a hundred years after the death of Hippocrates. Much
less can we think that the Dionysius he has spoken of, was the famous Historian
of Halicarnassus, who lived under Augustus. But to what King Demetrius could
Hippocrates write, since in his time there was none such in the world. The
first of the name being Demetrius Poliorcetes the son of Antigonus, one of the
successors of Alexander, whom Hippocrates could no more have seen, than the
former. The same may be said of Cratevas, who lived at the soonest but in the
age of Mithridates, and Pompey, as we shall see hereafter. The Author of these
letters having heard of a famous Botanist of that name, or having seen his
works, thought he might very well make Hippocrates write to him without
informing himself whether he or Demetrius, or the rest aforegoing, lived in his
time or no. We find another ridiculous Anachronism at the head of Marcellus
Empiricus his book, supposed to be directed to Maecaenas by the same
Hippocrates. But though we had not these convincing proofs of the spuriousness
of these letters, we need only read them to be satisfied they were not
Hippocrates's. And I think a learned modern Physician too modest when he says,
Vix divino sine dignas Epistolas. Rhodius in Scribon. larg.
that they scarce deserve to pass for the productions of the (e) divine old
man. We may very boldly pronounce them scandalously unworthy. For example, what
could be more impertinent than the order that Hippocrates gives to Cratevas, to
gather him all the herbs he could find, without specifying any one, (c) This
Title was commonly given to Hippocrates, as we shall see below.
to send them to him, because he is sent for to take care of Democritus. Add to
this the Sentence which he subjoyns, that it were to be wished that Cratevas
could as easily pluck up the bitter roots of covetonsness of money or avarice,
so that they should never shoot up again, as he could pluck up the roots of the
herbs he desired of him. Had Hippocrates been as great a babbler in his medical
writings as he is in these letters, we should have had no occasion to complain
of his brevity. The letter directed to Dionysius is yet more merry than
the other. He desires him to come to his house while he should be with
Democritus. (For all the letters run upon this voyage, of which it seems he was
to inform the whole world before hand) and to have an eye over the conduct of
his wife, That she play no pranks in his absence.
she has been very well brought up, by her father, says he, but the Sex is
frail, and had need be kept within their duties, in which a friend may succeed
better than relations, etc. We'll content our selves with these two samples, by
which the reader may judge, how they agree with the gravity of Hippocrates.

As to the letters which Democritus and Hippocrates wrote one to another, there
are two of the former; in one he speaks of the voyage that Hippocrates made to
see him, and to give him Hellebore, having been called to that purpose by
Democritus his fellow Citizens, who took him for a mad man, because he lived in
a solitary place and laughed, and did not mind those that came to see him. You
found me, says Democritus, writing of the order of the World, of the
disposition of the Poles, and the course of the stars, and you judged thereby,
that those that sent for you were fools, and not I. Thereupon Democritus
delivers in two words his opinion in Philosophy, concerning the Images or
Species diffused through the air, of which his books as he says makes mention. He
tells Hippocrates afterward, that a Physician ought not to judge of his Patient
by the aspect only, for in that case he (Democritus) should have run the risque
of passing for a mad man in his judgment. He concludes with telling Hippocrates
that he had sent him back the book which this Physician had written concerning
madness, which book is immediately annexed after this letter. It consists but
of one page, which is nothing but a repetition of some lines of Hippocrates's
book of the falling sickness, which is likewise cited in this.

The second letter, or the second book of Democritus addressed to Hippocrates,
is entitled of the nature of man, which is the title of a book written by
Hippocrates, which has been ascribed to Democritus, as we have already
observed. This book or letter is very near twice as long as the former. It
contains an enumeration of the principal parts of the body, and the offices
they perform. There is nothing in it that deserves our observation, except what
he says of the Spleen, that it sleeps, and is good for nothing, which opinion
we shall see confirm^d See the Chapter of Aristotle and that of Eratistratus.
hereafter.

There is but one letter of Hippocrates to Democritus now extant, which is much
shorter than the two abovementioned. In the beginning of it he tells him, that
if the Physicians at any time succeeded in this art, the people ascribed it to
the Gods, but if they miscarried, they used to lay the blame upon them. I have,
says Hippocrates, got more scandal than honor by my practice, and though I am
advanced in years, yet I have not attained to perfection in this art, and even
Aesculapius himself, the inventer of it, never carried it so far. After this he
takes occasion briefly to mention his journey to Democritus, testifies for him
that he is far from being mad, and desires him to write to him often, and to
send him the books he had composed.

The letters of Hippocrates to Damagetus give a more particular account of his
conversation with Democritus, when he went to cure him, one of them is very
long, in it he gives Damagetus an account of his voyage, and all that happened
to him till his return. We have already seen in the preceding book the
occasion of this journey, and the success of it. I shall say no more of it for
fear of being thought too prolix; only give me leave to remark that these
letters have nothing of the style of Hippocrates. It may be easily imagined
that the pretended madness of Democritus, and the journey with Hippocrates
undertook with a design to cure him, afforded matter enough to make a sort of a
Romance. To conclude, I don't know who this Damagetus was.

The letter to King Perdiccas is of the same stamp with the rest, that is to
say, equally spurious. We there find, as well as in that which is addressed to
King Demetrius, some Anatomical observations, and some maxims relating to
Physic, which however don't deserve to be taken notice of, except a few that
are drawn out of the writings of Hippocrates.

The small book of Purgatives contains some necessary precautions to be
observed in the taking of them. It seems more probable that it is a collection
of precepts given by Hippocrates upon this subject, than a genuine work of that
ancient Physician.

The life of Hippocrates written by Soranus, contains besides what has been
said in the beginning of this book, an account of his country, his extraction,
the time of his birth, his studies, and his masters: in short, an abridgment of
the most remarkable things that happened to him in the course of his
profession, till his death. Hippocrates, says Soranus, having lost his father
and mother, quitted his own country, and fixed in Thessaly.

We shall hereafter speak of this Physician.
Andreas in his book of the Original of Physic, maliciously reports, that the
reason of it was, because he had set the Library at Cnidus on fire. Others
write, that the occasion of this journey was to learn the practice of other
places, and to furnish himself with an opportunity of understanding his
profession better, by the different cases that daily came before him. But
Soranus of Cos pretends that Hippocrates was influenced by a dream to make his
abode in Thessaly.

He made himself, continued this Author, to be admired by all Greece through
which he traveled and practiced Physic. One day amongst the rest being
called, conjointly with Euriphon another Physician, but older than himself, to
a consultation about Perdiccas son to Alexander King of Macedonia, whom they
gave out to be sick of a hectic fever, he soon found out that this Prince's
mind was more indisposed than his body, and as he carefully watched all his
actions, observing that he changed color at the sight of Phila, Mistress to
the King his father, he judged that he was in love with her, and found the
means to cure him, by letting this fair one know the dangerous effects of her
beauty. He was also desired by the people of Abdera to come and cure Democritus
of his madness, and to free their City from the plague. After this Soranus
informs us, how he refused to come to the Illyrians, and even to the Court of
Artaxerxes, where this latter sickness raged; how he hindered the war which the
Athenians were going to make upon the Inhabitants of Cos, by calling the
Thessalians to their relief, and what honors he received from the Athenians
themselves, the Thessalians, and all the Country of Greece. He likewise
testifies that Hippocrates instructed his disciples in his art, without
concealing any thing from them, and that he obliged them to take a certain We
shall speak of this Oath in the following Chapter.
Oath.

Hippocrates, as we said in Soranus, died at Larissa, a City of Thessaly, at
the same time with Democritus, being fourscore and ten years old, or fourscore
and five, or a hundred and four, or according to others, a hundred and nine. He
was buried between Gyrton and Larissa, and his sepulcher is shown to this very
day, where a swarm of bees has fixed for a long time, the honey whereof Nurses
come to fetch to cure their children of the Thrush. He is drawn in several
pictures, having his head covered with a bonnet, like that of Ulysses, which is
a mark of nobility, or else with his cloak, for which some assign this reason,
that it was to hide his bald head, others that his head was tender, or else to
show that this part, which is the seat of the soul, ought to be well guarded,
or to show that Hippocrates loved traveling (for it was only upon this
occasion and in that of war, or in case of sickness, that the ancients had
their heads covered) or to signify the obscurity of his writing, or to
instruct us that even in time of health, we ought to avoid whatever may hurt
us. In short, others believe that the reason why he threw his cloak about his
head, was that it might not hinder him in his business. There are great
disputes about his genuine works, for Authors differ about them, and indeed it
is a hard matter to say any thing certain of them upon several accounts. First
there is a great deal of difficulty in the words he uses. Secondly in his
Phrase or sense, for that is a thing that changes, and we write after another
manner when we are young, from what we do in our old age. Soranus concludes
with saying that Hippocrates did not love money, that his behavior was grave
and courteous, that he had a particular affection for the Greeks, of which he
gave evident proofs in freeing whole Cities from the plague, for which services
he had all the respect imaginable shown him. He adds, that Hippocrates left two
Sons, Thessalus and Draco, who were likewise very famous in the same
profession, and a great number of disciples.

CHAP XXIX. Some other particulars about the travels of Hippocrates, his
personal qualities, the commendations bestowed upon him, and what has been said
against him.
WE have already seen that Hippocrates quitted the place of his nativity, to
reside in Thessaly. The Author of his life affirms, that he visited most parts
of Greece, and followed his profession where e^re he came. It appears by his
writings that his chief abode was in Thessaly and in Thrace, and we find that
almost all the observations he has left us in his Books of Epidemical
distempers, were made in these two Provinces, the principal Cities whereof he
names, as Larissa, Cranon, Aenus, Oeniades Pherae, Elis, Perinthus, Thasus,
Abdera, Olynthus. In Libr. Hippocr. de articul. Comment.
Galen remarks likewise that he had been often at Smyrna, but tells us it was a
different City from that in Asia minor, that carries the same name, Variae
Lectiones Lib. 2. Cap. 18.
Mercurialis was of the opinion that he traveled into Scythia, Lybia, and
Delos, (by which Hippocrates means, according to Erotian, the three parts of
the world known in his time, the first being taken for Europe, the second for
Afric, and the third for Asia) because he speaks of these Countries in two
places of his works; but this conclusion is not justly drawn.

Hippocrates had occasion without doubt to see several Cities whereof he makes
mention, being sent for thither to visit the sick, as we have observed already
of the people of Abdera, who desired him to come and cure Democritus their
Citizen.

These Cities for the most part were but very small, properly speaking they
were but so many Towns, so that one of them was not sufficient to maintain a
Physician. In libr. de articul. C^mment.
Galen seems to insinuate this when speaking of a certain case in Surgery
which Hippocrates had not described or never seen, but which he tells us
himself had seen five times, once in Asia, and four times in Rome, he
acknowledges that perhaps he might never have met with such opportunities if
he had not lived in great Cities, such as Rome, one quarter of which alone
contains more inhabitants than the greatest of those cities, which Hippocrates
had ever seen.

In all probability Hippocrates alludes to this necessity that the Physicians
of his time lay under to travel up and down, either for maintenance, or to
find occasions to exercise their art, when he tells us in the little Book,
entitled Law, of which we have already made mention, that a (...).
Physician who will acquire all the qualities that he reckons, or be in such a
condition as he describes, must go from City to City and support the reputation
of his profession by his works as well as his words.

To come now to the Elogiums which antiquity bestowed upon him in a superlative
manner, he has not only passed by almost universal consent for the Prince of
Physicians, but his opinions were respected as Oracles, and we have already
observed what a particular esteem they paid to his writings. He has shared with
Plato the title of Divine, nay, he has this advantage over that Philosopher
that he was called the divine old man, by way of excellence, and without naming
his name, whereas they used to say the Divine Plato.

But lest it should be thought that Physicians were the only persons that had
him in such veneration, Seneca calls him the greatest of Physicians, and the
Author of Physic. Pliny likewise terms him the Father of all physic, and what
makes more for the honor of Hippocrates, his authority alone suffices, in the
As we have already shown.
Law, to decide several difficult, and important questions. Macrobius goes
farther than the rest, where he says that Hippocrates could neither deceive
another, nor be deceived himself. But we must here remark, that this celebrated
Physician was far from having any such good opinion of himself; he makes no
scruple to own his faults. He openly said that See the general Maxims of
Hippocrates.
a man ought to understand Physic so well, as to make as few mistakes as
possible; concluding, that in this profession he is most to be be commended,
who commits the fewest errors; which supposes that no man is exempt from them.
Celsus and Plutarch observe that Hippocrates has somewhere owned, that he was
once mistaken in probing a wound in the head through the sutures of the scull,
which had made him believe that the bone was broke. And Nam and Hippocrates
clarus art medicinae videtur honestissime fecisse, qui quosdam errores suos,
ne posteri errarent, confessus est.
Quintilian commends him upon the score of this very same ingenuity. Neither do
we find that he was afraid to cite examples of such patients as dyed under his
hand: Of two and forty sick men, whose distempers he describes in the first and
third Book of Epidem. Diseases, only seventeen escaped, all the rest dyed. For
this reason we may believe him when he tells us (in the second book of the
abovementioned Treatise) as he takes occasion to speak of a certain sort of
Quinsie that was accompanied with ill symptoms, that all the persons he ever
saw sick of it, recovered again. If they had dyed, continues he, I should have
certainly told it.

We may discover by this the character of an honest man, and indeed it is
visible in all the maxims which we have already cited, as likewise in those
comprehended in the Oath, See in the following Book the Chapter of the
Disciples of Hippocrates.
which he demanded of Disciples, the substance whereof is as follows, that a
Physician is obliged to honor the person who teaches him this art as his own
natural father, to let him participate of all that lies in his power in
relation to the necessaries of life, to respect his children, or his posterity
like his own brothers, and to teach them Physic in his turn if they have a
design that way, without asking any gratuity, to communicate to them all that
he knows in the same faculty, as well as to his own children, and to all such
as will bind themselves by this Oath, but not to others; to order his patients
such a This comprehends all that a Physician is to do for his patient. See the
Chapter of Diet.
regimen as he shall judge most convenient for them, and to the utmost of his
power hinder them from any thing that may hurt them, never to give poison to
any one, or advise others to do it; not to give women remedies to procure
abortions, but to follow his profession like an honest man; not to cut any one
for the Stone in the bladder, but leave the operation to those that make it
their profession; that whatever house he comes into, he shall only do it with a
design to cure the sick, and behave himself so that they shall not have any
matter of suspicion against him, or be able to accuse him of doing the least
injury to any one whatever, particularly of having abused any wife or woman, or
young man, whether free or slave: in short, that he will take care to keep
secret, and to conceal whatever he sees or hears while he is concerned, or
otherwise when he shall judge that it is a thing which ought to be published.
The conclusion is, that he wishes all manner of prosperity to him in this
practice, if he kee^s his Oath religiously, and quite the contrary if he is
perjured. The person that takes this Oath swears by See for this Lib. 1.
Apollo the Physician by Aesculapius, by Hygia, by Panacaea, and by all the
other Gods and Goddesses.

Hippocrates has been reproached with violating this oath himself, as to that
which relates to the procuring of abortions. We have spoken of this case
already, but the book from whence this story is borrowed is said to have been
written by Polybus. I don't know how to excuse this fact any other way.

This is not the only accusation that has been urged against Hippocrates. Some
have charged him, with setting the Library at Cnidus on fire. It has been
likewise pretended, to decry his reputation, that he Plin. Lib. 29. Cap. 1. See
Book 1. above.
prescribed no remedies but such as he copied out of Esculapius's Temple in the
Isle of Cos, making them pass for his own; which he was the easier able to do,
since the Temple was burnt down soon after he had committed this piece of
Plagiarism.

It Is true indeed that Hippocrates orders those that are troubled with a
Peripneumony, to take See the Chapter of the Cure of Diseases in the third Book.
Pine Apples and Honey, which is the very same remedy that Esculapius
prescribes in this case, as we have seen already. It Is likewise certain that
Hippocrates advised ptysical people to eat fat and salted meats, as Esculapius
counsels them to eat Bacon. But after all, if Hippocrates was lineally
descended from this God, he might easily enough come to the knowledge of these
remedies, either by tradition from his Ancestors the Asclepiadae, who were all
Physicians, without being obliged to copy them in the Temples of Aesculapius.

Among the things that have been said against Hippocrates, we don't comprehend
what the Physicians of following ages have urged to confute his opinions, or to
destroy the credit of his method. All which we shall examine, as occasion
presents it self.

CHAP. XXX. Of Phaeon, Euryphon, Philistion, Ariston, Pythocles, Philetas,
Acumenus, Aegimius, Physicians contemporary with Hippocrates.
It Is not to be questioned but that there were several Physicians in the time
of Hippocrates. The number of Physicians, or at least of those that bore that
name, was always great. Hippocrates has observed it himself, where he says that
there were several Physicians by name, but few that were so in reality, But we
scarce know any of either sort that lived at the same time with Hippocrates,
his reputation having wholly effaced theirs.

Galen mentions four Physicians, who he says lived partly before Hippocrates,
and partly at the same time. Their names are Phaon or Phaeon, Euryphon,
Philistion, and Ariston. I don't know who the first was. As for Euriphon of
Cnidus, he must needs be older than Hippocrates, since he passes for the Author
of the Cnidian Sentences, that are cited by Hipocrates. However Soranus makes
both of them meet at a consultation in Perdiccas's Palace, as we have already
shown.

As for Philistion he might very well pass for the contemporary of Hippocrates,
since he was the master of Eudoxus, the Cnidian, who flourished in the CIII.
Olympiad, of whom we shall speak hereafter. This Physician, I mean Philistion.
was of Locri, or as some say, born in Sicily. I know nothing of his opinions,
but that he believed with Hippocrates, Aut Gellius lib. 17. Cap. 11.
that there was a passage for part of what we drink through the lungs. Neither do
I know who was the brother of Philistion, whom, Tardar. pass. lib. 2. Cap. 1.
Caelius Aurelianus cites, without naming him otherwise. Philistion has
likewise written a treatise of Cookery, as Athenaeus has observed, and as we
shall have occasion to show in the Chapter of Diocles in the following Book.
Ariston has passed for the Author of Hippocrates's Book of Diet. Diogenes
Laertius speaks of six men that have bore this name, without reckoning the
father of Plato, but says nothing that one of them was a Physician.

In the seventh Book of Epidemical Diseases there is mention just made of one
Pythocles, of whom it is reported that he gave his Patients water, or milk
mingled with a great deal of water.

To these we may join the Sea the Phaedrus of Plato and Xenophon of the sayings
and deeds of Socrates.
Physician Acumenus, a friend of Socrates, of whom Plato and Xenophon talk very
advantageously. All that these Authors report of his opinions, is that he
looked upon a walk in the open air to be much better (...), We have translated
these words after the sense of Mercurialis, which seems to be just.
than in Portico's and other covered places.

There remains an ancient Physician named Aegimius of Velia, or Elis; who
according to Galen, was the first that writ about the Pulse, although the title
of his Book was about (...) instead of (...) Call. de differ. Pulls. lib. 4.
Palpitation, because at that time Pulse and Palpitation signified the same
thing, as we may gather from some passages in Hippocrates, where the latter of
these words signifies exactly the same with the former. If this Aegimius was
not cotemporary with the abovementioned, he lived at farthest in the time of
Diocles or Praxagoras, of whom we shall speak in the following Book.

THE HISTORY OF Physic.
PART I.
BOOK IV. Of what happened relating to this Art from the death of Hippocrates
to Chrysippus exclusively.
CHAP. I. Thessalus and Draco, the Sons of Hippocrates, Polybus his Son in law;
some others of his descendants, and some persons of the same name with
Hippocrates.
HIppocrates left two sons, Thessalus and Draco, who followed the profession of
their Father, and a daughter that was married to one Polybus, who was likewise
a Physician. His two sons had each of them one, to whom they gave the name of
their father, and this name was in such esteem in the family, that there were
no less then Suidas. See the Chapter of Praxagoras below.
seven one after another who bore it, who were all Physicians.

Hippocrates's eldest son was of greatest reputation. He spent the greatest
part of his life Galen in lib. Hippocr. de not. hum. Comm. 1.
in the Court of Archelaus, King of Macedonia. To him, as likewise to his
brother and even to their children were attributed some of the Books found in
the Collection of Hippocrates', even before the time of Galen who calls
Thessalus an Admirable man.

Galen ibid
Polybus also rose to great reputation, and continued to teach the scholars of
his father-in-law. There are yet some books remaining under his name, one of
which treats of the means of preserving health, others of diseases, and one of
the nature of the seed, which agrees almost in every thing with Hippocrates.
It Is very probable that these books likewise are suppositious. Those which were
found amongst the works of Hippocrates, and which were anciently ascribed to
Polybus, do him more honor, being, as we have observed before, of all the
books fathered upon Hippocrates, those wherein the reasoning is most exact and
most coherent. From one of these books, entitled of the nature of the Foetus,
is drawn the greatest part of what we have before laid down concerning the
manner of conception, or of the formation of the Foetus in the Womb. We find
likewise in the fourth book of Diseases, which has been laid with almost
universal consent to the same Polybus, a very Ingenious System of the causes of
Diseases, drawn from the four humors, established by the Author, which are See
upon this Book 3.
the Pituita, the Blood, the Bile, and the Water.

Galen testifies for Polybus, that he never deserted the opinions of
Hippocrates, nor made any alteration of him any more than Thessalus; but this
seems not probable especially of the former if the book we have cited be truly
Polybus's, we see already in it some difference in the System, and we find
further that the opinion concerning the passage of part of the drink into the
Trachaea Arteria, which is, as we have observed, maintained in more than one
place of Hippocrates's works, is vigorously opposed.

We must not confound the sons of our Hippocrates with those of whom Aristoph.
in Nubibus (...) Galen quod ^nimi mores sequantur temper. cor p. Cap. 4.
Ath^naeu^ l. 3.
Aristophanes, Galen and Athenaeus speak so brutish and lewd, that they gave
occasion to the people of Athens to call all persons of that infamous Character
the sons of Hippocrates. These were the sons of one Hippocrates an Athenian,
who was himself esteemed a man of no worth.

There is yet another Hippocrates among the Greek Authors who wrote of
Veterinary, or the Physic of Beasts, which are collected into one Volume, or
rather the Collectors have made bold with the name of the great Hippocrates,
and have fathered works upon him in which he had no concern.

CHAP. II. Prodicus Dexippus and Appollonius disciples of Hippocrates. Ctesias
his Kinsman.
HIppocrates was not contented to teach Physic only to those of his own
family. As he practiced Physic Galen affirms this, and it may be gathered out
of the Maxims of Hippocrates that have bee^ cited.
out of a principle of humanity, and not purely for profit or glory, he
imparted his knowledge to strangers, being the first of the Asclepiades that did
it, so that Physic, which was before confined within the limits of one Family,
was afterward communicated to all the world, and might be learned by any that
would apply themselves to it. We have seen already the Oath he exacted of his
Scholars.

One of the most considerable of these was one Prodicus of Selymbra, Plin. l.
29 C. 1.
who is said to have invented the use of unguents in Physic, to have first
anointed the body with those compositions, for preservation of health and for
the cure of distempers.

This Medicine became so common among the Ancients that they proceeded even to
the abuse of it, especially after they had introduced Liquid perfumes or
sweet-scented Oils, of which Virgil makes this complaint.

Casia was a sort of Sp^e infused in Oil of Olives to persume it.
Et Casia liquidi corrumpiturnsus Olivi. These being used as well for pleasure
as necessity, and lewd women and effeminate men making the greatest consumption
of them, this abuse grew so scandalous that sober persons were afraid to use
them, lest they should be taken to use them to the same purpose that they did.

For this reason 'twas that the Philosopher Aristippus who found these sweet
Oils serviceable to him, made such imprecations against those Debauchees that
brought a scandal upon the use of perfumes.

But Pliny seems to confound this disciple of Hippocrates with his master. The
Unguentarie medicine being a branch of the Gymnastick it is without doubt the
invention of See Book the 2
Herodicus, and not of Prodicus. The little difference there is between these
two names, and especially between the H and the (...) which are the two first
letters occasioned of being put often one for the other, and in the Manuscript
copies of Hippocrates the former is sometime called Prodicus sometimes
Herodicus Comment. lib. 6. Ep them
Galen following the first reading, mentions two Physicians named Prodicus, of
which one was of Lentini, the other of Selymbra, but he does not determine, of
which he speaks in the place he comments upon, referring the reader to another
place, where he says he has explain^d himself. The first seems very probable to
have been Hippocrates's master, the other his scholar. As for their names,
Plato and Plutarch always called the first Herodicus; for the better
distinction, we may continue that name to him, and call the latter Prodicus.

We have seen what Herodicus could do, Prodicus composed several works which
are cited by Galen, but he seems to set no great value upon them. He accuses
him for not following the method of his master, nor of the rest of the ancient
Physicians; but of amusing himself to quibble upon words or names, which is
never the sign of a man of ability in any profession whatsoever. Galen gives an
instance of this false niceness of Prodicus upon the word Phlegm, which is a
Greek word, and which the Latins have rendered by that of Pituita. All the
ancient Physicians understood by it a cold thick humor, but Prodicus only
would have the Phlegm to be hot; grounding upon the Etymology of the word
Phlegm, which is derived from another Greek word which signifies (...) Gal. de
Hippoc. and Platen. decret. lib. 8. cap. 6, and de natural. facul. lib. 2. cap.
9.
to burn, giving the name of (...)
snot to the first sorts of humor, which as we have said before, was otherwise
called Pituita.

Dexippus or Dixippus, another disciple of Hippocrates was a Coan as well as
himself. Suidas tells us that he wrote a book of Physic in general, and two
other of Prognostics. The same Author adds that Dexippus being sent for to
Heccatomnus King of Caria, to cure his sons Mausolus and Pixodarus, who had
each of them a desperate disease, which he refus^d, but upon condition that
Heccatomnus should cease to make war upon the Carians; whereupon Vossius
observes (...) instead of (...) Voss. de Philosoph.
that we ought to read the Coans instead of the Carians, it being more likely
that Dexippus should endeavor to ease his own Country from a War; to which we
may add, that it is not likely that the King made war upon his own subjects.

Aulus Gellius tells us, that Dexippus or Dioxippus, as he calls him, was also
for the Sea the Anatomy of Hippocrates, and the Paragraph of Philistion in the
Chapter foregoing.
immediate passage of the drink into the lungs. We know nothing of his method
of practice, except that both he and Appollonius, who is the third of
Hippocrates's scholars within our knowledge have both been censured for giving
their Patients too much to eat, and letting them perish with thirst.
Erasistratus said banteringly of them, that they made twelve doses of the sixth
part of a Cotyla of water, which they put into so many little waxen cups, and
gave their Patients one or two at most in the height of a burning fever. The
Cotyla was a measure that held about nine ounces. Galen says, that this was a
piece of malice in Erasistratus, who did it with a design through the scholars to
scandalize the master.

We have nothing further concerning Appollonius.

Ctesias a Cnidian Physician came immediately after the former, being
cotemporary to Xenophon. We are informed by Lib. de Artic. comment. 3.
Galen that he was of the family of the Asclepiades, and Kinsman to
Hippocrates. The same Galen takes notice that Ctesias corrected Hippocrates for
teaching the way of reducing a dislocated Thighbone, pretending that this
reduction was to no purpose, for the head of the bone being once out of its
cavity, it could never be kept in after, what care soever were taken; but that
it would slip out again. We know nothing more concerning Ctesias his Physic,
except that being taken prisoner in the battle, wherein in Cyrus the younger
was beaten by his brother Artaxerxes Mnemon, he cured a wound which the latter
had received in the fight. After which he practiced Physic seventeen years in
Persia, and became as famous a Historian as Physician, by writing the History
of Assyria and Persia, taken from the Archives of those Countries.

CHAP. III. Opinions of Plato concerning Physic.
AT this time also Plato lived, being born in the eighty eighth Olympiad. This
Philosopher following the steps of Pythagoras and Democritus, and the other
Philosopher Physicians, of whom we have spoken, wrote as they did, of several
things relating to the Theory of Medicine, particularly of the Economy of a
humane body, and the principles whereof it consists. The Pythagoreans, says
Var. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 22
Elian, applied themselves very much to Physic, Plato also was very much
addicted to it, as well as Aristotle and several other Philosophers. We shall
take notice here, of what is most considerable upon that subject in the
writings of Plato, as far as we understand him, which is not always very easy
to do. We shall be a little the more large herein, because we meet with diverse
things which relate to several modern opinions, and others which serve to
iliustrate those of Hippocrates.

Plato having supposed two universal principles of all things, (...)
God and Matter, the first form which he supposed Matter to take, was
Triangular, and that from these Triangles the four sensible Elements were
afterward produced, the Fire, Air, Water, and Earth; of which all bodies
seemed to him to be compounded.

As for the humane body, he thought that its first formation commenced from the
spinal marrow, which marrow was afterward covered with a bone, and these bones
with flesh. In consequence of this, he held that the links which joined or
fastened the soul to the body were in that marrow, which he called the seat of
the mortal soul. The reasonable soul he lodged in the brain, which he said was
a continuation of that marrow, and looked upon it as a soil purposely prepared
to receive the divine seed. As for that part of the soul upon which depend
Generosity, Valor and Anger, he placed it near the head, between the
diaphragme and the neck, that is to say, in the breast; or in the heart, in
which he followed Pythagoras. He held that the lungs encompassed the heart to
refresh it, and to calm the violent motions of the soul which was lodged there,
as well by the refreshment which it received from the Air in respiration, as
from the liquor which we drink, which he supposed to fall in part into the
lungs; Gell. llb. 17. cap. 11. Macrob. lib. 17, cap. 15.
which made one of the Ancients say, that Plato gave posterity occasion to
laugh, by meddling with that which was not his business. But he that said this
did not consider that Hippocrates and other Physicians before spoken of, were
themselves of this opinion, and that Plato apparently spoke only after them.

This Philosopher imagined also another part or sort of soul, which desired not
only meat and drink, and all that was necessary for the body, but which was the
Principle of all appetites or desire in general. This soul was posted between
the Diaphragm and the Navel, it was quartered in the lowest part, and farthest
from the head, that it might not by its agitations and commotions, disturb the
reasonable soul, which is the best part of us, in its meditations and thoughts
for the common good. These troubles or disturbances of the inferior soul, were
excited by Phantasms or Images presented to it by the liver, the liver having
been polish^d and made shining, that it might reflect the Images which were
communicated to it, to produce trouble, tranquillity or pleasure in the
inferior soul, according as the liver is it self troubled by the bitterness of
the Bile, or sedate and calm through the predomination of sweet Juices opposed to
the Bile.

Besides what we have already said of the heart and of the soul lodged there,
Plato held this further concerning it. The heart, says he, which is at the same
time Vi^^ Page
the source of the veins and of the blood, which (...) See page
whirls rapidly in all parts of the body, is set See page,
as a Sentinel or Sergeant, that when the Choler is inflamed at the command of
the Reason, upon the account of some injustice committed either without or
within, by the desire or passions, presently all that is sensibly in the body,
disposes it self by opening all its pores to hear its menaces, and obey its
commands.

The opinion of this Philosopher concerning the manner of respiration is no
less peculiar. He believed that there was no vacuum in the world, but that the
Air which escaped out of the Lungs and Mouth, in respiration meeting that which
surrounds the body without, pushes it so, that it forces it to enter through the
pores of the skin and flesh, and to insinuate it self into the most remote
parts of the body, till it fills the place which the other left, after which
making the same way out again by the Pores, it forces that without to enter by
the mouth into the lungs in inspiration. We see by this that Plato confounded
transpiration with respiration, pretending that both one and the other were
performed together, as it were by two semicircles.

As for the flesh, he thought it compounded of water, fire and earth, and a
certain sort of sharp leaven, biting and salt.

These are some of Plato's thoughts of a humane body in its natural state. As
for the causes of its destruction, which are diseases, old age and death, he
supposed in the first place that the bodies which are about ours, disolv'd and
melt it continually, after which every substance which gets loose or exhales,
returns to the principle from whence it was drawn; he supposes in the second
place that the blood which is, according to him, a fluid matter formed of the
Aliments by a peculiar artifice of nature, which cuts and reduces them into
small pieces, by means of (...).
fire, which rises in our stomach after the air or breath. He supposed that
this blood, whose redness was an evident token of the impression of this fire,
served to nourish the flesh and generally the whole body, and to fill up the
vacant spaces of it, as it were by a sort of watering, or general inundation.

This being supposed, he maintained that while we were young, this blood
abounding in all parts, not only supplied what was dissipated or diminished of
the flesh, which as was said was perpetual; but after having filled up what was
wanting, it furnished matter of increase to the mass of the body, from hence it
is, that in our youth we grow and become larger, but when we are advanced in
years, more of the substance of our body is spent, than the blood can supply or
restore, therefore we diminish by degrees.

Those principles also of which our bodies consists, which Plato calls
Triangles, which in our youth were stronger than those of which the Aliments
were compounded, reducing them easily to a substance like themselves, become
disunited and relaxed, by having so long endured the shock of other triangles,
this causes old age, which is followed by death, especially where the
triangles, whereof the spinal marrow consists, are dissolved and disunited, so
that the bands by which the soul was fastened to it, are entirely broken, and
let it loose.

As for diseases which attack us in all ages, and precipitate the usual time of
death, he supposed that our bodies being composed of the four Elements before
named, the disorders of these Elements were the chief causes of them. These
disorders consisted in the excess or deficiency of any of these Elements, when
they did not preserve the proportion of their first mixture, or when they
changed place, leaving their own place for another.

To explain himself more particularly, he adds, that the fire exceeding,
produced continual and burning fevers, that if the air over-ballanced, it
produced quotidian intermitting Fevers. If the Water, Tertian Fevers, and if
Earth Quartanes. The Earth being the heaviest of all the Elements, must have
quadruple the time to move it self in that the fire has and the rest of the
Elements in proportion.

Plato did not confine himself to these generals only, but proceeded to the
particular explication of the changes that befall our bodies in relation to the
blood and humors which are the immediate causes of distempers. While the
blood, says he, maintains its natural state, it serves to nourish the body and
to preserve health. But when the flesh begins to corrupt or to melt, and
dissolve the humor which comes from it, entering into the veins, carries this
corruption along with it, and changing the blood in several manners, turns it
from red to yellow; and bitter, or sower or salt; so that that which was pure
Blood, becomes part Bile and Phlegm or Serosities. What we call Bile, says
Plato, is particularly produced from the dissolution of the old flesh, it is an
humor that assumes diverse forms, and is very changeable both as to color and
taste, but it is chiefly distinguished into two sorts, the yellow Bile which is
bitter, and the black Bile which is sour and pricking. As for the Phlegm and
Serosities, or Water, Plato seems to confound them, or to make but one sort of
humor of them. The Phlegm according to him, is produced from the new flesh,
and the serosities or waters, which are designed by the particular names of
sweat or tears, are only the phlegm melted or dissolved. In another place he
seems to confound the phlegm and serosities with the Bile, when he says, that
what we call sour phlegm, is the same thing with the serosity of the black
Bile But in the explication of the effects of these humors, he restrains
himself to the two principal, which are See Page
the Bile and the Phlegm, and he acknowledges that these two juices by their
mixture with the blood are the causes of all distempers.

When the Bile evaporates outward, or discharges it self upon the skin, it
causes diverse sorts of humors, attended with inflammations, which the Greeks
called See Page
Phlegmons, but when it is confined within, it produces all sorts of (...),
burning diseases. The Bile is especially hurtful when it is mixed with the
blood, it breaks the orders of the Fibers which are according to him small
threads scatterd through the blood, that it might be neither too clear nor too
thick, to the end that on the one side it should not evaporate, and on the
other, might always move easily in the veins. This Bile continuing its havoc,
after having broken the fibers of the blood, pierces to the spinal marrow, and
destroys the links of the soul before spoken of, unless the body, that is to
say, all the flesh, melting or dissolving, breaks its force. When this happens,
the Bile being overcome, and obliged to depart the body, throws it self through
the veins upon the lower belly and the stomach, from whence it is discharged by
stool and vomiting, like those that fly out of a Town in an uproar, and cause
in their passage Diarrhaea's and Dysenteries, and other discharges, which prove
often healthful.

The sweet or insipid phlegm occasions Tumors, and some impurities of the
skin, and when it mixes with some little bladders of the Air, it is then called
A sort of Dropsy in Hippocrates. See Page
white Phlegm. If this Phlegm mixes with the black Bile, and penetrates into
the receptacles of the brain, it causes the Epilepsie or Falling Sickness.

The sour or salt Phlegm is the cause of all diseases, comprehended under the
name of Catarrhs or Rheums, and brings disorder and pain upon what part soever
it falls.

We must here take notice of the Idea which Plato had of the Matrix or its
properties, and some of its diseases. See Page
the Matrix, says he, is an Animal, which longs impatiently to conceive, and if
it be long disappointed of bearing Fruit, is is enraged, and runs up and down
the whole Body, and stopping the passages of their Air, it takes away
respiration, and causes great uneasiness, and an Anfinite number of Diseases.

These were the sentiments of Plato upon the causes of diseases, upon all which
we shall not trouble our selves to make reflections. We shall confine our
selves only to what he says concerning the Acidity and saltness of the humors,
it being of importance to our History to take notice of it, because of the
several Systems that have been since built upon that foundation. Hippocrates
had before spoken of the sour and the salt, but he has mentioned them only
upon the account of their effect, without showing their Original, which Plato
seems to have discovered, and therein to have made an improvement upon him.

We may observe first, that the Philosopher speaks of an Acidity and saltness
which is n^turally in the body in a slate of health. Such is the sowrness and
sweetness of the flesh, which he says, consists of Water, Fire and Earth, and
besides that a sour salt leaven, as has been already observed. He does not say
from whence this leaven comes, but by his manner of expressing himself it seems
not to be drawn from the common Elements, but to be something different from
the Water, Fire and Earth, which have their share apart in the formation of the
flesh.

In the second place, Plato held a saltness and sowrness, which were
praeternatural, which are in the humors which cause diseases. He seems further
to deduce the sour and salt from the same source, with the natural sour and
salt, that is from the flesh, which corrupting and dissolving, according to
him, infect the blood, and turn it into Bile, and into Phlegm. But this latter
sour and salt are something different from the former, though they come from the
flesh, for this is an effect of their corruption, the other is the principle of
the preservation. But Plato not explaining himself any further thereupon,
neither shall we enlarge.

He adds a third sort of sowrness, which is that of the black Bile, which of
bitter, becomes sour, when the bitterness which is natural to it is
alternated, and subtilized to a certain degree. It may be urged that the Greek
word which we have translated (...).
sour, might as well signify pointed or sharp, as sour; both in this latter
passage, and in all those before cited. The Greeks having only one word, to
express both meanings; but it is plain from the opposition in which Plato put
this word to (...)
bitter, that the former ought to be translated sour, and not pointed, which
is not so naturally opposed to bitter, as sour is.

Plato speaks elsewhere of sowrness, and holds that it has its Origin from
things sharp and pointed, which have been subtilized or attenuated by
corruption, and reckons it the occasion of Fermentations and Ebullitions, which
arise when the gross and terrestrial humors begin to move, and to swell or
rise up.

It is observable that Plato to these words (...); and (...). which are
Adjectives, joins the same Substantive that Hippocrates did, which is (...)
which according to the sense of Hippocrates, may be translated by the words
force, power, faculty or virtue, as well as by the words savor or taste,
(...), Sapor Acidus, sour taste, as Serranus translates it; as for the rest,
Plato thought as Hippocrates did, that diseases had their fixed periods for
duration. As the time of the life of every Animal is regulated by its lot when
it comes into the world, this time can neither be hastened nor delayed, but by
an effect of the passions; which come likewise themselves by a sort of
necessity. So likewise diseases must of necessity have their course, and we
ought rather to seek to temper them, and stop their progress, by means of See
the m^thod of Hippocrates in acute diseases.
prudent diet and exercise, than by medicines, especially those which purge,
which ought never to be used but in cases of extremity, otherwise of a small
evil you make a great one, and of a single one many.

By this we may see, that Plato did not deviate much from the principles of
Hippocrates, and as he lived at the same time with him, or very near it, being
born in the eighty eighth Olympiad, it is reasonable to believe, that he took
many things out of his writings, having testified as he did, abundance of
esteem of him. We may see by what has been said before See the general maxims
of Hippocrates.
the sentiments of Plato concerning the Gymnastick Medicine.

We find in Galen the description of some medicines which bear Plato's name, as
if he had been the inventor of them, but they were manifestly some other
Plato's, or rather the name of this Philosopher was put upon them, to give them
the more credit. We shall close with Plato's sense of the qualities to be
required in a Physician. There ought to be, says he, in every great City good
Physicians, who besides the study required to learn their profession, have
lived in their youth, amongst multitude of sick people, and have themselves run
through all sorts of distempers, being naturally infirm or Valetudinarians. This
maxim is directly opposite to that of Hippocrates who requires that a Physician
should be of a very healthy constitution.

Some have observed that Plato designedly chose the Academy, which was the
unhealthiest place of all Athens, to reside in with his scholars, only because
it was unhealthy, out of a persuasion that the infirmity of the body, rendered
the mind more vigorous. But we must beg leave to doubt, whether this was his
Motive or not.

CHAP. IV. Nicomachus, Aristotle 's Father.
ARistotle's Father, whose name was Nicomachus, lived about the same time with
Plato. He was of Stagyre in Macedonia, and Physician to King Amyntas, Father of
Philip. He was of the Asclepiades as well as Hippocrates, and pretended to be
descended from a Son of Machaon, of whom we have spoken before, who bore the
same name with himself. This Physician wrote according to Suidas, six books of
Physic, and one of Natural Philosophy, but we have nothing of them remaining.

CHAP. V. Aristotle.
WE should speak here of some Physicians, who lived before this Philosopher,
and were cotemporaries to his father, but after having seen what Plato, who was
his master, contributed to the advancement of Physic, we thought it convenient
immediately to subjoyn what his scholar further added.

Aristotle wrote two books Entitled (...). Diogen. Lacrt. in ^it. Aristot.
of Physic, but there are none of them remainning; nor those the Title of
which was (...) and (...) A. (...).
of Anatomy: Diogenes Laertius ascribes to him another book, the title of which
was (...).
of the Stone; this book is translated into Latin, in the Theatrum Ch^micum
with another, which treats of the perfect Magistery; that is to say, of the
Philosophers Stone, but both these books are evidently suposititious.

If Aristotle had ever writ any book, under the title mentioned by Diogenes
Lacrtius, supposing that we ought to understand by the Stone, the Philosopher's
Stone, this book would unquestionably have made more noise, amongst the
Ancients, whereas we find neither tract nor footstep, in all the Authors
extant, that wrote during the space of five hundred years, which were elapsed
between the Author of this pretended book, and him that quotes it. It is not
impossible, but that in the time of the later, the book in question was
attributed to Aristotle, but it is more probable, that there is some fault in
the Text. We shall have occasion to speak more of this, in the Chapter of
Theophrastus which comes next.

But it was not after this manner that Aristotle employed himself in Physic,
'twas in writing these other books which we first mentioned But since these
books are lost, we should be obliged to conclude here, what concerns the
Physic of this Philosopher, if his History of Animals, and of their parts and
Generation were not happily preserved, wherein we find many curious things,
relating to the History of Animals in general, and of their Anatomy in
particular. Plin. lib. 8.16. Athen. lib. 9. cap. 23 and lib. 8. cap. 11.
Alexander the Great, whose master he was, being inquisitive into the nature
and different properties of Animals, obliged him to this task, and furnished
him for it, with the sum of eight hundred Talents, which amount to almost a
million of Gold, besides several thousand men, in the several parts of Asia and
Greece, who had Orders to obey him, and to inform him of all that hunting and
fishing had taught them, and to keep on purpose all sorts of Animals, to
discover what was peculiar to them.

With these helps, a perfect work upon this Subject might have been expected.
Nevertheless the Ancients themselves took notice, that he advanced many a thing
contrary to fact. He may upon this account be excused, by saying that he took
them upon Credit from others, not having been able to act or view every thing
himself. But supposing he were in some things obliged to trust to relations. As
for Example, for certain Properties of Animals which only chance could
discover, there are others, in which he ought to have made his enquiries
himself, or at least to have been present, and directed those that were his
Operators. Of this nature are those things which relate to Anatomy, what
opinion can we have of his exactness in this particular, when we hear him
affirm, that all Animals have flexible necks, composed of Vertebrae, except
Wolves and Lions, in which tho neck consists of but one bone, and that the
bones of Lions have no matrow against all experience. (e) For his other Errors
in the Anatomy of a Lion and Eagle and a Crocodile, those that are curious may
consult the learned Borrichius.

Those that published the dissection of a Lion at Paris, in the Academy of
Sciences some years ago, have taken care to show, the Errors of this
Philosopher, in the Anatomy of that Beast. All that they observe, may in fact
be true, except one passage, in which they seem to make Aristotle say, what he
never thought of. We find these words in one of his books (f) (...) which the
Latin Interpreter renders thus, videtur Leo Animalium omnium perfectissimum
Animal, in assumendo maris formam. These Gentlemen explain these words, as if
Aristotle had meant that the Lion has, by way of Excellence, and beyond all
other Animals, the visible and apparent marks of the perfection of his Sex.
These are their own words, and they urge as a proof, that the Philosopher was
mistaken that the Vrethra of a Lion, that is the channel of the Virga, does not
appear outward above three inches and a half. Their conclusion had been just,
if Aristotle had meant as they think, and Borrichius with them that the Lion of
all male Animals, had the parts which distinguished the Sex most large and
apparent. But this in my opinion, was farthest from his thoughts, for I suppose
he meant no more, than that the Lion, is of all male Animals, the easiest to be
distinguished from his Female, by his Masculine Air, or that distinguishes
himself from all other Males, by a fierce and truly Masculine Air, which is
peculiar to him. I translate the Greek word (...) by the French word Air, which
might be rendered Species in Latin, which answers exactly to the Greek, the
Etymology being the same:

The dissections that Aristotle made, of several different sorts of Animals,
Quadrupeds, Birds, Fishes and Insects, had taught him diverse things concerning
the use of the parts of each of these Kinds. We shall not go about to examine
here, what he delivers of the difference of their parts and uses, because that
would lead us too far from our Subject. We shall only touch here in a few
words, upon what relates to the structure and use of parts, common to all
perfect Animals, such as Men, and all Quadrupeds.

Aristotle esteemed the heart, to be the Origin and Source of the veins and
blood. The blood, says he, goes from the heart into the veins, De Part. An.
lib. 3. cap. 4. Those that find the Circulation of the Blood in Aristotle, will
have some difficulty to get over this Passage.
but it comes not from any part into the heart. He says that there come two
veins out of the heart, one from the right side, which is the largest, and the
other from the left side, which is the least, which he calls the Aorta, (where
by the by) we may take notice, that this Philosopher Hist. Anim. lib. 3. cap. 5.
as Galen says, is the first that gave that name to the great Artery, which
proves that the book (i) of the Heart, wherein this name is found, is not
Hippocrates's. Aristotle thought that these two veins, distributed the blood to
all parts of the body. He says elsewhere, that there were in the heart three
Cavities, which he calls ventricles. Of these three ventricles, that in the
middle, of whose situation he gives no other account, is the common principle
of the other two, although it be the least; the blood which it contains is also
the most temperate and pure. The blood of the right, ventricle is the hottest,
and that of the left the coldest. This latter ventricle being the biggest of
the three. These three ventricles, says he, communicate with the lungs, by
vessels different from the two great veins, which disperse themselves through the
whole substance of the Lungs.

He made not only the veins of the vessels, which contain blood to come out of
the heart; but he would have the Nerves also to take their Origin from thence;
for which opinion this was his ground, Hist. An. lib. 3. cap. 5.
The biggest Ventricle of the Heart, says he, contains small Nerves, and it is
a true Nerve in its extremities, having no Cavity, and being stretched after
the manner of Nerves in the place where it terminates, toward the Articulation
of the bones. He says also in another place, De part. Anim. lib. 3, cap. 4.
that there are abundance of Nerves in the heart, which are of great use,
because the motions come from thence, which are made by contracting and
extending.

By this latter passage he seems to design the Tendons, which serve to dilate
and contract the heart, and if we have observed before that Hippocrates
confounded the Nerves with the Tendons and Ligaments, Aristotle does not appear
to have distinguished them any better, nor to have known the use of the true
Nerves.

In another place he affirms, H^st. Animal. lib. 3. cap. 5.
that the Nerves are not continuous, but scattered here and there, about the
places of the Articulations, by which it is visible, he meant the Tendons. If
he had known the use of the Nerves, he would not have said, De part. Animal.
lib. 2. cap. 10.
that none but the parts which had blood, could feel or had sensation; nor
would he have maintained De part. Anim. lib. 2. cap. 1.
that the flesh is the proper Organ of sensation; as for motion, if he
attributes it to the Nerves, or says it is made immediately by the Nerves, it is
easy to see, that the Nerves there meant, were either the Tendons or Ligaments.

As for the common principle of motion and sensation, Aristotle places it in
the Heart, which he looks upon also as the principle of the nourishment of all
the parts of the body, by the means of the blood which it sends to them, as the
Focus, which contains the natural fire, upon which depends life; as the place
where the passions have their birth, and where all the sensations terminate. In
a word, as the true seat of the Soul, and that not because the Nerves have
their Origin from thence as some imagine, but because it is the reservatory of
the blood and spirits. He formally maintains l^b. de Spiritu.
that the spirits cannot be contained in the Nerves.

But if Aristotle attributes such noble uses to the heart, the brain was in his
opinion but a heap of Water and Earth, without blood and without sense. The
office of this Cold Lump was, says he, to refresh and moderate the heat of the
heart. But besides that, he gives elsewhere this Office to the Lungs, he does
not account for the manner how the brain should be capable of discharging it.
And although the brain be placed immediately upon the spinal marrow, and fixed to
it, yet he pretended that the substance of that marrow was-quite different from
that of the brain, being a sort of blood prepared for the nourishment of the
bones, and consequently hot, whereas the other was cold. He made otherwise so
little of the brain, that if he did not absolutely reckon it amongst the
excrements, he thought it ought not to be ranked amongst the parts of the body,
which had any continuity or union with the rest, that he looked on it as a
substance of a peculiar nature, and different from all the rest of the body.

As for the rest of the Viscera, as the Liver, the Spleen, and the Kidneys, he
thought that their first and chief usage was to support the veins, which would
be pendulous but for them, and to strengthen them in their place. Besides this
first use, he assigned them some others. The Liver helped to the digestion of
the meat in the stomach and the guts, by the warmth which it imparted to those
parts; of which we shall speak more particularly in the Sequel. The Liver was
not of such universal use, and is, according to him, but accidentally necessary
to collect and concoct the Vapors which rise from the Belly; hence it is, that
Animals, in whom these vapors take another course, have but a very small
Spleen, as Birds, and Fishes, whose feathers and scales are formed and
nourished out of this moisture. And these Animals for the same reason, says he,
have neither kidneys nor bladder.

De part. Anim^l (...) 3 ^ap. 7.
The Kidneys also, according to him, are onl^ for convenience; their office is
to imbibe part of the excrement which goes to the bladder in Animals, in whom
this Excrement is in too great abundance, in order to ease the bladder. He adds
a little after, (...) 9.
that the humors filtre, or run through the substance of the reins, in which he
seems to touch upon the use afterward found for these parts, but he speaks of
it very obscurely.

Hist. Anim. ^b. 3. cap. 1.
The Testicles also are parts, made by nature for convenience, and not of
absolute necessity. He says, that there are two venous channels that come from
the Aorta into the Testicles, and two others which come from the Kidneys, that
these two latter contain blood, but the former none; that there comes out of
the head of each Testicle another channel, bigger and more nervous, which
bending backwards, and growing less, re-ascends toward the former, being
contained in the same Membrane, which proceed to the root of the Virga. He
adds, that this last Channel contains no blood, but a white liquor, and
terminating at the Virga, or neck of the bladder, it meets there with an
opening, which goes toward the Virga, round about which there is a sort of
(...)
husk or bark.

This supposed, he says that when the Testicles of any Animal are cut off, all
these channels spoken of shrink up, and that it is upon this retraction that
those that are castrated cannot procreate; as a proof of this, he instances in
a Cow, which being leaped by a ^ull after he was guelded, before these channels
of the seed were retracted, proved with Calf. In another place, he explains
himself more at large concerning the use of the Testicles, saying, Hist. An.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
That they are no part of the channels or receptacles of the Seed, and have no
communication with them, but serve only as a weight to draw them downwards, and
to retard the motion of the Seed, as Weavers fasten Stones to their Tackle. And
as a proof of the uselesness of the Testicles, for the principal intention, he
brings the example of Fishes and Serpents, who wanted, as he thought, those
parts, yet did engender.

(...) lib. (...) cap. 20.
He held, that the conception was made by the mixture of the Seed of a Man, with
the menstrual blood of a Woman in the Matrix, allowing no share to the Seed of
the Woman, which according to him was only an excrement of the Matrix, which
some emitted, others not, yet were not for that less fruitful, or less sensible
of the Pleasure of Coition, this Pleasure arising from a titillation caused by
the afflux of the Spirits into the parts of Generation.

As for the place and manner of digesting the food, Aristotle says, That the
Aliment is first prepared in the mouth of Animals, whose food requires to be
wet or mash'd; but we are not to think that any sort of concoction is performed
there, the meat is only reduced into small parts, so that it may be more easily
digested and penetrated after it is descended into the superior and inferior
Ventricle* which are both destin^d to this Office, that is, to digest the
Aliments: And as the Mouth is the opening by which the nourishment enters
unprepared, and the Oesophagus is the Tunnel by which it descends into the
upper venture or the ventricle, there is need of more openings to carry the
nourishment to all the parts of the body, from the belly and intestines, as out
of a Cystern; and these openings or pipes are the veins of the Mesentery. As
Plants, says the Philosopher, draw their nourishment by their Roots, which are
dispersed in the Earth, so Animals draw theirs by these veins, which are as so
many Roots, to draw from the Belly and Intestines the juice therein contained,
these parts being to Animals as the Earth is to Plants. He says also, That
these veins are branches of the great veins, and of the Aorta which go to the
intestines. As for the Omentum, Aristotle thought that it assisted in
conjunction with the Liver to the concoction of the Meat, warming the parts to
which it is contiguous with its Fat which is hot.

In explication of what has been already said, he held farther, that the
Coction of the Aliments was performed partly in the superior Venture, and partly
in the inferior, that the mass of the Aliments being yet too fresh, and not
being sufficiently concocted, while it is in the superior Venture, that is, the
Stomach, and being deprived of all its Juice, and all that is useful in it, so
that nothing remains but thick excrement, when it comes at the bottom of the
inferior Venture, there must necessarily be some space between these two, in
which the nourishment is changed, and is neither crude nor excrement. This
space, says he, is the thin Gut called Jejunum, which is immediately joined to
the superior Venture, and by consequence lies between that Venture, wherein the
Aliments were in part crude, and the bottom of the inferior Venture which
contained nothing but excrement.

These are the places, according to Aristotle, wherein digestion is performed.
This digestion was, according to him, a sort of Elixation, that is, he thought,
that the Aliments were prepared in the body, much after the manner that meat is
boiled in a Pot, by means of the heat of the Neighboring parts, the chief of
which were, as we have observed, the Liver and the Cawle.

We may see by this Gut which he calls Jejunum, and the distinction, that he
makes elsewhere between the Colon, the Caecum and the Rectum, that the Guts
were somewhat better distinguished than in the time of Hippocrates, who seems
to have acknowledged but two, the Colon and the Rectum, as we have already
taken notice.

The use of the Lungs and manner of respiration, according to Aristotle were
these. The Heart being inflated by too much heat, obliged the Lungs and Breast
to swell and move, and by consequence to receive in the Air, which insinuating
itself into the heart, refreshed it in its entrance, and returning carried off
the thick hot vapors exhaling from it, and served at the same time to form the
voice, the Air being necessarily obliged to enter into the Lungs as they rise
for fear of a void, which is a thing nature abhors.

Hist. Anim. lib. 1. cap. 21.
Of the structure of the Ear Aristotle has not delivered much. He observes only,
that it is turned within in the form of a Shell which terminates at a bone,
which, says he, is like to the Ear, and whither the sound comes, as the last
vessel which receives it. There is no passage from thence to the Brain, but
there is one goes to the Pallat, and a vein which descends from the Brain to
that place, that is, to the Bone of the Ear. De Anima b. 2. cap. 8.
He says elsewhere, that hearing is produced by means of the External Air which
moves the internal Air, or the Air enclosed in the Ear; and he adds, that if
the Membrane of the Ear be indisposed, we cannot hear, for the same reason, we
cannot see when the Tunicle of the Eye is in the same Condition.

De generat aninial lib. 2. cap. 6.
The Nose is divided into two Channels by a Cartilage. It has two veins, which
are joined to the Brain, but they come from the Heart, these go into the
Channel, which is the Organ of smelling, as it receives the External Air, and
all that is diffused through it.

The Flesh, as we have observed already, is the Organ of Feeling. The Tongue of
Tasting, being soft and spongy, and of a Nature approaching to that of the
Flesh.

Hist. An. lib. 1. cap. 11.
The Eye reaches into the Brain, and is situated on either side under a little
vein. Ib. cap. 9.
The humor which is in the Eye which causes vision, is what we call the sight.
De Genesis An. lib. 2. cap. 6.
The Eye of all the Organs of sensation has this peculiarity, that it is moist
and cold, or that it contains a humor that is moist and cold, which is not
there at first, or which is not at first in its perfection, but is separated or
distilled from the purest part of the moisture of the Brain, by the Channel
that goes to the Membrane of the Brain.

It Is very plain from what has been said, that Aristotle allowed the Nerves no
part in the production of sensation. Nor indeed could he acknowledge the Nerves
or their office, retaining the Idea which he had of the Brain. The Diaphragme,
which he calls Diazoma, or the Membrane which separates the lower Belly from
the Breast, has, according to Aristotle, no other business than to divide these
two Cavities, that the upper, which is the Seat of the Soul, may not be
infected by the vapors which rise from the lower.

This is the sum of what we could collect from the writings of this Philosopher
concerning Anatomy. And we may observe, that both he and Plato called
indifferently by the name of Veins the Veins properly so called, and the
Arteries; that they did not give the name of Artery to any thing but the
Windpipe; which they called (...), rough, or unequal in opposition to the
Arteries properly so called, and by the Ancients named, (...), laeves Arterlae
smooth Arteries
Aspera Arteria from whence we may infer, that when we find in See the next
Vol. lib. 1. cap. of Erasistratus.
Hippocrates the word Artery in the sense of the Moderns, that this word has
been foisted in, or that the Books in which it is found are not Genuine.

The only place that I know of, wherein Aristotle seems to give the name of
Arteries, to the Arteries properly so called is in his Book of the Spirit,
wherein he says that the Skin is composed of a Vein, an Artery, and a Nerve, Of
a Vein, says he, because the Skin yields Blood when it is pricked: Of a Nerve,
because it can extend it self: Of an Artery, because it is transpirable.
Aristotle seems here to have designed the real and true Arteries, and to allot
to them only Spirit, according to the opinion of Praxagoras and Erasistratus,
of whom we shall speak hereafter; which opinion perhaps they borrowed of him.
Perhaps also this Book was none of Aristotle's.

We must make one observation more concerning the Anatomy of Aristotle, which
is, that he never dissected any thing but Brutes, and that in his time they
durst not Anatomize a Humane body. Which he insinuates himself in these words
Hist. An. lib. 1. cap. 16.
, The inward parts of men's bodies are unknown, for we have nothing certain
thereupon, but we must judge of them by the resemblance which we suppose them
to have to the parts of other Animals, which answer to each of them. I am
surpised Anthropograph. lib. 1. cap. 4.
that Riolan should maintain the contrary, and more that he should endeavor to
prove it from passages of Aristotle, which are nothing to the purpose; but he
is not the only one, whose Prejudice and Bigotry for the Ancients, has caused
to make such false steps. We shall have occasion to say something more upon
this subject in the first Book of the next Volume. Aristotle wrote also some
Books of Plants, of which there are some yet remaining, but he treats of them
rather as a Philosopher than a Physician.

He was born in the ninety ninth Olympiad, and he dyed the 3d year of the
hundred and fourteenth Olympiad, aged by this account about sixty three. He was
the Son of a Physician, and of the family of the Asclepiades. He belonged also
to Physic another way, which is not much for his honor. Diogenes Laertius,
and Hesychius Milesius in vita Epicuri.
Epicurus reproaches him with having spent his patrimony while he was young in
debauchery, and that after he had been some time a Soldier, he betook himself
to selling We shall consider in the sequel the meaning of the word (...) used
by Diogenes Laertius on this occasion.
of Antidotes about the Markets, till Plato's School being opened, he applied
himself to the study of Philosophy under him.

CHAP. VI. Theophrastus.
THeophrastus, who succeeded Aristotle, took upon him the management of his
School, and after his death did something likewise toward Physic. The most
considerable of his works which remain to our times are his Books of Plants.
But as Plants may be considered either as a part of Agriculture, of Natural
History, or of Physic; Theophrastus, as well as Aristotle, seems to consider
them chiefly as a Naturalist, and seems rather to have examined their Growth
and Termination, and the parts whereof they are composed, than their Medicinal
properties, although sometimes en passant he touches upon them too. But he having
described several, we shall be oblig^d to take farther notice of him upon this
account with Dioscorides.

There are yet some small pieces of his remaining, concerning the Vertigo,
Swooning, Sweat, and the Palsy, of which he treats rather as a Philosopher
than a Physician; that is, he is inquisitive after the Causes of these
Distempers only, without speaking of any Remedies. He says, that Vertigo^s come
when some strange spirit or superfluous moisture goes into the Head, or as he
expresses it, about the Head, whether this comes from any sort of Food, as from
Wine, or from any other humor, or from turning the Head round. For, adds he,
the place about the Brain, or the Brain (an usual manner of expression among
the Greeks) is naturally moist, and when any foreign Spirit gets in, it does
violence after it is got in, and forces the natural moisture into the veins,
causing it to turn round, so that this Spirit has the same effect, as if any
body turned the Head round, it being indifferent whether it be done inwardly or
outwardly.

The Palsy arises from a chilness, or privation and want of Spirits or Spirit.
For, says he, the Spirit is the cause of heat and motion, so that if it becomes
motionless, the blood or moisture necessarily grow chill. And for this reason
we find the Feet be numm'd, and sometimes the upper parts, when they are
pressed by a Chair, or any other way, this compression stopping or interrupting
the Spirit, that it cannot move as usual, causes the Blood to grow cold.

By what has been said, we may see that this Philosopher suspected the Nerves
on these occasions, no more than Hippocrates did, and was no better acquainted
with their use than his Master Aristotle.

We have also a Book of Theophrastus of Stones, wherein he treats of several
sorts of Stones, as well Genuine as others, of their nature, the manner of
their formation, and the places where they are found, etc. And as we may see by
the Catalogue of his Writings, he gave to some of them the same Titles that
Aristotle had done before to his; perhaps the singular number was substituted
for the plural, in the Title of the Book of Aristotle of the Stone, of which
before.

CHAP. II. Heraclides of Pontus.
ALmost at the same time there lived another Philosopher, who engaged in
Physic. This was Heraclides of Pontus, who studied partly under Speusippus the
Scholar of Plato, and partly under Aristotle. This Heraclides writ a Book of
the cause of Diseases, and another entitled (...); What he called (...), that
is, without respiration, was a disease, in which sometimes, as our Author
affirms, men lay thirty days without breathing, as if they were dead, yet the
body did not corrupt. We have seen before that Empedocles cured a woman of this
distemper, which is a sort of suffocation of the Matrix. Diogenes Laertius
reckons fourteen famous men of the name of Heraclides, of which two were
Physicians, and not counting him of whom we are speaking. The first, who was
the eighth of the fourteen, was Scholar to Hicesius a Physician, of whom we
shall speak hereafter; the second was a famous Empirick of Tarentum, whose
History we shall likewise give. To all these Heraclides, we may add Hippocrates
Father, and Heraclides Erithreus, of whom also hereafter.

CHAP VIII. Diocles.
It Is time, to quit the Philosophers, and return a little back to reassume the
Physicians. The first of this Profession after Hippocrates and his Family, that
made any noise in the world, was Diocles Carystius, whom the Athenians for that
reason called the Theodor. Priscians.
Second Hippocrates. Plin. lib. 20. cap. 20. Celf. Praefat.
All the Ancients agree, that he came presently after the Father of Physic,
whom he succeeded very near both in time and reputation. He Is supposed to be
Author of a Letter yet extant, Addressed to Antigonus, King of Asia, which
shows, that Diocles lived in his time, and not in the time Tiraquell. de Nobil.
cap. 21. and after him Wolfgangus Justus in his Chronologia Medicorum. Who also
holds, that he lived both under Darius the Son of Hystaspes, and under
Antigonus, tho between those two Princes there passed two entire Centuries.
of Darius Son of Hystaspes, as two modern Authors have written. But the
Chronological Errors which we have detected upon the occasion of the pretended
Letters of Hippocrates, show that we are not to rely much upon proofs of this
nature, this Letter of Diocles being no less to be suspected than the others.
Those that place Diocles in the time of Darius, Son of Hystaspes are manifestly
in an error. Others have gone on the other side too low, if I be not mistaken.
But however it be, we find in this Letter rules for preservation of health,
which consist in foreseeing Diseases by certain signs, and preventing them by
certain Remedies. The Body is there divided into four parts, the Head, the
Breast, the Belly, and the Bladder; and there are Medicines there prescribed to
preserve these parts, from their usual Distempers. He prescribed Gargarisms to
purge the Head and Frictions. For the Breast he advises vomiting after Meals,
and Fasting. He ordered the Belly to be kept open, not by Medicine, but by
proper Diet, such as Blites, Mercury, Garlic boiled, the Herb Patience,
Colwort Broth, confections with Honey. For the distempers of the Bladder he
appointed some Diuretic Medicines, such as the Roots of Selery and Fennel
boiled in Wine, with the water of the Decoction of Daucus Smyrnium, of Elder or
Chiches.

Diocles wrote several Books of Physic which are lost. Amongst the rest was
one of Diseases, their Causes and Cure, a fragment of which is cited by De
Locis affect. lib. 3. c. 7.
Galen, concerning the Disease called the Melancholic or Flatulent Disease,
wherein Diocles speaks thus. There is a Disease, whose seat is about the
Stomach, which some call Melancholy, others Flatus, or Wind, in which, after
eating things hard of digestion, men spit abundance of very clear Spittle;
their Belches are sour, with Wind and heat in the Hippocondria, with a
rumbling motion, not at first, but sometime after, and often violent pain in
the Stomach, which extend in some even to the back. After the Meat is perfectly
digested all ceases and returns again after eating. The same symptoms sometimes
take a man fasting, and sometimes after Meals, and force him to throw his
victuals undigested up again, and sometimes bitter hot phlegm, or so sour as
to set their Teeth an edge. These distempers for the most part come in youth;
but come when they will, they hold a long time. We may suppose they that are
troubled with it, have too much heat in the veins which receive the nourishment
from the Stomach, and that the Blood which they contain is thereby thickened.
For it is plain that those veins are obstructed or stopped, from this sensible
proof that the nourishment is not distributed through the body, but remains crude
upon the stomach, instead of passing into the Channels which ought to recieve
it, and going the greatest part of it into the lower Belly, it is thrown up the
next day by vomit. Another proof that the heat is greater than naturally it
ought, is not only the heat which the parties feel, but the immediate relief
they find by taking cold things. Diocles adds, that some hold that in these
distempers the orifice of the Stomach, which is joined to the Guts, is in
flamed, and that this inflammation causes the obstruction, and hinders the
aliments from descending in due time into the Guts, and that by their stop the
inflation of the Stomach, the heat, and other symptoms before mentioned are
occasioned.

Diocles had a peculiar opinion of Fevers. We must judge, says he, of things
which we cannot see, by those which we can see; we observe that external
inflammations, abscesses and wounds are attended by Fevers, therefore when a
Fever takes any body, though we cannot externally discover any abscess, wound,
or inflammation, we must however believe that there is some such thing within
the body.

His practice was much the same with that of Hippocrates. He blooded and purged
after the same manner, and upon the same occasions. His particular method in
every distemper may be seen in Acuti Pass. l. 3 c. 17.
Caelius Aurelianus. The same Author reports, that Diocles caused all those
that were troubled with the Iliack passion to swallow a Leaden Bullet, a
Medicine of which I find no mention in Hippocrates, and which might perhaps be
of Diocles's own invention. He distinguished between the Ileus and Chordapsus,
which two names Hippocrates seemed to give to the same distemper. Diocles
signified by the former of these names a distemper of the intestina tenuia, and
by the latter of the intestina crassa.

He practiced also Surgery, and invented an instrument to draw out the head of
a Dart when it was left in the wound; which was called by his name in Celsus
his time. He invented also the manner of Galen de Fa^ci^s.
Bandage for the head, which went also by his name.

Galen observes, that this Physician was the first that wrote of Anatomical
Administration, that is, of the manner and order of dissection, for the better
displaying the parts of the body. He gave at the same time this account for the
Silence of those that preceded him, and of the motives that induced him to
write upon that subject. De Adminis^. Anatom. lib. 2.
Before Diocles, says Galen, Physic being almost entirely limited to the
family of the Asclepiades, the Fathers taught their Sons Anatomy, and bred them
from their infancy to the dissection of Animals. So that it going from Father
to Son by way of Manual Tradition, it was needless to write of the manner,
because it was as impossible they should forget it as their Alphabet, which
they learnt almost at the same time. But the Art of Physic spreading beyond
this family, by means of the Scholars of Hippocrates, Diocles wrote upon this
subject in favor of those whose Fathers were not Physicians.

Thus far Galen of Diocles, who nevertheless by Galen's own report had made no
great progress in Anatomy. He satisfied himself with what his predecessors had
done, who were no great Anatomists, as we have already observed.

Galen testifies likewise for Diocles, that he practiced Physic out of a
principle of Humanity, as Hippocrates had done, and not for Pront or Glory,
which were motives upon which other Physicians acted. He speaks of him
elsewhere as a great man in his Art, and affirms, that he was master of it in
every part.

Athenaeus mentions a piece of Diocles which treated of Poisons, and another
which teaches This Book was entitled (...).
the manner of dressing victuals. Athenaeus tells us of several other ancient
Physicians that wrote upon this latter subject, and mentions amongst others
Philistion, whom we have spoken of before, Erasistratus, Philotimus, Glaucus,
and Dionisius. Their design in probability was not so much to please the taste
as to render the food more wholesome. Nevertheless Plato complains (...).
that the Art of Cookery was crept into Physic under pretense of dressing for
health, whereas it had the quite contrary effect, and he asserts, that this Art
is just of as much use in Physic, as (...)
the Art of washing and perfuming is to the Gymnastick, of which we have
already spoken. He calls the art of Cookery and the art Washing and
Beautifying, the flatterers of Physic and Gymnastick.

Diocles wrote likewise the distempers of Women. He composed also a Book,
entitled of the weeks, wherein he treated undoubtedly of the critical days
after the manner of Hippocrates. There was also another Diocles of Chalcedon,
who is cited by Medicament. local. l. 7. c. 4.
Galen, but I know not when he lived.

CHAP IX. Praxagoras.
PRaxagoras came a little after Diocles, living at the latest about the time of
Aristotle. His Fathers name was De dissectiones ^ulv. cap ult
Nicarchius. (b) He was at the Isle of Cos as well as Hippocrates, and of the
same Family, that is, of the Asclepiades, with this peculiarity, Method. Med.
lib. 1.
that he was the last, the Family being extinct in him. This is the observation
of Galen, with which Suidas does by no means agree, who says, there were seven
descendants from Hippocrates, all Physicians, who successively bore his name,
but I am rather apt to credit Galen.

Praxagoras is reckoned the third after Hippocrates, who worthily maintained
the honor of rational Physic. Galen speaks honorably of him, as a man that
understood his business excellently well. He left several Books which are lost.
Galen cites some of them, as that of the use of abstinence, those of the
ordinary and extraordinary symptoms of Diseases, another entitled, of natural
things, or things which naturally happen, and another of Medicaments.

He past in his time for a great Anatomist, but all that he wrote upon that
subject being lost, we know nothing of his Sentiments, except that he believed
with Aristotle, that the Nerves come from the Heart. He added Galen. de decret.
Hippocrat. and ^laton.
that the Arteries turn to Nerves as their cavities grow straight toward the
extremities. He held with this Philosopher, that the brain was of little use,
and looked upon it as only an appendix to the spinal Marrow. He maintained also
that the De dignosee^d. Pulls. l. 4. cap. 2.
Arteries contained no Liquor, an opinion which we shall see driven farther by
Erasistratus. From hence we may conclude, that Praxagoras was the first Author
that distinguished the arteries properly so called from the veins. The
Physicians of the preceding ages having indifferently called both veins and
arteries by the name of veins.

Praxagoras was the first that distinguished with more exactness than before
the humors or juices of the body. See the Anatomy of Hippocrates and Aristotle.
Rufus Ephesius reports, that he said of these juices, that one was sweet,
another (...).
equally mixed or temperate, (...)
another resemosed Glass, which was a sort of flegin very penetrant, another
sower, another nitrous, another of the color of a Leek, another salt, another
bitter, another like the yolk of an Egg. He added besides these two other sorts
of Juices, one which he called (...).
Raking, that is, which produced a sense in the part, as if it were scraped
with a Knife or some such Instrument, the other he called (...). These names,
as well as those taken from the color of a Leek and the Yo^k of an Egg are
really new. But those of sour; bitter, nitrous, etc. were applied by
Hippocrates, to the same things before.
fixed. Introduct cap^ 9.
Most diseases according to him depended upon these dispositions of the
humors, and it was his opinion, that it was in vain to look any where else,
than into the humors for the causes of health or sickness. De sacultat. Not.
l. 2. c. 9
Galen limits the number of humors, which Praxagoras distinguished to ten,
without reckoning the blood which makes eleven, but he does not specify what
they were.

There are diverse specimens of the practice of Praxagoras in Caelius
Aurelianus. Amongst other things we find that he was very much for Ca^^s
Au^^lian ^out. l. 3. cap. 17.
vomits. He gave them even in the Quinsey and in Convulsions, the same he did
also in the Iliack Passion, as well as Hippocrates, but he urged them further,
continuing them until the Excrements came up at the mouth, which is a symptom
that comes in the extremity of this distemper, without giving a vomit. He
seemed to be a very bold practitioner; for in this distemper, if the Remedies
did not operate, he ordered an incision to be made into the Belly, and even
into the Gut itself, and the Excrements to be drawn out, and the wound to be
sewed up again. This example, and those before cited, shows that from the
beginning of Physic, they tried all means they could think of to answer their
ends, how dangerous soever. As for the rest, R fus ^phesius.
Praxagoras followed pretty close the practice of Hippocrates. He believ^d the
Fevers began in the Vena Cava, or that the seat of the Fever was in the Trunk
of the Great Vein, between the Liver and the Kidneys. He had several Scholars,
the most considerable of whom were Herophilus, Philotimus, and Plistonicus, of
whom we shall speak in the following Book.

CHAP X. Petron.
WE must here take notice of one Petron or Petronas, who lived, as Celsus says,
before Erasistratus, and Herophilus, and presently after Hippocrates. Galen
Comm^n in lib. 1. (...) poc. de vict ^ration^ in ^c^tis.
after having spoken of those who macerate their Patients by too long
abstinence, blames this Petron for the other extreme, that is, for feeding them
too much. But Celsus before-cited, tells us something of his Method, which is
very singular. Celsus l. 3 cap. 9.
Petron, says he, covered Men in Fevers with abundance of Clothes, that he
might make em very hot, and very thirsty. And when the Fever began to abate a
little, gave them cold water to drink; and if he moved Sweat, he thought he had
freed the Patient, if not, he gave them more cold water, and forced them to
Vomit. If either way the Fever was taken off, he gave them Roast Pork and Wine.
If it were not taken off, he gave them Water, in which Salt was boiled, that
they might cleanse their Stomachs by Vomit; and herein consisted his whole
Practice.

CHAP. XI. Menecrates and Critobulus.
MEnecrates was of Syracuse, and lived in the time of Philip King of Macedonia,
Father to Alexander the Great: He had so good an opinion of his profession,
that he thought he might recall the times, in which Physicians past for Gods.
He relished extremely well (...). A Man equal to a God. An Epithete which he be
stows likewise upon some other of his Heroes.
the Epithete, with which Homer compliments Machaon. He caused himself to be
called Jupiter, but Philip mortified him very much. This Prince having received
a Letter from Menecrates which began thus. (...) To be joyful or prosperous.
Menecrates Jupiter wishes all Prosperity to King Philip, made him this answer;
Philip (...); to be in health These were all common salutations in the
Superscriptions of Letters. But this latter was used equivocally on this
occasion.
wishes health to Menecrates; signifying thereby that he was brainsick, and
that he might not doubt of it, Philip adds, that he advised him to go to
Anticyra, an Island famous for producing Hellebore, used in the cure of Mad
Folks, as we have already observed. Plutarch reports the same of King Agesilaus.

Philip put also another signal affront upon Menecrates. Having invited him to
a very magnificent Treat, he caused a Table to be provided for him apart upon a
raised Platform, with a Pot of Incense upon it, and gave order, that while the
rest of his Guests were plentifully treated at another Table, (e) Var. Hist.
lib. 12. c. 5.
they should feed him with smoke. P. 469.
Elian says, that Menecrates was at first very proud of the Honor that was
done him, till hunger began to press him.

Deipnosophist. lib. 7. c. 10.
Athenaeus tells us several other Circumstances altogether as pleasant of his
Conduct. Menecrates (says this Author) used to make all those that he cured of
the Epilepsy enter into an obligation in Writing, that they would obey and
follow him for the time to come, as Servants do their Master. Athenaeus adds,
that one Nicostratus of Argos being freed from this Distemper by Menccrates,
followed him by the name and in the habit of Hercules. Another called Nicagoras
followed him in the habit of Mercury, Equipt with the Wings and Caduceus of
that God. One Astycreon was the 3 d of his Train, with the name and equipage of
Apollo, a fourth was rigged out like Esculapius. Menecrates himself had on a
purple Robe, with a Crown of Gold on his head, and a Scepter in his hand, with
the Buskins of the Gods. With this Train of Gods he took a progress through the
Cities of Greece. He wrote to King Philip in these Terms, You reign over
Macedonia, and can when you please destroy those that are in health, but I can
restore health and preserve it to those that have it, if they be obedient to
me, and can secure them to old Age. Your Macedonians are your Guards and
Followers, those that outlive Distempers are mine, for I Jupiter give Life.

The History of this Physician will serve to divert the Reader, if it be of no
other use. There was likewise another Menecrates, of whom we shall speak of in
his turn, that we may not confound him with the former, De Philosophia cap. 11.
as Vossius has done.

There was at the same time another Physician of more prudence than Menecrates,
he was called Critobulus. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 37.
He succeeded so happily in drawing the Arrow out of the Eye of King Philip,
and in the management of the Cure, that it occasioned no deformity to his Face.

CHAP. XXII. Philip, Glaucias, Alexippus, Pausasanias, Alexais, and Androcydas.
AMong the Physicians of Alexander the Great, was one Philip, an Acarnanian, in
whom he reposed so much confidence, that he took before his Face a Medicine
which he had brought him, before his Physician could read a Letter, which
Alexander put into his hands, at the same time, by which he received advice,
that Philip would poison him This may very well be the same Philip, who is by
Lib. 3. cap. 21.
Celsus called an Epirot, Acarnania being a part of Epirus. This latter Philip,
says this Author, being at the Court of King Antigonus, and having promised to
cure one of his Courtlers of a Dropsy of the mildest kind, had not the success
he expected, through the irregularity of his Patient, who, instead of
abstaining from meat and drink, as he was ordered, eat the very Cataplasms that
were applied to him, and drank his own Water. It Is not impossible, but that the
same Philip, who was Physician to Alexander, might be so also to Antigonus his
Successor in Asia. This Physician followed in some measure the method of
Hippocrates, who ordered his Patients to eat and drink very little in a
Dropsy. The Author of this History adds, that another famous Physician, who
was Scholar to Chrisippus, had before prognosticated, that the Patient would
not be cured; and being told, that Philip promised to cure him, made answer,
that Philip considered only the Disease, but he the humor of the Patient. This
Physician in all probability could be none but Erasistratus, of whom we shall
speak in the following book.

Gla^cias, another Physician of Alexander, was more unhappy than the former.
For Alexander imputing to him the Death of his favorite Hephaestion, who was
his Patient in his last Sickness, caused him to be crucified.

Plutarch speaks of two more Physicians to Alexander, or great men of his
Court, whereof one was called Alexippus and the other Pausanias, saying that
the first having cured Peucestas of a Disease, Alexander wrote him a Letter of
thanks, and the latter intending to give Hellebore to Craterus, he wrote to him
also partly to testify his concern for Craterus his Illness, and partly to
exhort the Physician, to proceed with all the caution necessary, to make his
Medicine effectual.

Pliny mentions a Physician named Androcydas, who wrote to Alexander in these
Term^, When you drink Wine, remember that you drink the Blood of the Earth; he
adds, that as Hemlock is poison to a man, so Wine is poison to Hemlock.

CHAP. XIII. Syennesis, Diogenes, Clidemus, Thrasias, and Alexias.
TO the preceding Physician we may add, those that are cited by Aristotle and
Theophrastus, and are not reckoned among the Ancient Physicians; as one (a)
Syennesis of Cyprus, and one Diogenes Apolloniates of whom the former makes
mention, reporting some fragments of their writing, by which it appears that
they believed with Polybus, that the Veins have their Origin from the Head.
One Clidemus of Plataea, cited by the latter, and one Thrasias of Montine, who
bragged that he had a Drug of such a property, that it would kill without pain.
The same Thrasias used to say, that the same thing would purge one man and not
another, which he proved by the example of a Shepherd that eat a handful of
Hellebore without being moved by it. To this Shepherd, he added one of his own
Scholars, who was also a famous Physician, one Eudemus a seller of Medicines,
and another Eudemus of Chio, who were all unmoved by Hellebore.

FINIS.

