I. Simon Fecit


A COMPENDIUM OF UNIVERSAL HISTORY: FROM The Beginning of the World, To the
Reign of The Emperor CHARLES the Great.

Written Originally in Latin, By Monsieur Le CLERC.

Done into English.

Nescire quid, antea quam natus sis, acciderit, id est semper esse Puerum.

Cicero. LONDON, Printed for M. Gillyflower, in Westminster Hall; J. Tonson, at
Grays-Inn-gate, next Gray's Inn-(...) W. Freeman, at the Bible in Fleet Street;
J. Wa^^^^, in the Temple; and R. Parker, under the Royal Exchange. MDCXCIX.

THE AUTHOR'S EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THERE is no necessity I should take upon me to set forth the Usefulness of
those Tracts, wherein the History of Mankind is contracted into a narrow
compass; the vast number of such sort of Books, which have been published by
learned Men, especially from the Time when good Literature has begun to revive
in these our Western Parts, does sufficiently evidence the Sentiments of the
learned World in this matter: These are the only Two things that can be
required at my hands; first, why I chose rather to project a New Method of my
own, than make use of others Industry, after the labors of so many learned Men
that are still extant; and then to show the Reason of my Design: Both which I
shall dispatch in a few words.

In the Course of my Studies, I could not but observe, that most of these sorts
of Epitomes were either too long or too short; so that there was a Deficiency
in both, that obstructed the Reader from receiving the benefit he hoped for, in
the perusal of them; for they are written to the intent they may be frequently
turned over by the Studious, and almost retained in their memories; which
cannot be, if they are of the larger size: For the Design of such Works as
these, is, That the Times wherein the most remarkable Events that have happened
among all Nations, may be notified, and that the Chronology of them, compared
one with another, may be revolved upon; so that who were Cotemporaries among
the remotest Nations, and what things fell out in the same Age, may be easily
produced: But this cannot be done, if your Historical Compendiums be too short,
of which there are very many, in which the Chronology is too summarily
comprehended.

Both these faults we have endeavored to shun herein, and therefore we have
followed Dionysius Petavius, the most accurate of Chronologers, in this our
Epitome, till the Year of our Lord, 533. to which he brought down his Annals.
Not that we look upon him to have been wholly free from error, in so perplexed
a thing, and that admits of so much variety; nay, we have noted some here: But
undoubtedly he is less guilty than those who have wrote before him; neither are
they rashly to be called Faults, that oppose some Conjectures, wherewith
Chronologers do now adays abound.

What was chiefly wanting in those Epitomes that are already extant, and for
the amending whereof we have applied our selves, in this our COMPENDIUM, we
have taken to be these things: 1. A truer, though short Narration of many
things, which were not very aptly represented in the days of our Ancestors,
such as those Matters that are boasted of, concerning the Four Monarchies, and
many others: 2. A pointing to several Modern Writers, from whom a fuller
knowledge may be had of several things, which we have briefly mentioned: 3. A
more accurate and truer expounding of many Particulars relating to the Holy
Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical History, than is found elsewhere.
Most Writers have, as it were, combined, in every thing to commend and approve
of those who have succeeded in their Designs; when, on the contrary, they have
mostly condemned others, and laden them with Reproaches, who have had the
misfortune to be born down with the number of Voices; as if prosperous Events,
and the multitude of Consents, were infallible arguments of Truth; or that
whoever were commended in Ancient Times, were worthy of Praises; as those who
were condemned, should be really guilty: But herein we neither absolve nor
condemn any Man, saving that the thing it self does clearly absolve or condemn
them; and, for the most part, we have also barely declared the thing as it was,
without making any enquiry what Opinions were true or false, but what really
happened, and actually came to pass.

AN INDEX of the PERIODS.
I. PERIOD, From the Creation of the World, to the Deluge, page 4 II. PERIOD,
From the Deluge, to the Calling of Abraham. p. 5 III. PERIOD, From Abraham, to
the Law of Moses, p. 10 IV. PERIOD, From the Law, till the Taking of Troy, p.
15 V. PERIOD, From the Taking of Troy, to the Building of the Temple of
Jerusalem, p. 22 VI. PERIOD, From the Building of the Temple, to the First
Olympiad, p. 25 VII. PERIOD, From the First Olympiad, to the Return of the
Jews, p. 29 VIII. PERIOD, From the Return of the Jews, to the Taking of
Carthage, p. 43 IX. PERIOD, From the Taking of Carthage, to Jesus Christ, p. 80
X. PERIOD, From the Birth of Christ, to the Conversion of Constantine, p. 96
XI. PERIOD, From the Conversion of Constantine, to the Reign of the Emperor
Charles the Great, p. 125
A COMPENDIUM OF Universal, History, FROM The beginning of the World, to the
Reign of the Emperor Charles the Great.
AS we are wont, when we learn Geography, in order to remember where the less
noted Towns, and more inconsiderable Buroughs stand, to six in our Memories
the Situation of the Principal Cities, about which we place those other lesser
ones and Villages; so when we study History, it will be of advantage to us to
settle in our thoughts certain Times that are remarkable for some illustrious
Event, to the end we may refer unto them whatever we meet with in the Monuments
of the Ancients; which sort of Events are distinguished by the Name of Epochs,
because our Minds do as it were (...), inhere or dwell upon them when they are
employed to divide the Age of the World, by the help of those Epochs, into
certain intervals of time.

This our Compendium is distinguished into twelve Epochs, and therein we take
in whatever has happened from the beginning of the World, to the Reign of
Charles the Great: For here an end ought to be put to Ancient History; for
about these times it was, that the Roman Empire was utterly destroyed, and new
Kingdoms set up both in Asia and Europe.

The first Epoch shall be the Creation of the World, which, according to the
Computation of Dionysius Petavius, whom we shall follow for the future,
happened the year before Christ 3984. From hence to the Deluge, will be
comprehended an History of 1656 years, for it was in that year of the World the
Universal Deluge happened, before our Savior's Birth 2328.

The Second shall be Noah's Flood, from whence to the calling of Abraham, which
happened in the year of the World 2022, before Christ 1962, are computed 366
years.

The Third shall be taken from the calling of Abraham out of Mesopotamia, to
the time of the Law given by Moses, which we referr to the year of the World
2453, before Christ 1531, and comprehends 431 years.

The Fourth commences from the time of the Law given by Moses, from whence to
the taking of Troy, we reckon 347 years, in the year of the World 2800, before
Christ 1184.

The Fifth is the Destruction of Troy, from whence to the building of the
Temple of Jerusalem, which was effected An. M. 2992, before Christ 992, are
comprehended 192 years.

The sixth is the Building of the Temple at Jerusalem by Solomon, which was 216
years before the first Olympiad, which is computed to fall in the year of the
World 3208, before Christ 776.

The Seventh is taken from the first Olympiad, from whence are reckoned 238
years, to the return of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity, that happened An.
M. 3446, before Christ 538.

The Eighth is the Freeing of the Jews from the Babylonish Captivity by Cyrus,
which fell out 336 years before Carthage was overcome by Scipio. An. M. 3782,
before Christ 202.

The Ninth is taken from the Subduing of Carthage, which happened 202 years
before our Saviors Birth, and fell out in the year of the World 3984.

The Tenth is the Birth of our Savior Jesus Christ, from which to the
Conversion of Constantine the Great to the Christian Faith, are reckoned 312
years, which fell out An. M. 4296.

The Eleventh is taken from the Conversion of Constantine, which happened 488
years before the Reign of Charles the Great, which begun in the year of our
Lord 800, An. M. 4784.

The Twelfth we fetch from the Reign of Charles the Great, with which we close
up this our Compendium of Ancient History. Now as for those Intervals of time,
that flow between the several Epochs, them we call Periods.

The Creation, The First EPOCH.
From the beginning of the World to the Deluge, are computed 1656 years, which
space contains

The First PERIOD.
The year of the World, The year before Christ, 1. 3984.

THE most accurate Chronologers do reckon that the World was Created in Autumn,
in the Month of October, concerning which you may consult Dionys. Petavius his
Ration. Lib. 2. p. 2. as also his book De Doc. temp. p. 2. l. 9. c. 7.

We are informed by no other History besides the Scripture, what was done in
this Interval of time; which yet at the same time speaks of things with that
obscureness and brevity, that but little knowledge of those times, can be got
from thence: Recourse may be had to the first six Chapters of Genesis, where
after the Creation of the World, these are the principal Events to be met with.

The Creation of Adam and Eve; their sinning and begetting Cain and Abel.

129. 3855.

Cain Slew his Brother Abel, when Adam and Eve had no other Sons besides them;
but afterward begat Seth; the Scripture says nothing of any Children they had
of the Female Sex, save that before Adam dyed he begat Sons and Daughters, Genesis
5.4.

987. 2997.

Enoch was Translated to Heaven, without tasting of Death.

1536. 2448.

God forewarns the corrupted World of the Deluge by Noah an hundred and Twenty
years before it came to pass.

Here two things are observable, the long life of the Antediluvian Patriarchs,
and their food. They lived then many Ages, which when some Men have not been
able to digest, they have said they were Monthly years, so that 1200 years
before the Deluge made up no more than 100 Solar years; but how ridiculous this
is, will immediately appear, by observing of the Computation; for according to
their Calculation, Seth who is said to have begot Children, when he was 105
years old must have begot his first born at nine years of Age; and others, as
Enoch, Cainan, and Mahalaleel must have done so much sooner. See Lanct. Div.
Inst. lib. 2. c. 12.

As to their Food, most of the Ancient, and many of the Modern Writers have
been of Opinion, that they lived only upon Fruit, and that eating of Flesh did
not begin till after the Flood, which is very likely from Genesis 9.3.

The Deluge, The Second EPOCH.
From the Deluge, to the calling of Abraham, are 366 years, which Interval
makes up

The Second PERIOD.
The year of the World, The year before Christ, 1656. 2328.

GOD sent the Deluge to destroy the Corrupted Race of Mankind, from off the
face of the Earth, and Noah with his Family alone escaped; whereof there remain
clear Footsteps in the Ancient Monuments of the Heathens; concerning which,
among others, Hugo Grotius may be consulted in his Annotations on the first
Book of V. R. C. as also Sam. Bochartus in his Phaleg lib. 1.

The Memory of Noah and his Sons, Sem, Cham, and Japheth, remained among the
Heathens, though obscured with diverse Fables, as they have showed.

1809. 2175.

Then Mankind began to Build the Tower of Babel, to preserve them a Name among
Posterity, and about which they might fix their Habitations, least they should
be scattered over the face of the Earth; But through Discord, they were
dissipated into different Regions, and it came to pass in process of time, that
the Original Language underwent various changes among a People that were so
remote from one another. Of this you may see what we have writ in our
Philological Comment upon Genesis 11.

The Posterity of Sem fixed their Seats in the upper Asia; of Cham partly in
Asia, and partly in Africa; and of Japheth in the lesser Asia and Europe. See
Genesis c. 10. as also the forecited Bochartus.

Soon after the first Discipation of Mankind, Nimrod the Son of Chus, who in
the Chaldee is called Bar-Chus, whence the name of Bacchus amongst the Greeks,
began to settle his Empire in Mesopotamia; the beginning of whose Kingdom were
Babylon, Ezech, Chalne and Acchad in the Land of Sinaar, that is, Babylon; from
whence he went out into Assyria, and built Nineve, Rechoboth, Chalach, and
Rosen, as Moses relates, Genesis 10.10, 11. by which words is only meant, that he
laid the Foundation of those Cities, which were afterward so called; for
Nineve was so named some ages after by Ninus. See Bochartus his Phaleg, Lib. 4.
c. 12.

But whether the Kingdom descended from this first King to his Posterity, is
uncertain. Africanus does indeed recite the Names of seven Chaldean Kings, and
six Arabian, that Reigned in Babylon; but these are clearly different from
those which some have produced out of Ctesia. The first that Africanus has, is
called Evechous, but that in Ctesia is Belus; and therefore all these are to be
reckoned amongst the obscure number. See Is. Vossius and Dion. Petavius.

Kingdoms were in those times very small; and what has been usually said of
that great Empire of Babylon, whose bounds were extended by Ninus the Son of
Belus, who is thought to have been Nimrod, through all the greater Asia, is a
mere Fable. The Earth in those days, was in a manner encumbered every where with
Trees, and inhabited rather by wild Beasts than Men.

A little after began the Egyptian Dynasties, which were in number four, the
Theban, Thinitican, Memphitican and Tanitican Dynasties, whose respective
Metropolitan Cities were Thebes, This, and Memphis in the Higher Egypt, and
Tanis seated in that part of the Country called the Lower Egypt; but the first
that seems to have possessed all Egypt was Menes, the first King in each Dynasty.
He seems to have been the same with Cham, Noah's Son. Sir John Marsham has a
Catalogue of his Successors. Sec. 1. and onwards, who is to be consulted with,
concerning the Antiquities of Egypt.

About these times Fohi seems to have flourished as first Emperor of China,
though their Calculation exceeds that of the Hebrews, which we follow, and does
better accord with the Greek of the Septuagint, but wherein the error lies, who
can tell? See Is. Vossius de Aetate Mundi.

The Kingdom of Scicyone in the Peloponnesus, is thought to have had its
beginning not long after, whereof Aegialeus was the first King, who is placed
by Chronologers about these times. See Petavius.

Arts seemed to have flourished about the end of this Period, and Architecture
was now first known, because certain Pyramids of a Stupendous bigness and
height are thought to have been built at this time in Egypt; but seeing the
beginning of all Ancient History commences here, we have commonly no more than
the Names of Kings and Patriarchs, and Fables beyond.

At this very time, Idolatry seems to have sprung up in the World, seeing
before now, all Mankind worshipped one only God. And this was the Original
thereof. Men knew that there were certain separate Essences, which were called
Angels, besides the Supreme God, whom the Almighty sent as his Legates or
Ambassadors, and if I may say so, as it were, lesser Gods, unto Men. These,
Mankind at first worshipped as Gods Ambassadors; as we see the Hebrews
themselves held them in great Reverence. But when they once fell into that
Notion, that the Supreme God committed Empires, Cities and Families to the care
of these lesser ones, they grew by degrees, almost forgetful of the Supreme
Deity, and showed that Reverence to those lesser Gods, that was due to him
alone. Then they fell into an opinion, that the Souls of Excellent Men, after
their decease, were admitted into the Order of those lesser Deities; and hence
it came to pass, that Deceased Kings were worshipped, as if they had been taken
into the number of the Gods. All which however did not hinder, but that that
Ancient and True Opinion still Survived amongst most Nations, that there was a
Supreme God, and that it was upon him alone, that the rest of the Inferior
Deities had their dependence.

Moreover, because Angels sometimes delivered Oracles in Statues, as John
Spencer concerning Urim and Thummin, prettily conjectures, the Heathens erected
Statues to their Gods. And it should seem afterward to have come to pass, that
when both the Worship and Manners of the Gentiles displeased the Angels of
Light, because they saw many put them up in the place of the Creator, they
forsook them; and the Angels of Darkness succeeded in their places, whence the
Scripture says, the Heathens worshipped Devils; not that the Heathens did
believe they adored Evil Spirits, which we call Devils; but because their
Temples and Statues were only inhabited by Devils. But the discussion of these
things require a larger Volume.

The Calling of Abraham, The Third EPOCH.
From Abraham's Calling, to the Law given by Moses, are 431 years, which makes
up

The Third PERIOD.
The year of the World, The year before Christ, 2022. 1962.

IDolatry being now grown prevalent in the World, God was pleased to make
choice of some Family, from among the rest of Mankind, wherein the Knowledge
and Worship of one only Supreme God might be kept up; and therefore he called
Abraham one of the Posterity of Sem, out of Ur of the Chaldees, and commanded
him to go into the Land of Canaan, where he made himself oftener, and more
clearly known unto him by the Ministry of Angels; and especially gave him that
Signal promise, that it should some time come to pass, that one of his
Posterity should bring the Blessings of Heaven unto all Nations.

A little after the coming of Abraham into the Land of Canaan, as there were
several petty Kings, both on this and the other side of the Euphrates, there
happened to be a War between them, as you have it in Genesis 14. where mention is
made of Amraphael, King of Sinaar, or Babylon, not as King of all Asia, as is
commonly thought the Kings of Babylon then were; but as the Companion of
Kedorlaomer, King of Elam, who was much more Potent, as having certain Kings in
the Land of Palaestine, that were his Subjects. And here is an Invincible
Argument for the overthrow of that opinion concerning the Kingdom of Babylon,
that it extended over all Asia before Abraham's time, under Ninus and
Semiramis, and Ninyas Semiramis Son; seeing Amraphael was King of Babylon at
this time, and not Arius, as they would have it, who follow Ctesia, or Ninyas
the Son of Ninus, as Vopiscus after Africanus, is of opinion; neither was the
King of Babylon, equal in power to the King of Elam.

There were several Kings in these times, in the Land of Palaestine, among whom
Abimelec and Melchisedec are mentioned, and who yet retained the knowledge of
the True God.

The Scriptures also contain the History and Birth of Ismael, Isaac, Esau and
Jacob, which may be consulted for that end.

2046. 1938.

Abraham was 99 years Old, when God gave him his Commandment about
Circumcision, and the same year were Sodom, Gomorra, Adma and Tseboim,
overthrown with Lightning, setting fire to the Sulphurous Earth, which
thereupon sunk, whereunto the River Jordan and other Rivulets flowing, and
mixing their Waters with the Sulphurous matter, formed the Lake Asphaltites;
concerning which, I have made a particular Dissertation elsewhere. This
Conflagration, which Lot with his Wife and Daughters was flying from, reached
his Wife, who out of Curiosity stopped, or turned her face back, and made her
give up the Ghost, with the fright of such a dreadful Spectacle; for so are
those words in Scripture to be understood; (...) and she was a Statue for ever,
that is, she grew stiff, and remained like a Statue in the same place; which we
have also showed in another Dissertation.

2122. 1857.

In Isaac's Days, Inachus founded the Kingdom of the Argives in the
Peloponnesus, and had Successors, of which see Petavius. Tanaquillus Faber, a
very Learned Man, after he had observed in his Notes upon the Bibliotheca of
Apollodorus, That there was nothing in Greece older than the time of Inachus,
says, that Inachus was of Eternal Original, which the Name of it self
sufficiently discovered; for that Inachus was no other than Anach or Enach,
from (...) in old Greek; which word, as is manifest from the Writings of the
Poets, signified a God or Gods. So far he. We shall not meddle with his
Etymology, but give our own Opinion of it. The Phoenicians in Old Times were
the first Navigators, and such as adventured to Sail to remote Countries; now
the Name of the Phoenicians is derived from the Hebrew word (...) Anac; for the
Phoenicians were as it were called (...) Bene-Anac, as Bochartus shows at
large, Chan. lib. 2. c. 1. that is, the Sons of Anak or Anakims, which were
famous in the Land of Palaestine; and that it should be so, will appear to be
no wonder, if we will allow that those who came first into Greece, were of the
number of them who were called Anakims, so that the first Inhabitants of that
Coast might have been called (...) Anakims, Anakim, Inachus; and hence it came
to pass, that Gods and Kings were called (...), those, as it were, who were of
the stock of the Anakims, being translated into the number of the Gods, or such
as sprang from them, who first Reigned in Greece; as the Syrian Princes were
called Hadads, the Egyptian, Pharaohs and Ptolomies, and the Roman Caesar's,
from some excellent Person who was the Founder of the Empire, and bore that
Name.

2202. 1782.

Ogyges built Eleusine in Attica, and six and twenty years after, during his
Reign in that Country, happened that which was called the Ogygian Deluge in
those parts, above two Hundred years before that of Deucalion's. Perhaps this
Story had its original from Noah's Flood, which in Hebrew may be called (...)
the Deluge of the Ocean, Mabboul Chab, from which word, it may be, the Name of
Ogyges was formed. So also they have confounded Noah's Deluge, with that of
Deucalion, as we shall see by and by.

2237. 1747.

Joseph the Son of Jacob, being Sold by his Brethren, was carried into Egypt,
and there, as you have it in Genesis, being raised into great Authority, he
sent for his Father and his whole Family thither, and settled them in Lower
Egypt, in the Land of Goshen, with the King of Egypt's leave.

2373. 1611.

Moses the Deliverer and Legislator of the Israelites, was born at a time when
all the Male Children of the Israelites were commanded to be slain through
Pharaoh's cruelty.

Cecrops was said about this time to have gone from Egypt, and planted a Colony
in Attica, where he built twelve Cities, and made Laws for Government.

A little after happened Deucalion's Flood in Thessaly, which the Greeks
confound with that wherein all Mankind Perished, as they do Deucalion with
Noah. For Example, the Scripture says, that Noah was a Man of the Earth (...)
Isch Haadamah, that is, an Husbandman, which words may also be turned (...),
the Husband of Pyrrha or Red; for Adamah signifies Red, as well as Earth. Hence
when the Phoenicians told the Greeks, that he in whose time the Deluge happened,
was, (...) Vir Rubrae, that is, of the Earth, they fancied their Deucalion to
have a Wife, whose Name was Pyrrha; Deucalion also can hardly be the Name of
one Man, but there are rather two words couched under this one (...) digle jon.
vexilla Ionum, the Banner of the Ionians, whereby they meant some Troops that
had escaped the Deluge. They are afterward said to have filled desert places
with Colonies, by throwing of stones which were turned into Men; because indeed
their (...) Abanim, which word in the Phoenician Tongue, signifies both Sons
and Stones, possessed themselves of those places. That this Deluge was not
universal, and so that one Man and one Woman were not the only Persons that
survived it, is manifested by Justin out of Trogus Pompeius, Lib. 2. c. 6. in
these words; There were some escaped by flying to the tops of Mountains, or by
being carried in Ships to Deucalion King of Thessaly, by whom for that reason,
the Race of Mankind was said to have been repaired.

The Phoenicians who filled Europe with their Colonies, as Bochartus
excellently proves in his Canaan, did certainly about these times under the
Conduct of Cadmus, arrive in great numbers in Greece, whither they brought
their Religion, and a vast number of Fables, no small part whereof the same
Great Man has made manifest to arise from their own ill understood words.

The History of Moses may be taken out of the Scripture, his Flight from Egypt,
his Return, and chief Miracles have happened in this our third Period.

The Law given by Moses, The Fourth EPOCH.
From the Law given by Moses to the Destruction of Troy, are 347 years, which
comprehends

The Fourth PERIOD.
The Year of the World, The Year before Christ, 2453. 1531.

WHEN the Children of Israel had continued in the lower Egypt for 217 years,
and suffered a cruel Bondage under the Kings of that part of the Country, who
by the Egyptians are called Shepherds, and took away that Country from the
Ancient Egyptians, they were at length after the working of diverse Miracles,
freed by Moses, as the Scriptures declare.

They increased to a vast Multitude in Egypt, seeing there were six hundred
thousand Men able to bear Arms, that went out of the Country, from whence we
may gather that they amounted in all at least to two Millions of Souls. These
passed the Red Sea in one Night, which by the following method, might be done
in the space of eight hours; let us suppose that the space of the Sea so
divided to each side as it was, might contain an Army, whose front consisted of
two hundred Men, that is, about two hundred paces broad; and let us suppose
that the Israelites filled all that space, so that the front of the Army or
Multitude, consisted of two Hundred; and lastly, let us grant that the Chanel
of the Red Sea contained in breadth, the space of two hours passing over, so
that 120000 Men might be contained in the Chanel of the Sea so long and so
broad, marching in a Body, whose front was made up of two hundred Men. Which
Notion carries nothing of absurdity in it; seeing every one at least is allowed
a pace square, for six thousand Paces takes in at least two hours Journey,
which if multiplied by 200, which was the breadth allowed for the dried space,
this will make up 120000 paces square. Hence it is manifest, that the first Rank
of the Army, might reach the opposite Shore in two hours time; and that Body
which followed the six thousand Men two hours after; by which method 120000 Men
might pass through that Sea in four hours. Now let us allow the other four
hours for the rest of the People, and all the Children of Israel might pass
over in the space of eight hours. But it is to be noted, that the Red Sea might
have been narrower, and the space from whence the waters were driven, larger;
from whence it follows, that that passage throught, might have been done in
less time than we have assigned.

It seems wonderful, that such a vast number of People could be contained in
the lower Egypt; but the wonder will be lessened to him that considers how
populous and fertile Egypt was of Old. Concerning which consult J. Vossius
observe. var. c. 10. Neither could there be any danger in the Opinion, though we
were to grant, that the Copyers or Transcribers might through neglect mistake
in the number, so as that they are sometimes found in our Books, to be more
than really they were. But of this we shall speak elsewhere. After they had
passed dryshod through the Red Sea, they lived forty years in the Deserts of
Arabia, where what befell them is contained in Exodas, Leviticus, Numbers and
Deuteronomy. There it was more especially that they received the Law, which
comprehended three sorts of Precepts. The first related to good Manners, and
were common to all Mankind alike; others related to Sacred Rites; and the third
were established for the Government of Civil Society.

The Moral Precepts were approved of by all Civilized Nations, and every Wife
Man; as to the Ceremonials, there are several of them taken from those of the
Egyptians, which God established by a Law, because the Israelites were already
used to them; those being rectified which might be faulty, concerning which you
may consult the Famous J. Marsham and J. Spencera There were also many things
in their Polity alike, from whence it came to pass, that the Athenian Laws
agreed in many things with those of the Hebrews, as Learned Men, and especially
Sam. Petyte, have observed; which last has made a Collection of them; because,
that as Cecrops the first King of Athens, being an Egyptian born, brought his
own Country Laws into the Country of the Athenians; so also Moses by God's
Command, the Children of Israel having been used to the Laws of Egypt,
commanded many Precepts out of them, though he added many particular ones: But
above all others, this was peculiar to the Commonwealth of Israel; that God
was the chief Magistrate therein; and that there was no name of any other
Polity, could agree with it; so that a new one was to be invented, which they
called a Theocracy.

2493. 1421.

Moses dyed before he got into the Land of Canaan, leaving to the Jews that Law
which he had given them in the Name of God.

2498. 1486.

Joshua having Subdued the Land of Canaan, divided it among the twelve Tribes,
and dyed eight years after.

2570. 1425.

The Argives having turned out Gelanor the last King of Inachus's Race, gave
the Government to Danaus, who came from Egypt into Greece.

2525. 1459.

When the Children of Israel after the Death of Joshua, fell into Idolatry,
they were Conquered by Cuschan, King of Mesopotamia, and paid him Tribute for
eight years; but at length they were delivered by Othoniel, the first Judge
after Joshua in Israel.

2583. 1401.

The Israelites returning again to their former sins, were subdued by Eglon
King of Moab, who was Slain by Ehud their second Judge.

Some think that Minos Reigned about this time; others will have him to have
Reigned King of Crete much later; some again contend there were two of them,
one more Ancient, and a famous Lawgiver, and the other co-temporary with
Theseus, who also lived about the end of this our Period.

The Kingdom of Troy was Erected and Enlarged in the lesser Asia, by Dardanus,
Erichthonius, Tros, Assaracus, Laomedon, and some other Princes.

Pelops the Phrygian, the Son of Tantalus, Reigned in Peloponnesus, and left
his Name to all that Country.

At this time the Isthmian Games were institutedh which were Celebrated in
Honor of Archemorus every third year, at the Isthmus of Corinth. But some will
have them to have been Consecrated to the Memory of Archemorus by Adrastus, and
those Captains that went to Thebes, which happened later; perhaps these only
restored them in Honor of Archemorus.

Belus in the same Age Reigned in Assyria, and after his Death, was reputed to
have been taken into the number of the Gods.

2663. 1321.

Jabin King of Canaan, Subdued the Israelites, but they were delivered Twenty
years after by Deborah and Barak.

2730. 1254.

He was Succeeded by Gideon, who overthrew the Midianites without fighting;
this Man was otherwise called Jerubbaal, and Sanchoniathon of Berytis consulted
him, when he writ his History, which he composed in the Phoenician Tongue, and
which Philo-byblius translated into Greek, of which version there are some
fragments still remaining. See Sam. Bocha^tus in his Canaan, lib. 2. Cap. ult.
You may also consult Henry Dodwell's Dissertation concerning it, who would have
Sanchoniathon to be a Supposititious Author.

2770. 1214.

Abimelech the Son of Gideon, after he had Slain his Seventy Brethren, Invaded
the Office of Judge.

He was Succeeded by Thola, Jair, and Jephtha, whose Deeds are recorded in the
Book of Judges. We shall only observe out of the History of Jephtha, who vowed
his Daughter in Sacrifice, that some Learned Men have thought the Fable of
Iphigenia to have sprung from thence, whom the Greeks are said to have Slain in
Aulis. Certainly (...) and (...) do not much differ, about which you may
consult Capellus in his Diatriba de voto Jephthae. But these belong to the
following Period. Many things during the time of these Judges in Israel, worthy
of Remembrance, have happened both in the East and West, which cannot be reduced
to any certain year.

Ninus the Son of Belus, Reigned in the Greater Asia in the time of Deborah;
the same that built Niniveh, and extended the Empire of Assyria far and near
through Asia. It was then this Empire seems to have begun to Flourish, so as
that Ninus may be esteemed as it were the founder of it. The Computation of
Herodotus is herein more exact; from which it appears that the Empire of the
Ancient Assyrians, lasted only 500. years, especially in the upper Asia.

After Ninus his Death, his Widow Semiramis Ruled the Empire, concerning whom
as well as Ninus, you may read Justin lib. 1.

Palaetyrus or old Tire, was built in the Reign of Ninus, as some would have
it; but others have thought it to be much older. As for Greece there were
several Kings who Reigned one after another, as well in Athens as in
Peloponnesus.

In Erichthonius his Reign, who was the fourth King of the Athenians from
Cecrops, were the Panathenaea or Minerva's Festival instituted; and under
Erichtheus the Sixth King, were appointed the Eleusinian Sacrifices, in Eleusis
a City in the Province of Athens, which were attended with very Great and
Sacred Rites; and Phoemonoe was the first Priest at Delphos, that delivered
Oracles in Hexameter Verse.

Amphion Reigned in these times at Thebes, and Perseus at Mycene.

A little after the time of Baruck, the Theban Hercules the Son of Amphitryon
and Alcmene Flourished. He was believed to have been Jupiter's Son; because in
Old Times all that were Valiant, were called (...), i. e. Jupiter's Sons; even
as the Hebrews called them (...), the Sons of the Strong, or of the Gods, Been
Elim. There were other Hercules's older than this, of whom as also of their
whole History, we have Treated in a particular Dissertation already.

The expedition of the Argonauts is to be referred to that Age, which seems to
be mingled with Fables that arose from want of a right understanding of the
words of the Phoenicians that related to them. For example, a Ship is called
Argo; and (...). Archo in the Phoenician Tongue, signifies a Long Ship. It Is
said that Ship spoke; because the Phoenician word (...) Doberah, signifies one
speaking, or the Helm. See Sam. Bochart. in his Canaan, and my Dissertation de
Statua Salina.

Atreus and Thyestes lived a little after in the Peloponnesus, who were
Notorious for their mutual enmities and wickedness.

Theseus brought twelve Towns built by Gecrops in the Land of Athens in the
time of Gideon, into one City.

Seven Captains wage War against Polynice King of Thebes, to wit, Adrastus,
Eteocles, Amphiaraeus, Tydeus, Hippomedon, Capaneus, and Parthenopeus. Most of
these having perished in that War, their Children called (...), i. e.
Posterity, by way of Peculiarity, were revenged upon the Thebans ten years
after, whom they overthrew in a great Battle, under the Conduct of Alcmeon,
Amphiaraus his Son.

2655. 1329. 2768. 1216.

Janus Reigned in Italy an Hundred and fifty years before the Arrival of
Aeneas; and Latinus about 35 years.

The Destruction of Troy, The Fifth EPOCH.
There are 192 years from the Destruction of Troy, to the Building of the first
Temple of Jerusalem, which makes up

The Fifth PERIOD.
The Year of the World, The Year before Christ. 2800. 1184.

A War arose between the Trojans and Graecians about Paris, the Son of Priamus
King of Troy, his stealing away Helen the Wife of Menelaus King of Sparta,
which after Ten years continuance, ended in the Destruction of Troy.

We shall hereafter mingle this Epoch, taken out of profane History, with
those Epochs taken from the Scripture; because there is nothing generally so
Celebrated in the History of the Heathens, as this is: Jair the Gileadite, was
Judge in Israel at this time.

Ibsan, Elon, Abdon, Sampson, Eli and Samuel, Succeeded him in this Period in
order; whose years may be taken out of Petavius his Tables, and teir History
from the Scripture.

2832. 1182.

Aeneas, that same year when Troy was taken, in the Autumn, Sailed into Thrace,
where he wintered, and two years after while he tarryed in Sicily, whither he
went from Thrace, having weathered the Tyrrhene Sea, he arrived in the Summer
at Laurentum, and soon after having Married Lavinia King Latinus's Daughter, he
Built the City Lavinium on that Coast.

2803. 1181.

The Rutilians under the Conduct of Turnus, wage War against Latinus and
Aeneas, wherein Latinus and Turnus were killed Aeneas Reigned three years in
Italy. Petavius will supply you with the order of his Successors.

2817. 1167.

A few years after, the Kingdom of Sicyon, which according to the computation
of some, had lasted about a Thousand years, entirely ended: To wit, the year
before Jeptha took upon him to be Judge in Israel.

2832. 1152.

Ascanius the Son of Aeneas, Built Alba Longa, Thirty years after the Building
of Lavinium.

2881. 1103.

The Heraclidae under the Conduct of Temenus, Cresphon and Aristodemus, fixed
their Habitations in Peloponnesus, in the time of Sampson's Judging Israel.

Next year began the Kingdom of Corinth, as also of the Lacedaemonians, which
was continued by the two Families of Erysthenides and Proclides, descendants
from Hercules. Here the Epoch is fixed of the Return of the Heraclidae, which is
much celebrated among the Greek Writers. They were said to have returned at
that time into Peloponnesus, because they had endeavored though in vain, an
Hundred years before to invade that Country.

2189. 1095.

That return of theirs happened to be when Eli was Judge in Israel, who being
Succeeded by Samuel, the Children of Israel in his time despising the Authority
of the Judges, would have a King set over them, and so Saul of the Tribe of
Benjamin was Elected.

In his time Codrus the last King of Athens, Sacrificed his Life for the safety
of his People; whose Sons Medon and Nileus contending for the Kingdom, the
Athenians took the opportunity to abolish the Royal power, and made choice of
Archons, whose Office was to be perpetual, but they were to give an account to
the People of the Administration, and Medon Codrus's Son, was the first that
bore that Office.

2913. 1071.

In these times the Greeks that were the Posterity of the Heb. (...) Which may
be read Ion or Javan.
Javans or Ionians, sent Colonies into Asia, from whence they came, wherefore
the Javanian Athenians, and their Posterity the Heb. (...) Been Eol, the Sons
of a Storm, or such as in a Storm came from Asia into Greece.
Aeolians contended, that Asia Minor was first planted with their Colonies,
whereas they ought to have acknowledged, that they themselves were descended
from thence, but that afterward they stocked the Country with new Colonies
that was till then but ill Peopled. They were the People that Built Cuma and
Smyrna.

2929. 1055.

David Reigned after Saul, being descended of the Tribe of Judah, and was at
first a Shepherd, afterward both King and Prophet.

2969. 1015.

Solomon succeeded David, as famous in the Art of Peace, as his Father excelled
for his Knowledge in Military Affairs, and he built a Temple unto God.

The Building of the Temple of Jerusalem, The Sixth EPOCH.
From the Building of the Temple of Jerusalem, to the first Olympiad, are
computed 216 years, which makes

The Sixth PERIOD.
2992. 992.

SOlomon built a Temple unto God, which his Father David who was desirous to
set upon that work, was forbid to do, and finished the same in the 23d. year of
his Reign; Herein was the Ark of the Covenant laid up, which before was wont to
be kept in Moses his Tabernacle.

The Scripture informs us that this King was adorned with all accomplishments,
both of Body and Mind; but that toward the end of his Life, he had not been
able to withstand the Temptations of Women; so that he fell unto base Idolatry,
for the love of his Wives and Concubines, whereof he had very many.

In his time, the Kings of Tire were very potent, and Hiram then Reigning, made
a League with Solomon. See Marsham ad Saec. 14.

Hadarezer or his Son Reigned in Syria, as appears from 2 Samuel 10. and from
that time forward, the Kings of Syria seem to have been very powerful to the
time of Nabopolassar, who brought Syria as well as Judaea, under the Subjection
of the Assyrian Empire. See 1 Kings 20.2. and 2 Kings 8, 9, 12. Petavius thinks
Homer lived at this time, which was not two Hundred years after the Destruction
of Troy. See his Book De Doct. Temp. 9. c. 30. Some make him an Hundred years
later at least. Hesiod was cotemporary with him, or at least but a little
later, but if you will believe the Authority of Arundel's Marble, a little
older. See Marsham ad Saec. 15.

3009. 975.

Solomon was Succeeded by his Son Rehoboam, who for want of Management, lost
the Sovereignty over the Ten Tribes, and continued only to Reign over Judah and
Benjamin.

Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, possessed himself of the other ten Tribes, and made
them Golden Calves to Worship, as you have it in the first Book of Kings.

Hence the Posterity of Jacob came to be divided into the Kingdom of Judah, and
the Kingdom of Israel, which for some Ages after without interruption, had
different Kings, whose names and years you may take out of Petavius his Tables.

In Rehoboam's time lived Sesac or Sesostris, the most Potent King of Egypt,
who took Jerusalem, and having united the four Dynasties of Egypt into one
Kingdom, made a Conquest of a great part of Asia. See Marsham ad Saec. 14, 15.

3026. 958.

Abijah, Rehoboam's Son, Succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Judah, and set
upon Jeroboam with four Hundred thousand Men, who had double the number, and
overcame him: Neither should this be looked upon as a wonder, that so many
Soldiers should be found in so small a Country; for in those days there were no
standing Troops, but all the Men, except such as were Aged, Children and the
Sick, went upon the Expedition.

3098. 886.

In the Seventeenth year of Pygmaleon King of Tire, when two Kings of the same
Name, for both were called Joram, Reigned in Judah and Israel, Dido left Tire,
and built Carthage, whence it is manifest that Virgil in making Aeneas and Dido
to be cotemporaries, has been guilty of a great Anachronism. See Sam. Bochart.
in his Canaan L. I. c. 24. who says that Carthage was called Carthada in the
Phoenician Tongue, that is, (...) Cartha-hadath or (...) Cartha-hadthah a new
City, and that the Tower was called (...) Botsrah, from which word being
pronounced by the Greeks, Byrsa, arose the Fable of the Ox-hide, being cut into
small thongs; for (...) is an Ox-hide, whereas the Hebrew word signifies a
Fortress.

3100. 884.

When Ahaziah King of Judah was dead, and that his Mother Athaliah having
destroyed all the Seed Royal, obtained the Kingdom by Tyranny, Lycurgus the
Famous Lacedaemonian Lawgiver flourished in Greece, whose Laws are extant in
his Life, writ by Plutarch. This was the greatest fault in his Polity, that it
was altogether Military, as if a Commonwealth was less founded upon the Arts
of Peace, than upon Military Virtues, and the next to it was, that all the
Infants who were born with any imperfections, and the Hilotae or Husbandmen,
least they should grow too numerous, were put to death.

3108. 876.

Petavius and others confine to this year, the end of the Babylonian Empire,
Sardanapalus being Slain by Arbaces Governor of the Medes, whom they reckon to
have been the last King, as if no body had been advanced to his place, and that
the Empire of the Medes had Succeeded that of Babylon, which we have confuted
in our Com. Philolog. ad cap. 10. Genesis

Arbaces the Mede, having shaken off the Babylonish yoke, set his Countrymen
at liberty, which they retained for about fifty years, until they chose Dejoces
for their King, as Herodotus says, Lib. 1.

3142. 842.

In the Reign of Joash King of Judah, and of Jehoahaz King of Israel, Hazael
who slew his Master Benhadad King of Syria, and invaded his Throne, was very
troublesome to Judah and Israel both; neither did his Son Benhadad carry it any
otherwise toward the Hebrews, but he was overcome by the King of Israel, 2
Kings 13.25.

3160. 824.

In these times lived Elisha the Prophet, Elijah's Successor; and not long
after the Prophet Jonah, who foretold Jeroboam King of Israel, he should be
victorious over the Syrians, 2 Kings 14.25. What year it was he went to the
Ninivites, is not known; but there is no doubt but it was before the
Destructiof that City, which was Prophesied by the Prophet Nabum, and which
seems to have happed in the Reign of Nebuchodonosor King of Babylon, and of
Cyaxanis over the Medes. See Petavius his Book, de Doct. Temp. lib. 10. c. 3.

3170. 814.

The Kingdom of Macedon was founded this year, Jeroboam II. being King of
Israel, as Joash was of Judah. Caranus the Argive of the Heraclidan Race, as
being the Eleventh in course of Descent from Hercules, taking a band of Men
along with him out of the Peloponnesus, began to Reign in Macedon. You may be
supplied with his Successors to the time of Philip out of Petavius.

The First Olympiad, The Seventh EPOCH.
From the first Olympiad, to the return of the Jews out of the Babylonish
Captivity, were 239 years, which makes up

The Seventh PERIOD.
The year of the World The year before Christ. The Olympiads. 3208. 776. Olym.
1. Year 1.

IN the time of Azariah King of Judah, the Olympic Games instituted of old by
Hercules, were restored by Iphitus. They were celebrated every fourth year, and
lasted for five days. The usual time for them, was in the Month of July, and
the City Olympia in Elis, was the place where they were held, which as it stood
in the Neighborhood of Pisa was sometimes confounded with it. These Games were
chiefly made up of five sorts of exercises, viz. of Leaping, Running, Quoiting,
Darting and Wrestling; and he that was conqueror at all these, was called
(...), and by the Latins Quinquertio But after the Greeks had begun to breed
Horses, Horse-races were also admitted among rest either with a single Horse,
or with Chariots drawn with two Horses, or with four. The Arts of Music,
Poetry, Eloquence, etc. were afterward introduced into the number.

As these Games returned every fourth year, the space of four years was called
an Olympiad, and from thence it was the Greeks began to reckon their years by
Olympiads, and hence whatever has any truth or certainty therein, in respect to
their Chronology, dates its original. There was nothing that could be relied on
before, as to their years. Whence M. Varro, who divided the Age of the World
into three Periods, that is, to an uncertain, fabulous and historical one, did
begin this last from hence: hereof you may consult Sir John Marsham De
Chronologia Graecorum ad Saecul. 16.

3213. 771. II. 2.

At this time Phul King of Assyria, was troublesome to the Children of Israel;
and it was now that Ninive seems to have been rebuilt, which is said to have
been destroyed before by Arbaces the Mede.

About these very times, the Greeks lead Colonies into Sicily, the most
considerable of which was that conducted by Archias of Corinth, who built the
City of Syracuse.

Hosea Prophesied also then, who sometime after was followed by Esaias, or
rather was cotemporary with him in respect to Age and Prophesying.

In this Age, to wit, in the fourth year of the fifth Olympiad, the Archons
which till now had continued in Office for life, were at Athens made to hold
but for ten years; and the first of them was Alcmaeon.

After the Reign of fourteen Kings in Italy, from the time of Aeneas, Romulus,
Numitor's Grandson, set up a new Kingdom, of which Rome was the Metropolis,
whose Foundations are thought to have been laid about the end of the third year
of the sixth Olympiad, whence from the following year, that way of reckoning
from the building of the City, dates its beginning.

Year of World. Before Christ. Olymp. Building of the City. 3231. 753. VI. iv.
1.

Romulus first King of the Romans, Reigned thirty eight years, and the year
following, the Conquerors at the Olympic Games began to be crowned, whereas
they had before no other reward, save that their Names were Registered among the
public Records. Those Crowns were made of Pine, Apple, Olive Trees, etc.

3237. 747. VIII. ii. 7.

While Phul and Tiglath-Phalasar his Successor Reigned in Assyria, and fixed
their Royal residency in the City of Ninive, Nabonassar began his Reign in
Babylon, whence the most celebrated Era of Nabonassar, took its beginning
among the Chaldeans. This Person seems to have restored the Babylonish Empire
which was fallen, and to be the same with him who was called Baladan, whose Son
was Merodac, 2 Kings 20.12. See Petavius Lib. 9. c. 52. De Doct. temp.

The Sabines having by a certain Stratagem, possessed themselves of the Rock
Tarpeia, were troublesome to the Romans; and both Parties being ready to decide
the difference by a Battle, they were by the intervention of the Roman Matrons
made friends, so as that they coalesced both into one People; and Tatius, and
Romulus Reigned jointly together.

3241. 743. IX. ii. II.

The Messenian War between the Messenians and Lacedaemonians began this year,
and lasted for twenty years, till the Messenians were utterly overthrown,
Aristodemus a brave Man, being General of the Messenian Forces. Pausanias and
Justin may be consulted hereupon.

3258. 743. XIII. iii. 28.

In the time of Hezekiah King of Judah, the Lacedaemonians were overthrown in a
great Battle by Aristodemus, who to propagate an offspring, prostituted their
Wives; from whence sprang the Parthenians, who thirty years after under the
Conduct of Philantus the Son of Aracus, who was the Author of the prostitution
of the Women, going to seek out new Habitations, possessed themselves of Tarentum
in Italy. See Justin L. 3.

3263. 721. XIV. iv. 33.

Salmanassar who Succeeded Tiglath Phalasar in the Kingdom of Assyria this
year, which was the last of Hezekiah's Reign, after he had taken Samaria and
Hosheah, King of Israel, carried the ten Tribes Captive into Assyria and Media,
and Transplanted into their room other Nations given to Idolatry, the History
whereof may be read, 2 Kings 17. and from them sprang those People who were
afterward called Samaritans, who received the Law of Moses; and of the Books of
Scripture allowed the Pentateuch only to be Canonical; and they have the same
to this day, written in the old Hebrew Characters' which the Jews have changed
for the Chaldee ones.

3269. 715. XVI. ii. 39.

Romulus, as we have already said, the first King of the Romans, and
cotemporary with Hezekiah, while he mustered the Army in the Marshes of Caprea,
upon the sudden rising of a Tempest, was never seen more. Some would have it,
that he was killed by the Senate, and that afterward to avoid the scandal of
it, he was taken into the number of the Gods; as if Mars had snatched him up
into Heaven. See Dionysius Halicarnas. Lib. 1.

About this time Sennacherib King of Assyria, entered with an Army into Judaea,
as is set forth, 2 Kings 19.

But in the lesser Asia, that Gyges, who was so famous for his Wealth,
Governed, being the first King of Lydia of the Mnermnadan Race after four
others descended from Hercules, of whom the last, whose name was Candaules, he
with the Queens assistance, cut off.

3270. 714. XVI. iii. 40.

Numa Pompilius Succeeded Romulus in the Kingdom of Rome, who improved the City
by Religious Ceremonies, and Civil Laws, and Reigned three and forty years.

Next year Merodac King of Babylon, while Assaraddon, Sennacherib's Son, ruled
in Assyria, sent Ambassadors to Hezekiah, as we read, 2 Kings c. 20. Assaraddon
is thought to have invaded the Kingdom of Babylon, which opinion is grounded
upon this Argument, in that there is no further distinction made after that in
Scripture, between the Kings of Babylon and Assyria.

3286. 698. XX. iii. 56.

Wicked Manasses Succeeded his Father Hezekiah, who eight years after, being
carried captive into Babylon, upon his repentance, was restored again, and
Reigned in all 55 years.

In his time the Medes, under the conduct of Arbaces, shook off the yoke of the
Kings of Babylon, and constituted Dejoces, who was a Man eminent for Justice
and Equity, to be their King, by whom was built the famous City of Ecbatana,
concerning whose name and largness, you may consult Bochartus in his Phaleg, l.
3. c. 14.

3297. 687. XXIII. ii. 67.

From this time forwards the Archons at Athens were chosen annually, and the
first of them was Creon.

The Messenians, the nineteenth year after the first War which they had waged
with the Lacedaemonians, revolted from them, under the leading of Aristomenes,
who for the space of fourteen years, valiantly defended them. But at last the
Lacedaemonians after ten years Siege, took Messina and put an end to the War.
And the remainder of the Messenians, upon the overthrow of their Country,
Sailed into Sicily, where they possessed themselves of Zancle, which they
called Messin^.

3313. 671. XXVII. ii. 83.

The year before the Messenians Sailed thither, Tullus Hostilius Succeeded Numa
Pompilius, and Reigned three and twenty years.

Egypt, from the time of Sesostris King of that Country, who, we have told you,
was cotemporary with Rehoboam, was molested with intestine troubles, and
divided into parts among diverse Princes, until again in this Age, it was
brought under the obedience of Psammetichus alone, concerning which, see Sir
John Marsham ad Saec. 16.

3326. 658. XXX. i. 96.

Cypselus began to act the Tyrant at Corinth, and held it for thirty years,
having expelled the Bacchiades, who hitherto had had the chief management of
the Public; whence it came to pass, that Demaratus the Corinthian Sailed into
Italy, for fear of that Tyrannical Government, and fixed himself at Tarquinij, a
City of Etruria.

3341. 643. XXXI. ii. 111.

Manasses King of Judah, was Succeeded by his Son Amon, who after he had
Reigned two years, left Josiah to Succeed him, who was a pious and good King.

3345. 639. XXX. ii. 115.

Ancus Martius the fourth King of Rome, began his Reign now, which he continued
for four and twenty years.

Then Solon was born, the Lawgiver of Athens, and the year before Thales
Milesius, both which were of the number of those seven famous Wisemen of
Greece. The names of the other five who were equal to these two, were these,
Periander the Corinthian; Pittacus a Mitylenian; Bias of Priene, Chilon the
Lacedaemonian, and Cleobulus the Lindian. Of these see the Book writ by
Ausonius, entitled Ludus Septem Sapientum.

A few years after, Phraortes the Son of Dejoces King of the Medes, having laid
Siege to Ninive, perished with the greatest part of his Army; but Cyaxares his
Son, who Succeeded him in the time of King Josiah, going about to Revenge his
Fathers Death, renewed the Siege of the said City; the Father or Grandfather of
Nebuchodonozor being then King of Babylon. While Cyaxares was engaged in that
Siege, the Scythians, under the Conduct of Madye, making an Eruption out of
Scythia, overpowered him, and so roving through all that part of Asia, which is
more to the South, held it under their power for eight and twenty years.

3359. 625. XXXVIII. vi. 129.

This year, according as Dionys. Petavius conjectures, Nabopolassar,
Nebuchodonozor's Father, began his Reign in Babylon, and as Berosus says, who
writ his Annals of the Chaldaeans in Alexander's time, he appointed a
Lieutenant under him over Egypt, Phoenicia and Syria, whom afterward Rebelling
against him, he reduced by his Son Nebuchodonozor unto obedience.

3361. 623. XXXIX. iv. 131.

Draco corrects the Laws of Athens, and made such severe ones, that they were
said (...), to be writ not with Ink, but with Blood.

3370. 614. XLI. iii. 140.

This year Tarquinius Priscus the fifth King of Rome began his Reign, and
continued it for 28 years. He was Son to Demaratus the Corinthian, who before
being named Lucius at Lucumum, was upon his living at Tarquinij called
Tarquinius.

3374. 610. XLII. iii. 144.

After Josiah was overthrown and killed by Necho King of Egypt, he was
Succeeded by Jehoahaz his Son, who Reigned only three Months, for being carried
into Egypt, Nechoh put Jehoiakim into his room, who Reigned eleven years.

3376. 608. XLIII. i. 146.

Nabopolassar sent his Son Nebuchodonozor this year into Syria, that he might
bring the Kings Lieutenant that had Rebelled against him, to his duty; which
when he had effected, he overran Judaea, took Jerusalem, imposed a Tribute
upon King Jehoiakim, and carried away some of the People into captivity, among
whom was Daniel the Prophet. Having returned from thence to Babylon, he
Succeeded his Father in the Kingdom, and from hence they compute the beginning
of the seventy years, which Jeremiah speaks of c. 30.

The Scythian Nomades, a few years after, when they had held Asia for 28 years,
being feasted by Cyaxares, being made drunk with Wine and fallen fast a sleep,
were utterly cut off by him.

3385. 599. XLV. ii. 155.

This year Nebuchodonozor dispossessed Jehoiakim, who Rebelled against him, of
his Kingdom, and put his Son Jehoiachin in his stead, who did not Reign above
three Months and some days, for he Rebelling also, he was besieged in Jerusalem
by an Army from Babylon, to whom he Surrendered himself, and was carried
thither. This was the second Captivity wherein Ezekiel, Mordecai, and Josedek
the High Priest were carried away.

Then Nebuchadnezer made Mattaniah his Uncle King, in stead of Jehoiakin, and
called him Zedekiah, who was the last King of Judah, and Reigned eleven years.

In these times flourished Epimenides and Anaximander the Philosophers, Aleman
and Alcaeus the Poets, and Sapho the Poetess; and from this Age forwards,
Greece abounded with such Wits.

3390. 594. XLVI. iii. 160.

Solon not long after being Praetor in Athens, corrected Draco's Laws, which
were too severe, as Platarch Relates in Solon's Life.

The same year Astyages the last King of the Medes, Succeeded his Father
Cyaxares, Nebuchadnezer being then King of Babylon, who three years after took
Jerusalem, and put out Zedechiah's Eyes, after he had Slain his Children before
his face, and saving a few poor People, led all the Jews into Captivity.

He also not long after according to Ezechiel's Prophecy, c. 26. and so on,
took Tire after a long Siege, and levelled it with the ground; which must be
understood of Palaetyrus, that stood upon the Continent, not of the new City
that was built in the Island, and which was now first built. For when the
Tyrians saw that they were no longer a match to the Chaldaeans, they carried
every thing that was valuable, with their Wives and Children into the
Neighboring Island, leaving the old City to the Chaldaean Army, and built a
new one, in that Island. See Sir John Marsham, ad Saec. 18.

After Nebuchadnezer had subdued the remainder of Judaea and Palaestine, he
Conquered the Ammonites and Moabites, and the Egyptians soon after also.

3397. 587. XLVIII. ii. 167.

Now the Amphyctions, that is, Senators chosen out of all Greece, who sat at
Delphos about the management of the public concerns of that Country, appointed
the Pythian Games to be celebrated every fourth year, as well as the Olympic
ones, in honor of Apollo.

3407. 577. L. iv. 177.

Servius Tullius the sixth King of Rome Reigned 41 years, who was of so obscure
an extract, that his Parents were not known; whence Seneca in his CVIII.
Epistle says, This shows, that there were two Kings of Rome, one of which has
no Father, and the other no Mother. For who Servius's Mother was is doubtful,
and as for Ancus, he had no Father, he being called Numa's Grandson; which
words are worth noting, because they are a clear illustration of those words of
the Author to the Hebrews, where Melchisedec is said to be without Father, and
without Mother.

Next year Nebuchadnezer having made Amasis Governor of Egypt, he slew King
Apries, whom Jeremy calls Vaphree, and after he had for some years Ruled Egypt,
in the name of the King of Babylon, he shook off his yoke.

At the same time the Nemaean Games were first celebrated by the Argives; and
then it was that Aesop the Phrygian, and Author of the Fables flourished among
the Greeks.

3420. 564. LVI. i. 190.

Evil-merodac Succeeded Nebuchadnezer his Father, and Reigned three years.
Neriglissor Son in Law to Nebuchadnezer having Slain him, substituted his own
Son in his room, and as his Guardian managed the Government for five years,
whom therefore, Daniel the Prophet attributes to Baltassar, for so was his Son
called.

About these times, Pisistratus first played the Tyrant at Athens, who being
afterward twice ejected, recovered his power as often within the space of
sixteen years.

Then also Astyages the last King of the Medes, according to Justin and others,
was divested of his Rule by his Grandson Cyrus; but according to others, whose
opinion, as being grounded upon Xenophon's Authority, we the more readily
favor; He dyed when Neriglissor King of Babylon made War upon him, and left
Cyaxares II. to Succeed him, who made Cyrus the Son of his Sister Mandanes, the
Daughter of Astyages, and of Cambyses King of Persia, who paid Tribute to the
Medes, absolute Commander of his forces; though we cannot deny but Marsham
reconciles these two opinions in this manner, when besides the Kingdom of the
Medes, whose capital City was Ecbatana, he makes another of the Medes and
Persians.

For he thinks that Cyaxares the first King of the Medes, whom he supposes to
have been Assuerus, delivered the Persians, whom his Father Phraortes had
Conquered, to his Son Darius to be governed by him as their King. Whom Daniel
c. 9.1. calls, as he conjectures, Darius the Son of Assuerus, of the Seed of
the Medes. And Cyaxares I. had Astyages for his Successor in the Kingdom of the
Medes, Dispossessed by Cyrus; but Darius who was also called Astyages, the
Grandfather of Cyrus, had Cyaxares for his Successor. See Marsham ad Saec. 18.
But there are many things that do occasion me to dissent from him, though
otherwise it must be confessed; that there can be nothing almost besides
conjectures in this business.

3426. 558. LV. iii. 196.

Craesus last King of Lydia, Reigned sixteen years, his Father being still
alive, as Petavius supposes.

The Poets Ibycus, Simonides and Stesichorus, as also the Philosopher
Anaximenes flourished at this time.

3429. 555. LVI. ii. 199.

After the Death of Neriglissor, Baltassar his Son Reigned alone nine Months,
at the end whereof he was Slain by Nabonides's faction, or as Petavius thinks
by that of Darius the Mede, and Nabonides or Darius the Mede succeeded him.

In this Age lived Xenophanes of Colophon the Philosopher; and Theognis the
Poet, Surnamed (...), now flourished.

Phalaris the Tyrant of Agrigentum flourished then also; one Perillus is said
to have made him a brazen bull hollow within, wherein he shut up Men alive, and
putting fire under it, made their crying to seem like the bellowing of a Bull.
But the first on whom the experiment was tried, was Perillus himself, of whom
Ovid in his first Book de Art Amandi, after he had said that Busiris slew the
Man who first taught him to pacify the Gods with the blood of his Guests,
speaks thus. Et Phalaris tauro violenti membra Perilli
Torruit, infelix imbuit auctor opus.
Justus uterque fuit: neque enim Lex aequior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.


3440. 544. LIX. i. 210.

Croesus King of Lydia, marched against the Persians, or the Army of the Medes
and Persians, commanded by Cyrus the Persian, and while he hoped to return home
Conqueror, he was deluded by the Ambiguous answer of the Oracle. (...):

For having past over the River Haly, he was overcome by Cyrus, and upon the
taking of Sardis, was made a Prisoner, and carried into Captivity, leaving all
Asia unto Cyrus.

A little after flourished Anaximander the Milesian, who foundout the obliquity
of the Zodiac, and Pherecydes of Scyros, (not the Syrian, for he was not of
Syria, but of the Isle of Scyros) who was Pythagoras his Master, who not long
after were followed by Hipponax and Hippicus the Poets.

In these times lived Consucius, in the furthermost parts of Asia, among the
Chinese, who was an excellent Philosopher. Of whom see Mart. Martinius in his
History of China, lib. 4. and Philip Coupletius in his Proem to Confucius.

Not long after Croesus his overthrow, when Harpagus in Cyrus's Name, governed
the lesser Asia; the Phocaeans being weary of his Rule, left Asia, and Sailed
into Gaul, where they fixed their Seats about a place where now Marseilles
stands, and built that City.

3446. 538. LX. v. 216.

This year Cyrus having subdued the King of Babylon's Confederates, marched to
Babylon it self, which he took; and for his Reward, his Uncle Cyaxares, who
dyed soon after, bestowed his only Daughter Mandanes upon him; whom when he had
married, he was made Heir to all Cyaxares his Kingdom, and gave a beginning to
the Persian Monarchy, which had not any equal to it before.

Daniel the Prophet lived to this time, who was carried captive into Babylon by
Nebuchadnezer, to whom under Nabonidus or Darius the Mede, the last King of
Babylon, the Prophecy of the Seventy weeks was Revealed, upon the elapsing of
which, the Messiah was to come, as we shall see hereafter.

The Return of the Jews, The Eighth EPOCH.
From the Return of the Jews out of the Babylonish Captivity, to the Subduing
of Carthage, are 336 years, which makes up the

Eighth PERIOD.
Year of the W. Year before Christ Olymp. of the Building of Rome. 3446. 538.
LX. v. 216.

THE same year wherein Cyrus began his Reign, upon the taking of Babylon, he
put forth a Decree, wherein the Jews who were held in Captivity by the Kings of
Babylon, were ordered to Rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem; in obedience to
which, they returned in great numbers into their own Country, under the Conduct
of Zorobabel, together with Josua the Son of Josedec the High Priest.

Two years after they laid the Foundations of the Temple, and erected an Altar;
But the Samaritans their Neighbors, who also worshipped the God of Israel,
while they pretended a readiness of themselves to assist the Jews in the work,
and were refused by the Jews, they endeavored by their Calumnies, to induce
the King of Persia to put a stop to the further carrying on of the building,
Esd. 4.

In these times Simenides of Ceos, Anacreon of Samos Lyrick Poets, and
Xenophanes the natural Philosopher and Poet, flourished amongst the Greeks.

3451. 533. LXI. iv. 221.

This year Tarquinius Superbus the last King of the Romans, having Slain his
Father in Law began his Reign, which continued for four and twenty years.

Five years after, Cyrus wageth War with the Scythians, if you believe Justin
and Herodotus, and was slain by Thomyris Queen of Scythia: But Ctesias says,
that he was wounded in a Battle he fought against the Derbices, and dyed three
days after, having first given many good Precepts to his Sons Cambyses and
Tanyoxares. But Zenophon clearly describes him dying pleasantly in a good old
Age, after he had Reigned thirty years.

He was Succeeded by Cambyses, II. King of Persia, who Reigned seven years and
five Months, Cambyses upon the Death of Amasis King of Egypt, and his being
Succeeded by Psammenitus in that Kingdom, invaded it; where after he had done
many cruel Acts, and in the mean time commanded his Brother in Persia to be put
to Death, he at last ran mad, and not long after was wounded and dyed.

After his Death a certain Magician called Smerdis, very much resembling
Tanyoxares both in body and face, took upon him to be the same Person, and
Reigned seven Months. Petavius thinks this Man to have been Artaxerxes, whom
Esdras makes to Succeed Ahasuerus, c. 9.7. See his Book de Doct. temp. lib.
12.27.

About these times Polycrates the Tyrant of Samos, was crucified by Oron
Governor of Sardis, who took him by a stratagem, after he held the Tyrannick
power for eleven years with great Success.

3436. 521. LXIV. iii. 233.

After the counterfeit Tanyoxares had hid himself seven Months, he was at last
taken, and destroyed by the Seven Peers of Persia, who conspired against him,
and one of their number, viz. Darius the Son of Hystaspis, was made choice of
in his room.

In the Second year of his Reign, the Jews begged leave to finish the begun
work, and at length after sixteen years, began to build again, notwithstanding
all the efforts of the Samaritans to obstruct them, who were always very
obnoxious to the Jews. The Temple was entirely finished within the compass of
six years, and a little after the Passover was kept at Jerusalem, Esd. 6.

A few years before, to wit, in the fourth of Cambyses his Reign, before the
Birth of our Savior 527, upon the Death of Pisistratus Tyrant of Athens,
Hippias Succeeded, who was his Eldest Son, and held the Government for eighteen
years. Hipparchus a very Learned Man, was his Brother, who is said to have
compiled the Rhapsodies of Homer into one Volume, which were before in several
scattered pieces. This Man seeing he maintained the Tyranny of his Brother, was
Slain by Harmodius and Aristogiton, who though they were themselves killed in
the midst of the Guards; yet this did so incense the Athenians, that they
Divested Hippias of the Government, who strove now to maintain it in vain, and
so put an end to Pisistratus his Tyranny.

3472. 512. LXVIII. ii. 242.

Not long after, the Province of Babylon Revolted from King Darius, which
however after a long Siege of the City of Babylon, he recovered by the cunning
of Zopyrus.

While these things were doing in Greece and Asia, Tarquinius Superbus the last
King of Rome, was expelled from thence, because that his Son Sextus Tarquinius
Ravished Lucretia, and immediately thereupon the Kingly Authority was
Abrogated, and two Consuls created in the place of the Kings; The first that
executed that Office, were L. Junius Brutus, and L. Tarquinius Collatinus,
which last was by P. Valerius who succeeded him, forced to lay down because of
his invidious Name; as not long after M. Horatius succeeded Brutus, who was
Slain in Battle, a Catalogue of the Consuls that succeeded, you have in
Petavius.

About these times, Pythagoras of Samos flying both from Samos and the Rulers
of it, for fear of the Tyranny exercised there, went an exile into Italy.
Syloson, Polycrates's Brother, was then Tyrant of Samos; Hence it is manifest,
that Ovid who makes Pythagoras to be Numa Pompilius his Tutor, is guilty of a
gross Anachronism.

Next year after the Creation of Confuls at Rome, M. Valerius Poplicola, in his
second Consulship, Triumphed for his Conquering Tarquinius and the Etrurians,
whom he excited to make War upon the Romans. But his Victories rendering him
afterward suspected by the People, he made a Law, whereby a Citizen that was
called into question for his life, might Appeal from the Consuls and the Senate
to the People. In the mean time the Family of the Tarquins making it their
constant business, to seek for aid among the Neighboring Nations against the
Romans, stirred up Porsenna King of Etruria, to make War upon them; in which
War the Romans did great exploits; and amongst others, M. Horatius Cocles,
Mutius Scaevola, and Cloelia Virgo, very much signalized themselves, by whose
Valor more especially, Porsenna was brought to raise the Siege of Rome, which
he had invested, and to grant a Peace to the Romans. A little after the Temple
of Jupiter Capitolinus was Consecrated by M. Horatius.

At that time Darius being to make War upon the Scythians, made a Bridge over
the Thracian Bosphorus, and then over the Danube; from whence passing over into
Scythia, after he had lost a great part of his Army, he returned into Asia,
leaving Megabazus to subdue Europe, with Eight hundred thousand Men, as being
persuaded thereto by Hippias the Tyrant of Athens, who by the assistance of the
Persian Forces, thought to reassume his lost power. Megabazus Conquered Thrace
and Macedon for the King of Persia, as also the Ionians, but having been
overthrown by the Athemians upon several occasions, Darius was so incensed at
it, that he resolved to make War upon Greece.

In these times flourished Heraclitus the Ephesian, and Democritus of Abderis,
both famous Philosophers.

The Romans won many Victories over the Sabines and Vejentians, they brought
also the Latins, who made a bustle and stir against them, after various
overthrows, wherein the Romans still worsted them, to renew their Alliance with
them, to whom they added the Volsci and Aequi, who also gave them trouble.

3491. 493. LXXI. iv. 261.

But the Romans themselves could scarce be at Peace at home; for the
Commonalty, finding they were oppressed with the extortions of the Nobility,
passed over the Anien, to the Hill called Mons Sacer, as if they designed to
erect another Republic without any Nobility; but they were brought back to
Rome, by the Speech and Dexterous Management of Menenius Agrippa. There it was
that three Tribunes of the People were first created, by a Law which they
called the Holy Law, to whose number two more were afterward added, who were
to defend the Privileges of the Commonalty against the Nobles: The Power of
these Magistrates was esteemed most Sacred, and no Law could be enacted without
one of them were present.

While these wranglings were at Rome, Darius made open War upon Greece, and
Mardonius his Son in Law was the first that expelled their respective Tyrants
out of the Cities of Ionia, and reduced Thrace and Macedon again, which had
shaken off the Persian yoke under its obedience.

3492. 490. LXXII. iii. 264.

At length when he had entered Greece, he engaged at Marathon, a City of Attica,
with the Athenians and Plataeensians, who under the Conduct of Miltiades, whose
number did not exceed ten thousand Men, overthrew three hundred thousand of
these Barbarians; Darius soon after, as he was preparing for a new expedition,
dyed.

At this time flourished Aeschylus the Athenian a Tragic Poet, and Sophocles
his Countryman was now born, who excelled him in the same sort of Poetry. Now
the Athenians by the advice of Themistocles, built the Pyraeum; and Gelo became
Tyrant of Syracuse.

C. Marcius Coriolanus being Banished from Rome, excited the Volsci to make War
upon this Country, and being made their General, he besieged Rome, whose Siege
when he could have taken it, he raised, at his Mothers tears and entreaties.

3498. 486. LXXIII. iii. 268.

Sp. Cassius, in his third Consulship, was the first Author of the Agrarian
Law, which was made about dividing the Land of the Hernici, whom the Romans and
Latins had Conquered; but next year the same Cassius, as affecting Tyranny,
was thrown down headlong over the Rock Tarpeia, and so perished.

3500. 484. LXXIV. i. 270.

While the Romans waged War with the Vosci, Vejentians and Aequi, their
Neighbor Nations, Xerxes, fourth King of Persia succeeded Darius, and Reigned
twenty years; in the fourth of his Reign, he made War upon Greece, whither he
Transported his Land Forces, consisting of eight hundred thousand Men, over a
Bridge made cross the Hellespont. His Navy consisted of above twelve hundred
Ships; But he was first beaten by the Athenians, more especially under the
Conduct of Themistocles, in a Naval fight at Salamis; and three hundred
Spartans under the leading of Leonidas, durst with wonderful boldness oppose
his Landforces at the Streights of Thermopylae, where valiantly fighting, they
were every man of them Slain. But that vast Army was next year utterly
overthrown at Plataea, a City of Boeotia, Mardonius being General of the
Persians, as Pausanias and Aristides were of the Graecians.

In these times flourished Pindar the Poet, and Anaxagoras the Philosopher.

3057. 477. LXXV. iv. 277.

Caeso Fabius, who with the single Family of the Fabij, to the number of three
hundred and six of ripe years, and four thousand Vassals, made War against the
Vejentians, was overthrown by them at the River Cremera, and the whole Army
destroyed, of which Ovid in his Fastorum says. Una dies Fabios ad bellum
miserat omnes,
Ad Bellum missos perdidit una dies.
One day the Fabij all
One day the Fabian Race made all extinct.


But that many things are false herein, as that amongst such a number of Men
grown, there was one under Age, is shown by Dionys. Halicarnasseus, and the
matter is handled at large by Jac. Perizonius, in his Observe. c. 5.

At this time Sicily was imbroil'd several ways, what with Gelon and Hieron
Tyrants of Syracuse, and Thereon of Agrigentum within; and the Carthaginians
from without, who endeavored to possess themselves of it.

3510. 474. LXXVI. iii. 280.

Artaxerxes was made partner with his Father in the Kingdom.

About the same time Sophocles began to teach the way of Tragedies, and a few
years after was the most excellent Tragedian Euripides born. In the same Age,
also flourished Herodotus of Hallicarnassus, who is the most Ancient of all the
Greek Historians we have.

3514. 470. LXXVII. iii. 284.

Cimon the Son of Miltiades, Admiral of the Athenians Fleet, took away several
Cities of Asia from the Persians, and overcame them at Sea with two hundred and
fifty Ships only, when they had no less than three hundred and forty; and a
little after gained another Victory over their Land Forces at Eurymedon, a City
of Pamphylia.

The Athenians at that time waged War with good success, against their
Neighbors in Greece, and gave diverse overthrows to the Thassians, Thracians
and Aeginetans. The Lacedaemonians also brought the Hilotes and Messenians, who
Rebelled against them, under Subjection again, having sent home the Auxiliary
Troops of Athens, because of the suspicion they had of them.

3516. 468. LXXVIII. i. 286.

T. Quinctius General of the Romans, obtained a Victory over the Voscians, and
after the taking of Antium, Triumphed.

Next year upon the Death of Hieron in the Isle of Sicily, succeeded his
Brother Thrasibulus, in his Tyranny over Syracuse, but being expelled by the
Syracusians, he went into Banishment to Locris; and from that time forward, the
Syracusians enjoyed a free State for 40 years together, till Dionysius his days.

3519. 465. LXXVIII. iv. 289.

Artabanus the Hyrcanian slew Xerxes, and Accused his Brother Darius of the
Parricide before Artaxerxes, whom, as we have said, Xerxes had made his
Copartner in the Empire; Darius being condemned to die, Artaxerxes was wounded
by Artabanus, but afterward slain by him, whence he obtained the Name of
(...), or Long Hands; and began this year to Reign alone, and Reigned XL years.

To him Themistocles fled in his Banishment, who was very kindly received, and
rewarded by him. The same Artaxerxes was a great favourer of the Jews, and in
the twentieth year of his Reign, gave Nehemiah leave to Rebuild the Walls of
Jerusalem, when Cyrus had only allowed them the favor of Rebuilding the
Temple. Nehemiah finished that work in a very short time, notwithstanding all
the opposition made to the contrary by the neighboring Samaritans, Ammonites
and Arabians.

3522. 462. LXXIX. iii. 292.

In the mean while there was a Law made at Rome, after several Tumults raised
by the People, which was called the Terentian Law, concerning the Quinqueviri
that were to be created with consular power, as well from among the Commonalty
as Nobility.

The year after Ap. Herdonius the Sabine, with four thousand Exiles and
Servants, seized on the Capitol; but soon after by the assistance, above all
others of the Tusculans, they were driven out. Thenceforward the Romans gave
many overthrows to the Sabines and Aequi; and when it happened so, that

Minucius the Consul, through ill management, was Besieged by the Aequi in his
Camp, Quinctius Cincinnatus being called from his Plow, to take upon him the
Office of Dictator, he conquered the Aequi, and made them Slaves.

The Athenians this very time, under the Conduct of Leocrates, often beat the
Corinthians and Epidaurians, and forced Garrisons upon the Aeginetae and
Megarensians, after which, under the leading of Myronides, they Routed the
Lacedaemonians, and from this spark was afterward that flame of the
Peloponnesian War kindled.

3530. 454. LXXXI. iii. 300.

Petavius thinks that Daniel*s Seventy weeks, ought to take their beginning
from this year. See Lib. 12. de Doc. temp.

This same year, upon the Abrogating of the Terentian Law, concerning the
Quinqueviri, there were three Ambassadors sent into Greece, to make an
inspection into the Laws of that Country, and especially into those of Athens,
that they might amend the Roman Laws by them. Upon the return of the
Ambassadors, which was three years after, the Tribunes of the People and
Consuls were laid aside, and the Decemviri constituted, to set down the Laws of
the Commonwealth, who were the first that reduced the same into ten Tables,
which by the addition of two more to them afterward, made up those Famous
twelve Tables, which were the foundation of the whole Body of the Roman Laws.

After the Republic had for the space of two years or a little more, been
Governed by this sort of Magistracy, it reverted to its Ancient form upon this
occasion. As the Decemviri demeaned themselves but indifferently in their
charge, and that Appius Claudius had made Virginia a free Maiden of Rome, a
Slave, out of the hopes he had to enjoy her, her Father Virginius Slew him,
made the People Mutiny, and brought things so to bear, that the Office of the
Decemviri was Abrogated, and Tributes of the People and Consuls were chosen
again.

While these things were doing in Rome, Nehemiah returning from Chaldaea,
together with Ezra the Scribe, Rectified the corrupt manners of the Jews, and
pressed upon them the observation of the Law of Moses.

From this time it was, that the Jews began to gather the Books of Scripture
together into one Volume, which is the same we have at this day. But seeing
that the Jews during the Babylonish Captivity, had almost forgot the Hebrew
Tongue, and way of Writing, the Ancient Books were written in Assyrian
Characters, and what was read in the Hebrew Tongue in the Scriptures, was
expounded to the People in the Chaldee; See Lud. Capellus concerning the Hebrew
letters. But the Samaritans when they received Moses his Law, before the
Phoenician or Ancient Character was grown quite obsolete, preserved them; from
whence it comes to pass, that the Pentateuch, which was written in the Ancient
Letters, is so handed down to us. There are Relics of them to this day in
Mount Gerizim.

In this Age Herodotus, whom the Greeks call the Father of History, published
his Books, when there was already an History of the Hebrews for fifteen Ages,
beginning only with Abraham, without going higher: He seems to have said
nothing of the Hebrews, because that the Land of Judaea, at that time, was
through the long absence of its Inhabitants, in a mean State, and the Jewish
affairs were inconsiderable; besides that, it was the business of the Greeks to
know only those Nations, with whom they had some commerce or other.

Artaxerxes King of Persia, being overthrown several times by the Greeks, but
more particularly by the Athenians, under the Conduct of Cimon, was forced to
make a Dishonorable Peace with them, upon these conditions amongst others;
that he should be obliged to leave the Maritime Cities of Asia free; that he
should not come nearer to the Sea, than the space of ground that a Horse could
run over without stopping; and that he should not be carried in a Ship, between
the Cyamean and Chelidonean Islands.

While the Athenians were overcoming the common Enemy, they procured to
themselves the envy of their Neighbors, and especially of the Lacedaemonians;
from whence breaking out into an open War; the Lacedaemonians were often
worsted in Battle by Pericles and Tolmides, the Athenian Generals; At last both
sides agreed to a Truce of thirty years, which neither kept.

In these times flourished Democritus, Melissus, Empedocles, Parmenides, Zeno
Eleates, and Socrates, who is to be preferred before all the rest of the
Philosophers; As also the orators Gorgias, Prodicus, Lysias, together with the
Poets, Sophocles, Aristophanes, and Euripides.

3540. 444. LXXXIV. i. 310.

This year were the Tribunes of the People upon a Tumult of the People, first
created with Consular Power; but finding that would not do; about three Months
after they put Consuls in their room: Next year, the Quinquennial Censors were
first Created; who had full power over the manners of the Citizens, so as to
punish and regulate them as they pleased, not long after Sp. Melius, in the
time of a great Famine at Rome, by distributing of Corn to the People, thought
to make himself King; but L. Quinctius being made Dictator, he was Slain in
pursuance to his commands by C. Servilius Ahala. The Romans in the succeeding
years, gained several Victories over the Vejentians and Etrurians, especially
under the leading of Mamercus Aemilius.

In the mean while there were diverse Commotions raised in Greece; the Athenians
under the Command of Pericles reduced once, and again the Revolting Samians
under their Obedience; And seeing according to Thucydides, it was not long
after, that the first War between the Corcyraeans and Corinthians brake forth,
the Athenians by the persuasion of the Ambassadors of Corcyra made an Alliance
with them, by whose Aid they became Conquerors. And now the Lacedaemonians out
of envy to the Athenians, having called a Diet; concluded that the Truce made
fourteen years since, was violated by the Athenians.

3553. 431. LXXXVII. ii. 323.

Hence sprung the Peloponnesian War, while the Romans being involved in a War
with the Aqui and Volscians, under the Conduct of A. Posthumous the Dictator
triumphed over them. This Posthumous put his Son to Death, because he had
fought contrary to his Commands. These were the principal causes of the
Peloponnesian War; because the Lacedaemonians envyed the power of the
Athenians, and for that Pericles, after he had spent Seven thousand Talents
during the time of his Magistracy, refused to give an account thereof; which he
hoped to get clear of, when the People were involved in War; neither was he
mistaken therein, for two years after he dyed.

In this War which lasted for seven and twenty years, Theramenes, Thrasybulus,
Demosthenes, and Alcibiades, on the Athenian side, performed many brave
Exploits; and those that were Famous among the Lacedaemonians were Brasides,
Myndarus and Lysander Admiral of their Fleet, who took Athens, rased the Walls
of the City, and committed the Government of it to thirty Tyrants. Thucydides
has written an accurate History of this War, and he lived in that Age. We shall
pass by the circumstances thereof, and briefly touch upon other things, that
fell out in the interim of time.

3558. 326. LXXXVIII. iii. 328.

This year, there were again created at Rome, four Military Tribunes, who
fought against the Vejentians with bad Success. But Mamercus Aemilius being
made Dictator, he overcame them together with the Fidenates, and took and rased
the City Fidena it self.

Next year upon the Death of Artaxerxes, who Reigned forty years, Xerxes
Succeeded for two Months, and Sogdianus for Seven.

3560. 424. LXXXIX. ii. 331.

Darius The Bastard Succeeded him, and was the Ninth King of Persia, who
Reigned nineteen years.

There were two Consuls created at Rome next year, according to Ancient custom,
who were Succeeded by nine Military Tribunes with the same power, for the space
of nine years.

3568. 416. XCI. 338.

The Athenians undertake the Sicilian War, in favor of the Citizens of Aegesta
and the Leontini, against those of Selinos and Syracuse, Alcibiades; Nicias and
Lamachus, being constituted Generals of their Forces. Alcibiades was presently
after recalled, as being accused of an impious fact; because he had taken care
to throw down all the carved Statues of Mercury, the night before his
departure; but Alcibiades fled to Lacedaemon, whom he excited to send Succors
to the Syracusians, who sent Gylippus, by whom at last the Athenians received
great overthrows.

Alcibiades a little after, got leave to return home from his Banishment, and
brought things so to bear, that Tissaphernes who was angry with the Athenians,
was reconciled to them, and that an Oligarchy was set up in Athens. Wherefore
there were four hundred appointed for the Administration of the Government,
butthey degenerating into Tyrants were removed, and other Magistrates put into
their room, to whom the care of the Commonweath was committed.

3574. 410. XCII. iii. 344.

While the War was carried on in Sicily, between the Cities of Aegesta,
Syracuse, and others of that Island; Hannibal the Grandson of Amilcar, the Son
of Giscon, was sent thither by the Carthaginians, to whom the Aegestans fled
for Succor.

At length the People of Rome, did the year following prevail to get three
Quaestors of the People made: The Romans afterward overthrew the Volscians
diverse times, and hitherto confined themselves within the bounds of Italy.
Hence forward also the Military Tribunes managed the Republic for fifteen
years.

3579. 405. XCIII. iv. 349.

Many Memorable things happened this year, when the Siege of Veij began, which
lasted ten years; And Dionysius raised such accusations against the Commanders
of the Syracusians, that he was at last in conjunction with others chosen
General: And when afterward he commanded the Army alone; he set himself up for
a Tyrant, and compelled the Carthaginians though often conquerors, to make
Peace with him.

Darius the Bastard dies, and was succeeded by Artaxerxes his Son, who was
called by the Greeks (...), Mindful, and who Reigned forty weeks, being the
tenth King of Persia.

The following year was the 28th of the Peloponnesian War, wherein Athens after
six Months Siege, was taken by Lysander, as we have said already. The thirty
Tyrants set upby him in Athens, were after three years expelled by Thrasybulus,
who restored a Democratical Government there.

3583. 401. XCIV. iv. 353.

The same year that the thirty Tyrants were expelled out of Athens, Cyrus, to
whom his Father Darius had given the lesser Asia, made War upon his Brother
Artaxerxes, and perished therein. There were ten thousand Auxiliary Greeks in
the Army, who though they had lost their General Clearchus, a Lacedaemonian,
whom the Persians slew after Quarter given; yet they returned into Greece in
spite of the Persians, through Nations that hated them even from the Euphrates
by way of the Euxine Sea, which they coasted, under the Conduct first of
Chaerisophus the Lacedaemonian, and then of Xenophon the Philosopher and
incomparable Historian, a Native of Athens. Xenophon himself writes this
History in his Books, entitled (...).

The next year was a mournful one, by the Death of the incomparable Philosopher
Socrates, who was Seventy years old, and by Anytus and Melitus accused of
Irreligion or Profaneness. From him Philosophers were called Socraticks, who
after had the name of Academicks, of whom Plato was chief, but by no means to
be compared with Socrates.

3588. 396. XCVI. i. 358.

M. Furius Camillus being made Dictator, takes Veij, while what with Dionysius,
the Carthaginians, and Cities of Sicily the War Raged every where in that
Island; Agesilaus King of Lacedaemon, having entered into a Confederacy with
Nephreus King of Egypt, obtained diverse Victories over the Persians; but being
shortly after recalled, he fought against the Boeotians and their Allies, with
uncertain Success; and the Lacedaemonians could not help being stripped of the
Dominion of the Sea, where Conon the Athenian Admiral of the Persian Fleet,
gave them several overthrows.

3591. 393. XCVI. iv. 361.

There were Consuls chosen this year at Rome, as there were also the year
following, but from thence forward for five and twenty years, there were
Military Tribunes created, or else they had no chief Magistrates at Rome.

In the third year after the Creation of Consuls, when the Commonwealth was
Governed by six Military Tribunes, the Cisalpine Gauls laid Siege to Clusium,
whose Inhabitants had Recourse to the Romans for Succor, of whom they begged
three Commanders of the Fabian Family; who seeing they could do no good with
the Gauls, under their Conduct they went toward them in a Suppliant manner in
Battle Array. The Gauls being moved with their unusual boldness, marched
straight to the City, overcame the Romans in a great Battle at Allia, and took
Rome except the Capitol: But while they showed themselves careless of their
Affairs, Camillus who had before been driven into Banishment, having gathered
some disorderly Troops together, did for all that overthrow them, whom he drove
out of the Roman Territories.

But M. Manlius, who for delivering the Capitol, was called Capitolinus, being
suspected for his Liberality toward those who were in Debt, to have a design
that way to assume a Regal Authority, was thrown down headlong over the Rock
Tarpeia, and so an end made of him.

3606. 377. C. iv. 377.

When the Lacedaemonians endeavored to oppress the Cities of Greece, and
possessed themselves fraudulently of the Theban Tower called Cadmaea; the Thebans
shook off their yoke, by the assistance of the Athenians, whence arose the
Boeotian War wherein after various Conflicts and Events of War* the
Lacedaemonians were reduced to great extremities by the Boeotian Generals, and
especially by Pelopidas and Epaminondas, and lost the Dominion of Greece;
whence sprung continual Wars between the Grecian Cities.

Artaxerxes King of Persia, being about to make War against Egypt, exhorted
them as well then as afterward, to a Peace to no purpose; but that expedition
into Egypt under the Conduct of Pharnabazus and Iphricrates, through the
overflowness of the former, came to nothing.

3618. 366. CIII. iii. 388.

This year dyed Artaxerxes Mnemon, and was succeeded by Ochus the Eleventh King
of Persia, whom Lud. Capellus thinks in his Chron. Sacr. to be Ahassuerus the
Husband of Esther. It Is certain the two former Syllables of the word (...)
Achasveros do not ill agree with the word (...). This King according to
Eusebius his account, Reigned six and twenty years.

3621. 363. CIV. ii. 391.

In the time when a great Plague raged in Rome, L. Manlius Imperiosus was made
Dictator, according to Ancient Custom, in order to settle the Government. This
Man had a Son, whose Name was Titus Manlius, whom he had Banished into the
Country, and where while he remained, he was informed that his Father was cited
into Judgment by M. Pomponius Tribune of the People, which made him return to
the City, and with his drawn Sword, forced the Tribune to lay aside the
Accusation, whereby he gained much of the Peoples love. This same year that
followed next after the Plague, when a certain Chasm opened it self in the
forum, M. Curtius threw himself alive into it; after which the Romans gained
several Victories over the Gauls.

In the mean time the power of the Thebans was wonderfully augmented in Greece,
by the valor of Epaminondas; but he dying of the wounds he received in the
Battle of Mantinea, where he overcame the Lacedaemonian and Arcadian Armies,
that Republic fell with him.

In Asia, the Nobles having formed a Conspiracy, Revolted from the King of
Persia; but being betrayed by Orontes Governor of Mysia, they were in a short
time reduced to their Duty. Thachos King of Egypt, who paid Tribute to the
Great King, Revolted at the same time from him, being Assisted therein by
Agesilaus King of Lacedaemonia, to whom he gave the Command of his Land Army,
while Chabria^ the Athenian was Admiral of the Fleet; but Nectanebos Thachos's
Son, having forsaken his Father, fled to Persia, and returning with a Persian
Army into Egypt, he Besieged his Father, together with Agesilaus in the City of
Memphis; but Agesilaus making a Sally, overthrew the Persians, and being soon
after about to return into Greece, he departed this life, while he was in the
Country of Cyrenaica.

3625. 359. CV. ii. 395.

This year dyed Perdiccas King of Macedon, being slain by the Illyrians, and
was Succeeded by Philip the Son of Amyntas, who in a short time won several
Victories over the Athenians, Paeonians and Illyrians.

The Jewish Affairs in these times were of no great consideration, but the
Country seems to have been peaceably cultivated, under the Persian Government;
which however did not hinder, but that a great number of the Jews, who before
and after the Captivity, had fixed their Habitations in Egypt, were
Transplanted by King Ochus into Hyrcania.

3627. 357. CV. iv. 397.

While diverse Wars were waged among the Greeks, all which seem to have turned
to the advantage of Philip King of Macedon only; Dionysius Tyrant of Syracuse,
was divested of his Government by Dion, during his absence from Syracuse. Two
Transport Ships laden with Mercenary Troops, overturned a Government furnished
with 400 Ships of War, an Hundred thousand Foot, and Ten thousand Horse.

In the mean time Philip Subdued the three Neighboring Kings of Thrace,
Paeonia and Illyria, and in the three hundred fifty sixth year before the Birth
of Christ, had born to him by his Wife Olympias his Son Alexander, on the very
same day wherein the famed Temple of Diana at Ephesus was burnt: Of this
Timaeus in his History spoke prettily, when he said, that it was not to be
wondered, that Diana, who was desirous to be at the Labor of Olympias, should
be absent from home, as you have it cited in Cicero de natura Deor. lib. 2. c.
27.

A little after began that called the Sacred War in Greece, which the Thebans
and Locrensians undertook against the People of Phocis, because these last had
possessed themselves of some part of the Holy Ground, and afterward by the
encouragement of Philomelus, pillaged the Temple of Apollo at Delphos. Philip,
after eight years time, put an end to this War, by destroying the Cities of
Phocis.

3633. 351. CVII. ii. 403.

Artaxerxes Ochus sent an Army against the Phoenicians and Cyprians, who
revolted from him; and subdued the Cyprians, by the help of Idrieus Prince of
Caria, Phocion of Athens, and Evagora, who held Cyprus in his Name; but Tennes
King of Sydon, having received from Nectanebos King of Egypt, some mercenary
Greeks to assist him, defended himself for some time: but afterward, having
made a Peace with the King, he was slain; which brought the Sydonians to such a
desponding condition, that they burnt themselves, and all their Substance,
together with their City, all at once. From hence forward the Riches of New
Tire seem to have increased, as being a Place that was very potent in
Alexander's days, whereas the Affairs of the Sydonians were but in a mean
condition.

Nectanebos himself was driven out of Egypt by Ochus, with the assistance more
particularly of the Theban Army, and forced to fly into Aethiopia.

Four Years after, Dionysius recovered Syracuse, ten years after he had lost
it: but the Syracusians, some time after, having got of the Corinthians
Timoleon for a General, (who had killed his Brother Timophanes, for seeking to
compass the Supreme Power into his hands,) Dionysius was driven out again; who
went to Corinth, where, it was said, he turned Schoolmaster, to get him a
livelihood. The same Timoleon overthrew the Carthaginians diverse times.

In this tract of time, the Romans, under the Conduct of several Dictators and
Consuls, (a Catalogue of whom you have in Petavius's Tables) won several
Victories over the Gauls, Samnites, and other neighboring Nations: but they
underwent very great danger in that called the Social War; where T. Manlius
struck off his Son's Head, because that being challenged to a single Combat, he
overcame his Enemy, when there were strict Orders given that none should stir
out of their Ranks. The other Consul P. Decius Mus devoted himself to death for
the Army; the same being a Ceremony usual to the Romans in extreme Danger.

3644. 340. CX. i. 414.

Artaxerxes Ochus was succeeded by Arses, who was the twelfth King of Persia,
and reigned four years.

At this time flourished Isocrates, Demosthenes and Aechines, Athenian Orators,
and the Philosopher Anaxarchus. Epicurus was born the year before Ochus his
death.

Philip, after many happy Successes, overcame the Athenians and Boeotians at
Charonea; in which Battle, his Son Alexander, but then Eighteen years of age,
fought valiantly. Then Philip was chosen by all Greece to be their
Captain General against the Persians: but next year he was slain by Pausanias,
after he had reigned four and twenty years.

3648. 336. CXI. i. 418.

Bagoas the Eunuch, who slew Ochus, and put Arses upon the Throne, having laid
him aside, and substituted Darius Codomannus, Arsamus's Son, and Great
Grandson to Darius the Bastard, in his room: yet when he went about to take
away Darius by Poison, Darius forced him to drink the Cup he had made ready for
that purpose.

In the mean time, Alexander, Philip's Son, was chosen General of the Greeks,
against the Persians; and when the Thebans revolted from him, he hasted from
Thrace, where he was then waging War, besieged Thebes, took and levelled it
with the ground; no Houses being saved but a few, among which were those of
Pindar and Epaminondas. From thence, the following year, he transported the
Army into Asia, and overturned the Persian Empire. We shall pass over most of
his Actions unmentioned, as being such as may easily be seen in Quintus Gurrius.

3652. 332. CXII. i. 422.

Alexander, after he had taken Tire, went to Jerusalem, with a design to be
revenged on the Jews, who refused to send him any Aid while he was engaged in
the said Siege: but he was pacified by Jaddua the High Priest, (who being
dressed in his Sacerdotal Ornaments, went out to meet him, with all the People
clad in White, and commanded Sacrifices to be offered for him) and granted the
Jews many Privileges. In these times also, Manasses the Brother of Jaddua
raised a Disturbance, who refusing to put off Sanballat's Daughter, the
Samaritan, whom he had married contrary to the Law, was forced to flee to
Samaria. Sanballat his Father-in-Law, who was much in favor with Darius, by
whom he was made Governor of that Country, obtained leave of the King for this
Man to build a Temple in Mount Garizin, like unto that at Jerusalem. The same
Sanballat, when he saw how prosperously things went with Alexander, revolted
from Darius, and sent the other some Auxiliary Troops when he was besieging
Tire, whereby he won to himself the Favor of Alexander.

From thence Alexander went, and in the Battle of Arbela gave Darius a total
Overthrow; who having norrowly escaped being killed among the rest, was said to
have been slain afterward by Bessus Governor of Bactria. The Persian Monarchy
ended with this King, after it had lasted for about two hundred years.

Whilst Alexander the Macedonian subdued the Upper Asia, Alexander King of
Epirus, his Uncle, waged War in Italy, where at length he died. It Is reported,
that he comparing the War his Sister's Son was engaged in with his own, should
say, That Alexander had to do with Women, but he with Men.

In the mean time the Romans fought with the Gauls and Samnites with various
success: but at last, after having been beaten in some Battles, they came off
Conquerors in the War.

3660. 324. CXIV. i. 430.

Alexander having almost conquered all Asia by Arms, returned to Babylon, and
died there, after he had reigned twelve years, and seven months, on the 22d.
day of June. He would appoint no Successor; but his Empire being divided into
several Dynasties, was from henceforwards infested with continual Wars. At
length, from these Dissentions arose two most potent Kingdoms, viz. that of
Seleucus Nicanor in Syria, and of Ptolemy the Son of Lagus in Egypt; from
whence sprung the Seleucian and Lagidan Race of Kings, which are to be had in
Petavius's Tables.

3661. 323. CXIV. ii. 431.

Eight thousand mercenary Greeks, that some years before had been disbanded by
Alexander, having made choice of Leosthenes the Athenian for their General, now
Alexander was dead, recover the Liberty of Greece, overcome Antipater Governor
of the Country, and besiege him in Lamias a City of Thessaly, whither he had
fled. In this Siege Leosthenes was killed with a Stone, and Hiperides made his
Funeral Oration; Demosthenes at the same time rejoicing, because of the Money
he had received from Harpalus. But being recalled next year, the Macedonians
vigorously renew the War against the Graecians, and especially the Athenians;
and having overcome them, they put a Garrison into Munichia, and forced
Demosthenes to flee from Athens again; who, on the 10th of November, poisoned
himself in the Isle of Calauria.

Aristotle is said to have died the same year, aged sixty three. A little
after, Demades the Orator, entreating Antipater, in the Name of the Athenians,
to withdraw his Garrison from Munichia, was, together with his Son, slain.

3663. 321. CXIV. iv. 433.

While Alexander's Successors contend with one another with various success,
the Consuls of Rome, T.Veturius Calvinus, and S.Posthumous, were overcome at
Furcae Caudinae, and sold for Captives; but next year, the Romans, under the
happy Conduct of L. Papirius, served the Samnites the same sauce.

Three years after, Agathocles Son to Carcinus, made a Citizen of Rhegium, to
fill up the number, being first taught the Potters Trade by his Father, did
afterward turn Soldier; and being in time chosen General, made himself at last
a Tyrant, and from thenceforwards waged diverse Wars in Sicily against the
Athenians and Syracusians, and in Africa against the Carthaginians.

About these times, Demetrius Phalereus fled from Athens to Ptolemy King of
Egypt, who made him Keeper of his Library, which was very great. In which Age
flourished also Demetrius Poliorcetes, who should not be confounded with the
other. The first Demagogus was an Athenian; but the other was Son to Antigonns
who then possessed himself of Greece, and other Countries. Then also lived
Arcesilaus, Prince of the Newer Academy, who was descended from Pitanes a City
of Aeolis. Epicurus sprung from the Gargettian Tribe of Athens; and Philemon
and Menander, both Comic Poets, were Cotemporary with him. In the mean time
the Romans waged diverse Wars with the Etrurians, Samnites and Gauls.

All things were quiet with the Jews at the beginning of the Seleucian and
Lagidan Monarchies, Seleucus allowing them the freedom of all the Cities of
Syria, while Ptolemy conferred singular Privileges on them in Egypt.

At this time flourished the Philosophers Crates and Theophrastus.

Agathocles, after he had reigned over the Kingdom of Syracuse, and other
neighboring Cities of Italy and Sicily, for eight and twenty years, and
escaped great Calamities, was poisoned by Archagathus, who with him slew his
own Father Agathocles, and the other's Son, who was designed by him for his
Successor.

While Alexander's Followers and their Children contended with one another with
various fortune, they sullied the Glory they had gotten before, with
innumerable Villainies. The Commonalty of Rome being oppressed with Debt,
withdrew into the Place called Janiculum; but being pacified by Q. Hortensius
the Dictator, they returned again.

3699. 285. CXXIII. iv. 470.

Ptolemy (called by the Alexandrians, Philadelphus, by way of Antiphrasis) the
Son of Ptolemy Lagus and Berenice, in his Father's lifetime began to reign,
and reigned Thirty eight Years. In this or the foregoing year there was a
Translation made of the Law of Moses into the Greek Tongue, by the Septuagint,
who were brought together for that end by Philadelphus, and perhaps by his
Father. Concerning which Translation there are many fabulous things vented, and
whereof Humphrey Hoddy has written learnedly, in his Differtation, cont. Hist.
Aristeae de LXX. Int.

As soon as Philadelphus came to the Kingdom, and that his Father was dead,
Demetrius Phalereus began to decline in Favor; and at last was banished, in
the second year of Philadelphus, wherein Lagides died with the biting of an
Asp. He had offended Philadelphus, because he had put Lagides in the head, to
leave some one of the Sons of Eurydices, his other Wife's, his Successor, and
not Philadelphus the Son of Berenice; and therefore it does not seem that this
Person should correct the Translation of the Septuagint, as some would have it,
which is far enough from the Attick Dialect.

We do not mention in this place the Wars and Dissentions of Alexander's
Successors, no, nor their Names: but we think it next to Impiety to pass over
Pyrrhus King of Epirus.

3703. 281. CXXIV. iv. 473.

When the Tarentines had first pillaged the Romans Ships, and evil entreated
the Ambassadors that had been sent to them to complain of the Wrong, they made
War upon them; wherein they were at first overthrown in a great Battle, by the
Romans.

But next year, Pyrrhus being invited by them into Italy, overcame the Romans,
who were frightened chiefly at the unusual sight of his Elephants; and when C.
Fabricius was sent to him about the Redemption of Prisoners, he dismissed them
all without any Ransom.

Then he sent Cynea for his Ambassador to Rome, about concluding a Peace. But
Appius Caecus opposed it; and so there was another Battle fought between them
with doubtful success, but was attended with that consequence that Pyrrhus was
forced to leave Italy. Then he transported his Army into Sicily, where he first
fought successfully against the Carthaginians: but when, in a short time, his
Affairs began to decline in that Island, he returned on a sudden into Italy,
but he was overcome by the Romans, despoiled of his Camp, and forced to forsake
Italy, having left a Garrison in the Tower of Tarentum.

He spent six years in these Expeditions to little purpose. After his return
into Epirus, he began to ravage Macedon, and by little and little, after he had
won a Victory over Antigonus, seized upon it all. The second year after this,
Cleonymus the Lacedaemonian invited him into Laconia, to assist him to
dispossess his Brother Arius of the Kingdom. He came, and had almost possessed
himself of Sparta: but being at length beaten from thence, he laid Siege to
Argos; and being upon entering into the City it self, he was killed by a Woman
that let a Tile fall upon his Head.

While Pyrrhus was in Italy, the Gauls, under the Conduct of Brennus, wasted
Macedon, and other Parts of Greece: but when they went about to take Delphos,
they were said to have been driven from thence by an Earthquake, Thunderbolts,
and portentous Signs. Brennus soon after dying of his Wounds, they invaded
Thrace, under the Command of Comontorius, and exacted Tribute of the Byzantians.

3715. 269. CXXVII. iv. 485.

Hiero of Syracuse, being seven years before chosen General, by the Soldiers,
was this year saluted King of Syracuse.

The Romans in the mean time wage various Wars with the Tarentines, Samnites,
Bruttians, Vmbrians, Picentians, and Salentines, wherein they always came off
Conquerors. The Carthaginians fearing so much fortune, gave the Tarentimes some
assistance, and so they broke the League which they had hitherto observed with
the Romans. Seeing therefore that in the fourth year after Hiero took upon him
the Dominion of Syracuse, the Mamertines, who had possessed themselves of
Messena, were molested by him and the Carthaginians, and for that reason sought
assistance from the Romans, the first Punick War began.

3720. 264. CXXIX. i. 490.

Appius Claudius Caudex the Consul transported an Army into Sicily, and so
worsted Hiero, that he was necessitated to leave the Mamertines, and to retreat
to Syracuse.

Because we have made mention of this War, we will briefly recount the chief
Events thereof, without the interfering of other things: Wherefore next year,
Man. Valerius Maximus and Man. Ottacilius being Consuls, they sailed into
Sicily, as the Consuls of the succeeding years did, who won diverse Victories
over the Carthaginians and Sicilians. The Romans, who knew nothing hitherto of
Maritine Affairs, did, in the fourth year of the War, set out a Fleet; and the
year following, under the auspicious Conduct of C. Dulius the Consul, overcame
the Carthaginians in a Sea Fight, though they were very skilful in Maritime
Affairs, as they did often also in the succeeding years, though they underwent
diverse Shipwracks.

In the ninth year of the War, after the Carthaginians had to no purpose
opposed their Fleet of Three hundred and fifty Ships, against that of the
Romans, consisting of Three hundred and thirty, which was Commanded by M.
Attilius Regulus, they could not hinder the Roman Army to make now their first
Descent into Africa. Regulus, in the beginning, performed many things very
successfully; but next year he was overcome and taken by Xantippus the
Lacedaemonian. This Man's Fortitude is very admirable, who when he was taken
and sent to Rome by the Carthaginians, to treat about the Redemption of
Prisoners, but supposing at the same time that the thing was a Dishonor to the
Commonwealth, he dissuaded the Senate from it, and returned into Africa; where,
if we believe Appian, he was cruelly put to death by the Carthaginians, in a
Cave full of Iron Spikes: But Jac. Palmerius upon Appian shows that this sort
of Death is fabulous.

After this, the Romans being worsted in diverse Naval Fights, and lessened by
Shipwracks, were for some years compelled to yield the Dominion of the Seas to
the Carthaginians: but in the three and twentieth year of the War, having
repaired their Fleet, they beat the Carthaginians near Agates, an Island on the
African Coast, under the Conduct of Q. Lutatius the Consul; and next year,
which was the twenty fourth, they granted Peace to the Carthaeginians, upon
hard Conditions.

In the beginning of this War, Eumenes, after Phileterus, held the Principality
of Pergamus in Asia; and Nicomedes King of Bithynia gave the Name of Nicomedia
to the enlarged City of Astacus.

The Republic of Achaia began to flourish about the middle of this War: About
thirty years before, diverse Cities of Achaia entering into a Confederacy, gave
beginning thereunto, and entrusted the same to be administered by two Praetors,
that were chosen soon after. But afterward the Supreme Power was devolved upon
one; and the first that exercised that Charge alone, was M. Carynensis, who
after four years time was succeeded by Aratus of Sicyone, who though but twenty
years of age, brought his Country to enter into a Confederation with the other
Cities of Achaia.

Between the first and second Punick War, Learning began to be cultivated at
Rome. Livius Andronicus was the first that wrote Fables; who for his
Contemporaries had Ennius, Pacuvius, Naevius, and other Poets given to promote
the Art in their Mother Tongue.

3749. 235. CXXXVI. ii. 519.

The Romans quickly appeased the Tumults that arose both in Africa and
Sardinia; and having made Peace every where, did now the first time shut the
Temple of Janus, after the days of Numa; afterward they won diverse Victories
of the Gauls, Ligurians, and Sardinians. At the same time, Teuta Queen of the
Illyrians permitted her Subjects to pirate by Sea, and pillage the Coasts of
Italy. The Romans sent C. and L. Coruncanus to make complaint hereof unto her;
of whom Lucius speaking bolder than the other, was, contrary to the Law of
Nations, slain. But next year the Queen was overcome, and forced to pay
Tribute: And a little after, the Romans, having sent Ambassadors to the
Achaians, Aetolians, Athenians and Corinthians, began now the first time to
intermeddle with the Affairs of Greece. But almost all the Greeks having entered
into a stricter Alliance, made Antigonus, the Tutor of Philip King of Macedon,
their General.

3764. 220. CXL. i. 534.

The Carthaginians in this and the preceding Age possessed themselves of the
greatest part of Spain. Asdrubal was Governor there for the space of eight
years, who both held and enlarged that Province more by Gentleness than Arms.
But his Successor Hannibal, a Man intent upon War, and new Undertakings, broke
the Peace, with laying Siege to Saguntum, a City in Confederacy with the
Romans; which, without any regard had to the Roman Embassy, after seven months,
he took. The same Ambassadors insisted at Carthage, That Hannibal should be
given up to them: But their Demands were rejected.

3766. 218. CXL. iii. 536.

Hence sprang the Second Carthaginian War, which commenced twenty four years
after the First. When Rome was reduced almost to the last extremity in it by
Hannibal, she was delivered by Scipio, who for that reason was sirnam'd The
African. This War continued for the space of seventeen years, whereof you have
a compendious and elegant Description in Florus:

We shall now return to the Jewish Nation, of whom we have almost said nothing
since the time of Alexander: These People were infested by the Kings of Syria
and Egypt diverse ways; and it is said, that Antiochus King of Syria, being
overcome by Ptolemy Philopater King of Egypt, attempted to enter into the
Temple of Jerusalem, but was kept out from thence by a Miracle; and that
Philopater, going about to force the Jews, who lived in Egypt, to abjure their
Religion, was also warned from Heaven to desist.

The Empire of Parthia is said, a little before this, to have taken its
Original in Asia, the first King whereof was Arsaces, from whom the succeeding
Kings were called Arsacidae. At the same time also, several of the Eastern
Nations strove who should soonest shake off the Macedonian Yoke: But others
there are who would have these things to have come to pass in the time of the
first Punick War.

Philip King of Macedon, in the heat of the Second Carthaginian War, made a
League with Hannibal; and falling into Peloponnesus, cut off Aratus by Poison.

At the same time, Laevinus the Praetor, in conjunction with the Aetolians, and
Attalus King of Pergamus, began to infest Greece. The Achaians, and other
Nations of that Country, had recourse to Philip for Aid to withstand them, who
was already angry with the Romans, because the said Praetor had fought against
him for the Apolliniati; and not only so, but after having burnt his Fleet,
forced him to march back into Macedon. And these were the Adventures that gave
a beginning to the Macedonian War.

3772. 212. CXLII. i. 542.

The Scipio's at this very time were successful in Spain against the
Carthaginians; but they were both of them, three years after, together with
their Army, slain by Asdrubal.

Marcellus also carried on the War with good success in the Isle of Sicily; and
at last, after three years Siege, took the City of Syracuse. Archimedes alone,
by the help of some new-invented Engines, continued to resist, and was, against
Marcellus's will, slain by a foolhardy Soldier.

Hannibal's Successes began to decline in Italy, while he endeavored, but to
no purpose, by the Siege of Capua, to expel the Romans, and attempted Rome her
self in vain, though he slew Marcellus, after two Battles fought with uncertain
victory; especially after his Brother Asdrubal, who was come into Italy to join
him with his Forces, had been slain by Cl. Nero, and Livius Salinator, both
Consuls.

But in Spain, P. Scipio took New Carthage in one Day, overthrew the
Carthaginian Army; and passing over into Africa, made a League with Syphax and
Massinissa, Kings of Numidia: And returning afterward from thence into Rome,
he made all necessary Preparation to go back again into Africa, and settled the
Affairs both of Sicily and Spain, that were out of order.

3778. 206. CXLIII. iii. 548.

While Scipio was thus engaged, Philopoemenes, Praetor of Achaia, performed a
great many other notable feats, as well as overcame Mechanidas Tyrant of
Lacedaemonia, whom Nabis succeeded.

The Romans sent Ambassadors next year to King Attalus, to bring the Image of
Idaea the Mother of the Gods to Rome: but as in pursuance to the Answer of the
Oracle, the best Man of the whole City was to receive her; young P. Scipio
Mnasica was the Person adjudged worthy of that Title. And hence it was that
those Plays called Megalesia, were instituted in honor of the said Goddess.

Syphax, upon his marrying of Sophonisba, Asdrubal's Daughter, having fallen
off from the Romans, and closed in with the Interests of the Carthaginians, was
overcome and taken Prisoner by Scipio and Nssinissa: And when the Carthaginians
had endeavored, to no purpose, to induce the Romans to make a Peace, they
recalled Hannibal out of Italy; who, sore against his will, passed over into
Africa, where he was overcome by Scipio in battle, who imposed Conditions of
Peace upon the Carthaginians, and sent their Ambassadors to Rome; whither
himself afterward returned in triumph.

The Conquest of CARTHAGE, The IXth EPOCH.
From the Conquest of Carthage, to the Birth of our Savior Jesus Christ, were
Two Hundred and Two Years; which comprehends

The IXth PERIOD.
The Year of the World, The Year before Christ, Olymp. From the Building of the
City, 3783. 201. CXLIV. iv. 553.

UPon the terminating of the Carthaginian War, that called the Macedonian grew
hot between the Romans and King Philip; which was also made an end of by them,
by the frequent Overthrows given King Philip, within the term of five years.

3789. 195. CXLVI. ii. 559.

Hannibal, impatient of Rest, endeavored still to excite his Countrymen to
make War upon the Romans; but he was constrained, for fear of the latter, to
flee into Asia, to Antiochus the Great, who was preparing to invade the Romans.
This King did indeed suddenly enter Greece, but was quickly overthrown in a
great Battle by M. Acilius Glabrio, and so forced to leave that Country. But
this was not all; for in the sixth year after the first Preparations for War,
he was overcome in Asia it self, by L. Scipio, who, for that reason, had the
Surname of Asiaticus given him, and obliged to purchase a Peace, by quitting
all claim to the Countries on this side Mount Taurus. Two years after, P.
Scipio Africanus, and Lucius Asiaticus, were both adjuged Guilty; the former
for taking Money of Antiochus, to clap up a Peace; and the other, for
misapplying the Treasure of the State.

The Romans, in these times, having subdued the Aetolians, and so become
Arbitrators of the Affairs of all Greece, received Embassies from all Parts
bringing Complaints against Philip, who by his Son Demetrius, whom he deputed
for that purpose, cleared himself before the Senate.

In this and the following year died three of the most famous Men of that Age,
viz. Scipio Africanus, at Liternum, whither he had voluntarily gone into
Banishment; Philopomoenen, Praetor of Achaia, at Messena, by whose Citizens he
was slain; and Hannibal, in Bithynia with King Prusias, where, lest he should
be given up by him to the Romans, he ended his days with Poison. Philopomoenen
was succeeded by Lycortas in the Praetorship of Achaia: But this Republic
could not continue long, for the Romans its Enemies.

3804. 180. CL. i. 574.

Philip King of Macedon had two Sons, whereof one was a great Enemy, and the
other a Friend to the Romans. Now the former, whose Name was Perseus, being
afraid lest Demetrius, the younger, (of whom before) relying upon the
Friendship of the Romans, should after their Father's death, contend with him
for the Kingdom, he brought such false Accusations against him to his Father,
that he commanded him first to be poisoned, and when he was half dead, to be
strangled. But Philip, not long after, coming to know the Innocence of
Demetrius, died of grief about three years after, and was succeeded by Perseus
in his Dominions.

3817. 167. CLIII. ii. 587.

This Prince spent the first five years of his Reign in making Preparations of
War against the Romans, though he could scarce bear the shock of their Power
for the space of four. L. Aemilius Paulus triumphed for subduing of him, and
reduced the Kingdom of Macedon into the form of a Roman Province, thereby
putting an end thereto, after the same had stood for Seven hundred Years.

Two years after Perseus had begun his Reign over Macedon, Antiochus Epiphanes
succeeded Seleucus in the Kingdom of Syria. Of this Prince it was, that Jason,
having ejected his Brother Onias, obtained the High Priesthood, and received
him at his entry into Jerusalem in great state. He sent the said Prince, then
fitting out a Fleet in Phoenicia, Money, by his Brother Menelaus, who gave him
the same in his own Name; and with the addition of three hundred Talents more,
procured the High Priesthood for himself: But failing again in the Payment of
the promised Money, his Brother Lysimachus was substituted in his room. Hence
arose great Contention between these Highpriests. Antiochus being afraid lest
the Jews would revolt from him when he had failed, as he had endeavored, to
invade Egypt, went back to Jerusalem, took away the Vessels out of the Temple,
and committed many other Outrages there. Soon after, he endeavored, by
exquisite Torments, to bring the Jews to abjure their Religion; many of whom he
forced to it: though he was not able, by the cruellest kinds of Death he could
think of, to frighten others to it; among which number were Eleazar and his
seven Brethren, of whom read, 2 Mac. vi. and vii.

3816. 168. CLIII. i. 586.

Matthatias, one of the Lineage of Aaron, fled to the Mountains of Judaea, and
invited those Jews who were zealous for their Old Religion to come and join
him: but he dying the following year, left Judas Maccabaeus his Son to succeed
him, who performed many famous Exploits against Antiochus his Captains. Now the
reason why Matthatias's Sons were called Maccabees, was because these letters
(...) Machbai, were on their Ensigns, which are the initial letters of these
four words (...), Who, among the gods, is like unto thee, O Lord? They were
also called Hasmonaei, from the Chaldee word (...), which signifies Princes.

3819. 165. CLIII. iv. 589.

Judas, after he had won many Victories over Antiochus's Generals, purged the
Temple that had been polluted, and consecrated the same by a new Dedication, on
the 25th. Day of the Month Casleu, that is, November the 23d. Hence it was that
the Feast called (...), or, The Dedication of the Temple, was celebrated every
year.

Next year, Antiochus being dead, Judas began to take upon him the Office of
High Priest, though he could not yet take the City of David, where Antiochus
Epiphanes had planted a Garrison. While he laid Siege to it, Antiochus Eupator,
the Son of Epiphanes, came with an Army to Jerusalem, and for some time sat
down before it; but having afterward patcht up a Peace, he entered the City,
and took and demolished the Walls thereof. A little after this, Demetrius
Soter, this Prince's Uncle, who had been long kept for an Hostage at Rome,
privately left the City, went into Syria, and having recovered his Father's
Kingdom, slew Antiochus, and Lysias his chief General; and then growing angry
with the Jews, he was soon after, by the artifice of Alcimus, who lay upon the
catch for the High Priesthood, brought to make a League with them. But the
Peace was of no long duration; for next year a War broke out between them, and
Judas Maccabaeus fought Bacchides, Demetrius's General, and slew him.

Now it was, that Eumenes and Attalus, Kings of Pergamus, lived, as also
Hipparchus a famous Astronomer among the Greeks; not to forget Pacuvius of
Brundusium, a Tragedy-Writer among the Romans.

3835. 149. CLVII. iv. 605.

The Carthaginians molesting Masinissa King of Numidia, who was Confederate
with the Romans, and building Ships contrary to the Articles of the last Peace,
gave a beginning to the Third Punick War, which was carried on by Sea and Land
by both Consuls, and within four years finally terminated with the Destruction
of Carthage by Scipio Aemilianus.

Much about the same times began the Achaian War, occasioned by the Achaians
driving out the Roman Legates from thence; as also the War in Spain, against
Viriatus, who invaded Lusitania.

3839. 145. CLVIII. iv. 609.

The Jews, under the Conduct of Jonathan the Brother of Judas, did well enough,
neither were the Kings of Syria at Enmity with them; and Jonathan brought
things so well to bear, that he made a League with the Romans and
Lacedaemonians; which last he accosted in a very honorable manner, as if they
had been originally descended from the same Stock as* the Jews, 1 Maccab. xii.
He was succeeded in the Office of High Priest by his Brother Simon, three years
after the forementioned League.

3851. 139. CLXI. iv. 621.

The Achaian War was terminated within a year after the first commencement of
it; and the City of Corinth being burnt by L. Mummius, Achaia was reduced into
the form of a Province: which is so much the more to be wondered at, that the
Jews should a little before make an Alliance with the Lacedaemonians who were
in Confederacy with the Achaians. But in Spain things were carried on with
various successes, until now that Scipio Aemylianus, after a long Siege,
destroyed Numantia.

Simon, two years before this, being treacherously slain by Ptolemy his
Son-in-Law, he was succeeded by John Hyrcanus, his Son, who was at first in
amity with Antiochus Sidetes, but afterward becoming his Enemy, laid some of
his Cities waste, and among others Sicima and Garizim, where the Temple that
had been built above two hundred years before, was utterly destroyed: Then he
subdued the Edomites, and forced them to be Circumcised, because they were the
Posterity of Abraham.

The very same year that Numantia was taken, died Attalus, and left the Romans
his Heir; and the now bringing of rich Hangings, Paintings, Pictures, Precious
Movables, etc. out of Asia into Italy, began to infect the Romans with Luxury,
and debauch their Manners. That year also, Tiberius Gracchus, Tribune of the
People, raising a Sedition in the City, was slain.

It was not long after, that the Romans began to lead Colonies into Gallia
Transalpina, after they had subdued the Inhabitants of the Province of
Narbonne; whilst all things in Asia were turned topsie-turvy by base Murders,
among the Kings of Syria, Demetrius was killed by his Wife Cleopatra, for
Rhodogunes's sake. She also did the same by his Son Seleucus, who had assumed
the Kingly Power without her Authority. Antiochus Grypus reigned in his stead,
who made his Mother Cleopatra, that would have given him Poison, drink it her
self. After which, he waged War with his Brother Antiochus Cyzicenus for a long
time, with various success.

3873. 111. CLXVII. ii. 643.

This year began the Jugurthine War, the History whereof is written by Salust.
King Jugurtha corrupted some of the Roman Commanders with Money, and received
great Overthrows from others of them; till at length, after the Revolution of
eight years, he was led in triumph by C. Marius then Consul.

At that time it was, that Aristobulus, upon the Death of Hyrcanus, succeeded
as High Priest, and reigned one year, leaving the Kingdom to Alexander Jannes,
his Brother, who was greatly distressed by Ptolemy Lathurus King of Egypt.

Marius overcame the Teutones and Ambrones, at a Place called Aquae Sextiae;
and from henceforward the Romans began to oppress the Gauls.

3830. 94. CLXXI. iii. 660.

Ariobarzanes being by Mithridates expelled the Kingdom of Cappadocia, was
restored by L. Sulla, Propraetor of Cilicia; and this gave a beginning to the
Mithridatick War, which kept the Roman Armies in play for forty years together.
A little after, Nicomedes King of Bithynia, being expelled by the same
Mithridates, was reinstated by Sulla. But Mithridates, the very next year after
the Restitution of Nicomedes, having levied a greater Army, seized on and
wasted Phrygia, took care to put to death all the Citizens of Rome that were in
Asia, and that in one day, and invaded Macedon Thrace, and Greece.

Sulla was at that time engaged in the Italian War, and gave the Samnites a
great overthrow. Marius, in the mean time, by the assistance of C. Sulpicius
Tribune of the People, endeavored to deprive him of his Command: But Sulla
returning out of Campania to Rome, slew Sulpicius, and put Marius to flight.
Italy was again much afflicted the following year, with the Armies commanded by
Marius, Cinna, Carbo, and Sertorius, while Sulla won many Battles from
Mithridates, and wasted his Army. Marius dying of Sickness, Cinna being then
Consul, L. Flaccus succeeded Sulla in the Command: but his own Lieutenant
Fimbria killed Flaccus; who being afterward forsaken by the Army that went
over to Sulla, slew himself. Nay, Cinna was also slain by the very Army he got
ready to march against Sulla, leaving the Consulship to Carbo alone, who
refused to accept of the Terms of Peace offered him by Sulla. This Man
therefore marched out of Greece, at the Head of Thirty thousand Men, and with
them overthrew a much more numerous Army of Cn. Norbanus Flaccus the Consul, in
Battle. At the same time, Q. Sertorius, who had an Army in Italy, despairing of
any good Success, went into the farther Province of Spain, which fell unto his
lot to govern: But Cneus Pompeius, who afterward conquered him, joined Sulla
with three Volonian Legions, being then but Three and twenty Years old. Sulla,
next year, overthrew C. Marius, the other's Son, in battle, at Praeneste; and
then possessing himself of the City, confiscated the Estates of his Enemies. He
also fought with and overcame the Praetor Damasippus, Marius, Carrinates, and
the Samnite Troops, before the Gate called Collina. He was afterward made
Dictator; which Office, after three years space, he laid down of himself.

3906. 78. CLXXV. iii. 676.

Hyrcanus, upon the death of King Alexander, his Father, succeeded him in the
Kingdom of Judaea, and reigned eleven years. In the mean time, Sertorius in
Spain, being one while beaten, another while Victor, worsted the Roman Armies
commanded by Metellus and Pompey, in diverse Battles; till that after five
years, both himself, and Perpenna his Lieutenant, were slain by the Treachery
of their own Men, whereby Pompey had the opportunity of recovering Spain.

At that time, Servilius conquered the Isaurians, and took their Cities in
Cilicia; from whence having got the Surname of Isauricus, conquered the
Pirates, and reduced Cilicia and Crete into the form of a Province, he
triumphed. L. Lucullus engaged in the Mithridatick War, and won many Victories
over that King. That War called the Servile one, breaking forth, under the
Conduct of Spartacus, it was with difficulty put an end to in three years
space, by M. Crassus the Praetor, and Cn. Pompeius.

Cicero was then Quaestor in Sicily, and began to be famous for his Eloquence.
Varro also, with Lucretius, Catullus, and other learned Men, lived in those
days.

3917. 67. CLXXVIII. ii. 687.

Servilius having not perfectly destroyed the Cilician Pirates, and others, who
having repaired their Shipping, infested the Seas every where, Pompey was
entrusted with an extraordinary Commission to clear the Seas from those
Robbers; which he performed with that celerity, that he either took them all,
or having burnt their Ships, rendered them incapable of more mischief, in the
space of forty days. The same Pompey being next year sent against Mithridates,
did at length put a final period to that War, and so had the honor of
Triumphing: He performed also many famous Exploits almost throughout all Asia.

Then Hyrcanus, King and High Priest of the Jews, was put out of the
Pontificate, by his Brother Aristobulus, who exercised that Charge for the
space of three years; but being taken Prisoner by Pompey, when he conquered
Jerusalem, he was, together with his Children, sent to Rome, and Hyrcanus
restored again to his former Office.

The same year, Cicero being Consul, delivered the Commonwealth of Rome from a
most dangerous Conspiracy: Cataline, who was the Chief of it, being overcome
and slain by Petreius, Lieutenant to Anthony the other Consul.

3924. 60. CLXXX. i. 694.

Pompey, Crassus and Caesar having contracted a strict Friendship one with
another, formed a Design of oppressing the Commonwealth, now distracted with
diverse Factions. Caesar obtained Gaul for his Province, and held the same for
ten years: Syria fell to Crassus his lot; from whence marching against the
Parthians, he was, together with his Son P. Crassus, and the whole Army, hemmed
in by their Horse, and slain: The two Provinces of Spain came to Pompey's
share. In the mean time, Cicero was sent to, and recalled from Banishment.
Hyrcanus, in Judaea, being driven out of Jerusalem by Alexander the Son of
Aristobulus, was restored by Gabinius. This same Gabinius, that he might lessen
the Authority of the Grand Synedrim or Council at Jerusalem, erected four more
like thereunto, viz. at Gadaris, Amathus, Jericho, and Saphoris.

While Caesar was getting several Victories over the Gauls and Germans, Pompey
dedicated his Theater, and gave Plays wherein ten Lions and eighteen Elephants
were slain: But Crassus, as was said before, warring rashly against the
Parthians, perished in the said Expedition.

3933. 51. CLXXXII. ii. 703.

Cicero, this year, got a Decree of the Senate, to make him Proconsul in
Cilicia; and after having overcome some bands of Robbers in Mount Amanus, and
taken some Castles, was saluted by the Army with the Title of Imperator.
Cassius also, at the same time, valiantly defended Syria against the Irruption
of the Parthians; so that they were forced to be gone, re infecta.

Next year, after the Senate had in vain required Caesar to dismiss his Army,
broke out the Civil War between him and Pompey; wherein first Caesar entering
Italy with his Army, drove the Senate and Pompey from thence: Then Pompey's
Troops in Spain submitted to him; and after that, returning victorions to Rome,
he entered upon the Consulship, and having transported his Army over into
Epirus, he overcame Pompey himself; who flying into Egypt, was slain by
Ptolemy. Caesar pursuing Pompey thither, was very like to have been cut off by
the King of Egypt: yet he overcame the Alexandrians, and entered upon the Office
of Perpetual Dictator: He conquered Scipio, Pompey's Son-in Law, in Africa, the
following year; and at last, in the fifth year from the first breaking out of
the Civil War, beat Pompey's Sons in Spain: by which last Victory he got the
Sovereign Power entirely into his hands.

Then he bethought himself of regulating the Course of the Year; and seeing the
preceding one, which was called the Year of Confusion, by his Command,
consisted of 445 Days; this, which was the 45th. before the Birth of our
Savior, was the First Julian Year, the same being made up of 365 Days, and 6
Hours; which being set together, make One Day in every Fourth Year, the same
being called the Bissextile or Leap-Year. See Pet. Rationar. p. 2. l. i. c. 1.

He was slain in the fourth year of his Dictatorship, and the sixth after the
commencement of the Civil War, on the First of March, in the Senate House.

There was one Antipater, an Edomite by Nation, who being advanced by the
favor of Hyrcanus to the highest Employments at the Court of Jerusalem, proved
very serviceable to Caesar, in the Expedition he made to Alexandria, and
therefore was made by him Governor of Judaea. This Man was Herod the Great's
Father, who for all that, upon the death of Caesar, assisted Cassius; and when
he was overcome, joined in with the Interests of M. Antony, as we shall see by
and by, and made way for himself to obtain the Throne, by his marrying, some
time after, Mariamne, Hyrcanus's Granddaughter.

We are to observe, in the first place, that Brutus and Cassius, who were Heads
of the Conspiracy for cutting off of Julius Caesar, were in some time overcome
by C. Octavius Caesar, and M. Antony, after they had caused great Disturbances
in the Empire, which would be too tedious for me to particularize: what was
most remarkable, were the Proscriptions they made, wherein perished a great
many of the best and most accomplished Men, of which number was Cicero. M.
Lepidus, as Triumvir, had a hand in these mischiefs, with Antony and Caesar;
and then dying, left the Supreme Power in their hands: but they almost ever
after were at perpetual enmity one with another, until at last they brake out
into a Civil War.

Sextus Pompeius, who was the only surviving Son of Pompcy the Great, was then
in possession of Sicily, and had a strong Naval Force: but being at length
conquered by Octavius Caesar, he was by Antony's Command cut off, as he was
going to him for succor.

3945. 39. CLXXXV. ii. 715.

The Parthians, while these things were in agitation, brake into Syria; and
having seized on Jerusalem, they, at the Instigation of Antigonus, the Son of
Aristobulus, cut off the Ears of Hyrcanus, divested him of the Pontificate, and
made Antigonus High Priest in his room. Herod, who took Hyrcanus's part, fled
to Antony and Caesar, at Rome, of whom he obtained the Kingdom of Judaea,
according to a Decree of the Senate, beyond his own expectation: From thence
going into Judaea, and being assisted by C. Sosius, he took Jerusalem, in the
fourth year of his Reign. Having made Antigonus a Prisoner, he crucified him;
and thus having put an end to the Dominion of the Hasmonaean Family, that had
continued One hundred twenty six years, he advanced one Ananelus, who was
fetched from Babylon, and made him High Priest: but he discharged him
afterward, and put in Aristobulus the Brother of Mariamne, his Wife; whom,
soon after, because he found him Popular, he caused to be strangled, as he was
swimming: He also commanded his Wife Mariamne to be beheaded, some years after,
because she continually upbraided him with that Murder.

3953. 13. CLXXXVI. ii. 723.

This year was the Actian War, waged by Augustus Caesar against Antony and
Cleopatra; wherein the former prevailed, and took Egypt, while the other two
laid violent hands upon themselves. Caesar triumphed the third year after, and
it was not long before he obtained the Name of Augustus.

The Actions performed by him we shall pass over, as having been set forth by
diverse Persons, and only say, That after such bloody Beginnings, when once he
got the Supreme Power into his own hands entirely, he proved to be an excellent
Prince, and governed the Commonwealth with great Clemency; the most notable
Examples whereof you have in Seneca, de Clementia. He was also a favourer of
Learning, whereby it came to pass that many excellent Men flourished in all
sorts of good Literature, in his time; the chief of whom, whose Writings have
reached our hands, were Livy, Strabo, Vitruvius, Virgil, Horace, Tibullus,
Propertius, Ovid, etc.

He had no Male Children, but only one Daughter named Julia, whom at first he
married to Marcellus, his Sister's Son, that died young; and afterward to M.
Vipsanius Agrippa, who, together with Mecaenas, was his intimate Friend. From
this last Marriage came Caius, and Lucius Caesaeres, who being Adopted by their
Grandfather, died young. Augustus also Adopted Tiberius and Drusus, his
Sons-in-Law, the Children of Livia. Tiberius died without leaving any Child;
for his Son Drusus, by the treachery of his Wife Livia, died before him. But
from Germanicus, the Son of Drusus, came a numerous Progeny, of whom hereafter;
yet Germanicus himself, as well as his Father Drusus, lived not to an advanced
Age.

3979. 5. CXCIII. iv. 750.

Herod, after the perpetrating of various Murders, and even upon his own
Children, Alexander and Aristobulus, Mariamne's Sons; being near his end, for
the completing of his Cruelty, slew the Children of Bethlehem, because there
was a rumor spread abroad, That the King of the Jews should be born there. For
Christ, according to the Calculation of Petavius, whom we follow herein, was
born about Fifteen Months before the death of Herod. The Wise Men, soon after;
came into Judaea; and from their making an enquiry, where the King of the Jews
was born, Herod took occasion to cut off the Infants, as aforesaid. He also, a
little after, commanded his Son Antipater, whom he kept in Prison, and knew he
had designed to poison him, to be slain. The which when Augustus heard,
Macrobius, in his Saturn. lib. ii. c. 4. says he should express himself to this
purpose, That it were better to be Herod 's Hog, than his Son. Archelaus, after
Herod's death, came to Rome, that, in pursuance to his Father's Will, he might
obtain the Kingdom of Judaea from Augustus, who divided the same into
Tetrarchies, or four Governments, two whereof he bestowed upon Archelans, and
gave Herod Antipas, and Philip, each of them one.

3983. 1. CXCIV. iv. 753.

Though all Chronologers do agree, that our Savior was born about these Times,
yet as to the Year they do not agree: some are of opinion, that blessed
Nativity happened six years before the vulgar Computation; Petavius thinks it
to have been five; and Baronius and Scaliger, with some others, will have it to
be no more than two years. In the mean time, that they may not derogate from
the ancient usage, and lest a confusion should be introduced into the Account,
all reckon the Years according to the Vulgar Opinion, which is, That our
Savior was born when Cossus Cornelius Lentulus, and L. Calphurnius Piso were
Consuls, on the Twenty fifth Day of December, Forty three Years after the first
Consulship of Augustus, when, in conjunction with Antony and Lepidus, he
invaded the Rights of the Commonwealth of Rome. Yet this is not accounted the
First Year of Christ, but the following one only, in reference to the
Calculation of the Julian Year.

Christ, The Xth EPOCH.
From the Nativity of Christ, to the Conversion of Constantine the Great; are
reckoned Three Hundred and Twelve Years; which makes up.

The Xth PERIOD.
Years from the Birth of Christ, 3.

TIBERIUS, who was of a morose and jealous Nature, being not able to agree with
Caius and Lucius Caesar's, withdrew into the Isle of Rhodes, and lived there for
seven years; but having this year obtained leave of Augustus, he came back to
Rome, wherein Lucius, being sent into Spain, sickened, and died at Marseilles.
Eighteen Months after his Brother's decease, Caius also departed this life, in
Lycia, as he was at last returning into Italy, whither he had been required to
come, by Augustus. Tiberius, from henceforward, was, as it were by the Suffrage
of all Men, designed Successor of the Empire. Augustus had indeed a third
Grandson from his Daughter Julia, whose Name was Agrippa; but him he never
dignified with those Honors, nor loved to that degree as he did his Brothers.

Augustus, at length after he had governed the Empire for fifty seven years,
obtained the (...), or easy death, which he wished for, at Nola in Campania,
on the 19th. of August, in the Seventysixth year of his age.

14.

Tiberius suceeded Augustus, and reigned Two and twenty years: This Prince, by
his overcruelty, afflicted the Romans grievously, (as you may see in Tacitus
and Suetonius.) In the mean time, Germanicus, the Son of his Brother Drusus,
reduced the mutinous Legions in Germany to Obedience, though they made a tender
unto him of the Empire, and led them against the Cherusci, Chatti, and
Angrivarii, Nations dwelling about the Rhine; whom he overcame, and then
triumphed. From thence he was sent with an extraordinary Commission into the
East; of whom Tiberius, who was of a most mistrustful and exceeding timorous
Disposition, growing jealous, 'twas believed he was poisoned by Piso, Governor
of Syria, two years after. Tiberius, after the Revolution of seven years, left
Rome, and retired to Campania, with an intention never to return, confining
himself to the Island Caprea to his dying day. The very same year that he went
into Caprea, was Pontius Filate sent Governor into Judaea.

28.

The next year, which was the fifteenth of the Reign of Tiberius, John the Son
of Zacharias, who was born in the same year with our Savior, began to preach
Repentance in Judaea; neither did he admit the Jews themselves to become his
Disciples, without they were first Baptized.

30.

After he had spent a year in that Work, Christ came to be baptized by him, and
then began his own Ministry; but John was cast into Prison by Herod, upon
account of the Reason given in the Gospel. This year died Livia, Tiberius's
Mother, being hated by her wicked Son, when she had lived eighty six years.

33.

Christ, in the third year after he began his Preaching was Crucified, for the
Salvation of Mankind, on the Twenty third Day of March, the Sixth Festival, and
fifteenth Moon, according to the Usage field in Judaea, when he had celebrated
the Passover the third, or at least the second time, aster he had entered upon
his Office: He died toward the end of a Friday, and rested in the Grave all
the Saturday, together with part both of Friday and the Sunday following, that
is, about Six and thirty Hours in all. He arose the Twenty fifth of March,
before Sunrising; ascended into Heaven the Third of May; and sent the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles, the Thirteenth of the same Month.

The Apostles henceforward began to preach the Gospel, not only in the
Ghaldaean or Greek Tongues, which were used in Judaea, and common to them, but
also in all other Languages throughout the World. This very year Stephen was
martyred; and the Church of Jerusalem, except the Apostles, scattered.

34.

But that we, according to our Custom, may mix Profane with Sacred History,
two very memorable things happened at Rome this same year, and four years
after. Sejanus, who had been in highest favor with Tiberius, was accused by
him, in the Letters he wrote to the Senate; there upon taken Prisoner, and put
to death: And the Parthians, who were at very ill Terms with Tiberius and the
Romans, growing weary of their King Arabanus, came to Rome, that they might get
Tiberius to allow of Phraates to be their King. But Phraates dying on his
Journey, he made Tyridates their King; and him, Vitellius, Governor of Syria,
conducted to his Kingdom. Then died Philip, Herod's Son, on whom Augustus
conferred a Tetrarchy, in Judaea.

36.

Paulus Tarsensis, who was converted to the Faith, in the Three and thirtieth
Year of our Redemption, began then to enter upon his Apostolical Function; and
three Years after his Conversion, went up to Jerusalem, to see Peter; from
thence to Casarea; and from Casarea journeyed to Tarsus.

37.

Next year died Tiberius, and was succeeded by Caius Caligula, Germanicus's
Son. As soon as he came to the Empire, he set Agrippa, Herod's Grandson by
Aristobulus, at liberty; and not only bestowed on him the Tetrarchies of Philip
and Lysanias, but also the Title of King. This is that Agrippa whereof mention
is made in the Acts of the Apostles.

Peter went the same year to Antioch; where, after the Revolution of three
years, the Disciples of Christ were called Christians.

Caligula, after he had reigned four years, and abounded in all Wickedness, so
far as to have a mind to be esteemed a God, and worshipped accordingly, was at
last cut off by Chaerea, and other Conspirators.

41.

Claudius, his Uncle, succeeded him, who was as remarkable for his
Blockishness, as the other was for his Madness. Seneca writ an elegant Satyr
upon him, entitled (...).

This Emperor also enlarged the Kingdom of Agrippa, by adding Judaea and
Samaria thereunto; which made him go to Jerusalem, and to please the People, to
persecute the Christians, of whom he slew James the Apostle, and threw Peter
into Prison.

The Ancients have recorded, That Peter went next year from Antioch to Rome, to
oppose Simon Magus: But some Modern Writers in this and the last Age, from some
Difficulties in Chronology, and other light Conjectures, deny that Peter ever
was at Rome, and even, what all Antiquity has unanimously concurred in, that
he suffered Martyrdom there. But it looks like an absurdity, in a thing of that
nature, to contradict all Men, because we cannot clear up some Difficulties
that lie in the way. Indeed, it is certain, Peter never was at Rome in the space
of four and twenty years together; but that he never saw that City, looks like
a crime to deny. Consult hereupon the First Dissertation of Dr. Pearson,
concerning the Succession of the First Bishops of Rome, chap. vii, viii.

There are no Remains left, to show whether at Rome, or where else, the Second
Epistle of Peter was written. Hugo Grotius, Salmasius, and Joseph Scaliger,
think it to be none of his. The First is said to be written from Babylon; and
by Babylon, the Ancients meant no other than Rome, by reason of the Greatness
of the Roman Empire, in conformity to that of Babylon, and whose Metropolis
might therefore very well be dignified with the Name of the Metropolis of the
Babylonish Empire. It Is true, Peter makes no mention of Paul therein, because
he was not then at Rome: The time when it was written cannot be assigned. See
Lud. Cappellus, in his Appendix to the Apostolical History; where, however, he
enclines to the contrary Opinion. The same Author has furnished us with an
History of Paul's Travels, and the time when he wrote each of his Epistles:
which Argument is also most accurately handled by Dr. Pearson, in his Annals
Paulini, and Praelectiones in Acta.

49.

Claudius, in the ninth year of his Reign, turned the Jews out of Rome, and the
Christians also with them, who were at that time confounded with, and taken for
the Jews: whence Suetonius says that they, Auctore Chresto tumultuantes,
growing tumultuous under Christ their Leader, were expelled Rome. Then it was,
as some will have it, that Peter returned into Judaea, and Aquila and Prisoilla
came to Corinth, (as you have it Act. xviii.) The same year arose a
Controversy at Antioch, about the Jewish Ceremonies: Whereupon the Apostles,
with the Church of Jerusalem, make that Decree that is contained in the XVth
Chapter of the Acts.

Claudius, at that time, having slain his Wife Messalina, who was an open
Adulteress, married Agrippina the Daughter of his Brother Germanicus, who, by
Domitius Ahenobarbus, had a Son, whose Name was Nero; to whom this same Year,
he assigned L. Seneca, now recalled from Banishment, for his Tutor: and being
moved thereunto by the advice of his freed Man, Pallaes, disinherited his Son
Britannicus, whom Messalina bare him.

In the fourth year of Claudius's Reign, died King Agrippa: so that his Kingdom
was put under the Government of Roman Magistrates; who by innumerable
Enormities so exasperated the minds of the Jews, that they broke out at last
into open War.

54.

Claudius being removed by Poison, was succeeded by Nero; whose very Name was
enough to strike Horror, for his brutal savage Disposition, and unheard of
Cruelties: He slew his own Mother, Brother Britanmicus, Seneca his Tutor, and
other famous Men; turned Stage Player; set. Rome on fire, and having cast the
odium of the Crime upon the Christians, cut off a great many of them by
exquisite Torments.

In his time lived Perseus, and Lucan the Poet, as did Quintillian a little
before; who was a most excellent Rhetorician. It was not long after that
Juvenal flourished; to whom we are to join Curtius the Historian, though he
published his History in Vespasian's Reign.

68.

Peter and Paul are thought to have suffered Martyrdom at Rome, in the
fourteenth and last year of Nero's Reign.

69.

The Jewish War began a little before; whereof Josephus, who was engaged
therein, has writ an accurate History. Vespasian, Governor of Syria, won many
Victories over the Jews, before he assumed the Empire into his Hands, which he
acquired the year after Nero's death, when Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, having
slain one another, had in vain endeavored to secure themselves. He then made
his Son Titus Commander in Chief in the Jewish War; who, after a Siege of seven
months, took Jerusalem, and razed it down to the Ground. As there was scarce
any other Nation that committed such flagitious Impieties and Evils as the Jews
did in this War, so was there scarce ever any that suffered so much. A little
after this, was Onion, or the Temple of the Jews, in Egypt, built by Onias the
High Priest, levelled with the Ground, upon a Tumult raised by the Jews in that
Country.

Somewhat before these-times, are supposed to be written the Two Epistles of
those Apostolic Men, (viz.) Barnabas, which is Catholic or Universal; and
Clemens, First Bishop of Rome, to the Corinthians. The Ancients differ very
much, whether Clemens, or Li^^^, or else Cletus, was first fixed in the Sea of
Rome, Hereof you may consult Dr. Pearson, and Henry Dodwell* in his
Dissertation concerning the Succession of the first Bishops of Rome.

At this time flourished Asconius Pedianus, the famous Grammarian; as did also
Pliny, Author of the Natural History.

79.

After Vespasian had for the space of ten years and six months governed the
Empire, he died, and left Titus, the best of Emperors, to succeed him; who
complained, That he lost a Day, when he had not done some good Deed or other.
But he scarce attained to the third year of his Reign, in which he was cut off
by an untimely fate; and left so much the more longing after him, by how much
his Brother Domitian, that succeeded him, proved a worse Prince than he. This
Man growing imperious both toward God and Man, commanded himself to be styled
both God and Lord, slew a great many of the Citizens, and expelled Philosophers
out of Rome; for which Sulpitia writ the Satyr upon him, which is still extant.

81.

But he who was thus outrageous to Heathens, proved much more so to the
Christians, in raising up the Second Persecution after Nero against them,
though it was of short duration; of which you may read, as well as of others,
in Dodwell's Dissertation, entitled, de Pancitate Martyrum.

93.

John the Apostle is said, at that time, to have been thrown into a Cauldron of
hot Oil, and to have come from thence safe and unhurt, and to be afterward
banished to the Isle of Patmos. Christianity began now to spread it self far
and near, so that Persons of highest Quality began to own and profess it; of
the number of whom was Flavius Clemens, Consul, and Domitian's Cousin German;
whom, for that reason, he commanded to be put to death.

About these times, it is generally believed that John writ the Apocalypse, or
Book of Revelation; and Josephus himself bears witness, that he was employed in
writing his Book of Antiquities. At the same time flourished Justus of
Tiberias, Josephus's Enemy, who also wrote the Jewish History.

96.

Domitian, after he had reigned for the space of fifteen years, was slain by
certain Persons, that conspired against him, and was succeeded in the Empire by
Cocceius Nerva, who rescinded all the other had done: whence it came to pass,
that John had the opportunity of returning from the Isle of Patmos, into Asia;
where, the next year, which was the Ninetieth of his Age, he is said to have
wrote his Gospel, and to have lived two years longer.

98.

Nerva, after he had reigned one year, and some months, had Vlpius Trajanus for
his Successor; who did great things; for he conquered the Dacians, Armenians,
Iberians, Sarmatians, Parthians, and several other Barbarous Nations. But the
Persecution that was raised during his Reign, against the Christians, did not a
little detract from that Princely Virtue of Clemency wherewith he was allowed
to have been endowed: However, it was of no long continuance, as appears by the
17th Epist. Lib. 10. of Plinius Junior, where he gives the Christians a great
Character. This is reckoned for the Third Persecution, wherein many did not
die, (as Mr. Dodwell sets forth.) But yet it was under this Emperor, that
Clemens Bishop of Rome, and Ignatius of Antioch, suffered Martyrdom: concerning
whose Epistles, that are remaining, you may consult the most learned Doctors,
James Usher, and John Pearson.

113.

The Jews making an Insurrection in Cyrene and Egypt, after having committed
many Outrages, were slain in vast numbers, as well in the forementioned Places,
as in the Isle of Cyprus; whither it was Enacted to be a Capital Crime for any
of the Jews to go, though driven thither by a Storm.

117.

Aelius Adrian succeeded Trajan in the Empire, when the latter had reigned
nineteen years; and in his time it was, that Florus and Suetonius, the Roman
Historians; and the Greek Philosophers, Plutarch, and Sextus the Empirick
flourished.

In this Reign, Saturninus, Basilides, and Carpocrates, the Heretics, are said
to have lived; from whom, some are of opinion, the Sect of the Gnostics
sprung, though others think them older. You may consult Dr. Hammond on this
Head, in the Third Chapter of his Prooemial Dissertation concerning Antichrist:
He thinks those Heretics to have had their Original from Simon Magus, and that
they were given to all manner of filthy Concupiscence, and no farther
Christians than in Name; which, in time of Persecution, they made no scriple to
deny. They must certainly be the worst of Men, who, in the days of the
Apostles, boasted of (...), vain Science. See 1 Timothy vi. 20. But of this we
have already spoken in several places of our Additions to Hammond's Annotations
(...) the New Testament.

In this Age it was, that Quadratus a Disciple of the Apostles, and Aristides
an Athenian Philosopher, wrote Apologies for the Christian Religion; which are
lost, though there be a fragment of the former extant in the Sixth Book, and
Third Chapter of Eusebius's Natural History. About those Times was also written
that Tract which we have now under the Name of Hermes Pastor.

128.

Aquila Ponticus, who was at first a Christian, then turned Jew, translated the
Old Testament into Greek, in the time of Adrian; who not long after began to
rebuild Jerusalem, and to carry a Colony thither, calling the same by the Name
of Aelia Capitolina. This the Jews were offended at; wherefore they began
secretly to consult about making an Insurrection, and at last brake forth into
open Rebellion, under the Conduct of Barchochebas, who boasted himself to have
been the Messiah, and therefore took that Name upon him which implied as much
as The Son of a Star, (...). But having failed the Expectation of the Jews,
(for he and a great number of his Men were overthrown by Hadrian) he was called
(...), Barchozba, i. e. The Son of a Lie.

Phavorinus, of whom A. Gellius has written so much, in his Book called Noctes
Articae, flourished at this time; as did also Ptolemy, the famous Mathematician.

137.

Adrian adopted Cejonius Commodus Verus, to whom he gave the Name of Aelius
Verus; and, together with his Adopted Son, died the following year: But had, a
little before his departure, adopted Arrius Antoninus, (who afterward got the
Surname of Pius,) but it was upon this Condition, That he should adopt Arrius
Verus, and M. Aurelius.

He was succeeded by Antoninus Pius, in whose Reign lived Justin Martyr,
several of whose Pieces are still extant; Galen of Pergamus, the famous
Physician; Arrian, a Philosopher of Nicomedia; Maximus of Tire; Sextus of
Chaeronea, Plutarch's Grandson; and Lucian of Samosata. Marcion and Valentine,
the Heretics, began at that time to diffuse their Heresies at Rome.

161.

Antoninus Pius dying this year, was succeeded by the two Caesar's, M. Aurelius
Antoninus, and L. Aelius Verus, who, eight years after, died of an Apoplectick
Fit. These Emperors waged various Wars both against the Parthians and Germans,
with good success.

In the Reign of these Emperors, lived Athenaeus, Author of the Deipnosophists;
and Polycarpus, among the Christians, whose Epistle to the Philippians is still
extant, and who himself was martyred; Theophilus of Antioch, whose Books we
have to Autolychus; as also Melito of Sardis, and Athenagoras, whose Apology
for the Christians, and Book concerning the Resurrection, are still in being.

Marcus Aurelius, after a Reign of nineteen years, about nine whereof were in
conjunction with Verus; and the rest, either alone himself, or with his Son
Commodus, ended his days in Pannonia, now called Hungary. This was the best
Prince that ever governed the Roman Empire; he left an excellent and most
useful Book behind him, entitled, (...), on which Thomas Gataker wrote learned
Notes.

180.

The best of Emperors was succeeded by the worst of Sons, L. Aurelius Commodus;
in whose time lived Irenaens, Bishop of Lions; and Theodotion Ponticus, who
translated the Old Testament into Greek. Montanus also, together with Priscilla
and Maximilla, gave now a beginning to the Heresy of the Montanists. Neither
are we to forget, that Julius Pollux flourished in this Age, whose work called
Onomasticon is still extant.

192.

Commodus, after he had escaped several Plots against him, was at last taken
off, by the Contrivance of Martia his Concubine, with Laetus and Electus, his
Chamberlains; who advanced Pertinax in his room: but he could not hold it full
three months, and so was slain by the Soldiery. Next after him was Didius
Julianus made Emperor, who, in about two months time, ran the same fate as his
Predecessor. In the mean time, L. Septimius Severus in Pannonia, Pescennius
Niger in Syria, and Clodius Albinus in Britain, set up for the Empire. It was
agreed, not long after, between Severus and Albinus, That the former should
allow the latter the Dignity of Caesar: And as for Niger, Severus overthrew him
in battle, at the River Euphrates, and slew him. When he had reigned near six
years, and frequently endeavored, though in vain, in a clandestine manner, to
cut off Albinus, he at last attacks him with open force. They fought a very
great Battle, at Lions, in France; where, after many Men were slain on both
sides, Albinus also fell, leaving the Empire to Severus alone.

197.

There was a great Controversy arose between the Asian and Western Churches,
concerning the Observation of Easter: Victor, Bishop of Rome, who would have
that Feast to be celebrated the first Sunday after the Fourteenth Day of the
New Moon which immediately followed the Vernal Equinox, Excommunicated the
Bishops of Asia, who thought the same should be celebrated on the very
Fourteenth Day it self. For which Procedure of his, Irenaeus sharply reproves
Victor.

Two years after, Severus, who had given his Son Bassianus the Name of
Antoninus, and made him Caesar, in pursuance to a Decree of the Senate, created
him Emperor; as he did his other Son Caesar.

202.

Under this Emperor, it is said, the Fifth Persecution arose, but it does not
seem to have been very great. Then it was, that Tertullian and Origin
flourished; the former in Africa, and the other in Egypt.

211.

When Geta, Severus's younger Son, was created Augustus, Antoninus sought all
opportunities to kill his Father: Which when he came to understand, he wasted
away for very grief, and died at York, in Britain, when he had built a Wall,
for the defense of that City and the Roman Province, from Sea to Sea, cross the
Island, against the Incursions of the Picts. He reigned seventeen years, eight
months, and some days.

As soon as he was dead, Antoninus commanded the Physicians, who would not obey
him, to take off his Father by Poison, to be put to death; and in their ruin
was also Papinian the Lawyer involved, because he would not consent to the said
Execution.

215.

Agrippinus, Bishop of Carthage, having held a Council in these times, Enacted,
That Heretics should be Rebaptized.

217.

Antoninus the Emperor, after he had ravaged the Kingdom of Parthia, and was
come back to Mesopotamia, was taken off by Opilius Macrinus, by the means of
Martialis the Centurion, after he had reigned for six years: But Macrinas
himself, after one year's Reign, together with his Son Diadamenianus, whom he
had made Caesar, was slain by the Soldiery.

Antoninus Alagabalus, a most wicked Emperor, succeeded him. He was at first a
Priest of Alagabalus, a God of the Emisseni, from whom he had his Name; for
Alah gabal, (...), signifies a Mountain-God; or God of the Mountain. The
Emissenians worshipped God, under the form of a Mountain, which they believed
to have fallen down from Heaven, and who was esteemed to be the chief among
them, as is set forth at large by Is. Casaubon, and Claud. Salmasius, upon
Heliogabalus of Lampridius. He introduced the Worship of his Name-sake-God into
Rome, and built him a Temple there.

He adopted his Cousin-German, Alexander, Mammea's Son, whom he called Caesar;
and after he had reigned three years, and nine months, was, together with his
Mother Julia, slain at Rome, in a Tumult made by the Soldiery, and thrown into
the Tiber.

222.

Alexander, a good Prince, assumed the Imperial Dignity: He is said to have
worshipped Apollonius Tyanaeus, Christ, Abraham, and Orpheus, in his private
Chapel: so that we do not find the Christians much molested in his Reign. Nay,
it is said, that he would have built a Temple for our Savior; which Adrian was
affirmed to have designed, who commanded Temples to be built in Cities without
any Statues in them. He also allowed especial Privileges to the Jews; and if
any suffered Martyrdom in his Reign, the same must be attributed to certain
Lawyers, whose Counsel he made use of, and who were great Enemies to the
Christians. Amongst others, Vlpian, Pomponius, Celsus, Modestinus, Paulus,
Proculus, and Venuleius, were famous.

231.

About these times it was, that Origin undertook a most useful Work upon the
Old Testament; he put forth that called by the Name of Tetrapla, where you have
first the Hebrew Text in Hebrew Characters, then the same in Greek; after which
follows the four famous Versions, of the Septuagint, Aquila, Symmachus, and
Theodotion; whence sprang the Name of (...), not from the number of the
Columns, but of the Versions; for the Columns were five, whereas the Versions
were no more than four. An Example whereof, we have subjoined in this place: 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. Hebraic. (...) LXX Int. Aquila Symmach. Theodot. (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) But seeing that in the Reign of Antonine Caracalla, there were
three Versions more found in a great Tub at Jericho, which they called the
Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh; there were with the addition of these, two Columns
more made, one whereof took up the Fifth place, as the Sixth and Seventh, who
were looked upon as all one, took up the other; and perhaps there was no great
difference between them. That work being ended in this manner, they called it
(...), because the same consisted of fix Versions, the Sixth and the Seventh
being reputed but for one. But Epiphanius, and some other eminent Writers, have
given this Edition the Name of (...), because they had a regard to the Columns,
and not the Versions; that is, they allowed two Columns for the Hebrew Text,
and six for the Versions, for the reason already given. They have also, for the
same reason, called that (...), which we before, with Origin and Jerome, have
distinguished by the Name of (...).

Origin has also done this in the Septuagint's Version, that (...), or that
which was vulgarly used, wherein are many things added or borrowed from other
Interpreters: he has distinguished them which were not the Septuagint's, with
Asterisms and Lines; but in the Hexapla, has inserted the Septuagint's
unmixed. As to this point, you may consult Eusebius, lib. vi. cap. 16. of his
Ecclesiastical History, and Henry Valesius upon him, as also Is. Vossius
adtertias Objectiones Ric. Simonii. Andrew Masius's Pref. to the Greek Text of
Joshua, may withal be seen upon this occasion.

From this Origin, several of whose Pieces are quite lost, but many still
extant, as from an Everlasting Fountain, have the Fathers of the Greek Church
drawn almost all their Writings: neither did St. Jerome borrow a little matter
from him, though his great Opponent; nor Ruffinus, Presbytes of Aquileia, who
stuck close to his part, who also translated much of him into Latin. He was
afterward accused of diverse Errors; concerning which, you may consult
Sulpicius Severus, in his Dialogues. Indeed, as to those Controversies relating
to Grace, yea, and to the Holy Trinity, and other Points of Christian Theology,
he has very different Sentiments from those which afterward prevailed,
especially in the Latin Church. At that time flourished Gregory Thaumaturgus,
and Julius Africanus, who were great Admirers of Origin.

In this Age it was, that Artaxerxes the Persian, after he had overcome and
slain Artabanus, restored the Empire to the Persians, or rather suppressed the
Name of Parthia: yet Alexander overcame this Prince; but was soon after,
together with his Mother, slain by the Soldiers, when he had reigned thirteen
years.

In his Reign lived Dio Cassius, who wrote the Roman History.

235.

Maximinus, whose Father was a Goth, and Mother an Alane, succeeded him; being
made Emperor by the Soldiery, without the concurrence of the Senate. This very
year, to which Writers refer the Sixth Persecution, the Gordians, Father and
Son, usurp the Empire: Which was no sooner made known at Rome, but the Romans,
by the Authority of the Senate, revolted from Maximinus, and chose Twenty
Senators to take care of the Public Weal. But after the Revolution of one
year, the Gordians were slain by Capelianus, and Maximinus himself, while,
together with his Son, he laid Siege to Aquileia, was cut off also. The Senate
presently advanced Maximius and Pupienus into his Place: But these, as being
beloved by the People, and hated by the Soldiery, ran the same fate, in the
following year.

238.

Gordianus, yet a Child, was chosen Emperor, by the African Legions; who, by
the Assistance of Misitheus, his Father-in-Law, a most valiant and learned
Person, held the Dignity for six years: But not being able to hinder Philip the
Arab from killing him, and getting himself to be Praefectus Praetorio, or
Captain of the Lifeguard, in his room, he was slain the next year by the same
Person.

244.

M. Julius Philippus, together with his Son of his own Name and Caesar, held
the Empire for about five years. Some of the Ancients have mistakingly thought
these Philips to have been Christians, as after Joseph Scaliger, and David
Clerk, in his Sacred Questions, quaest. xix. has showed. The Father was slain
at Verona; and the Son at Rome, by the Soldiery.

249.

The next that succeeded in the Empire, was Decius, who was descended from
Lower Hungary, and who is said to have raised the Seventh Persecution against
the Christians.

St. Cyprian flourishing under this Prince, who, a year before Decius came to
be Emperor, was made Bishop of Carthage, wherein he succeeded Donatus. Not long
after, a Schism brake forth in Africa, upon account of the Defection of Persons
from the Faith, in time of the Persecution, which we have spoken of; whom
Felicissimus the Deacon would never allow to come to Communion; wherein he was
followed by Novatus and Novatianus, the Presbyters,, who, a little while after,
were condemned, in a Synod held at Rome.

251.

Three years after, Decius was succeeded in the Empire by C. Vibius Trebonianus
Gallus, and C. Vibius Volusianus, whom his Father made his Colleague in the
Empire: But these, at the expiration of about three years, as they were
marching against Aemylianus, who was forming new Designs against them in
Moesia, were slain at Interamna; and three months were hardly at an end, when
Aemylianus himself ran the same fate.

254.

Valerian was made Emperor in Noricum; and Galienus at Rome, under whom began
the Eighth Persecution.

In the third year of their Reign, St. Cyprian having assembled a Synod of the
Bishops of Africa, Enacted, That the Baptism of Heretics was not valid; and
that therefore they ought to be Rebaptized, who had been Baptized by them. The
same thing was Decreed by Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea, in Cappadocia, and
Dionysius of Alexandria. Stephen Bishop of Rome opposed both, and got another
Synod of Italian Bishops to withstand them. Two years after, St. Cyprian was
martyred in Africa.

In these times, several Nations from Scythia and Germany, particularly the
Gorani, Goths, Carpi, and Burgundians, made an Irruption into the East; which
wrought so much Distraction in the Empire, that many assumed the Imperial
Dignity, among whom, seeing there were thirty Persons of greater Eminency than
the rest, they were called by the Name of the Thirty Tyrants, which was taken
from that of the Athenian Oligarchy, the History of whom we have written by
Trebellius Pollio.

About these times, Sabellius, originally of Ptolemais, in Libya, is said to
have broached his Opinion; which, if we may give credit to the Ancients, was
this, That he believed God who was one and the same numerically, was in certain
respects called Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

260.

Valerian going unadvisedly to conferr with Sapores King of Persia, was taken
and slain by him. Galienus, after he had reigned with his Father for seven
years, held the Empire eight years longer; but not without the Assistance of
his Brother P. Lucinius Valerianus, whom his Father had created Caesar.

While this Prince gave himself up wholly to his Pleasures, Odenatus King of
Palmyra seized on the East, and defended those Parts against the Persians: but
being slain soon after, his Wife Zenobia, a Woman of a masculine Spirit, took
the Government upon her.

At this same time it was, they say, that Paul of Samosata, Bishop of Antioch,
was condemned in the First Synod of Antioch, for teaching, that Christ was but
a mere Man.

268.

Gallienus and Valerianus being treacherously slain, M. Aurelius Claudius
succeeded, who reigned almost two years.

270.

This last Emperor dying of the Plague, was succeeded by Aurelianus; who is
reckoned among the good Princes. In his Reign, it is recorded, That Paul of
Samosata was condemned again, at Antioch: That when he would not go out of the
House belonging to the Church, nor be driven from the Flock whereof he was
Pastor before, he was driven thence by the Authority of the Emperor Aurelian,
though an Heathen. Which how it could be done, I cannot easily imagine; seeing
that Eusebius, who tells this Story, says, that the Ninth Persecution raised
against the Christians, was in this Emperor's Reign.

275.

This Emperor overcame Zenobia, and led her away in Triumph; and commanded his
Rhetorician, Longinus, who was Greek Secretary to him, because it was thought
he had wrote haughty Letters, to be put to death. Himself, after a year and
half's Reign, was treacherously murdered by Mnestheus, his Secretary. After
whose decease, happened, what had never come to pass at any time before, an
Interregnum for Eight Months, while the Senate and Army would leave the Power
of choosing an Emperor to one another. M. Claudius Tacitus was chosen by the
Senate, who died six months after, and was succeeded by his Brother Florianus;
who, in about another month's time, was slain, and succeeded by Marcus Aurelius
Probus.

276.

In this Emperor's Reign sprang up the Heresy of the Manichaeans, which had
its beginning from a Babylonish Servant, whose Name was Manes, now, in that
Language, (...), Man, i. e. a Vessel, which with the addition of (...), dechai,
of the Living, makes it Mandechai, (...), that is, the Vessel of God. This Man
defended the Fatality held by the Stoics, and denied Free Will so far to Man,
that all things must be done necessarily: but for Sin and Vice, he attributed
none of that to God; for he urged with the Persians and Magi, that besides God,
there was another Principle which was the Author of all Evil. There were also
several of the ancient Heretics, who, in like manner, denied this Freedom, and
introduced a fatal Necessity: Which made Irenaeus, Athenagoras, Origin, and
other Fathers, inveigh most sharply against such Opinions.

282.

The Emperor Probus, for his severe Discipline over the Soldiery, in his March
through Illyricum, was slain by them, after he had reigned six years.

He was succeeded by M. Aurelius Carus; who made his Sons, Carinus and
Numerianus, Caesar's, and who succeeded him, he being slain in Mesopotamia, by a
Thunderbolt, within a year's time. It was not much longer, before Dioclesian, a
Dalmatian, the Freed-man of Anulinus the Senator, cut them off. In these days
lived Olympius and Nemesianus the Poets, some Eclogues of whom, which are not
contemptible, have survived to our times.

284.

Then also flourished Minutius Felix, Arnobius, and not long after, Lactantius,
who writ against the Heathens, in the Defense of the Christian Religion.

Seeing there were now diverse Tumults in France, that Britain was not quiet,
Wars coming on from the East, and Seditions raised in Africa; Dioclesian
created Maximianus Herculius, whom he had made Caesar before, now Emperor. And
not long after, they constituted each of them a Caesar, which were Maximianus
Armentarius, and Constantius Chlorus, who was sent into Britain, against
Carausius, that had caused himself to be declared Emperor.

291.

Eutropius says, That Dioclesian was the first that found out the form of
Royal Usage, more than that of the Roman Liberty; and commanded himself to be
Adored, when all others before him were only Saluted; That he wore Jewels on
his Clothes and Shoes. For the Ensign of Empire consisted before in a Purple
Robe only, but in other things they went like other People. But it is manifest,
the same thing was done by Caligula; and perhaps he inveighs the more bitterly
against Dioclesian, because he saw he was hated by the Christians; For
Eutropius lived in the time of the first Christian Emperors.

302.

Dioclesian and Maximianus Herculius, after they had put an end to various
Wars, raised the Tenth and greatest Persecution of all against the Christians:
They pulled down their Temples and Churches every where, (if we may call those
Places so, where the Christians privately met to worship) and sought out for
the Scriptures in every corner; which they forced from many, with exquisite
Torments: who, for that reason, were called TRAITORS. Some time after, there
was a Synod held against them, at Cirtha, in Numidia; wherein those who had not
given them up, would have the Traitors Excommunicated: But as there were
several of the Bishops who had been themselves tardy in the point, they let the
matter fall. This Account we have in St. Augustine, against Cresconius, lib.
iii. cap. 26. Whence it is evident, there were not as many suffered Martyrdom,
as the Writers of the latter Ages have boasted of.

304

This year, Dioclesian and Maximianus Herculius having laid aside the Imperial
Dignity, the first at Nicomedia, and the other at Milan, resumed a private
Life: while Constantius Chlorus and Maximinianus Armentarius were at the same
time declared Augusti, as Severus and Galerius Maximinus were also made
Caesar's. These Princes divided the Provinces of the Empire, so as that it was
assigned to every one what part it was his business to govern and defend.

Constantius died two years after, at York; and his Son Constantine, by the
unanimous Consent of the whole Army, was saluted Caesar, and next year Emperor.
But when Constantine's Picture was brought to Rome, Maxentius, the Son of
Herculius, was presently proclaimed Emperor, by the Praetorian Bands.

The same year, Caecilianus was constituted in the Place of Mensurius Bishop of
Carthage, by Felix of Aptungitanum: From whence sprung a Schism, for that those
to whom the Church-Plate was entrusted by Mensurius, were compelled to give
them up to Caecilianus, (if so be we are bound to believe herein St. Augustine
and Optatus, the Donatists Opponents, from whom only we have this Account.) The
Schismatics pretended that Caecilianus had been Ordained by the Traditores, or
Betrayers (as they called them) wherefore they thought that they had a Right to
Create another Bishop, which was Majorinus. The Chief Man among them, was
Donatus of Casae-Nigrae, from whom the Schism was denominated.

307.

When Galerius Maximianus came to understand that Maxentius, who was his
Son-in-Law, had invaded the Imperial Authority, he endeavored both himself,
and by his Generals, though in vain, to subdue him. His Father Maximianus,
hoping he might by the means hereof assume the Purple again, went from Lucania
to Rome; but being found to have conspired against his Son, he was expelled
from thence: And so he fled to Constantine, then in Gaul, on whom he bestowed
his Daughter Fausta in Marriage, and withal, consigned unto his hands (as far
as in him lay) the Title and Power of Augustus, or Emperor.

Licinius, who before had been declared Caesar, by Maximianus, did the
following year assume the Name of Augustus: So that there were this year no
less than four Emperors, (viz.) Maximianus, Constantine, Maxentius, and
Licinius.

The Donatists, at the same time, gathered a Synod of Two hundred and seventy
Bishops, at Carthage, wherein they Decreed, That the Betrayers should be
Rebaptized; and upon their Refusal, be Excommunicated.

311.

Galerius, in the mean time, by an Edict, put a stop to the Persecution of the
Christians, which he had before promoted, and died of an infectious Wound he
had received. An Anonymous Author, published by James Sirmondus, adds, That
this was such a drunken Emperor, that when in drink he commanded what ought not
to be done, he Enacted, upon the Advice of the Prefect, That none should
execute his Commands after Dinnertime.

THE Conversion of Constantine, The XIth EPOCH.
From the Conversion of the Emperor Constantine, to the Reign of Charles the
Great, are Four Hundred Eighty Eight Years; which comprehends,

The XIth PERIOD.
312.

Constantine is said to have seen, this year, in the Air, something
representing the Sign of the Cross, with these words on it, (...), In this thou
shall overcome, and that then he was converted. He thereupon, together with
Licinius, to whom he was reconciled, put out several Edicts in favor of the
Christians: But he made War upon Maxentius; who being beaten, fell, in his
flight, over a Bridge that was built across the Tyber, into that River.

The Donatists from thence-forward raised many Disturbances in Africa, whose
Dissentions Constantine endeavored to accommodate, by the means of some Bishop
employed for that end, (though to no purpose) upon application being made to him
upon the said account, which Dionys. Petavius wrongfully ascribes to the next
year. He did indeed Enact, That the Determination of the Bishops, even in Civil
Controversies, should be allowed of. But he ought to have referred this Edict
to the Year 331; for the same was dated at Constantinople, which began to be
re-edified, A. D. 328: And this Observation we have from David Blondell, who
has inserted the same, with some few more, in the Margin of Petavius.

Upon this, a War brake out between Constantine and Licinius; wherein the
former prevailing in two great Battles, imposed these Terms upon the other,
That he should govern Thrace, the East, and remoter Provinces, while
Constantine should from Illyricum possess all the rest of the Empire Westward.
It was not long after, before Constantius and Crispus, the Sons of Constantine
the Great, as also Licinius the Son of Licinius, were made Caesar's.

At the same time, it is said, Arius, a Presbyter of Alexandria, taught the
People publicly, that (...), the Word, was not of so perfect a Substance as
the Father, though he were (...), most like unto him; inasmuch as his Substance
had been created by the Father, before the Formation of the World, (...), of
that which had no Entity. But Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, who, with
several others, believed the Word to be a Substance altogether equal to that of
the Father, and Eternal, turned Arius out of the Church; who, for all that,
drew several Bishops to take his part, the chief whereof was Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia.

Philostorgius, who wrote an Ecclesiastical History from the time of the Nicene
Council, down to that of Theodosius the Younger, some Fragments, and a short
Compendium whereof, made by a Person who was of the Homoousian Opinion, are
still extant, testifies, that one Alexander, Surnamed Baucala, made a
difference between Arius, and Alexander the Bishop; and that from thence it
was, that occasion was taken to preach the Consubstantial Doctrine. This
Philostorgius was indeed a favourer of Arius's Opinion; but there is no reason
we should give him no manner of credit, and all, as is usual, to those of the
opposite Party.

324.

About the same time began Licinius, out of hatred to Constantine, to trouble
the Christians, and soon after brake out into open War; but being overcome by
Constantine, in some Engagements both by Sea and Land, he was brought to
comply: yet Constantine finding at last, that he and Martinianus, whom the
other had made Caesar, could not forbear forming of new Designs and Attempts,
he commanded his Head to be struck off.

325.

But as the Controversy about the Celebration of Easter, (of which we have
already made mention, in the time of Victor, Bishop of Rome) did still the more
heighten the Differences between Arius and his Opponents, there was a Synod
appointed to be called, to meet at Nice, from all the Roman Empire, wherein met
cccxviii Bishops; and the same began on the 14th. of June, and ended on the
25th. of August following.

In this Council it was Enacted, That all should celebrate Easter on the same
Day, that is, the first Sunday after the Fourteenth Day of the New Moon next
succeeding the Vernal Equinox. There was also a Creed or Confession of Faith
made, wherein that Opinion that opposed Arius's Sentiments was confirmed. As
for the Creed, you will find it in Socrates, l. i. c. 8. of his Eccles. Hist.

But because this Synod was accounted to be the first Ecumenical Council, we
shall contrary to our custom, say somewhat more concerning it.

In the first place, There were great Contentions between the Bishops, which is
expressly affirmed by Eusebius, cap. xiii. lib. 3. of the Life of Constantine;
though Constantine, in a grave Speech, exhorted them all to Peace and
Unanimity: These are his words; (...), etc. Some began to accuse their
Neighbors, while others defended themselves, and returned the Accusation upon
their Opponents. Neither could their Wranglings be composed any otherwise, than
by throwing their Petitions into the fire.

There is no small Controversy about the meaning of the Nicene Creed;
concerning which, you may read Stephen Curcellaeus's Dissertation, de Vocibus
Trinitatis, etc. where he shows, the Nioene Fathers believed there were Three
Gods equal to one another. There were Five Bishops who would not subscribe, and
they were Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nice, Maris of Chalcedon, Theonas
of Marmarica, and Secundus of Ptolemais: These said, they could not consent to
admit of the word (...), because that may be said to be Consubstantial, which
proceeds from another either by Partition, or Flowing, or Eruption; by
Eruption, as the Bud is from the Roots; by Flowing, as Children from their
Parents; and by Partition, as two or three small vials, from a mass of Gold.
But none of these ways can the (...), or Word, be the Son of God. But the Synod
said, that the Son was from the Father without any Partition, as it might be in
Corporeal things; but they made use of the word (...), as signifying only the
Equality of the Substance, and not Numerical Unity.

Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, who sat near the Emperor in the Synod, was at
first dubious whether the word (...) should be allowed of; but at last, upon
granting him to make his Interpretation, he gave way to it. He said, He
approved of it, for peace sake, as he did also of those words, (...), Begotten,
not made; because they said Made was a word that was common to all other
Creatures, that were made by the Son, wherewith the Son had nothing like unto
them; and moreover, that he was not made like unto those things made by him,
but was of a much more excellent Substance than all the Creatures, which indeed
the Divine Oracles taught us to be of the Father, by some secret method of
Generation: That he was Consubstantial with the Father, implied no more, than
that the Son has nothing of likeness in him to the Creatures he had made, but
that he was like unto, (...), the Father alone, of whom he was begotten; and
that he was of no other Subsistence, or Substance, but of the Father. These
things, which are taken out of Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea's Epistles, (as you
have them in the forementioned place of Socrates, and others that might be
mentioned) do sufficiently manifest unto us, that the Nicene Fathers had other
sort of Sentiments, than what the Modern Christians have, in relation to the
said Point.

The Arians also themselves did at length acquiesce, except Theonas and
Secundus, with the Creed of that Synod, and allowed of it; but upon that
Condition, (as you have it in Athanasius's Second Apology) That Arius, who
himself also allowed thereof, should not return to Alexandria. Athanasius, next
year, was advanced into the Sea of Alexandria; who, while he was yet but
Deacon, stiffly opposed Arius. Philostorgius has many things in relation to
him, that are not much to his Reputation; which perhaps are as little to be
credited, as what the Consubstantial Men have said concerning Arius, and
therefore are yet no more to be rejected than these.

326.

The same year, which was next after the Synod, Crispus Caesar, upon account of
his being suspected to have committed Incest with his Mother-in-Law, was put to
death, by his Father's Command: And Fausta being kept in custody till the
following year, was killed in a Bath, because she was thought to have falsely
accused Crispus. Ablavius, who afterward attained to the Honor of being
Consul, has set forth Constantine's Cruelty, in the following lines: Saturni
aurea saecla quis requirat?
Sunt haec gemmea, sed Neroniana.


Then Constantine and his Mother Helen built several Churches in Judaea,
Jerusalem, Mount Olivet, and Bethlehem.

330.

The Council of Nice, by the Definition they made, could not extinguish the
Dissentions reigning among the Christians. In Egypt there were great
Animosities between the Arians and Athanasians: Which last the Consubstantial
Writers have so far favored, that they have condemned the other's Proceedings
in all Points. This year there happened a Tumult at Antioch, arising from the
same Cause; which Petavius, after Baronius, has mistakingly assigned to the
Year 324, and cites Eusbius's Authority for it, to no purpose; when that
Author, in Constantine's Life, lib. iii. cap. 60. speaks of things quite
different therefrom, and such as happened five years after the Synod was held;
as H. Valesius, upon that place in Eusebius, has demonstrated: Upon the death
of Paulinus Bishop of Antioch, they had great feuds amongst them in that City,
about the Choice of a Successor; the Arians being obstinately bent to have
Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea translated thither. [ Eusebius. lib. iii. de Vita
Constantini, cap. 57.] At length, Eustathius, a Catholic, and worthy Prelate,
was put in. [Theodor. lib. i. c. 7.] Blondell has well observed, in the Margin
of Petavius, it is wrong; for what Eusebius relates, belongs to the Deposing of
Eustathius. He might also have added, That it was not the Arians, but
Eustathius, that was the occasion of the Sedition; whom Eusebius (in the
forecited place) calls (...).

This same year was the City Byzantium Dedicated, which Constantine had two
years before begun to re-build, and was, according to the Emperor's Name,
called Constantinople. From henceforward it was made the Metropolis of the
East, and began to be called NEA PO.

333.

Constans, the Son of Constantine, was made Caesar this year. The Sarmatians,
about the same time, that had been so often conquered, and their rebellious
Servants being brought to submit, were divided through Macedon, Thrace, and
Italy.

335.

Dalmatius, the Emperor Constantine's Brother's Son, having been advanced to
the Dignity of Caesar; the Empire was in this manner divided between the
Caesar's. Constantine the Younger had the Charge of Gaul; Constantius, of the
East; and Africa, Illyricum, and Italy, was the lot of Constans; whilst
Dalmatius was to look after the Gothic Frontiers.

Then it was that Athanasius was condemned in the Synod of Tire, because he had
by ill methods got himself made Bishop of Alexandria, and for other grievous
Offenses, if you will believe Philostorgius. [See lib. iii.. 11.] It Is certain,
that though Philostorgius was a favourer of Arius; yet where he believes him to
have fallen into an Error, he fails not to reprove him; and therefore he might
deal heartily in other things. [See lib. ii.. 3.] Athanasius being accused a
second time, by the same Bishops now assembled at Constantinople, that had
condemned him at Tire, was by Constantine banished to Treves. This year it was,
that Arius is said to have died by a wonderful Judgment of God, as his
Adversaries afterward gave out; but their Squabbles were then too hot to
incline us to give credit to either Side.

337.

This year died the Emperor Constantine the Great, after a Reign of One and
thirty years. His three Sous, Constantine, Constantius, and Constans, were
immediately Proclaimed; who divided the Empire betwixt them. Dalmatius Caesar,
Constantius the Brother of Constantine the Great, and Anaballianus, on whom the
Purple and Golden Robe was conferred by Constantine, who declared them
Nobilissimi at the same time, were also in some measure Sharers in the Empire.
As to this last mentioned Dignity, you may consult John Meursius, in his
Lexicon Graeco-Barbarum, under the word (...). But these three were slain in a
Tumult of the Soldiery, by the means of Constantius, who egged the latter to
it, or at least connived at them; and together with them, Optatus made a
Patrician by Constantine, (of which word see the said Author, under the word
(...)) the same being a new-coin'd Honor, which privileged him who enjoyed it,
to take Place of the Praejectus Praetorio. At the same time, Ablavius, who was
Praefectus Praetorio, was cut off also. We learn out of Philostorgius, that
there was a Rumor spread abroad, That Constantine was poisoned by his
Brethren; and that when he found his death draw nigh, he made his Will, and
commanded the first of his Sons that should reach Nicomedia, where he died, to
revenge his death: And perhaps, Constantius, who first arrived there, laid hold
of this pretense to cut them all off.

341.

Athanasius was honorably recalled from Banishment, by Constantine the
Younger; who, not long after, making War upon his Brother Constans, and
breaking more like a Robber, than an Enemy in War, into his Division of the
Empire, was slain. Athanasius was thereupon called to the Synod of Antioch,
where about an hundred Bishops were assembled, one third whereof espoused
Arius's Opinion; who condemned and deposed him, putting Gregory the Cappadocian
into his See. In the mean time, Julius, Bishop of Rome, absolved not only
Athanasius, in a Synod assembled in that City, but also condemned the Synod of
Antioch: And Athanasius returning to Alexandria, raised a great Tumult against
Gregory, wherein diverse Soldiers and Citizens were slain. Macedonius, at the
same time, being substituted by Hermogenes, the Emperor's Prefect, in the room
of Eusebius, who from the Sea of Nicomedia, was translated to that of
Constantinople, Hermogenes was tore to pieces by the Homoousian Party (as they
were called,) these last being intent to restore Paul, who had been put out, to
the exercise of his Function again.

Then it was, that Photinus, the Disciple of Marcellus of Ancyra, they said,
broached his Opinion concerning Christ; which was much the same, as far as may
be gathered from the Ancients, with that of Paul of Samosata, of which we have
made mention under the Emperor Aurelian.

344.

There was a new Council held by the Arians, at Antioch; wherein was formed a
new Confession of Faith, besides that made in the former Synod held in the same
City, wherein the word (...) was left out. The latter is said to have been
Lucian the Martyr's, whom Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and Philostorgius,
own to have been of Arius's Opinion. [See Sozomen, lib. iii. cap. 5.] Lucian,
and the Arians in this same Confession, declining to make the Son
Consubstantial, say, that he was (...), that is, As to his Divinity, Immutable,
and not obnoxious to Change, but the Immutable Image of the Essence, Council
and Power of the Father, the Firstborn of every Creature. H. Valesius
translates the word (...), In no wise differing. But though the word frequently
occurs in that sense, yet it signifies also Immutable. Which enclines me to
believe, that Lucian would have a Confession made in such terms as were
agreeable to both Parties; which has been often done, in relation to this
Controversy.

347.

While Constantius was engaged in a War against the Persians, Constans, in the
West, was intent upon the Restitution of Athanasius to the Sea of Alexandria;
and for that end, with his Brother's concurrence, called a Synod at Sardis, a
City in Illyricum, in the Confines of Thrace and Mysia. Here met Three hundred
and seventy Bishops; wherein, when most of them were Homoousians, Athanasius
was absolved. But the Arian Bishops, stealing from thence, met at Philippi, and
set up contrary Decrees, which they also called by the Name of Sardis-Decrees.
Neither would Athanasius have been recalled to Alexandria, but that Gregory
being killed by the Homoousian Party, and that Constantius, moved by Constans
his threathing Letters, thought fit to restore him, for Peace-sake, two years
after the Synod of Sardis,

350.

Constans was this year slain by Magnentius, who seized upon the Empire in
Gaul. The same was done by Vetranio in Panonia, and Nepotianus at Rome: But
Magnentius quickly overpowered the rest, though he was himself, a year after
he assumed the Empire, ruined by Constantius.

The same year, wherein Magnentius was slain, there was a Synod held at
Sirmium, wherein Photinus was condemned. They were all Arian Bishops that met
there, yet their Canons were no less sound than others. Then it was, the
Appellation of Pagan is thought to have had its original, to wit, when
Constantius commanded all the Soldiery to embrace Christianity, and cashiered
those that refused, and would have them called Pagans.

When Constantius marched against Magnentius, he made Constantius Gallus, his
Cousin-German, Caesar; but in about four years after, when he had perpetrated a
great many Cruelties, he took care to have him slain. Julian, Gallus's Brother,
had much ado to escape the same sat; but he was afterward sent to Athens, to
study.

357.

Athanasius was about the same time condemned in the Synods of Arles and Milan,
and several of those that were for the Homoiousians Doctrine were banished, of
which number were Laberius Bishop Rome, Hilary of Poictiers, Eusebius of
Verceil, with other Bishops. Liberius, after two years Exile, subscribed the
Condemnation of Athanasius, and put out a Confession of Faith, wherein the word
(...) was left out; though he said, the Son was in all things most like unto
the Father. About these times it was, that the Arians began to be distinguished
into Homoiousians and Anomaeans; of which the first said, he was in all things
of like Substance with the Father; whereas the other contested, he was unlike
unto him, (if the Ancients may be credited upon this Head.)

Julian, whom Constantius had created Caesar, performed many famous Exploits in
Gaul and Germany, while Constantius made an Invasion into Sarmatia.

After the Celebration of the Synod of Ancyra, wherein the Anomoeans were
condemned, and that several Places were pitched upon to hold a General Council
at; it was at last agreed, there should be two Synods had; one at Seleucia, in
Isauria, for the East; and the other at Ariminum, in Italy, for the West.

359.

There were great Contentions between the Homoiousians and Anomoeans, but at
length the latter were worsted; and that Confession of Faith that was made in
the first Synod, held at Antioch, in the Year 341, was approved of; wherein the
word (...) was only left out.

There were Four hundred Bishops met at Ariminum, of whom almost one fourth
part favored Arianism; and wherein, after diverse Janglings, and many Delays,
most of them subscribed to a Confession of Faith, wherein the Son of God was
denied only to be a Creature like unto the rest of the Creatures.

Macedonius was said, the following year, upon his Expulsion from
Constantinople, to have broached his Opinion concerning the Divinity of the
Holy Spirit. This Man did indeed deny, with the rest of the Arians, that the
Son was Consubstantial with the Father, and contended that he was only like him
in all things; but he openly said, that the Spirit was a Creature. [See
Theodoritus's Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. ii. cap. 6.] He was succeeded by Eudoxius
the Anomoean, who had been before Bishop of Antioch; at whose departure arose
much strife at Antioch. There were some who would follow Eustathius, who was
Expelled in the Year 330; but others were for Miletus, who had been introduced
by the favorers of Eudoxius, and forsaken Arianism: And, lastly, some sticking
close to the Opinion of Arius, withdrew from the Communion of both, and
followed Euzoius for their Bishop.

362.

Constantius and Julian had been very jealous of one another for some years;
and the latter had at length broke out and made War upon Constantius, if the
other, in his return from the Persian War, had not died. Then Julian made an
open Profession of Heathenism; and having opened the Temples of the Gods, took
the Office and Part of Pontifex Maximus upon him. This Prince allured many to
become Heathens, and fomented the Divisions that were between the Bishops, who
were already, of their own accord, but too much disposed to them.

Lucifer Calaritanus began a Schism, which had its first rise from him; and
that was, That he and his Followers would not Communicate with the Lapsed.

Themistius, Libanius, and several other Philosophers flourished at this time,
whom Julian greatly favored, who, to give him his due, was a most learned and
valiant Prince, and in whom there was scarce any thing reprove able, save his
Heathenish Superstition. He began to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem, but could
not finish the Work. As he was the same year waging War against the Persians,
and had begun the Battle without his Coat of Mail on, he received his mortal
Wound by an uncertain Hand.

363.

Jovian was immediately chosen Emperor by the Soldiers, being before the Chief
of his Domestics; who, having made a Peace with the King of Persia, returned
to Constantinople; where he professed himself to be of the Homoousian Belief.
He caused the Temples of the Heathens to be shut up, and allowed the Christians
to open Schools for the Professors of the Liberal Arts, which Julian had
prohibited. But he dying next year, as was said, with the Smell of Prunes, was
succeeded by Valentinian; who having declared Valens, Augustus, left him at
Constantinople, to govern the East, while himself went to do the same in the
Western Parts of the Empire. Then the Arians, Semi-Arians (for so they called
the Homoiousians,) and the Homoousians or Consubstantialists, filled all
places, especially the East, with Tumults, and Valens proved to be a favourer
of the Arians.

Gregory and Basilius, who before had led a Monastic Life, left their
Solitude, that they might oppose the prevailing Arians, and defended the
Homoousian Doctrine.

367.

Upon the death of Liberius, there was such a base Contention between Damasus
and Vrsicinus, about the Bishopric of Rome, that there were no less than an
Hundred and thirty seven Persons found slain in one day, in the Church of
Sicininus. At length Damasus prevailed, and is said to have been lawfully
chosen, as it is usual with the Church History, where all things are judged by
the Event of them.

Valentinian, the same year, created his Son Gratian, Augustus, from the
Tribunal; while Valens, in the mean time, fought several Battles against the
Goths.

Didymus of Alexandria, a most learned Man, lived in these times, though he had
lost the use of his sight since he was but five years old; so did also Ruffinus
of Aquileia, who translated several Pieces of Origen's Works into Latin; as
well as Basil, Bishop of Caesurea; and Gregory of Sasimum, in Cappadocia.

371.

It Is recorded, as a very singular thing, That Valentinian allowed the Altar of
Victory to stand in the Capitol, and the Heathen Senators to offer Sacrifice
upon it; for which he had thanks given him by Symmachus, a most eloquent Man,
whose Works are still extant. The truth of it is, both the Theodosian and
Justinian Codex are full of very severe Rescripts against Heathens and
Heretics; so far, if I may so say, was the nature of Christian Meekness
unknown unto them.

374.

Auxentius, Bishop of Milan, was succeeded by Ambrose, who was chosen to that
See, the eighth day after he was baptized. Then it was, that Jerome, Epiphanius,
Augustine (though not yet converted to the Faith,) and Martin, Bishop of Tours,
lived; which last wrought a great many Miracles, (according to the Account
given by Sulpicius Severus, a faithful Writer, both in his History and
Dialogues:) But we may justly prefer, before all those miraculous Stories, what
is said concerning Martin's Judgment, in respect to the Slayers of Heretics,
with whom he would not Communicate, and did not above once, and that against
his will, at the instance of Maximus Tyrannus.

375.

Upon the death of Valentinian, besides Gratian, who was already Emperor, his
younger Brother was also elected to the Dignity; and next year, Valence was
overcome in Thrace, by the Goths, and his Body never found, the Barbarians
having burnt the Village, whither he was carried, out of the Army. The Goths
thereupon ravaged all Thrace and Moesia, and advanced sometimes even to the
Gates of Constantinople, but they were repulsed by the Citizens.

379.

As they stood in need of a valiant Man in the East, to repress the fury of
these Barbarians, and their Incursions, Gratian made Theodosius Emperor, and so
retired to the Western Parts of the Empire; and it was not long before
Theodosius overthrew the Goths, and drove them out of Thrace.

Then was there a Council held at Antioch, wherein it was Agreed between
Meletius and Paulinus, Successor to Eustathius, That upon the death of one or
other of them, the Survivor was to be Bishop alone. Here also, Apollinaris of
Laodicea was condemned; who, they say, should affirm, that the Word was only
united to the Flesh of. Christ, and not to the Soul, and that the Soul remained
in sin. [See Theodoritus, lib. v. cap. 3.] But his Adversaries bring him in,
arguing in so absurd a manner, that it gives occasion for no small doubting,
whether they have given a faithful Account of his Opinion.

There arose a great Controversy in the Church of Antioch, (to use the words of
Henry Valesius) concerning the word Hypostasis; the Meletians affirming there
were Three Hypostases or Substances in the Trinity, whereas the Eustathians
would have only One therein. Alexander, in the Council held at Alexandria,
reconciled the matter, by enacting, That the Profession of the Nicene Faith
should be only required, without making any mention of the Hypostasis, (as you
may see in Athanasius's Synodical Epistle to the Church of Antioch:) But this
Controversy, notwithstanding the Decree of the said Council, continued in the
Church of Antioch, (as Jerome witnesses, in his lviith Epistle to Damasus.)
Valesius is of opinion, they differed only in words; which is true: But the
Word-warring did not consist herein, that they who affirmed or were for (...),
meant it to be One Substance for Number; or that they who were for the (...),
believed there were Three Persons, though they participated of one and the same
Numerical Substance. The Ambiguity consisted herein, that those who stood upon
the term (...), meant that there was but One Substance in Species; whereas
others affirmed there were Three Hypostases in Number, though they agreed with
others in respect to the Unity of the Species, as others did with them as to
the Trinity of Substances. Now the original of the strife, or rather obscurity
of the word (...), was this, that the word bore two significations, one whereof
was in use among Philosophers, and the other among the Vulgar. The Philosophers
called the Existence of some thing, and not the thing it self, (...): Examples
whereof we have in Budaeus's Commentaries of the Greek Tongue, p. 138, and 244.
Now in this sense some have affirmed there were Three Hypostases, that is, that
there were Three Substances in the Trinity, subsisting apart from one another,
though they were (...), a like perfect, and of the same kind: But (...), in the
vulgar sense, is not the Existence of the thing, but the Thing it self; and
accordingly, Paulinus Eustathianus asserts a (...), which is, that the
Substance of the Son and of the Holy Spirit is not of a different Nature. The
same Budaeus has Examples of this Notion, page 466. In the Synod convoked at
Sardis, whose words are recorded in Theodoritus, lib. ii. cap. 8. there is an
Anathema pronounced against those who say that the Hypostases of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost are different, and it is affirmed there was but (...), that
is, one Hypostasis, which the Heretics call (...). It Is expressly said in the
words of this Synod, that the Heretics call that (...), which the Catholics
name (...): but Jerome, in his Epistle to Damasus, does not use another word,
when he says, That all the learned Schools, in all Ages, knew no other (...)
but (...). Many others have also spoke after the same manner.

Gregory Nazianzen went to Constantinople, and began to engage the People with
such an admiration of his Learning, that he had had that Episcopal See
conferred upon him, unless Peter of Alexandria had withstood it; who made it
his business, in the absence of the other, to get Maximus (who from a Cynick
was turned Christian) by ill methods, substituted in his room. But Demophilus
the Arian, and Maximus, being turned out by the Authority of Theodosius, he
was, not long after, brought in again to the Church of Constantinople.

381.

Then was the Second Ecumenical Synod convocated in that City, when Meletius
first, with some other Bishops, confirmed Gregory in Antioch, before the Synod
met together. Afterward, upon the death of Meletius, and that Flavian was
substituted in his room, Gregory, upon account of the forementioned Compact,
opposed it: so that a Contention arose; and upon the arrival of the Egyptian
Bishops, things came to that pass, that Gregory relinquished the Bishopric of
his own accord. After this, there were Canons made against Macedonius.

Maximus, next year, seized upon the Empire in Britain; and having the Seat of
his Empire at Treves, he made his Son Victor his Colleague therein. Not long
after, his General, Andragathius, flew the Emperor Gratian, now forsaken by his
Party; while Theodosius, in the East, gave the Dignity of Augustus to his Son
Arcadius.

385.

There was a Synod held at Bourdeaux, against Priscillian, Bishop of Abila, in
Spain, and some others; who being declared guilty of notorious Wickednesses,
were beheaded, and their Disciples slain. The Bishops Idacius and Ithacius were
so eager for the Infliction of the said Punishment, that 'twas thought Martin
of Tours refrained Communicating with them upon that account, (and herein you
may consult Sulpitius Severus.)

St. Jerome went the same year into the Land of Palaestina, and St Augustine was
converted from Manichaeism, saving that he never utterly relinquished the
Notion of Fatal Necessity, and the Sentiments of the Manichaeans concerning the
Liberty of Man.

About these times, Valentinian the Younger put forth an Edict in favor of the
Arians; while Theodosius, on the other hand, did many things in favor of the
Homoousians (as they called them.) So that the pious Rules no less strove with
one another, by the Authority of the Emperors, whom they endeavored to engage
on their side, than they did in Reproaches and Anathema's.

Now it was that Cyril of Jerusalem flourished; and Jerome and John, both
Presbyters of Antioch, (which last was called Chrysostom) began to grow famous;
and about two years after the latter was made Presbyter, when the Antiochians
had thrown down the Statues of Theodosius, he made those Orations which are
known by the name of (...). At the same time, Maximus the Tyrant was overcome
and slain by Theodosius, at Aquileia: Neither did his Son Victor survive him
long; for Count Arbogastes cut off his Head, in Gaul. Theodosius restored to
Valentinian what he took from Maximus. Two years after, the People of
Thessalonica having slain a principal Officer of his, Theodosius commanded a
great slaughter to be made of them: For which reason, St. Ambrose shut him out
of the Church of Milan, till he had given signs of a Public Repentance;
neither was he admitted in, till after the expiration of some months, as other
Penitents used to do. Moreover, he made a Law, That the Execution of Sentence
past, should be deferred for Thirty Days.

Valentinian also, the same year, made a Law concerning Deaconesses, and Women
consecrated to God, That they should give nothing to the Churches. Which was
Repealed not long after: And this proved to be the fate of all the Edicts that
seemed to take any thing away from the Clergy. A Decree of the same Emperor had
a like success, wherein it was Enacted, That Monks should not enter into
Cities, but dwell in solitary Places. For the same was disused in three years
after, or thereabouts.

391.

Eugenius relying upon the aid of Count Arbogastus, invaded the Western Empire;
and Valentinian, not long after, died of a Wound he received of Arbogastus, at
Vienna. He was a Catechumen a^ that time, and desired Ambrose to Baptize him,
before he went upon the Expedition he had projected against the Barbarians. But
though he died unbaptized; yet Ambrose in his Funeral Sermon, stick'd not to
say that he was saved.

Then began great Wranglings to arise about Origen's Opinions, between John
Bishop of Jerusalem, and Epiphanius Bishop of Salamis, in Cyprus, whose Epistle
concerning the said John of Jerusalem's Errors is still extant, and was turned
into Latin by St. Jerome. Paladius of Galata, and Ruffinus a Presbyter of
Aquileia, were favorers of the same Opinions. You may consult Sulpitius
Seuerus's Dialogaes, and the Origeniana of P. D. Huetius, upon this Subject.

Theodosius, being accompanied with Honorius, whom, the year before, he had
created Augustus, marched against Arbogastus and Eugenius; and having joined
Battle, was worsted the first day: But he overcame the day following, the Winds
(as they said) fighting for him. Theodosius died the year after this Victory.
Ruffinus had dispossessed his Son Arcadius of the Eastern Empire, to whom his
Father had assigned it, had it not been for Stilicho, Honorius's General, who
defeated and slew him.

Then Augustine, who had been ordained Presbyter five years before, was made
Bishop of Hipp. Claudian, the last of the Latin Poets, flourished at that time.

Eutropius was assisting to Stilicho, in the overthrowing of Ruffinus; but they
could not agree long: Eutropius made it his business to get the former, who was
going to the East, declared an Enemy to the Commonwealth, by the Emperor and
Senate; and endeavored, from under Honorius's Command, to take away Africa, by
the means of Gildon; wherein he proved at first successful: But Mascezel,
Gildo's Brother, having received supplies of Men from Stilicho, overcame his
Brother, and distressed him so far by his Victory, that he went and hanged
himself; and himself, soon after, was, by Stilicho's Command, thrown over a
Bridge, into the River.

398.

John Chrysostom was made Patriarch of Constantinople, a Person no less
addicted to a severity of Discipline, than famous for Eloquence.

While he ruled the Church of Constantinople, Gainas, a Confident of Eutropius,
having made a League with the Barbarians, so far deceived him, that in some
time he effected his ruin: But after diverse Commotions raised in
Constantinople, he was at length slain himself in Thrace.

At the same time, Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, having assembled a Synod,
took care to have Origin and his Followers condemned. He used ill the Origenian
Monks of Egypt, who, in vain, fled for Protection to St. Chrysostom.

400.

Then it was, that Alaricus, King of the Goths, wasted Italy; and had Gaul and
Spain assigned him, by Honorius, to dwell in.

There were several Synods held about these times, in Africa, against the
Donatists; whom at length, seeing they could not do it by Arguments, they
overcame by Force. And this, St. Augustine, in his Epistle to Vincentius,
asserts to be lawful.

403.

St. Chrysostom, not long after, was condemned by Theophilus of Alexandria, and
some other Bishops, at the Instigation of Eudoxia the Empress, whom he had
offended, by inveighing against the Plays that were celebrated in honor of
her, at her Silver Statue, which stood not far from the Church. Next year he
was exiled into Cilicia, thence into Armema; and in the fourth year of his
Banishment, died at Comana, upon the Euxine Sea.

408.

Arcadius himself, who sent him into Banishment, died also not long after,
leaving Theodosius, his Son, an Infant, behind him, and whom he recommended to
the Protection of Isdegerdes King of Persia, who discharged the Trust committed
to him with great fidelity.

Stilicho, endeavoring to get his Son Eucherius made Caesar, was slain.
Whereupon, Alaricus offered to enter into a League with Honorius: But the
latter rejecting the Terms, the other advanced with his Army twice to Rome, and
at last took the City; while one Constantius, an obscure Person, who invaded
the Empire, was in the mean time slain in Gaul. Alaricus, when he had taken and
plundered Rome, did, at his departure, take along with him Placidia, Honorius's
Sister, and bestowed her in Marriage on Ataulphus, his Kinsman; who, upon the
other's death, that happened in a short while after, succeeded him in his
Dominions.

413.

About these times, Coelestius, a Disciple of Pe^gius, who was a Scot or
Britain, was condemned ^n the Synod of Carthage. Pelagius's Tenet was, That all
Men had strength enough, and to spare, bestowed upon them by God, whereby
freely to discharge their Duty; and that they stood in no need of other
extraordinary Grace to help them therein, besides what the Providence of God
bestowed upon all Men; and, That Infants were neither capable of Vice nor
Virtue, which then only exert themselves, when they become adult. Others, who
denied the said liberty, and believed most Men, through an Eternal Necessity,
which they called Predestination, were adjudged to go to Hell, withstood them
stiffly; and under the Name of Divine Grace, (which they said Pelagius was an
Enemy to) established their own Opinion among the Christians, which before was
scarce ever heard of in the World.

At the same time, Attalus and Heracliaenus, set up for Tyrants in Italy and
Africa, but quickly lost their Usurped Power; while the Goths, in the mean
time, waged War against the Alans and Vandals, in Spain and Gaul, under the
Conduct of Vallias, Ataulphus's his Successor, who restored Placidia to
Honorius, and was married to Count Constantius.

514.

This year, the first Synod at Diospolis, in the Land of Palestine, was held
against Pelagius; where he is said to have retracted his Errors, and to be
absolved. Another Synod, in conformity to this, condemned the Pelagian Errors
in Africa; and sent Letters to Innocent, Bishop of Rome, to induce him to do
the like. The same thing was done that year, by the Synod held at Milevitum, in
Numidia. But Coelestius, the Disciple of Pelagius, coming to Rome, after the
death of Innocent, cleared himself before Zosimus, then Pope; who wrote to the
Clergy in Africa, That if they knew of any one that were minded to accuse
Coelestius, they should send him to Rome: And he did at the same time inveigh
bitterly against Lazarus and Herotes, two Gaulish Bishops, for their rash
Accusation of Coelestius and Pelagius. He wrote also, not long after, such
other Letters in favor of Pelagius, which Pelagius's Adversaries say were
obtained through cunning Dissimulation: But there is no reason we should
believe them, before Pelagius; seeing they used all the Artifice imaginable to
defame his Doctrine, and obtained an Order from Honorius against him. [See Ger.
John Vossius, in Historia Pelagiana.]

From thence, in the mean time, arose Contentions about Appeals from Places
beyond the Seas; while Zosimus, in opposition to the African Bishops, urged,
That Appeals to the Sea of Rome were lawful; and for this he insisted upon I do
not know what Canon of the Council of Nice, whereby he said it was manifest
those Appeals were Canonical. But the African Fathers found the Canon was
fictitious, by sending some to the East, to bring them the Canons of that
Council: And hence sprung a Schism between the Roman and African Churches.

420.

While the Romans waged War against the Persians in the East, and that
Honorius, who governed the Western Empire, wasted away his time in Idleness,
the Kingdom of the Franks, under Pharamond, is said to have begun.

424.

A few years after, when Placidia, with her Sons Valentinian and Honorius, were
drove away by the Emperor Honorius, she fled to Theodosius, into the East;
where she had the Dignity of Augusta conferred upon her, as her Son Valentinian
had that of Caesar. This Prince, upon the death of Honorius, was sent into
Italy, to suppress John, Principal Notary, who had invaded the Empire of the
deceased. Which he successfully performed, and in a little time after, did, by
the help of Aetius, a valiant Man, to whom he was much obliged, overthrow Count
Boniface, who had seized upon the Empire in Africa.

428.

Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople, is said to have spread his Doctrine at
that time; whereby he contended, as they would have it, That there were Two
Persons in Christ. Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, opposed him vehemently; though
it is very likely, the whole Contest was nothing but mere Word-warring: nay, if
Cyril's words were as rigidly scanned as those of Nestorius, the Bishop of
Alexandria would appear to be more Heterodox than the other. But yet the Synod
assembled at Ephesus, which was called the Third General one, and which
consisted of Two hundred Bishops, condemned Nestorius: But John, Bishop of
Antioch, coming thither with his Party, did, on the fifth day after Nestorius's
Condemnation, serve Cyril the same turn, and annull the Council's Decrees. From
whence arose a Schism in the Eastern Churches, which could scarce be composed
again. The whole Controversy had its beginning from the ambiguity of the words
(...) and (...): For while some confounded the terms, and said there were (...)
in Christ. Others, who made a Distinction between them, contended, That there
were indeed Two Natures in him, but One Person. Besides which, there were also
some who said there were but One Nature and One Person in him; from whence
afterward sprang the Opinion of the Eutychians, of whom by and by. At length,
when Cyril's Party, who were at first inferior to the other, got the better
on it with the Emperor Theodosius, Nestorius's Books were condemned: In Defense
whereof, the Nestorians published the Books of Diodorus of Tarsus, and
Theodorus of Mopsuestenum, who defended both Natures, which were condemned by
some, and approved by others, when they did not rightly understand one another.

Then was the Theodosian Code published, being the year after Vincentius
Larinensis put out his Book called Commonitorium.

The Goths, Huns and Vandals, about these times, molested the Roman Empire, in
diverse Parts; though the Roman Generals craftily made use sometimes of one,
sometimes of another's friendship, in order to appease the rest.

437.

Valentinian the Second married Eudoxia, Theodosius's Daughter, to whom he had
been betrothed a long time before. Eudoxia, the Mother of this Prince, went to
Jerusalem the next year, to pay her Vows, where she stayed for the space of a
year; for then it was that holy Places began to be had in much veneration, and
many Pilgrimages were under taken thither: several also of the Relics of the
Saints long since deceased, began to grow famous, by which great Miracles were
said to be done; whereby it came to pass, that Men began to invoke the holy
Martyrs, and others, by whose Prayers they believed those things they asked of
God, would be more easily obtained. From henceforward the Thirteenth Book of
Dionysius Petavius de Doct. Temp. is stuffed with a great many Monkish Stories,
he neglecting no opportunity of taking notice of those Relics, which at that
time grew in vogue with the People.

439.

Carthage was taken by the Vandals, after it had been almost for Six hundred
years in the hands of the Romans. The Conquerors are said to have vented their
rage against the Christians, and especially the Priests, by the Command of King
Geisericus.

It Is said, there were several Manichaeans discovered at this time in Italy,
who were sharply prosecuted by Leo, Bishop of Rome.

Bleda and Attila, Kings of the Huns, ravaged Illyricum and Thrace; and besides
that, extorted great Sums of Money from Theodosius. But Attila, after his
Brother Bleda was slain, had the whole Power in his hands; and not long after,
overran almost all Europe.

448.

Eutyches, this year, is said to have been convicted of Heresy, in the Synod
of Constantinople, because he confounded the Natures of Christ, which Nestorius
had over separated. But next year, there was a Synod held at Ephesus, wherein
Dioscorus, Bishop of Alexandria, restored him to Communion again, from whence
arose great Janglings.

450.

Theodosius having once expelled his Wife Eudoxin, and Sister Pulcheria (whose
wise Counsels had been a long time useful to him) from the Court, did now, upon
a sense of his error, recall them, and died not long after, after he had
appointed Marcianus to succeed him; who, (together with his Wife Pulcheria)
taking the Reins of Empire into his hands, assembled the Council of Chalcedon,
which was styled the Fourth General one, and wherein Eutyches and Dioscorus
were condemned.

From these times it seems to have come to pass, that the Abyssines, and others
in Egypt, who were infected with Dioscorus's Doctrine, have begun to oppose
other Christians, as there were many in Babylon who followed Nestorius's
Opinions, remnants of whom continue to this day, both in Africa and Asia.

Though Attila, at that time, was overcome in some Battles, by Aetius, yet he
wasted Gaul and Italy far and near; in which Age, they say, the City of Venice
had its beginning; many Persons, for fear of Attila, flying into the Island
wherein the same is situated.

453.

He died the year after he had quitted Italy.

454.

Valentinian, not long after he had put Aetius to death, was himself cut off by
Maximus, a Senator, who had advised him to that Fact. But Eudoxia,
Valentinian's Wife, called Geisericus out of Africa; who possessing himself of
Rome, transported vast Riches from thence into Africa, and married Eudoxia's
Daughter, of the same Name, to his Son Hunericus.

455.

Avitus, in the mean time, usurped the Empire in Italy; while Mer^veus, who was
the third in descent from Pharamund, and who distinguished the first Race of
the Kings of France by that of the Merovingian, according to his own Name,
reigned among the Franks.

Theodoricus, King of the Goths, brought the Suevians, who held part of Spain,
under his Subjection, after he had made their King Rechiarius his Prisoner,
being encouraged thereunto by the Persuasions of Avitus.

457.

But this Person, next year, being forsaken by the Gauls and Goths, lost both
his Empire and his Life. At the same time died Martianus, Emperor in the East*
and was succeeded by Leo, with whose consent Majorianus was made Emperor of
Ravenna. But this Prince, after four years Reign, was slain by Ricimer, and
succeeded by Severus.

In those times it was, they say, that the Egyptian Monks, of the Eutychian
Persuasion, raised Commotions, under the leading of Timotheus Aelurus, and that
at last they advanced him into the Episcopal See of Alexandria, when they had
slain Proterius; but that Aelurus, soon after, was banished by the Emperor Leo.

463.

Peter Fullo, another seditious Person, having expelled Martyrius, invaded the Sea of Antioch. They say, this Peter held the same Opinion as the
Theopaschites, who affirmed, That not only Man, but God had suffered; and that
he had added to the Trisagium, who died for us, these words, Sancte fortis,
Sancte Deus, Sancte Immortalis, qui passus es pro nobis, miserere nobis: O Holy
and Strong, Holy God, Holy and Immortal, who have suffered for us, have mercy
on us. But he was quickly banished by Leo.

465.

This year, Severus, by the Treachery of Ricimer, a Patrician, was poisoned and
died; after whose decease, there was an Interregnum for one year, when
Theodoricus, King of the Goths, departed this life, and left his Son Evaricus
to succeed him. After this, did Leo the Emperor send Anthemius, a Nobleman, to
Rome, and made him Augustus.

467.

In the mean time Geisericus, who with a strong Fleet wasted the Coasts of
Greece, being overcome by Lea's Generals, sued for Peace, and confined himself
within the Bounds of Africa: But soon after, he raised new Commotions; which
were difficultly quelled, because of the Treachery of Basiliscus, whom Leo sent
against him.

472.

Anthemius was slain by Ricimer, his Son-in-Law, and Olybrius advanced to his
Place, who died the same year. His Successor was Glycerius. After him came
Majorinus, and then Nepos, all of them in the space of two years. There were
also others who rashly snapt at the Western Empire, which they could not hold.
At length, Augustulus, the Son of Orestes, was the last Emperor of the West.

474.

Leo, in the East, left a Son of his own Name, Leo II. who made Zeno his
Colleague in the Empire; and not long after, by his death, gave Basiliscus and
opportunity to invade the Empire, who expelled Zeno: But he, in a short time,
recovered his Station, and made an Exile of Basiliscus, in which state he died.

476.

In the mean time, the Ostrogoths wasted Illyricum and Italy; while the Arabian
Saracens did the same by Mesopotamia, or caused the People to ransom it for
Money. The Herulians also being called in by Nepos's Favorers, whom Augustulus
had succeeded, divested this last of the Throne, and at length PUT AN END TO
THE WESTERN EMPIRE. So that their King Odoacer took the Government upon him.

482.

Acacius, whom Zeno had advanced to the Sea of Constantinople, was the occasion
of his writing a Letter to the Clergy and Monks of Egypt; wherein he reconciled
the Tenets of those who followed Dioscorus's Opinion with the Decrees of the
Synod of Chalcedon: And those who followed the said Decrees, were by others
called Melchites, because they embraced the Opinion of (...) Melech, the King;
for in the Arabic Language, used by the Egytian-Arabs, that is the Name they
give a King, as it is also in the Hebrew. Zeno would have the Egyptians
subscribe this Epistle, which in inserted in Evagrius's Ecclesiastical History,
lib. iii. cap. 14. but herein they did not comply with him. The same was also
called (...), because it was written with a design of reconciling the
contending Parties. The Synods of Nice, Constantinople and Ephesus are approved
of therein; but that of Chalcedon is left out, and this Confession of Faith
inserted: We confess one only begotten Son of God, and God made true Man, our
Lord Jesus Christ, These words are taken out of the Chalcedon Creed. See Evag.
l. 2. c. 4.
consubstantial with the Father, according to the Divine Nature, and the same
consubstantial with us, according to his Humanity; (...): who came down and was
begotten by the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary and the Mother of God; That he
is One, and not Two, (...): For we call both the Miracles and Sufferings, which
he endured of his own accord in the flesh, the Miracles and Sufferings of One;
but for those who divide or confound them, or introduce a phantom, we by no
means receive them; for that true and sinless Incarnation, from the Mother of
God, made no accession of another Son; for the Trinity always remains the
Trinity, though God, to wit, the Word, one of the Trinity, was Incarnate. Those
who have followed this Edict, because they have neither condemned the
Eutychians nor others, nor yet adhered to the Heads of any one Faction, have
been called (...), the Doubting, and (...), the Headless; others give a
different original to the Name, than this now suggested.

484.

Zeno, over and above the Church-Commotions he had to do with, had Illus and
Leontius, who rebelled against him, to suppress. At that time there arose new
Wranglings among the Bishops; hence it came to pass, that seeing some had long
since introduced the Pictures of the Saints into their Churches, others have
esteemed that Practice to tend to Superstition; therefore these last purged
their Churches of them, and run them down both by Word and Writing; among whom,
Philoxenus, Bishop of Hierapolis, was Chief.

490.

This year, Theodoricus, having conquered Odoacer King of the Heruli, possessed
himself of Italy. This Prince is not the same as is abovementioned, under the
Emperors Martianus and Leo.

Zeno died next year, and was succeeded by Anastasius, through the favor of
Ariadne, the deceased Emperor's Wife, who was enamored on him, in the
Lifetime of her Husband. Zeno's Brother, Longinus, being excluded, who being
sent by Anastasius into Isauria, rebelled against him, and was with difficulty,
after a seven years War, overcome.

492.

Anastasius favored those whom they called the Doubters, or Headless; and
allowed every Man the freedom to follow what he pleased, and turned those out
of the Churches who raised Tumults about the Synod of Chalcedon, or condemned
or approved it. But the Emperor, who was very much for Peace, could not bring
to Agreement those Bishops who were but little acquainted with the Christian
Religion; and such sharp Sticklers for the said Divisions, they thundered out
their Anathema's continually against, and refused Communion with one another.
Concerning which, it is worth while to read Evagrius, lib. iii. cap. 30.

At this time was Odoacer slain by Theodonicus, who having mastered all Italy,
besieged him at Ravenna, in vain, for three years.

495.

There were indeed many of the Goths who embraced the Christian Religion, in
this Age; but they were hated by the Homoousians, as Heretics, because they
were Followers of Arius's Opinions. The Kings of France were also Heathens till
now, but Clodovieus received the Christian Faith, this year. Then did the
Burgundian Affairs flourish, but in a short time the French had the mastery of
them.

501.

There were great Contests, this year, in the Conclave, whether Symmachus or
Laurentius should he Pope; which could not be composed without Bloodshed,
though there were Counts present, whom Theodoricus sent thither to suppress the
Seditious.

At length Symmachus prevailed, and therefore was esteemed lawfully chosen; for
here things are always measured by Success.

510.

Though Anastasius could scarce defend the Empire against the Persians and
Saracens; yet he was plagued besides, with the Domestic Seditions both of the
Ecclesiastics and Laics. The contrary Factions oftentimes murdered one
another at the Public Plays, and the Bishops wrangled continually about the
Henotick and Chalcedon Synod. Some Historians have recorded, That when he would
have added these words to the Trisagium, Who was crucified for us, he was
almost destroyed by the Catholic Monks, who while they breathed nothing else
but the death of the Emperor, and all the Doubters (thus they called them)
cried out as if violence had been offered them, that the time of their
Suffering Martyrdom was at hand. [See Evagr. lib. 111. cap. 44. and Theodorus,
lib. 11. p. 562. of Valesius's Edition:] But it is hardly credible that
Anastasius, who was one of the Doubters, and a lover of Peace, as Evagrius
describes him to be, would attempt to do any thing by Violence; but because he
would not comply with Macedonius the Bishop of Constantinople's humors, in
destroying his Adversaries, it is not to be doubted but what these did, was
attributed to the Emperor, as Zealots usually do.

Historians also say that Severus, the Theopaschite, Invaded the Sea of
Antioch, and that though Anastasius before bound him by an Oath, not to put the
Council of Macedon under an Anathema; yet as soon as ever he was fixed in his
Bishopric, he did, without any regard to his Oath, anathematize the said
Council; from whence it is manifest, that while Anastasius mediated between both
Parties, he was lashed by both, as it usually happens in Civil Contentions;
where the Seditious look upon them to be their Enemies, who do not sight under
their Banners.

514.

Hence sprang the Rebellion of Vitalianus, a Scythian Count, who took up Arms
for the Homoousians against Anastasius; under Pretense whereof he drained great
Sums of Money from Anastasius, until a Peace was concluded; upon condition
that a Synod should be called where Hormisdas Bishop of Rome should be present,
who was alike an Enemy to the Eutychians and Doubters: They say the Emperor
promised to do this with an Oath, but that afterward he broke his word;
doubtless because he would not have new Definitions coined, whereby nothing
else was designed, but the Oppression of certain Bishops that stood in their
way: for they were minded to assemble only the Orthodox, or most of them at
least, who should Condemn without Mercy, such as they called Heretics.

518.

Now it was that Anastasius died, being above Eighty years Old, and an Emperor
endued with great Moderation, but he was exposed to the Reproaches both of the
Eutychians and their Adversaries, because he would not let the Reins loose to
neither Party; He was Succeeded by Justin, a Thracian Born, who was a Favourer
only of the Adversaries of the Eutychians, and carried things no longer with an
even hand, according to the Example of Anastasius: Hormisdas sent Messengers to
him, who so animated those who were of the same Sentiments with him, that they
every where oppressed the contrary Party, by Violence offered to, and Decrees
made against them.

525.

They say there were a great many Manichaeans at this time in Persia, so that
they infected Cabades his Son, who was Heir to the Crown, with their Heresy;
which made Cabades cunningly to get them all together into one place, and then
sent his Guards who cut them all off; Justin also slew many of them, and by his
Edict, according to the Custom of those times, condemned diverse others to
Death: The same Prince grievously persecuted the Arians, which coming to the
Ears of Theodoricus King of the Goths, he sent John Bishop of Rome to
Constantinople, to tell Justin, That unless he gave over Troubling of the
Arians, Theodoricus would use the Homoousians or Consubstantial Men in the same
manner.

Priscian the Grammarian, and Boethius a Man of Consular Dignity, who was also a
very Learned Person, flourished in this Age; this last, together with Symmachus
his Father-in-Law, were upon a false Accusation put to Death by Theodoricus,
who Imprisoned John Bishop of Rome, together with the Legates he had sent with
him to Constantinople; because they seemed underhand to favor the Persecution
of the Arians; and that John after his return, troubled them openly, as much as
he could, in Italy.

527.

Justin the Emperor, after a Reign almosth of Nine Years, made Justinian, his
Sister's Son, his Colleague in the Empire, and died not long after. This Prince
began his Reign, with the Persecution of Heretics, whose Opinions he Condemned
by Edicts, which are still extant in his Code, and with a War against the
Persians, which his Generals, because of their Discord, managed with ill
Success.

The Kings of the Hunns and Herulians, did then embrace the Christian Faith, as
Tzathus King of the Lazians had done not long before; in whose Favor Justinian
made War upon the Persians.

There were great Differences in the mean time in the Families of the Kings of
France, which Petavius has distinctly set out, who also shows there were
diverse Synods held in France; as one at Orange against the Semipelagians, and
another at Arles for them; each of them boasting their Sentence to be the
Opinion of all Christians.

Justinian at the same time published both his Novellae and his Code, while his
General Belisarius waged War against the Persians, and overthrew them; whence
it came to pass, that Narses and Aratius, Princes of Persia, took part with the
Romans. But the same Persians, renewing the War at the Instigation of
Alamandurus Prince of the Saracens, overcame Belisarius in a bloody Battle.

532.

This Year a great Sedition was raised in Constantinople by the Prasinan and
Venetan Factions, with whom the Monks and People falling in, occasioned a great
Slaughter in the City, and struck such a terror into the fearful Emperor, that
he would have left the Place, and was hardly restrained from it by the
Persuasions of Theodora his Wife: There were two Persons whom the common People
chiefly struck at in that Sedition, and they were John the Cappadocian, who was
Captain of the Guard, and the Lawyer Tribonianus who was Treasurer, both of
them very different from one another herein; That the latter was a most Learned
Person, but the other illiterate, yet they agreed in this, that both of them
were abominably Covetous. Tribonianus published Justinian's Code, Institutions,
and most of the Laws that bear the Name of that Emperor; but the Sedition at
length was suppressed by the Conduct of Narses and Belisarius.

A strange Question was started among the Divines of Alexandria in the Reign of
Justinian, whether, to wit, the Body of Christ was corruptible or incorruptible
before the Resurrection? Those who thought his Body was incorruptible, denied
he had suffered any thing; but contested that a fantastical Body was only put
upon the Cross, which is the Opinion of the Mahometans at this day. They who
contended that Christ's Body was altogether like unto ours; because the Apostle
to the Hebrews said, He was made in all things like unto us, Sin excepted,
became divided into two Factions; some, among whom Timothy of Alexandria was
one, denied that it followed from hence that any thing was unknown unto Christ,
while Themistius his Deacon, urged most warmly that he was ignorant of some
things; But these last, were branded, as noted Heretics with the Name of
Agnoetae; from whence arose great Commotions in the Reign of Justinian.

533.

This Emperor set upon the Vandals in Africa, where they had now fixed
themselves almost for an Age, and within two Years space successfully drove
them out thence by the Conduct of Belisarius; whilst himself, besides the
abovementioned Collections of the Laws, set forth the Digests, which are as it
were a Body of all the Ancient Laws. From thence Belisarius where they often
overcame Theodahatus King of the Goths, at whose Misfortunes the Goths were so
disturbed that they slew him, and advanced Vitiges into his room, who stoutly
withstood the Romans, and reigned Four Years.

539.

He was at last constrained to deliver himself up into the hands of Belisarius,
who lead him in Triumph to Constantinople; but soon after, in the absence of
Belisarius, the Affairs of the Goths began to have a better Aspect in Italy,
first, under the Conduct of Theudibaldus, and then of Totilas, while the Roman
Generals wasted away their time in Idleness.

545.

The Doctrine of Origin concerning the Preexistence of Souls, and the end of
Punishments, being defended by some, Origin was again Condemned in Paelaestine:
Theodorus, Bishop of Caesarea, who was a favourer of those Opinions, says, that
if it were lawful to Condemn a Tenent after the Author's Death, that then the
Opinions of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuesta, Theodoritus of Cyrene, and Iba of
Edessa should be Condemned; because they wrote what was contrary to the
Determinations of the Synod of Chalcedon, though they were not Condemned by it.
Hence sprang those three Factions, which wrought great Disturbances in the
East, while some Condemned those three Men, and others declined it. Vigilius
Bishop of Rome, after some delay, Condemned them, and made himself suspected of
Eutychianism, though he afterward be silent in that Matter till the Sitting of
the Council.

553.

Italy in the mean time was torn to pieces by the Romans and Goths, until
Narses overcame and slew Totilas, after he had reigned almost Eleven Years: The
fifth General Council was held the same Year at Constantinople, wherein the
three forementioned Writers were Condemned, against the will of Vigilius
Bishop of Rome; but the same was at length confirmed by that celebrated at
Rome, though they had condemned the Writings, which had been approved of in the
Synod of Chalcedon: The French in the mean time finding the Goths decline in
Italy, invaded the remainders of their Conquests in France, and began also to
draw nigh to Italy, whereinto together with the Almains, they made several
Incursions, in spite of Narses who was Governor thereof.

561.

Some who had conspired against Justinian, being detected and taken, accused
Belisarius as being guilty of the same Crime, who thereupon was seized with all
his Family, but next Year was discharged, being now an old Man. Some Authors,
who were too great Favorers of the Sea of Rome, feigned a Story that his Eyes
were put out, and he reduced to beg, because he contested with the Roman
Pontiffs for the Empire; but the Greek Writers Procopius and Agathias, who
wrote the History of these Times wherein they lived, make mention of no such
thing. He died the Second Year after the said Accusation.

563.

It Is said that Justinian the Emperor, who had plagued the Heretics with so
many Edicts, fell into their Opinion himself, who believed that Christ's Flesh
was incorruptible and could not suffer, and began to persecute those who were
of another Sentiment; wherein, indeed, he did not give us a new instance of his
former Cruelty, but turned the same upon others: He died two years after,
leaving behind him most excellent Laws to the Roman World: But he was a Prince
not fit for War, because he was of a timorous Nature, and therefore mistrustful
and Covetous, if we believe the Historia Anecdota of Procopius.

Toward the end of his Reign, Ethelbert King of Kent, embraced the Christian
Religion, being instructed therein by Augustine the Monk, who was sent from
Rome thither. Columban the Presbyter, is said to have gone at the same time
from Ireland to the Picts, and to have converted them also to the Faith. From
henceforward the Christian Religion flourished in that Island, which before
seemed to have lain hid therein, seeing the same, if we believe Gildas a
British Writer of those times, had been brought thither in Tiberius's days.

565.

Justin II. Steward of the Household, and his Sister's Son, succeeded Justinian
in the Empire; who, because he did not go out of his Palace by reason of a
Meagrim wherewith he was afflicted, he could not give a Hearing to the
Complaints of the People against the Nobles, which yet were very great; but
they had Satisfaction given them through the prudent Management and Severity of
the Captain of the Guard.

Narses in the beginning of his Reign was called out of Italy, and Longinas put
into his room, who was the first Exarch of Ravenna: At that time Alboinus, King
of the Lombards, leaving their Habitations in Germany, invaded part of Italy;
where they erected the Kingdom of the Lombards.

578.

Justin died without doing any thing memorable, and left Tiberius Anicius
Constantine for his Successor.

Leovigildus, King of the Goths, in Spain is said at this time, to have
forbidden that any of those who went from the Homoousian or Consubstantial
Party over to the Arians, should be rebaptized by them, as had been practiced
before; but that they should only be admitted by the Imposition of Hands, with
this set form of Words, If he gives Glory to the Father, through the Son in the
holy Spirit; which Evagrius also says was in use among the Arians in the East.

582.

Tiberius did in the mean time overthrow the Persians in several Battles by his
General Mauritius, whom, for that reason he created Caesar, because he had
overcome the Enemy with a small Army; and falling Sick not long after, he
appointed him to be Emperor, and gave him his Daughter Constantina to Wife.

The Avarians made War upon him, but without Success, while the French fought
with the Lombards, and the Saxons with the Suevians, who had taken Possession
of their Seats in Germany, while the Saxons were with the Lombards in Italy.
These last People, after the Death of Alboinus, were without a King for Ten
Years; but at last they advanced Atharitus to the Regal Dignity, who prevailed
mightily over the Romans in Italy. Recaredus, at the same time, quits Arianism
and espouses the Consubstantialists Opinion in Spain; and for that reason, had
the Appellation of Catholic given him.

Mauritius by his Generals Philippicus and Commentiolus, worsted the Persians
in diverse Battles, at what time Gregory, sirnam'd the Great, was chosen Bishop
of Rome, in a Season when a great Plague raged there.

Gregory soon after wrote his Dialogues, and Evagrius bears Testimony, that he
wrote his History in the same Age.

The Avares and Sclavi having possessed themselves of Pannonia, and the
neighboring Countries, Mauritius was almost continually at War with them;
therefore as he was resolved to keep an Army upon the Frontiers of the Empire,
to defend the remote Provinces, he chose rather that they should take up their
Winter Quarters in the Enemies Countries, than there; which so disgusted the
Soldiery that they rebelled against him, and chose Phocas a Centurion to be
Emperor; who presently laying hold of the opportunity, marched with a Body of
his Troops directly for Constantinople, and soon after, when he had first slain
Mauritius's Sons before his Face, put him to Death also, who showed wonderful
Constancy in this Tragedy.

602.

This Phocas is said to have given the Title of Universal Patriarch to the
Bishops of Rome, and a right of Precedence before the Bishop of Constantinople,
which happened during the Incumbency of Boniface, who next to Sabinianus
succeeded Gregory, and was the Third of that Name.

606.

Phocas, as he had begun, went on to reign cruelly, and condemned all to Death
whom he suspected to be in the least guilty of any Innovation, without
excepting his own Sons in Law: Hence it was that several conspired together
against him, and Heraclius and Gregoras made an Agreement between themselves,
that he should be Emperor that Killed him; wherein Heraclius prevailed, who
immediately, together with his Wife Eudoxia, took upon him the Imperial
Dignity: This Prince; observing Phocas's neglect of Military Affairs, made it
his first Care to levy an Army, to oppose the Persians, who ravaged all the
Frontiers of the Empire: Soon after died his Wife, after she had brought him
forth a Son, whom he named Heraclius, and dignified with the Title of Augustus;
then, with the Permission of Sergius the Patriarch, he Married Martina his own
Niece.

5.

(...) that time a most wicked Woman in France, whose Name was Brunechildis,
sowed Discord between her Nephews Theodobertus and Theodoricus, disturbed the
Royal Family, and at length after he had been twice overthrown, procured
Theodobert to be slain by his Brother: She her self afterward took care to
have his Children put to Death, and then removed Theodoricus also, by Poison,
out of the way, who was Succeeded by Clotair his Cousin-German, and who
obtained the Monarchy of all France, which was before divided between the
Brethren.

Now the first Attempts of Heraclius to raise an Army proving slow and faint,
because he was naturally averse to War, the Persians and Avares, rejecting the
terms of Peace he offered them, pressed him hard on both Sides; so that he went
seriously to work about forming an Army, wherewith having now made Peace with
the Avares, he might at least repress the Insolence of the Persians; for which
end he was forced to borrow Silver and Gold Plate, and other the Sacred
Treasure of the Church: Wherefore the War commenced in the Twelfth Year of his
Reign; at the beginning whereof, the Persian General Saes having, contrary to
the Law of Nations, made his 70 Ambassadors Prisoners, sent them to King
Cosroes, who being Angry that he had not taken Heraclius himself, commanded
Saes his Skin to be flayed off alive, and put Sarbarus into his Command.

622.

Mahomet this year being accused of Sedition in Mecha, a City of Arabia, fled
to Medina, which for that reason by the Arabs is called (...) Medinath ol Nabi,
the Jurisdiction of the Prophet; from this year it is that the Mahometans begin
their Era, which they called by the name of Hegira, i. e. flight: It Is said,
Mahomet was at first a Keeper of Camels, but that afterward by conferring with
a certain Monk, whose name was Sergius, who was a follower of Manetes's
Fantastical Opinion, he became well instructed in the Notion of
Predestination, for which the Mahometans are great Sticklers, and for those who
thought Christ himself had not Suffered, but that a Phantasm was substituted in
his room, which is believed by Mahomet's Followers to this day. From hence it
was that the Crafty Man had an itching desire to erect a new Sect in the World,
whereof himself was Head; wherefore having Married his Mistress, whom he had
served in looking after her Camels; he took this occasion to act the Part of a
Prophet: He was taken with the Falling Sickness, which he pretended to have
come upon him, when Michael the Archangel revealed any thing to him. Sergius
confirmed the Fiction; and seeing there had been innumerable Divisions and
Janglings among the Christians, and were still in being concerning the Holy
Trinity, they deemed it a safer Way to assert but one Divine Person and Nature,
that all occasion of Strife might be taken away, than to embrace any one of the
Opinions in Controversy; he also forbad the Drinking of Wine, as if he had
received the same in Command from God; but in reality it was because he had
learnt it of Sergius the Manichaean, for those Sects thought it a Duty to
abstain from Wine. Some have said that Sergius was before a Jew, and that
therefore he retained something of Judaism, which is not unlikely; for besides
the Tenants already mentioned to be held by the Mahometans, these that follow
savor of Judaism: It Is not lawful for them to Eat Blood, Swine's-Flesh, any
Creature that died of it self, any thing Sacrificed to Idols, Strangled, any
Animal killed with a Stick, any thing cast out, gored with an Horn, or stung by
a Viper. Polygamy is tolerated, and Divorce not forbidden: They also Circumcise
as the Jews did; but whether Mahomet instituted the same, or that the said
Ceremony is now in use among the Saracens is a question. However this may seem
to be commendable in the Mahometans, that they do not Arbitrarily adjudge all
Mankind to the Punishments of Hell; as appears from these words of Mahomet,
Alcoran. Surat. II. The Musselmen and those who Judaize with the Christians and
Zabeans, whoever of them shall believe in God to the Day of Judgment, and do
good, shall have their reward of their Lord, but not fear. In like manner he
blames the Jews and Christians for Condemning one another; saying, They have
affirmed, He shall not enter into Paradise unless he be a Jew or a Christian:
Says the Jew, The Christians are nothing; but say the Christians, The Jews are
nothing, but in the Day of the Resurrection, God shall judge between them
concerning the thing about which they differ. He also pretended, That this Book
was brought to him by Piece-Meals, and various Chapters from Heaven by the
Angel Gabriel: It Is written in elegant Arabic, exactly Comma'd, and the Vowel
Points are most Accurately added by his Disciples; wherein some Learned Men
think they have been imitated by the Jews.

631.

Mahomet drew away the greatest part of the Saracens, a People of Arabia, to be
his Followers, and as he had espoused Heraclius's Interest, he assigned him
Lands to inhabit on the Confines of Arabia Felix, and died Nine years after his
flight from Mecha, at which place his Friends buried him, whither the
Mahometans go on Pilgrimage to this day to visit his Sepulcher: His Successors
afterward by degrees invaded Egypt, Palaestine and Syria.

626.

But to return again to Heraclius, when he saw that all the offers of Peace he
had made were rejected by the Enemy, and that they kept no Faith with him, he
took Courage, and marching in Person at the Head of his Army into Armenia and
Persia, got a famous Victory over the Persians: But the Persians so wrought
upon the Avares, by the Rewards they gave them, that they should join their
Forces with them to set upon Constantinople and Chalcedon; while with another
Army they invaded the other Provinces of the Empire: Heraclius sent several
Armies against all these Enemies, and called in the Turks to his Assistance,
who through the Streights of the Caspian Sea, broke out of Scythia into the
Persian Territories, and ravaged the same far and near: Now it was that the
Name of that Nation came first to be known, who afterward possessed themselves
of all the Provinces of the Eastern Empire: Heraclius, by their Assistance,
distressed Cosroes very much, who at length falling Sick at Seleucia, was slain
by his Eldest Son Siroes, because he endeavored to make his Younger Son King.
But Heraclius triumphed at Constantinople.

Next year when the Emperor was at Edessa, and entered into a Discourse with
Athanasius Syrus, whom, upon the Approbation of the Synod of Chalcedon, he had
made Patriarch of Antioch; he asked him, Whether there were one Will in Christ,
God and Man, or two? One, answered Athanasius; and Syrus Bishop of Alexandria,
with Sergius of Constantinople approving the same, the Emperor embraced the
said Opinion, the Favonrers whereof were afterward called by the Name of
Monothelites; and this occasioned great Disturbances in the East.

632.

The Saracens being made Strong by the favor of Heraclius, when they saw the
Persians weakened with the Losses they had sustained, made War upon them, with
that Success, that Othman, after having slain Jezdegirdus the King of Persia,
seized upon that Empire; whence arose the Jezdegirdies Era, which the Persians
use.

Mahomet was Succeeded in Arabia by his Kinsman Abubecher, who was called
Chaliph, i.e. Successor; which Name, by way of excellency or peculiarity, was
given to Mahomet's Successors; This Man, two years after, was succeeded by
Omar; who, in the Reign of Heraclius, invaded Egypt, Palaestine and Syria.

639.

This year Sergius, Patriarch of Constantinople, took care to get the Opinion
of the Monothelites declared to be Catholic, in a Synod that was Assembled for
that Purpose; and put out his Exposition in the Name of the Emperor, which he
sent into Italy, that the Bishops of Rome might Subscribe it, who otherwise
should not be confirmed by the Emperor, which then was requisite, that their
Election might be valid; but Severinus would not Subscribe, who was at that
time chosen Bishop, and who died not long after, as did also Sergius himself.

641.

Heraclius, after a Reign of Thirty Years, died of a Dropsy, and was
immediately Succeeded in the Empire by his Son Constantine, but in about four
Months time was Poisoned by Martina, his Mother-in-Law, who advanced her Son
Heracleon into his Place: Yet six Months were scarce at an end, when she,
together with her Son, were dispossessed of the Government by the Senate of
Constantinople; and that the Son might never after aspire to the Empire, they
cut his Nostrils; but for Martina, she had her Tongue cut out; and Constans,
the Son of Constantine, was advanced to the Throne.

645.

While Sigebert and Lodowick, the Sons of Dagobert, ruled their several
Proportions in France; Rotharithus, King of the Lombards, reduced into Writing
the Laws of his Country, which had been hitherto preserved only by Memory and
Use, bringing of them all into one Book, which is still extant.

648.

Constans, finding that diverse of the Bishops of Africa, and others, were
alienated from him, because of his addictedness to the Monothelite Opinion; he
put forth an Edict, called the Type, whereby he forbad any to speak of the Will
of Christ; that this might be a check upon those who were of the contrary
Sentiment. But Pope Theodore, supposing that thereby all Discourse was also
forbid concerning the Two Natures of Christ, condemned the Type, as impious.
The Emperor endeavored, next year, by the means of Olympius, Exarch of
Ravenna, to compel the Italian Bishops to subscribe the Type, but to no
purpose.

In the mean time, the Saracens invaded Cyprus and Sicily, with other Islands,
and grew stronger and stronger daily; the Emperor Constantine being not forward
enough to oppose their growth, who was forced to buy his Peace of them with
Money.

653.

Cedrenus says, that Mavias, General of the Saracens, having seized upon the
Isle of Rhodes, found there a piece of the Colossus, which had been thrown down
above Eight hundred and seventy five Years before, by an Earthquake, after it
had stood almost Eight hundred Years: It was eighty Cubits high; and the Legs
of it stood so far asunder, that Ships might sail between them. Cedrenus says,
that Nine hundred Camels were laden with the remains of it. So that considering
the ordinary burden of a Camel is Eight hundred Pounds weight, it followed,
that the Weight thereof amounted to above Seven hundred thousand Pounds of
Brass. But it is not likely that the Brass should be so much despised, that none
of the Christian Emperors thought it worthy to be taken away till those times.

Next year, Constans the Emperor was overcome in a Sea-Engagement, by Mavias,
when the former had dreamed, the night before, that he was at Thessalonica:
Which, by the Interpreters of Dreams, was construed to amount to as much as if
God had told him, (...), Yield the Victory to another.

The same year, Othman, King of the Arabs, who had seized on the Persian
Empire, being slain, was succeeded by Hali, whom the Persians make to be equal
with Mahomet.

663.

The Saracens being engaged in a Civil War among themselves, the Emperor
Constans took an opportunity to go into Italy; where, at first, he gave the
Lombards several Overthrows: but being afterward often beaten by them, he was
forced to return to the East: Whither, as he was going, he was slain in a Bath,
at Syracuse.

668.

One Mizizius, an Armenian, was chosen Emperor in his room; who was quickly
overcome and slain by Constantine the Son of Constans. This Constantine was he
that had left Constantinople when Beardless, and returned thither a Bearded
Man, and was called Pogonatus.

The Saracens, in his Reign, began to invade Africa, and return with a Fleet
again to Sicily, wasting all before them.

672.

They did the same in other Provinces of the Empire, and with their Fleet set
upon Constantinople it self: but they were stoutly repulsed by Constantine; as
also by Bambas, King of Spain, upon whose Coast they came.

678.

The Bulgarians, so named from the River Volga or Bulga, making an Irruption
from the Northern Shores of the Euxine-Sea, even unto Thrace, began to be
troublesome unto the Roman Empire, and grew so powerful, that the Emperor was
forced to pay them Tribute.

681.

At last, after many Contests, the Sixth General Council was assembled at
Constantinople, wherein the Monothelites were condemned, the Western Bishops
proving great Sticklers against them.

685.

Four years after, died the Emperor Constantine, and was succeeded by his Son
Justinian H. who, in the beginning of his Reign, drove the Saracens out of
Armenia, and made them pay him Tribute. But they, in a short time, violated the
Conditions of the Peace, by removing the Emperor's Garrisons from Mount
Libanus, who were posted there. At which the Emperor growing angry, he
proclaimed War against them, though they now offered to pay him a greater
Tribute than ordinary, and in a submissive manner sued for Peace. He did
indeed, in the first Battle, give them the Overthrow, they being uprovided for
it; but the Sclavi, whom he led against them, being corrupted, he was overcome
again, and lost Armenia.

692.

Ten years after the Sitting of the Sixth Council, another was called by
Callinicus, Patriarch of Constantinople, wherein he put forth several Canons in
the Name of the Sixth Council, and, among others, allowed the Clergy to have
Wives, provided they abstained from the use of them in the time of the
Administration of the Sacred Mysteries. These Canons were received by the
Eastern Churches, but rejected by the Western; and from henceforward the Church
of Constantinople was in a manner divided from the Communion of that of Rome.

694.

When Justinian II. had done many cruel things, and designed to bring his
Soldiers to Massacre the People of Constantinople; Leontius, a Patrician, whom
he kept in Prison, having set the Prisoners at liberty, possessed himself of
the Empire; and having cut off his Nostrils, banished him to Taurica
Chersonesus, where he lived for the space of ten years. Leontius, in the
beginning of his Reign, happily drove out the Saracens, who had invaded Africa,
by the Conduct of John, his Brother. But the same John, not long after, growing
negligent of his Affairs, was overcome by them; and when the Army, for that
reason, required he should be brought forth to be punished, they made
Absimarus, who was also called Tiberius, Emperor. This Man, marching
unexpectedly to Constantinople, seized it, and Leontius also, whose Nostrils he
commanded should be cut off, and sent him Prisoner to a Monastery in Dalmatia.

698.

We have hitherto omitted the barbarous Names of the French Kings, and their
Neighbors, and the continual Wars they almost always waged against one
another, the knowledge whereof is not very material; but it were a crime, to
say nothing of Pepin, Mayor of the Palace in France, who, about these times,
begot Charles Martell, upon his Concubine Alphaida, who succeeded his Father in
the same Charge. The Kings of France, in this Age, gave themselves up wholly to
Sloth, and left the Management of all their Affairs to the Mayor of the Palace;
which made them have the Surname of Faineant, or Slothful, given them; and the
Regal Dignity, at last, devolved upon Pepin's Family.

703.

Though Absimarus, and his Brother Heraclius, often overcame the Saracens, and
governed the Empire very well; yet they could not defend themselves against
Justinian, who was Emperor before Leontius: For he being assisted by the
Bulgarians, took Constantinople; and having taken Absimarus and Heraclius, in
their flight, hung them upon the Walls, and held the Empire nine years. He gave
the Bulgarians, at first, Thanks suitable to their Service; but afterward,
violating the Peace, he made a great slaughter of them; for which they took
severe Revenge, not long after.

709.

Roderick, fearing an Insurrection by the Spaniards, over whom he was King,
took away their Arms, and rased the Walls of their Cities: Which gave Walidus,
King of the Arabs, an opportunity, by his General Tarichus, to attempt
something upon Spain; and having sent a Fleet thither, brought off a very great
Booty. But being invited thither, two years after, by Count Julian, whose
Daughter Roderick had debauched, he went over with twelve thousand Men into
Spain, fortified his Camp upon a Mountain near the Straight of Gibraltar,
anciently called Calpe, and afterward, for this reason, named Gebal-Tarich,
that is, the Mountain of Tarich; whence comes the word Gibraltar. Roderick
endeavored, to no purpose, to drive out the Saracens from thence; but there
they continued, wasting the Neighborhood, for the space of two years; till
having called in fresh Forces, often defeated, and at last slain Roderick, they
seized, in the Year 713, on all Spain.

In the mean time, Justinian the Emperor, by the unheard of Cruelties which he
exercised in the Chersonesus, because there had been Attempts in that Province
to betray him, forced the Inhabitants to make choice of Philippicus for their
Emperor; whose Eyes being put out, not long after, was succeeded by Artemius,
who was also called Anastasius, whom Rufus, Prefect of the Army, was
instrumental to advance to that Dignity; and therefore Philippious was justly
punished, seeing himself, a little after he had seized on the Empire, had slain
Justinian and his Children.

714.

Artemius also had his turn; for the Army which he had sent into Phoenicia,
against the Saracens, having slain their General, and fearing Artemius's
Displeasure, made one Theodosius, a Syrian, and Collector of the Tribute-Money,
Emperor, though against his will. He marched to Constantinople, laid Siege to
it for six months; at length, took the Emperor Artemius, and thrust him,
shaven, into the Monastery of Thessalonica.

716.

But in about two years after, Leo, whom Artemius had before sent to be
General, into Armenia, and who stood hitherto for him, took upon him the
Imperial Dignity, which the Armenians and Saracens tendered to him, and made
Theodosius, his Son, Prisoner; who having been advanced, against his will, to
be Emperor, did voluntarily relinquish, and going to Ephesus, he and his Son
both took Holy Orders upon them. Leo, soon after, by the help of that which
they called Ignis Graecus, or Powder, not unlike that made use of by us at this
day, burnt a great Fleet of the Saracens. [ Isaac Vossius, in his Oservat. cap.
xv. may be consulted, concerning the Invention of that Fire.] A new Fleet of
the same Nation, consisting of Four hundred Ships, was also partly destroyed by
Leo, and partly by Storms. The Emperor had, the same year, a Son born to him,
who, at his Baptism, befoul'd the Baptismal Water; and for that reason, was
called Constantine Copronymus. But Artemius, who had fled to the Bulgarians,
and by their help endeavored to recover the Empire, was, the following year,
betrayed by them to Leo, and slain.

722.

In these times, Charles Martell, Mayor of the Palace in France, after other
great feats in Arms, subdued the Saracens also, who were ravaging the
neighboring Provinces, compelling them to retreat over the Pyrenaean Hills;
and did many other famous Exploits: And making War upon Adgillus, the Son of
Radbodus King of the Frisons, forced him to embrace the Christian Religion;
and, by his Authority, was very helpful to Boniface, an English-Saxon, who, by
the Command of Pope Gregory II. preached the Gospel in Germany.

722.

It Is said, the Emperor Leo endeavored to do the same thing by the Jews at
that time, but with ill Success; for those whom he compelled to be Baptized,
either fled elsewhere and abjured it, or shut themselves and their whole Family
up in their Houses, and setting them on Fire were burnt: He endeavored, not
long after this, to throw out the Images which the Bishops had introduced into
the Churches, wherein he found Opposition from the People whom the Priests
incensed against him. Gregory Bishop of Rome, condemned his Edict; and having
entered into an Alliance with the Lombards, refused to pay the usual Tax to the
Exarch of Ravenna, who governed Italy under the Emperor, and at last brought
things so to bear, that the Exarch himself was driven out of Ravenna, and he
sought for Aid of Charles Martell, who in the Year 726. won a great Victory of
the Saracens, that if Leo should attempt any thing in Italy by force, he might
be opposed by French Arms. This Martell also, at the Request of Willibrordus
Bishop of Vtrecht, constrained the Frisons, who would not, according to their
King's Example, embrace the Christian Religion, by force of Arms at least to
feign themselves Christians.

In the mean time, Leo did not so easily prevail against the Iconolatrae or
Image-Worshippers in the East, who stiffly withstood him, while the Exarch
Eutychius, with the Assistance of the Venetians, recovered Ravenna.

731.

This year, Venerable Bede finished his Ecclesiastical History of the English;
and in the next Leo Married Irene the Daughter of Chaganus King of the Chazari,
whom he had taken care to have brought up in the Christian Religion, to his Son
Constantine, and contended sharply with the Bishop of Rome about the Images,
which last would have them again introduced into the Churches, and expelled the
Eastern Bishops that favored Gregory's Party.

Though the Saracens possessed themselves of Spain, yet Pelagius who was
descended from the ancient Stock of the Goths, preserved the Country of
Asturia, out of their hands, and transmitted the Dominion thereof to his
Posterity, wherein he was not a little favored by the great Slaughter which
Charles Martell made of the Saracens in these times; his Son Flavilla succeeded
him, and then Alphonso his Son-in-Law, who deducing his Pedigree from
Reccaredus, would as well as he be styled the Catholic; which title being
neglected by his Successors, was again conferred upon Ferdinand of Arragon, by
Pope Julius the Second.

740.

Luitprand, King of the Lombards, did this year divest Transamundus of the
Duchy of Spoleto, and wasted the Territories of the Bishop of Rome; for from
the time that the Authority of the Eastern Emperors began to decline in Italy,
the Bishops of Rome Usurped the Dominion of that City, and the adjacent Country.

742.

Next year died three Men of the greatest Authority of any in that Age, viz.
the Emperor Leo, Gregory III. Bishop of Rome, and Charles Martell, Mayor of the
Palace in France. The first of these was Succeeded in the Empire by Constantine
Copronymus, the other by Zacharias, and the third by his Sons Carloman and
Pippin.

Artavastus endeavored to deprive Constantine of the Empire, while he was
engaged in a War against the Saracens; but he overcame him at last. However,
Walidus of Damascus King of the Arabs, making use of the Contest between them,
ravaged Natolia or Asia minor, and seemed to menace the Empire with greater
Evils, had he not been next year prevented by Death, wherein also died
Luitprand, King of the Lombards; who, had it not been for the intercession of
Pope Zachary, would have driven Eutychius quite out of Italy.

751.

While Pippin, now his Brother Carloman was turned Monk, managed all Affairs in
France at his Pleasure, under Hilderic a sluggish Prince, he proved at length
unsatisfied with the Chief Power, and nothing would serve but he must assume
the Royal Name also; therefore having dispatched Ambassadors to Pope Zachary,
he desired that Stupid Hilderic might be shut up in a Monastery, and himself
declared King, as being more worthy, in the opinion of the Nobles, of the Royal
Dignity.

Aistulphus, who at that time was King over the Lombards, drove Eutychius at
length out of Italy, and so an end was put to the Power of the Eastern Emperors
in that Country: The same Aistulphus began to be troublesome to the Pope, and
endeavored to Possess himself of the City of Rome; but Stephen, Zachary's
Successor, withstood him stiffly, and having sought to Constantine for Aid to
no purpose, he has recourse to Pippin, to whom he privily wrote Letters wherein
he begged his Assistance against the Lombards, and Pippin at length prevailed
so far with Aistulphus, as to make a Truce with the Pope; but Aistulphus
refusing to stand to his Promise, Stephen in the year 754. went himself in
Person to Pippin, and wrought so far upon him, as to raise an Army to pass over
the Alps in his favor, who accordingly entering Italy, overthrew Aistulphus's
Forces, and at last granted him Conditions of Peace: But so, as that he should
deliver up Ravenna to the Pope, and make restitution of whatever he had taken
from him. From thence he returned into France, and finding by the time a year
came about that Aistulphus had violated his Faith, he made a second Expedition
into Italy, and having beaten Aistulphus again, imposed the same Conditions
upon him. Here was laid the principal foundation of the Pope's Power; so that
the Roman Pontiffs were beholding almost for all to Pippin and Charles the
Great.

In the mean time Constantine having assembled 338 Bishops, held the Seventh
General Council, wherein Images were put down, and called Idols: The
Iconolatrae or Image-Worshippers do not allow this to have been a lawful Synod,
because the Western Bishops consent was wanting.

759.

Jusaph, who reigned over the Saracens in Spain, was dispossessed in the Name
of the King of the Asian-Saracens, by reason of an overthrow given him by the
remainders of the Christians in that Kingdom, and Abderamen made King in his
stead, who reigned at Corduba Seven and twenty Years.

763.

All the Work which the Image-Worshippers found for Constantine, could not
hinder him from making War upon the Bulgarians, whom he overcame, and at his
return to Constantinople triumphed; though the Turks breaking into Armenia
through the Streights of the Caspian Sea committed great Depredations there, as
they did afterward, and won great Victories over the Saracens themselves.

766.

He sent Ambassadors not long after to Pippin, to persuade him to take away the
Images, about which there arose much Strife between the Greeks and Latins in
the Synod of Gentiliacum; but nothing seems to have been determined upon that
Head: The Greeks also accused the Latins, because they added, and from the Son,
to the Nicene Creed, where it treats of the Procession of the Holy Ghost,
whereas it was only before, who proceeds from the Father.

768.

This year, wherein, after much Contention, Stephen III. was chosen Bishop of
Rome, died Pippin, who left his Sons Charles and Carloman to succeed him.

Constantine about the same time, finding by Experience that the Monks were a
sort of People given to Sedition, commanded them to leave their Monasteries and
to Marry, and so live among the Laiety, unless they rather chose to be banished.

771.

Carloman, after a Reign of Four Years died, and left his Brother Charles sole
Monarch, of France, who not long after, sent Bertha, Daughter to Desiderius
King of the Lombards, back to her Father: This Prince divested Pope Stephen of
the Exarchate of Ravenna, and Charles's Ambassadors could by no means bring him
to restore it, which made Charles march with an Army into Italy, and wrest that
out of his hands, which he could not effect by an Ambassy, and so put an end to
the Kingdom of the Lombards: Paul the Deacon was Secretary to Desiderius, and
was the most Learned Man of those times, and therefore highly esteemed by
Charles, who, as the times went, was a Learned Prince. Alcuin an Englishman,
and Charles his Tutor, was also a Person not inferior to the Deacon.

773.

The Saxons by their continual Rebellions cut out much Work for him now, and
afterward; while that Constantine the Emperor died in the mean time, leaving
Leo III. his Son to succeed him; who also created his Son Constantine, of that
same Name with his Grandfather, Emperor, when he had first bound his Nobles by
an Oath, that they should suffer no other to Reign; Leo had before this made
his Wife Irene his Mother's Namesake, Augusta: This same Princess was the King
of Bulgaria's Daughter, whereas the other Irene was Daughter to the King of the
Chazari; which I thought fit to take notice of in this place, lest the sameness
of the Name should work any Confusion in History.

779.

Whilst Charles the Great, overcame the Saracen Prince of Navarr in Spain, Leo
also got a great Victory over that People in Syria. This Prince was so set
against the Idolaters or Image-Worshippers, that upon his finding some Images
with his Wife Irene, he abstained from her Company, though she denied that she
knew any thing of them. Irene, soon after upon his Death, in her Son's Name
assumed the Imperial Power, and held it for Ten Years. Thereupon the Images
were presently set up again, and the Monks and Nuns sent into their Monasteries.

Nicephorus, Leo's Brother, whom Copronymus had formerly given the Dignity of
Caesar to, was still alive; who, when some of the Nobles had endeavored to
advance to the Throne, was seized by Irene, together with his Brothers, shorn,
and shut up in a Monastery.

786.

Irene, this year, endeavored to assemble a General Council at Constantinople,
in order to Condemn the Image-Breakers, but was obstructed in her Design, by a
Sedition of the Common People; yet next year, there was one held at Nice,
wherein the Image-Breakers were condemned, and this second Nicene Council was
called the Seventh General one, by those who approved of the Worship of Images.

Irene and Charles could not well agree, because Rachisius, Duke of Beneventum,
her Vassal, was quelled by Charles, when he would have made War upon the Bishop
of Rome; wherefore the Proud Woman sent an Army into Italy to restore the
Kingdom of the Lombards; but being overthrown by Charles's Forces, they
returned to Constantinople without effecting their Design.

788.

This year the Normans or Danes, arriving at first with three Ships only in
Britain, ravaged the Seacoast of it.

In the mean time, the Government of Irene grew daily more and more intolerable
to the Nobility; but when she observed that some of them favored her Son's
Interest, she thrust them into Monasteries, and forced the Inhabitants of
Constantinople to Swear fealty to her, without any mention of her Son: But she
could not the year following hinder Constantine by a Joint Consent of the Army
to be advanced to his Father's Throne. Though this Prince, who before was invited
by every body to take the Administration upon him, being beaten often in the
succeeding years, became hated almost of all Men, and lest his Unkles might
perhaps be preferred before him, he commanded their Eyes to be pulled out, and
their Tongues cut off; by which Fact of his, he increased the hatred already so
universally conceived against him.

792.

In these times lived George of Taras, the next Man in Authority to the
Patriarch of Constantinople, who took in Africanus and Eusebius's Chronicle
into his own; As also John Mailros and Claud Clement, both Scotchmen, who moved
Charles the Great, to Found the University of Paris, especially at Alcuin's
Instigation.

794.

A little after this, there were almost Three hundred Bishops, besides several
Abbots, gathered out of Charles's Dominions, who met at Frankford; where, after
they had, in the first place, condemned some Spanish Bishops, for adhering, as
they thought, to Nestorius's Opinion. They then took into their Consideration
the Proceedings of the Second Council of Nice, where Pope Adrian presided by
his Legates, and which he had Approved of; and Decreed, That Image Worship was
a wicked Practice, and that the Approvers thereof were in the wrong, and
therefore that the Canons of the said Council were to be rejected, though
approved of by the Bishop of Rome.

While these things were in agitation in the West, Constantine, having divorced
his Wife Mary, at the Instigation of Irene, his Mother, who studied to render
him odious to the People; that she might obtain the Empire a Second time,
married another whose Name was Theodete; whereat the Inhabitants of
Constantinople were much offended.

797.

At length the Mother did so reconcile her self to the Nobility, that two years
after, she took care to secure his Person, and put out his Eyes; which proved
so grievous to him, that he died within a few days after, while Irene invaded
the Administration of the Government. It was not long after, before she slew
Nicephorus and Christophorus, her Husband's Brothers, and so the whole Race of
Leo Isaurus became extinct. Then she sent Ambassadors to treat with Charles
about a Peace, whom he honorably received.

800.

Next year, Charles went to Rome, to decide the Pope's Case, who being accused
of many wicked Actions, had been evilly entreated; and upon his taking an Oath,
that he was innocent, he spared him. After which, going, on Christmas Day, into
the Cathedral of St. Peter, he was saluted by Leo, and all the People of Rome,
with the Title of Augustus, and Emperor of the West.

It Is said, Irene took this very ill; but afterward, when Charles treated with
her about a Marriage between them, he was acknowledged by her. However, the
Marriage did not go on; because that in the very nick of time when Charles's
Ambassadors came to Constantinople, she was deposed by Nicephorus a Nobleman,
and sent close Prisoner to the Isle of Lesbos. This Nicephorus reigned in the
East almost nine years; and Charles, from the time that he was saluted Emperor,
ruled in the West fourteen, for he died in the beginning of the Year 814: He
was both a learned and very warlike Emperor, insomuch that his Army was never
beaten, when he was present.

The XIIth EPOCH. The Empire of Charles the Great.
AT length we are come to our Last EPOCH, which is that of the Reign of the
Emperor Charles the Great, wherewith we close up the XIth. Period of our
History: And we have no more to do now, after we have heaped up so long a
Catalogue of Errors and Impieties, wherewith the History of Mankind has been
perpetually diversified, but to declare,

That none appears to us to be a perfect Pattern, either of Wisdom or Sanctity,
but our only Savior JESUS CHRIST, whom Almighty God, his, and the Father of us
all, has proposed to be the alone Exemplar of our Imitation in all things; To
whom be Glory and Praise. Amen.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OF UNIVERSAL HISTORY.
A
ABderamen the Arab King of Corduba, Page 188 Abraham called out of Chaldea,
Page 10 Absimarus the Emperor, Page 181 Abubecer, Chaliph, Page 186 The Achaian
Republic, Page 75 The Achaian War, Page 86 The Egyptian Dynasties, Page 7
Aelius Verus the Emperor, Page 107 Aemilian the Emperor, Page 116 L. Aemilius
Paulus, Page 82 Aeneas his Travels, Page 23 Aeolidae or Aeoles, when named,
Page 24 Aeschylus the Poet, Page 49 Aesop, Author of the Fables, Page 39
Agathocles, Tyrant of Syracuse, Page 70 Agesilaus, King of Lacedaemon, Page 60,
63 Agnoetae, Page 165 Agrippa M. Vipsanius, and his Children, Page 94 Agrippa,
Herod 's Grandson, Page 99 Agrippinus the Carthaginian, Page 111 Aistulphus
the Lombard, 187. often beaten by Pepin, Page 188 Alagabalus, Page 111
Alaricus, King of the Goths, 147. takes Rome, Page 148 Alboinus, King of the
Lombards, Page 168 Alcaeus the Poet, Page 37 Alcibiades, General of the
Athenians, Page 58 Alcman the Poet, Page 37 The Alcoran, Page 173 Alcuin, an
Englishman, Page 190 Alexander, King of Epirus, Page 68 Alexander the
Macedonian born, 64. fights at Chaeronaea, 66. His Feats, 67. dies at Babylon,
Page 68 Alexander, King of the Jews, Page 88 Alexander the Emperor, Page 112
Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, Page 125 Allia, the Battle there, Page 61
Altar of Victory, Page 139 Amasis invades the Kingdom of Egypt, Page 39
Ambrose of Milan, Page 139 Amphion, King of Thebes, Page 21 Anakims, a Noble
Family of Palaestine, Page 12 Anacreon the Poet, Page 44 Anastasius I. Emperor,
who loved the Peace of the Church, Page 159, 160 Anastasius II. Emperor, Page
183 Anaxagoras the Philosopher, Page 50 Anaxarchus the Philosopher, Page 66
Anaximander the Philosopher, Page 37, 42 Anaximenes the Philosopher, Page 41
Angel-Worship or Idolatry, the Occasion of it, Page 8 Anibal the Son of Amilcar
wages War in Spain, Page 76. passes into Italy, 77. his Affairs decline, 78. is
overcome in Africa, 79. flies to Antiochus, 80. dies of Poison with King
Prusias, Page 81 Annibal the Brother of Giscon, Page 59 Anthemius the Emperor,
Page 156 Antigonus, Surnamed. Daturus. Page 76 Antioch, the Difference in the
Church there, Page 136, 141 Antipater, Prefect of Greece, Page 69 Antipater
the Edomite, Page 92 Antioch, a Council held there by the Arians, Page 133
Antiochus Epiphanes, Page 83 Antiochus Eupator, Page 83 Antiochus Grypus, Page
86 Antiochus the Great angry with the Jews, 77. overcome by the Romans, Page 80
Antoninus Pius Emperor, Page 108 M. Antonius, Triumvir, Page 92 Apollinaris of
Laodicea, Page 341 Apries, King of Egypt, slain, Page 39 Aquila Ponticus, Page
107 Aratus, Praetor of Achaia, Page 75 Arbaces gets the Medes their Liberty,
Page 28 Arcadius made Emperor, 146. dies Page 148 Archagathus, the Grandson of
Agathocles of Syracuse, Page 70 Archelaus the Tetrarch, Page 95 Archias of
Corinth, Page 30 Archimedes of Syracuse, Page 78 Armies, how they were so
Numerous in Ancient Times, Page 27 Perpetual Archons of Athens, 24. made every
Ten Years, 30. lastly Annual, Page 34 Argonauts Ship, whence called, Page 21
Arian, their Differences, Page 127 Arians divided into Parties, Page 141
Ariminium, a Synod there, Page 136 Aristides, General of the Athenians at
Platea, Page 50 Aristides, an Athenian Philosopher, and a Christian, Page 107
Aristobulus, High Priest of the Jews, Page 86, 93 Aristodemus the Messenian,
Page 32 Aristomenes the Messenian, Page 34 Aristophanes the Comic Poet, Page
55 Aristotle the Stagyrite, flourished under Philip and Alexander, Kings of
Macedon, and was Praeceptor to the latter, and Author of the Peripatetick Sect,
Page 69 Arius the Heretic, Page 125, etc. Arnobius, Page 120 Arrianus the
Philosopher, Page 108 Arsaces, first King of Parthia, Page 77 Arses, King of
Persia, Page 66 Artabanus slew Xerxes, Page 52 Artaxerxes Longimanus is made
Partaker of the Kingdom with his Father, 50. Reigns alone, 51. Makes a base
Peace with the Greeks, Page 55 Artaxerxes the Mindful, King of Persia, 59.
overcomes his Brother Cyrus, Page 60 Artaxerxes Ochus, King of Persia, 62.
subdues the Cyprians and Phoenicians, Page 65 Artemius the Emperor, Page 184
Ascanius builds Asbalonga, Page 23 Ascanius Pedianus, Page 103 Asdrubal,
Brother of Annibal, is slain, Page 78 Asphaltidis, the Original of that Lake,
Page 11 Assarhaddon invades Babylon, Page 33 Assuerus, Esther 's Husband, who
he was, Page 40 Astyages, the last King of the Medes, Page 38, 40 Athanasius,
chosen Bishop of Alexandria, Condemned at Tire, 129. Recalled from Banishment,
132. Condemned again in Asia, Acquitted in Italy, Returns to Alexandria, ibid.
Condemned in the West, Page 135 Athenaeus the Grammarian, Athenagoras, Page 108
Athens taken by Lysander, and betrayed by the Thirty Tyrants. The Athenians
begin a War with the Lacedaemonians, and make a Truce, 55. Win many Victories
under Pericles, 60. Begin the Peloponnesian War, ib. M. Attilus Regulus, Page
74 Attalus I. King of Pergamus, 78. II. makes the Romans his Heirs, Page 85
Attila, King of the Huns, Page 153 Atreus, when he lived, Page 21 Avares
created a great deal of trouble to the Eastern Emperors, Page 170, 171 Aurelian
the Emperor, Page 118 M. Aurelius Anton. Emp. Page 108 Augustine converted from
Manichaism, 144. Made a Bishop, Page 146 Augustulus Emperor, Page 156 Augustus
gets the Power. The learned Men that flourished in his time, Page 93, 94
B
BAbylon taken by Cyrus, Page 42 Babylon taken by Darius, Page 46 The
Babylonian Tower, Page 6 The Babylonian Kingdom, whether it ended with
Sardanapalus, Page 28 Baladan, the same as Nabonassar, Page 31 Baltassar, King
of Babylon, Page 39 Barac, King of Israel, Page 19 Barchocheba, Page 107
Barnabas, his Epistle, Page 103 Basil of Caesarea, Page 138 Bid, Page 185
Belisarius, Page 164 Belus the Assyrian, Page 19, 166 Boethius, Page 163, 167
Brennus the Gaul, Page 73 Brunechildis, a Wicked Woman, Page 171 Brutus and
Cassius conquered, Page 92 Bulgarians troublesome to the Eastern Empire, Page
179 Byrsa, a Tower of Carthage, from whence called, Page 27 Byzantium
Dedicated, Page 130
C
CAdmus, when driven into Greece, Page 14 Calcedon Synod, Page 154 Caligula,
Emperor, Page 99 Callinicus the Patriarch of Constantinople, Page 180 Cambyses
the Father of Cyrus, Page 40 Cambyles Second King of Persia, Page 44 Caracalla,
Emperor, Page 113 Caranus the Heraclidan, Page 29 Charles the Great 's Reign,
Page 195 Charles Martell, 184. overcomes the Saracens, Page 185 Carthaginians
wage the First War with the Romans, 73. the Second, 76. the Third, Page 84
Carthage, when it was built, and whence named, Page 27 Carausius, Page 120
Carinus, Emperor, Page 119 Carus, Emperor, Page 119 Cataline 's Conspiracy,
Page 89 Catullus the Poct, ibid. Cecrops 's Age, Page 13 Censors of Rome first
created, Page 56 Chabrias the Athenian, Page 63 Chaerisophus the Lacedaemonian,
Page 60 Christ 's Nativity, 95. His Death, Page 98 Christians, when so called,
Page 100 Chrysostom, 144, 147. Condemned, ibid. Cicero, Quaestor, 89. Consul,
ibid. Proconsul of Cicily, 90. His Death, Page 92 Cimon, Miltiades 's Son, his
Exploits, Page 51, 55 Claudius, Emperor, Page 100, 101 Claudius (M. Aurelius)
Emperor, Page 118 Claudius Clemens, Page 192 Clearchus the Lacedaemonian, Page
60 Clement 's Epistle, Page 103, 105 Cleopatra, Syrian Queen, a wicked Woman,
Page 86 Clodius Albinus, Emperor, Page 109 Clodovaeus the French King, Page 160
Codrus the Athenian King, Page 24 Coelestius, a Disciple of Pelagius, Page 148,
149 Colossus, the Remains thereof at Rhodes, Page 178 Columban, an Irishman,
Page 168 Commodus, Emperor, Page 109 Confucius, the Socrates of the Serans,
when he lived, Page 42 Conon an Athenian, Page 60 Constans, Caesar, 131. slain,
Page 135 Constants the Son of Constantine, Heraclius 's Grandson, Emperor, Page
177 Constantinople, New Rome, Page 130 Constantinopolitan Synod, the Second
Ecumenical one, Page 143 Constantinopolitan Synod, the Sixth Ecumenical one,
Page 179 Constantinus Chlorus, 120. made Emperor, Page 121 Constantine,
Emperor, 121. His Conversion, 124. His Decree in honor of the Bishops, ibid.
War with Licinius, ibid. His Cruelty, 129. His Death, Page 131 Constantius, the
Son of Constantine, Caesar, Page 125 Constantius, Heraclius 's Son, Emperor,
Page 176 Constantinus Pogonatus, Emperor, Page 179 Constantine Copronymus, Page
186 Constantine, the Son of Leo III. Emperor, Page 190 Constantius Caesar, 131.
His Death, Page 137 Constantius Gallus Caesar, Page 135 Consuls at Rome first
Created, Page 46 Crates the Cynick, Page 70 Crispus Caesar, 125. slain, Page
129 M. Curtius throws himself into the Chasm, Page 63 Q. Curtius the Historian,
Page 102 Chuschan, King of Mesopotamia, Page 18 Croesus, the last King of the
Lydians, 40. is overcome by Cyrus, Page 41 Cyaxares I. besieging Nineve to no
purpose, is overcome by the Scythians, 36. Destroys them, ibid. Cyaxares II.
King of the Medes, 40. makes Cyrus his Son in Law, and his Heir, Page 42
Cyprian the Martyr, Page 116, 117 Cypselus, a Tyrant of Corinth, Page 35 Cyril
of Alexandria, Page 151 Cyril of Jerusalem, Page 144 Cyrus the First Persian
King, 42. His Death, Page 44 Cyrus the Younger makes War upon his Brother, Page
59
D.
DAlmatius Caesar, 131. slain, Page 132 Damasus, Bishop of Rome, how created,
Page 139 Danaus, King of the Argives, Page 18 Daniel the Prophet, Page 39
Darius, the Son of Hystaspis, King of Persia, Page 45 Darius makes War upon the
Scythians to no purpose, His Death, Page 47. Darius Medus, who he was, Page 43
Darius Codomannus, King of Persia, 66. is overcome by Alexander, Page 63 Darius
the Bastard, King of Persia, Page 58 David 's Reign, Page 25 Deborah the
Prophetess, Page 20 P. Decius Mus devoted himself to Death, Page 66 Decius,
Emperor, Page 116 Dejoces, first King of the Medes, Page 28, 34 Demetrius
Phalereus, 90. Poliorcetes, ibid. Demates the Orator, Page 69 Demaratus of
Corinth goes into Banishment, 35. His Son becomes King of the Romans, Page 36
Demetrius, Philip 's Son, Page 81 Demetrius Soter, Page 84 Democritus the
Philosopher, Page 47 Demosthenes the Orator, Page 69 Desiderius Longobardus,
conquered by Charles the Great, Page 190 Deucalion 's Flood, 13. Whence the
Name of Deucalion, Page 14 Diacrinomenians, or the Doubting, Page 158
Diadumenianus Caesar, Page 111 Dido, what time she lived, Page 27 Didymus of
Alexandria, Page 139 Deluge, Universal, what Year, Page 6 Dio Cassius, Page 114
Dioclesian the Emperor. His Pride, 120. His Cruelty toward the Christians,
121. Resigns his Imperial Dignity, ibid. Dionysius Senior, Tyrant of Syracuse,
Page 59 Dionysius Junior is expelled by Dion, 64. Recovers Syracuse, and is
thence expelled, Page 65 Dioscorus of Alexandria, Page 154 Domitian the
Emperor, Page 104 Donatists Schisms, 122, 124. Extinguished by force, Page 147
Draco amends the Laws of Athens, Page 36 Drusus, Aug. his Son in Law, Page 94
C. Duillus the Consul, Page 74
E.
ECbatan built, Page 34 Eglon, King of the Moabites, Page 18 Ehud, King of the
Hebrews, ibid. Eleusinian Sacrifices, when instituted, Page 20 Elam, its Kings
more powerful than those of Babylonia, Page 10 Elisha the Prophet, Page 28
Empedocles the Philosopher, Page 55 Ennius the Poet, Page 75 Epaminondas the
Theban, 62. His Death, ibid. Ephesian Synod, Page 151 Epimenides the
Philosopher, Page 37 Epiphanius, Page 140, 146 Epicurus the Philosopher, Page
66 Epoch, what they be. How many in this History, Page 2 Ethelbert, King of
Kent, Page 168 Evagrius the Historian, Page 170 Evaricus, King of the Goths,
Page 156 Eugenius the Tyrant, Page 145 Evil-merodach, King of Babylon, Page 39
Eumenes, King of Pergamus, Page 75 Euripides the Tragedian, Page 55 Eusebius of
Caesarea, Page 128 Eustathius of Antioch, Page 130 Eutropius, a Seditious
Captain, Page 146 Eutyches condemned, Page 152 Eutychius the Exarch, thrust out
of Ravenna, 185. Recovers it again, ibid. Is Expelled a second time, Page 189
Ezekiel the Prophet, Page 37
F
FAbius (Caeso) slain, with the whole Fabian Family, Page 50 Fables of the
Greeks, relating to the Second Period, Page 8 Fausta, Constantine 's Wife,
slain, Page 129 Florianus the Emperor, Page 119 Florus, Page 106 Fohi I. King
of the Serans, Page 8 Francfort Synod, Page 192 Fruit, the Antidiluvian Food,
Page 5 M. Furius Camillus expells the Veians, Page 60 Furcae Caudinae, Page 69
G
GAinas, a Seditious Person, Page 147 Galba the Emperor, Page 103 Galen, Page
108 Galenus Maximus Caesar, 121. Emperor, Page 122 Galienus the Emperor, Page
116 Garizim Temple, Page 67 Gauls depopulate Macedon, and other neighboring
Coasts, Page 73 Gauls take Rome, and are expelled, Page 61 Geisericus, King of
the Vandals, 153, takes Rome, Page 154 Gelon, Tyrant of the Syracusians, Page
50 Gentiliacum 's Synod, Page 189 George the Sub-Patriarch, Page 192
Germanicus, Son of Drusus, Page 94, 97 Geta the Emperor, Page 110 Gibraltar,
whence derived, Page 182 Gideon, Judge of the Hebrews, Page 19 Glycerius the
Emperor, Page 156 Gnostics, Heretics, Page 106 Gomorrah 's Subversion, Page
11 Gordianus the Emperor, Page 115 Gordias the Rhetorician, Page 55 Goths,
their Affairs grow desperate in Italy, Page 165 Goths, Arians, Page 160
Gratian, Aug. 139. is slain, Page 143 Gregory Thaumaturgus, Page 114 Gregory
the Great, Page 169 Gregory III. Bishop of Rome, Page 184 Gregory Nazianzen,
Page 139, 143 Gyges, King of the Lydians, Page 33
H
HAdarezer, King of Syria, Page 26 Hadrian the Emperor, Page 107 Heretics
ordered by some to be Rebaptized, by others not, Page 117 Hali, Patriarch of
Persia, Page 178 Hazael, King of Syria, Page 28 Helen is stolen, Page 22 Henoch
taken up into Heaven, Page 4 Henoticon 's Epistle of Zeno, Page 158 Heracleon
the Emperor, Page 176 Heraclides return into Peloponnesus, Page 24 Heraclitus
of Ephesus, Page 47 Heraclius I. Emperor, Page 171 Heraclius II. Emperor, Page
172 Hercules the Theban, when he lived, and why he was called the Son of
Jupiter, Page 21 Ap. Herdonius possessing the Capitol, is from thence cast
down, Page 52 Hermas, Pastor, Page 107 Herod the Great made King of Judaea, 92,
93. His Reign, Page 94, 95 Herod Antipas, Page 95 Herodotus Halicarnasseus,
Page 51, 54 Hesiod, what time he lived, Page 26 Hieron, Tyrant of the
Syracusians, Page 51 Hiero Junior, King of the Syracusians; Page 74 Hilarious, a
Pict, Page 135 Hipparchus, an Astronomer, Page 84 Hipparchus, an Athenian, Page
45 Hippias, a Tyrant of Athens, Page 45, 47 Hipponax* a Poet, Page 42 Hiram,
King of the Tyrians, Page 25 Homer, at what time he lived, Page 26 Homer 's
Poems, by whom collected, Page 45 Honorius Aug. Page 146 Horace, Page 94 Hosea
the Prophet, Page 30 Hyperides the Orator, Page 69 Hypostasis, Dissentions
about the word, Page 141 Hyrcanus, King of the Jews, Page 88, 89
I
JAbin, King of the Canaanites, Page 19 Jaddua, the High Priest of the Jews,
Page 67 Janus, when he reigned, Page 22 Ibycus a Poet, Page 41 Iconolatrians,
vexed by Leo Armenus the Emperor, 184, and 185. Defended by the Bishops of
Rome, 184. Condemned by the Seventh Synod, 188. by Leo III. Page 191 Idolatry,
when and how it sprung up, Page 8 Jephtha 's Daughter gave Original to the
Fable of Iphigenia, Page 20 Jerome, Page 140, 144 Jeroboam 's Reign, Page 26
Jerusalem 's Walls repaired, Page 52 Ignis Graecus, Page 183 Ignatius, a
Martyr, Page 105 Image Worship defended and opposed, Page 158 I nachus, whence
so called, Page 12 Joakim, King of the Jews, Page 37 John the Apostle, Page 105
John Hyrcanus, Page 85 John Mailros, Page 192 John, Principal Notary, Page 151
John, Zacharias 's Son, Page 97 Jonas the Prophet, Page 28 Jonathan the
Machabite, Page 84 Ionians, whence so called, Page 24 Joseph carried into
Egypt, Page 13 Josephus the Historian, Page 105 Joshua divides Canaan, Page 18
Jovian the Emperor, Page 138 Irene, Daughter to the King of Bulgaria, 190.
defends Images, 191. Her Wickedness, Page 192 Irene, Chaganus 's Daughter,
Page 185 Isdegerdis 's Fidelity in the Education of Theodosius, Page 148
Israelites, how they could pass over the Red Sea in so short a time, Page 15
Isthmian Games, when instituted, Page 19 Italian War, Page 87 Jews First
Captivity, 37. Second, ibid. Third, Page 38 Jews return from Babylon, 43. Lay
the Foundation of the Temple, ibid. At last finish it, Page 45 Jews change
their Letters, Page 55 Jewish Priests dissent among themselves, Page 82 Jews
compelled to abjure their Religion, by Leo Armenius, Page 184 Jewish War with
Vespasian, Page 103 Judas the Macchabite, Page 84 Jugurtha and his War, Page 86
Julianus (Didius) the Emperor, Page 109 Julianus Caesar, the Emperor, 136.
professes Heathenism, 137. His Death, Page 138 Julianus the Count, calls the
Arabians into Spain, Page 182 Julius the African, Page 114 Julius Caesar
obtains Gaul, 90. His Civil War, is slain, ends it within five years, ibid.
Page 91. ibid. Julius Pollux, the Grammarian, Page 109 Justinian I. Emperor,
163. His Heresy, Page 167 Justinian II. Emperor, his Exploits, and various
Fortune, i 79. His Death, Page 183 Justin I. Emperor of Thrace, Page 162 Justin
II. Emperor, Page 163 Justin Martyr, Page 108 Justus the Historian, Page 105
Juvenal, Page 102
L
LActantius, Page 120 Langobards invade part of Italy, Page 169 Langobardian
Laws, Page 177 Latinus, when he reigned, Page 23 Lavinium, when built, Page 23
Leo I. Emperor, Page 155 Leo II. Emperor, Page 156 Leo III. an Armenian,
Emperor, Page 183 Leo IV. Emperor, by others III. omitting the II. the Son of
Leo I. because of his short Reign, Page 190 Leocrates the Athenian, Page 53
Leonidas, King of the Lacedaemonians, slain at Thermopylae, Page 49 Leontius
the Emperor, Page 181 Leosthenes the Athenian, Page 69 Leovigildus, King of the
Goths in Spain, Page 169 M. Lepidus, Triumvir, Page 92 Libanus the Sophist,
Page 138 Liberius, Bishop of Rome, Page 135 Licinius the Emperor, 123. His War
with Constantine, 125. Falls out again, 126. Is slain, ibid. Licinius, Son of
Licinius Caesar, Page 125 Livius Andronicus the Poet, Page 75 T. Livy, Page 94
Lot's Wife, whether she was turned into a Pillar of Salt, Page 11 Lucan, Page
102 Lucian of Samosata, Page 108 Lucifer Calaritanus, Page 137 Lucretius the
Poet, Page 89 L. Lucullus, Page 88 Luitprand, King of the Langobards, Page 186
Lycortas, Praetor of Achaia, Page 81 Lycurgus, and the Errors of his Polity,
Page 30 Lysias the Orator, Page 55
M
MAcchabees, whence so called, Page 83 Macedonian Kingdom, when it began, Page
23 Macedonius the Heretic, Page 136 Macrinus the Emperor, Page 111 Magnentius
the Tyrant, Page 135 Mahomet, a False Prophet, his Tenets and Beginning, Page
172, 173 Majorianus the Emperor, Page 155 Man's Life formerly longer, Page 5
Mamercus Aemilius, Page 57 Manasseh, King of Juda, Page 34 Manasseh, the
Brother of Jaddua, Page 67 Manes the Heretic, 119. Manichaeans in Persia, Page
162 L. Manlius Imperiosus, Page 62 T. Manlius kills his Son with an Axe, Page
66 Marathonian Battle, Page 48 M. Marcellus takes Syracuse, 78. is slain by
Annibal, ibid. Marcian the Emperor, Page 154, 155 Mardonius prospers in Thrace
and Asia, 48. is overcome at Marathon, ibid. at Plataeae, Page 50 Mariamne,
Herod 's Wife, Page 92, 93 Martina Augusta, Page 176 Martinianus Caesar, Page
126 Martin, Bishop of Tours, Page 140 Marseilles, when it was built, Page 42
Massinissa, King of Numidia, Page 79 Mattathias the Priest, Page 83 Mavias, a
Saracen, Page 177 Mauritus the Emperor, Page 169, 170 Maxentius the Emperor,
Page 122 Maximus the Emperor, Page 114 Maximianus Armentarius, Caesar, Page 120
Maximianus Herculius, Emperor, 120. lays aside his Royal Dignities, 121.
attempts to take them up again, Page 122 Maximius the Emperor, Page 114 Maximus
thrusts himself into the Empire, 143. He is slain, Page 144 Maximus of Tire,
Page 108 Mecaenas (C. Cilnius) Page 94 Megabasus, sent into Europe by Darius,
Page 47 Melchites, who they were, Page 157 Melissus the Philosopher, Page 55
Melito of Sardis, Page 108 Sp. Melius aspires to the Kingdom of Rome, and is
punished, Page 56 Menander, a Comic Poet, Page 70 Menenius Agrippa reduces the
Commonalty of Rome, Page 48 Meroveus King of the Franks, Page 154 Messenians,
Builders of Messana, Page 34 Messenian First War, 154, Second War, ibid.
Miltiades the Athenian, Page 48 Minos, it may be two of the Name, Page 18
Minutius Felix, Page 120 Misitheus, Gordian 's Father in-Law, Page 115
Mithridates, and his War with the Romans, Page 87, 89 Monks commanded to Marry,
Page 189 Monothelites, their Original, Page 175 Montanus the Heretic, Page 109
Moses, his Birth, 13. His Acts, 15, 16. His Laws, His Death, Page 17-18 L.
Mummius of Achaia, Page 85 Myronides the Athenian, Page 53
N
NAbis, a Lacedaemonian Tyrant, Page 79 Nabonassar, Restorer of the Babylonian
Empire, Page 31 Nabonidus, the last King of Babylon, Page 41 Nebuchadonosor
carries away the Jews captive, 37. Besieges Tire, 38. His Death, Page 39
Naevius the Poet, Page 75 Necho, King of Egypt, Page 36 Nectanebos, the Son of
the King of Egypt, revolts from his Father, 63. Is overcome by the Persians,
Page 65 Nehemiah repairs the Walls of Jerusalem, 52. Regulates their corrupt
Manners, Page 54 Nemaean Games instituted, Page 39 Nemesianus the Poet, Page
120 Nepos the Emperor, Page 156 Nepotianus the Tyrant, Page 135 Neriglissor,
Nebuchadonosor 's Son-in-Law, Page 40 Nerva the Emperor, Page 105 Nestorius
Condemned, Page 151 Nicene First Synod, Page 127 Nicene Second Synod, Page 191
Nicephorus, Brother of Leo Armenius, Page 191 Nicephorus Patricius the Emperor,
Page 194 Nicomedia, by whom and when it was built, Page 75 Nimrod 's Reign,
Page 6 Nineveh built, 20. Repaired. Page 31 Ninus, when he lived, and why he is
thought to be the Founder of the Babylonian Empire, Page 20 Noah 's Sons, what
Coasts they inhabited, Page 6 Numa Pompilius, King of the Romans, Page 33
Numantia taken, Page 85 Numerianus the Emperor, Page 119
O
Octavius Caesar, Triumvir, 92. See Augustus. Odonatus, King of Palmyra, Page
117 Odoacer, King of the Heruli, Page 159 Ogyges 's Reign, and Flood, Page 13
Olybrius the Emperor, Page 156 Olympic Games restored by Iphitus, Page 29
Olympian Conquerors, when they began to be Crowned, Page 31 Olympius the Poet,
Page 120 Omar, a Chaliph, Page 176 Origin, 112. His Tetrapla, Hexapla, Octapla,
Page 113. His Opinions, Page 114 Origin 's Opinion condemned after his Death,
Page 166
Otho the Emperor, Page 103 Othoniel, Judge of the Jews, Page 18 Ovid 's
Anachronism, Page 46
P
PAcuvius the Poet, Page 75, 84 Pagans Name, whence risen, Page 135 Palladius
of Galata, Page 146 Panathenaea, when instituted, Page 20 Papinian the Lawyer,
Page 111 Paris Academy, Page 192 Parmendides the Philosopher, Page 55
Parthenians Builders of Tarentum, Page 32 Parthians seek a King of Tiberius,
Page 99 Parthian War, whence risen, 77. Its end, Page 114 Passover, Differences
concerning its Celebration, Page 110 Paul- the Apostle, Page 99 Paul the
Deacon, Page 102 Paul Ictus, Page 112 Paul of Samosata, the Heretic, Page 118
Pausanias overcomes Mardonius at Plataea, Page 50 Pelagius 's Opinion, 148.
Synods held against him, Page 149 Pelagius, who was descended of the Goths,
preserved the Country of Asturia, and transmitted the Dominion thereof to his
Posterity, Page 185, 186 Pelopidas a Theban, Page 62 Peloponnesian War, 56. The
Occasion thereof, Page 57 Pelops, when he reigned, Page 18 Pilgrimages for
Religion's sake, Page 152 Pericles the Athenian, Page 55 Perillus 's fate, a
Blacksmith, Page 41 Perseus, King of the Mycenians, Page 21 Perseus, the last
King of the Macedonians, Page 82 Perseus the Poet, Page 102 Persian War begun,
Page 114 Pertinax the Emperor, Page 109 Pescennius Niger, the Emperor, Page 109
Peter, whether he has been at Rome, 100, 102. His other Epistle, Page 101 Peter
Fullo the Heretic, Page 155 Phalantus, a Parthenian Captian, Page 32 Phalaris
the Tyrant, Page 41 Phantasiasticks, Page 165 Pharamund, Page 150 Phavorinus
the Philosopher, Page 107 Pherecydes the Syrian, Page 42 Phylemo, a Comic
Poet, Page 70 Philetaerus, King of the Pergamenians, Page 75 Philippicus the
Emperor, Page 183 Philip the Arab, Emperor, Page 115 Philip, the Son of Amyntas
King of Macedon, 46. is slain, Page 66 Philip, the last King of Macedon, save
one, Page 78, 81 Philip the Tetrarch, Page 95, 99 Philomelus, the Author of the
Holy War, Page 64 Philopoemen, Praetor of Achaia, Page 81 Philostorgius,
whether to be believed, or not, Page 125, 129 Phocas the Emperor, Page 170
Phoemonoe delivered the first Oracle in Hexameter Verses, Page 21 Phoenicians,
whence so called, Page 12 Photinus the Heretic, Page 133, 135 Phraortes
besieges Nineveh to no purpose, Page 35 Phul, King of the Assyrians, Page 30
Pindar the Poet, Page 50 Pippin, Son of Charles Martell, King of France,
brought back Aistulphus into his Obedience, Page 188 Placida, Sister of
Honorius, 148. She is Dignified with the Title of Augusta, Page 150 Plataean
Battle, Page 50 Plato the Philosopher, Page 60 Pliny the Elder, Page 103 Pliny
the Younger, Page 105 Plutarch the Philosopher, Page 106 Polycarpus the Martyr,
Page 108 Polycrates, a Tyrant of Samos, Page 45 Cn. Pompey the Great, his Acts,
90. overcome by Caesar, and slain by Ptolemy, Page 91 Sex. Pompey, Son of Cn.
Pompey, Page 92 Pontius Pilate, Page 97 Porsennus his War with the Romans, Page
47 A. Posthumous Dictator, Page 56 Priscian the Grammarian, Page 163
Priscillian the Heretic, Page 144 Probus the Emperor, Page 119 Prodicus the
Rhetorician, Page 55 Propertius, Page 94 Psammeticus, King of Egypt, Page 35
Psmamenitus, King of Egypt, Page 44 Ptolemy, the Son of Lagus, Page 70 Ptolemy
Philadelphus, Page 71 Ptolemy Philopater, a Hater of the Jews, Page 77 Ptolemy
the Mathematician, Page 107 Pulcheria Augusta, Page 154 Punick War, 72. Second
War, 77 Pupienus the Emperor, Page 115 Pygmalion 's Kingdom, Page 27 Pyrrha,
whence so called, Page 14 Pyrrhus, King of the Epyrots, Page 72 Pythagoras the
Philosopher, Page 46 Pythian Games instituted, Page 38
Q
QUadratus, Page 107 T. Quinctius Cincinnatus triumphs over the Volscians, and
Antium, 51. Overcomes ths Aequi, Page 53 Quintilian, Page 102
R
RAchisius, a Beneventan Captain, Page 191 Ravenna 's Exarchate, its Beginning,
168. Its End, ibid. Recharedus the Catholic, Page 169 Rehoboam 's Reign, Page
26 Roderick, King of Spain, Page 182 Rotharitus Langobardus, Page 177 Romulus
's Reign, 32. His Death, Page 33 Ruffinus of Aquileia, Page 139 Ruffinus, a
Seditious Captain, Page 146
S
SAbellus the Heretic, Page 117 Saguntum Besieged, Page 76 Salaminian Battle,
Page 49 Salmanassar, King of Assyria, Page 32 Samaritans, sent from Assyria
into Judea, 32. use the ancient Characters of the Hebrews, Page 54 Sanaballat,
a Samaritan, Page 67 Sanchoniathon, an Historian of Phoenicia, Page 19 Seven
Wise Men of Greece, Page 37 Sappho the Poetress, Page 38 Saracens, when they
began to flourish, Page 177 Sardis, a Synod held there, Page 134 Saul 's Reign,
Page 24 P. Scipio Aemilianus, Page 84, 85 P. Scipio Africanus ended the Second
Punick War, 79. Condemned, Page 81 L. Scipio Asiaticus, Page 80 P. Scipio
Nasica, Page 79 Scipio, Pompey 's Son-in-Law, conquered in Africa, Page 91
Scythians invade Asia, Page 36 Sedekiah, the last King of Judaea, Page 37
Seleucian Synod, Page 136 Seleucus Nicanor, Page 68 Semiramis, Queen of
Babylon, Page 20 Sennacherib, King of Assyria, Page 33 Sextus of Chaeronea,
Page 108 Seventy Greek Interpreters of Moses 's Law, Page 71 Q. Sertorius 's
Acts, Page 88 Servius Tullius 's Reign, Page 39 Servile War, Page 89 Servilius
Isauricus, Page 88 Sesostris, King of Egypt, what time he lived, 26. Subdues
Asia, ibid. Seth, when born, Page 4 Severus (L. Septimus) the Emperor, Page 109
Severus Caesar, Page 121 Severus the Emperor, Page 154 Severus the
Theopaschite, Page 161 Sextus the Empirick, Page 106 Sicyons Kingdom, 8. comes
to a period, Page 23 Sidon burnt, Page 65 Simon the Maccabee, Page 85 Simonides
the Poet, Page 44 Sirmium Synod, Page 135 Smerdis Magus, Page 44 Socrates,
Chief of the Philosophers, 55. His Death, 60. His Disciples, ibid. Sodom
destroyed, Page 11 Sogdianus, King of Persia, Page 57 Solomon's Kingdom, Page
26 Solon, when born, 35. Corrects the Laws of Draco, Page 38 Sophocles the
Tragoedian, Page 51 Spanish War, Page 84, 85 Spartachus, General of the Servii,
Page 89 Stesichorus the Poet, Page 41 Stephen the Protomartyr, Page 98 Stephen,
Bishop of Rome, Page 117 Stephen the Pope flies to King Pepin, to no purpose,
Page 187 Stilicho, one of Honorius 's Captains, Page 146, 147, 148 Strabo, Page
94 Suetonius, Page 106 L. Sulla, his Exploits, Page 88 Sulpitius Severus, Page
140 Syloson, a Tyrant of Samos, Page 46 Symmachus, Page 139 Symmachus, Bishop
of Rome, when Created, Page 160 Syphax, King of Numidia, Page 79 Syrian Kings,
most Potent in the times of the Kings of Israel, Page 26, 28 Syracuse built,
Page 30
T
TAchos, King of Egypt, Page 63 Tacitus the Historian, Page 105 Tacitus the
Emperor, Page 119 Tarichus the Arabian Invades Spain, Page 182 Tarquinius
Priscus 's Reign, Page 36 Tarquinius Superbus, King of the Romans, 44. is
Banished Rome, Page 46 Tatius Reigns with Romulus, Page 32 Temple of Jerusalem
built, 25. Dedicated, Page 83 Tertullian, Page 110 Teuta, Queen of the
Illyrians, Page 76 Theban War, twice begun, Page 21 Themistius, Page 138
Themistocles Conquers Xerxes, 49. Is Banished. Flies to Artaxerxes, Page 52
Theodoricus I. King of the Goths, Page 155 Theodoricus II. King of the Goths,
159. a Disciple of Arius, Page 163 Theodosian Code, Page 152 Theodosius the
Elder, Emperor, 140. His Repentance, 145. His Death, Page 156 Theodosius the
Younger, Emperor, 148. His Death, Page 154 Theodosius, a Syrian, made Emperor,
Page 183 Theodotion Ponticus, Page 109 Theognis the Poet, Page 41 Theophilus of
Alexandria, Page 147 Theophilus of Antioch, Page 108 Theophrastus the
Peripatetick, Page 70 Thereon of Agrigentum, the Tyrant, Page 50 Theseus, when
he lived, Page 21 Thrasibulus, Tyrant of Syracuse, Expelled Page 51 Thucydides
the Historian, Page 56 Thyestes, when he lived, Page 21 Tiberius obtains the
Empire, Page 97 Tiberius Anicius, the Emperor, Page 168 Tibullus, Page 94
Timaeus 's jocular Expression concerning the Birth of Alexander, Page 64
Timoleon 's Acts at Corinth, Page 65 Timotheus Aelurus, Page 155 Titus
Vespasian the Emperor, Page 104 Tolmides the Athenian, Page 55 Trajan the
Emperor, Page 105 Trebonianus the Emperor, Page 116 Three Factions, Page 166
Tribonianus the Lawyer, Page 164 Tribunes of the Roman People instituted, Page
48 Thirty Tyrants of the Roman Empire, Page 117 Triumvir's Proscriptions, Page
62 Troy, when its Kingdom began, Page 18 Trojan War, the occasion thereof, Page
22 Tullus Hostilius 's Reign, Page 34 Turks called in by Heraclius, to his
Assistance, Page 175 Type, an Edict of Constans the Emperor, Page 177 Tyrus
(Old) When it was Built, 20. Destroyed, and Rebuilt, Page 38 Twelve Tables,
containing the Roman Laws, Page 53
V
VAlens the Emperor, 138. His Death, Page 140 Valentinian the Elder, Emperor,
Page 138 Valentinian the Younger, slain, 145. His Laws, Page 144, 145
Valentinian, the Son of Placidia Augusta, 150. His Death, Page 154 Valerian the
Emperor, Page 116, 117 Valerian, Caesar, Page 117 M. Valerius Poplicola, Page
46 Vallias, King of the Goths, Page 149 Vandals, they possess themselves of
Africa, Page 153 M. Varro, Page 89 Veij, is Besieged, Page 59 Venetians, their
Original, Page 154 Vespasian the Emperor, Page 104 Vetranio the Tyrant, Page
135 Vincentius Lirinensis, Page 152 Virgil, Page 94 Viriathus Lusitanus, Page
84 Vitalianus the Count, Page 161 Vitellius the Emperor, Page 103 Vitruvius,
Page 94 Ulpian the Lawyer, Page 112 Volusianus the Emperor, Page 116
W
WAlidus, King of Arabia, sends an Army into Spain, Ransacks Natolia, Page 182.
186 Western Empire put to an end, Page 157 Willibrordus, Bishop of Utrecht,
Page 185
X
XEnophanes the Philosopher, Page 44 Xenophon the Socratick, Page 60 Xerxes I.
King of Persia, 49. Conquered by the Greeks, ibid. Is slain by Artabanus, Page
52 Xerxes II. King of Persia, Page 57
Y
YEar amended by Julius Caesar Page 91 Years in ancient Times were not Monthly,
Page 5
Z
ZEno the Emperor, Page 157 Zeno the Philosopher, Page 55 Zenobia, Queen of
Palmyra, Page 118 Zorobabel, Leader of the Jews, brought back out of Captivity,
Page 43 Zosimus, a Roman Bishop, Page 150
THE END.
BOOKS Printed for M. Gillyflower, J. Tonson, W. Freeman, J. Walthoe, and R.
Parker.
A New Voyage to Italy, with Curious Observations on several other Countries,
as Germany, Switzerland, Savoy, Geneva, Flanders, and Holland. Together with
useful Instructions for those who shall Travel thither. Done out of French. The
Second Edition, Enlarged above one Third, and enriched with several new
Figures. By Maximilian Misson, Gent. In Two Volumes.

A Complete Body of Chyrurgical Operations, containing the whole Practice of
Surgery, with Observations and Remarks on each Cases; amongst which are
inserted the several ways of Delivering Women in Natural and Unnatural Labors.
The whole illustrated with Copper Plates, explaining the several Bandages,
Sutures, and diverse useful Instruments. By M. de la Vauguion, M. D. and
Intendant of the Royal Hospitals about Paris. Faithfully done into English.

The Roman History, from the Building of the City, to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar, containing the space of 727 Years; and from the
Settlement of the Empire by Augustus Caesar, to the Removal of the Imperial
Seat by Constantine the Great, containing the space of 355 Years: Designed as
well for the understanding of Roman Authors, as the Roman Affairs. Carefully
Revised and Corrected. In Two Volumes, Octavo. By Lawrence Echard, A. M. late
of Christ's College in Cambridge, Prebendary of Lincoln, and Chaplain to the
Right Reverend James Lord Bishop of that Diocese.


