Something CONCERNING THE Two Births.
IN serious Meditation, and weighty Consideration, upon those words of Christ
to Nichodemus, John 3.3. Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom
of God: And hereby it does plainly appear that there is an absolute necessity
of a second Birth, and Work of Regeneration: And seeing it is thus, it greatly
concerns all, that none neglect nor slight the day of their Visitation, lest it
be said unto them, as it was said unto Jerusalem of old, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee; How often would I have gathered thee, even as a Hen gathers her
Chickins under her wings, and ye would not, Matthew. 23.37. Here was the Love of
God in Jesus Christ unto Jerusalem, but Jerusalem neglected, or rather rejected
the day of their Visitation; which shows, that God is not the Author of man's
Destruction, as some would make him, who hold that Point or Principle of
Reprobation; but that man has Destroyed himself, according to the Prophets
Words Hosea 13.9 O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. And this I really do
believe, that God bath given to all People upon the Face of the Earth a day and
time of Visitation, as he did unto Jerusalem: And seeing it is thus, what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy and godly Conversation? The first
Birth being of the Earth earthly; and as the Apostle says, speaking of
themselves as well as others, Among whom also we all had our Conversation in
times past, in the Lusts of the Flesh, and were by nature the Children of
Wrath, even as others, Ephesians. 2.3. Which is a state of Death, and Darkness, and
Disobedience, Loving and Delighting in the Creature more then in God the
Creator, having the Heart and Mind alinated and separated from a Life in God
and Righteousness, and their chief Delight and Pleasure in things below the
Lord, and of this World, and their Minds mostly exercised thereupon, with
great Delight and Pleasure, being not subject to the Lord that made them, nor
willing to be led and guided by his good Spirit, but choosing and joining with
that which does most agree with their carnal sensual Minds; neither knowing a
Bridle to their Tongue; though they may make a great profession of God, and
Christ, and Scriptures, and yet their Religion but vain; as the Apostle James
says, If any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue,
that man's Religion is vain, James 1.26. And if this be so as I certainly
believe it is, then how many men's Religions will prove but vain? who love and
delight so much in foolish Talking and Jesting, which are not convenient, Ephesians.
5.4. And let Experience spoke to this, whether it be not much the Practice both
of Priests and People, when they are together; and what Benefit do any of you
find by Reading and Speaking of the Scriptures, while you do not Live and Walk
accordingly? This does discover your Hypocrisy, and will be a witness against
you: Be not deceived, God will not be mocked, for whatsoever a man sows that
shall he also Reap, as the Apostle is very express, Gal. 6.8. He that sows to
the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption; and he that sows to the
Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting. (Now Mark) here is a sowing
to the Flesh and to the Spirit, and a reaping accordingly; neither are such
willing to take up the daily Cross, without which none can be his Disciple,
take his own Words for it, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his Cross daily, and follow me, Luke 9.23. Nor yet a true Love to
Brethren, which is a great evidence and token of an Eternal and Everlasting
Inheritance, 1 John 3.14. where the Apostle says, We know we are past from
Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. And how far are unregenerate
People from this, as is manifest by their Fruits; what Pride, Covetousness,
Envying and Destroying one an other and that about Carnal, Earthly things; and
this in short is the estate of too many People upon the Face of the whole
Earth, in one degree or other, in the first Nature, before the work of
Regeneration be known or witnessed.

But being Changed and Redeemed, by the effectual working and opperation of the
holy divine Spirit of God upon the Heart; then a great Work wrought and
witnessed, a new Heart, a new Mind, new Love, new Delight, old things are
passed away, and all things become new; and then, a loving God with all thy
Heart, with all thy Soul, and thy Neighbor as thy self, and a Cross taken up
to all the Worlds Ways, Delights and Pleasures, Customs, Fellowships and
Fashions, though heretofore never so much loved and delighted in; and the
Heart, Mind and Spirit exercised in, and upon Heavenly and Spiritual things,
being alive thereunto, and dead unto the World and worldly things which have
Evil in them; according to David, that man of God, of whom it is said, His
delight was in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law does he meditate Day and
Night Psalm 1.2. And such become willing to do, or to suffer for God and his
Truth, and bear a faithful Testimony for him, against that which is evil in all
its appearances, being separated from the World its Ways and Worships, which
are out of the Spirit, into the Worship in the Spirit, and in the Truth; being
kept in the holy fear and dread of the Lord at all times, whereby they dare not
join with them whose Tongues are at Liberty, lik^ those who said, Our Tongues
are our own who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.4. But such are out of the fear of
the Lord which keeps down and under that vain, light, airy Spirit of the World;
and here is not only a talking and profession of Religion, but a living and
walking accordingly: For this I know, that that Religion, Profession and
Worship, be what it will, in which People are not redeemed and changed out of
their vain Conversation, in that Religion, Pofession and Worship their Souls
can never be saved, according to Christ's Doctrine, Except a man be born again
he cannot see the Kingdom of God; and seeing it is thus, let all press forward,
that they may attain to that Pure and undefiled Religion which keeps unspotted
from the World; and such will become good Pattrons and Examples in their
places, having a constant care over their Thoughts and Words, like good David,
who said, I will take heed to my Ways, that I sin not with my Tongue: I will
keep my Mouth with a Bridle, while the Wicked is before me, Psalm. 39.1. A good
Man, a blessed Condition; but how unlike unto David are many professing
Christians now, both Priests and People, who talk much of God and Christ, and
Scriptures for their Rule; but how little do they endeavor to Live and Walk
accordingly: Is it not plain Scripture, and Christ's own Words, That for every
idle word that men shall speak they shall give account at the day of Judgment.
And yet how common are not only idle Words but invoked Oaths, and other great
Abominations among a People professing Christianity, for which we may justly
fear a Judgment come over the Nation. Oh that the Lord would give Repentance,
that his Wrath might be appeased; and Blessed, and Happy are all they whose
^earts and Minds are redeemed out of the Evil of this World, and out of the
Pleasures thereof, into that one true Fellowship the Apostle declares of 1 John
1.7. If we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin. Here
is the new Creation, and second Birth, Christ spoke of, known; and Blessed, and
for ever Blessed are all they that are VVitnesses hereof, ye for ever and for
evermore, Amen.

From a Lover of Truth and Righteousness. Thomas Laythes.
Dalehead in Cumberland the 12th of the 8th Month, 1686.
THE END.

