Something Concerning my Convincement OF GOD'S TRUTH, THE Way, Work and Manner
thereof.
MANY Years I spent in the World, before I was much convinced of the evil of
many things I then did; living in Pride and Pleasure, and satisfying my vain
Mind therein, not much seeking or desiring after the things of God, having
little of any Form or Profession of Godliness, and much less of the Power
thereof; and herein I may still admire the great Mercy of God, in that he did
not cut me off in this time of my Sin and Transgression, but gave me time to
Repent. And this was my State and Condition for many Years; till about the Year
1^55. I begun to take notice of some Professors about Keswicke in Cumberland;
and looking upon them as more like to be the People of God then those I had
formerly been amongst; I frequented their Meetings, and walked with them after
the stric^est manner, for about four Years, in all thing pertaining to Religion
and Worship, as I was then persuaded; yet toward the latter end of that time,
I felt my Spirit much dissatisfied, as to Religion and Worship, in many things
which we then practiced; and the more I thought and pondered in my Mind
thereupon, the more did my dissatisfaction grow upon me, insomuch that at
length I did question both that Ministry and Worship, which we then owned,
whether it was the true Ministry and Worship or not; and all those our
Religious Practices, whether God would accept of them or not; being done, as I
then feared, out of that Spirit which gives acceptance with the Lord, and so
but will worship; and though we had the form of Godliness, yet I doubted whether
we had the true power or no, being not redeemed out of the Spirit of the World;
but still living in the Forms, Fashions and Customs thereof, being much
persuaded in my Heart that there was a People nearer the Lord then we were, and
did enjoy more of his Power and Presence then we did; and thus my Heart and
Mind did withdraw from that People more and more, and inclined much after them
People called Quakers; and the more I did observe and take notice of them, and
their Behavior, Life and Conversation, the more did my Love and good desires
grow and increase unto them; being much persuaded in my Heart that they were
the People of God, though I had little discourse with any of them, or ever been
at any of their Meetings; but often when I read the Scriptures, and the Saints,
Conditions there recorded, I thought in my Heart they were likest the People
there spoken of, and then my Spirit traveled to be with them, though very
unwilling to leave those People that I had so long been in Fellowship with. And
thus I traveled under great weight and pressure of Spirit for many Days,
Weeks, Months, if not Years; sometimes secretly saying in my Heart, I had
rather die with this People (meaning the Professors) then leave them, if I
could believe that God would accept of what we did, and great was that Love and
Affection I had for natural Relations. And this was my State and Condition a
long time, being unwilling to give up in answer to Gods requirings, and deny
self, and take up the Cross, which made my Travel both longer and harder;
which at length the Professors perceiving, and thinking that I was like to
leave them, endeavored to keep me amongst them as long as they could, and did
use their best Arguments to that effect; sometimes in Love, and otherwise, in
telling what great danger there was in joining with such a People as were
deluded, as they would say; but when they did see that all they could do would
not prevail, then they begun to threaten me with Excommunication, telling me of
the fearful and horrid Sentence thereof; which afterward they proceeded unto,
pronouncing the Sentence of Excommunication, as they called it; [but Mark] this
was not done until they were without any hope of my continuing with them, and
then they would pretend to cast me out from amongst them, when they could keep
me no longer; and when James Cave their Pastor, so called, had pronounced
Sentence against me, he spoke to one Richard Waterson, called a Deacon, to put
me forth from amongst them, where they were met, which he did accordingly; but
what has befaln him since, and for what cause is best known unto the Lord
alone: I wish he may be sensible of his own Condition, repent of his Sins, and
find Mercy with the Lord: And herein I witness Christ's Words fulfilled, Blessed
are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their
Company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your Names, as evil, for the Son
of man's sake: Rejoice you in that day, and leap for Joy, for behold your Reward
is great in Heaven, for in the like manner did their Fathers unto the Prophets,
Luke 6.22, 23. And how feelingly have I witnessed that Scripture fulfilled Isa.
66.5. Here the Word of the Lord ye that tremble at his Word, your Brethren that
hated you, that cast you out, for my Names sake, said let the Lord be
glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. And sure
this was my Condition in that day.

Yet after all this, greatly was I exercised, being several times moved to go
to their places of Worship where James Cave was, and that in much weakness of
Body, having neither eaten Bread, nor any other Food, unless a little Water
sometimes, for many days: And at one of their Chapels I did warn James Cave
not to go away and leave that People which he had professed himself Pastor to,
nor when Sufferings were like to come on; laying several things before him,
which might draw him from them, 1st. Fear of Persecution and Sufferings: 2dly
Doubting of Maintenance according to his mind: 3dly The persuasion of natural
Friends and Relations, as to Wife and others.
Yet notwithstanding all this, not long after he went away, and left that
People for many Years, whether they would stand or fall, and soon after they
gave over their accustomed Meetings, and fell away.

And at another time I declared Christ's Words to James Cave, (in another of
their Chapels, before the Auditors) Mat. 7.24.25, 26, and 27. Speaking of the
Wise man that built his House upon a Rock, and the Rain descended, and the
Floods came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon that House, and it fell not, for
it was founded upon a Rock: But the foolish man built his House upon the Sand,
and the Rain descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon
that House, and it fell, and great was the fall of it. And it is plain and
evident what their Building was upon, which if it had been upon a Rock,
doubtless would have stood, but being upon the Sand, is fallen, ruinate, and
not visible; therefore let see what they build upon, for it is that Church
built up the Rock, against which the Gates of Hell do not preva(...) Glory to
our God forever.

But to return again to my own State and Condition. In t(...) Year 1659. I went
first among Friends, and to Friends Me(...)ings, and though I was much
persuaded in my Heart a(...) Mind of Truths way, and that they were the People
God; yet by being conversant amongst them and freque(...) in Meetings, I was
much confirmed and strengthened in m(...) former Faith.

And as for my Convincement of Gods Eternal Truth, a the work and manner
thereof, which was much in my E(...) at the first, this, I say, was a secret,
inward and spiritu(...) Work, wrought upon my Heart and Soul by the
effectu(...) vvorking and operation of the holy Divine Spirit of Go(...) and
much without the help of outvvard means, or outvva(...) instrument, though
some did endeavor it; but the vvo(...) was the Lords, and to him alone be the
Praise and Glo(...) forever.

And if I here declare what God has done for my So(...) and made me a vvitness
of, both in the time of my Convin(...)meant, and since, I know it will be hard
to be believed b(...) many; but this I may say, oh the travel in Spirit Day
an(...) Night, the many great and weighty Exercises both inward(...) and
outwardly, the Watches, the Fasts for seven Days, for ni(...) Days, for ten
Days, and for fourteen Days, unless only (...) little Water sometimes; and the
last day thereof I travel(...) five miles to a Meeting, and as far back again
that d(...) on foot, and this was in the Year 1661. besides at man(...) other
time and times, even such was that great desire th(...) was begotten in my
Heart after God, and love to him abo(...) all natural and visible things,
though being at the very poi(...)

(...)Death, in my own apprehension, and scarce discerning when(...)er in the
Body or out of the Body, my Visage more altered (...)en many in that day;
insomuch that some of my familiar (...)cquaintance have said, There Is none
looks like him; for indeed (...)e Lord did chasten me sore, though he has not
given me (...)ver unto Death, but in, and through, and over all has ^^ised me
up, and fully satisfied my Soul for Religion for ever.

Having often richly pertaken of Gods Living Power and Divine Presence in our
blessed Assemblies and Meetings, and (...)t many other times, which to me is an
evident token that (...)he God of Heaven is our God, and that we are his
People; (...)or the Pearl of great price has been found and purchased,
(...)ough with the loss of all, and the Truth bought, which I (...)open, can
never be sold, nor parted with for all the Worlds (...)reasures, Delights and
Pleasures; and now after all those (...)rrowful Days, and mournful Nights,
great is that Peace (...)nd Comfort that is enjoyed by many in the Lord. And as
(...)itherto a faithful Testimony has been born for God and (...)is Truth, so
it is my Belief and Confidence, that in the (...)rength of the Lord, I shall
continue unto the end, waiting (...) Faith and Patience for that blessed Reward
of an eternal (...)nd everlasting Inheritance of rest and Peace with God the
(...)ather, and his eternal Son Jesus Christ, and that for evermore.

And now God Almighty, for the continuance of thy Love (...)nd Goodness, which
thou have made my Soul sensible of, (...)nd in that thou have made me any way
serviceable in thy (...)hurch, and amongst thy People, now in the declining
time (...) my Age, and when my Eyes are growing dim; oh how (...)st thou hereby
engaged my Heart, Soul and Spirit to Bless (...)nd praise thy great and holy
Name.

And oh thou Living and Eternal God, as hitherto thou have made me sensible of
thy great Power, and admirable, wonderful Works; oh do thou evermore keep me;
keep me, that my Heart and Spirit may never withdraw nor depart from thee; but
keep me, keep me, near and close unto thee, even unto the end, that I may
Bless, and Praise and Magnify thy great and holy Name, both now and forever,
and forevermore, Amen.

From one who has rather chosen to suffer Affliction with the People of God,
then enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season, Thomas Laythes
From Dailehead near Keswicke in Cumberland, the 18th 10th Month, 1686.
THE END.

