England's HAPPINESS: In a DISCOURSE Occasionally Written on the glorious
Solemnity of the CORONATION. Of King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, The 11th. of
April. 1689.

By B L.

portraits of William and Mary with crowns

Printed for J. Blare on London Bridge 1689.

England's HAPPINESS; In a DISCOURSE Occasionally Written on the glorious
Solemnity of the CORONATION Of King William and Queen Mary, the 11th. of this
instant April.

BEING An Incitement to Loyalty and Obedience, and a Christian Acknowledgment
to God Almighty for His Mercies and Favors toward these Kingdoms, in Blessing
us with so gracious a King and Queen, and the extraordinary Felicity we are
like to possess in our Great and Miraculous Delivery from the Danger we might
have expected.

By B. L.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for J. Blare at the Looking-glass on London Bridge, 1689.

ENGLAND'S HAPPINESS, etc.
Prove. 29.2. When the Righteous are in Authority the People rejoice.


WHat greater Blessing can fall to the share of any Kingdom, or People on
Earth, than to be Governed with Uprightness, and Truth; to see her self fenced
about with Justice and Judgment; her Laws, that are her security, to run smooth
in an interrupted Chanel of Impartiality, where no Corruption can turn them
aside to destroy the Innocent, nor free the Guilty? in such a Case, I say, a
Nation is happy, and this depends mainly on the supreme Power; for where the
Fountain runs with a Crystal Stream the Waters are pleasing, and desirable;
they refresh the fainting Heart, and spread a Joy through those that partake of
them; but when it proves the contrary, no satisfaction is rendered; for
according to the Saying of the wise Man, Prove. 29.2. When the Righteous are in
Authority the People rejoice: but when the Wicked bears Rule the People
mourn. And we find that when God more immediately designed to favor his People
Israel, he gave them his Servant David to be their King, and to Reign over
them; and with him he gave them Plenty in their Gates, and Victory over their
Enemies, brought under the Oppressor, and the Spoiler was no more seen in the
streets, the Cries of the oppressed were turned into Songs of Deliverances, and
they were made to hear of Joy and Gladness; for how plainly may we behold in
Holy Writ the Face of things to be changed, and that People, who but a little
before were compelled to bow their Necks to the Yoke of the Philistines, a
cruel and merciful Enemies, had their Lands wasted and spoiled, looking every
moment to be destroyed, suddenly raised to unexpected Advantages; their Enemies
were put to flight, they had Peace in their Dwelling, their Vineyards, and
Olive-yards flourished, and Corn and Wine increased, so that they might
conclude themselves, by a sudden and unexpected Change, more happy than the
Nations round about them, and it must consequently be a greater satisfaction to
any People, and create in their Minds a larger sense of Joy, and thankful
Acknowledgment, to be snatched from a Chaos of Disorder and Confusion,
threatening every moment Ruin and Desolation, into Calmness, Serenity, and a
prospect of lasting Tranquillity, than if they had been in no such Danger. Holy
David gives extraordinary Praise and Acknowledgment on this occasion, Psalm
124.6, 7, 8. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a Prey to their Teeth;
our Soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler; the Snare is
broken, and we are escaped: our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made
Heaven and Earth. And indeed it has been no less in all Ages of the World; for
any Man delivered from a sharp and torturing pain, or from an extreme peril and
danger, concludes that Deliverance an extraordinary Happiness; then it behooves
us to raise our Souls to a highth that may fill us with Joy, for a more than
ordinary Deliverance, in considering the Royal Instrument is in the Hand of the
Author of all our Happiness, from whom we have our being, and our well-being;
for as it is written, Prove. 23.11. He that loves pureness of Heart, for the
Grace of his Lips, the King shall be his Friend. And what can be more
desirable? for the favor of a Righteous Prince is more excellent than Gold,
and his Love above the price of all precious things; he sits fearless from
Danger, and is the brightness and luster of his Kingdom: And as a more
excellent Epethite, the wise Man says, Prove. 29.14. The King that faithfully
judges the Poor his Throne shall be established for ever; and, as no small
honor, and peculiar favor of Heaven, even the Church of Christ has a
comfortable Promise, viz. That Kings shall be her nursing Fathers, and Queens
her nursing Mothers.

These things bring us to a further consideration, which may more and more open
our Eyes to behold what may make us with a Holy Zeal cry out, This is the Lords
doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes; for who but a short time since could
have foreseen the Miracles he has done by the Prudence, Conduct and Courage of
the happy Instrument in his hand, which in the performance required Virtues,
hardly to be credited, till seen. Great indeed, have been the Actions and Fame
of Men in most Ages, for being renowned in War, celebrated in Learning, or
excellent in curious Arts, which has caused their Names to be Registered in the
Golden Robes of Fame; but in this the difference is vastly transcendent, and
nothing but wonder and astonishment can fill our minds, whilst we contemplate
it, and are carried away with thoughts of our happiness, when the Righteous are
in authority, the people rejoice.

But to come nearer, there ought to be in this Case a great and more than
ordinary sense of the highest Gratitude incumbent on us; and first let us lift
our Eyes to Heaven, and give hearty Praise and Acknowledgment, adoring his
Goodness and Mercy, confessing with Holy David, Psalm. 126. v. 3. The Lord has
done great things for us, whereof we are glad; and especially according to the
Advice of the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 13.1. Let Brotherly Love continue.
Let us own our selves unworthy of so great a Blessing, and humble our selves
before him that exalts the lowly, and abaseth the Proud: Let us commit our
ways to the Lord, and put our Trust in the Shield and Rock of our Salvation,
and ever bless his Holy Name, that we live to see this happy day, in which we
beheld the Work of our Deliverance so fully wrought, and as our Hearts ought
ever to be full charged with Joy, for the Peace and welfare of Zion, so let us
study to preserve and maintain it to the utmost of our power, by uniting in
Peace, and Unity, that by our Breaches or Divisions, we may give the Enemy to
advantage over us, that by the old Machiavilian Policy we may not divide,
thereby to suffer breaking in or going out; and that there may be no murmuring
or complaining in our Streets. We, no doubt, are one of the best Governments,
founded upon wholesome and substantial Laws; the Purity of the Gospel shines
bright as the Morning Star amongst us, Plenty flows in our Land, and the
Oppressors are removed from our Gates; let us then conclude our selves a
People in a happy Condition; yea, rather let us conclude our selves so, because
our God is the Lord, who, with a mighty and outstretched Arm, has raised up
Salvation to us, and heard us out of his Holy Hill in the time of trouble, and
has bound himself by a holy promise, if we provoke him not by our sins, he will
never leave nor forsake us. O! that Men would therefore Praise the Lord.

But secondly, O let us Kiss the Son, least after all these Mercies, he be
angry, and his anger burn against us, for making no better use of so great a
Mercy. A Wise Man is as steadfast as the Foundation of the Earth, says the
Philosopher, and in Holy Scripture finds, he builds a House upon a Rock, and
that Rock is Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and therefore his House is never
shaken down, though the Storms or Tempests be never so rough and raging, He
that trusts in the Lord, shall stand as Mount Sion. This made Holy David
bold, when he said, Psalm. 23. Though I should walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil; for thou art with me, thy Red and thy
Staff, they shall comfort me and again, Psalm. 27. The Lord is my Light and my
Salvation, whom shall I fear?

When Ezekiah heard the proud Message of a Scribe sent to him and his People,
by Rabshaketh the King, stood not much to consult the Arm of Flesh, but went
unto the House of the Lord, and prayed unto the Lord to save him and his people
out of the hands of their Enemies, that all the Kingdoms of the Earth might
know he is alone God, and accordingly the Assyrian Host fell before them,
without any loss to the Israelites. This Miraculous Deliverence may in
somemeasure be applied to our Case; God sent his Angel to put fear into the
Hearts of those who, a little before, thought of nothing but our Ruin,
blasting and withering all their Courage, and enfeebling them, that they were
not able to carry on their Devices to any kind of perfection, that had cost
them extraordinary Treasure, Labor and Industry. This we must own to be the
Lord's doing; for it is most plainly demonstrated, as it was revealed to the
great Babilonian Monarch, that the most High God rules in the Kingdoms of Men,
and gives them to whom he pleases; It Is he that rules the Hearts of Kings and
Princes, disposing of them as it seems best to his Godly Wisdom; all Crowns
and Scepters are before him, and in his Hands are the Balances of the Earth;
his looks dry up the Deep, and the Winds are in the hollow of his hand; Power
and Might are ever before him, to do what seems best to his infinite Wisdom;
for whatever he wills, that he has Power to perform. These things considered,
What Persons ought we to be in all Holiness and Conversation, that he may
continue his Love and Favor toward us, that he continue his Protection and
Favor toward us? for although his Mercy is, and has been very great, yet if
we triffle with such transcendent Goodness, What can we expect, but that he
should change his Smiles into Frowns, as has happened to many, who have turned
his Grace into wantonness? O let us not, like Gesserun, wax Fat, and kick
against our Maker; but rather seriously consider what he has done for this Land
and People, with all the thoughts of Humility and Gratitude, that we enjoy the
Royal Blessings, on whose Heads the Crowns flourish in Righteousness, and may
their Thrones be established, that every one sits under his Vine in peace, not
constrained or compelled to violate his Conscience, or to undergo hard-ships
upon the Score of Conscience or Religion: And the better to mind us of it, let
us look back a little into the times of Persecution, wherein the Saints of God
suffered all manner of ignominy, and torment, being hated of all Men for the
Name of Christ, despised as the Filth of the World and Dung of the Earth; yet
they continued faithful and constant, arming their Hearts with the comforts of
God's Promises in his Gospel, and were so far from repining, that they suffered
joyfully, and many run violently to flames and torments, not accepting
Deliverance, singing Triumphs, even in the Arms of Death; and when they were
called before Kings and Princes, and others of Authority, and commanded to
forsake the Truth of the everlasting Gospel, they notwithstanding continued
faithful unto Death, to gain a Crown of Life and glorious Immortality.

These Trials, I say, are not before us, we live at Peace under a Pious and
Virtuous King and Queen, who make Religion the brightest Jewels in their
Crowns, and the highest concernment of Regal Glory: We live under such Laws as
guard and secure our Religion, Lives, Liberties and Properties to us. This
might raise us to the Rapture of the Kingly Prophet, when he says, Thou Lord,
shall have both Man and Beast, how excellent are thy Mercies, O God! and the
Children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy Wings; they shall
be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy House, and thou shall give them to
drink at thy pleasure, as out of a River; for with thee is the Well of Lafe,
and in thee we shall see Light, Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9. and certainly no Eye can
perceive, nor Heart conceive, the high and sudden pleasures which God has in
store, for those that with thankful Hearts and Minds obey, and serve him; be
earnest then, in running the Race that is set before you, contend for the Prize
of an inestimable value, that may Crown you with Imortality, and Eternal Life;
and be careful to consider what the Apostle says, Gal. 6. Look what a man
sows, that shall he reap; he who sows in the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption; but he that sows in the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
everlasting Life; for God, says Holy David, Rewards every man according to
his work, Psalm. 16.12. Let us take heed to our selves therefore, that we
mistake not our way, and wander upon the dark mountains; for as the wise Man
says, Eccl. 21.10. The way of sinners is paved with stones; but at the end
thereof is Hell and Darkness, and Pains; but let us with fear and reverence
approach the Throne of that Tremendious Majesty, who makes Darkness his secret
place, and Clouds and thick Mists are round about him, yet dwells, in
unapproachable Brightness, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose
right hand, are pleasures for evermore. Great, we must confess, it is to dwell
in glittering Courts and gilded Palace, to enjoy the Smiles and Favors of a
Prince, to have Attendance, and Trains of Pomp and Grandeur, followed with
State, and even the Ensigns of Majesty cringed too, served with a kind of an
Adoration; this must raise the mind to a very high pitch, though supported with
an extraordinary virtue; but when we consider this world, and the Fashion of it
passes away, of what little moment and duration all earthly things consist,
then we must confess them of two small a value to six our hearts upon, and own
that here we have no tarrying City, but look for one above, the bright
celestial City, the new Jerusalem, there our imperfect joys will be made full
and complete, when we shall be found worthy to attend on the Throne of the King
of Kings, with Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving, and our Fellow-Courtiers shall
Seraphim, Cherubim, Archangels, Patriarchs, Apostles, Saints and Martyrs, and
all the Souls of just men made perfect. These are things worthy of our highest
contemplation, and the Stairs that lead to this Mansion, built without hands,
are Faith, Hope, Charity, Justice, Uprightness, and many other Graces and
Virtues, that ought to shine in the Soul of a good Christian, as the Stars in
the Firmament guiding him through the Wilderness of this World, that he wander
not into the Paths of error, which at the entrance appear in prospect
exceeding fair, and many times be desired, but are full of stumbling Blocks,
and paved with Ruin, to overthrow and bring to destruction, such as go astray,
and of this the Wise man gives us an Item, Prove. 28.18. Whose walks uprightly
shall be saved, but he that is preverse in his ways, shall fall at once, and
this brings me to the third consideration and exhortation, to follow the way of
virtue and uprightness.

Since the Wisdom of the Father has declared, that by him Kings Reign, and
Princes decree Justice and Judgment, we ought to look upon them as
extraordinary persons, with a distence, of respect and obedience, becoming the
highest Character upon Earth; and more immediately charged by the Almighty with
the care of the Kingdom, Nation, or People, committed to their Trust and Care;
and here we are commanded to tender to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's, Romans
13 8. And let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power
but of God; the powers that are, are ordained of God. Tit. 3.1. Whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves Damnation 1 Pet. 2.13. Put them in mind to
be subject to the principalities and powers, and to obey Magistrates, and
again, submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lord's sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him for the punishment of Evil Doers, and the praise of them that do
well.

These are the Commands of Heaven, carrying with them an undisputable
Authority, which demands our Obedience in so strict a sense, that they leave us
no place of turning to the right, or the left, and therefore our Circumspection
must be great; but a good Prince even commands the Hearts of his Subjects, and
there flows a universal concurrence in Duty and Affection, from secret Springs
of the mind; for when the Righteous are in Authority the People rejoice. A good
Man, a value and esteem inseparable from virtuous Actions, which gives Life to
those that are Influenced by him, and obliges them to Joy and Gladness, even
amidst their melancholy Thoughts: But on the contrary, as it is in the latter
part of the Verse, when the Wicked bears rule the People mourn. This is not
difficult to be proved, but rather evident, if we look upon our present
Condition for the former, and on our Neighbor Kingdom for Instances of the
latter.

I might lay down many particulars more than are already mentioned, to exhort
and persuade all to true Loyalty and Obedience, but think it, in our Case,
altogether needless in a generous Nation, whose Souls scorn any thing beneath
themselves, and hold it the blackest of all Crimes to be branded with
Ingratitude, unless by the way I should take notice of the Sons of Rome, who
are bigoted into Opinions, for which they cannot give us the least Reason,
unless they shuffle it upon a blind Obedience to their pretended spiritual
head, who sits upon his seven Hills, and sends his Foxes with Firebrands at
their Tails to inflame the World; but we find his Measures have been taken
amiss, the Snare is broken, and we are escaped; and what shall we now say, but
that our Hearts are filled with Joy and Gratitude to our Deliverer? who, when
they thrust sore at us, and we had almost fallen, upheld us, even when with
holy David, we might truly have said, If the Lord had not helped me it had
failed, but my Soul should have been put to Silence, Psalm 94.17. when on the
contrary, though in a lower degree, we may sing with Solomon, Cant. 2.10. Arise
my Love, my fair One, and come thy way; for behold Winter is past, the shower
is over, the flowers have appeared in our Land.

And now to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Power, Glory, Honor,
and Dominion, World without end. Amen.

A Prayer for the King and Queen, and preservation of the Protestant Religion.
O Lord God, Holy, and Righteous, in whose Hands are the Hearts of Kings and
Princes, we, with all humility, and low prostration, implore thy Benediction
upon Their most gracious Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, protect them
with thy Almighty Power, and give them Wisdom from above; endue them with all
Princely Graces, give them the Blessings of the right and left hand, and
inspire them with Zeal and Courage, ever to protect thy sacred Truth; make the
King a nursing Father, and the Queen a Nursing Mother to thy Church, and let
their days be as the days of Heaven. Grant O most Merciful Lord God, that the
Vine which thou have planted with thy own right hand, may prosper and flourish,
till its Branches overspread the Earth; prosper our Counselors in great
Affairs, and inspire our Senators to carry on with a fervent Zeal, whatever may
tend to thy Glory, and to the good and welfare of the Kingdom, for the sake of
our ever blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.
portraits of William and Mary in roundels


