THE Wounded-Heart; OR, The Jury -- Man's OFFENSES DECLARED, And Ingeniously
Acknowledged, For the Satisfaction of those who were thereby troubled.

By THOMAS LEADER.

Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

The Wounded-Heart, etc.
WHereas I understand that many have been troubled at what has of late past at
the Old Baily, concerning some persons called Quakers, in which Action I was an
Instrument; I do therefore, for the honor of God, and for the satisfaction of
those which are troubled, and unto my own shame, write these things following,
which I do from my whole heart desire that you would look upon as no feigned
thing, but that which does flow from the abundance of a bleeding-soul.

You have heard that I was one of the Jury upon January last past, when there
were some persons, called Quakers, to be tried for the breach of an Act of
Parliament, entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles,
and upon their Trials, brought in guilty. Now as to the breach of which Act,
you may judge that they were not guilty according to the literal meaning of it;
and your trouble, as I understand, does arise from this, That I should have a
hand in such a thing, which may be to the ruining of many poor souls, that are
(as I judge) altogether innocent; Now for your satisfaction in this case, I
judge it no less than my duty to declare to you, and the whole world, the whole
state of the Case, which is as follows: I being summoned to appear at
Justice-Hall in the Old Baily upon the Jury on the 13th of January, I did not
use that means to get off as otherwise I might, and the reason of it was this;
that much about this time twelvemonth I was summoned in the like nature, but
not impanelled, and so I thought I should not now at this time; but herein my
expectations failed me, and being mistaken upon that account, I was impanelled,
and did attend upon the business of the time for two days; but before I was on
the Jury, I did enquire whether there were any such persons to be tried as were
called Quakers? and I was then informed that there were none, and then I was
the more indifferent in the business: but upon the last day of the week I did
hear there were some such persons, as is beforementioned, to be tried; at the
hearing of which I was much troubled, and did not know what to do; and having
many reasonings in my self, I came to this conclusion, That it was not safe for
me to use means to get off; and that, first, because I was called thereunto;
also supposing I might be an Instrument of good; withal thinking that they were
not breakers of that Act, and therefore nothing could be made of it. But for me
to relate all those things that passed there, is not the business that is
necessary in this work, but only this; that when they were called to the Bar,
and the Indictment being read, which was for being at an unlawful Meeting or
Conventicle, contrary to the Lyturgie of the Church of England; and being
asked, Whether they were guilty, or not guilty? the answer that many of them
made was this; Not guilty of breaking of any righteous Law of God; others, that
they were innocent, and the like answers were given by them. The Witnesses
being called, they were asked, Whether such and such (naming of their names)
were at the Bull and Mouth? the Witnesses finding of their names in a Paper
which they had in their hands, replied, Yes, my Lord, they were there. Such
Evidence as this I thought would be strange and very slender, to bring persons
in guilty of the breach of that late Act of Parliament; for the most that any
of them did say, as to what they did there, one of the Witnesses said, That
they were there a prating. When the Witnesses had done, and the Prisoners had
leave to speak for themselves, the Judge asked them, Whether they were at the
Bull and Mouth? some of them answered, They were there: and being asked what
they did there? some answered, They were there to worship God. Then said the
Judge, It Is enough: And others said, that they were there, and met in the Fear
of God; he also replied, That Is enough. But God forbid that any Rulers or
Governors in the whole world should look upon it as a crime to worship God,
and to meet in the fear of God. When they had answered the Judge in this
manner, he told us the business was so clear that we need not go from the
place, but that we might give in our Verdict presently; and moreover, that
whereas every one of them was convicted twice before, before two Justices of
the Peace, we had no more to do, but to find whether they were there or no. But
some not being willing to make so light of a thing of such great concernment,
we did (I mean the Jury) all withdraw. When we were altogether, the Foreman of
the Jury did begin to declare his opinion in these words, That the business was
so clear we need not spend time about it, but go and carry them in guilty. This
was the opinion of many. At the hearing of which I told them, that it was not
my judgment so to do; and although the Eleven were against me, I was and must
be against such a Verdict, and my Reasons for my so saying, were these that
follow.

1. First, Because there was no witness to prove what they did there: It Is
true, one of the Witnesses said, that they were there a pating. That Law, as I
do understand, does not condemn men for being at the Bull and Mouth, neither
does it condemn men for prating there; and although they were there, and as
they said, met there in the Fear of the Lord God, yet I did not judge that it
takes hold on such that shall so do; because I judged that it was the duty of
all men, and in all places, to meet in the Fear of God.

2. A second Reason I did then urge was this, That the Act and Indictment
says, contrary to the Lyturgie of the Church of England; I told them, that for
my part I was very ignorant of the Lyturgy of the Church of England, and being
ignorant of it, could not make them guilty of the breach of a thing I knew not,
for in such a case no man is fit for a Jury-man but what is well-learned in the
Lyturgy.

3. Thirdly, Because as I told them, that the Indictment ran, for being at a
Conventicle; which I told them, That by a Conventicle, as I did understand,
(for what man can judge more than he knows) was a meeting together of some
persons for to act against the King and Government, but we could not find that
any thing was acted there tending unto any such thing.

4. Fourthly, Because (as I did understand) that that Act of Parliament (as the
Judge did inform us) was to prevent Insurrections, by meeting together under a
Pretense of Religious Exercise; but as unto these People they could not be made
guilty of the breach of that Act, because there was not any Witness to prove
that they were there upon pretense, but, as they confess, really to worship
God; or upon the account of any Insurrection; and, as far as ever I could hear,
were not the people that ever had hand in any such thing.

5. Fifthly, I minded this unto them, That the hand of God has been seen in an
extraordinary manner, by them that had of late been transported, Therefore did
advise that they would not be rash, but consider what it was that they were a
going about to do.

These Reasons I did use, as that which did satisfy me, and I thought might
have satisfied the rest of the Jury, that the Prisoners were not guilty of the
crimes charged in the Indictment: But all would not signify any thing.

Now in the consideration of these things, the Officer came and said, My Lord
has sent to know whether you are all agreed: word was sent, No. Many of the
Jury said, That they had confessed so much, therefore they could do no less than
carry them in guilty. I told them often, that I could never agree unto it. The
Officer comes again, yet we were not agreed; and goes, and comes again, and
said, My Lord has sent me for to lock you up. At this many of the Jury were
troubled, and how to help we could not tell: but at last we did begin to
consider, how far we could agree together, and about four of us came to this
conclusion, that we could carry them in thus, That they were at the Bull and
Mouth, and upon a Religious account, and no further; and no more had we, either
from the Witnesses or themselves: But here all parties were not agreed; and
about this time the Officer comes again, and said, My Lord has sent me to know
the Names of those that are not agreed. I then told him my Name, and told him
that I could not agree to the bringing of them in guilty of the Indictment. And
in this condition we were in for about two hours, about which time those that
were for not bringing of them in guilty of the Indictment, did begin to be of
another mind, and not only so, but did also use Arguments for to persuade me;
so that with what the Judge told us, That we had nothing to do but to find
whether they were there or no; and also with the Officers often coming unto us,
and about eight or nine of us that were never upon such a Jury before, and as
to my own part I underderstood but little in such things, and so being in a
great strait, and reasoning with my self and others, I was over-perswaded, and
deeply surprised, so far, as to hold my peace at the Bar, notwithstanding when
that we were a coming out of the room where we were together, I told them that
I was not agreed any further than is beforementioned, and to this some of them
are my witnesses; and the Lord of Heaven that knows all hearts, is also Witness
to the truth of this.

Now this I have to say, and do before the Lord, his People, and the whole
World, declare, That herein I was surprised, and became an Instrument of great
dishonor unto the Name of God, and a trouble unto his People; and the more I
consider of it, the more I do see the wickedness of it, and the lowness and
baseness of my own spirit, that I should be silent at such a time, and in such
a case of so great concernment, that was directly against my own understanding,
which gives me great cause of grief and sorrow of heart, and does even cause
my soul to bleed; and the Lord knows it does disturb me of my peace by day, and
of my rest by night, That God should give me a Tongue, and yet I should not
have a Heart to make use of it, in such a case, and at such a time! And it has
been often in my thoughts, that if God should deal with me as I have dealt in
this case, he might deprive me of that member; for whereas I have been a
dishonor unto God, a grief unto the Righteous, a trouble unto my own Soul, and
a means of sorrow and affliction unto many innocent Souls, for want of bearing
a Public Testimony when the Lord had put it into my hands; the consideration
of which makes my soul to cry out, O Lord God, what may be done in this case!
Sos being under this trouble and sorrow of heart, for which I may (a I have
just cause) to mourn all the days of my life, it came into my heart to write
these things following, to the end that it might be a Warning unto all men in
the like case, that when they are called unto such a work as this was, that
they may have a care how they are either persuaded against their own
understandings, (which as I conceive no mortal man will require) and also to
know when to speak, how to speak, and when to be silent.

Again, That all men may know I never consented unto any other Verdict to be
brought in against those people called Quakers, no otherwise than by my silence
at the Bar, which for the want of a good understanding in the work I was then
upon, with the Arguments used by others, and by often sending to, and
threatening withal, I was surprised and led into a snare; but yet I thank God
that it was not done with premeditation, as Judas betrayed his Master: yet I
dare not excuse my self, but say, I have sinned: and as Eve was surprised by
the subtilty of the Serpent, yet it was sinful in her, and the sin lay heavy
upon her. Peter was brought into a snare, to deny his Master, yet was not to be
excused from sin in that case. David was tempted to number the People of
Israel, yet he was not excused from sin, notwithstanding he was provoked and
tempted unto it: and indeed this instance of David has la in heavy upon me,
that as David did number the People of Israel, 2 Samuel 24.1, 10. it is said, that
David's heart smote him; and his heart smiting him, was a plain discovery that
he had not done well. Our hearts do not smite us when we do those things that
are good and right in the sight of God. And at that very time in which these
things were done, I was not without a smitten heart, and great jealousies I had
that I had not done well, and yet deprived of that reason and courage as I
ought to have had, to say those things which was really my Judgment before. I
shall not make it my business to say any thing of the faults of others, having
too much to say of my own; and because I would not be teadious nor burthensom,
I shall for the instruction of the Christian Reader, comprise what I have to
say into these following particulars.

First, as unto the frame of my own heart, before I was on the Jury, and that
was thus; I was too too confident in my self, and of my own strength and
thoughts, judging the Prisoners were not guilty of the breach of that Act; and
from that consideration concluding that I should not be an Instrument to bring
them in guilty of it; and here let me tell thee, too much of my own strength
did appear, and herein I was too much like unto Peter, when he said, that
though all men forsook Christ, yet he would not; but when he came unto the
trial, he became another man. From hence learn, That a man's own strength is his
exceeding weakness, and a man's own confidence is great foolishness. Be
therefore put in mind always to stay upon God; and observe this as a certain
Rule, That a man being given over to follow his own understanding, and to leave
the Counsel that proceeds from above, is ready to work his own ruin, and is
like unto a Lamb fed in a large place, subject to every devouring Wolf, to be
led into every temptation and snare of Satan; but the man that does make the
Lord his strength, who gives himself up to be led and guided by him, is a safe
man: for if floods of temptations arise against him, yet he has a Rock under
him. And from hence David's confidence did proceed, Psalm. 46. That as his
confidence was in God, and not in his own strength, he would not fear though
the Earth was removed. Now the end for which I write these things is, that no
man might be as I have been, too too confident in my own strength: but in all
things of concernment, little or much, every man may have his expectations from
Heaven, that he may walk surely therein. Now, from the consideration of such an
estate and condition in which I was in (as by woeful experience I speak it to my
shame) in being so confident in my own strength, does put me upon an enquiry
into the cause and reason of these things, that I should fall into such a
snare, which does indeed make me jealous of my own heart, that it has not been
so right to God as it ought, and I desire to deal plainly in this thing; time
was, that it was the rejoicing of my heart to follow the Lord whithersoever he
went, but of late it has not been so; time was that I had greater discoveries
of God's Love unto my soul, but of late I have seen to arise Mists and Clouds,
and have been as one that has lost his first Love; and indeed the sinfulness
of this wickedness is so great, that it may give great jealousies to think I am
one that i^ spued out of the mouth of God: but as to my self I am not
altogether left without hope, because I did it ignorantly. And Christ is held
forth in the Gospel not only to be a Savior from small offenses and sins, but
great sins also; not only to give Grace to restrain from them, but if any are
overtaken by them, he is an Advocate to plead their cause, and to save from the
guilt and punishment of sin, if they truly repent. These things I write, not to
encourage any in sin, but to avoid all the appearances of sin; and not to give
way unto a spiritual decay, for it will end in misery. Peter's confidence was a
forerunner of greater miseries; he denied his Lord, and what followed? Peter
went out and wept bitterly. And so I would it might be a Caution to others,
from my experience, to take heed what they do in matters of so great
concernment.

Secondly, When I was on the Jury, and the Verdict brought in, I was
exceedingly troubled in my self, yet at that time not thereby sensible wherein
I had done amiss, and that because the Judge told is, that we had no more to
do, but to find whether they were at the Bull and Mouth; and they confessing of
it, was the great thing that stopped my mouth; but as to the Indictment it
self, never otherwise persuaded but that they were not guilty: but being
ignorant of my duty in such a work, I held my peace; yet however, my ignorance
will not excuse me; my own peace has been, and is disturbed by it, and how I
may recover my self, and do good unto those that I have offended (by my so
acting) I know not: the Lord has convinced me that I have been an Instrument
of Unrighteousness in this thing, my heart has been as an Anvil for Satan to
work on, not only to imprison, but also to banish, as who knows what may
happen unto them, their wives and children, they may cry for vengeance from
Heaven; and herein I may say, as David, Its I that have sinned: and O that God
had blessed me with that happiness to have prevented me! but now it is too late
to recall the thing past, but I must bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I
have sinned against him. Which leads me to the next particular thing, To
desire others that they would sympathize with me; I do not mean in the sin, but
in the sorrow; desiring those that have an intrest in God, would improve it
upon my account, that the Guilt might be taken off from me, and that God would
satisfy me with his Love, whatsoever he should do to me upon any other
account. When Job was in trouble he called unto his Friends to assist him, Job
19.21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the Hand of
the Lord has touched me. But on the other hand, it was matter of grief unto
him, and the adding of sorrow unto sorrow, when that they had forsaken him; Job
19.14, 19. All my inward friends abhorred me, and they whom I loved are turned
against me. Therefore I desire that you would assist in the bearing of the
burden with me, and that, if it be the will of God, the Judgment which I may
look for, may be prevented, but in a special manner the Sin forgiven.

Now that which I have mor to say is, That all men might have a care, that
whenever they may be called unto any work of Concernment, especially when the
Honor of God lies at the stake, that you would look well to your hearts; and
although you may think you stand, yet to tak heed lest you fall, as I have
done, into snares and temptations, and so come to lose your peace, which is as
a precious Jewel of great price: threfore keep your hearts with all diligence;
for the neglect thereof leads into snares: Thorns and snares are in the way
of the froward, but he that keeps his soul shall be far from them. The heart
of a man is very deceitful, therefore it is time for a man to look about him,
and to have a care of his heart when he thinks himslf most confident; And God
is more honored by a man that has a low esteem of himself, than of the other.
If he be going about any thing of Concernment, he is very fearful of
dishonouring of God; he is often with God to ask counnsel, often with Friends
to take advice, and all is, because he knows but a little; He is afraid of
dishonouring God, and therefore he is very jealous over his own heart. It
pleased the Lord when he heard Solomon say, that he was but a Child, and
therefore he gave him the things he requested.

This I speak to that end that you may be advised to lean upon the Lord for
advice and counsel, which is the way to keep your eyes from tears, and your
feet from falling: but because I took not this counsel my self, I shall rather
desire to conclude; only say this, That I look upon what I have here written
to be my duty; first, to condemn my self for my silence, and that I should be
surprised in such a manner as I was; secondly, that as I have herein committed
a public Offense, so I judge it my duty to make a public Acknowledgement of
the same; and although (as it is possible) these lines may come into the hands
of men of several Opinions and Persuasions, yet that they would judge
charitably of me, that I do it not to please any man's humor, neither thereby
intend to offend any; but as I have offended through my weakness, and my soul
burdened by reason thereof, I hope they will all bear with me, considering what
the Scripture says, Prove. 18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear?

THE END.

