portrait of Innocent XI INNOCENT THE XI who held ye Pontificate 12 years 10
months and 22 days, Aged 78 years and 3 Months, Obiit Aug: 120 1689


THE LIFE AND REIGN OF INNOCENT XI.

LATE Pope of ROME.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper in Fleet Street near Temple Bar, M DC XC.

TO THE READER.
THE length of the Reign of the late Pope Innocent XI. in respect of the
greater Number of his Predecessors, and the various Transactions that have
happened in Christendom in his time, and his more than ordinary concern
therein, besides what passed more privately in the Conclave; calls for a
public and particular Account to be given thereof. This I have here endeavored
to perform, and can safely assure the Reader, that my Collections are taken out
of very good and Authentic Writings, having purposely rejected such, whose
Favor or Malice might seem to byas their Pens to vain and fabulous Relations.

I shall detain thee no longer from reading that which I hope will be more
acceptable than a long and tedious Preface, only wishing it may fully answer
thy Expectations, and the Faithful Endeavors of

Thy Servant T. L.

THE LIFE Of the Late Pope Innocent XI.
INNOCENT the XI. (whose name was Benedictus Odescalchi) was born at Como, a
City in the Dukedom of Milan in Italy, Anno 1611. his Father was called Livio,
and his Mother Paula Castella, both of Noble and Patrician Families in that
City, of Thirty thousand Crowns yearly Revenue, belonging to the House of
Odescalchi. He had his Education among the Jesuits for Grammar and Humane
Learning, and after studied the Civil and Canon Laws at Rome and Naples; and
tho he was never esteemed for a Polemical Divine, yet he had the reputation of
one that knew the World, and understood the nature of Mankind, and the art of
Government well; being withal a Man of great sincerity and honesty, very
innocent in his Life and Coversation, and discovering no inclination to side
with any Party or Faction whatsoever; because he esteemed it better to be a
general friend to all, than a particular one to some, while he must stand
exposed to the hatred and envy of others. These qualifications prepared the way
to his several Advancements, and at length raised him to the highest dignity in
the Romish Church. It is true, it has been reported of him, that he was
extremely ignorant in all the parts of Learning, and that he scarcely
understood Latin, insomuch that Cardinal Albici, who opposed his Election,
should say, in the Conclave, to those that were for promoting him, For the love
of God, let us at least have a Pope that is so Learned, that he may be able to
read the Gospel in the Mass. But the same Cardinal expressed no greater esteem
for his Judgment, for when some others in his commendation said, That he
digested things well, he scurrilously replied, That nothing could be expected
from his digestion but a -- Although the contrary has very much appeared, as will
be found in the sequel of this Discourse.

In the time of Urban the VIII. he was made one of the Prothonataries of the
Apostolic Chamber, and suddenly after President of the same: he was also made
chief Commissary for gathering the Taxes and Duties arising in the Province of
Marchio, which were laid on the People at the time of the Wars in Italy. When
this business was over, he was constituted Governor of Macerata, and the
Province thereunto adjoining. By Innocent the X. he was made one of the Clarks
of his Chamber, and in the Year 1645. by him also made Cardinal; which dignity
is conferred by the Pope only by delivery of a Paper (wherein the Names of such
as are to be promoted are written) into the Consistory of Cardinals, with these
words Habetis fratres.

The Romanists say, That St. Peter constituted a College of twenty four
Presbyters, with Authority to decide and determine matters of difficulty
arising in the Church; these in the time of Pope Sylvester the I. were called
Cardinals or Princes in the Church. Innocent the IV. at the Council of Lions
bestowed upon them the red Hat, as a mark or badge of their Dignity; anciently
these were a check upon the Pope, and a sort of a Council without whom he could
do nothing in Temporals; yet now they have quite lost that, and they have no
other share in affairs than that to which the Pope thinks fit to admit them. It
is true as to Spirituals they retain still a large share, so that in Censures
and Definitions the Pope can do nothing regularly without their concurrence;
tho some think they have not so good a Title to that as to share in the
Temporal Principality. For if the Pope derives any thing from St. Peter, all
that is singly in himself, and how else, also, can the Infallibility (so much
pretended to) rest in him? yet because there was not so much to be gotten by
acting arbitrarily in those matters, and a summary way of exercising this
Authority, might have tempted the World to have enquired too much into the
grounds on which it is built: Therefore the Popes have let the Cardinals retain
still a share in this supremacy over the Church, tho they have no claim to it
either by Divine or Ecclesiastical Warrant, further, at least, than within the
City and Diocese of Rome where they were Presbyters, if that be true of Saint
Peter's constituting such a College of them to assist him in the Government of
that Church. But as for the endowments of the Sea of Rome, to which they may
justly lay claim, as being in a manner the Chapter of that See; there is so
much to be got by this, that the Popes have engrossed it wholly to themselves
and to gratify and advance their Creatures by. However the Cardinals are great
Princes, make a considerable Figure in Rome, and respect is paid them
accordingly; and that People might do it, as they passed in the City, a Bell
used to be rung before them, that all might know them; but this has been left
off, their Purple and Equipage sufficiently notifying them.

There are three different Classes of Cardinals, viz. six entitled Cardinal
Bishops, fifty Priests, and fourteen Deacon-Cardinals.

In the Year 1631. That the Grandeur of the Apostolical Chair might be advanced
Pope Urban VIII. bestowed the title of Eminence upon them, and it was entered
into the Records of the Congregation of Ceremonies, That they should be styled
Most Eminent and most Reverend.

But to return to our Cardinal; He had presently the Deaconry of the Saints
Cosma and Damianus bestowed upon him; and taking Priests Orders, he had the
title conferred upon him of St. Onuphrius, and by Innocent X. sent Legate to
Ferrara, wherein he acquitted himself with honor, and was made Bishop of
Noverase, where he resided for some years, but afterward removed through
dislike of the Air. And being at Rome he was employed in many affairs of the
Church, and appointed to serve in diverse Congregations of Cardinals, and made
Protector of several Colleges and Monasteries; in all he behaved himself with
singular prudence, modesty and virtue, which with the Endowments before
mentioned were good Ingredients to capacitate him for the Papal Chair, to which
(as we shall show) he was Elected the 21st of September 1676. and was Crowned
with the usual Ceremonies on the 4th of October following.

But before we come to show his Election, it will not be impertinent to set
forth the manner of Electing Popes, being a thing in it self not only worth the
Reading, but also relating so nearly to this History that it might seem
imperfect without it.

Popes were anciently chosen by the Nobility, Clergy and People of Rome, tho
the Book of Sacred Ceremonies used in the Church of Rome tells us, That Saint
Peter named Clemens to be his Successor, if it seemed good to the Senators,
that is, the Presbyters, who were twenty four, appointed by Saint Peter before
his death, to determine matters of difficulty in the Church, and that they
chose Linus, whereby it might appear that Popes had not right to Elect their
Successors; that afterward, Schisms and Dissentions arising among the Senators,
the Clergy and People of Rome were present at the Elections, but had no voice;
and that after this the force and violence of the People was such, that they
would have a Voice, and joined in their Votes. This popular way of Election,
caused such heats and disturbances, that the Emperors were constrained, for
keeping the Peace, to interpose by their Authority, and ordered that no
Election should stand good, until it was confirmed by the Imperial approbation.
Charles the great assumed the Power of Electing, or, which is all one, of
confirming of Popes.

The truth is, as the Power was, sometimes the Emperors made Popes, and
sometimes the Popes made Emperors.

Some Emperors, after Charles 's time, transferred the Election wholly to the
Roman Presbyters, Clergy and the People; which the Romans would have to be done
out of Piety, because the Pope was to be a Shepherd to the Emperor.

This popular manner of Election produced Parties, Schisms and Contentions,
which often ended with blood, so that there was scarce a regular Election for
some years; the strongest possessing the Chair till he was undermined by
another, so that there were often two or three Popes at one time, and a great
many in a few years, until Nicholas II. Anno 1051. to prevent the Confusion
which happened at every Popes death, did establish a Law, that the Elections
should wholly rest in the Cardinals, which Law or Canon was since confirmed by
Popes and Councils. And as a rule to be observed herein, Alexander III.
instituted at a general Council, that he only should be esteemed to be
Canonically Elected, who was chosen by at least two thirds of the College of
Cardinals.

This Power of Election has ever since rested in the Cardinals, who appoint
Octaves for solemnizing the Funeral of the deceased Pope, and have on the ninth
or tenth day after entered the Conclave to proceed to a new Election.

The Conclave is held in the Vatican Palace, where, in a long Gallery, are
erected small Apartments or Cells, made of Boards covered with Purple Cloth,
for every Cardinal, whereby they may have convenient conference one with
another. It has been endeavored in a hot season (because the Vatican is ill
air) to Elect in another place, but none was found convenient. Each Cardinal
has two Servants, and no more, to attend him, which are called his
Conclavists, unless in case of sickness or infirmity, and then three may be
admitted.

The Cardinals being entered, the Conclave is strictly guarded by the City
Militia, to hinder all commerce or intercourse by Letters from without. The
Gallery is also very closely watched, being kept by a Master of the Ceremonies,
who inspects their Meat, lest any Letters be conveyed with it. According to
this first Institution, for the first three days the Cardinals have free use of
diverse dishes of Meat; whilst they are eating or doing any thing else in their
Cells, the outward Curtains are to be open, and undrawn, unless in the Night
when they sleep, or at other time repose themselves, and then great care is
taken that no noise or disturbance be given.

It has been customary of late years for the Cardinals to premise certain
particular Points, or Articles, necessary for the Government of the Church,
which are subscribed by the whole Community, and every one takes an Oath to
observe them, in case he should prove to be the person chosen, and promoted to
the Pontifical Dignity. After which matters are performed they proceed to an
Election.

There have been three ways used in the Election. 1. By Scrutiny. 2. By Access.
3. By Adoration. The Scrutiny is, When every Person writes in a Schroll of
Paper, the Name of that Person whom he gives his Voice for, folding it into
five several Pages or Colums; on the first of which he writes these words, Ego
eligo in summun Pontificem Reverendissimum Dominum meum Cardinalem -- which is
written by the hand of the Conclavist, that the Cardinal may not be discovered
by his own writing. On this Fold two others are doubled down, and some Wax
dropped thereon, and sealed with some private Seal, made for that purpose. On
the Fourth, the Cardinal writes his own Name, and covers the same with the
Fifth Folding. Then all the Cardinals sitting in their order on Benches in the
Chapel, with the Schrolls they have prepared in their Hands, take their turns
to ascend to the Altar, before which a Table is placed, covered with a Purple
Cloth, and a Chalice with a Patina, or Plate set thereon; on the right side of
which sits the first Cardinal Bishop; and on the left, the first Cardinal
Deacon; then every one kneeling makes a short Praver, and arising, puts his
Schroll into the Chalice; which being done, and all the Cardinals returned to
their Places; the first Cardinal Bishop takes the Chalice with his Right Hand,
and turns out all the Schrolls upon the Patina, or Plate, which he holds in his
Left Hand; then setting the Chalice again on the Altar, he takes the Schroll
which comes first to hand, and gives it to the Deacon Cardinal, who reads it
with an audible Voice, the Cardinals noting with their Pen and Ink, or
Table Book, how many Voices every Person has; and the Papers being read, the
Master of the Ceremonies comes in with a Pan of Coals, and burns all the Papers
or Schrolls, so that no Man is known for whom he gave his Vote. In case any
Person has gained two thirds of the number there present, then the Election is
good, and he is presently declared Pope; and this way is most commonly
practiced in the choice of Popes. When by reason no one has two thirds, the
Election is not determined, its then tried by Access in this manner: All the
Cardinals sitting in their Places, one arises and goes to the Cardinal he would
have elected, and says, Ego accedo ad reverendissimum Dominum meum -- and so
all the rest, the which is noted by the Cardinals, both the Names of those that
made the Access, and the Persons to whom. If two thirds agree in their Access
to one Person, then the Election is determined; if not, then the next day they
proceed again to Scrutiny, for it cannot be made twice in one day.

The third way, by Adoration, is almost like that of Access: The Cardinal
approaching him whom he desires to have created Pope with a profound Reverence
and low Obeisance: But both the Access and Adoration are to be proved, if they
hit, and confirmed by the Scrutiny, wherein they often differ from what they
did by the former, and so make it Null.

There was anciently another way of Election, which was called Compromise; and
it was when the Divisions were high, and scarce determinable by the Conclave,
that then the Cardinals with common consent referred all their Votes to the
choice of three or five Cardinals, giving them Power to elect any Person, whom
all or the Major part should choose, obliging themselves to rest satisfied with
the Choice made by them, provided, That their Election were concluded while a
Candle did last burning; and if Election were made in that time, the Person so
chosen was acknowledged Pope by all the rest; but in the choice of
Commissioners, every Cardinal must agree.

There is another way of Election, called by Inspiration, that is, When the
Cardinals are assembled in the Chapter, and every one has taken his Place
according to his Degree and Order: Then the first Bishop Arises, and in a short
Speech exhorts the Fathers to provide such a Person for Government of the
Church, as by his Wisdom and Sanctity may be capable to sustain so great a
burden. Then he demands of them the manner by which they intend to proceed,
whether by Compromise or Scrutiny; telling them, if his Opinion or Vote might
prevail, he would choose no other than -- and accordingly did elect him for
Supreme Bishop, and Head of the Universal Church. If all then present, without
one opposing, did agree, this was looked on as by Inspiration, and he was then
without further Trouble or Scrutiny canonically Elected, which was anciently
frequently practiced.

The Pope being legally chosen by any of the foregoing Methods, he is conducted
into the Sacristia, or Vestry; where, being disrobed by the Cardinal Deacons of
his own Habit, he is clothed in his Pontificalibus, or Papal Vestments; and
being thence brought forth, with his Mitre on his Head, adorned with Gold and
Jewels into the Chapel, is Seated on the Altar; where the Cardinals perform
the Ceremony of Adoration to him, every one in his Order, kissing his Feet,
Hands and Mouth.

While these Ceremonies are performing, all the Doors and Gates of the Conclave
are opened; at which a multitude of People appearing, the Pope shows himself,
and blesses them. And then the first Cardinal Deacon proclaims with a loud
voice these words to the People, Annuntio vobis gaudium magnum, Papam habemus:
Reverendissimus Dominus Cardinalis -- Elect us est in Summum Pontificem, and
elegit sibi nomen -- This being said, the Pope descends into St. Peter's
Church, the Cardinals leading the way with a Cross born before them; and going
directly to the High Altar, he takes off his Mitre, kneels and prays a while,
and then returns Thanks to God, and the Blessed Apostles; and rising, seats
himself on the Altar; and the first Bishop kneels and sings Te Deum. And then
again the Cardinals perform the Act of Adoration as before, which, with the
short Office for that Solemnity being finished, the Pope again blesses the
People; and in the same Order they return to his Apartment, where he takes his
Repose, and the Cardinals go to their respective Lodgings.

The Pope ever since Sergius's time (who was the first that did it) Anno 843.
change their Baptismal Name for such other as likes them best. This Sergius's
Name was Bocca di Porco, or Hog-snout, which for shame he changed; and so it
has continued ever since, unless some few that would not do it. Others give a
more favorable Account, viz. That his Name was Peter, and out of his profound
respect to that great Apostle, he would not bear his Name in the Chair.

Generally there are great Intriegues and Divisions about the Elections of
Popes, partly occasioned by the endeavors that Great Princes use to have one
of their Friends or Favorites set up; and partly through the aspiring of the
Cardinals unto the Chair, where they are not only great themselves, but seldom
sail (though their Reign be short) to raise their Families exceedingly; so that
many of the great Houses in Italy are beholden for their Fortunes to the Favor
and Bounty of the Bishops of Rome, who did originally advance them to such
Places of Trust and Employments, whereby they gained that State and Dignity
they, or their Posterities now enjoy; and considering how short a time they may
have to make their Fortunes, which generally depends on the uncertainty of an
Old Man's Life, the People are heavily oppressed, all Preferments bestowed upon
them that will give most, and the Welfare of the Commonweal lightly regarded;
so that the People are become extremely miserable that live in the Pope's
Dominions.

It is time now to return to the principal Subject of this short History.

Clement X. having breathed his last, Altieri the Cardinal Chamberlain gave
Notice thereof to the Chief Officers of the Household; whereupon all the
Prelates and Grooms of the Bedchamber in decent and mourning Habits repair to
the Palace of Monte Cavallo, and found their late Master laid upon a Pallet,
covered with Crimson Velvet: In their Presence Altieri, whose Office it was to
do it, brake the Sigillum Piscatorium, or the Pope's Seal in pieces, which is
presently done, to prevent the use of it after his Death. The Notaries of the
Camera took an Inventory of the Goods found in the Palace, which remain to his
Successor; and therefore when a Pope draws near his end, his Relations carry
away and possess themselves of what they can, during his Life.

The Body of the Pope was then delivered to those who were to embalm it; and
then the Bell of the Capitol was rung out, that the City might all be assured
of his Death.

During the time that the Funeral Obsequies were Solemnizing, the Cardinals
began to work in forming Parties against the Election. The Second of August
several Cardinals assembled in St. Peter's, and two by two in grave Order, in
form of Procession, entered the Conclave; more coming in next day, they make up
the number of Fifty Two; and on the Third of August the Conclave was shut, and
Guards set by the Marshal of the Conclave. On the Fourth the Mass of Veni
Creator was sung, and the Cardinals began the choice by way of Scrutiny.

The Persons nominated were Vidone, Barberigo, Odescalchi, Spinola, and Cerri,
wherein appeared near an equality of Votes; Odescalchi had Eleven, but
proceeding toward the Evening by way of Access, Seven only drew unto him.

On the Sixth day a second Scrutiny being made, Corsini had 27 Votes, and at
the Access in the Evening 14 only appeared for him: However Chigi, who managed
it for him, did not doubt of carrying it, till Cardinal Nitardo, Ambassador for
Spain, opposing it, drew off the Spanish Party, and the Grand Duke of Corsini's
Faction followed.

Chigi then endeavors to gain the French Party, but was countermined by
Altieri, and the Flying Squadron; things appearing thus, a Party of Cardinals
united, being called the New Squadron, who pretended Zeal for the Church, and
to be solely moved by a Principle of Piety to promote one eminent for Learning
and Wisdom, without regard to Secular Interest. Cardinal Pravina was a chief
among these, and at his first entrance into the Conclave had fixed upon our
Odescalchi, for whom he used all his Endeavors, and would not be drawn off;
and Scrutiny being again made, he had so wrought, that 36 Voices were in his
Favor, enough to secure the Election; insomuch that it was given out, That the
Election was made, and People came flocking to the Gates; so that the Guards
were doubled to keep off the Crowd, who pressed into the Precincts of the
Conclave. Yet at the Access some fell off; for Altieri and Chigi labored
underhand, seducing some in hopes of being preferred: The Spaniards also were
willing (on further consideration) to spin out the time of giving a final
dermination, expecting to hear from the Court of Spain.

The French Cardinals were chiefly for Rospigliosi; but in case his Interest
should fail, they approved best of Odescalchi; who, though he were a Subject of
Spain, yet his Virtues and sincere Intentions reconciled him to well-meaning
Men, and made others shy of opposing him, unless they could carry it as their
respective Interests lead them, which none else could form a Party to do;
because the New Squadron (who were firm to him) were 16 in number, and with
their Adherents could always make above a third part, which was enough to
prevent any other of his Complement, though they could not carry it themselves.

Barberin and Chigi had a Negotiation for Jachenetti, that balanced the New
Squadron, and were probable to succeed; for on Scrutiny he had 22 Votes; but on
Access in the Evening, 11 only: Whereupon the New Squdron renewed the Scrutiny,
and found 29 in their Candidate's favor. By these several Scrutinies it
appeared the Conclave were inclined most to Odescalchi, which again occasioned
a rumor in the Town, That he was chosen; and the other Parties finding they
could not prevail, were likely to join; and indeed the Conclave had then
proceeded to have completed the Choice, and by Accession created him Pope, had
not the Cardinal d' Estree suspended the Proceedings by a Request made, That
their Eminences would for some time suspend their final determination, until
the Arrival of some French Cardinals, who, by that Kings Order, were on their
Journey toward the Conclave; which, he said, was not to hinder the choice of
so worthy a Person, for whom he also concurred, but that his Christian Majesty
might have opportunity thereby to join with them in so sacred an Election, by
the consent and approbation which he was ready to yield unto.

The Conclave in the mean time would be practicing, and set up others; every
one being willing to leave no stone unturned that might any wise conduce to
advance one to the Chair, that they proposed to themselves Interest in, or at
least to gain it by being the Instruments for their Advancement. Azzolino
promoted Conti, whose Interest being small, he with Chigi, the Spanish Party,
and the Great Dukes, sets up Piccolomini; and to allure Altieri, engaged to
advance his Friend Bichi to be Cardinal Nephew; but Altieri had other designs;
Chigi failing herein, sets up Spinola, but no more than 7 Votes could be
procured in his Favor on the Scrutiny. Then some proposed Crescentio; but the
Duke d' Estree, Ambassador for the French King, esteemed him an Enemy to
France, whereby that Party was too great for his Promoters: Then on a new
Scruti Odescalchi had 14 Voices, Carpegna 7. Alberici 9. Gastaldi 9. Albici 5.
and Crescentio 3.

After this manner diverse designs and Intreagues were working, till the arrival
of the four French Cardinals, which was the 13th of August, and then a speedy
Election was expected; but those hopes were soon blasted; for still they were
embroiled, and Arbritio by the dextrous management of Altieri and others, was
in a fair way; but the several designs of others were enough to oppose any one,
that still they thwarted, and no one party could gain his Complement.

On September 1. the French Cardinals entered the Conclave, with a great train
and concourse of People after them, crying out for a speedy Election, and
naming Rospigliosi and Odescalchi. And the French Party seemed to incline to
the later. But their King being greater in the Conclave, as well as in other
Princes Councils, they would not join a sufficient number to conclude the
matter, until they had his approb^tion; and an express is sent with their
Informations, and for Instructions; and so still the time was delayed, and the
Cardinals began to quarrel among themselves on slight matters, since they could
not carry their designs in the greater, nor so well vent their Gaul about it.
Colonna and Maldachino could not refrain giving one another such reproachful
Words, as Fool and Beast, upon a small account; but with others concerned in
it, grew a contest between Buglion and Howard, for that the former had not
returned a Visit that the latter had made him. Buglion, to excuse himself,
frankly told him, That it was the King's express Command not to acknowledge the
Cardinals of the last promotion. Howard would not allow his Excuse, alleging
diverse particular respects that the French King had made him, and caused him to
be treated in all parts of France, as he passed through it from London to Rome
as a Cardinal; and now the others of the same promotion join him; but the
French opposing, the Conclave feared that disorder and confusion would ensue,
and therefore procured the French Cardinals to subscribe a Letter to their
King, beseeching him to give Orders to his Ambassador and Cardinals to visit
and own those Cardinals of Clement the Tenth's Promotion, which otherwise might
cause a Schism, and many Inconveniences to the whole Conclave, to the
disturbance of the present affair, until Answers were returned to the
Dispatches. Such an Ascendent had this Monarch (though at such distance) over
this great Council, that though they pretend to the Conduct of God's good
Spirit, and sing the Veni Creator, yet the Spirit of France must direct them,
that they would not join in an Election till they heard thence; which, though
by making Parties they could somewhat obstruct, yet they could not prevail for
any other, and in diverse Scrutinies it was always most favorable for our
Odescalchi; and though they must waste time for his Answers, yet they could not
be free from Trials of Skill, and made several Scrutinies in favor of Massini,
Cerri, Jachinetti, and others, in which, though there was fervor and ardency in
the interested Persons, yet the favor of the whole Conclave was faint and
insignificant; so that for a long time many paid reverence and respect to
Odescalchi, as the only man who was likely to carry it.

The Courier returned from France on the 19th of September; on the 20th the
Ambassador was introduced into the Conclave, who presented his Majesty's
Letters, and in an eloquent Speech represented the necessity of a speedy
Election, (though the delays had been procured by him) the present concern of
Christendom, not bearing the inconvenience of an Interregnum, or a Vacancy in
that Government: That they had an ample Field for their Election, the College
of Cardinals consisting of so many virtuous Persons, all fit to Reign. Yet
considering the Vicar of Christ ought to transcend in all the Virtues and
Graces of Religion, to be such an one as would reform the Abuses and
Corruptions, which to the Scandal of the Christian Church, were crept into the
Court of Rome; if there was any one that did excel others for a public Spirit,
sincere, and disinterested, he ought to be the Man, and did (though without
naming) decipher the very Person of Odescalchi. And having praised and
applauded Barberino, and giving God thanks for the great Piety and Zeal of that
Man, he retired, leaving the Conclave to their Election, after he had delivered
forth the Inspiration from France, which the Major part received, and therefore
now there was no difficulty to be expected.

That Evening a great number of Cardinals went to the Cell of Odescalchi, and
gave him the kiss of Covenant, who with Tears in his Eyes desired them to find
a Subject more fit, and able to bear such a Load and Burden of so great weight,
and showed some unwillingness and reluctance; but being overcome by Arguments
and Entreaties, he consented, on condition, they would assent unto, and
subscribe certain Articles for reformation of Ecclesiastical Government, which
he then proposed to them; which the Cardinals approving, a great part
Subscribed it that Night, and swore to maintain them, as did the others in like
manner the day following.

By this time Alticri, (who had all along been the Intreaguing Man) finding it
was a folly to contend any longer, became the forwardest of any to make the
Scrutiny, and had Nineteen of his Creatures to follow him. The Choice was
therefore immediately determined by Access; and on the 21st of September, 1676.
the whole Conclave, with one Voice and Mind, declared Odescalehi to be the Pope
of Rome, and the Vicar of Christ, and the true and undoubted Successor of St.
Peter. And then the Dean of the College, according to his Duty, lead the way to
Adoration, and the other Cardinals followed, according to their Places and
Seniority.

He was next vested in his Pontificalibus, and took the name of Innocent XI. in
remembrance of his Benefactor Innocent X. (as some others have used to do,
bestowing likewise their Cap on some relation to such their Benefactor). Then
he was conducted to the Chapel with the usual Ceremonies, and at the Altar
received the second time Adoration. After which the Master of the Ceremonies
demanded, Whether it were his Holiness's pleasure, that the Nobility attending
without, desirous to kis his Feet, should be admitted in, to pay that duty and
devotion which they owed to Saint Peter? which being granted, the Queen of
Sweden was first introduced to pay her devoir; and then the Ambassadors of the
Crowned Heads, and after them the Princes, Prelates and Nobles, who kissed his
Feet, testified their great joy for so worthy a Man's being advanced to the
Papal Chair.

After which a door was opened over the great Porch of Saint Peter's Church,
into which the Master of the Ceremonies led the way, carrying a Cross before
the new Pope and Cardinals, which the People (tho at great distance)
reverenced, and the Cardinal Deacon, presenting the Pope before them,
pronounced with a strong voice the accustomed words, Annuntio vobis gaudium
magnum: habemus Pontificem Eminentissimum and Reverendissimum Dominum,
Cardinalem Benedictum Odescalchum, qui sibi nomen imposuit Innocentii XI.

Great Joy the City expressed on this Popes advancement, and demonmonstrated it
by ringing Bells, firing Cannon, vollies of Small shot, Drums and Trumpets; and
the Soldiers seized the Coach, Horses, and Coach-mans Cloak as their Fees. The
Popes resentment during the Ceremonies, and singing Te Deum, was rather
Pensiveness and Mortification than Joy or Loftiness, which many of his
Predecessors could not conceal, and it was observed that he blessed and crossed
the People with tears in his Eyes.

He was Elected the twenty first of September 1676. and Crowned the fourth of
October following, with the usual Ceremonies; and as you had an account of the
manner of Elections, it will not be amiss here to lay down the form and manner
of the Coronation of Popes.

The whole Ceremony takes up a days time, and for refreshment (the better to
support the labor and toil) in the midst of the day the Cardinals take a short
repose, and it is but necessary, considering their years, most being aged
Persons, and sometimes it happens in a hot season; it is remembered of one Pope,
that the toil thereof cost him his life.

It would be tedious to set down or read every particular Ceremony, I shall
therefore only give a summary account, yet omitting nothing that is material.

In the Morning early the Pope goes from his Bed chamber into the Chamber
called Papagalli, where he is clothed by the Cardinal-Deacons, Sub Deacons, and
other Officers, with a white Cassock girt about with a long Girdle: Over it he
wears his Stole and Pluvial, or a robe of a Scarlet color, with a rich Mitre
on his head, set with many precious Stones In this Habit, having the train of
his Robes carried up by the Emperor* or some King then present, or in their
absence by one of the chiesest, Princes attending at the Ceremony; a Canopy of
State over his Head supported by Eight Ambassadors or Nobles, and the Cardinals
in their Habits walking before with a Cross for their Banner, they orderly
proceed to Saint Peter's Church: where being entered, and having laid aside his
Mitre, and prayed a while, he arises and goes into the Chapel of Saint
Gregory, by some called Saint Andrew, and being sat in a Chair placed there for
that purpose; he receives all the Cardinals with their Caps on their Heads to
kiss his Hand, and other Prelates his Feet: Then the Pope arising stands up and
blesses the People. After which the Subdeacon reads the Epistle, and all the
rest of the Office for the Coronation, which being performed, the Pope vests
himself with the Pontifical habit, according to the method prescribed in this
case. By ancient constitution it belonged only to the Bishop of Hostea to
Consecrate the Pope; of late years the first Cardinal Bishop performs that
function: in Consecrating a Pope, he is anointed with Oil on his Head, and the
Palms of his Hands; his Consecration is not always the day of his Coronation.
This Preludium being over, and the Pope himself having celebrated Mass, he goes
to the stairs ascending to the Altar of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, where a
Throne is erected for him, on which being seated, and encompassed by his
Prelates, and the People ordered to keep distance; the Dean-Cardinal takes the
Mitre off the Popes Head, and places it on the left Hand, and having the
Triple-Crown ready, he sets that on his Head, the People crying out Lord have
mercy upon us.

Then the Dean publishes the Pardons and Indulgences which the Pope grants
them, proclaiming them on the right Hand in Latin, on the left in the vulgar
Language; So the People pray and the Pope answers them.

The Pope and his Cardinals then go and dine at the Palace of the
Arch-Presbyters of Saint Peter's, and the other Prelates at the Houses of the
Canons. After Dinner, the Cardinals mount their Mules, and the Pope his Horse,
and march in solemn Procession to the Lateran, attended with a very great Train
of the Nobles and Officers in due rank and order; the Pope being alighted, is
met by the chief Canon of the Church, who offers the Cross to be kissed by him,
which the Dean-Cardinal taking from his Hands, holds to the Popes Mouth: Then
they take the Triple Crown from off his Head, for the burden of it, (consisting
of Gold and Jewels) is too heavy for an old Man to bear long, and deliver it to
the custody of the Auditor of the Rota, and the Mitre is again placed on the
Popes Head: Then he is conducted to the Seeds Stercoraria, on which he seems
rather to lie then to sit, from which he is honorably raised by the Cardinals,
and this Hymn is sung. He has put down the mighty from their seats, and has
exalted the humble and meek; (tho some have been the proudest Men in their
Age.) He has raised the needy from the dust, that he may set him among the
Princes of his People: tho he were never so rich a Prince before.

After this several short Ceremonies are performed, and Adoration again paid by
the Cardinals and Prelates; and by this it is Evening and the Pope returns to
his Palace of Monte Cavallo; commonly, sufficiently tired with the Fatigues of
the Day.

The buisness the French Cardinals came for being over, they prepare for their
return; and if the French King had then known how this Pope would have acted,
they would have had no thanks for their labor, as will sufficiently appear in
the sequel of this History. But to make all fair with the Court of Rome, before
their (...), they (by the Kings Order) paid their Visits to the Cardin^^ (...)
the last Promotion, and so a good Correspondence was renewe^ established.

The Pope no sooner (...) upon the affairs of Government, but he cast in his
thoughts how to (...) a Reformation of several abuses and grievous Corruptions
that (...) both in the Court and Church of Rome: For the later the Power (...)
Interest of the Traffiking Religious, whose chief gain lies in the ^^rruptions
of the Christian Religion, he had little hopes of doing (...) in it, at least
wise at his first entrance, and if ever he could it must (...) gradually
effected: But as to his Court, that lay in his own Pow^^, and therefore in the
first place he declares against Nepotism, and ^^used to receive his Nephew Don
Livio into any part of the Government, forbidding him to receive or return
Visits under the notion of Nephew to the Pope. Had a Pope a mind to flatter or
gain upon the Clergy and People of Rome, he could not have pitched upon one
thing so much to oblige them: For these Nephews having the management of the
affairs, bestowed all Benefices, Offices, etc. on them that bid most,
exercising a Tyrannical Power over great and small, rich and poor, for the
agrandizing themselves and heaping up riches for their posterities; tho for
that end they also exhausted the Treasure of the Apostolical Chamber, without
any regard to the Weal-publick, or the oppression of the People, or damage the
Church sustained. But it was hoped this Pope did it in sincerity, which made it
the more grateful. And that his Nephew might not complain of the severity of
his Uncle, and look upon himself more unfortunate than any had been, who were
so nearly allied to the Papal Chair, he relinquished unto him, in present, all
his Temporal Estate, amounting unto thirty thousand Crowns of yearly Revenue.

He was not satisfied in denying himself that in which his Predecessors were
extremely solicitous, I mean their advancing their Kindred and Nephews, (many
of their Families being still known by the Princes they advanced) but to
continue it to Posterity, he drew up a Bull perpetually to abrogate Nepotism,
which yet he could never procure the Conclave to pass, tho it has been long
experienced to be grossly scandalous among them; so hard a matter it is to
reform Rome, so that he has only left his Example and Endeavors herein to be
admired by Posterity. I have here inserted it in English as follows,

The Minutes or preparation of a Bull which our most holy Father Innocent XI.
was about making, for the moderating some abuses in the Apostolic See.
Innocent Pope, Servant of the Servants of God, for a perpetual memory hereof.

HAving often considered in our mind, that the holy Synod of Trent, treading in
the steps of the holy Fathers, does altogether forbid, that any one should
study to enrich their Relations or Friends, out of the Revenues of the Church;
and does admonish them as much as may be, that they absolutely lay aside all
worldly affections to Brothers, Nephews, and other of their kindred, which has
occasioned many mischiefs in the Church. And the same holy Synod decreeing,
That these things which are spoken in relation to Bishops, ought to be observed
not only by all having Ecclesiastical Benefices, as well Secular as Regular,
but even by the Cardinals of the Church of Rome themselves, who being of
Council to the Pope, for the administration of the affairs of the Universal
Church, ought above all to excel in those eminent virtues, and regularity of
living, which may deservedly turn the Eyes of all upon them: But the reason
holding much stronger, that the Pope himself who is placed by the most High in
his House, as a shining light on a Candlestick, should keep the wholesome
Constitutions of the Fathers, in such manner as to provoke by his Example all
other Prelates to the observing of them.

Having seriously considered these things, among the manifold and weighty cares
of our Pastoral Charge, which (as far as our frailty permits) we daily sustain
for the Church, in order to the Salvation of Souls, and the promoting the Works
of Piety: We have observed this wholesome discipline, established by the Fathers,
all along from the beginning of our Popedom, and with the Lords help shall
observe it as long as we live. But to declare to our Successors what we think
unlawful, we have forever firmly Decreed, to establish the same Discipline in
this holy See, from which Bishops and other Prelates of Churches ought to take
Examples of Truth; being partly led to it by the present Exigencies and
narrowness of the Pontifical Treasury, which we do not doubt but is
sufficiently known to our Brethren.

Therefore for the glory of Almighty God, the honor of this Apostolical See,
and the good example of Prelates and Governors in the Church, and also that the
Apostolical Chamber may have no damage. We do for ever Establish and Decree,
That it shall not be lawful, neither for Us, nor for any of our Successors,
Popes of Rome, by any manner of pretext or color, directly, or indirectly, or
by any sort of Title of Bounty or Free-Gift, or for Gain and Advantage in
whole, or in part, to dispose of Moneys, Places of the Montes, void or not
void, set to Sale, and disposed of in consideration of their Price, or any
manner of Rights that do any ways belong to the Apostolical See and Chamber, in
favor of Brothers, Nephews, or others related by Blood or Marriage, or the
intimate Acquaintance or Favorites, as well of Our Self, as of every Roman
Bishop Our Successor for the time being respectively; and likewise that nothing
of this shall be done in favor of those that may be any ways made choice of,
and taken into the Family of any Pope in the room of Nephews, or other near
Relations.

Moreover We Decree, That it shall not be lawful neither for Us, nor for any of
the Popes of Rome Our Successors by Apostolical Grant to enrich Brothers,
Nephews, and Relations by Blood or Marriage, or any that may be received, or
chosen in their place, or Favorites aforesaid, with Churches, Monasteries, or
any other Benefices or Pensions, of what kind or quality soever; nor with any
manner of Ecclesiastical Incoms, Fruits, Revenues, Perquisites, Rights or
Profits beyond the merits of any one of them, and the decent maintenance of
that Dignity they obtain in the Church; that so a due moderation, and the Rules
of distributive Justice being in all things observed, there may be no occasion
of complaining or cavilling left to any one, but the Ecclesiastical Revenue may
be distributed to those that labor in the Church of God, according to every
ones merit. But if the aforesaid Brothers, Nephews, and other Relations by
Blood or Marriage, or those that are chosen and received in their Place, should
fall into want, the Pope for the time being, in his tender concern, may relieve
their Poverty out of the Revenues of the Sea and Chamber aforesaid, in the same
manner as he relieves poor Strangers out of the Goods of the Church, which are
God's; but so as the Goods of the Sea and Chamber may not be bestowed on those,
or havock't or imbezel'd for the sake of those. But if (which God forbid) the
measure of kindness equally here, and wholsomly prescribed, should be exceeded
toward Brothers, Nephews, and other Relations by Blood or Marriage, and
Favorites, the Bishops of Rome successively may and ought, either at the
Instance of any one, or by their own proper motion, to take away those things
that were unduly obtained from them, and to revoke and annul what is given or
freely granted in the way abovementioned; and herein must be no place for
ill will or favor, but all things must be reduced to the rule of Apostolical
Equity, besides other Punishments, which may be inflicted at the Will of the
Pope. And that as little damage as is possible may accrue to the Apostolical
Chamber, We do suppress and abolish the Office of General of the Roman Church,
and the Stipend or Emolument of the Superintendent of the State of the Church,
and also of the Government of the City Beneventum, which was used to be paid by
the said Chamber; adhering in this both to the sense of the College of
Cardinals our Brethren, in a late Conclave, wherein We, by the Grace of God,
were raised to the Popedom; and also by a Secret Decree, made by Us in Our
Consistory, the 16th of December, 1676. And do We also Establish and Decree,
That other Military Offices, which have been estimated according to the changes
of the times, and as we at this present do estimate them, shall not be bestowed
with a Salary or Stipend.

And that all things as is aforesaid may for ever remain in their full
strength, We will and command, That as all and singular the Cardinals present
have promised and sworn, as much as in them lies, to observe this Bull, and
never to withstand it, nor to consent to any Pope's acting against it; so
likewise that this shall be done by the Cardinals now absent from the
Consistory and Court of Rome, whenever they shall repair to the said Court,
and shall be promised and sworn to by all future Cardinals when they receive
the Hat; and this Oath shall be added to that which is taken of course by all
the Cardinals. And we Decree, That those that do otherwise, shall thereby incur
the pain of Perjury, and perpetual Infamy Juris and Facti. Moreover We Decree
and Ordain, the Cardinals, in the Vacancy of the Apostolical See, promise by
Oath the Observation of the Bull of Pius V. of happy memory, our Predecessor,
De non infoedandis, etc. and of Sixtus V. concerning the aforesaid Moneys,
reposited in the Castle of St. Angelo; and likewise the Constitutions of other
Roman Bishops our Predecessors. So every one that shall be Elected Pope, after
he is elected to the Papl Dignity, shall promise and swear inviolably to
observe this our present Bull, according to the express form and tenor of the
aforesaid Bull of Sixtus V. our Predecessor, in the 11th Section.

And We will, that these Our Letters be drawn into a Libel, and added to the
aforesaid Decrees of Pius and Sixtus V. etc. for Entry and Publishing, etc.

But since Princes are not able to undergo the Burden of Government, without
Officers and assistants, and that as these are, so must they expect the eyents
of their Governments: This Pope without any respect to his own Relations, chose
such as he thought were Men of Sincerity, and adequate to the Employments he
entrusted them with. In the first place he made Cardinal Cibo his Secretary of
State, being a person endued with a great and generous Soul, a clear
Understanding, Zealous for the welfare of the Church, and dexterous in the
management of Public affairs. The Family of the Altieri having before enjoyed
it, he continued in their Military Employments, as he did the other Officers.
But since they were at Peace with all the World, for ease of the Chamber (much
indebted) he caused the Officers of the Papal Army to satisfy themselves with
the honor thereof without pay. Yet intending to do such things that would
render himself obnoxious to ill Men, he increased his number of Archers;
wherein he took all the care he could to have such Men listed as were discreet
and sober, not given to quarrels, or apt to commit Insolences, as the Corsi
had done in Pope Alexander VII. time, which gave him great trouble; for upon
affronting the French Kings Ambassador, he sent an Army into Italy, which
obliged that Pope to disband them, and erect a Pillar with an Inscription of
their Banishment, and for what Cause.

In the next place, for due administration of Justice, that Criminals might no
longer secure themselves in priviledg'd places, which were many and very large,
and for long time had been the common shelters of Villains and the worst of
Men; he would not allow such places for the future to be Sanctuaries, tho they
were the Houses of Ambassadors and great Princes in Rome; and in pursuance
thereof caused a famous Bandito to be seized at Riccia, a Seat of the Prince
Chigi, which was done without any opposition, tho afterward the French and this
Pope had great contests about it.

The Pope also confirmed the seventeen Articles which were signed in the
Conclave of Cardinals, a little before the time of the Election, (which other
Popes in the like case have failed to do.) These for the most part tended to a
Reformation of Manners, and to amendment of those abuses which were crept into
the Church. That himself might be a pattern of Temperance and Sobriety, he
retrencht the expenses of his House, and lived so frugally, that his own Table
diet exceeded not five shillings a meal; he reproved the vanity of the
Cardinals in their fine Clothes and Liveries and outward Gaities, not becoming
the gravity of Men of their Order (contrary to other Popes who labored to
dignifie 'em with honors.)

And because the Corruption of the Church, as it began, so continued by ill
Men's being in it, who were commonly preferred by Friendship or Money, and not
for deserts; he appointed four Cardinals, and four other Clergymen, to examine
the Lives and Manners of such who aspired to the Degree of Bishops, ordering
them to admit none thereto suspected, or in the lest blemished with ill Fame,
or debauched Conversation, or taxed with Ignorance. And to show his dislike of
such debaucheries, and prevent Temptations, he drove out of Rome the Curtesans
and Strumpets, and persons openly Scandalous and Dissolute in their Manners and
Behavior; and in particular banished a Gentleman of Quality into Germany, for
endeavoring to ravish a Lady. He put down Gaming-Houses, and forbad all lewd
and unlawful Assemblies; wherefore those sort of Men did account this Popes
reign but a dull time, and were weary of it long before it expired. Tho in
truth Conversation has been free and unlimited; for tho at Rome there is no
Printed News, yet in the Anti-chambers of Cardinals, Ambassadors, Princes, and
particularly at the Queen of Swedens, all the News of Europe was usually
discoursed (not without animadversions or reflections upon it:) And tho
Learning be not much in Vogue there; yet those that would apply themselves to
it, might meet with no discouragements, and a general outward Civility
(according to the Italian way) was practiced over the City, and strangers
kindly received (being not obnoxious in their Speeches) so that they may live
there without any molestation, and discourse freely enough of any thing that is
the common subject of Civil Conversation.

And for the rights and properties of the meaner people, in regard the Barons
of Rome, by the privilege of their Nobility, were above the reach of their
Creditors; the Pope ordered Cardinal Cibo to take an account of such Creditors
as would bring it in, what any of these priviledg'd persons owed them, and to
pay their dues out of the Chamber; causing such persons to assign the Debts due
to them to the Chamber, which could better deal with them by proceedings out of
the Exchequer.

Many have accounted him Covetous, and one that made it his buisness to heap up
Wealth, and probably there might be more reason to lay that to his charge
rather than other vices; and one thing they take notice of is, That he has not
raised any public Structure or Building for the glory of the City, as other
Popes have done, who advancing their Families at public expense, if not
oppression, were willing to do something of that Nature to stop the Peoples
Mouths, or else for vainglory, and to perpetuate their memories to Posterity.
But this Pope found the Chamber greatly in debt, by the ill management of
affairs before him, and also did not know what occasion he might have to defend
his Dominions, if the Turk had prevailed at Vienna, or the French King should
have invaded a people long accustomed to ease and luxury. But he has parted
with great store of Money to carry on the War against the Turk. And one
particular Act of generosity, in this first year of his Reign, is observable,
Christina Queen of Sweden having the greatest part of her Revenue from Sweden
stopped, (through the necessities of the Times) the Pope in recompense thereof,
for her comfortable livelihood, allowed her a Pension of 3000 l. per Annum.

Having done these things at home, he now looks abroad, and considering the
Turk, as the Common Enemy of Christendom, he writes Letters to the Emperor, the
Kings of France and Spain to be at Peace, offering himself for Mediator, and to
assist in it in Person, provided the place appointed for the Treaty were some
City of the Catholic Religion; and animated the King of Poland, to continue
his War against the Turk, for the recovery of Kaminiec, and to be revenged on
the Vizier Kuperlee for taking Contribution from the City of Leopolis, and
remitted to him the Sum of 50000 Crowns to assist him therein.

1677. Whilst the Pope labored for Peace abroad, the better to repose himself,
and advance the Affairs of the Church, which never have thriven in War, unless
in some Cases to divert War from Italy, the Popes have been incendiaries to
raise it in others places, and thereby may be said to get advantage; I say,
while he labored for Peace among others, those very persons whose good he
designed thereby, did make but an ill requital, tho no advantage could accrue
to some of them. The first accident that had like to set Rome in a Tumult was
this, The King of Spains Ambassador without the Popes leave, (pretending the
French for his Example) knowing his Master wanted Soldiers in Sicily,
adventured to make some levies of Men at Rome: People knowing the hardship his
Soldiers used to endure, came in slowly to list themselves, and a rumor was
spread, that he had hid Men in Cellars, which getting wind among the Vulgar,
glad, of a pretense to be tumultuous, and egged on by a secret malice they had
entertained against that Nation; they affronted them in all places, which ended
sometimes in scuffles and fightings, so that several were killed and some
wounded; against such a torrent, there was no resistance to be made by a few
Spaniards, but they were forced to retire and keep close. The Pope used
severity against such as were found guilty of these Riots, tho the Spaniards
not thinking that sufficient satisfaction, refused or durst not appear at
Court; and the Viceroy of Naples refused to give Audience to the Popes Nuntio
there, without any color or ground. The Pope was hereat disturbed, and in
pursuing of his Decree for depriving all places and persons of the privilege
of harboring Outlaws and Criminals; he publishd an Edict forbidding all
Persons to affix the Arms of any Ambassador, Prince, or Noble Man over their
Shops, looking upon it as a Mark, or Sign that they had renounced his
Protection, and put themselves under the Persons whose Arms they had so
affixed; and declared he would Govern at Rome, as other Princes did in their
Dominions. This his courage and resolution surprised many, who thought it, as
indeed it was, no small thing to take away that which had been allowed by his
Predecessors, wherein were so many great Persons concerned; besides the
incensing of those Desperadoes who were hereby covered from Justice.

The Circumstances of the Spaniard would not admit him to contend, but desires
Audience, which the Pope denies till his Nuntio were heard at Naples; which
being done, and the Spaniard desiring by Letter that his Ambassador might have
Audience on some emergent Occasion, at the persuasion of Cardinals Cibo and
Barbarino it was at last granted, and the Ambassador departed well satisfied
with the proceedings of the Court. And this had better issue for Rome, than the
contest between Paul V. and the Venetians; for he intending to make all
Kingdoms truckle to him, begins with the States of Venice, who he thought would
not stand upon Points of honor, as Crowned Heads might do; but he took wrong
measures, for neither his Spiritual nor Temporal weapons could bring them to
recede from their rights, and so with shame he desisted.

The Contests between Popes and Princes have been the troubles of the Court and
City of Rome; but tho this Pope has had some share in them, yet he has held
his own without War or Bloodshed. And it was no mean concern to enter the lists
with one that then appeared, and ever since until now, the greatest Monarch in
Europe, I mean the French King who styled himself Lewis le Grand.

The Contest was about the Regalia wherein I shall follow Sir Paul Rycaut's
History of this matter (who has for the most part extracted it from the now
Bishop of Sarum's tract on that Subject) so far as he carries it.

The point of the Regalia had been an ancient dispute for many Ages in France,
which was in some sort determined in the Year 1431. by the Council of Basil,
where it was ordained that Cathedral Churches and others should have a freedom
of Elections: This afterward was confirmed by a general Assembly of French
Clergy at Bourges, and addressed to King Charles the Seventh, desiring him to
protect that Council. At that time the Council of Basil sent to the King an
Abstract of their Decrees, consisting of Thirty Seven Articles, by which
Decennial Councils, and the Authority of the Councils above the Pope was
established, etc. together with an Abstract of the Decree they had made
concerning Elections. All which were considered at that Assembly at Bourges,
where the Dauphin and the chief Nobility of France were present, and by their
Advice the famous Pragmatick Sanction was made in Confirmation of those
Articles, which was observed during the Reign of Charles the Seventh. But Lewis
the Eleventh esteeming it the Interest of France to maintain a good
correspondency with the Pope, was inclinable to wave the advantage of this
Sanction. In the beginning of Charles VIII. an Assembly of States being called
at Tours, the Third Estate petitioned, that the Pragmatick Sanction might be
again renewed and confirmed; calling those which were preferred by the Court,
Court-Bishops; so it was again put into force and practice, much to the
displeasure of the Pope; notwithstanding which Lewis XII. made a perpetual
Edict in confirmation of it: Francis I. succeeding to the Crown, and having
vast Designs in Italy, thought it not his Interest to stand at a distance with
the Pope, and therefore was willing to treat with him about the Abolition of
the Pragmatick Sanction on such terms, as might reconcile his own Prerogative
with the Popes Authority. This Design occasioned an Interview between the King
and Pope at Bologna, and thence the Concordat was produced, which was afterward
put into the form of a Bull, and confirmed by the Council of Lateran: The Sum
of which was, The King and the Pope agreed to divide the Promotion to all
Prelacies between them; for the King was to nominate the Person within Six
Months after a Vacancy, and the Pope was to confirm him, if no lawful exception
did lie against him. When the Emperors were low by adverse Fortune, the Popes
forced them to be beholding to them, and not without some far-fetched Notion
would make advantage for themselves; and sometimes Emperors and Princes have
retaliated the like measure to Popes.

Lewis XIV. in the year 1673. being high and Prosperous in his Fortune,
resolved to put a Period to the Process for the Regale, which had continued
near Thirty years, and made this Declaration:

That the King had Right of Regale in all his Dominions, except only in those
Sees, that had purchased their Exemption from it: And therefore all Bishops who
had not yet Registered their Oaths of Fidelity in the Chamber of Accounts, were
required to do it, and to take out a Writ upon it for closing the Regale,
otherwise their Bishoprics were still to be looked upon as under it.

All the Bishops of France, unwilling to incur the Displeasure of their
successful Monarch, submitted; excepting the Bishops of Alet and Pamiers.

It was now under the Reign of Clement X, an old doting Pope, who committed the
management of the Pontificate to Altieri, a Person from his beginning
distastful to the Court of France. This was the time for France to move the
Pope, who knew not his own Interest; and Altieri was not able to contend in so
litigious a case against so powerful a Prince.

In January 1676. The Kings Right was claimed in disposal of the Deanery of
Alet; the Dispute was left to the Bishops to maintain, neither the Pope nor his
Cardinals taking cognizance of it. This Pope dying in August following, left
the Contest to our Innocent XI. more able to maintain it than his Predecessor.
Another Case also happened; one Pawcet was provided in right of the Regale to
be Archdeacon of Pamiers, but was rejected by the Bishop and Chapter;
howsoever the Regale prevailed; for the Archbishop of Toulouse gave Judgment in
favor of the Regalist; but on the contrary, the Bishop of Pamiers acquiesced
not in this Sentence, but appealed to the Pope, who was now engaged in the
Controversy, and the matter lodged in his Hands.

1678. Wherefore the Pope writ his Brief to the French King, and in soft, and
yet pressing Terms, complained of the Innovations made on the Liberties of the
Church, and the Authority of the Council of Lions: And after several Arguments
to persuade him to desist from this Enterprise, he concludes, He cannot forget
those Popes his Predecessors, whom, upon the like Occasion, had endured long
and great Afflictions.

But these Allegations satisfied not the King, who pretended, That the Rights
of the Regale were inherent in the Crown, and had been enjoyed by his
Ancestors, and by them derived down to himself. The Pope on the other side
replied, That the Secular Power had no Right to things Sacred, but as it was
derived to them by the Authority of the Church, and that the Church had not
granted any such Right, having expressly limited it by the Council of Lions,
which has now been observed 400 years.

This Controversy seemed to lie dormant from September 1678. unto December
1679. when it was again revived in the Sea of Pamiers, in that point which
concerned the Vacant Benefices, and the mean Profits; for the Kings Officers
seized on them, so that the good old Bishop had nothing to live on the last
twenty Months of his Life, but the Oblations and Charity of his People. This
occasioned the Pope to write to Cardinal D'Estree to interpose in this Affair,
as being a Person more than ordinarily concerned in the Dignity of the
Apostolical See, to which the Cardinal answered in the Style of a Court-Bishop,
extolling the Kings Merit, his Zeal for the Faith, and respect for the
Apostolical Chair; what he had done for the suppressing of Calvinists and
Heresy within his Dominions, and how bravely he had defended the Christian
Cause against the Turks; and in fine, he laid down the dangers which would
follow, if any Dissension should arise between that King and the Church.

At length Cardinal D'Estree was dispatched to Rome with a Letter of Credence,
and Orders to treat immediately with the Pope himself; but it seems his
Negotiation produced little Alteration; for the Pope continued steady and
constant to his Principles: And on the other side, the Parliament of Paris
became as zealous for the Kings Right and Authority, for which the Kings
Attorney General pleading, made little esteem of the Popes Censures in respect
of the Kings Orders.

The Church (said he) may indeed have an Authority to punish Men for Heresy
and an ill Life; but the World was now too well enlightened, not to discern,
that the Thunders of Rome had been for several Ages vainly employed, for
extending its Authority beyond all due Bounds, the Limits whereof were to be
found in the Canons of the Church, by which the Pope, as well as others, ought
to govern himself. And therefore desired that the last Brief sent by the Pope
might be suppressed, which was accordingly done by a Judgment of the Court of
Parliament on the last of March, 1681.

And to give a farther Authority to this Judgment, an extraordinary Assembly
was called of all the Bishops then residing at Paris, where were present Six
Archbishops, Twenty Six Bishops, and Six that were named to Bishoprics, to
whom the Agents of the Clergy represented the Invasions made on the Liberties
of the Gallican Church by the Popes Briefs, both in general, concerning the
Regale; and in particular, in the Affair at Pamiers, and the Nunneries, and
concerning a Book of Gerbais, a Doctor of the Sorbonne, De Gausis Majoribus,
which were equally contrary both to Church and State, to the Canons, and the
Concordate, by which the Pope, upon a simple Complaint, without any Appeal, did
by the plenitude of his Power judge at Rome concerning the validity of
Elections, and the Authority of Archbishops and Primates, etc. The issue of
this Assembly was, They asserted the Authority of National Churches, for
judging all matters both of Faith and Manners; and in the conclusion agreed to
make an Address to the King, praying him to give leave either for a National
Counsel, or an Assembly General, the later of which was consented unto by his
Majesty, and summoned to meet the first of October following, which met
accordingly, and at the opening thereof, the Bishop of Meaux preached a most
eloquent Sermon with much Applause; after which, the point of the Regale was
put to the Question, and argued learnedly on both sides, and in conclusion, the
greatest part were of opinion, that the Rights unto the Regale were inherent in
the Crown, and that the pretensions thereunto were Usurpations by the Church,
as appears by this following Declaration.

The Declaration of the Clergy of the Gallican Church concerning Ecclesiastical
Power.
WE the Archbishops and Bishops, Representatives of the Gallican Church, being
by Command of His Majesty Assembled at Paris, together with others of the
Clergy, in the same manner delegated with us, after long Debate, and mature
Consideration, have thought fit to declare and determine these several
particulars following:

I. That a Power is given by God to St. Peter, and his Successors, who are the
Vicars of Christ, and to the Church to Order and Regulate all Spiritual
Matters, but not to intermeddle in Civil or Temporal matters, according to that
Saying of our Lord, My Kingdom is not of this World. And again, Give unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. And
Agreeable hereunto is that of the Apostle, Let every Soul be Subject to the
Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God; the Powers which are, are
ordained of God; and whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of
God. Wherefore Kings and Princes by the Law of God are not liable in temporal
matters to the Ecclesiastical Power, nor by the Power of the Keys can they be
deposed, either directly or indirectly; or can their Subjects be absolved from
their Fealty and Obedience to them, or from their Oaths of Allegiance, the
which We confirm and determine, as Principles not only necessary for
conservation of the Public Peace and Tranquillity, but for the better
Government of the Church, and as Truths agreeable to the Word of God, the
Tradition of the Fathers, and to the Example and Practice of Saints and Holy
Men.

II. That the Apostolical See, and the Successors of St. Peter, who are the
Vicars of Christ, have a full and plenary Power, in all Spiritual matters, in
such manner as is given to them by the Ecumenical Synod of Constance, which is
received by the Apostolical See, and in such manner as has been confirmed by
the constant use and practice of the Popes of Rome, and the whole Church, and
observed by the Religion of the Gallican Church, and Decreed by the Authority
of the General Councils, in the Fourth and Fifth Sessions: And the Gallican
Church does condemn the Opinion of those, who esteemed those Decrees of
doubtful Authority, and do endeavor to restrain their Obligations only to a
certain time of Schism, and to invalidate the present Power thereof.

III. Hence it is that the third exercise of the Apostolical Power is to be
regulated by Canons established by the Spirit of God, and thereunto all the
World is to bear Respect and Reverence; likewise the Rules, Manners, and
Institutions received by the Kingdom, and Church of France, as also the Customs
of our Forefathers are to remain unalterable; the which is a clear
Demonstration of the greatness of the Apostolical See, that the Statutes and
Ordinances thereof are established and confirmed by and with the consent of the
Churches.

IV. In Questions of Faith the Pope is chief Judge, and his Decrees extend
themselves to the Churches in general, and to every one in particular; nor can
his Judgment be repealed, unless by the consent and determination of the
Universal Church.

V. These Particulars received from the Doctrine of our Forefathers, we have by
the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, Decreed to send unto all the Gallican
Churches, and the Bishops residing over them; and we do all concur in the same
Sense and Meaning of them.

Subscribed by Archbishops and Bishops and Clergy, as before related, and
Registered as required by the Kings Attorney General, March 23. 1681/2.
The French King used all means to gain this point of the Pope; and thinking
that the very bruit of any part of his Army marching into Italy, might have a
considerable Influence, he sent a Protestant General, Marshal Schomberg, with
an Army into Italy, and the Fourth of October, 1681. he entered Cazal. The
pretense was, That the French King had bought that place of one of the Duke of
Mantua's Ministers for three Millions, which the Duke disowned, as done without
his privity, and would not receive the Money; and the Pope and all Italy by
fortifying this place, and several other apparent Designs of the French King,
were frequently Alarmed, so that in 1687. his Holiness durst not send his
Galleys to assist the Venetians, but was put to the charge of raising Forces
for his Security.

The King caused the Declaration of the Clergy, and his Edict for conforming it
to be registered both in the Chamber of Accounts in France, and in the Sorbonne,
without the Doctors Assent, who showed their resentment of it; and therefore
the Parliament of Paris summoned twelve of the Doctors before them, and gave
them a sharp Reprimand; and in June, 1682. the King commanded several of the
Doctors of the Sorbonne to leave the Society, and repair to certain places
distant which he appointed: He also sent several of the Clergy to the Bastile,
who had spoke or wrote freely on this occasion.

The Pope was not idle in the mean time. In January 1681. he did by several
Briefs require the Jesuits to expel Father Maimburg, a French Jesuit, out of
their Society, for having wrote a Book offensive to his Holiness, but the King
took him into his protection. In April 1682. He sent a Decree to the Carmelites
at Paris to suspend one of their Members for publishing certain Theses
Offensive to the Court of Rome, which they performed; but the Parliament of
Paris commanded the Prior to take off the Suspension, and forbad all the
Religious Orders to execute any Mandates, Letters, or Orders which did not
concern the internal Ordinary Discipline of their Convents. The Assembly at
Paris wrote to the Pope the third of February 1682. in unpleasing Terms
touching the Regalia. And the Pope by his Brief of April the 6th. 1682.
directed to his Venerable Brethren, the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. assembled at
Paris, checked them for their Letter, and argued his Cause in answer to theirs,
and reproved them for departing from their Rights; and lastly, rescinded and
annulled what had been done in their Assembly in the Affair of the Regale; and
withal excommunicated the Archbishop of Toulouse.

The Clergy of France before this Brief was made public to them, May the 6th.
made their Protestation against several Letters that the Pope had wrote into
France to the Bishop of Pamiers, etc. and against all Acts done thereupon; and
were considering of ordaining, that no Appeals should be made to Rome, and of
setting up a Patriarch of their own.

Hereupon the Pope sent a Bull of Excommunication of the Deputies of the Clergy
of France, to be published in their Assembly; which the King having notice of,
stopped their meeting, and a little after commanded them to repair to their
several Charges; and on the Doctors of the Sorbonne's Petition to the
Parliament, they are restored, and ordered to give their Opinion on the
Propositions of the Clergy, wherein they spent much time, even to May 1683. and
still continued divided in their Opinions.

Cardinal D'Estree had spent his time in vain at Rome, prevailing nothing upon
the Pope. In the Assembly, before they separated, the Archbishop of Paris
offered several Proposals to accommodate the matter between the Pope and his
Eldest Son, which with many other things were debated upon.

1. That those to whom the King in right of his Regalia shall give any
Ecclestical Benifices, shall in the Vacancy of the Sees have Approbation and
Mission from the Vicars General.

2. That the Chapters that are in possession of bestowing Prebends and other
Dignities, shall as formerly dispose of them in the Vacancy of the Sea.

3. That in those Vacancies where the Collation is alternative, between Bishops
and the Chapters, the same shall be observed during the Vacancies of the Sees
that are under the Regality, the King having the turn which the Bishops should
have had.

4. That where the Bishop, jointly with the Chapter, disposes of the Prebends,
the King may in the Vacancy of the Sea appoint a Commissioner, who shall have
the same power and place in the Chapter as the Bishop had.

In January 1682. The French King ordered the Sieur Prior to visit the
Monasteries, etc. where any Divinity Schools are kept, and to require the
Professors to teach the Propositions of the Clergy in their Assemblies; several
Books also were seized in France, which asserted the Popes Authority; and
diverse Ecclesiastics and others suspected to be concerned therein, were
imprisoned thereupon, and the Abbot of Meuard was committed to the Bastile for
holding correspondence with some persons at Rome.

After this the French Kings Superintendant forbad the Professors of Divinity
at Doway to teach or exercise their Functions, because they had refused to
subscribe the Propositions of the Clergy, which so dissatisfied the Pope, that
the Bulls for confirmation of several Persons nominated by the King to
Vacancies, were not dispatched, tho they were such as the Pope had no pretense
against; and as to the Abbot of Maupeau, whom the King had named to be Bishop
of Gastres, he absolutely refused his Bull, because he had signed the
Declaration of the Clergy.

The Pope sent to diverse Princes, desiring them to cause their Clergy to
assemble, and to consider of, and give their Opinions touching the French
Clergy's Propositions. Those of Poland and part of Hungary met and condemned
them.

And thus the Pope's Thunder having frighted the Clergy, the Assembly was
dissolved, and these high Contests began to cool: Nevertheless, both Parties
held their own pretenses, neither yielding to the other; but while the two
Heads strive, many Churches remain vacant, and that notwithstanding the cry and
pretense that a vast number of new Converts stood in need of Instruction, to be
confirmed in their pretended Orthodox Belief.

And here I shall leave off this Affair, until the business of the Franchises
comes together with it to be treated on, having proceeded further than I ought
to have done, because I was willing to continue the Relation of this Affair
with as little interruption by other matters as was possible.

1681. The College of Cardinals being diminished to twenty six and those in
being many of them very Aged, the Pope resolved to create sixteen new ones, and
reserve the other Ten, either to gratify Princes, or please himself as he
should afterward see necessary occasion, though he was backward to increase
the Number, but rather lessen them, looking on many to be a burden to the
Church: And this was his first Creation, tho many empty Palaces in Rome craved
Inhabitants; and herein he showed he would not fawn upon, or flatter the French
King, by raising any of his Kingdom to that Dignity, but chose Italians, whose
Names are as follow:

1. John Baptista Spinola a Genoese, aged Sixty Seven, Governor of Rome, and
Secretary of the Congregation of Regulars. 2. Anthony Pignatelli a Neapolitan,
Sixty Six years of Age, Bishop of Lecca and Master of the Popes Chamber. 3.
Stephen Brancaccio a Neapolitan, aged Sixty Four. 4. Stephen Agostini,
Archbishop of Heraclea, aged Sixty Five. 5. Francis Bonvici of Lucca,
Archbishop of Thessalonica, aged Sixty Three. 6. Savo Mellini, a Roman,
Archbishop of Cesarea, aged Thirty Seven years. 7. Frederick Visconti of Milan,
aged Sixty Three, Archbishop of Milan 8. Marco Gallio of Como, Bishop of
Rimini, aged Sixty Nine. 9. Flaminio del Tayo, of Siena, aged Eighty years. 10.
Raymond Capizucci a Roman, aged Sixty Nine. 11. John Baptista de Luca a
Neapolitan, aged Sixty Four. 12. Laurentio Brancati, of Laurea in Calabria,
aged Sixty Four years, Library Keeper of the Vatican. 13. Urbano Lachetti of
Florence, aged Forty Four, Auditor of the Apostolical Chamber. 14. John
Francisco Ginetti a Roman, aged Sixty years, Treasurer of the Chamber. 15.
Benedict Pamphilio, aged Twenty Eight, Grand Prior of Rome. 16. Michael Angelo
Ricci, aged Sixty five years.
All these took their Promotions patiently, and without much reluctance, only
Tayo and Ricci were hardly brought to it.

The Pope being sensible that the Cheat of Indulgences was apparent to many of
the common People, and the first thing Luther made use of to incline great
numbers to protest against the Encroachments and Superstitions of the Roman
Church; and also how ridiculous they are esteemed by Protestants, and
scandalously made use of by their own Priests, especially in remote Countries;
and particularly disliking that Indulgence of the Immaculate Conception, (a
Controversy among the Dominicans and Franciscans) thought it the best way in
Reforming his own Church, to begin with such things as the Reformers justly
took offense at, and therefore suppressed diverse of them.

In the first place, The Office of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed
Virgin, approved by Paul the First, who granted, That whosoever should devoutly
recite the same, should have an hundred days Indulgence, as may appear by his
Bull of July the 10th. 1615. printed at Milan. The Pope therefore now Decreed,
That no Person, of what Order, Degree or Condition soever, should dare to keep,
read, print, or cause to be printed the said Book; and requiring that whosoever
should have the said Office in his keeping, should forthwith deliver the same
to the Ordinary, or to the Inquisitors of the place; which Decree was published
Febr. 9. 1678.

Then he set upon others, and suppressed a multitude of idle and foolish
Indulgencies, which many cheating Priests raised Money upon, from the ignorant
People; of which kind were those Indulgencies granted by John the Second,
Sixtus the Fourth, to those who should recite the Prayer of Charity of our Lord
Jesus Christ; by Eugenius the Third, to the Revelation made to St. Bernard, of
a blow on the Shoulder of our Lord Jesus Christ.

By John the Twenty Second to those who kiss the measure of the Soal of the
Foot of the Blessed Virgin.

By Leo the Tenth, to those who wear the Cord of St. Francis, printed first at
Rome, then at Milan, 1663. To them that shall say the Angelical Prayer (when
the Clock strikes) to the Image of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin
Mary, printed in a Circle, with the Moon under her feet.

By Paul the Fifth, and Gregory the Fifteenth, to those who say, Blessed be the
Holy Sacrament.

Likewise those Indulgences for fourscore thousand years, copied out of the
Ancient Table, which is said to be kept in the Lateran Church, to those who say
this truly pious Prayer, O God, who for the Redemption of the World, etc.

He also suppressed many others, and declared, That though according to the
Doctrine of the Council of Trent, the use of Indulgencies may be useful to the
People, and does Anathematise such as shall deny, that there is not a Power in
the Church to grant them, yet he is desirous that the Doctrine thereof be
rightly understood, and a Moderation used in granting them, lest by too great
facility or easiness, the Discipline of the Church be corrupted and enfeebled.

It was indeed one of the main businesses that the Council of Trent should have
handled, that and the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both Kinds, being two
principal matters then contested in the German Churches; but that Council's
Inspiration being brough from Rome in a Cloak-bag, the Spirit of the Papacy
would not allow it; and withal they could not but see that this Doctrine was not
solid, and would not hold water; therefore they slightly touched thereon, and
nothing was determined in it, than only, That Indulgences be used with such
moderation, as was approved by the ancient Custom of the Church of God.

As this Pope endeavored to remove all Remora's of Justice that might hinder
the due execution thereof, in suppressing the pretended and long abused
Privileges of the Franchises; and (to take away those Temptations and seeming
Encouragements to Vice, which had been given by licensing of Stews) had
suppressed those places, and expelled both Strumpets and other debauched
Persons out of the City; and also had appointed such Magistrates for the due
execution of Justice, that Rome was become very regular, and no public Vice or
Disorders to be seen or heard therein; so considering that Men of evil
Principles might yet act such things which no positive Law in being could
reach: That he might (at least in some measure) eradicate some of those
Positions and Doctrins in Morality, which had by the subtle distinction of the
Casuists and Jesuits been scattered and maintained in several of their
Writings, tending to the Debauchery of Manners, and to the Encouragement of a
loose and dissolute Life: He especially deputed certain Cardinals to be the
general Inquisitors: And having gathered out of several Writings diverse
Doctrins which appeared to be pernicious in practice, and scandalous to the
Profession of Christianity, frequently and exactly discussed before his
Holiness; on mature Consideration, it was on the Second of March, 1679.
appointed and decreed, That the following Propositions, and every one of them,
shall be damned and prohibited; not intending by this Decree to approve other
Propositions of the like Nature not here expressed.

1. That it is not unlawful in the Administration of the Sacraments to adhere
to a probable opinion touching the Validity of the Sacraments, rather than one
that is more safe, unless some Law or Agreement, or the hazard of some grievous
damage to be sustained thereby may prohibit it.

Hence it appears, That an Opinion only probable is not to be followed in
conferring Baptism, or Ecclesiastical Orders.

2. That a Judge may give Sentence according to an Opinion less probable.

3. When we do any thing, relying upon its probability, whether it be
intrinsical, that is, grounded on reason; or extrinsical, viz. grounded on
Authority, be it never so little, so we do not go beyond the bounds of
probability, viz. to that which is apparently false, we act always prudently.

4. That an Infidel that will not believe, led by an Opinion less probable,
shall be excused from his Infidelity.

5. That a Man is not to be condemned of Mortal Sin, that never had any act of
Love to God, but one alone, in his whole Life.

6. That it is probable that the Command of loving God does not of it self
oblige, no not every fifth year rigorously.

7. Its only obliging to us when we must of necessity put our selves into a
state of Justification, and have no other way by which we can be justified

8. It is not a sin to eat and drink for pleasure, even to Satiety, if it be
not prejudicial to our Health; for the natural Appetite may enjoy lawfully its
proper Acts.

9. The use of Marriage for pleasure alone is free of all fault, even of a
venial failure.

10. We are not obliged to love our Neighbor by an internal and formal Act.

11. By external Acts only we may satisfy the Command of loving our Neighbor.

12. Secular Persons (tho Kings) can hardly be said to abound; so that if one
is only bound to give out of their abundance, there is scarcely any one obliged
to give Alms.

13. Without mortal Sin one may be troubled for the Life of another, so it be
done with moderation; and one may rejoice at his natural Death, and wish and
desire it with inefficacious desires, if it be not out of dislike of his
Person, but for some worldly advantage that may accrue thereby.

14. It is lawful absolutely to desire the Death of ones Father, so it be not
desired for his hurt, but for the good of him that wishes it, that he may have
thereby possession of a good Inheritance.

15. A Son may lawfully rejoice for the Murder of his Father, tho committed by
himself, if he were drunk when he perpetrated it, in respect of the increase of
his Wealth by gaining his Inheritance.

16. Faith does not seem to be under any particular or absolute command.

17. One act of Faith is sufficient for ones whole Life.

18. Upon examination before a Magistrate, I advise the party ingenuously to
confess the Faith, both for the Glory of God and that; but I do not condemn
silence as sinful in it self.

19. It is not in the power of the Will to make the Assent to Faith more firm
in it self, than the strength of Reasons which enforce its assent, does require.

20. A Man may with prudence reject a Supernatural Assent which he had formerly.

21. An Assent of Faith that is supernatural and available for Salvation, may
consist with a probable knowledge only of Revelation; nay, with a fear that God
has not spoken it.

22. The Faith of one God seems requisite alone by an indispensible necessity,
but the explicit belief that God is a Rewarder, does not appear necessary.

23. Faith in a large sense, only from the testimony and evidence of the
Creation, or some such like motive, is sufficient for Justification.

24. To call God to witness a Lie in a light matter, is so great a dishonor or
irreverence to him, as that therefore he will, or can condemn one for it.

25. Whether it be about a small or great matter, if a man have cause for it,
he may lawfully take an Oath, without any intention of swearing.

26. If any one, either alone, or before others, either when he is asked, or of
his own accord, or for his diversion, or any other end, shall swear that he did
not do a thing, which he really did, reserving a meaning to himself, either of
some other thing which he did not do, or of doing it another way, or by adding
any other Truth to it; in this case he is indeed neither a Liar nor perjured.

27. A secret meaning may be used justly as often as it is necessary or
profitable for preservation of Life or Honor, or saving ones goods, or for any
other Act of Virtue, so that the concealment of Truth seems in that case to be
expedient or desirable.

28. One that is promoted to be a Magistrate, or to some Office, either by
recommendation or bribery, may with a mental reservation take the Oath required
in such cases, not regarding the intention of him that exacts it, because the
Party is not bound to confess himself guilty of a Crime that is secret.

29. Great and urgent fear is a just cause of dissembling in the Administration
of the Sacraments.

30. A Person of Honor may lawfully kill a Man that designs to calumniate him,
if he cannot otherwise avoid the reproach; the same may be said, if one give
another a Box on the Ear, or strikes him with a Cudgel, and when he has done
so, runs away.

31. For the saving the value of a Crown, I may regularly kill a Thief.

32. We may not only lawfully defend Goods in our Possession by killing such as
would take them, but also such things to which we have only a right begun or
imperfect, and which we have hopes to possess hereafter.

33. An Heir or Legatee may defend himself against him that unjustly hinders
him to take Possession of his Inheritance, or from receiving his Legacy, by the
same means a Professor or Prebend may use against one that hinders them from
their possession.

34. It is lawful to endeavor or procure an Abortion before the Infant is
quickened, to hinder the Woman's being killed or defamed, by the discovery of the
Woman's being with Child.

35. All Conceptions as long as they are in the Womb, its probable are without
a reasonable Soul, and when they are born begin to have one, and then it
follows in any Abortion there is no Murder committed.

36. Its not only lawful in extreme, but also in great and heavy necessity to
steal.

37. If a Servant of either Sex have not a Salary answerable to their service,
it is lawful to steal from their Masters to the value of their services.

38. It is not mortal Sin not to restore that which one stole by many Thefts,
how great soever the Total may be.

39. He that persuades another to do a mischievous thing to a third Person, is
not bound to make up the damage which is thereby sustained.

40. The Contract of Mohatra is lawful, tho made with the same Person, and with
the refelling the same thing, before agreed on, with an intention of gain.

41. Since Money laid down in present is more esteemed than Money remaining due
yet unpaid, and all Men value it more than that they look for hereafter, a
Lender may require more than his Stock from him that borrows, and be hereby
excused from Usury.

42. It is not Usury when something above the Principal is required as due by
way of Benevolence and Gratitude; but it is only so when exacted as due of right.

43. Why may it not be accounted only a Venial Sin in any one, to charge a Man
with a false Crime, thereby to lessen his great Authority, which is prejudicial
to himself?

44. Probably it is not a Mortal Sin, to fix a false Crime on another, in
defense of our own Honor and Justice; and if this be not probable, there is
scarce any Opinion in Divinity so.

45. To give a temporal thing for a spiritual, is not Simony, when it is not
given as the price, but only as a mo^ive for bestowing or doing the spiritual
thing; or when the temporal i^ only a gratuitous recompense for the spiritual,
or that the spiritual be a compensation for the temporal.

46. And this also takes place, although the temporal thing be the principal
motive for giving the spiritual; nay, although it be the end of the very spiritual
thing, and be higher esteemed than the spiritual.

47. When the Council of Trent does say, That they partake in other men's sins,
and are guilty of mortal sin, who do not prefer to Churches those whom they
shall judge to be more worthy, or more useful to the Church; the Council either
first of all by more worthy, seems to mean nothing else but the worthiness of
those that are to be chosen, the Comparative Degree being put for the Positive.
Or Secondly, it puts down more worthy improperly, that it may exclude the
unworthy, but not such as are worthy. Or 3ly. It means the more worthy should
be chosen, when there is a competition.

48. It seems so plain, that Fornication has nothing of evil in it self, and is
only evil, because it is forbidden to think otherwise, is contrary to reason.

49. Voluntary Pollution is not prohibited by the Law of Nature, from whence it
follows, That if God had not forbidden it, it might have been often good, and
sometimes obligatory under the pain of mortal sin.

50. Copulation with a married Woman, her Husband consenting, is not Adultery;
and therefore in this case it may suffice a man to say in Confession, that he
has been guilty of Fornication.

51. A Servant who knowingly helps his Master upon his Shoulders to get in at a
Window to deflowr a Virgin, and does many times serve him that way, by bringing
a Ladder, opening a Door, or any thing like this, does not sin mortally,
provided it be done for fear of some considerable prejudice may otherwise
happen to him, as, lest he should be ill used by his Master, ill looked upon or
turned out of doors.

52. Setting aside the Scandal, the precept for observing the Festivals, does
not oblige under the pain of mortal sin, provided there be no contempt.

53. That Person satisfies the command of the Church, in hearing Mass, that
hears two, yea, even four parts of it from diverse Priests that celebrate.

54. He that cannot recite his Matines and Lands, but can say the rest of his
Hours, is bound to nothing, i. e. is excusable, because the greater part draws
the lesser along with it.

55. The Precept of receiving the Sacrament yearly, is satisfied by a
sacrilegious eating our Lords Body.

56. Frequent Confession and Communion, even in such as live like Heathens, is
a sign of Predestination.

57. Its probable that natural Attrition is sufficient, provided it be honest.

58. We are not obliged to confess the custom of any sin to a Confessor that
asks it.

59. It Is lawful Sacramentally to absolve those that by reason of a great Crowd
of Penitents have made but half Confession; for instance, this may happen on
some great Festival-Day or time of Indulgence.

60. Absolution is neither to be denied, nor deferred, to a Penitent, that has
got a custom of sinning against the Law of God, of Nature, or the Church,
though there appear no hope of his Amendment; if he does but say, he is Sorry,
and purposes Amendment.

61. He that is Conversant in the nearest occasions of Sin, which he can, and
will not avoid, but directly and purposely seeks and thrusts himself into them,
may sometimes be absolved.

62. The nearest occasion of Sin is not to be avoided, when some profitable or
honest cause, for our not avoiding it, does occur.

63. It is lawful to seek directly the nearest occasion of Sinning, for the
Spiritual or Temporal good, either of our Selves or Neighbors.

64. A Man is capable of Absolution, however ignorant he may be of the
Mysteries of Faith, and though, by negligence that deserves blame, he does not
know the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, and of the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

65. It may suffice to have once believed these Mysteries.

At the end of these Propositions, was a Declaration, That whosoever should
defend, publish, or treat of them, though by way of Dispute, except it were to
confute them, should ipso facto stand Excommunicated, and never receive
Absolution, (unless in the hour of Death) but from the Pope himself for the
time being.

There was also a strict Prohibition to all faithful Christians, in virtue of
their holy Obedience to the Apostolical See, and under the pains of the
Judgments of God, to forbear reducing any of these Opinions into practice.

And lastly, All Doctors and Schoolmen were commanded to abstain from censuring
or reproaching one another in Controverted Points, which are not here
determined, and to wait peaceably for the Judgment of the Holy See about them.

It was observed his Holiness was very favorable in the Character that he gave
of these Impious and Immoral Tenets, calling them, Ad minus scandalosas and in
praxi pernitiosas, at least Scandalous and Pernicious in Practice; not charging
them with any sinfulness in themselves, as contrary to the Laws of God and
Nature, for the Title prefixed to the Decree for condemning these Propositions
runs thus:

The Decree of our most holy Lord Innocent the XI. by Divine Providence Pope,
by which he has condemned 65 Propositions of Casuists, as at least scandalous
and pernicious in practice, and has forbidden the defending and publishing of
them by any one under the pain of Excommunication, ipso facto, and that to be
reserved to the Holy Apostolical See.

This Decree was published at Rome in the usual places, on the 4th of March,
1679. by Francis Perin Cursor to the Pope and Court of Inquisition.

In December 1682, an Imperial Envoy arrived at Rome, to give the Pope an
account, that the Turks were making very great preparations for a War in
Hungary; the Pope very readily gave assurance of his Assistance both against
the Turks and Count Teckeley, who had been some time in Arms in Upper-Hungary;
and January the 8th a Congregation was held to consider of the best way to give
assistance to the Emperor, and resolved, That the Tenths of all Ecclesiastical
Benefices in Italy and Spain, and where the Popes Power is acknowledged,
(except in France) shall be employed for carrying on this War; and in the mean
time for present Occasion, remitted 200000 Crowns to the Emperor at Vienna.

He also wrote to the French King to agree the Differences with his Neighbors,
and assist against the Turks; and the French King's Envoy at Vienna declared
his Master desired a lasting Peace between him and the Emperor, and that he
would be ready to assist with his Forces against the Turks: But at the same
time a Domestic of the Envoy's was found to have Correspondence with Count
Teckeley, and secured; the French Troops had about a year before forced in upon
the Magistrates, and seized Strasburgh, which he refused to re-deliver. And the
French King both now and for some time after so alarmed the German princes,
that they could not assist the Emperor, promoting in many ways the Turks
Invasion of the Empire, and assisting Teckeley with Money; This last the Pope
charged him with, and urged it as one ground for his displeasure, when the
Disputes were about the Regale, which suspicion the King endeavored to remove,
though with little satisfaction to the Pope.

And since it will be my part to give an account of the large Assistances the
Pope gave both to the Emperor, the King of Pol^nd, and the Venetians, in
carrying on the War, it will not be impertinent to give yearly a short account
of the Success that ensued thereupon.

The Turk published his Declaration of War against the Emperor, containing many
Blasphemous Reproaches of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which in the
Consequence was the occasion of his own Deposing, though by his own Soldiers.

May the 8th, 1683, his Holiness had an account, that according to his desire,
the King of Poland had entered into League with the Emperor, for assisting in
the War, which was to be Sworn to by each of their Cardinal Protectors at Rome;
for every Prince and State (that own the Pope for their Head) has a Cardinal
at Rome, (who joins with his Ambassador, if there be any residing there, or
else alone) to take care of the Affairs of that Country at Rome, and is called
the Protector of such a Realm or State, Cardinal Pio was for the Empire, and
Barbarin for the King of Poland.

In June the Pope sent to the States of Venice, to persuade them to enter into
the same League, with all the Encouragements he was able.

In the latter end of July, this year, the Turks besieged Vienna, much sooner
than was expected, the Emperor, Court, and many Inhabitants speeded out of it,
almost surprised; Count Staremberg, the Governor, made a very brave Defense,
notwithstanding the many violent Assaults of the Turks, and before Relief came
killed near 20000 of them; The Duke of Lorraine lay with the Emperor's Forces
not far off, expecting the King of Poland, and other Succors, to raise the
Siege; the Turks therefore sent a Body of 15000 Turks and Tartars against him,
but he kept his Ground, killing many of them, and foreing the rest to return to
their Camp; General Dunewald possessed himself of a considerable Post on the
Forest near Vienna, which if the Turks had been possessed of, it might have
been difficult for the Christian Armies to have joined. September the 9th, the
King of Poland with his Army, and and other Forces came, and the whole
Christian Army amounted to 64400 fighting Men. On the 12th of September they
attacked the Turks in their Camp, and in a short time totally routed them, the
Turkish Horse fled, and there were about 25000 Foot killed in the Camp, their
Baggage, two millions of Money, 60000 Tents, and vast Riches were taken; the
Garrison was brought to its last extremity, their Bombs being spent, many
Cannons burst, the Turks were lodged in their Ditches, so that the Shot from
the Garrison could not annoy them, and the Soldiers within were reduced, brought
from 15000 to 5000, these sallied out and assisted at the Fight also; It was
said the Turk lost during the Siege, and at the raising, 70000 Men. The
Christians Chiefs at this Battle were, the King of Poland, the Electors of
Saxony and Bavaria, the Duke of Lorraine, Prince Waldeek, two Princes of Baden,
Prince D'Anhalt, Duke of Croy, Prince de Salme, Margrave of Brandenburgh, the
Landgrave of Hess, the Prince of Hanouer, two Princes of Newburg, four Princes
of the House of Saxony, three Princes of Wirtemberg, the Prince of Hobenzeller,
etc.

In May, this year, the Emperor sent to the Pope to desire to grant him the
Tenths of the Ecclesiastics in the Hereditary Countries, and for leave to turn
Church-Plate into Money toward carrying on the War against the Turks. The Pope
for the present returned Answer, That he would see the War first begun: But in
August following he called a Congregation, and it was resolved that a Tax after
the Rate of 6 l. per Cent. should be laid on all the Ecclesiastical Revenue per
Annum for 10 years in Italy, and that the Emperor might renew the Imposition of
One pound per Centum upon the Clergy in the Hereditary Countries for the War.
The King of Spain in Answer to the Popes Request sent One hundred and seventy
thousand Crowns to the Emperor on the same account.

In November the Pope having notice of the taking of Gran by the Duke of
Lorrain, received it with Joy, and remitted Money to his Nuncio at Lintz for
the Emperors use, and sent 30000 Crowns to the Viceroy of Croatia, to
encourage and enable him to assist in the War. And being desirous to have the
War carried on effectually, he not only renewed his Persuasions to the
Venetians to enter into the League, offering them the Tenths of the
Ecclesiastics within their Dominions for their assistance, but labored a
Peace between France, and Spain, and the Empire, and was very much troubled he
could not effect it then.

In February the Venetians entered into League for six years with the Pope, the
Emperor, and the King of Poland, to join in War against the Turk, and that no
Truce or Peace should be Treated of, or Concluded with the Turks, but by joint
Consent: By this the Pope engaged himself to pay the Venetians 50 thousand
Crowns a month, and to maintain six Galleys at Sea during the War. The Pope
hereupon borrowed 3 millions of Crowns of the States of Genoua.

This year died Cardinal Caesar Fachenetti, and also Cardinal Archbishop of
Bologne, whereby 21 places were vacant in the College of Cardinals.

In April 1683, the Pope sent his Brief to France, wherein he consents, that
the Revenues of the Abbeys of St. Denis and St. German shall be employed
toward the maintenance and for the use of the New-Converts in France.

The Dauphiness having been last year delivered of a Son, Created Duke of
Burgundy, the Pope was desired to be Godfather, which he consented unto, and
promised to send some Blessed Clouts for the Child; but this was delayed from
time to time until May the 3d 1683, and then the Bishop of Fano was sent as
Nuncio Extraordinary with the Present: When he landed, he was forbid to come to
the Court or Paris, but ordered to stay at Orleans until the King returned from
Alsace, which he did, so that it was the 22d of July before he could have
private Audience of the King.

1684.
For the carrying on the War this year against the Turks, the Pope sent the
King of Peland 300 thousand Crowns, and a considerable Sum to the Cossacks, to
encourage them to join with the said King. To the Emperor he sent 100 thousand
Crowns, and also granted the States of Venice the Tenths of all Ecclesiastical
Revenues within their Dominions. And June the 5th the Popes Nuncio by his Order
distributed 200 thousand Florius, the one half for such Hungarians as had
forsaken Count Teckeley, the other half for a Field Hospital for sick and
wounded Soldiers; He sent also his Galleys to assist the Venetians in the
Levant.

August the 26th, the Venetian Ambassador gave the Pope an account, that they
had this Summer taken the Island of Sancta Maura, and what Councils were
agitated for further Designs; whereat the Pope much rejoiced, and told him,
that his Galleys should Winter in some convenient Port in the Adriatic, to be
ready to join theirs the sooner next year, but in the beginning of December
they arrived at Civita Veccbia, not being able to Winter abroad without
Recruits, having lost in this years Expedition 100 Soldiers, and 200 Seamen and
Slaves. They took this year also Prevesa from the Turks.

In September the Pope sent another Supply of Money to his Nuncio at Vienna, to
be employed in the War, the Emperor having sent several times Auxilliaries to
his Army that had besieged Buda; which was most vigorously defended by the
Garrison, notwithstanding the many Assaults and violent Attempts made by the
Dukes of Lorrain and Bavaria, with the loss of many Men on both sides; They
continued the Siege (although the Sarasquier with a potent Army of the Turks
had attempted several times to raise it) until November, when (in regard of the
Season of the year, loss of 12 or 14 thousand Men, and near 8000 sick and
wounded, and the Serasquier continuing so near the Camp as to hinder their
Foraging, they were forced to raise it, and put the Foot in Boats on the
Danube, while the Horse stood in Battalia, lest the Turks should attempt them,
and so carried off their Men and Artillery without the loss of a Man. However
the Emperors Forces in Upper Hungary made some progress by beating some small
Parties, and taking in some Fortresses.

The King of Poland appeared with his Army in the Tartars Territories, but
returned without doing any thing considerable.

On a Letter from the French King to desire it, the Pope granted a Dispensation
for a Marriage between the Duke of Savoy and Mademoiselle, and in August the
Popes Nuncio had Audience of the same King touching the business of the Regale,
and after presented the King from the Pope with a Sable set with Diamonds and
Pearl, and to the Queen a Rose of Diamonds of great value, for he took all
occasions to be obliging and respective to the King, save wherein he thought
the Rights of the Romish Church were concerned, or his own Government, and
therein he would never (notwithstanding many applications) be brought to yield
in the least.

In October a certain Printer was taken out of the French Ambassadors Quarter,
which he (as others) claimed as Franchises, exempt from the Popes Officers; of
which the Ambassador complained, and declared he would not go to Court, until
the Printer were restored to his liberty; nevertheless the Pope continued him
in Prison till he had sufficiently suffered for his Offense.

In December, at the Request of the Ambassador for the Republic of Venice, the
Pope gave leave to that State to buy Corn in his Territories; so willing was
the Pope to advance the War, for in yielding thereto, he lost his Income that
he should have received, for so much as they bought, which was very
considerable, as will better appear by the great Imposition that lies upon all
Corn that grows in St. Peter's Patrimony, of which it cannot be impertinent to
give this short account;

Donna Olimpia, who ruled the Church and State of Rome, during the greatest
part of the Pontisicat of Innocent the Tenth, began this Tax or Impost on Corn,
and all the Popes who have Reigned since, have found so great advantage by it,
that it has been still continued; and it is at present a very considerable
part of the Ecclesiastical Revenne. The Substance of the Law or Ordinance is
this: That no Person whatsoever is suffered to sell Corn to any Strangers; but
all those that raise any, are obliged to sell it at a price certain, to the
Ecclesiastical Chamber; which is not above one moiety of the real value; and
then the Chamber sells it again at double the price, and at a lesser measure,
so that what comes in at 5 Shillings, is sold out at 12 Shillings: In the Popes
Dominions there is no Person either in City or Country, who is permitted to
make his own Bread, but every one is obliged to buy it of the Bakers, who are
appointed by the Chamber; In each Village there is but one Baker established, in
Rome and the great Cities are several; They are all obliged to buy a certain
quantity of Corn of the Ecclesiastical Chamber for one whole year to come,
which they pay for at the delivery of the Corn, at the Rate of ten Crowns the
Salme or Measure, whereas the Chamber bought it in, of the Owners, for 5 Crowns
the large measure; and although the Bakers may not have vended all, they were
obliged to take in, the year before, yet must they take out the like quantity
again, and return what they had spare, at 5 Crowns the Salme into the Chamber;
And this brings in a very great yearly Incomb, but is a very great Oppression,
both to the Occupiers of Lands, and so to the Landlords, and also to the Poor,
who if they have Bread cheap, can make better shift to live upon the less of
other Sustenance, and this in 33 years time, has been almost the ruin of the
Ecclesiastical Estate, so that the Country is much unpeopled, and a great part
of the Land lies uncultivated, because it is not worth while to manure it, and
to raise Corn, when the Price will not answer the Cost and Rent of the Lands.
It was moved to this Pope a little before he died, to release this Tax, he
answered to this purpose, That it would not be thankworthy for him to do it
when he could not live to enjoy profit by its continuing, and therefore he
would leave it for his Successor.

October the 5th, Cardinal Francesco Albizzi died at Rome in the 92 year of his
age, and two days after Cardinal Basadonna died, by which there were 23
Vacancies in the College of Cardinals; and the Pope was moved to add more
Cardinals to the Sacred College, which he did not seem to deny, but disliked
Persons proposed to him for that Advancement; He was now very much indisposed
in his Health, of which he was always very careful, so that upon the least
indisposition he presently kept his Chamber, and sometimes his Bed; of this
illness he soon recovered, but afterward fell very ill of the Gout, and kept
his Bed 3 weeks.

In December the Pope wrote Letters both to the Emperor, King of Poland, and
States of Venice, earnestly exhorting them to make good Preparations for the
War against the Turk the year ensuing; and his Nuncio assured the Emperor, that
the Pope was raising a great Fund to assist him and the other Princes in the
War, in which (if there should be occasion) his Holiness would employ the
Treasures of the Church; and the Pope gave Absolution to all such as should
contribute to the carrying on the War.

In January, 1682, the King of Spain's Ambassador at Rome was made Viceroy of
Naples, and shortly after took upon him the Government, wherein he has acted
very honorably for the King, and worthily for the Subjects, and was beloved
and esteemed by all sorts of People; for in few years he redressed such Abuses
that seemed past cure, or at least required an Age to correct them; He
repressed the Insolence of the Spaniards so much at Naples, that the Natives
had no occasion to complain of the haughtiness of their Masters; for he
proceeded against the Spaniards with no less severity, when they gave cause for
it, than against the Neopolitans. He took the Pay of the Soldiers so
immediately into his own Care, that they, who, before his coming, were half
naked, and robbed such as passed on the Streets of Naples in daylight, were
afterward exactly paid, well disciplined, and so decently clothed, that it
was a pleasure to see them: He examined their Musters also so exactly, that he
was sure never to be cheated by false Lists. He brought the Markets and Weights
of Naples to a true Exactness; and whereas the Bread was generally too light,
he sent for Loaves out of the Markets, and weighed them himself; and, by some
severe Punishments on those that sold the Bread too light, he brought this
matter to a just Regulation. He also retrieved the Reputation of the Courts of
Judicature, that were before generally thought corrupt; and it is believed he
had Spies to watch, in case the Trade of Bribes should continue to go on. He
fortified the Palace, which was, before his time, so much exposed, that it
would have been no hard thing to have made a descent upon it. But the two
things that raised his Reputation most, were his extirpating of the Banditi,
and the Regulation of the Coin; it is well enough known, what a Plague the
Banditi have been to the Kingdom, for, going in Troops, they not only robbed
the Country, but were able to resist an ordinary Body of Soldiers, if they had
set on them: These traveled about seeking for Spoil all the Summer long, but,
in Winter, they were harbored by some of the Neopolitan Barons, who gave them
Quarters; and thereby did not only protect their own Lands and Friends, but had
them, as so many Instruments, ready to execute their Revenges on their
Adversaries, (a thing very grateful to the Italians:) This was well enough
known at Naples, and there was a Council, that had the Care of reducing the
Banditi committed to them, who, as they catched some few, and hanged them, so
they fined such Barons as gave them harbor, and it was believed that those
Fines amounted to near 150 thousand Crowns a year; but still the disease went
on, only now and then a little Blood let, which never went to the bottom of the
Distemper. But when this Viceroy entered upon the Government, he resolved to
extirpate all the Banditi, and he first let all the Barons understand, that if
they harbored them any more, a little Fine would not save them, but that he
would proceed against them with the utmost severity; and by this means the
Banditi could find no Winter Quarters; so they betook themselves to some
Fastnesses among the Hills, and resolved to make good the Passes, and to
accomodate themselves the best they could amid'st the Mountains; the Viceroy
sent a great Body against them, but they defended themselves, for some time,
vigorously, and in one Sally killed 500 Men; but, at last, seeing themselves to
be hard pressed, and hearing that the Viceroy intended to come against them in
Person, they accepted of the Terms that he offered them, which was a Pardon for
what was past, both for Life und Galleys, and Six pence a day for their
Entertainment in Prison during Life, or the Viceroy's Pleasure; and so they
rendered themselves: They were kept in a large Prison, and now and then, as he
saw cause for it, he sent some few of them up and down to serve in Garrisons,
and some went to serve the Venetians against the Turks, and did good Service.
And thus was this Country quieted, and in entire Security, which, for many
Ages, (notwithstanding often vigorous Endeavors to suppress them,) had been
continually infested with Robberies and Pillages, to the hazard, and frequent
almost ruin of Travelers. As to the Coin, it, as all other Spanish Money
(being Square,) was so subject to Clipping, that the whole Money of Naples was
become light, and far below the true value, which he resolved to redress; he
considered that the crying down of Money, that had passed on the public
Credit, would be a robbing of those, in whose hands the Money happened to be
when such Proclamations were put out, and therefore took a Method, that was
more general, in which every one would bear his share, and no particular Person
crushed more than other; he laid some Taxes on the whole Kingdom, and procured
some to bring in Plate to be coined; and when he had got such a quantity, as
might serve for a necessary Circulation, he called in the old Money, and gave
out new of full weight, according to the Sums that he received of the old light
Money, not respecting its weight or real Value.

This Year in Sept. the Pope received the welcome News, that he had succeeded
in his endeavors for an Agreement, betwixt the Emperor, King of Spain, Princes
of the Empire and the French King, whereby he had hopes the War against the
Turk would be carried on the better; which did succeed accordingly.

He had also another pacifick work to do at this time, which he earnestly laid
his hands to, which was to compose the Breach between the French King and the
States of Genoua, and since the Pope was concerned in it, what he obtained will
not well appear, unless there be a short Narration of the concern in which he
engaged himself.

In May the 17th this year, without any apparent discord, or demand of any
thing, the French King sent Men and Ships well provided, before Genoua, and
after the usual salutes of Friendship between the French Ships and the Fort,
the States sent six Deputies to complement the Admiral, and to know the
occasion of their being come thither, who answered, That their King was not
well pleased with the conduct of the States, and that he required them to quit
the Protection of Spain, and join four new Galleys they had built to the French
Fleet, and allow the French to have a Magazine for Salt in Genoua, and to send
four Senators on board their Admiral to ask their Kings Pardon, etc. These
demands (without any color of right) did not a little surprise the Senators,
but necessitated them to send in answer, that if they did not draw off, they
should give orders to their Fort to fire upon them, and after two hours
expectation of their going off, when they did it not, the Fort by order of the
Senate, first fired Powder only, and a ter with Ball, which was presently
returned from 10 Galleys of the French (that continued in their Post) with
shooting Bombs into the City day and night until the 28th of May, and then
they made a descent both on the East and West side of the City; but being
beaten back, they returned to their Ships, with the loss of 200 men slain, and
32 taken prisoners; and thus with their own cost and damage, and no manner of
advantage (more then damaging others) they went off to Sea; though at their
departure they threatened a return. It was reckoned that in this time they had
often shot 130 Bombs in one Night, and in the whole 14000. of which about 2000
might break in the Air, and 4000 fall short in the Sea; So that about 8000
might do Execution; the Dukes Palace was quite beaten down, and both he and the
Senators forced to remove; It was accounted that the City, within the outermost
wall 25000 Houses, whereof not less than 500 were broken down or spoiled, though
there was not above 120 persons killed by the Bombs or fall of Houses; some of
these Bombs were shot two Miles, and weighed 150 English pound weight, and 57
pound weight of Charge.

The Pope made application in their behalf to the French King, and in the Truce
lately made between that King and Spain, Genoua was comprehended, saving that
the French King would reserve liberty to procure satisfaction of the Republic
of Genoua; and in September following the French Fleet came before it again,
but the Sea proved then so boisterous, that the Ships could not ride at Anchor,
and were forced to put off to Sea, and afterward they appeared before it, but
put off a second time; the Senate sent thereupon to desire the Popes further
Mediation in their behalf, which he willingly embraced, and sent a Courier to
his Nuntio in the French Court, to know what the King yet demanded; and in
October he held a Congregation of Cardinals to Consider of the affairs of
Genoua; at which time the Courier returned, with Letters to the Pope and the
French Ambassador at Rome, purporting that the French King expected that the
Senate should send the Doge (or Duke) and four Senators to France, to ask the
Kings Pardon. After several Messages, by the Popes mediation, (not without
great reluctance of the States of Genoua) an Agreement is made, and the 12th of
February 1684. these Articles were signed, (viz.)

That the Doge and four Senators shall repair to some place in France, before
the 10th of April next following, whence they shall continue their Journey to
the place where the King is, and being admitted unto Audience in their Robes of
Ceremony, the Doge shall in the name of the Republic, declare their great
regret, for having displeased his Majesty; and shall use such other submissive
and respective Expressions, as may best manifest the sincere desire the
Republic has to deserve for the future his Majesty's kindness; That on their
return to Genoua they shall re-enter on the exercise of their respective places
and functions: That the Republic shall dismiss within a Month, the Spanish
Troops which they have received into any of their places; and do by the present
Treaty renounce all Leagues and Associations made since the first of January
1683; That the Republic shall reduce their Galleys to the same Number they
were three years agone, and shall disarm those they have sitted out since; That
the Republic shall restore what can be found remaining of the effects taken
from the French, and his Majesty in lieu of other reparations for the losses
sustained by his Subjects, is content the Genoueses shall give such a sum of
Money, as the Pope shall think fit, for repairing Churches and Convents at
Genoua, that were ruined or damnify'd by the Bombs, etc. That the Republic
shall pay 100 thousand Crowns to the Count de Fisque, but without prejudicing
the reasons they have against the said Count; and his Majesty promises that he
will not support with his Arms, etc. the Pretention of the said Count, but will
leave them to be decided by the methods of Justice; the King will give the Doge
and Senators such favorable reception, as may satisfy them of the return of
his Royal kindness; and after they have performed the Function they were sent
for, they may return to Genoua; His Majesty declaring that no other conditions
or demands, shall be imposed upon them, but such as are agreed by this Treaty;
all Acts of Hostility to cease in a Month, and all Prisoners to be set at
Liberty. In April 1685. the Doge and Senators came to Paris, according to the
abovesaid Articles.

1685.
March the 29th, the Popes Nuntio had Audience at the Diet in Poland, wherein
he did in the Popes name exhort them, to a vigorous prosecution of the War
against the Turks, promising considerable supplys of Money from his Holiness
for that service; and the Pope himself, assured Cardinal Cibo, that he would
continue his assistance to the Emperor.

In June the Popes Galleys joined the Venetian Fleet near Corfu, and about
August they took Coron a very considerable place in the Morea; and in the end
of the year the Venetian Envoy gave the Pope an account of the good success
that their Fleet and Army had this year had, in gaining ground of the Turks in
the Morea, to his great satisfaction, and in November the Popes Galleys
returned home to Civita Vecchia, without any considerable detriment.

The Duke of Lorrain, with the Imperial Army went on prosperously in Hungary,
and took the strong Town of Newheusel from the Turk, which had been (in a
manner blockt up) near twelve months, and also obtained a very considerable
Victory over the Turkish Army, who had besieged the Imperial Garrison of Gran,
to make a diversion. The King of Poland made a great appearance this year but
did little, it was supposed the French Kings Money overweigh'd the Popes.

The Republic of Venice, named four persons to the Pope, for his Holiness to
choose one out of them to fill the place of the Auditor of the Rota, vacant by
the death of Signior Palucci, that place being always held by a Venetian.

In September, Cardinal Paulo Savelli de Montalio dyed at Rome, in the 63d year
of his Age, and 20th of his Cardinalship; whereby there became 27 vacant places
in the College of Cardinals.

The Pope (to encourage brave undertakings against the Turk) advanced one
Dunstar an Englishman, to be Lieutenant of his Guards, as a reward or showing
his Valor lately at the siege of Coron, occasioned by a lusty Turk who came
forth out of the Garrison, brandishing his Scymiter, and (Goliath like) sent a
bold Challenge to the Venetian General, that he was there ready to fight any
single man of his whole Army; for several hours none durst undertake the
Combat, till it coming to the Ears of this Dunstar (whole pay was but 6 d. a
day) he acquainted his Captain, that he would embrace it, and being brought
before the General Morosini, he inquired of his name and Country, who told him
that he was an Englishman, bred up near the Bear-Garden in Southwark; the
General commended his resolution, and so he went forth, with a good Backsword
in his hand, and engaged the Turk, who with his Scymiter made a stroke to cut
off Dunstar's head, but he warded off the blow, and gave the Turk a cut on the
Hamstring, which enraged him greatly, and at a second blow brought him down to
the ground, and then cut off his head, searched his bosom (which the Turks use
as a Pocket) and found 200 Chequins, and some Jewels, the Hilt of his Scymiter
was set with precious Stones; the Conqueror bore them all off, and presented
them with the Turks head at his Generals feet, who only accepted the head, and
gave him the rest, with a reward suitable to his Merit, and afterward his
Captain presented him to the Pope with a relation of his Exploit, upon which he
was advanced as aforesaid.

November the 21. Things being a little quiet betwixt the Pope and French King,
his Ambassador at last had Audience of his Holiness, acquainting him that the
King his Master had resolved to refer to his Arbitrament (with the approbation
of the Duke and Duchess of Orleans (the pretensions the Duchess had, by the
death of her late Brother the Elector Palatine) to certain Lands and the
Movables, for these the Duchess claimed (as not belonging to her Brother, as
Elector, but in his natural Capacity) and so to her after his decease as
nearest allied; The Ambassador added that the chief motive that induced his
Master thereunto, was to take all pretenses from the Princes of the Empire of
excusing themselves from assisting against the Turks, and that for that reason
his most Christian Majesty would not do any thing that might disturb the Peace
of the Empire. The Pope showed all tokens of his favorable acceptance of this
Declaration, which, if it had been real, would have been the greatest
satisfaction the French King could have given the Pope, but he too well knew
the contrary, and that though he did not with his Arms at present molest the
Empire, it was not out of good will, but while he prepared by building some new
Forts, and fortifying others on or near the Rhine, for the better carrying on
his work, when he thought it convenient for his purpose, which accordingly he
did in 1688. by sending forces into the Palatinate, and taking several places
and harrasing the Country, etc. However the Pope sent notice to the Emperor of
the French Kings Declaration touching the Duchess, etc.

And now preparations must be made for the next Campaign in December, therefore
the Nuntio acquainted the Emperor that his Holiness had remitted to him 400
thousand Florins, to be employed for that purpose, and the Clergy of the
Hereditary Countries brought in their Contributions to the Popes Nuntio at
Vienna; the Pope also sent a brief for raising an extraordinary Contribution on
the Clergy in Spain, and desired his most Catholic Majesty to assist the
Venetians with his Galleys, which though he did not consent unto, yet he ratified
a Treaty the Venetians had made with the Governor of Milan for raising forces.

The Nuntio at Poland continued his applications to that King, assuring him to
receive from the Pope 500 thousand Florins, and to provide clothes for 6000
foot Soldiers, and Money toward a train of Artillery, and in February the King
assured the Nuntio that he would be in the field before the end of May next,
and command his Army in person; the Nuntio therefore employed 500 thousand
Florins (which the Pope had remitted to him) in providing Magazines, etc. for
the War, without putting it into the Kings Treasure, having for two years past,
had experience that it never turned there to good account for the design it was
intended; he sent also a considerable sum of Money for raising 12000 Cossacks
to join the Polish Army.

1686.
In May, the Popes Forces were put on board his Galleys, and in June they
joined the Venetian Fleet, and directed their course to Old Navarino in the
Morea, and soon became Masters of it, and then sat down before New Navarino,
and having intelligence that the Serasquier of the Morea, was advancing toward
them with 10000 Men and destroyed all the Country as he marched, General
Conningsmark, leaving some Forces to maintain the Siege with 14000 men hasted
to encounter him, and totally routed the Turkish Army, and returned to the
Siege, where the place was speedily surrendered to him, and having Garrisoned
both these considerable places, he set sail and made Modon, which was also
surrendered unto him, and shortly after he obtained two considerable Victories
over the Turks near Napoli di Romania. In August the Fleet blockt up 12 of the
Turks Galleys, eight whereof they took, the other four escaping by Night; the
Land Army also took in the Castles of Argos and Termini; and August the 29th
Napoli di Romania, the chief City in the Morea, was surrendered unto the
Generals Morosini and Conningsmark; and then the season of the year requiring
it, the Auxilliaries returned homeward, and the Popes Galleys arrived at Civita
Vecchia October the 21th, his Troops much weakened by sickness, of whom the Pope
took great care, and bestowed Medals on his Officers.

The Imperial Army set forward toward the Campaign this year in May; that part
under the Duke of Lorrain's Command consisted of 55000, another under the Duke
of Bavaria of 35000: The Muster-Rolls exactly taken in June in all parts of
Hungary engaged in the War, as well Field as Garrison was,

Of Imperialists and Hungarians, 75230. Of Auxilliaries, 28700. Amounting in
the whole to 103930.

The 17th of June, the Duke of Lorrain invested Buda in Hungary the second
time; wherein was a very strong Garrison being 12000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, with
store of Ammunition and Provision, as expecting to be besieged, and having had
time enough to provide, it being a year and half since the former siege was
raised. In August the Turks came with a great Army to raise the Siege, and when
they came near, 8000 were sent before to force their way into the City; the
Duke of Lorrain, drew out a detachment, and met, fought, and drove them back
with loss to their main Body, and before night returned with his Men within the
Line of Circumvallation. The Turks encamped not far off, and frequently
parties, (that had advance Money given them) were sent to get in to the relief
of the Garrison, some whereof did obtain their Ends, but never attempted the
Dukes Camp with their whole body. September the 2d, after two months and ten
days close Siege, with the loss of a great number of Officers and Soldiers on
both sides, this strong and eminent place was taken by Assault, in the sight of
the Ottoman Army; in an hours time, the first entrance was on that side the
Duke of Lorrain made the Attack; at the time of the Assault the Garrison was
reduced to 5000 men, whereof 3000 were killed and 2000 taken prisoners, who
were employed in burying the dead and cleansing the ditches. It was now 158
years since the Turks first took this City, being led by Solomon the II. 1526.
and it was gained back by the King of Hungary, 1527. but regained by the same
Solomon, 1529, since which time it has continued in the Turks possession, though
it has been diverse times besieged before this in vain; this was very welcome
news to the Pope, who caused 20000 Crowns to be distributed among the Soldiers
wounded at the Siege, and gave 50000 more toward repairing the Fortifications
of that place, and sent a further supply to the Emperor toward paying his
Army.

The Duke of Lorrain marched after the Turkish Army (for they decamped quickly)
but their march was so hasty also, that they got over Esseck Bridge before he
could reach them, and the time drew on for such of his Army that were to have
Winter Quarters in Germany to return, so that the main business of this
Campaign ended; Nevertheless the Imperial Forces that remained in Hungary had
considerable advantages against the Enemy, for in October the 23d, the Turks
and Tartars coming to raise the Siege of Segedin were beaten by the
Imperialists, and the Town yielded; the Town and Castle of Chonad was taken by
General Wallis; and also the Castle of Five Churches and Syclos yielded to
Prince Lewis of Baden, who marching toward Esseck the Garrison of Darda quitted
the Fort, leaving their Cannon, etc. behind them, and the Prince marched on,
and burnt 800 yards of Esseck Bridge, and taking Coposwar was satisfied in his
this years success, and took up his Winter Quarters.

June the 4th, the Popes Nuntio in Poland (assisted by four Bishops of that
Country) gave the King the Benediction, and the King went immediately to head
his Troops, his own Army consisted of 30000, the Lithuanians had 15000, and the
Cossacks Auxilliaries near 10000, in all 55000 men; the Nuntio had provided a
Magazine at Limberg and other Frontier places, and also a Field-Hospital for
sick and wounded Soldiers. With this, Army the King marched toward the
Black-Sea, and annoyed the Turks and Tartars in those parts, and afterward
obtained a great Victory over them; but want of Forage hindered his intended
march toward the Danube, and the season requiring it he returned to
Winter-Quaruers.

The Muscovites entered into League with the King of Poland this year, and
engaged to enter into the Crim of Tartars Country, but made only an appearrnce,
for nothing of Action occurred; but the Nuntio to give his Holiness an account
that the King of Poland had not only appeared but done something, which he
accordingly did, with a request of a further supply; and the Pope being willing
to encourage and reward him for the least services, did in November remit to
him 300 thousand Crowns.

And now the Pope having had an account from all places of the successes the
Christians Arms had this year obtained against the Infidels, caused Te Deum to
be sung in the Vatican Chapel, in testimony of his thankfulness to God for the
same.

This year a differance happened between the French King and the King of Spain,
as well by reason the Viceroy of Gallicia had seized a French Ship with Money
at Guoyn, and for the seizure of other Ships at Malaga after the late Truce was
concluded between the two Crowns, (but before the News of it arrived at those
places) as also for that the Spaniards had raised 500 thousand Crowns on the
French effects in the West Indies; whereupon the French King sent 20 men of
War, and blockt up the Port at Cadiz, so that no ships could pass in or out
there. The Pope by his Nuntio's in both Courts applied himself to make up these
breaches, and at last brought them to an accord; so that the Viceroy restored
the Money to the Captain of the Ship, and the King of Spain entered into an
Engagement, that as soon as the Ships came home from the West Indies, the
500000 Crowns should be repaid to the Fren^h Ambassador in that Court; the
other matters were likewise accommodated, and a peace of Commerce at the
West Indies settled between the two Crowns, whereupon the French Fleet sailed
off from Cadiz, and at the return of the Spanish Fleet the Money was paid to
the French Ambassador, and the seizures made by the French King on the Subjects
of Spain, in the French New Conquests, were taken off.

Since the time of the Emperor Charles the V. by an agreement, the King of
Spain yearly on St. Peter's Eve, with a great deal of ceremony, is to present
the Pope with a White Spanish Genet, by way of acknowledgment, for the Kingdom
of Naples, this year it was not offered according to place and order of
Ceremony, as it ought to have been, so that the Pope refused to receive it,
looking upon it, that a breach in a small point, might be a president for a
greater in future time: Notice being sent hereof to Spain, That King ordered it
should be done in all respects as the Pope required.

This year upon Easter-Eve the Earl of Castlemain, Ambassador from King James
the II. of Great Britain arrived at Rome, it being the Custom of Princes who
own the Pope to be Head of the Church, on their first access to the Crown, to
send an Ambassador to that Court, to notify the same to his Holiness Cardinal
Howard met him on the way, conducted him to his Palace, and entertained him and
his Family very magnificently about 10 days, while ^amphilio's Palace was
making ready; within a weak he had private audience of the Pope, being
conducted by Cardinal Howard; he then fell upon preparations for his public
Entry, the splendour and magnificence whereof was such, that the Artizans were
pressed to hasten it, yet it was about the beginning of November before every
thing could be fitted, and then the Pope fell so ill of the Gout that he could
not have audience before the 8th of January, and then not in the public Hall
where Ambassadors are usually (on such solemn Occasions) received, but in the
Bedchamber. Take here a short account of it (which you may find at large in Mr
Wrights Book on that Subject* with Figures of the Arms, Coaches, etc.)

In the Morning the Arms of the Pope, the King of England, and the Ambassadors
(which had been set up some days before above the Gate of the Palace covered)
were uncovered with a Flourish of Trumpets, the whole was of a prodigious
bigness, the wood-work whereon the Popes and the Kings Arms were painted being
24 foot in height each, and 16 in breadth, with supporters on each side,
devises and Ornaments above, and Hieroglyphical figures underneath double the
Life, one among diverse others under the Pope, was a Woman clad in White,
representing the Church, and one under the Kings was Britania as she is usually
painted, the Ambassadors Arms were placed over the Gate, being in a round about
2 yards diameter.

About 2 of the clock in the Afternoon the Prelates with the Popes chief
Officers came to attend the Ambassador, who received also at the same time the
complement of the Cardinals, Princes, and great men of Rome, by their Relations
or Gentlemen that brought their several Coaches to wait upon him to the Popes
Palace. He set out about four in the Evening, having six Archbishops in his
own Coach, and Monsignior Barrolini; he had ten Coaches in his own Livery, all
filled with Prelates, after which came their own Coaches and others that were
sent to attend filled with Gentlemen that brought them. His first Coach was
covered with Crimson Velvet, richly embroidered with Gold and lined with a
Broccard of Gold, with a rich embroidery round the Cornish, and in all the void
places, with abundance of Gold Lace Fringe and Embroidery. On the Curtains were
embroidered Loops a foot long and eight inches broad; the Velvet for Coach,
Cushions, Harness, Braces, etc. amounted to 120 yards, the four Vases or Knobbs
at the corners of the Coach were three foot high above the roof; the body was
supported by standards of large carved Images of Tritons, and besides diverse
other Images, all the Wood-work to the very spokes of the Wheels were all
carved, representing Leaves of Oak and Ivy, gilt with Gold, insomuch that all
the Carriage seemed to be a Massy-piece of Gold. The second did almost answer
the first, being of Blew Velvet. A third also very rich in Gold Lace and Gilt
Brass-work, but covered with Leather, and all the rest of the Coaches were
Noble and Rich. Before the first Coach went 30 Footmen, 20 in Cloaks, and 10 in
close bodied Coats, by the side of it eight Pages, and the Dean or Chief of the
Footmen in Black Velvet; The Gentleman of the Horse followed on a Managed
Neapolitan Horse, richly Caparison'd; the Ambassadors other Coaches had each of
them six Horses also, and a Groom to attend every one; The Livery men were 60
in Number, the Pages in Crimson Velvet, their Cloaks lined with Brocard Blue
and Gold, laced with Gold Lace, mixed with a little White, Blew, and Black Silk,
above half a yard deep, with rich trimmings of Gold and Blue Ribbons, with
Feathers in their Hats, Point Crevats, and Cuffs, and every thing else very
fine; The other Liveries were all of Scarlet, lined with Silk Brocard, and very
richly laced; The weather was somewhat Rainy, yet this splendid show drew
abundance of spectators, and thus being come to Monto Cavallo where the
Soldiers were drawn up to receive him, he was conducted to the Pope, and after
some stay with him, he went to Cardinal Cibo's Aparment, and afterward with
the help of Flambeaux returned to his Palace. The next day he visited Cardinal
Ludovisio, Dean of the College; the day after the Queen of Sweden and several
others in the same Equipage. On the 14rh of January he gave a noble
Entertainment to diverse of the great Prelates at Rome in this manner; The
Entrance was a great Hall, surrounded with long Tables furnished with
Sweetmeats, Fruit and other Delicasies, at the upper end being a Cupboard of
all kind of Plate, and another of Glasses; then passing through three Rooms
richly furnished (in the last of which was a Cupboard under a Canopy of curious
Gilt Plate) they entered the Dining Room, where was a Table that held 80 Armed
Velvet Chairs, with a space between every four Chairs for a Carver on the one
side, and a Sewer on the other, so that there were eight persons to a Mess,
with those two Officers and a Servant behind each person to attend. The breadth
of the Table was eight foot, and through the middle ran a range of large
Historical Figures, ten in number made of a kind of Sugar-Paste, sent
afterward as Presents to great Ladies; and to fill the vacancies betwixt them
were variety of Birds and Beasts of the same make; On either side these stood
two rows of Intermesses of all relishing bits, whether Salt, Sweet, or Sour;
only where the Carver and Sewer were to stand was a void place on each side the
Middle range for two large Dishes of meat to stand, which were fresh brought in
for twelve courses, being 24 Imperial Dishes to every Mess; but to avoid
tediousness they were contracted to ten courses, and so but 20 Dishes; of which
every one was served from the Carvers, whether they eat or not; and then the
Triumphs and Ornaments being taken away, the whole table was covered with all
kind of Sweetmeats imaginable, which at last the standers by snatched and
carried away. The entertainment lasted 3 hours, each course was served up with
loud Music, and while they eat, they were entertained with soft Music, as
Voices, Lutes, etc. there was plenty of all sorts of delicate Wines and other
Liquors, wherein the Ambassador about the middle of the Dinner began the Popes
and the Kings Healths; on one side of the Room against the middle of the Table
was the Kings Picture at large in his Royal Robes, and over against it, diverse
Hieroglyphick figures with the Kings Arms over them. The Ambassador having now
done his part, he was complemented by several great Persons and Academies in
Rome, being invited to splendid Entertainments, accompanied with Music,
Orations, Poems, Plays, Masks, Dances, and other Exercises, as every one
thought sit to set forth the respect they bore to the King in the Person of his
Ambassador; The first that invited him was the Queen of Sweden, then Cardinal
Pamphilio, Cardinal Fran isco Barbarini, the Fathers of the Gregorian or Roman
College, the Clementin College, the Academicks of the Infecondi; and lastly,
he was entertained at the Popes Palace at the Ceremony of giving Cardinals Hats
in open Consistory, for the Pope was prevailed with at length to make a new
creation of Cardinals, and four (that is) Ciceri, Petrucci, Caraffa, and Medici
received their Hats the 24th of May 1687. Other Hats had been sent where the
Cardinal resided, as to the Cardinal of Furstemberg, etc. and now the
Ambassador takes his second leave of the Pope and had his Benediction again,
(for his being present at this Ceremony, obliged him to see his Holiness, though
he had before had his Audience of leave, the Benediction with a pair of Beads,
at which hung a Gold Medal of our Savior, and on the 23th of June 1687. he
left Rome and returned homeward.)

I do not find that this Ambassador was much caressed by the Pope, but rather
slighted, for on his telling the Pope, that if he were not better used he would
leave Rome; the Pope replied, You are Master of that as you please; Whether it
were because (as some say) the Pope was a Protestant in his Heart, and did not
favor the designed Perversion of England, or (as others with more probability)
out of his covetous temper, because it was looked upon, that little profit was
like to accrue from England to that See (at least for his time) Or rather
because the King of England was linked in alliance with France, betwixt whom
and the Pope there were continual differances; Or lastly (which is chiefly
insisted upon) because the King of England was altogether influenced by the
Jesuits, and the Ambassador now there gave himself entirely up to their
conduct; whose Mortification this Pope always endeavored, and not without
reason, for as to their Religion he liked not their Morals, and as to their
Power in all Christian Princes Courts it exceeded his, and they were got into
such a condition, that if differences should arise between him and them, they
were likely enough to give him some check; and in the mean time lessened him in
that Grandeur of Government which he aspired unto, by their interposing in the
State Affairs of most Nations, without concerning themselves with him at all
therein; He looked upon them as a distinct and Independent Society, Subject to
none but their General, from whom alone they receive all their prefrements, and
to whom therefore they pay an absolute Obedience without reserve; and that they
had got great riches in all places, and only used it for the advantage of the
Society.

This year 1686. November the 5th, the River Tyber swelled to that prodigious
height, that it not only drowned the Neighboring Country, but put several
quarters of Rome under water, which continued to the 7th, and then the waters
began to decrease; this Inundation was not so high as one that happened in the
year 1657. yet did an unspeakable damage, drowning several people, and a great
number of Cattle, and overthrowing many houses, and part of the wall of the
Castle of St. Angelo, and damnifying one of the Bassions so much, that it was
in danger to fall, the Pope took care to have the People assisted with Boats
and Provisions, and what else they should want; 300 Men were employed suddenly
to build up the wall of St. Angelo's Castle, and assistance was given to people
toward their losses.

The Pope now to give some ease to his Subjects took off the Impositions upon
Provisions which was farmed at 65 thousand Crowns per annum.

In the beginning of December, Father Charles de Noyeles, General of the
Jesuits dyed, and in July following the Society chose Father Thyrso Gonsales a
Spaniard, for their General, who had a contest in himself whether he should
visit the French or Spanish Ambassador in the first piace, he would willingly
have waved visiting either, but that could not be admitted; he at length
resolves it, and visited the French first; at which the King of Spain ordered
the Jesuits in his Dominions not to own the new General, and the French King in
retaliation, forbade several Religious Orders to obey their Generals being
Spaniards.

On January the 30th 1686. The Duke D'Estrees who had resided 15 years at Rome
in the Quality of Ambassador from France, dyed of an Apoplexy. The Pope now
resolved to take the opportunity to put the Bull effectually in Execution, for
regulating of the Franchises (which hitherto he had been easy in) and
accordingly did abolish the Franchises of the Palace of Farnese, where the late
Ambassador had had his residence, and caused the Sbirris, or Officers of
Justice to appear therein; of which the Nuntio at Paris acquainted that King,
who seemed not willing to quit that point; He afterward let him know also,
that the Queen of Sweden had voluntarily quitted the Franchises, of that
quarter adjoining to her Palace at Rome, admitting the Sbirris to execute what
belonged to their Office therein; the King notwithstanding showed an
unwillingness to admit it, and hence grew another Controversy between the Pope
and the French King, as shall be showed hereafter.

And now its time to be making preparations for the next years War. In
February, the Popes Nuntio in Poland undertook to provide Magazines with
Provisions, etc. for the Army of that King; and in March the Prince of
Lubmirki, Great Marshal of Poland, came to Court, where the Muscovite
Ambassador gave their reasons why they did not advance further the last
Campaign, and promised for the next year with their Auxilliaries to have a
brave Army in the Field. Another Ambassador from thence was also at Vienna, who
went away well satisfied; yet in the latter end of June they returned to the
borders of Muscovy, after they had made some little incursions into the Tartars
Country, without ever seeing an Enemy.

The Pope, Emperor, and King of Poland had formerly sent Envoys to the Sophy of
Persia at Hispahan, who were there a year before they could be admitted to
audience, to have answer to the Letters they brought, which were to set forth
the advantage the Christians had gained over the Turks in the late Wars, and to
encourage him to bring an Army, at so considerable a juncture of time as this
was, which if omitted he might expect not only to be frustrate of such another
opportunity, but be also set upon by the Turk (if he should prevail against the
Christians) when he had strengthened himself and had more leisure; The Sophy at
length gave answer in seven Letters, two to the Pope, two to the Emperor, and
three to the King of Poland, the result of all was, That the Sophy is in Peace
with the Turks, and that his Conscience will not permit him to violate his
Oath, (by which he had confirmed it) in declaring War against the Turk.

In March, the Pope remitted a 100 thousand Crowns to his Nuntio at Vienna, for
the service of the next Campaign.

Cardinal D'Estrees told the Pope that the French King would religiously
observe the Truce and good correspondence with the Emperor; yet went on to
Fortify places on the Rhine.

In February, the Pope resolved to maintain 1000 Men at his own charge, to
assist the Venetians in Dalmatia, and Signior Imperiale Treasurer General of
the Chamber, went to Civita Vecchia, to give orders and hasten the fitting of
the Galleys against May, that Month being appointed for the Rendezvous of the
Popes Galleys and those from Malta and Tuscany, who had all along heretofore
joined the Popes, to assist in the Morea.

1687.
In July, the Popes, Maltese, and Tuscany Galleys did not think fit to join the
Venetian Fleet, for fear of infection (the Plague having been amongst them)
though it was assured that now the Fleet was clear; however they feared there
might be some remains in Napoli di Romania; but his Holiness wrote to the
Senate, That in case his Galleys could be serviceable to them toward Dalmatia,
they should have Orders to Sail thither.

Toward the end of July, the Venetian Fleet in the Gulf of Lepanto Landed
some Soldiers, and beat the Turkish Army, found Lepanto, and several other
places presently abandoned by the Turks, which they made themselves Masters of,
with some Guns; at Sea they took almost all their Naval Force, being 14
Galleys. The Popes Galleys, etc. at length having adventured to join the
Venetian Fleet; with the assistance of these they also took Castle-Novo in
Albania, and discomfited the Turks Army there; the Vessels from this place used
much to infest the Adriatique Sea, which made the gain of it the more
considerable; there were found in it 700 Christian Slaves, who had been taken
by the Turks this year, which the Conquerors released, getting besides a very
considerable booty, which had been taken by Pyracy.

This year the Venetians likewise took Athens, and the Turks having abandoned
Corinth and set fire to it, the Venetians entered it, and had the Keys of the
Castle of Totnes delivered to them. Thus in a little time the Venetians became
Masters of all the Morea, (being 500 Miles in Circuit) but the Fortress of
Malvasia; and now the Season of the year requiring it, the Popes Galleys, etc.
returned homewards, and in the beginning of November arrived at Civita Vecchia.

On the 10th of August the Dukes of Lorrain and Bavaria, Generals of the
Imperial Army, obtained a very great Victory over the Turks Army, near Siclos;
It was said the Turks Army consisted of 100000, of which between 8000 or 10000
were killed on the place, and as many drowned; the Imperialists also took all
their Cannon, Tents, and Baggage, of very great value, with the loss of not
above 500 Men. After this the Duke of Lorrain passed the Danube, but found the
Country so scarce of Provision and Forage, that he was forced in October to
retire toward his Winter Quarters to refresh his Men, but General Dunewalt,
with some of the Imperial Army that were left with him, and the assistance of
the Croatian Militia, took Buezin, and Walpo, and surprised Esseck, where at
the Imperialists entrance at the one end of the Town, the Turks fled out at the
other, Mines were ready charged to have blown up the Castle at their departure,
but their haste to be gone prevented firing them, and the Imperialists being
speedily by the Inhabitants directed to them, took out the Powder. And thus was
this Campaign completed with the possessing the chief Passage the Turks had
into Hungary.

The Archduke, Joseph, Son of the Emperor, was by consent of the Diet,
December the 9th, Crowned King of Hungary. On the 18th of December, that
considerable place, Agria was surrendered to the Imperialists that stayed in
Hungary; It was taken by the Turks 1596, and had continued in their possession
until this time.

The Pope had formerly taken the Assignments of several Noblemens Creditors,
because he could better deal with them than others, as is noted before; This
year in June, He gave Orders for seizing the Estate of the Duke of Bracciano
for payment of his Debts, notwithstanding the great Solicitations of his
Relations and Friends to the contrary; The Duchess, who was Sister to the Duke
of Noirmonstier, parted the latter end of this Month for Paris, hoping to find
out some means, whereby to prevent the absolute sale of their Estate, and
consequently the ruin of that ancient Family, which is a Branch of the House
of Ursini.

In the beginning of July several Congregations were held in presence of the
Pope, upon occasion of the Quietists, whom he was thought to favor, and was
reproached in France as though he had suffered a Heresy to grow up under his
Nose, and spread it self through the whole Church.

In August another Congregation was held on the same account, where it was
Decreed, that Dr. Molinos should publicly Recant several Propositions drawn
out of his Books, his Letters, and the Confessions of some that had been
apprehended and imprisoned by the Inquisitors for those Opinions; But this
business of the Quietests is so considerable, that this History would be
imperfect, if I do not give a farther account of it; for in February and March
(before this came so home on Dr. Molinos) there were imprisoned by order of the
Inquisitors, 200 Persons, some whereof, for their Rank, Learning, and Piety,
were very much esteemed at Rome, who were supposed to have imbibed the Doctrine
of Molinos, it will be therefore necessary to begin with some account of him.

Michael de Molinos was a Spaniard of a good and wealthy Family; He entered into
Priests Orders, but had never any Ecclesiastical Benefice; so that he seemed to
have Dedicated himself to the Service of the Church, without designing Temporal
Advantage to himself; He passes in Italy for a Man both of Learning and good
Sense, but has to good way of Reasoning to maintain his Opinion; His course of
Life has been exact, so that the Pope, who looked chiefly at the practice of
Men, (not well indeed understanding or concerning himself in the Mystery of
Divinity) said of him, That though he might err, yet he was a good Man; and
therefore to depress him in the Popes favor, and calumniate him to others, the
Jesuits (who became the Prosecutors of him and his Followers) suggested, that
he was of a Vicious Life and Conversation: It is true, he never practiced those
Austerities that are so much magnified in the Church of Rome, and among
Religious Orders; neither did he recommend them to others, nor was he sond of
those poor Superstitions, that are so much magnified by the Trafficking Men of
that Church; and indeed when he was accused as neglecting Confession, so that,
to clear himself, he was forced to write a Tract, wherein he commends it, he
does it with such ridiculous Stories to prove its usefulness, that it makes it
nauceous to all considerate Persons, who are not bound up to a blind belief of
all the Forms and Orders of that Church.

He gave himself up to the Study and Reading of Mystical Divines, and to the
Practice of that Sublime, Mysterious Devotion, which in Writings appeared first
in the middle of the Fifth Century; as Cassiaus Collations, Denis the
Areopagite, since then St. Bernard, Thauler, Rusbrachius, Horphius, Suso, and
chiefly Thomas a Kempis, and one Walter Hilton in England wrote a Tract,
called, The Seal of Perfection, inferior to none of those beforementioned, and
in the last Age St. Feresa, Beltasar Alvares a Jesuit; also of late Father
Cress^y has published out of F. Bakers Paper, a whole Body of that Method of
Divinity and Devotion: Dr. Molinos himself has wrote some things hereupon, one
Book is public, Entitled, Il Guida Spirituale, which is a short Abstract of
the Mystical Divinity; the substance of the whole is reduced to this, (as a
Learned Writer sets it forth) That in our Prayers and other Devotions, the best
Methods are to retire the Mind from all gross Images, and so to form an act of
Faith, and thereby present our selves before God; and then to sink into a
silence and cessation of new Acts, and to let God act upon us, and so to follow
his Conduct.

There is also this account given of this Mystical Divinity, That they consider
Man in three Degrees or Estates, first, the Animal or Imaginative State, in
which Religion may work strongly on the Fancy and Sensitive Powers, but is but
a low form, variable, and of no great force; the second is the Rational, in
which those Reflections are made on Truths, which convince the Reason, and puts
a force upon the Will, but as they say is only dry, and without motion; the
third and highest is the Contemplative, in which the Will is so united to God,
and overcome by that union, that in one single act of Contemplation, it adores
God, loves him, and resigns it self up to him, and herein feels a secret Joy in
God, and an acquiescing in his Will; in which (say they) the true elevation of
Devotion lies, which is far above either the heats of Fancy in the first State,
or the strength of Reasoning in in the second. Molinos having it seems drank in
the Principles of the Contemplative Devotion in Spain, where the great
Veneration that is paid to St. Teresa gives it much reputation, he brought over
to Italy a great Zeal for propogating it, and being settled at Rome, writ his
Book, and entered into Conversation with Men of the best Apprehensions, and the
most elevated thoughts, that were to be found there; several concurred with
him, though it may be on different Principles; as, some sincerely to elevate
the Mankind above those poor and trivial Superstitions, that are so much in
vogue among all the Bigots of the Church of Rome; some perhaps from an aversion
to the Regulars, that they might lead Men's Devotions into other Channels;
others of sincerity and prudence saw the necessity of Correcting many things in
their Worship, which they durst not yet attack as simply unlawful; but thought
it more safe and likely to prevail, by raising Men above them, whereby their
vain Superstitions would fall of themselves, and so hoped to introduce a
Reformation of many Abuses, without seeming to do it; and perhaps some tired
out with the Forms and Ceremonies they had been so long accustomed unto, were
ready to catch at a thing that appeared new and more refined, especially being
Opinions favored by Men of their own Religion, who were in great Esteem for
Learning and Sanctity among them.

The Book which Molinos wrote was published in the year 1675, with several
considerable Men's Approbation before it, by which and his Letters he gained a
great Acquaintance and Correspondence in many different places, so that several
adhered to his Doctrines, and some Secular Priests both at Rome and Naples
declared themselves openly for it; three eminent Fathers of the Oratory, who
were advanced at the last promotion of Cardinals, Coloredi, Ciceri, and
Petrucci, joined themselves to him with great heartiness and sincerity; some
other Cardinals were observed to court his Acquaintance; the Pope (who is
chiefly the Subject of this Discourse) lodged him in an Apartment of the
Palace, and diverse Priests not only began to form themselves according to his
Method, but to dispose their Penitents to follow it, and it grew so much in
vogue, that several Nuns (who had not Jesuits to be their Confessors) began to
lay aside their Rosaries and other Devotions, and to give themselves much to
exercise Mental Prayer; In France there was a Book also wrote on the same
Subject, so that it appeared these Opinions had gained much ground both in
Italy, Spain, and France.

And now the Jesuits and Dominicans began to be alarmed at its progress, and
found their Trade begin to decay, and that it would more and more, if some stop
were not put to this new Method; first therefore they decry the Authors as
Heretics, and to fasten a name upon them, they called them Quietists, Books
were also written against them; and these Disputes raised so much noise, that
the Inquisition took notice of the whole Matter; Molinos and his Book, and F.
Petrucci's Treatises and Letters, were brought under a severe Examination, and
the Jesuits were their Prosecutors; One of that Society had subscribed the
approvement of Molinos's Book, in order to the Printing of it, but they took
care he should be no more seen at Rome, for he was either sent away or shut up,
so careful are they that all their Order speak the same Language; Upon this
Trial both Molinos and Petrucci justified themselves so well, that their Books
were again approved, and the Answers which the Jesuits had writ, were censured
as Scandalous, and the others Credit was raised, and Petrucci soon after made
Bishop of Jessi, which was a new Declaration of the Popes Favor.

The Jesuits finding they could not ruin them hereby, prevailed (by the
Interest their Order has with the French King) that he should (by his Minister
at Rome) interpose and represent to the Pope the danger of such Innovations,
and it was said that by his Order Cardinal D'Estrees had appeared very vigorous
both to the Pope and the Inquisitors against the People now appearing numerous,
and having the Name of Quietists conferred upon them; and though they had lain
still a great while, yet in February this year 1687, the Count Vespiani and his
Lady, Don Paulo Rochi, with others, to the number of 70, were clapped up by the
Inquisitors, as Molinos and some of his Followers had been in the year 1685,
upon which Pasquin was made to speak pleasantly, That in one week one Man had
been condemned to the Galleys for somewhat he had said, another had been hanged
for somewhat he had writ, and Molinos was clapped in Prison for standing Quiet:
What must we do then? But to return to our present time, the things laid to the
Churchmens charge, was their neglecting to say their Breviary; and for the
rest, they were accused for going sometimes to Communion without Confession,
and that they neglected all the Exterior parts of their Religion; being brought
to answer, the Countess Vespiniani's case made some noise, for she said, she
had never revealed her Method of Devotion, to any Mortal, but to her Confessor,
and so it was not possible that it should come to their knowledge any other
way, but by his betraying that secret, and, she said, it was time for People to
give over going to Confession, if Priests made this use of it, to discover
those who trusted their most secret thoughts to them, and therefore for time to
come, she would make her Confessions only to God; This had got vent, so that
the Inquisitors thought it more fitting to dismiss her and her Husband, than to
give such an occasion to lessen the Credit of Confession; but that which more
immediately concerns this History, and is the most surprising part of this
account is, that on the 13th of February some were deputed by the Court of
Inquisition to Examine the Pope himself, (suspected to be guilty of this
Heresy) not in the Quality of Christ's Vicar, or St. Peter's Successor, but as
Benedict Odescalchi; what was done in it, is too great a secret to penetrate
into, but it procured Discourses at Rome, touching his pretended Infallibility,
and the power of his own Court to Examine him. A Circular Letter was now sent
by the Inquisitors to Cardinal Cibo, as chief Minister, to be sent by him about
Italy, to all Prelates, That whereas many Schools and Fraternities were formed,
in which some persons under pretense of leading People into the way of the
Spirit, and to the Prayer of Quietness, they instilled into them many
abominable Heresies; therefore a strict charge was given to dissolve all these
Societies; and requiring the Bishops to oblige all the Spiritual Guides to
tread in the known Paths; And particularly, that care be taken, that none of
that sort should be suffered to have the Direction of the Nunneries, and the
Books tending thereto were sent for out of the Nuns Hands, and they were
required to return to the use of their Beads.

The Inquisitors then drew up 19 Errors, which they said they had abstracted
out of the Quietists Books, Writings and Letters, (though some were unjustly
ascribed unto them, to calumniate them to the People;) these were refuted and
condemned.

After two years gentle Imprisonment of Dr. Molinos, on the third of September,
1687. he was brought into the Dominicans Church, the Minerva, and set upon a
Scaffold erected on purpose, and the whole Process read against him, wherein he
was taxed of many Enormities in Life, as well as Errors in Doctrine, digested
into 68 Propositions, and then his Sentence was also read, condemning him to
close Imprisonment during his Life, and to say his Credo, and the fourth part
of his Rosary every day: All that he was heard to say, was, That they saw a Man
that was defamed, but was penitent; he was chained, and a Wax-light put into
his hand, and some Persons were prepared to cry, Fire, Fire; he was carried
then to his little Cell, which he entered with great Tranquillity, and had in all
his Deportment, appeared free and calm, and took leave of his Priest in these
words, Adieu Father, we shall meet again at the Day of Judgment, and then it
will appear on which side the Truth is, whether on my side or on yours.

As to what concerned Cardinal Petrucci, it was accommodated thus, That upon
his arrival at his Bishopric, he should write a Letter to the Pope,
acknowledging, That he was unhappily inclined to Molinos's Doctrine; and
therefore desired his Books, treating of that Subject, might be prohibited;
submitting himself to such Penance the holy Office should think sit to impose;
and promising, in a short time, to publish a Book in Refutation of their Errors.

And now, since the Doctrines had been condemned, and Books and Writings called
in, several came in, and abjured their Errors; and the Pope, either out of
Kindness to them, as Persons he liked well, or, willing to show Mercy to
Offenders, grants a general Pardon, remitting such as are in Prison to their
Liberty, and a Discharge from further Prosecution; the Errors being supposed to
be dead by the Inquisitors condemning them, and Molinos's Imprisonment. Yet
many of his Followers, says he, abjured nothing of his own Doctrine
considerable, but such false things as were put upon him: And, as to his
Defamation, touching a scandalous Life, they believed not a word of it, both
because they never were assured any such thing was proved, neither had those of
both Sexes, that conversed with him, any ground to believe him Guilty of such
Scandal or Hypocrisy, as he was charged with; and also the Bull, that condemns
his Books and Doctrines, makes no mention of his ill Life, which it would very
probably have done, if the matter had been well proved. And it is known, that
People do yet follow his Method of Devotion in Rome it self.

On July the 7th Cardinal Sluze, Native of Liege, after a long Sickness, in the
60th year of his Age, died: And also in August Cardinal Nicolo Albergeti
Ludovish died, in the 79th year of his Age, which made five Places void in the
College of Cardinals; he had been 43 years a Cardinal, his Generosity and Piety
having drein'd his Coffers, he coined his Plate, when the Turks besieged
Vienna, and sent it unto the Emperor.

In the end of October, the Pope bestowed the long expected Provisions, or
Benefices, on the Cardinals of the late Promotion.

In December he ordered the 40 hours Prayers to be revived for the Peace of the
Church.

About December, the Cardinal of Furstemberg, by the French King's Interest,
(in opposition to what the Pope or the Emperoror could effect,) was chosen to
the Coadjutorship of Cologne, whereupon the Pope delayed his Confirmation.

In January, the Pope was indisposed by a strong Des^uction, so that he kept
his Bed, admitting none to speak with him, but his Nephew Don Livio, and the
Treasurer.

In the later end of this year, about November, began the great Revolution at
Constantinople, which, considering what has passed before, will not be
impertinent to this History.

The Ottoman Army, having received so great a defeat this Summer, and their
Arms succeeding no where, the Soldiers, in stead of being ashamed, that they
had done no better, began to mutiny against the Great Men of the Port,
complaining, that they had not been well paid, and that the Vizier wanted
Conduct, etc. The Grand Signior promised their Arrears should be paid, and,
that not contenting them, sent the Seal to a Chiaus Bassa, their Leader in this
Mutiny, (which made him Grand Vizier,) and afterward the Head of the late
Vizier; but neither would this satisfy, though, withal, word was sent them,
that the Treasurer, and other Great Men, (of whom they complained,) were kept
alive only to discover their Estates, which should be confiscated for pay of
the Army, whereby Four or Five hundred thousand Crowns were raised, and several
of them were strangled soon after: The Mutiniers not satisfied, declare then
against the great Expense of the Port; whereupon 1000 Women, Attendants at the
Court, and diverse others, were turned off, and Ibrahim, a former Vizier, was
strangled, and several Great Men were sent to the Army, that they might see
them executed, who, upon their arrival, would not wait for that, but in great
Rage cut them to pieces, and with them an Officer in the Army, of their own
Accomplices, for desiring to forbear killing one, only until he should give an
account, which way the Revenue was wasted; and the same day the confiscated
Estates were sent them, with Orders to stay at Adrianople, and come no nearer:
But nothing of this could quell their Fury, they insist upon having the Grand
Signior deposed, and the setting up his Brother Solomon in his place; but
Mahomet, to prevent this, resolved the death of his Brother and Sons, and went
accordingly to their Apartments, but there he found Resistance, and the very
Officers he took with him would not obey him, and so he returned to his own
Apartment, where was presently a Guard put upon him, and his Brother and Sons
were conducted to the Old Serail, and had a Guard for their Security: The Army
(notwithstanding the former Command,) marches on-ward, and some Officers, with
1500 Men, came in haste to Constantinople, and, early in the morning, met with
others in the chief Mosk November 18, and put this Question to the new Mufti
(viz.) Whether, for the good of the Empire, Mahomet the Fourth might not be
deposed, and Solomon set on the Throne, who answered in the affirmative;
Thereupon Solomon was Proclaimed; Mahomet knew not of this until Noon, when,
asking for Horses, he was told he must ask leave of Sultan Solomon, who soon
after sent an Order under his own handwriting to this effect; That as Mahomet
had kept his Brother in Prison 40 years, it was but just that he should be shut
up as long himself, to do Penance for his sins, and ordered him to be secured.
Of those that came to seize him, he asked, What have I done to deserve this
usage? To which was answered; That if there were no more in it, he had now
Reigned 40 years, and that might content him. All this was done without Blood,
or so much as disturbance to the Shopkeepers in the City; and now he that so
vaunted himself, in his Declaration, as above Christ and his Followers, was
thus easily deposed by his own Soldiers, which he raised against the Christians.

The present Sultan is a person of strong Complexion, fair Stature, and beloved
by the Priests and Lawyers, having much addicted himself to the study of their
Law during his confinement. His first entrance was easy, but the Janissaries and
Spahies coming to Town, became very tumultuous, and committed great Insolences
and Violencies, which the Grand Signior could not restrain, until they had
their Arrears paid, and their Donative (usual at the setting up a new Sultan)
given them, and notwithstanding that, seeing themselves now to be Masters,
there was no bridling their Appetites, for in March following they began again
to be mutinous, and killed the Grand Vizier and others, plundering both theirs
and the best Shopkeepers Houses: This they did twice, and were suppressed both
times by the Grand Signior's setting up the Standard of Mahomet, and the
Priests making Proclamation for all true Musselmen to repair to it; which they
must do, or else they are ipso facto divorced from their Wives; and withal,
they look upon themselves obliged in Conscience to do it, so that all sorts of
People (even to the aged and decrepid,) resorted with Arms to defend it; and by
them were many of the Mutineers taken, and presently cut in pieces, and the
rest fled and hid themselves; and afterward a Quarrel began between the Horse
and Foot, wherein many were killed, and thereby (the time of the year also
calling them into the Field,) they were at last appeased.

The Grand Signior, presently after, consulted how to bring them to their
ancient Discipline, and to live according to their Law, in not drinking Wine,
etc. And in January this year, 1687/8, the strong and very considerable place
of Mongatz was surrendered to the Imperialists by the Princess Ragotski, (Count
Teckeley's Wife) who, with her Children, were brought to Vienna, where they
remain, having the whole City for their Prison.

This year the French King sent the Marquess de Lavardin to be his Ambassador
at Rome, who came into the City, with a very great Train, upon the 16th of
November, although the Pope had forbid, that any Notice should be taken of him
as an Ambassador in his Journey through Italy, because the King had not
consented to allow the Bull about the Franchises; and the Marquess knowing it,
to avoid any disrespect that might be showed to him, came incognito till his
arrival near Rome, where he was met, guarded, and attended very splendidly unto
the Palace of Farnese. The Pope had some notice before his coming, that diverse
strange Persons had resorted to the City, and therefore had ordered an account
to be taken of what Strangers were lately come into the City, and what was
their business. Before the end of December the Ambassador had twice demanded
Audience of the Pope, and was denied it until his Master had so far owned his
Holiness Authority as to admit his Bull; whereupon the Popes Nuncio in France
had the like usage. In the mean time the Ambassador caused twelve Men to go the
rounds every night about his Palace, changing them upon the ringiag of a Bell,
in the same manner as Sentinels are relieved in time of war; some said it was
to hinder the City Officers of the Watch from coming near the Palace, though
the pretense was to hinder Malefactors from taking Sanctuary in his
Excellency's Quarters; both the Ambassador and the Marchioness his Wife,
frequently passed through the Streets visiting the Churches, and places of
Devotion.

St. John of Lateran's Church was endowed in part by Henry the Fourth of
France, and the French Ambassador residing at Rome usually joined there in the
Church Service on the 13th of December, being the Feast of St. Lucy, celebrated
with great solemnity; This year the Pope caused it to be omitted to prevent the
difficulties that might ensue if the Ambassador should come as formerly, for
the Pope in his Bull touching the Franchises, had declared such as should not
conform thereunto, to stand ipso facto Excommunicated, and therefore the
Marquess de Lavardin, and the principal persons of his Retinue, on
Christmass-Eve following, being admitted to midnight-Mass (as other French
Ambassadors used to be) at the Church of St. Lewis, about two days after there
was found affixed on that Church the following Sentence of Interdict.

By the Apostolical Authority, and the special Command of our holy Lord the
Pope, the Parish Church of St. Lewis, is declared to be under an Ecclesiastical
Interdict, for that the Rector, Officials and Members of the said Church have
rashly presumed, on the Eve of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, to admit
to Divine Service, and the Participation of the Sacrament, Henry de Beaumonoir,
Marquis of Lavardin, who is notoriously Excommunicated. Given at Rome, this
26th day of December 1687.

Jaspar, Cardinal-Vicar.

Let none dare to take this down, upon pain of the greater Excommunication to
be incurred by a Sentence reserved to our holy Lord.

On the morrow after the affixing the aforesaid Interdict, the Ambassador
published the following Protest.

Henry Charles Sire de Beaumonoir Marquess of Lavardin, Ambassador
Extraordinary from the Most Christian King to Pope Innocent the Eleventh,
cannot believe that a Printed Placard that is spread abroad, vended and affixed
in Rome, supposing Notorious Excommunication against him, by virtue of a
certain pretended Bull unknown to him, and not published in France, can have
proceeded from his Holiness himself; and there are few Rational People in all
Christendom, exempt from passion and animosity against France, that can
imagine, that at a time when his Majesty does with so much success employ all
his Care and Authority to reduce his Subjects into the Bosom of the Church, and
to cause God to be served and adored in all places where his Dominion reaches,
in the purity of the Catholic Apostolical and Roman Religion, a Pope, whose
advancement he desired, through the esteem he had of his Virtue, should of his
own proper Motion refuse all Audience to the Ambassador of so great a King, the
eldest Son of the Church, who has deserved as much and more of it than his
August Ancestors, to whom it is indebted for the most considerable part of its
Temporal Greatness, and who, even in this conjuncture of continual Occasions of
Discontent given him by the Popes Ministers, has recommended nothing more
expressly to the said Ambassador, than to make manifest to his Holiness the
Filial Respect he shall ever have for him, and use his utmost care to restore a
perfect understanding between the Pope and himself; It seems much farther from
all probability, that his Holiness should without any Form, Cause, Reason, and
without having allowed him a Hearing, Interdict the Church of St. Lewis, and
term him notoriously Excommunicated, before that he had done any thing that
might incur the least Censure, nay and without their being able to know what
his Orders are with which he is encharged, which coming from the Wisdom and
Piety of a most Christian King, can never expose him to the penalty of
Excommunication, from which also his Character representing the Sacred Person
of so great a Monarch, ought ever to Skreen him; God forbid also, that the said
Sieur de Lavardin should suspect his Holiness of so unmaintainable, and so
extraordinary a Procedure. He plainly perceives that he has only occasion to
complain of the Insolence and Temerity of those, that abusing the Confidence
which the Infirmities of so great an Age as is that of his Holiness, obliges
him to put in persons about him, and whom he makes use of to be eased of part
of his care, and make advantage of his relianceon them to make him enter into
Engagements directly contrary to the sentiment of Paternal Affection, which the
most holy Popes have ever had for the Kings of France, and giving false Colors
to all that passes through their Hands, impose upon his Holinesse's Judgment,
and make it their Business to let him see nothing, but what must exasperate him
against France. This has made them redouble all their* Efforts to hinder his
Holiness from being undeceived by all that the Marquess de Lavardin is to
represent to him in his Majesty's Name, and it would be easy for him to make
it appear to his Holiness, that the pretexts they make use of are without any
ground; for not only the said Ambassador is not come to disturb his Holiness's
Temporal Jurisdiction, but on the contrary he can with Truth protest on the
behalf of the King his Master, that if the Pope were attacked by any one
whatsoever, his Majesty would employ the Forces and Power that God has put
into his hands to maintain the Holy See, after the Example of the Kings his
Predecessors, in its Prerogatives and Possessions, to whose Augmentation they
have ever contributed; This is also what ought to oblige his Holiness to
hinder, as a Sovreign Prince, that in his Territories there should not be any
Diminution made in the Respect which has ever been observed toward the
Ambassadors of France; And as the Marquis de Lavardin does not pretend to
extend it beyond the Immemorial possession, which the said Ambassadors have
ever had, and which the Duke de Crequi, de Chaulnes, and D'Estrees have
retained, as his Holiness himself has seen and known, not only by Virtue of
that ancient Prerogative of the Crown of France, in the common Country of all
Christendom, of which it has ever been the firmest support, but also in
Consequence of the Treaty of Pisa, for whose performance the Pope is no less
bound than he that contracted it. There is not a person of good sense that can
presume that this pretended Excommunication can regard the said Ambassador; and
without entering into all the reasons that have been so often said upon the
Bull, in Coena Domini, against which the whole Gallican Church assembled at
Tours in 1510. has reclaimed, as being unmaintainable in regard of France, and
published by a Pope who had declared himself its Capital Enemy, nor in all that
can be said against the other Bulls, which serve for a Foundation to that which
is pretended to be from his Holiness, which can never be published nor received
in the Realm: It is sufficient to say, that the Marquis de Lavardin is his most
Christian Majesty's Ambassador, and by Consequence exempt from all
Ecclesiastical Censures, as long as he shall be invested with that Character,
and shall Execute the Orders of the King his Master. Therefore he does not
think it necessary to appeal from his pretended Excommunication of the Pope ill
informed, to his Holiness himself, when he shall be undeceived, in the Audience
he shall grant him, of the false Impressions which turbulent Spirits, and such
as are Enemies of France, who make it thelr whole business to break the good
understanding that ought to be between the Holy-See and his Majesty, have made
upon him.

He also reckons it to be useless to appeal to a future Council lawfully
assembled; and nevertheless from this present, and as far forth as shall be
needful, he protests the Nullity of all that may hitherto have been done, or
may hereafter be pronounced, published, or affixed against his Person, Family,
Domestiques or others, and to provide himself as shall be found reasonable,
declaring that if any one of whatsoever Quality he may be, is wanting to the
respect and regard due to his Character, he shall become responsible both to
God and Men, for all the mischiefs that may result from the offense done to his
Majesty, by violating the right of Nations, in the Person of his Ambassador.
Given at Rome, Dec. 27th, 1687.

And in January following, in France, the King's Council having in a large
Harangue laid the business open to the Parliament of Paris, where was read the
Bull concerning the Franchises, and the Orders of the 26th of December, for the
interdicting St. Lewis's Church, together with the Act of Appeal, put in to a
future Council by the King's Attorney General; The Court of Parliament admitted
of the said Appeal, and declared the said Bull and Ordinance as Null and
Abusive; Prohibited all persons whatsoever to vend them in the Kingdom, on
pain, of being proceeded against according to the severity of the Law; enjoined
those that had Copies of them to bring them to the Regi^ter of the Court, there
to be suppressed. Ordered, that the Act of Appeal put in by the
Atturney-General to a future Council, should be Registered in the Registry of
the Court, and that the King should be most humbly desired to employ his
Authority for the maintaining the Franchises and Immunities of the Quarter of
his Ambassadors in the Court of Rome, in the whole extent they had hitherto
enjoyed them. And the Kings Council having alleged, that the Pope had refused
to grant his Bulls to confirm Ecclesiastics, which the King had nominated to
vacant Benefices, so that a third part of the Churches of the Kingdom were
destitute of Pastors; the Court did further Order, that the King should be most
humbly desired to order the holding of Provincial Councils, or even of a
National Council, or an Assembly of the Nobles of his Kingdom, so to advise
about the most suitable means for the remedying the Disorders which the long
Vacancy of several Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics, had therein introduced,
and to prevent the progress and increase of them; and in the mean while, to
forbid his Subjects in such manner as the said Lord the King should judge
convenient to have any Commerce, or remit any Money into the Court of Rome. And
this present Arrest to be affixed in the public and usual places of Paris, and
every where as should be needful. Done in Parliament, the 23th of January,
1687/8,

Signed,

Jacques.

Hereupon in February 1687/8, the Pope resolved to give Audience to several
Cardinals apart, upon the differance betwixt France and that See, after this
manner, (viz.) unto two in one day, as he should name them, one in the Morning,
the other in the Afternnon, and on the 15th of February he began with Cardinal
Cibo, and so went on. And after these Debates he took off the Interdict of the
Church of St. Lewis, for which Te Deum was sung in that Church; and withal
Cardinal Cibo had leave to receive from, and pay Visits unto Cardinal
D'Estrees; and all exasperating Books and Writings, which reflected on France
in the handling these Controversies were prohibited.

In March following, the Pope appointed Cardinal Cibo to Negotiate the matter,
with the Auditor of the Rota a Frenchman, who was thereto appointed by the
Marquis de Lavardine, and the Envoy of Venice, then residing at Rome, was to be
Mediator betwixt them: But the Pope would not grant that they should make any
accord, unless there were a previous surrender of the Franchise, which the
Ambassador would not grant, and so it came to nothing.

1688.
In February 1688, the Pope granted leave to the Venetians to raise 40000 pound
Sterling on the Clergy within their State; and that there might be 1000 men
Enlisted, in the Ecclesiastical State, to help to man their Galleys of Malta;
and prevailed with the Duke of Mantua to lend the Venetians 500 men, all this
was for carrying on the War, for as to his own Galleys he durst not venture to
send them into the Morea this year, the suspicion daily increasing that the
Erench King had a design upon Italy; it appeared that the Marquis de Lavardin
had not less than 600 Men, lodged in his Quarters, and it was whispered that he
designed to make a public Entry, maugre the Popes good will and pleasure;
beside the French at this time fortified Montferrat and Cazal. The Pope was not
willing to take notice of either, that there might be no pretense for a
disgust, yet raised Land Soldiers, that he might not be surpised, and his
Galleys cruised about Italy, under pretense of meeting with the Corsairs of
Barbary, whereby they were near at hand, if the French should attempt to make a
Descent upon Italy.

The Venetians (with the assistance the Pope gave and procured for them) landed
Men on the Isle of Negropont, and took the Castle of Carambaba there, and a
Fort near Negropont, which also they closely besieged, and the 2^th of August
they took the Outworks, and many very furious assaults were made, and diverse
men killed on both sides, in particular 25 Knights of Malta; and a body of
Turks were beaten that came to relieve it, but after all, the season of the
year requiring it, and the Army weakened, the 20th of October the Siege was
raised, and the greatest advantage of this years Campaign, was that the strong
Fortress of Clin was surrendered unto General Cornaro, General Conningsmark, by
reason of sickness, could not Act in the Campaign this year, and toward the end
thereof dyed; and it may be remarked that since he left the Field, the success
in the Morea never was answerable to what it had been, the several years whilst
he was General.

This year the Doge of Venice dyed, and Captain General Morosini was chosen in
his place, chiefly for his Merit and the Service he had done against the Turk.

This years Campaign in Hungary began with the surrender of Alba Regalis to the
Imperialists, which had been blocked up a great while, and was surrendered in
May. In it was found good store of Arms and Ammunition; and it was followed
with a very considerable thing, (viz.) An Act of Submission of the Prince and
States of Transylvania to the Emperor, as their Father and Sovereign, offering
to deliver up their Fortresses unto him, and promising their Obedience and
Assistance, provided they might have that Liberty in Religion as was heretofore
granted unto them, though it had not been duly observed with them; yet upon some
disputes, the submission was not fully made till some time after.

The Deputies of the States of Wallachia concluded also a Treaty, to put
themselves under the Emperors Protection, saving their Privileges to the
Hospoda^ or Prince, and to the States their just Rights.

The Duke of Lorrain being ill of a Feavor, orders were sent to General Caprara
to open the Campaign, who soon had the Fortresses and Castles of Lippa, Solmes,
Lugos, Illock, Bret, Peter-Waradin, surrendered unto him, either upon Summons or
approach of Forces.

In the beginning of August, the Elector of Bavaria passed the Drove, and
coming near Belgrade, the Turks who were there encamped, retired, and putting
4000 recruits into the Castle of Belgrade, set fire to the outward Town, which
the Imperialists entered, and soon quenched the Fire. The Castle made a very
vigorous defense, for about 3 weeks, and then was taken by Storm, not without
the loss then and during the Siege to the Emperor of 2000 men, and to the
Turks 7000. It Is a place of a very great concern, being not only a security for
the places already taken in Hungary, but is the passage or way for the
Imperialists into Servia, Bulgaria, Romania, even to the Gates of
Constantinople. When it was formerly in the Christians hands, it was besieged
by Amurath the Second, in the year 1442, and by Mahomet the Second, 1456.
without success, but Solomon the Second, at length, in the year 1521. gained
it, since which time, it remained in the hands of the Turks until this time,
though the Christians had formerly made several attempts to retake it.

In the mean time, Prince Lewis of Baden, with the Forces under his Command,
took the City of Casta-Novitza and Gradisk^; and having notice where the Bassa
of Bosnia was, with about 5 or 6 thousand men, he hasted with 4000 Horse and
Dragoons to attack him at unawares; but when he came within view he was better
informed, and found there were a body of Turks, Horse and Foot, consisting of
about 15 thousand; He then told the Officers and Forces he had, that they were
misinformed, but that there was more danger in retreating, then in assailing,
and they must now fight for their Lives; They cheerfully received it, and with
great courage charged the Enemy, and obtained a very great Victory, killing
about 5000, and taking 2000 Prisoners, with the loss not of above 150 of his
own men; and suddenly after he took Bagnaluca, by which means all Bosnia was in
a manner gained: And thus ended this years very successful Campaign, with the
Emperors Forces; and the Bulgarians, and Servians sent to desire the Emperors
protection, and some Troops to shelter them.

The King of Poland, notwithstanding the continual assistance and encouragement
he had received from the Pope, did very little in the year 1687, and in the
Winter the Tartars made an Incursion into his Country, and killed or took into
Slavery (as it was computed) about 100 thousand Souls. The King for shame could
not stand looking on his Country, thus wasted and harassed any longer, but this
year he appoints his Army to Rendezvous, and in the mean time, a body of
Cossacks, were appointed to march on to observe the Tartars, for whose
encouragement the Popes Nuntio remitted them a good sum of Money. In June, the
Nuntio pressed the King to go to his Army, according to his Agreement made with
the Muscovites, promising in that case to furnish necessaries and pay for 3000
Horse, besides 30000 Crowns he had before advanced by the Popes Order, in the
preparation for the Campaign. The Tartars began again to make Incursions, and
at length the First of August, the King goes in person to his Army, and
besieged Caminieck; but upon the Tartars and Turks drawing near with 40^00 Men,
he drew off, and permitted the Enemy to put in 300 Wagons laden with Provisions
into the place; whereupon the King returned without ever giving them Battle.

In April 1688. The Pope gave a Dispensation to the Prince of Conti, to Marry
with Mademoiselle de Bourbon.

June 3. The Archbishop of Cologne died, one of the Electors of the Roman
Empire, whereupon the Government was pro tempore committed by the Chapter to
the Cardinal of Fustenburg, the Coadjutor of that See; and now the Choice of an
Elector was a Matter of great Consequence, for the French King had in prospect
at least three of the Seven in his Power, and if he could prevail to get in the
fourth Place one for his Interest, he would be able to out-ballance the other,
in case the Emperor should dye, and there should be a new Election; wherefore
he uses all his Endeavors with the Chapter, to obtain it for the Cardinal of
Fustenburg, his Creature, and causes some Troops to advance that way to be a
check upon them, and requires the Dutch not to intermeddle therein, or send
Forces toward it, that the Election might be Free; though it appeared that he
only offered a Force upon the Electors: However, by the Pope's and Emperor's
Interest, Prince Clement of Bavaria was set up also for a Candidate, and on the
19th of July, the Chapter proceeded to an Election, and both the Cardinal and
Clement pretended themselves fairly chosen, and the French urged that it was
clear for the first, he having thirteen Voices, and the later having but Nine;
and the Matter being in Suspense, it was referred to the Pope, to consider
which of the two was duly elected, who referred it to a Congregation of
Cardinals to be examined, and the Pope's Confirmation, pursuant to the
Congregations Decree, was published in these words.

The Sacred Congregation, appointed for Consistorial Affairs, having examined
the Authentic Instrument, which the Canons and Chapter of the Metropolitical
Church of Cologne delivered, by their Syndick, to the Archbishop of Damascus,
Apostolic Nuntio on the Rhine, by which it appears, that the most Eminent and
most Reverend Cardinal of Fustenburg, Bishop of Strasburg, was postulated by
thirteen of the four and twenty Canons: And the most Serene, and most Reverend
Joseph Clement Prince of Bavaria, and Bishop of Ratisbone and Frisingen, was by
virtue of an Apostolical Indult of Eligibility (previously granted him) chosen
by Nine of the said Canons, to be Archbishop and Elector of Cologne, the other
two Voices having been conferred on others: After a mature and most diligent
Consideration of the whole Matter, has, by unanimous consent of the Fathers,
thought fit, if it shall so seem good to our Holy Father the Pope, that the
aforesaid Postulation of the Cardinal being rejected, the Election made of the
Person of the said Joseph Clement be confirmed, with the Clause supplying, etc.
as far as may be necessary. And Report hereof being made, his Holinss
favorably approved the Sentence of the Sacred Congregation. Given at Rome the
15th of September, 1688.

Signed

Cardinal Cibo Archbishop of Ostia. Laurentius Cassanus, Secretary.

Prince Clement being but Seventeen years of Age, the Congregation made the
following Sentence, which the Pope confirmed.

The Sacred Congregation, for Consistorial Affairs, after a mature Discussion,
in what manner the Church of Cologne may be provided for, till such time as the
most Serene, and most Reverend Joseph Clement Prince of Bavaria, Canonically
chosen thereunto, shall attain to a lawful Age, has thought fit, if it shall
so seem good to our Holy Father the Pope, that the Administration of the
Temporalties of the said Church, be given to the aforesaid Joseph Clement, and
that the Administration of the Spiritualties be likewise committed to him, on
this Condition, that he exercise the same jointly with the Bishop of
Hierapolis, Suffragan and Canon of the said Church, who shall be understood to
be deputed to this Co-administration, during the pleasure of his Holiness and
the Apostolic See. And Report being hereof made, his Holiness favorably
approved the Sentence of the Sacred Congregation. Given at Rome the fifteenth
of September 1688.

Signed as the former.

In December following the Emperor's Minister, by order of the Pope, required
the Cardinal of Fustenburg, and his Party of the Canons, to own Prince Clement
of Bavaria, as their Archbishop and Elector of Cologne, on pain of
Excommunication.) And afterward six of the Canons (who had taken part with the
Cardinal) not appearing upon Summons of the Official of Cologne, were by
public Sentence deprived of their Benefices and Ecclesiastical Dignities.

May 7. Cardinal Crescentio, and on the Ninth Cardinal Felice Rospiglosi died
at Rome; whereby there were eight places void in the College of Cardinals.

In June there was a terrible Earthquake in Naples, and other Towns
thereabout, even perceived at Rome; many Persons were destroyed by the fall of
Buildings, Palaces, and eminent Structures; A Famous Church of the Jesuits, one
of the finest in all Italy tumbled down; and the neighboring Town of
Benevento, was quite demolished: The Pope therefore sent large Sums of Money, in
particular 50000 Crowns unto Naples, for the relief of People that suffered by
this sad Calamity. This Earthquake continued several days, more or less, with
some Intervals; the People feared it would last a whole Moon, as one did in
December 1456. and therefore many retired into the Country, in hopes of more
Security, but by the violent Storms and Rain which followed the Earthquake,
such sudden Floods arose that several were drowned, and all People extremely
terrified by the frequent and violent Shakings of the Earth, mighty Thunder and
Lightning, great Hailstones. Besides which, a Mountain also split in sunder,
the Earth opened, and out of it issued black Vapors and Flames of Fire, the Sun
appeared incircled with a Flame about it, the Sea (though at Calm) strangely
retired in, three times: All which Prodigies so terrified the Inhabitants of
Naples, that scarcely a third part of the People remained therein.

July 25. being St. James's day, began public Rejoycings at Rome for the Birth
of the Queen of Englands Son: There was held a Chapel of eighteen Cardinals,
who assisted at High Mass; and Te Deum was sung with rare Music in the English
Church, which was richly adorned, and the Cardinal of Norfolk made great
Expressions of Joy at his Palace. Sir John Lydcot, Agent at Rome then for King
James the Second, showed all the Demonstrations of Joy usual on such
extraordinary Occasions, viz. A very large Picture or Emblem was set up over
his Palace-gate, relating to the Subject, which consisted of an Effigies of a
Child, adorned as a Knight of the Garter, and about it several Trophies
relating to the Prince of Wales, Kings of England, and Warlike Exploits, with
the then King and Queen of England's Pictures on each side, and the Pope's over
it: Not only the Windows of his House were illuminated, but he had diverse Pots
of combustible Matter flaming, set upon Posts before his House, and distributed
1100 Lanthorns, with the King's Arms upon them, to be hung up with Lights in
them before the Neighboring Houses, and a Fountain of Wine ran for three days;
upon the second day he provided a whole Ox, the Belly whereof was filled with
Fowls, etc. to be roasted for the common People, and entertained diverse Persons
of Quality in his Palace with all Rarities. The Wine and good Cheer had so
filled the common Peoples Bellies and Heads, that they made returns with
shouting and noise, so that it was said not only the Music in the Palace was
deaded by it, but the Drums, Trumpets, yea, the very Chambers and Mortars were
not to be heard. The Pope was Godfather to this Child (whose Baptism was
deferred to October 15. 1688.) and was represented by his Nuntio in England; for
as King James had sent an Ambassador to complement the Pope, so the like in
return was done by him, and his Nuntio made his public Entrance at Windsor in
the beginning of July 1687. but the Pope knew how to use his Money otherwise
than to be at so great Charge as the King of England's Ambassador had been at
in Rome, for his Nuntio had only four Pages, twelve Footmen and three Coaches
of his own, when he made his public Entry.

The Pope made Cardinal Pallavicino Legate of St. Urban, and upon his Creation,
he is reported to have made a learned Speech in the Consistory, in relation to
the Queen of England's Son, and gave a piece of Money to all that would fetch it
at St. Peter's Church, where there resorted about 30000 Persons.

In August the Lord Thomas Howard, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Great
Britain, had Audience of His Holiness.

The Pope confirmed the Election of the Baron of Plettenbergh to the Bishopric
of Munster.

1689. The Difference between the Pope and the French King not being yet
composed, April 30. the Marquis of Laverdin left Rome and returned to Paris in
July following, and the 26th of the same Month the Pope's Nuntio left Paris, in
order to return to Rome: And the Pope's Apprehensions increasing, that the
French King might make some Attempt on Italy, he made great Preparations to be
in a Posture to defend himself, by daily enlisting more Men, providing
Ammunition, fortifying and reinforcing his Garrisons; and denying Audience to
the Cardinals d'Estrees and d'Este, they and the Duke of Savoy's Minister at
that Court, prepared themselves for their Departure: The Pope resolved also to
make use of his Spiritual Weapons, and threw his weightiest Thunderbolt,
Excommunicating in the severest manner, all Persons of what Degree or Quality
soever, that shall usurp, possess, or separate from the State of the Church,
any part of its Lands, Dominions, etc. or that shall seize upon any part of its
Revenue; or that shall interrupt or hinder the Commerce on the Coasts and Seas
of the Ecclesiastical Estate; as likewise those who shall attempt the calling
or appealing to future Councils, or that shall write against the Pope or
Church. Which Bull was affixed at all the usual public Places in Rome; and was
ordered to be sent into France, that so that Crown might not pretend Ignorance.

At this time the French King declares War against Spain, and before, or since,
against the Emperor and some of the German Princes; as likewise against
England, Scotland, Holland, etc. So that though the Pope had all his Life-long
labored Peace among Christian Princes, yet now he lived to see them all
engaged; but he had this to solace himself with, that there was so much work
cut out for France, that his Arms were like to be diverted from him, so that he
might dye in Peace, which he did accordingly. And he had yet greater
satisfaction, since he had a fair prospect, that as he had been instrumental to
free a great part of Christendom from the Slavery of the Grand Seignior, so now
he saw so many great Princes joined together to rescue their Countries from the
Tyranny and Usurpation of France, which two had designed to share Christendom
between them, and none but himself had before so courageously and vigorously
(according to the Methods of the Papal See) opposed the Encroachments of France
as he had done: He was sensible that this was not a Religious War, as the
Jesuits would insinuate, who have labored the Exaltation of France, but that
the French King had ravished something from most of his Neighbors, as well
Papists as Protestants; and that none of them were able to cope with him
singly, but upon any Fraction that he made with any particular Prince, he would
give Laws to them, and they were forced to truckle and submit to him, who would
be Judge as well as Party in all Differences betwixt them; and that it had long
been his Method, that if any Princes were at Variance, to side with one of
them, and force the other to a Peace upon what Terms he pleased, wherein (on
pretense of his Arms assisting) he would not fail to be a considerable Gainer
by the Bargain: He saw also that he never observed any Peace or Truce, (though
ratified by the most solemn Oaths) further than it was for his own Interest.
All these Perfidious and Tyrannical Actions the Pope detested, and therefore
had he lived, would in all Probability as well have assisted the French King's
Enemies, as he had done the Grand Seigniors.

I have already given an account of what passed as Matter of Fact in the
Differences between the French King and the Pope, wherein sometimes the French
Allegations were more public than the Popes, as by the Marquess of Laverdin's
Protestation, etc. for which reason I shall here insert a short Account of what
was alleged on the Pope's side, whereby the unreasonableness of the French
King's Demands, will farther appear; especially considering his pretended Zeal
for the Roman Catholic Religion, and his affecting to be called the Eldest Son
of the Church.

First, That the French King was so far from having a true cause to complain of
the Pope's unfair Dealings toward him, that the Pope has showed him, on
diverse Occasions, the most effectual Marks of particular Esteem and paternal
Affection, that he might or could do without giving up the Churches Rights;
whereas the Pope received from the French King and his Subjects, on his
account, and by his allowance (witnessed by his Protection of them) diverse and
several Injuries, Contumelies, Reproaches as well as Slights, and Oppositions
both by Words and Writings.

Secondly, In the Matter of the Regale, The French King extended his Power over
more than half the Churches and Parishes of his Kingdom, contrary to the
express Dispensation of the second General Council of Lions, and the immemorial
Possession and Rights of those Churches, confirmed and authorized by the Acts
and Ordinances of his Royal Predecessors, and the Sentiments and Arrests of the
Parliament of Paris, the Registers of the Chambers of Accounts, and the uniform
Judgments and agreeing Opinions of the most famous and celebrated French
Lawyers. He endeavored to subject diverse Monasteries to his Nomination, where
they were Elective, even to the almost Destruction of some of them, and where
he did suffer others to elect, by his uncontrolable Power and absolute
Authority; he forced the Electors to choose whom he pleased, and disinvested
the Bishop of Pamiers of his Revenues, because he defended the Canonical
Liberty of the Church, and persecuted the Canons and other Ecclesiastics, by
Imprisoning and Banishing them, because they would not obey the Schismatical
Vicars, which the Archbishop of Toulouse named, in opposition to those
Canonically elected and confirmed by the Sea of Rome, with diverse other
Obtrusions on Religious Houses and Churches, contrary to all Rules of Right and
Justice.

Thirdly, He suffered Books Dedicated to him and Licensed, to be published both
at Paris, and by his Ambassador at Rome, contrary to the Apostolical See, and
injurious to the Pope's Person.

Fourthly, By his Edicts he confirmed the Propositions made by his Assembly, in
Derogation of the Pope's Authority, and forced them to be Registered in the
Sorbon, against the Doctor's Will. As to the Pope, he was always ready for an
Accommodation, but that the King ever insisted upon having his Demands first
accurately satisfied. That the Pope never refused his Bull of Confirmation,
where the King regularly Nominated, unless to such Persons (of whom he is the
sole Judge) that were Court-Church-Men, and had signed the Propositions, which
were Diametrically contrary to the Apostolical See, or were notoriously
Scandalous: That the Pope denied not Audience to the French King's Ambassador,
if he would have communicated his Commission to Cardinal Cibo, as the French
King hears no Ambassadors, etc. before they have conferred with his Secretary
or chief Minister of State; but withal the French King had never returned
answer to the Pope's Brief touching the Regalia, which had been presented eight
Years before the Ambassador was refused the immediate Access to the Pope he
required.

And, Lastly, As to the business of the Franchises, they have been found to be
so great an Evil in the Government, that the Pope was resolved to Extirpate
their pretended Privileges, and that he is the sole Judge of what concerns his
Temporal Government, and no one ought to intermeddle therein, but leave it to
himself, who is resolved to be Master in Rome, as other Princes are in their
Dominions. And thus the Pope left these Differences undertermined: What may
further occur therein, we must expect in the new Pontificate.

In the beginning of this year the Turkish Envoys came to Vienna to Treat of
Peace: The Diet in Poland ordered an Ambassador to be sent thither to Treat on
their King's part, notwithstanding the French Ambassador in that Court had
labored the contrary: The Venetians had one there also, and on the twelfth of
March 1688/9. the Emperor's Commissioners having before received the Envoys
Proposals, gave their Answer by way of Demand, viz. That the Turks should yield
the Emperor to enjoy all the Countries, Towns and Fortresses that he had gained
during the War. That Transylvania and Wallachia, which have put themselves
under the Emperor's Protection, shall be freed from the Annual Tribute they
formerly paid the Port. And that Count Teckely be delivered up to the Emperor.
The Envoys declared they had no Instructions to intermeddle in the last Demand.

The Venetians demanded the Island of Negropont, and the Duchy of Athens, and
the Fortresses of Dulcigno and Maona, with all the Morea, and that the Turks
should pay the Venetians 400000 Ducats toward the Charge they had been at in
the War.

The Poles demanded Caminiec to be delivered up to them.

The Envoys gave answer, That they were tied up to the Propositions they had
made, and could not recede from them, or give any answer to their Propositions,
until they had sent to inform the Port of them; and had received thence further
Instructions. It was discoursed of offering them fifty days, and that if a
Peace were not after that concluded, the Envoys should be sent to Raab, and
detained there during the War, in return for that the Grand Seignior had
secured Count Caprara, when he resided in quality of the Emperor's Ambassador
at Constantinople.: No Peace ensued, for the French Minister at the Port
represented to the Divan or Council, That his Master was entered into the heart
of the Empire with an Army, and that he had put all the Princes and the Estates
thereof into a great Consternation, wherefore the Emperor had withdrawn his
Forces out of Hungary for the defense of the Empire; and that his Master being
now actually in War with him, the Grand Seignior would have a favorable
opportunity (by continuing the War) to recover the ground he had lost, and
promised on his Masters part a powerful Diversion to the Empire. Upon which the
Divan resolved to continue the War, and gave orders for new Levies, etc.

As to the War against the Turk, little can be said of it in the time I am
limited to, (viz.) the Pope's Death; the Venetians had then made but little
Progress in this years Expedition.

April 17. Prince Lewis of Baden was appointed by the Emperor to command his
Army against the Turks, which consisted of 32000 Germans, besides Hungarians
and Croats that should join him on his march: He pursued the War with very
great Success.

The Tartars, in the beginning of this year, made an Incursion into Russia,
from whence they carried a great number of People into Slavery, having defeated
some Troops that got together in have, without due order or conduct to oppose
them. And since I have often mentioned the Tartars and their Incursions, take
this short Account of them; They are a Savage sort of People, that have few
Towns or Villages in their Country, but live for the most part in the Fields
and Woods, removing from place to place with their Children and Cattle in great
Troops or Bands, where they can find Sustenance: They breed up Horses with
great Difficulty for their use, practicing them to live two or three days
without Meat or Water, so that in the training of them to it, they loose many;
when they go into a neighboring Country to Pillage, they ride on one of these
Horses, and lead another to carry away their Plunder, or change in riding as
they see occasion; and for themselves, they provide a good piece of raw Flesh,
of a Horse or other Beast, and putting it under their rude Saddles, they ride
upon it, and in a days time the heat of the Horses back will have stewed it
sufficiently, and then as they are hungry, they tear or draw out a piece of the
Flesh, and devour it without any Let or Hinderance in their Journeys; but they
that have Milch'd Mares, sustain themselves by drinking their Milk: And thus
they will, with great speed, travel 2 or 300 Miles, till they meet with People
or Spoil, which they take and carry away, before Troops can be assembled to
attack them: Their Arms are only a kind of Sword or Scimiter, with which they
spare not to cut off the Heads of such as will not yield to them: When they
join the Turk, they march in the Van, without any order, Robbing and killing as
they please. Those of them in Caminiec, this year, did often ride forth,
Robbing and Spoiling the King of Poland's Country, and 2000 of them brought in
300 Wagons laden with Provisions into the Town, which did formerly belong to
the King of Poland, and he has often attempted (as he did this year) to regain
it, but without Success.

In June the Moscovites met and engaged a very great Body of them, and on the
place and in pursuit killed 3000 of them.

April 19. Christina Queen of Sweden died at Rome. In the year 1655. she
renounced both her Religion and her Kingdom, she had been educated in and owned
the Protestant Religion, but after she was Queen, she was persuaded to change
it for the Roman Catholic, and considering her Subjects could not bear the
Propagation hereof, which her new Principles obliged her unto, she resigned her
Kingdom unto her Kinsman Charles Gustavus; and apparelling her self in the
Habit of a Man, she stole away, and passed through Denmark and the Lower
Germany, and came by way of Holland into Brussels, where she changed her Habit,
and in the Privy-Chamber of the Archduke Leopold, then Governor of the
Low Countries, made her self and Design known, and on Christmas-Eve in the
presence of him and several of his Nobles, she abjured the Heresies of Luther,
and made Profession of the Roman Catholic Faith. She resolved to spend her
days at Rome, where she might live and enjoy her Religion in the most pompous
and splendid manner, and not only delight her self in the Conversation of Grave
Cardinals, and Learned Men (which she loved) but also gain Favor of the Pope,
and have recourse to him for Pardons, Indulgences, and his paternal
Benediction. But the Plague raging that year at Rome, she deferred her Journey
thither almost a Twelvemonth, until the City and Country were restored unto
Health. Alexander the Seventh was then Pope, and she signified her Intentions
to him, who gave her License to come, but desired she would make another solemn
Abjuration at Inspruck, to prepare and dispose Italy for her more solemn
Reception: When she was on her way in Germany, the Pope sent Luke Holstein the
Keeper of the Vatican Library, to make her Majesty a Complement in his Name;
which Person he thought would be very acceptable to accompany her in her
Journey, being accounted one of the Learned Men of that Age. When she
approached near Rome, he sent four Nuntio's to meet her; at her entrance into
the City, she was met by two Legates a Latere, who, with a pompous Train,
conducted her to the Vatican Palace, where she was lodged with the Royalty
appertaining to a Queen. Many and various were the Ceremonies which passed at
the Reception of this Great Person; after which, on Christmas Day, she was
confirmed by the Pope in St. Peter's Church, who superadded the name of
Alexandra to Christina. She continued her abode at Rome to the day of her
Death, and outlived that Pope, and Clement the Ninth and Tenth, and died a
little more than a quarter of a year before Innocent the Eleventh, in whose
time, by reason of Wars in Sweedland, the yearly Stipend of one hundred
thousand Crowns (which she reserved on her Resignation) falling short, he
allowed her a Pension; she lived not like a mortified Woman, but in Splendo so
that the Bishop of Salisbury in his Letter from Rome, of December 8. 1685,
saying, That the Conversation at Rome is generally upon News, and though none
is Printed there, yet in the Anti-chambers of Cardinals, the News of Europe and
Reflections upon it may be had, among the Persons that daily assemble there.
adds, That at the Queen of Swedens, all that relates to Germany or the North
is ever to be found; and that that Princess (who must ever Reign among all that
have a true taste of Learning or Wit) has still in her withdrawing Room the
best Court of all Strangers, and her Civility, together with the vast Variety
with which she furnishes her Conversation, makes her to be the chief of all
the living Rarities one sees in Rome. Her own words to him were, That she now
grew to be one of the Antiquities of Rome. September 10. 1687. In compliance
with the Pope's Bull about the Franchises, she suffered two of her ordinary
Domestics to be taken by the common Officers of Justice within the Precinct of
her Palace, and carried away. In December before she died, she withdrew her
Money and Jewels out of the Mount of Piety, and deposited them in her own Palace
under a Guard.

In the beginning of August the Pope fell ill of an Ague, and sometimes pains
in one of his Sides, and on the eleventh day was so very Ill, that his Friends
suspected he could not hold out long; wherefore the Prisoners in the night time
were removed to the Castle, and Don Livio his Nephew caused two Cannons and a
Mortar to be removed from the Castle to Villa Pamphilla: He likewise caused to
be carried out of the Palace, all the Money that properly belonged unto the Pope
and his Nephews, and took out of the Vatican all his Clothes, and the curious
Image of our Savior presented him formerly by the Queen of Sweden, and
employed Carts a whole day to carry away all his Movables, which were his own
proper Goods; and also took away his Horses out of his Stables.

On the Twelfth about three of the Clock in the Afternoon, he told those about
him, That he found the Signs of Death upon him, and therefore desired the
Extreme Unction, which was performed accordingly.

He then sent for the Generals of several Orders, and spent much of the night
with them, and in the Morning Cardinal Colrado, Chief Father Confessor, gave
him the Benediction in Articlo Mortis; afterward he called for other
Confessors, and two Monks of each Order, who gave him their Benediction: He
took Absolution from the Regulers, and then recommended his Soul.

About twelve of the Clock his Fit returned more violently than formerly, and
the pain on his Side shot up to his Back: Then again he called for the Cardinal
Confessor to assist him at the hour of Death, and desired him to acquaint the
Sacred College, how much troubled he was, that he was not in a State to call
them together; and desired that they would supply his Defects in choosing such a
Successor as would rectify his Miscarriages; declaring yet, That he had never
erred willingly, and always believed he did well: And further requested, That
the Money he had left might be employed for the Ease of the Subject: And
declared, That he had thoughts in the time of his Sickness, to take off the Tax
imposed upon Corn, but being now near his End, his Successor could do it with
more Honor. And thus between the twelfth and thirteenth of August, S. N. he
departed this Life.

Cardinal Alteri Chamberlain, went immediately (on notice given) to his
Chamber; whereupon the Standers by, calling aloud three times Benedicto
Odescalchi (according to the Custom) and no answer being given, it was a
public Confirmation of his Death; upon which the Chamberlain took off the
Fishers Ring, and brake it in the presence of all, and gave the Corpse to the
Father Confessors of St. Peter, commanding them to resign it up to the Canons
of the Chapel of Paaliness, and caused the accustomed Bell to be rung out: Then
the Officers of the Militia went to the Prisons and discharged all the
Prisoners, and the several Princes, Ambassadors, Cardinals and Foreign
Ministers, had Guards set for the Security of their Palaces from the Mobile,
who use at such times to be Outrageous, and in a short time all concerned went
into Mourning.

The Treasurer and Commissioners disposed of 120000 Scaddies in Alms; he left
in the public Treasury one Million and a half in Money. At his Death there were
ten Vacancies in the College of Cardinals.

It will now perhaps be needless to give a Character of him, so many of his
Actions already mentioned, better showing what he was, than Men's Opinions: Only
in short, he was a great Prince, an Excellent Governor, a Lover of Peace and
Truth, and resolute and courageous to maintain the Rights of the Church;
insomuch, that he declared (when he was threatened by the French King) that he
would look upon it as a special Grace of God, to suffer on that Occasion for
Righteousness-sake, and even, if there were necessity for it, to terminate his
Life in Martyrdom: Yet he would not fail to take all those Measures that Wisdom
and Prudence could suggest to avoid it. And certainly if the French King durst
have attempted him, he would never have brook'd those Oppositions the Pope gave
him.

It plainly appeared the Pope endeavored all that in him lay, to reform Men's
Morals, and the Success was such, that for many Ages the like Regularity had
not been observed in Rome as was in his time: As for the Discipline and Worship
of his Church, and the external Pomp and Splendour of it, he never appeared very
Zealous for it, and by his favoring Molinos, Patrucci, etc. it was likely he
would not have been ill pleased with a Reformation: But he well knew the Number
and Power of the Trafficking Divines, and the Inquisitors, and that the Disease
was so deeply rooted in their Natures, and become so Epidemical, that sharp
Corrosives would but exasperate, and the Cure must be the long and almost
insensible work of Time, and that the course Molinos had taken, was the most
probable way to effect it. And of the truth of this he had sufficient Testimony
in the beginning of his Reign, when he could not get the Bull passed against
Nepotism, though the evil Effects of it had been so long manifest to all the
World, that none could approve it, but those that either were or expected to be
Gainers by it. He was a Man of extraordinary Probity, and of a very severe and
rigid Temper, which inclined him to think, as well of the Jansenists and
Quietists, as he did ill of the whole Order of the Jesuits. His way of living
was very Mean and Sparing, for it is said his Meals did not ordinarily amount to
the value of a Crown a time; and this may with better reason be imputed to his
great Abstemiousness and Temperance, than to any thing of a covetous Temper,
with which I know he has been charged; though his large Contributions, for
carrying on the War against the Turks, render him fairly excusable as to that
Point. In short, his Piety and Virtue, and continual care for the common Good
was such, that it may be truly said, The World for many Ages has not seen a
better Pope than Innocent XI.

An ELEGY on the late Holy Father Pope Innocent XI.
Written by T. D.

STrange power of Piety, when Virtue is
So strong it can disarm our prejudice!
When Luther's Sons Rome's prizeless loss bemoan,
Less than a Miracle can there be shown:
Yet see they Mourn, and those our Doctrine bred,
Hating the Body, yet adore the Head.
This Truth, tho Ages past scarce understood,
Ours boldly may affirm, one Pope was Good;
Not Partial, nor to private Interest sold,
Nay, what is more strange than all, not fond of Gold;
But durst against the Stream of Avarice swim,
St. Peter's Keys were never gilt by him;
Nor did the Churches Biggots, till his sway
Ever, so little for Salvation pay.
His mellow'd Wisdom prop'd Rome's tottering State,
His moderate Judgment stemmed the Clergies Hate,
Willing the Churches Variance to atone,
Railed not at ours, nor lessened not his own.
When Heathens did in swarming Numbers list,
And War began 'twixt Mahomet and Christ;
The imprisoned Treasure which he then set free,
Showed him refined from former Papacy.
The Gold which to that Holy War he threw,
Declared him more than Pope, a Christian too.
When France observed him scourge the Infidels.
Quite different from his Pagan Principles:
His Mother Church the Apostate durst condemn,
And slight her Power to make his own Supreme,
Nor longer owned Rome's Doctrine his Souls guide,
When its Ambition was unsatisfi'd;
This Faultless Prelate, if ever Pope was so,
Sounded his Wiles, and Plots did overthrow,
Lent th Golden Mattock to this pious Work,
And balk'd both Pagan, and the Christian Turk,
Who stily did like snarling Blood-hound lurk,
To snap the Prey, and gorge himself alone,
When the rest were tired with fighting for the Bone.
Mourn all ye neighboring Princes, Sigh and Mourn,
Old Rome will now to her old Sins return;
Her Scarlet Robe has for a time been clean,
But with new Errors, will new Spots be seen:
Now each Ambitious Cardinal Bribes high,
To fill the Conclave for the Prelacy,
Which gained, th enchanted Purse strait shuts as close,
As if the strings were never to unloose.
The Fish is caught, farewell Hypocrisy,
The Vizor banished, and the Net laid by,
Religion late was beyond Gold preferred,
But Profit now is the only sound is heard.
Vile Sores over Rome's corrupted Body grow,
Her Trunk is filthy, now her Head lies low:
For when as some Rich Honest Farmer Dies,
Leaving behind him Lands and Legacies,
His Brainless Offspring by their Vice allured,
Destroy the Crop, which he with care Manured;
His Garden's Fruitless, and his Vineyard bleeds,
The One yields no Grapes, the other only Weeds:
So Rome, her pious Farmer being gone,
Is left to her lewd Race to be undone,
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published, The Amors of Anne (Queen to Lewis XIII.) With the
Chevalier de Roan, the True Father of the Present Lewis XIV. King of France. In
which the whole Cabal and Intriegue of Raising this Heir to the Crown is fully
Detected and Exposed, together with the Engines and Instruments of that Grand
Imposture. Richly adorned with a Copper Plate.


