A French Conquest NEITHER DESIRABLE NOR PRACTICABLE.

DEDICATED TO THE KING of ENGLAND.

London: Printed by His MAJESTY's Servants. MDCXCIII.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
NOtwithstanding You have been traduced by Your Enemies for having ill Designs
upon the Nation, and that these Enemies have had too fatal a Success in
spreading such improbable Suggestions (too fatal for their Native Country as
well as for You, who are the Monarch of it;) yet I am so assured that Your
Majesty jealously watches over the Glory, and Aims at the True Interest of Your
Kingdoms, that I am confident a Discourse that proves a French Conquest of this
Island, to be neither the Intention of Your Friends, nor Your Own, nor
Practicable in it self, will not be an unacceptable Present.

CONQUEST is a harsh Word, and it frightens weak Minds. And that YOU Your Self
should Conquer, can be only wished for by such, as intend their own Interest
more than Yours, in Your Restoration; who intend to live upon Prey, and would
destroy half the Nation that They might have the better share of the
Confiscations. But if that should be, yet the most remote surviving Relations
of those that are Killed, or Executed, when that horrid Trial of Skill shall be
over, will have a mind to the Estates of their Ancestors: And the Banished
Outlaws will be ready to stir up any enterprizing Prince abroad, or such as
are discontented at home, to give future Disturbances; So that these Kingdoms
will be still continued under Convulsive Agonies. And, after all, I beg leave
to say, That no Prince by Conquering, or, to speak more properly, Reducing, his
Rebellious Subjects, can have any Title to take away the Laws, and Liberties of
those that remained Faithful.

I must confess, I am one of those that can never (as well for His, as Our
sake) assist any King that has the Glorious Title of SUCCESSION, to debase it
into the mean, hated, and precarious one of Conquest. But I think our own
Hereditary and Equal Monarchy to be so much the most happy sort of Government,
both for Prince and People, that I can very willingly run any hazard to settle
things upon that Foundation.

Come Home, Great Sir, to Restore our Trade, to Repair our Naval Reputation and
Strength, to make Us the Umpires of Europe, to Deliver Us from Dutch Delusions
to Preserve Our Church as Established by Law from being Debauched by
Comprehension, to Settle Liberty of Conscience in a duly Elected PARLIAMENT,
and to Establish all the Liberties of the English Subject.

It is because I am confident these are Your Royal Resolutions, that I Wrote
this short Discourse, and now Dedicate it to Your Majesty. The Subject is of
that Importance to Your Affairs, that it deserved to have been better handled;
and I desired some other Pens to have undertaken it, but Their Thoughts were
otherwise employed: Yet though I am sensible I have not done it all the Justice
They would, I think I may without Vanity say, I have made it plain beyond the
Cavils, or at least reasonable Objections, of Your Adversaries, and I hope it
may have some effect upon them.

That God would Restore Your Majesty to Your Throne, and to the Hearts of all
Your Subjects, is the unfeigned Prayer of,

May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty 's most Obedient, Loyal Subject, N. N.

A French Conquest NEITHER Desirable nor Practicable.
SINCE our Enemies, in some of their Pamphlets, and many of their Discourses,
amongst several other things wherewith they falsely charge those whose sole
Design is to restore the Ancient and Hereditary Monarchy, together with all
those Securities we ever had, or are necessary for the Preservation of the
English Liberties and Protestant Religion; I say, Since our Enemies, amongst
other things, unjustly charge us with designing, or, at least, unwarily helping
forward, a French Conquest, I have determined to show that such a Conquest is
neither Desirable nor Practicable; that we are neither such Fools nor Knaves as
to think of such fatal Projects against our Native Country. I shall endeavor
to make out both the One and the Other plainly, but not elaborately, since
Brevity and Perspicuity is more proper to disabuse the honest and plain-hearted
(for whose Information I particularly write, and who are most misled by these
Insinuations) than long and artificial Harrangues, wherein the Authors refine
too much, or interlard too much Learning.

I begin with the first Head of my Discourse, viz. That a French Conquest is
not desirable.

There is no sort of Men desire it. I know no body that would subject our
Fortunes, our Liberties and Lives to the Power of France: They that urge it,
don't believe we would. We lament the Taxes, the Imprisonments, the
Plunderings, and the Pillaging of England; the Torturing against Law, and the
Glenco-Massacre in Scotland, together with all the other Miseries that infest
this Island; We would not bring more upon it; we would not depopulate it; we
would not make it a Golgetha: And that the World may be convinced that none of
the Jacobites desire a French Conquest, I shall show it contrary to the
Interests and Inclinations of every Denomination of them to let the French have
any footing here.

It is almost a Jest to go about to prove the Whiggish Jacchites would not find
their Account in a French Conquest. Can it be imagined, that Men who have been
always struggling with their own Kings for more Liberty, and to have their
Properties better guarded, who have been hitherto so jealous of the lowest
Imitations of French Monarchy, should expect greater Securities under a
Provincial French Government, or desire to become Subjects to a King whose own
Natural Subjects they think are very hardly dealt with?

As to the Jacobites of the Church of England, nothing can lie more cross to
their Notions and Interest, than a French Conquest. Can it be believed that
those who venture All to preserve every Gradation of the Royal Line, would
convey over the Tenure of the Crown to one that has no Pretense of Right to it?
Did they not oppose the Bill of Exclusion upon this Principle, That it is not
in the Power of King and Parliament too to alter the Succession? Can they then
give up the Interest of our English Monarchs all at once? No, their Consciences
will bid them oppose a French Conquest with the hazard and expense of the last
Drop of their Blood: And their Interest will bid them do so too; for a French
Conquest cannot be maintained here without so many Outlandish Roman Catholics,
as will be a very indifferent Guard to the Church of England; and if the French
King should be King of England, he must in mere Policy set up his own Religion
here, if he did not think himself obliged in Conscience to do it.

I come in the last place to the Roman Catholics, (of whom our Adversaries
expect the World should believe any Figment, though never so monstrous and
absurd;) and I must say, That those among them who, by reason of their Estates
and Sense, will always govern the rest, are not so little read in our
Histories, as to suppose, that, though such a Conquest did at present make for
them, (as it really will not) it would be lasting. They are now convinced, that
it is by becoming Englishmen, and not by running counter to the English
Interest, that they must be happy; and they profess, that if we will once give
them opportunity to show how well they love our Liberties, we shall see they
place their Hopes in the Indulgence, they shall gain by the moderate and
inoffensive Carriage of their own Party, and not on Foreign Dependencies. They
know that the Revulse of all such Projects must extirpate Them and their
Posterity together with the Foreigners; and they know we must be entirely
rooted out, or we shall root out all Foreigners at last.

I must do that Party still more Justice. I thought always they were neither
Wisely nor Religiously used by us; that we ought not to punish any Man for mere
Opinions, and that we ought not in good Sense to irritate Men into Treasons at
Home, or Dependencies on Foreign Princes: This I always thought; but since the
Misfortunes of His Majesty I have had Occasion to converse more freely with the
Roman Catholics, and I must say, I have found amongst many of that Persuasion
the same Sense of Liberty their Ancestors had, and our Old Papists who have
transmitted to us our Magna Charta, Charta de Forresta, etc. I have found
amongst so many of that Persuasion not only all the good Impressions of that
Happiness we enjoy by our Constitution, but so particular a Detestation of all
Thoughts of a French Conquest, that as I think no Death too cruel for any body
that would promote it, so I am confident whoever can be proved designing it,
would be found Guilty even by any Jury of Papists that can be summoned.

There are possibly some Romans Priests, that may endeavor to blow up the Laity
to some unreasonable Hopes and Designs; but I am well satisfied a French
Conquest is none of them, and besides the Laity of that Church begin to reflect
upon the Folly of the Priests, when the King was here; and they now see, that
the Priests are light Gentlemen without Families or Fortunes, and so can better
shift in a Storm than the Laity can, which makes Ghostly Politics much out of
fashion even with the Roman Catholics, that have Sense, Quality and Estates;
and they will always govern the rest, in what concerns the security of their
Persons and Estates.

Cambden, though in many respects an excellent Historian, whether out of
Bigotry to his own Church, or that he may enhaunce the Character of Queen
Elizabeth, who made and promoted such severe Laws against both, never speaks
favorably either of Puritan or Papist, and yet there drop from him
Expressions, which show, although the Reformation was then so newly settled, and
though the Papists were then more numerous than they are now; nay, though they
were not many of them satisfied of the Legitimacy of Queen Elizabeth, yet the
generallity, and the most considerable Papists would not join in the Spanish
Designs; and they blamed the hot-headedness of Parsons the Jesuit, etc. Read
Cambden's Annals in English, Page 113, 114, and 115. and you will find that in
the Rebellion of the North, (which was the first in her Reign,) though Chapine
Vitelli, Marquess of Cotona, was sent over to Head Forces, which the Duke of
Alva had promised the Rebels; and Nicholas Morton, a Priest, was sent at the
same time by the Pope to denounce Queen Elizabeth a Heretic; yet most of the
Papists sent the Letters they received from the Rebels, together with the
Bearers of them, to the Queen. Page 125, 126. you may read Pope Pius's Bull
against the Queen, and that the modester Papists mislik'd it, and were
unwilling to bring Mischief upon themselves; nay, the beginning of the next
Page tells you, they contemned it as a vain crack of Words. Page 218. the
Papists express such dislike of Parson's fiery zeal against the Queen, that
they thought themselves to have delivered him into the Magistrate's hands. Page
248. the Romans Catholics mislike the Notions, in Politics, of their Priests;
and J. Bishop, a Man devoted to the Romish Church, writes against them, and
against the Deposing Doctrine. Other passages might be quoted out of that
History; but here are enough, and perhaps some will think too mamany, for whose
purpose it makes more to render the Papists errant Monsters.

Though, by reason that our Adversaries are likeliest to be believed against
the Roman Catholics, and prejudice Our Cause by the general Prejudice that is
against them, I have been the more particular about that Party; yet I thank God
no Man is less liable to be proselyted to their Opinions in matters of
Church-worship, than I am, or more loves, or will venture farther in all Times
for the Characteristick Liberties of the English Subject; Liberties that I will
defend, as far as in me lies, not only from all Foreign Powers, but from all
Encroachments of our own Monarchs too; though I must say at the same time, that
I can distinguish between Liberty and Licentiousness, and like our own true and
ancient Hereditary and equal Monarchy the best of all the several sorts of
Government; and know also that there are many Prerogatives that are as
necessary for the Protection of the People, as for the Safety and Grandeur of
the Prince.

The World is much mistaken in our Notions; I wish they would hear 'em from our
selves, who can best tell the Reasons of our Dissent from the present
Government, and with what Designs, and how far we do, and will serve K. James;
and they will find even the Non Swearers of the Church of England have in their
Loyalty to Him a due regard to their Country likewise. By this frankness all
Parties might come to understand one another better, and the late Experiments
have made all those of the several Parties, that are for K. James wiser and
more temperate than formerly; the Jacobites wish their own Disappointments had
made the Williamites as much so; we know indeed they have made many of them
wiser.

We are so far from wishing the King of France should Conquer us, that we don't
wish King James should. We will receive Him, we will help Him, as our Father,
as our King; but Conqueror is not in the Language of our Loyalty. The Church of
England have been ever thought to carry the Notions of Prerogative the highest;
but I believe amongst the Non Swearing Clergy, there will not be found one St.
As^ph, one Burnet; and we are heartily glad, that those who sit in the Two
Houses ordered such a Stigma for such nauseous Flattery: And should the King be
forced to reduce these Kingdoms by a high Hand, which many of the Jacobites are
sure he is very unwilling to do, and we hope the Nation will be wiser than to
put him to it; yet even then all the wise and influencing Jacobites will
interpose, will keep him (if he should be inclined to do otherwise) from
pursuing Revenge, and will tell him, that the end of Civil War must be attended
with Moderation in the Conqueror; or otherwise he that is one day Victor by the
Sword, may be vanquished the next by Jealousies. If he should unmercifully
devour even his Rebellious Subjects, we our selves should stand affrighted at
him, as at a Polyphemus, and conclude he would feast upon us at last. Our Henry
the Third had like to have lost himself by an intemperate use of his Victory
over the Barons: And Edward the Second did lose himself by using extreme
Rigours after his Victory at Burton upon Trent: Other instances of this sort
may be found in our own Histories; and if we rightly consider the present State
of Affairs, the Defection was very general, and upon the Account of Male
Administration, and therefore the Pardon ought to be without Exceptions; and a
Rectification of those Errors will restore the King to the Hearts of all his
People, as well as his Kingdoms, without Effusion of Blood. They are
State-Quacks, who only understand Phlebotomy. A good Physician will sweeten and
compose the Mass of Humors, and by proper Lenitives quiet all our boiling
Spirits, and correct the Temperament of the State into Obedience, without
creating Faintnesses, or destroying our Vitals. This all the considerable
Jacobites are now satisfied of, this is their Opinion. It is not the Title of
the King that is the Dispute; then indeed Wise Kings have, after Victories,
been severe, as our Henry VII. was; but the same Henry VII. was as Merciful in
Flammock's Rebellion, though it was occasioned by collecting Taxes that were
granted by Parliament. His Son also, Henry VIII. (who was a Prince of a high
mind) when 30000 were in Arms in the Yorkshire Rebellion, which was upon
account of what they thought Maladministration, pardoned every Man, and after
quieted their minds by sending down a Book amongst them to explain his
Intentions. It is by Mercy, and letting us see clearly into his Royal Heart,
that our King, King JAMES, must establish his Throne; and even they who believe
Passive Obedience, would not be active in the Destruction of their Country; and
though they think the Church of England supports the Monarchy, yet now they are
satisfied nothing less will secure their Church, than what makes our Liberties
safe. You know there are others in his Interest, who will claim their Rights in
a bolder manner yet; I bless God there are many of them, some of whom never
touched with this Government, and others who have been so disappointed by its
Ministers and Administration, that they no longer expect a Cure from the Prince
of Orange's hands; you cannot think either the One or the Other of these desire
to be a Conquered People, nor do I know any one Man that desires it.

Indeed this Government has taken all Methods by Harrassing and Imprisonments,
and such Taxes as must undo us, to make the Jacobites do some desperate thing:
and if any thing would, such Usage would make us wish for a French Conquest, or
any other Change of Torments; but nothing can make us wish for a French
Conquest. They have not yet made us Rise, that they might have the Confiscation
of our Fortunes, and du^ King William Conqueror without control: I hope we
shall never Rise, till we do it to the purpose, till the Nation rises with us;
I hope we shall disappoint that Design of parcelling out our Inheritances
amongst the sworn Vassals of the Prince of Orange, as Ireland (which could
easily have been made to follow the Fortune of England at the beginning of this
Revolution, had not this Project been in their Head) has been shared amongst
them. I hope we shall disappoint them here by a wise and temperate Conduct.
They care not what Slaughters, what Distresses, they bring upon, the Nation:
but We would restore Peace and Plenty to it; and whatever our Enemies say (who
have all along had a great Faculty of contriving Lies, and forming Hobgoblins)
we love our Country, our Native Country too well to let any Uneasiness make us
have one Thought, one Wish for a French Conquest.

The Prince of Orange in his Declaration says, One of the Ends of his coming
was to cover all Men from Persecution. He has kept that as well as the other
parts; for he cannot but know that many of those who refuse the Oaths, do it
out of Conscience, and how many (against whom no other Crime has been proved,
but the refusal of those Oaths, and therefore in the sight of the Law guilty of
none else) have had their Arms and Horses seized, have been hindered from
following their Lawful Business, put to find unreasonable Bail, been laid up in
loathsome Prisons, and been forced to pay most part, if not all their Incomes?
If this is not Persecution, I know not what is; and I think he cannot but
believe it is generally for Conscience Sake. Is not that Venerable Old Man
Archbishop Sancroft, and several other Bishops and dignified Persons, who have
shown a sufficient Concern for the Protestant Religion, and whose Loyalty was
not so stupid (to use Dr. Sherlock's Epithete) but that they stood up for the
Laws. Are not many of these Excellent Persons reduced to great Straights and
Poverty, because they have not supple time-serving-Providential Consciences?
How many of the Inferior Clergy are sent to beg their Bread, who made it a
point of Conscience to oppose the Irregularities of King James's Ministers,
who, though they would have been, and are now willing to consent to Liberty of
Conscience Parliamentarily settled, were not flexible to the Tricks set on foot
by those designing Ministers? There has been already, I think, a sufficient
Persecution of the Jacobites; but the Judges are commanded to set a greater
forward still: however, that shall not provoke us to a rash Attempt, neither to
hurt our selves nor our Country, neither to make King William's Hotchpotch
Title a Conquest, nor to think of a French Conquest.

We cannot swear away our Allegiance, which we owe to King James, as his Birth
right, and which most of us have sworn to him; but if it had been thought fit
to contrive an Oath, which should have expressed our Love of England, and our
Abhorrence of a French Conquest, whatever Mulct had been laid upon the Refusal
of it, whoever had refused it would have been by us unpitied, though you had
exacted the Mulct never so severely, for we are all satisfied a French Conquest
is not desirable.

That a French Conquest is contrary to the Inclinations and Interests of the
several sorts of Jacobites, is a good Argument that it is not practicable. But
now I fall upon my second Head, I presume I shall directly and irrefragably
make out. I hat a French Conquest is not Practicable; and that, by showing,

I. That a French Conquest is as little King James' s Inclination as his
Interest. II. That such a Conquest is palpably opposite to the Interest of all
the Princes and States of Europe. And lastly, That to attempt a French Conquest
of England, either for Himself or King James, is not the Interest of the King
of France himself.
I omit showing a French Conquest is against the Interest of King James, for I
don't think it worth my while to prove that it is against a Man's Interest to
have his Estate taken from him, and his Posterity destroyed. King James has a
Child, that He believes, and you believe too (notwithstanding all the pains you
take to be thought to believe that useful Flam of your pretended Imposture,
which was at first taken up, and industriously promoted (like that of the Irish
cutting the Throats of all the People of England and Scotland) to help forward
this Revolution) to be a True PRINCE OF WALES; and at least, this innocent
Child has not disobliged the King; and this is enough to make him take pity of
the Nation, however Rebellious and Ungrateful we have been to him: But besides,
he has several times since his Exile expressed himself in so pathetick and
extenuating a Style concerning those Subjects that have used him so ill, that
it would be almost incredible, if related; And though the Prince of Wales was
dead, he retains even for the Princess of Orange such a Fatherly Affection, as
plainly supersedes Royal Resentment; and I have heard one that was by say, That
upon a Gentleman's mentioning, even upon occasion of Business, the Fault of the
Princess of Orange, and that with all the Modesty imaginable, (and he must
touch very tenderly upon that String who will make his Court to the King, though
such virulent Pamphlets are Licensed here against Him), the King replied That
the Princess of Orange had Natural Foundations of Good ness that Dr. Burnet and
the Bishop of London can never destroy* And further, they who have been at S^
Ge^mans k^ow with what Indignation the King treats althoughts of Restoring him
by any other Method than by a great Concurrence of his own People. The King
knows how obstinately the People of Britain, nay, many that are now his own
Friends, would resist any other Method; and he knows that the Riches of a
Country are the People of it: He would be Himself, and he would have his Son,
the King of Great Britain; and he does not think it worth his while to be King
of Trees, of Beasts, and a desolated Land, or to leave such a ruined Kingdom to
his Son. When I weigh the good Inclinations of the King, and the barbarous
Persecution and Misrepresentation he has met with, I am shook with a double
Agony: I compassionate His Wrongs, and am astonished at our Ingratitude, and
that we would not once try whether the Things we complained of proceeded from
His own Nature, or from those about him, whom the Prince of Orange had
corrupted. The Scene of His and our Miseries is abundantly and admirably laid
open in an excellent Book printed last Summer, called, Great Britain's Just
Complaint; and if I would entertain the World upon that Subject, I must either
transcribe what may be found in that Book, or relate the History of the same
Matter of Fact, without doing the same Justice to the Cause of the King. That
Great and Judicious Author has discovered the whole Mystery of Iniquity; How
such Snares were laid for the King as an honest-minded Man could scarce escape;
How willing the King was to redress our Grievances, when he found he had been
in Mistakes, and this before he went away; How he continued in the same Mind
when he was addressed to by some of his Subjects of Scotland, who had appeared
most vigorously to resent those Mistakes, and this when he was under no
Pressure in his Affairs. I will add no more to justify the Inclinations of the
King, but beseech every body who reads this to read Great Britain's Just
Complaint, which puts the Nation upon the best Method for us to know the
Inclinations of our King. He advises, page 48. to resume that Treaty we so
foolishly broke off and refused, and thereby to secure Religion and Property by
those Concessions which our Sovereign is still ready to grant us. He goes on,
"Let us put it home to him, and lay it at his own Door; Let him have it in his
choice to return by his People, if he pleases. Convince him, that his
Protestant Subjects, upon securing their Religion and Liberties, will repair
their former Errors, by contributing heartily toward his Restoration. And, as
that Author says, if he declines to return upon a Protestant and English Foot,
there is an end of the Controversy, and of all Disputes amongst Protestants;
for Religion and Liberty will never be sacrificed by true Englishmen. And I
will add to what he says, If no true Englishman join with him, whatever Forces
they can transport upon us, neither can King James come home, nor can the
French conquer us: But, God be praised, a great many true English men will join
to bring home the King, though I know not one so bad an English man as would join
in a French Conquest.

But I come in the second place to show, That it is not the Interest of any of
the Princes or States of Europe, that the French should make us a Conquest. The
excellent Author of the abovenamed Great Britain's. Just Complaint has proved,
that whether this Confederate War ends successfully or unsuccessfully, in all
likelihood, and according to all the Rules of Policy, the Restoration of King
James must in a short time follow upon the Determination of it: But it is my
business to make it plain, That though it may be, and is the Interest of all
Countries to have King James Restored at the conclusion of this War, yet it is
not the Interest of any of them, that the French should conquer us, have our
Kings their Vassals, or be Masters of our Ports. Would the Spaniard have the
Chanel shut up on both sides to Flanders? Would the Dutch have the English and
Irish Ports managed by such select Committees, as the French would infallibly
set up for Trade? And how long would the Dutch resist Ours and the French
Power, united under one Absolute Monarch? Would not the Northern Crowns, and
all the Princes of Germany, soon feel the Weight of such a Confluence of
Strength? The Influence that such a Conquest would have upon all the States of
Europe, be they never so remote, is at first sight so evident, that there is
not one of them who would be an idle Spectator of our Ruin. Every body now
knows the Danger their own House is in, when their Neighbor's is on fire. Every
little Politician knows how much Greatness depends upon Naval Preparations and
Trade; therefore every body would be alarmed, every body in an Uproar, when
they saw such Maritime Kingdoms as ours like to be made an Accession to the
numerous Landforces of France. They are idle Brains, that dream of Universal
Monarchies at this day; and though whole Kingdoms heretofore would not join in a
Common Defense, whole Europe would now. However Ambitious the King of France
may be, he can never think of so unweildy a Project, in which he must not only
encounter all England, all this Island, all these Three Kingdoms, but all
Europe too.

I come in the last place to show, That it is not the Interest of the K. of
France to attempt to make us a Conquest, either for Himself or K. James. I
would ask but two things to be granted me, which I think will be granted by
most Men: The one is, That the King of France tolerably understands his own
Interest; The other is, That he will follow it where he finds it. And now I
shall proceed to prove, That it is not the Interest of France to attempt to
make us a Conquest. The Unweildiness of the Project is one very good Reason
against it. Less than One hundred thousand of his best Men cannot make us a
Conquest, and keep us so; and he must only take Possession of the Land, and not
expect to be Master of the People, by reason of our Religion; and whoever he
sends to be his Lieutenant here, will be under great Temptation to revolt from
him, and set up for himself, or become the First Subject of these Kingdoms,
which we shall be willing to make him, and a greater Subject than France has,
rather than not get rid of the Miseries of a Provincial, and be restored to our
own Government. Consider how much danger the Absolute Power of France will run
by a too free intercourse with the few surviving Britains, who will acquaint so
many of his Soldiers what were the Freedoms of our Land. Consider whether
France can bear such an Evacuation as is necessary to Make and People us a
Province. We believe that the Expulsion of the Hugonots let out too much of his
People, too much of the Vital Blood of France: It did so doubtless, and a
Plantation of our Island would endanger all he has upon the Continent. What
Neighbor that envies him, would not be glad to see him make such an Experiment,
would not nick the lucky Opportunity, and pull back all those Towns and
Provinces, which he may now much more easily keep, than he can gain us? Would
any Peace, any Leagues they can have with him, be Proof against such a
promising Temptation? To attempt the Conquest of these Kingdoms would indeed be
grasping at a prodigious Shadow, but he would not fail to lose a great deal of
real Substance. The King of France is not such a Knight Errant, he does not
love to venture over much: He, like Julius Caesar, when he had attained the
Empire, loves to make good what he gets, and is not like the Macedonian
Rambler, greedy of difficult and bloody Travels. Let the Designs of France be
as vast as they will, their King is no Madman. Augustus and Tiberius (who were
both skilful in Government) are thought by very sensible Men to have neglected
Britain out of this wholesome State-Maxim That it was necessary to bound and
moderate the Roman Empire. It is certain those two Emperors often thought of
bounding the Roman Empire, and of bringing it into a tenable Compass; and it is
plain, that mighty Empire was at last overthrown by its own Weight and
Largeness. The Jurisdiction of France is of a prodigious growth for this Age,
and if the King of France thinks of subduing such a brave and populous Country
as we are, so united as we shall be, when we find only the French King's
Interest at the bottom of the Plot, and so assisted as we shall be by all the
Potentates of Europe for their own sakes, he will miscarry in the Enterprise,
and France it self will tumble from its Highth. It is a bolder Undertaking,
than what is recorded of Alexander the Great; and tho the King of France should
overrun us, he would, like that Alexander, never be able to settle a Government
amongst us, but his very Victories would shake his own.

Let it be farther considered, That though the French have been successful in
Wars near home, yet they have been unsuccessful in remote Undertakings, where
either the transporting by Sea, or the uneasiness of the passage by Land have
rendered Succors hard and difficult to be sent. What rendered all their Attempts
upon the Kingdom of Naples and Duchy of Milan ineffectual, but the
difficulties they found in sending Supplies to Naples by Sea and to Milan over
the rough Alps? In our King John's time Lewis, the then Dauphine of France,
was invited over and sworn to by many of the Barons; But did not the difficulty
of getting Supplies to maintain his footing at last utterly defeat all his
Hopes? Would not our present Sailers carry their Ships to any part of the
World, rather than let them be carried into France? Is there not think you one
Great Man left, whose Fidelity to our own right Line, and whose Courage and
Vigilance is equal to Hubert de Burgh's? Think you there is no Gallant Man, who
would by a Sea Fight hinder the pouring in of fresh French Succors, when we
saw they aimed at the Destruction of the Right of our Royal Family, and our own
Rights? I am not over fond of the present Age, yet there are many Brave and
Loyal Men in it, that would defeat any French Design that were injurious to our
own legal Monarchy. But to come to our own Days; What enabled Spain to recover
Catalonia in a great measure, and to pluck Messina in Sicily out of the present
King of France's hands, when they were losing Ground in the confining
Provinces, but the difficulty of sending Supplies to the one over the Pyrenean
Mountains, and to the other by Sea? And it is remarkable, That the
uncertainties alone of Wind and Weather rendered the suppling of Messina
impracticable, even when the French were Masters of the Seas, and had routed
the Spanish and Dutch Fleets, and killed the famous de Ruyter; How much more
will the same uncertainties of Wind and Weather, joined with our brave Ships,
and braver Seamen render us safe, and all such Designs as a French Conquest
impracticable? Did not also this present King of France in our own Memories
overrun like a violent Torrent the United Provinces, and possess himself of a
great part of their Country, and yet was obliged to throw up all his Conquests?
And for what Reason? Because there was the interposition of fifty or sixty
Miles that was not his own, which might have hindered the sending Supplies, and
will not the interposition of more Miles of a tempestuous and uncertain Sea,
joined with the Rebuffs which will be given him by our Fleet, lay greater Rubs
in his way, and oblige him at last to disgorge, though he should by surprise gain
Ground upon us? What was it induced the Romans to maintain Fourscore thousand
Men in Britain, and to secure their Frontiers in this Island, by the famous
Walls of Adrian and Severus, as well as with such numerous Troops, against the
Incursions of the Scots and Picts, who were confined within the little Country
now called Scotland; when at the same time they were able to protect their
Frontiers with less numerous Troops from the Insults of the Parthians and of
the Germans (which then included all modern Germany to the North and East of
the Danube and Rhine, the Northern Crowns, Poland, and better part of Muscovy)
each of which Nations taken separately did possess Countries six times bigger
than France at this day? Was it not because of the difficulty of sending Troops
into Britain, occasioned by the uncertainty of Wind and Weather, though they were
Masters of the Seas, and their Enemies had no Fleet to oppose them? What Reason
then have the French to dream of the Conquest of our Island, when all its
Inhabitants are united in one Monarchy and Government; when all Nations are now
equalized as to Arms and Discipline of War, and when our Fleet, modestly
speaking, is equal to any of our Neighbors? Would it be reasonable for them,
with Forces less considerable than those of the Romans, with fewer
Encouragements from the Advantage of Military Discipline and Arms (in which the
Romans did far surpass their Enemies) and under many more Discouragements from
our Fleet and otherwise, to attempt the Conquest of a People much more Great,
Rich and Numerous, than the ancient Scots and Picts, who have the sense of
Religion as well as Liberty, of all that is dear and valuable, to rouse and
influence their Courages; especially when from all Histories Foreigners may
learn this Lesson: That nothing less than an Annihilation can extinguish the
sense of Religion, Honor, and Liberty in English Breasts?

I think I have already shown, That it is not the Interest of France to attempt
to make us a Conquest for themselves: And it is as easy to show, It is as
little their Interest to make us Slaves to King James.

I am resolved I will advance what will be thought a Paradox, viz. That there
is no one Country so much concerned as France, that we should have good
Securities for our Liberties under the Restoration; and if I am challenged on
this Head, I can make this Paradox plain to every body's Understanding. I shall
touch upon it briefly here. France is concerned to keep us from an Absolute
Monarchy and Popery too, and that by reason of our Pretenses upon that Kingdom.
It would be the greatest Sol^ecism in the French Politics to make a King, that
has such a Claim, entire Master of a People, who have such natural Courage, and
that love Glory rather too immoderately, or to remove such a Shiboleth, as are
our different Creeds. It is the Interest of France to promote and head our
Discontents, and not to lay the People at the King's Mercy. They thought so
formerly, and of late years. Did not Lewis mentioned, in my last Paragraph,
before he departed this Realm, take care that Hen 3. should give his Oath, nay
made him give it; That he would restore to the Barons of the Realm, and other
his Subjects all their Rights and Privileges, for which the Discord began
between King John and his People; Baker's Chronicle, P. 114? Did not their
great Richelieu at the beginning of our late Civil Wars send Emissaries into
Scotland to stir up the Male Contents, and that though we had so lately married
a Daughter of France, and so lately had had a Quarrel with the Spaniard? Their
Kings must be ready to assist the People, if their Rights are in real Danger;
or, when we have lost our Rights, they may lose their Crowns. The Friendships
of Neighboring Princes seldom last long, seldom during their own Lives, and
are more seldom transmitted to their Posterities. Many Reasons and Jealousies
of State are falling in, which occasion frequent and unavoidable Breaches, and
a King of England who is Absolute and Master of his Subjects may be troublesome
and dangerous to France, and may revive our Old English Pretenses to the most
considerable Provinces, nay to the Crown of France its self. So that it will be
prudent in the French King to let us alone with our old Quarrels between
Prerogative and Privilege, and let our Ease be a check upon the Ambition of our
Princes, when a daring and enterprising Spirit may be upon the Throne, one who
may be willing to court Difficulties and Dangers, and try for what his
Forefathers have possessed. The King of France is so far from designing a
Conquest for himself, that he desires no Retribution for what King James his
Misfortunes have cost him. And this I say from good Authority. And as for
Conquering for King James, he too well knows his own Interest to think it so,
to make us Slaves or Papists, or either of them. Of this you may read more in
Great Britain's Just Complaint.

I know how artful and indefatigable our Adversaries are, and that though a Man
beats them out of all their strong holds, yet they will at last retire and
betake themselves to those Arguments that they in their own minds know have no
real weight; and I therefore foresee they will still endeavor to scare Men
with the remembrance of all our former pretended Conquests; and for that
reason, and that there may remain no umbrage, not even the least to imagine a
French Conquest practicable, I will take every one of those Conquests into
consideration, and handle them apart, that I may treat of them more distinctly:
and I presume the Reflections I shall make upon them will show not only a vast
difference between the Condition and Circumstances of those that are said to be
our Conquerors, and the present French Power, and between the State of the
British Affairs then, and what they are now, but also show a great disparity
between the Interests that those Invaders proposed to themselves, and what the
King of France can have at this day: So that whether in a genuine and strict
sense they were Conquests or no, I hope to make it plain that they will in no
wise overthrow the Positions I have been advancing.

If any man has a mind to examine whether they were properly Conquests, he must
consult our Antiquities, and those Treatises that are expressly written on that
Subject, wherein he will find the Point warmly debated on both sides, and
perhaps with more Heat than Judgment; I will refer this Enquirer to those
Authors, and sall directly to consider our several Invaders.

I will begin with Caesar's Invasion, which was the first of which we have any
certain knowledge.

Julius Caesar, who was then only an Officer of the Roman State, but had laid
in his own Breast the Design of seizing upon that Empire, when he had subdued
most part of the ancient Gallia, (which comprehends the modern France, Savoy,
Switzerland, Germany on this side the Rhine, and the Spanish Netherlands,) and
by a Potent Faction at Rome had obtained it of the Senate as his Province for
many years, thought it necessary to add to the Glory of his Name some Attempt
upon Countries beyond the end of the World, (for so was Britain in those days
thought at Rome,) that so his dazzling Achievements might make his long intended
purpose more easy: I mean, his Design of raising himself from a Servant to be
Master of his Country. As to the Romans themselves, when they came first
amongst us, their Power was united, entire, and so much too big for all our
Neighboring Countries, that they had given Law to every one of them before they
had attempted Us, and we were divided into several petty Governments, who would
not join in a common Defense.

Give me leave now to set down, That the King of France is already at the Head
of a Government, and needs not risque what he has, to make him Superior to
those amongst whom he dwells. We are united under one Monarchy. There are many
Princes confederate against France, that are very Powerful; and Neutral Princes
enough to turn at any time the Scale: Nor is there, as I said, amongst all the
Jacobites that I know, one Man who so little loves his own King and his own
Country, as that he would not hazard his Life against the French, if they
designed any thing in prejudice of our Rightful Monarch or his Posterity, or
our Constitution it self. Can any Man think we have less sense of Liberty than
the Irish, who yet had not a different Religion to caution them, as the
Protestant Jacobites have here? Indeed some of us are (like them) sometimes
wheedl'd into too early and undue Suspicions of the French, even by the
Emissaries of the Prince of Orange; and if any body talks of governing England
by French Power, I am sure they must be the Prince of Orange's Pensioners; and
though the Prince of Orange himself is not good at Much, his Agents have the Art
to foment Jealousies.

Besides all this, there is a great disparity between the Times in which the
Romans came hither, and now, by reason of our Skill in Military Affairs. I
suppose few Englishmen will allow the French so much superior to us in the Art
of War, as the Romans were to the naked Britains. Our late Taxes have been very
ill bestowed, if our Fleet does not hold the same Disproportion; and yet in
those days, though the Romans were so long amongst us, and though they governed us
in great part by our own Laws, and many of their Lieutenants rather taught us
the exercise of, than took away our Liberties, nevertheless they never had (if
our best Historians may be credited) the whole Land at any one time in
Subjection; and though such Multitudes of the Britains were slain, the Tribute
the Romans got here cost them, in Massacres and Battles, more Men than France
will ever be able to spend upon the Project of Conquering these Kingdoms.

Most of what is recorded of the manner of the coming, and being here of the
Romans, is handed down to us by their own Writers, with a naked and sedate
Narration: but Cloistered Clergymen (who used themselves to write Hyperboles
rather than precise Truths) being those from whom we have most of our Accounts
of the Saxon Times, we must expect swelling and Legendary Reports; but that
wherein I shall consider, to show the disparity between them and the French,
and ours and those days, lies in a small Compass, and will be granted on all
hands.

The Quarrels of the Roman Empire had carried into France, under the Banners of
Maximus (one of the Competitors for it) the Flower and Strength of Britain; and
with the overthrow of Maximus by Theodosius, they either all perished, or
seated themselves in Armorica. There was likewise another great Transplantation
of the British Youth under Constantine; and at this time the Saxons were a very
Warlike People, and so over-charg'd with Numbers, that they sent Multitudes
abroad to fight for a Habitation. The Frame of their Government agreed very
well with the British, and was very near what are at this day the Fundamentals
of our Government: They were invited in, to preserve us from being overrun by
the Scots and Picts, who were our Fellow-Islanders; and though I don't doubt the
Saxons carried the Merit of their Successes against our Enemies further than
became our Friends, yet I cannot imagine but that there was a more equal
Incorporation of the British Stock than we can discover at this distance of
time, and from such passionate Writers as are the Relators of what passed then.
And, after all, it was want of Ships, and great Divisions amongst the Britains,
occasioned their Overthrow (for our Monarchy was not perfected, and, as Milton
says very well, Vortigern was rather Chief, than sole King.) These were the
Reasons why the Saxons so far mastered the Britains; and yet the Saxons often
ran a Risque of a final Extirpation.

From this Account of the Saxon Invasion, the disparity is very obvious. I
heartily lament the Loss of so much English Blood as has been spilt
unnecessarily and unlawfully too, in these our deplorable Distractions, into
which we have brought our selves, by inviting over a Foreigner to rescue those
Liberties, which he has (as we might well suppose he would) more trampled upon
than all the Evil Counselors of King James. We would invite a Foreign Prince
to do our own proper Work, instead of endeavoring Parliamentarily to redress
our Grievances, or rescuing our selves our Liberties by an English
Insurrection, such a one as those whereby our Ancestors obtained the
Confirmations of their Charters, and which often ended (as all Insurrections
ought to do) without any real Prejudice to the Successive Monarchy, and which
(let it be called now as Whiggish as they will, and those that were formerly
were Popish) is more justifiable either to Prudence or Religion, than the
Nobility, Gentlemen, and Though the Prince of Orange's Declaration mentions Lords
Spiritual, and some have raised a Scandal upon Archbishop Sancroft as if his
hand was to the Invitation of him; I am well assured that neither that Right
Reverend Prelate, nor his Fellow Sufferers ever engaged in that design of
calling over the P. of Orange.
Clergy, (who call themselves of the Church of England) their Invitation of a
Foreign Prince, which (with all the Charity and Pity in the World for those who
were inconsiderately misled, and are not so obstinate as to think with
Catiline, That ill Deeds must be made safe with worse) I beg leave to say was
Unnatural, and in despite of His Relative, and their Civil Duty. I say, I
heartily lament the Loss of so much English Blood as has been unwarrantably
thrown away in Ireland, at Sea, and in Flanders; and yet, God be praised, we
have still left generous Youth enough to make us the Terror of all Ambitious
Princes, if we would once again unite to take away all Disputes of Title by
restoring our rightful and lawful King, and betake our selves to negotiate in
the Arbitration of Europe, rather than over hastily engage in Wars abroad,
which Wars might be evidently proved destructive to this Nation; and, would it
not too much lengthen this Discourse, would be no unuseful digression here,
since our own woeful experience, from the time we have been hooked into this
present Quarrel of Europe, which is more the Confederates than Ours, has made
it so proper a Subject to be well considered of. I hope some Person or other
will handle it in a Paper apart.

But I must return to show the disparity between the British Affairs now, and
when the Saxons came amongst us, and that with a respect to the French Nation;
and I again bless God we are not yet drained by this Confederate Quarrel, we
have hand over head engaged in, of all those Gallant Man, that should defend
our Island. But farther, Have not the French a Land to live in? Is France so
overstocked with People? has their Government any Affinity with ours? Have we
any Fellow-Islanders, who are of a distinct Government that endeavor to
destroy us? And lastly, Is not our Government resolved into a natural Monarchy,
though, praised be God, it is a limited one?

As for the Danes, though their Original is disputed, it is plain by all the
Histories of those Times that they were Rovers and Robbers, that were to seek a
Country to live in, and possibly might be another swarm of the Saxons; and it
is observable that they were above Two hundred Years before they mastered this
Land; and that the Reason they mastered us at last, was our want of Ships; and
after they had been attacking us about Two hundred Years, they were entirely
Massacred, Man, Woman and Child, all in less than Four and twenty Hours; and
when Swain the Danish King (which was Two hundred twenty and four Years from
the first entrance of the Danes) had forced King Ethelred into Normandy; Swain
dying the next Year, and the Danish Army setting up Cannte or Knute his Son,
the Saxon Nobility and States were in such Heart and Power, that they sent
Messengers to Ethelred, Declaring they preferred none before their own Native
Sovereign, If he would promise to Govern better than he had done; and
accordingly upon his Promise to redress their Grievances, they repossessed him
of his Throne, and continued it to his Son Edmond Ironsides I wish our English
Nobility and Gentry would now send Messengers to lay before the King all the
Male-Administrations of his Ministers, and what are the proper Securities
against all such Male-Administrations for the future; and I am confident the
King will receive such a Message very kindly, nay I know from very good
Authority he would, and that he is willing to give mankind all reasonable
Satisfaction. Here I must observe also, That there still remained amongst us
distinct and quarrelling petty Governments, (for the Saxon Heptarchy was not
entirely wrought up into a Natural Monarchy,) and yet Edmond Ironside had
totally routed Canute, had it not been for that Traitor Edrick, who at the
Battle of Alf^rd by some Wiles detained Edmond from pursuing him, which Edrick
(as an Example to Traitors) was afterward put to Death by Canute. I have
another Remark that I would set down concerning the Danish Matters, which is,
That the Citizens and Nobility of London stuck by Edmond Ironside, but the
Sherlockian-Providential-Archbishops, Abbots, and some of the Noblemen elected
the Conqueror Canute; as some Bishops and too many of our Nobles have done the
Prince of Orange. I am sorry that the Citizens of London have not more
unanimously stuck to their Natural and Rightful Monarch; but I hope they will
yet have an Opportunity to redeem their Reputation, and that they will then
unanimously call back their King, that they may blot out the Guilt of their too
general Defection; and though too many have joined with the present Usurpation,
yet there are many worthy Citizens that have retained their Ancient Loyalty
during all this Revolution; and the Number of those who how see their Error
daily increases.

I have digressed a little by repeating some Things, which are not altogether
so pertinent to my main Design; and since I am turned Story-Teller, I will put
down the Reason why Canute put Edrick to Death, which was for slaying the
Lord's Anointed, Edmond Ironside; and that, though Edmond was Canute's Enemy,
and yet Canute himself made away the Brother and Children of Edmond, either of
which had a better Right to be the Lord's Anointed in England, than Canute had
himself. This was such a piece of Justica, as it is now of Religion for our
Conquerors, William and Mary to keep with Solemnity the 30th. of Jan. and 29th.
of May. But though he was guilty of this Mockery in point of private Justice,
yet in relation to the Constitution of England he commanded the Observation of
the Ancient Saxon Laws (which were afterward called the Laws of Edward the
Confessor) and at a Convention of Danes at Oxford, it was agreed on between
both Parties to revive and keep those Laws. I think our present Conquerors have
not revived many of our good Old, or made many New advantageous Laws for us. It
is by Unreasonable Fines, Arbitrary Imprisonments, Pressing men contrary to
Law, etc. (against all which Things the P. of O. his own Declaration inveighed,
and our Bill of Rights provided) that they maintain their Conquest. These are
their Methods, instead of granting the Judges Bill, the Bill for I have it from
a good hand, That the Prince of Orange, a little before he refused the
Triennial Bill, had in some Discourse this Expression, I hear they think I will
pass the Triennial Bill; but I promise them, the Crown shall be never the worse
for my wearing it.
Triennial Parliaments, and the Bill for Mines; these are their Methods,
instead of courting the Love of those they call their Subjects.

I will add no more about the Danish Invasion, but that their Empire here
lasted not many years, and that their Kings who ruled us made this the Seat of
their Dominions.

Let us now compare things with respect to the Danish Invasion, and the present
posture of Affairs. I must again say, the French are not a roving People, that
live by Pillage, and that are destitute of a Dwelling; nor would they be
willing to engage in a War of such Continuance; nor would their Monarch change
the situation of his Palace; nor can he spare from guarding his Frontiers such
an A^my as would be necessary to keep us in quiet, though we were subdued by a
sudden Fight; nor are we unprovided with Ships, though I must confess I fear the
Prince of Orange has not taken so much care of our Fleet, as Mr. Pepys's
Memoires lately put forth has proved King JAMES did; which shows King JAMES
understood and prosecuted the True English Interest, and is a sufficient
Confutation of that scandalous Aspersion their celebrated Dr. King casts upon
His Majesty. His expressions bespeak the King's Inclinations to let the Fleet
of England sink, and the Ships rot: But Mr. Pepys has proved the contrary with
a witness, and appeals to the Books and Men that are now in the Admiralty and
Navy Offices. By this you may guess at the Sincerity of Dr. King in other
particulars. King JAMES, without Taxes repaired and added to our Navy, and
augmented its Stores: but the Vote which declares the Sense of the House of
Commons to be, That the Commission of the Admiralty should not be filled with
Men experienced in Sea-Affairs, (though it look like a Jest) was well enough
calculated for the Humor of this Prince, who is willing to put the Nation
under an absolute Necessity of maintaining a vast standing Army; though a
Pamphlet written and dispersed at the beginning of the last Sessions, by the
wiser Williamites themselves, called, The Interest or State of Parties, had so
evidently made it out, That the Natural and only Defense of England depended
upon its Wooden Walls; and spoke broadly of the Insufficiency of the present
Lords of the Admiralty. I suppose too, that they who occasioned our not making
use last Summer of our Victory at Sea (which even those who would fright us
with the French Power, say was gained by a part only of our Fleet inferior in
Number and Quality to the French, who attacked them) and since have got Russel
discharged from being Admiral, instead of being rewarded with an Earldom and
Garter for that Victory; which did indeed destroy many of the French Ships,
though it was not the greatest Victory that ever the Sun saw, (as Dr. Tillotson
phrased it) and yet it is the only time that we have not (by reason of our
preposterous Management) come off with loss and shame: I say, These Men know
how much better King William is pleased with Landforces than Tarpawlins; but
how little Care soever has been taken of our Ships, whatever Dangers the Prince
of Orange would expose us to hereafter, that he may rule us more arbitrarily
during his own Time, yet the Nation will find out his Designs, feel their own
Strength, know whereon their own Safety depends, time enough to hinder his, or
a French Conquest, though they will at the same time perceive it necessary to
call home that Prince whose Claim is indisputed, and whose coming home upon
such Concessions as we want, and He is ready to grant, will swallow up all
F^ctions. They will ever long perc^ive it necessary to call him home upon such
Securities, even to secure their own Interests. All Remains of (...) p^^t^
Governments are at an (...), and since Printing has been in the World, the
French and all Nations so well know how vindicative of their Liberties the
English have always been, that they will have but little mind to make us a
Province.

I have already intimated how unsafe it would be for the Absolute Power of
France at home, to let their Soldiers hear from the surviving Britains what
were our Freedoms; and it would be yet much more unsafe for the French
Lieutenants to agree to the Observation of our Laws. But I will hasten to the
Norman Conquest.

Before any body takes it for granted that William the First was a Conqueror, I
wish they would read the First Part of the Historical Discourse of the
Uniformity of the Government of England, written by Mr. Nathanael Bacon, and
the latter-end of the third Part of Mr. Will. Prynne's Historical Vindication
of the Fundamental Liberties of English Freemen, together with all those
Authors these two Writers refer to. But I resolved at first to wave examining
whether we have ever in a proper and strict sense been conquered or no; and
therefore must fall directly upon comparing those and our Times, and the
Pretenses of the Duke of Normandy, and what the French can have upon us.

I can find but one thing that has any show of likeness with our present
Circumstances; and that is, Harold was an Usurper, and had broke the
Protestation he had formerly made to Duke William, as much as the P. of Orange
has his Declaration to the People of England; and truly if any thing can
facilitate a French Conquest, and if the Times did not exceedingly differ in
other respects, the Breaches we have made upon the Lineal Succession, and the
Impotencies, Irregularities, and Exactions of the present Government might make
way for it: But those things that made a Conquest feasible then, and are not in
our present Case, are very many.

The Normans came from Norway and Denmark, which Places were surchaged with
People; and there was no Project so improbable, in which their Leaders could
not easily engage them. The Religion of the Normans, and the Inhabitants of
Britain, was the same. The Conqueror had many Pretenses of Title: Edward the
Confessor's Will, the Donation of the Pope, who also gave him a Consecrated
Banner, an Agnus of Gold, and one of the Hairs of St. Peter. Besides his
Titles, here were several Normans within this Land, who helped him; he had been
here himself to view our Land, and make a Party, as his own Speech intimates;
the then King of France helped him in his Acquest: So did the Emperor Henry
the Fourth; he likewise came and lived among us, and stipulated at his own
Coronation to defend the Holy Church of God, and the Rectors of the same; to
govern the universal People subject to him justly; to establish equal Laws, and
see them duly executed. Nor did be (as the Judicious Samuel Daniel well
observes) ever claim any Power by Conquest, but as a regular Prince submitted
himself to the Orders of the Kingdom, desirous rather to have his Testamentary
Title (however weak) to make good his Succession, than his Sword; and though the
Style of Conqueror by the flattery of the Times was after given him, he showed
by all the Course of his Government he assumed it not, introducing none of
those Alterations (which followed) by Violence, but by a mild gathering upon
the disposition of the State, and the Occasions offered, and that by way of
Reformation. These are the words of Daniel, page 36.

Now I come to compare, I must once more repeat, That France has no occasion to
send forth Droves of People; and the Religion of France will make the People of
England resist a French Conquest to all Extremity: And if King James would sell
his Kingdoms (as some ridiculously have suggested) the People of England would
hardly be brought to make good the Bargain; and the Pope's Gift would as little
influence our Minds, though he should send with the Arms of France all the
Relics of Rome. We have, indeed, many French amongst us; but I think no one
Man fears they will assist their own King in such an Adventure; They are so far
from that, that they have not been (which I am sorry to say) GRATEFUL to King
James, who gave them Protection and Relief, when they came hither in Distress.
And I have already proved, That it is not the Interest of any Prince abroad to
join our Three Kingdoms to the French Territories; And I believe, if the King
of France should promise to protect the Protestant Church of God, and the
Rectors of the same; to govern the universal People subject to him justly, to
establish equal Laws, and to see them duly executed; we should not take his
Word; nor would his own Subjects be well pleased. It is King William only, that
is allowed to have a Religion for his several Dominions; that may be a
Synod-of-Dort-Presbyterian in Holland, an Episcopalian in England, of the Kirk
in Scotland, and a downright Favourer of Popery in Ireland, as is apparent by
the Limerick Treaty, and the Pamphlet put out by the Irish Gentlemen,
concerning the Proceedings of their late Parliament, and the Depositi^^^ that
are before the House of Lords.

I have told over our former Conquests somewhat tediously, and will add very
little about them; however, I desire the Reader will reflect, That the
Neighboring Princes, because they did not animadvert how much Greatness
consisted in Naval Preparations and Trade, and because we had not begun to make
a Figure in either, never thought themselves so much concerned, as all the
Potentates of Europe will now, what becomes of us None of our Neighbors ever
helped Us formerly, some of 'em did our Invaders. Let the Reader farther
reflect, that it was not necessary for any of our former Invaders to make such
a total Subversion of all our Laws, as it will now be for the French King, and
consequently Composition and Treaties more easily succeeded Battles. The former
Alterations rather meliorated, than overthrew our Constitution. They bundled up
and refined our Bylaws into National Statutes, and introduced Forms where the
Methods of Justice seemed less articulate. And lastly, Let it be considered,
though there are great Divisions amongst us; some few for keeping the Prince of
Orange; others for restoring the King, and several for something that they have
not yet licked into Form; yet all Persons that make the respective Parties of
these Divisions, will all of 'em join together to obstruct a French Conquest.

There will be such Divisions whenever Men will commit Violence upon the
natural and ancient Constitution, and I must confess these Divisions are the
most fatal Symtom that attends our distempered State, and may, and will
certainly subject us (though not to a French Conquest) to great Calamities and
Devastations, unless we restore the King. I suppose I have sufficiently proved
a French Conquest to be neither Desirable nor Practicable, yet God knows what
infinite Mischiefs we may have brought upon our selves by reviving a sort of
Quarrel which, by the Mercy of God, has been so long extinguished. A Dispute
for Title, which has in the days of our Forefathers had so fatal an Effect,
which has so dismally wounded our State, and is left bleeding in the Histories
of so many Reigns. Because you shall not think I aggravate the Calamities, that
were occasioned by the Contention of the Two Roses, I will only transribe some
Passages out of Trussel, who is a chaste and cautelous Writer, and it cannot be
supposed his History was written to serve a Jacobite-Turn. Page 257. he says,
There were in the Quarrel of the Two Roses, Fourscore Princes of the Blood
destroyed, and twice as many Natives slain, as were lost in the Two Conquests
of France. Page 260. he says, In the Battle of Townton there were killed Thirty
five thousand ninety and one Englishmen, and of Strangers One thousand seven
hundred forty five, beside Two hundred and thirty slain the Day before at
Ferry-bridge. In his last Page his Words are these: The total of private
Soldiers that perished in these Civil Wars, and suffered Punishment of immature
Death for taking part of the one side or the other, was Fourscore thousand nine
hundred ninety and eight Persons, besides Kings 2. Prince 1. Dukes 10.
Marquesses 2. Earls 21. Viscounts 2. Lords 27. Lord Prior 1. Judge 1. Knights
139. Esquires 441.


The Number of the Gentry is uncertainly reported, and therefore Trussel omits
them, but says; That for the most part they are included in the Number of
private Soldiers set down to be slain, to which he says you must add the Number
of Six hundred and thirty and eight, (the total of all the Persons not therein
accounted,) and then there appears in all to be slain Fourscore five thousand
six hundred twenty eight Christians, and most of this Nation, not to be
repeated (says the Historian) without grief, nor remembered without Deprecation,
that the like may never happen more. He concludes his History with this Saying
--

Pan una Triumphis innumeris potior. The whole History of that Quarrel sets
before us such apposite Lessons for our Times, that I wish all who love England
would seriously read and ponder it.

It is time to draw to a Conclusion, I am not willing to prophecy the
Destruction of my Country, and I beseech God Almighty to incline our Hearts to
the Things that belong unto our Peace; to our Peace in this World, and to our
everlasting Peace in the World to come. I beseech God to incline the Prince of
Orange not to forfeit an eternal weight of Glory for a momentary Crown, which
has nothing of good in it, if it is not got by the Acts of Goodness. God grant
that he may consider it as a more valuable Character to be a Virtuous and a
Christian Prince, than a Romantic Hero; and God grant that he may be so Wise,
that his Days may not end in Tragedy, I wish he would review his own
Declaration and the Memorial of the States, and that he would pursue those
excellent Ends, for which he came, for which the States said they lent their
Ships, and which King James would have complied with, and is ready to comply
with still. The King is willing to secure the Liberties of England and the
Protestant Religion, and had not the Confederates made their Quarrel ^^^ult by
giving way to an unnatural Ambition in the Prince of Orange, and dispossessing
King James (whilst they pretended they formed this Confederacy to repair the
Injuries done to them by the French.) -- K. JAMES, the injured King JAMES,
would have checked the Growth of France, and kept Namur and Mons. He was far
from a French League, and would have performed the part of a true Guarrantee;
for either the King would have prevented France coming before them, by
reminding their King of the Treaty of N^miguen, or our Arms would have had,
doubtless, success when we had Justice on our side, and the Wishes and Prayers
of all Englishmen joined with the undertaking of our rightful indisputed King.
How far he was from a French League, how unwilling to think ill of the Pr. of
Orange, and how unwilling to be too much beholding to France, his disbelief of
all the Advices of d'Avaux, and of many of his Friends, his Answer to Bonrepos,
and his refusal to the last of any French Assistance sufficiently witness; and
as much as he has been beholding to France during his Troubles, I am satisfied
that even in his exiled State he thinks himself (as King of England) so
naturally the Arbiter of Europe, that he will mediate, as soon as his Affairs a
little more recover his Figure a reasonable Peace for it. But the KING needs
not much solicit it, for I am satisfied the King of France is willing to come
into such a Peace, upon Condition that the King's Restoration may be one of
the Terms of it, and that he will not be brought to make Peace upon any other
Terms; so that (...) Restoration of King JAMES would give a happy Issue to the
Troubles of Europe, and our own, which our Experience (after all the Blood and
Treasure spilt and spent to humble France) may show us will be the only
Expedient to save us from the Power we have so much envied; and this we may
learn from King William's own Speeches to these two last Sessions of
Parliament; for he does not only make the obtaining an Honorable Peace from
France to the Confederates (instead of our Conquest of France) the Bounds of
his Hopes in this War, but allows the Growth of France during this War so much,
as to increase his Style from the Great Power of France, (which were the words
of his Speech Michaelmas was Twelvemonths) to the Excessive Power of France, in
his Speech of the last Sessions. This very Consideration should move us. But
farther.

Into what Shambles are all the Parts of Flanders the Rhine, Catalonia, and
Piedmont turned? What Slaughter-Houses may be erected in the unhappy Isle of
Britain? Unhappy, because she will blind her self against her own true Interest
and only Cure. Our Taxes grow heavy, but we have paid our Blood, but we must
pour it out yet more plentifully, before this Reckoning is over; if we will not
return to our Wits and our Duty, Civil Distractions will overtake us;
Foreigners both on the one and the other side will be poured in upon us, and we
shall become the Cockpit of the World; and though all the Jacobites abhor a
French Conquest, and so does the King too, yet if the Nation will not come to
such a Temper as to restore him without their Help, the KING's Friends cannot
be blamed for being willing to admit of such a moderate Number of French, or
any other Forces, as may be necessary to cover Them, when they come to him,
till they get together, and as may give them Opportunity to rise. We had rather
the Nation looked so directly toward Him, as that there should be no occasion
for One Man in Arms to come with Him. We had rather, He had much rather, nay
the King of France declares, HE had rather his Restoration should be wholly
owing to his own Subjects. We will never agree that he should bring such a
Force as may give any the least just Jealousy, that either He or France design
to Conquer; and he is perfectly resolved to come in that manner that shall be
agreed to by such Friends of his, as the World must allow to be Men of Honor,
regardful of the British Rights, and of the Protestant Religion. With such Men
he will adjust the Manner and Time of his coming. They will see, that his
coming shall be safe to all those dear Concerns for which we have so often
struggled; and the Measures and Condescentions such, as that they may answer to
God and Men their engaging in his Quarrel.

Can any Man of Sense believe that the Earl of Middleton; who could never
during his whole Ministry be drawn into any one irregular step, would go over
upon any other Errand? That Great Man is known to understand his Duty to his
Country as well as his Prince, and thinks he ought at the same time to be the
Minister of both, and his Affection and Firmness to Protestancy was never once
suspected: He will neither betray our Laws, nor his own Religion^; nor will he,
to do the King but Justice, be tempted to either; for all that we have mislik'd
in the King's Measures abroad, has proceeded from Misr^presentations from
hence; and my Lord Middleton is so fraughted with the genuine Interest as well
as Sense of these Nations that the most inveterate of our Enemies will have
hereafter no Opportunities to clamor and exasperate. This is a Truth which in a
short time will want no Vouchers. The future Acts of State that come from that
Court will prove he has discoursed many of the Leading Men, and compromised the
Grievances of all Parties. And whereas some of the Prince of Orange's Ministers
have declared what great Expectations they have from the Quarrels at St.
Germains, I can assure them they will be deceived in their Hopes; for there is
so good an Understanding between my Lord Middleton and those who had before
entire Credit with the King, that they don't only personally agree, but concur
in Sentiments relating to the British Affairs; which is a ^ull Evidence that
what we misliked there cannot be charged upon the Disposition of the King, nor
upon the depraved Tempers of those about him (as even some of his Friends were
apt to suspect) but proceeded merely from their want of a True State of these
Nations, and the knowledge of what would satisfy us, till the Eart of
Middleton went thither Every day will make this Truth plainer than other.

I cannot but wish, that all Men would so avowedly own their Mistake, would so
willingly sit down under our Ancient, Legal, Limited, and Hereditary Monarchy,
would so openly tell their D^ssatisfactions, and what they think Proportionate
Securities, so fairly state the Differences between the Crown and People, so
unanimously express their Willingness to Re-establish the Old and Natural Frame
of our Government, that it might be advisable that we might advise him wholly
to depend upon his British Subjects. I like neither French, nor Dutch, nor
Irish upon our Island, though I cannot be afraid of any such Numbers of either,
or all, as will be much out-numbred by those of our Fellow Subjects and Fellow
Islanders, who resolve to repair to the King as soon as he is landed. Oh* (...)
that we would recant our Mistakes! that we would repent of our Folly! that we
would yet let our Moderation, our Civil and Christian Moderation, be known unto
all Men! Oh! that a nice Security for the Church of England, as the National
Church (and best Church too, as I think) as nice a Security for our ( English
Libe^ties, and Liberty of Conscience, were our only Aims! that Party and Picque
Faction and Friendsh^p^ Fears and Fancies, did not predo^inate neither on the,
One nor the Other Party! (...) at the Ends, and not the Forms of Things were
what we (...) lord that our Afflictions would make us Wise! then the King would
as little need as he wishes to bring any Foreign Force. See you any end of your
Troubles? Is your Deliverer a fit Instrument for so great a Work? Do his
Measures hold any resemblance with his and your Pretenses? Are his ministers,
G^^r -- n. and Not -- m, Tr -- r, Roch -- r, and Sey -- r, Ren -- augh, G -- y,
Bla -- t, and Convert-reconverted Sund -- d, (behind the Curtain;) together
with his Creature Br -- n, (that indefatigable Secretary to all Turns, and to
the High Commission Court, that Assistant to the sour Popish Bishops, ready
Evidence, and industrious Informer;) and Con -- by, of whose Merits in Ireland
the Parliament here took so much notice, that he is since taken into the Privy
Council of England, for his undoubted Integrity, and unheard of Abilities; with
the long Roll of such sort of Men, (though his sinking Game has forced him to
call some lately into his Councils, who have not yet lost their Reputation with
the People) fit Guardians for that Liberty and Property which you so justly
value? Think seriously, Ought the People of England to trust these Men, or have
they reason to trust one another, even in the business of that Master they
pretend to serve? Awaken out of your Dreams; Get rid of your Phantasins;
Consider as Men; Act as Lovers of your Country; Rescue your Rights; Restore you
KING, who will confirm those Rights with solid Securities; Do your own Work,
that After Ages may pity your Mistakes, and give Allowance for your Resentment;
and that You and your Childrens Children may be happy. I beseech the God of
Order, That He will produce it out of our Confusions; That the King may have
what is due to Him, and that we may have what is as much due to us; and that
the King and People may both praise the Almighty for his Mercies to this Land,
this miserable and sinful Land.

Let the Sense of our Miseries, our Faults, and our Duty, stir us up. Let the
sad Example of former Times exhort us. Let us, I say, CALL HOME THE KING, with
an exact Security to the Church of England, as the National Church, and with
such solid Securities for our Liberties, as may make all other Religions
harmless Opinions, though we allow them a fair and impartial Liberty; And yet let
us not so hamper the Crown, that it will not be able to protect us from our
Enemies and one another; Let us not say, That the hands of the Nation are
bound, and that it cannot call home the King; For if all those who plainly see
that we shall be undone under this Usurpation; and likewise that it is
impossible this Government should stand (though it shills about now it is in an
ill taking) would upon these Terms join with those who are for the Restoration
of King James, as well in the English Army, as all over the Nation, from the
sad prospect they have of the Ruin of that Liberty (the mistaken Jealousy and
Care of which, was the only Motive that hurried them into what they did) all
the Force the Prince of Orange has would soon dissolve, and he must be glad to
return again, and spend all his time at the Loo (which our English Money is
making so fine a Retreat) and at the Hague; which is the very worst, I call God
to witness, that I ever wished him.

I am conscious I have not, in all the parts of this Discourse, written with
that brevity, which I designed at the beginning of it, and may possibly be
guilty of some Redundancies, Tautologies, and Repetitions, as well in other
places, as I have in my Remarks upon our former Invasions inserted some
passages, which crossed my way, though they were rather applicable to our
present times, than suitable to the Thread of my Discourse. When a Man writes
Things of this Nature, he is willing to be rid of them as fast as they are
finished, though they may not be so correct; and notwithstanding the Critics
(for whose: either praise or diversion I never scribble) may find many Faults
with them, I have set down Things, as I am persuaded in my own Mind, and as I
have heard them discoursed by the considerable and influencing Jacobites of the
several Denominations; though I must Answer for my unskilful and careless
clothing and ranging their Thoughts; I hope I have generally kept in sight of
my Text; and I suppose also have upon the whole made good what I undertook to
prove, viz. That a French Conquest is neither desirable nor practicable. If it
is unsuitable to the Interests and Inclinations of the several sorts of
Jacobites, and contrary to the King's Inclinations, and the Interests of all
our Neighbors; and the very Attempt of it, either for himself, or King James,
contrary to the King of France's Interest; if the Condition and Circumstances
of the French Power to make a Conquest and Interest in such an Experiment, and
that of our former Invaders and the State of the British Affairs now and what
they were then, so very much differ; I think we may infer, That a French
Conquest is neither desirable nor practicable; and that it is as weak to
suppose France can or will conquer us, as it is to believe we shall sack Paris,
and conquer France, with the Prince of Orange at the Head of the British
Forces, who we see with Them, and all the Confederate-strength, has so
indifferently passed his Campaigns in Flanders.

FINIS.

