THE VINDICATION OF THE DEAD: OR, Six Hours Reflections upon the Six Weeks
Labor in Answering Mr. Ashton's Speech published by Authority.
1. THE Case of Mr. Ashton was indeed so hard, and his Speech so handsome, that
I don't wonder to see a Secretary's Command for Printing an evasive, trifling,
and malicious Paper, that endeavors to load his Person, and blast his
Writings; but the Subject will bear no more, and the Government stands in need
of a Defense. However I cannot but wonder the late Answerer should expect to
persuade the World it was not his; because he who professes himself an
illiterate Man, and unskilled in the Laws, uses the Terms of Impending,
Prevaricating, Premises and Consequence, (two of which are not Terms of Art,
none of the Law; and those other two, that are Logical, made familiar to all
those that have ever had any sort of Breeding or Conversation) for all that is
said of this Nature, both at the Beginning and End of the Answer, will appear
very impertinent to any one that reads his Trial, even as it is thought fit to
be published; wherein some Things have been omitted, as well as others amended,
to make it fit for perusal: For in that he defends himself so sensibly, that it
provoked the L. Chapter Just. Pol -- to rage, and sufficiently proved himself
capable to write such a Paper; whose natural Parts were so very strong, and so
well improved. And if he was so well satisfied that those that Comply with, as
well as those that Support the present Establishment are Guilty of Perjury, and
partake with Rebels, it very well became the Charity of a dying Man to warn
those he left behind him to Repent; and if the Words of dying Men have
generally more Weight, and make deeper Impressions, he did but his duty to
recommend to those who survived him, Amendment and Restitution.

2. As for those Matters of Law, which he thought hard in his Trial. I believe
he neither complained of, nor desired any thing, but what the Lord Chief
Justice Pollexfen, Sir Francis Child, Mr. Herbert, and almost every Man upon
his Jury, as well as Tremain, and all the other Council, would have Censured,
or thought fit to be Granted in any other Reign: But by this we see they have
learnt to practice those Methods of Trial which themselves formerly complained
of, as Arbitrary and Illegal; and have borrowed Law from the Tories, while to
make them Amends they have taught them their Gospel. I must confess I know
nothing could have seemed to warrant the late Extraordinary Proceedings so well
as a Reformation of our former ill Measures, and proved, that that, and not
private Advantage, was the true Motive of the Undertaking. It cannot be denied
but we are poorer of late than formerly, and if the evil In^^^^ments in the
late Reigns are fit to be our Ministers under this, and what was
Maladministration then commences just and necessary Politics now, we shall
too certainly and too soon be miserable; if they don't change Things, you are
little the better for changing the Men: The hardship and inequality of Trials,
and Innovations upon the Rights of Subjects in that particular, made a very
specious Head of the Prince of Orange 's Declaration; and it is one of the
Articles of our new Original Contract, that the Subjects shall be free from
such Burdens: But yet our Judges are in the beaten Road of Arbitrary Power,
and can do nothing contrary to those blessed Precedents; and though it was
great, and the self-denial of a dying Christian in Mr. Ashton, not to name the
L. Chapter Just. P. and Mr. H. for fear of transgressing that Law of Christ of
forgiving Enemies, yet it is to be hoped that some Parliament will mark them
down to Posterity for Examples sake; I am sure I wish them no Punishment, but
what may be necessary to keep a Judge (who ought to be the Prisoner's Council)
from being an Advocate against him; and a Jury-man from Party and Faction,
where Life and Death. are concerned.

3. What Mr. H. did is thought so much the more strange, because it is
confidently reported that upon hearing the Papers so Charged, upon my Lord
Preston at his Trial, he said that Night publicly at the Grecian Coffee-house
in Devereux-Court near the Middle Temple, that if he was not Excepted against
upon Monday, he could not bring in either of the other; Guilty, in Relation to
the Papers; yet he it was that would have helped them to Evidence, and improved
one Insinuation against Mr. Ashton, which the Answerer I suppose had from the
same Mint, viz. That one of the Papers was written in Mr. Ashton's Hand;
though, as the Answerer observes, it had been very material to have made Proof
of that upon his Trial, which they might easily have done, had it been true; no
Man's Hand being better known, and they having in their Hands Volumes of his
Writing, when he was in Places at Court: Though it had been after all for the
Honor of our Deliverers to have exploded Similitude of Hands from being
Evidence in Cases of High Treason. And unless the Answerer proves the Delivery
of it to a third Person, he will be thought as much the virulent and unjust
Murderers of his Reputation, as the others were of his Body, for want of due
Proof that he knew the Contents. I think a Man is innocent of what he dies for,
in the Sight of the Law, if the Evidence does not amount to Legal Proofs of the
Indictment, and that ought in Common Justice as well as Charity to be thought
the meaning of his Asserted Innocence; for he does not pretend he had not
endeavored to Restore the Uncle, and the Father, of Him and Her that possess
the Throne.

4 I don't see in Mr. Ashton's Paper so much Art as Honesty, according to his
Principles; but I find in the Answerer all the advantage taken that his own six
Weeks Labor, and a Club, could furnish; from hence a Compliment Mr. Ashton
makes the Court Fol. 112 and 115. is with him a Proof that Mr. Ashton had a
Copy of the Indictment; Panel of the Jury, sufficient notice, etc. (which I
believe, and always did, to be necessary to make a Trial just and equitable,
according to the Laws of England) at least the stress this Answerer lays upon
that Compliment, proves that he esteems all the management of that Trial to
have been very fair, and that so Pol -- 's Brats in the Charge is a Language
well becoming a Judge, and that Herbert's ensnaring Questions are no less
becoming an impartial Jury-man; I omit to mention any other hardships both in
Mr. Ashton's and in my Lord Preston's Trial, but particularly the King's
Council's excepting against so many Jurymen without showing Cause, which is so
notorious a Prejudice to a Prisoner, that unless they can show very Authentic
Presidents of the like Practice in Criminal Cases, they must give me, and
others, leave to think it one of the boldest Encroachments upon the People's
Liberties that our Age has produced; and all good Men ought to reflect upon the
great Violations of their Liberties in this case by such unheard of Methods, as
the late Trials give us an Account of. The Council for the Crown in the Trial
of Croan excepting against Jurymen without showing Cause, and not being
publicly animadverted upon for so doing, it gave them confidence to do the
same thing in my Lord Preston's Trial; and had they had need, they would
doubtless have ventured to set by Men, after they had been Sworn to pass upon
the Life of the Prisoner; as in Croan's Trial they set by Mr. Harrison
Goldsmith, Mr. Parker Tobacconist, Mr. Johnson Herald Painter, etc. all Men of
Wealth, and Reputation; a procedure so palpably unjust, that my Lord Not -- m
could not believe it, when it was told him.

5. Nor must I neglect to reiterate that unusual way of Charging the Jury in
these Trials; the Bench often tells them that they believe in their Conscience,
that the Prisoners are Guilty of such and such a thing, and that they must
bring in their Virdict, Guilty; now the Jury is to have no belief but what
arises plainly and positively from the Evidence brought before them, their
Consciences are to be directed by plain Proof that appears so to them, not to
be guided by other Men's Reasons; and if their belief be determined any other
ways, than from the Evidence before them, all Trials will be rendered very
Precarious; and I am very sorry to see our Reformers out bid in this point all
the Extravagancies of which they so much complained of. If these things are
necessary to support what is done, I will recommend farther to them the Scotch
Boots and all the inventions of Tyranny in all Country's; but let us not
pretend Jealousy for our Laws, and our Liberties, and encourage the most
dangerous outrages against them. And God grant succeeding Times may never learn
by their Example. God grant that a Judge may never dare to leave a matter of
Law, as similitude of hands was to a Jury; nor them to find matter of Fact but
according to the Evidence produced; and may he grant likewise that it may be
scandalous to the last Degree in a Jury-man to turn Prosecutor, and busle for
Evidence; had some of the Judges and Jurymen in the late Reigns been made
Examples, we should have found these more tender in this; but perhaps some Men
were cautious in that, knowing they should have occasion to use the Presidents
in this. But I return to what more particularly concerns Mr. Ashton the Man (as
P. in his Charge calls him) who ought to be honored by every Party, if they
have a fence of bravery in themselves; it is a shame that those that extolled
the Gallantry of Sydney should lessen his Character, by saying how easy it is
for an English Man to dye; for few have, or can dye like Mr. Ashton. Let us
acknowledge Virtue in our Enemies, and have a greatness above Sect, above Mode
and above Party; it is English Men come to this, they are not worthy of that
liberty about which they make such ado.

6. Thus much for Mr. Ashton; I will now pass to the consideration to Passive
Obedience, the Justice of this Cause, and the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales.

The prevaricating Sons of the Church of England, have so plainly contradicted,
by their Practices all that they have formerly Written; they have been all such
Sherlocks, that a Man had need be well satisfied of his Religion to keep him
from Hobbism. Let those that Read this Pamphlet, Read the Authors Quoted in the
History of Passive Obedience, let them peruse Tillotson's Letter to my Lord
Russel when he was preparing to dye. Let them consider impartially what all of
them would have had the World believe they meant at that time, and then if they
can, let them forbear abhorring such Practical Atheists, as are our Swearing
admired Divines. I blame them sufficiently for Ascribing such Luscious
Authority to Princes, they have tempted them to Exercise an uncontroleable
Rule, and now they as vilely flatter the Mobb. I am not bound to defend all Mr.
Ashton's Principles, which they had taught him; but I am confident they would
have been Orthodox with the Body of the Church of England, had the Declaration
of Indulgence never been put out by King James; and whatever the Answerer says
page 9 and 10. though too many prevaricate by Submission, and Obedience, yet
there are but few of the Sons of that Church who submit to the Pr. of Or. as,
or believe him, the Rightful Lawful King, and so consequently the Object of
Passive Obedience; those that were of that Church in both Houses would have
appeared as much against that Alteration of the Oath, as they did against
Abjuration: Nay the very Secretary that is of that Communion, though he has
gone greater lengths, than those who are strictly and sincerely of that
Principle can approve of, would not I believe, be able to stretch his
Conscience to swear this an Elective Monarchy, or the Quarrel Just, or which is
the same thing the Pr. of Or. Lawful Rightful King.

7. If the Prince of Orange 's Declaration had been pursued (which was once by
Mr. Ashton designed to have been Reprinted as a proof, how well it has been
made good) if the false steps of the late Reigns had been rectified; if the
Objected Imposture, League, and Murder, had been proved; the ill Ministers
called to account, and the Prerogative fully debated and settled in Parliament,
( a Reformation that would have looked worth our Hazards, our Fortunes, our
Reproach, and our Lives) I say if this had been the effect of the Revolution,
it might have tempted a prudent Man to sit quiet: But where are the
Quo-Warranto-Projectors, the surrenderers of Charters, or the Regulators
punished? many of them are well, and well preferred. Is the Parliament House
less crowded with Officers* Danby is President of the Council, and knows how to
manage that matter. Are the Elections and returns better secured? The Quakers
in the late Elections were no Freeholders in Barkshire, Hartfordshire, etc. and
Jack How was a better Churchman than Powle who was Speaker to the Convention
upon the Corporation bottom at Windsor. Are (...) Lives Liberties and the
Estates of Englishmen better guarded? Unless you think mercenary Foreiners
fitter for that purpose than such who having Relations amongst us would be, and
were tite to the National Interest. I know nothing we are the better, or wiser
in, but in the Methos of Taxing the Subjects, and Guilding the Pill with
popular Names, Enacting Martial Laws, Suspense of the Habeas Corpus, etc. while
those very Persons who had taught us, That the King could not be called to
account by his Subjects, and both swore themselves, and obliged others to
swear, that it was not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against
him, engaged both themselves, and others, to help the Pr. of Or. to dethrone
his Uncle, and his Princesses Father, the Lord's Anointed, and their own Lawful
and Rightful Sovereign. The Prince's Declaration, and the Memorial of the
States, denied that this was his Design, but St. Asaph has found it in the
Revelations.

8. Now give me leave to examine the Justice of this Engagement; the Answerer
plainly points out, that it was to stop the Increase of the French Monarchy:
But this will not go down till the French League is proved, the contrary of
which was most true; insomuch that though d' Avaux had got the Secret of this
Invasion, and the King of France pressed King James to take Care, yet he was
jealous it was art in the French King to dip him in his Quarrel, and could not
believe the P. of O. would undertake what he thought so horrid and unnatural:
So that Van Cyters his false Protestations had more Credit than the true
Informations of Barillion; and some will think it was not impossible for that
Parliament which K. James was Calling, to have persuaded him to have taken a
just Care to balance Europe: I am far from commending the way they were to be
Chosen in, perhaps I am as nice as any Man living of the Privileges of
Englishmen, but I believe the Men that were recommended to the Corporations
were many of them Chosen into the Convention, and some of them perhaps were but
too hot Members there; nor do I believe they could have been mealy-mouthed
under King James: So that the Emissaries of the P. of O. might have persuaded
them to talk loudly of the Growth of France, and of the Growth of Popery,
without all that Expense of Blood and Treasure we have been at, and God knows
when it will be at an End; though if he came to save the People of England, he
should have made us the better for his Preferment, and our Redemption; but
considering the Natural Obligations he had to King James, he should not have
made him only the worse.

9. And here I cannot forbear mentioning one thing that is mightily discoursed,
viz. that he did not only dethrone him as a King but despoiled him as a
Merchant; and that when Sir Robert Howard denied by the Pr. of Or. Command to
let him have his own Money out of his own Exchequer, after he returned from
Rochester, and he was forced to borrow of a faithful Servant a Sum of Money to
carry him off, and out of his great Justice made over to that Servant some
Money which he had in the East-India-Company (as a Trader) to reinburse him,
(the Company willingly joining in the disposal) yet even here he is using all
his Power to wrest this Money out of the Gentleman's hands and suffers all the
Tradesmen to whom the dispossessed King was indebted to devour that Gentleman
for what belongs to the Royal Treasury to satisfy; he ought to give greater
encouragement to gratitude, for Jeffrys himself could not prevail to destroy
one of the Duke of Monmouth's menial Servants after his defeat; and this
present King should be ashamed to be hardest upon such as Mr. Ashton and this
Gentleman were, and to suffer all his Courts (and to help them too) to worry
them every Term. This makes Mankind wonder.

10. But to return to the Invading Politics; The Dutch Ambassador ought not to
have been ordered to deny those Preparations were against King James; and it
was fit to have tried whether things might not have been amicable set right by
Treaty, before they entered into Conspiracies, and Clandestine Confederacies;
with the Pope, the Emperor, and Spanish King (with the Assistance of the
Inquisition) to Establish the true Protestant Religion. Nor should Dickvelt
have come hither to corrupt and to List the King's Subjects against him. Those
that can find Presidents and Arguments for these things, can Reverse Nature and
all her Laws, can put off the sense of a God and a World to come, whilst they
basely lend their Pens, to the blackest Villainies; they may declaim for
Lucifer, and commend the Aspiring minds of the fallen Angels, who have obtained
a Government and Superintendency over Perjured and Wretched Souls, over the
Base, the Treacherous, and the Ungrateful, and reign in the Hearts of none
else; and that Church. Divine that can make the Message by the Three Noble
Lords, a very good natured Compliment may go a great way, toward proving the
Regicides Noble, and Conscientious Patriots; I think in my Conscience by his
wording that Paragraph (which I had almost slipped over) he could have been
willing, the Life of his Sovereign should have been taken away, to put an end
to the War and the Charge; he might have had Arguments from the Army
Remonstrants 1648. And with Dr. Bur -- t's help and from his Text have proved
it the Lord's doing; a Man would think he had been in Holland, that he allows
all things to be done for Interest, and the most unnatural barbarity to be good
breeding if it does the business; he lets loose all the Ambition imaginable in
Princes against all the Sacred Ties of Natural and Civil Relation, against
their Uncles, their Neighbors, their Allies, their Friends, and their
Fathers-in-Law; and sets down the wildest Maxims that were ever Advanced in
Politics and thinks to cast upon the Doctrines of the Church of England, every
Act of State wherein Princes have consulted their own secular Advantages, and
got a willing Clergy, or perhaps but one of that Robe to Countenance what yet
was not so apparently opposite to the sense of all good Men, as our Pretenses
are.

For my part this Answerer shall no more send me to the French Cabinet than to
the Netherlands to be instructed in honesty. And I know no body that would have
blamed the Pr. of Or. for obstructing the French Designs, if he had not taken
an unjust way to do it. I wish he could have resettled the Edicts of Nantes,
and the Assembly of the States there, the Liberties of the Oppressed, and
Liberty of Conscience; but I am sorry he has chosen rather to be what
After-ages will call a Pirate, and a Robber, than to be the acknowledged
Benefactor and Protector of Mankind. He has had great Opportunities, but he has
shown he knows not how to use them. He has not a Soul large enough for the Post
in which this fickle Nation has put him. A Paultry Self-Interest governs his
Councils, and as ill Men govern him, and make him mistake his way to Glory;
there were too apparent Prints of this Self-Interest, in that part of his
Declaration quoted by this Answerer in relation to the Prince of Wales; and
since that is a new insisted on by this Licensed Author (though the Convention
and present Parliament wisely let it alone, because many of the Members knew
there would be produced unanswerable and undoubted Proofs) I will promise them
they shall hear of it with a Witness in a particular Discourse, since it would
draw this Paper to too great a length. I will conclude, after I have solemnly
returned my Thanks to the Government, for at last publishing Mr. Ashton's
Speech, though not without the best Answer they could make to it, which yet
scarce ever was bought, but to make the Speech in a Closet no Crime.

The Postscript.
SInce this went to the Press there is published part of what Mr. Ashton left
in the Hands of a private Friend; I hear the Court is much Enraged at it, and
there is much hunting after the Printer: It seems the Government is very tender
about the Proof of the Prince of Wales, Mankind must be informed in that
Matter; and those that believe he is Legitimate only desire the next Parliament
will give them a Fair Hearing. And if they don't demonstrate him so, by all the
Series of Proofs necessary in such a Case, and to the Satisfaction of the whole
World, they will be content to submit to, and to join, even with the
Abdication, Conquest, or any other Title the King de Facto likes best.

FINIS.

