An Historical VINDICATION OF THE Naked Gospel, Recommended to the University
of Oxford.

Printed in the Year, 1690.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Design of this Work is of no less Importance than to discover the Naked
Truth, as far as it is possible, after the Destruction of such infinite Numbers
of Volumes by the Barbarity of former Ages: The little Fragments and Gleanings
whereof, (that accidentally escaped the Flames and Fury of those Times) though
dispersed up and down, yet do still afford some Light to a perspicacious
Erquirer; and indeed give such a Landscape of things, as the Ruins now at
Athens, Carthage and Rome, do of those Majestic Cities. We may still plainly
see, how the simple Primitive Chastity of the Gospel was defiled with the
Ceremonies, and the vain Philosophy of the Pagans: How Platonic Enthusiasm was
imposed upon the World for Faith, Mystery and Revelation, by cloistered
Ecclesiastics; Qui omnia quae putabant Christianismo conducere, Biblijs
interseruerunt, as any one may collect from Erasmus, Scaliger, Grotius,
Cappellus, and F. Simons, who had compared Manuscripts. Their dogmatical
Contradictions in Councils, their silly Quarrels, their frequent changes in
Opinion, their childish trifling in Words, their Inconstancy, Pride, and other
Passions are laid open, as the Source of public Troubles and common
Calamities. We may justly lament with Joseph Scaliger the cruel Suppression of
the old Books that were in the hands of the Fathers, for if we had them now in
our Libraries, Nous verrions des belles chooses, says that Prodigy of Learning,
who in another place complains, Nihil fuit erga bonas literas injuriosius
veteribus Christianis; si voluissent, haberemus tam praeclara. -- But
considering how they handed things down to us, Je ne me ferois jamais Chrestien
a lire les Peers, Ils ont tant de Fadaises. Scalig.

In our own time we have seen the same Phrenzy acted over again, Academick
Inquisitors (like supreme infallible Tribunals) burning Articles and Books,
afterward embracing and practicing the very same; expelling and recalling,
canting and recanting, after the manners of their Forefathers, who veer'd
about with every Wind, and were very angry that the Laity would not believe
things against their Sense and Reason, as the Woman would have had her Husband
against his own Eyes: What! Believe your Eyes before your own sweet Wife?

The most considerable Parts of the present Vindication are, I. The History of
Plato's Trinity. II. The Arian Controversy. III. Of the Nicene Council. IV. Of
the Athanasian Creed. V. Of the Quarrels and Divisions of the Churches: Which
take as follows.

A Modest and Historical VINDICATION, etc.
THat this work may be clear and instructive, it is thought necessary to observe
Method and Order of Time, which are the chief lights in Historical
Controversies; Therefore we will begin with the most learned Bishop of the
Primitive Church.

Eusebius was born in Palestine, and perhaps at Caesarea; Ap. Socrat. lib. v.
c. 8.
for he says in the beginning of his Letter to the Christians of that City,
That he was there baptized, and instructed in the Christian Faith. He was born
toward the end of the third Century; though we cannot find exactly the year of
his Birth. He began early to apply himself to Learning, especially to Divinity,
as it sufficiently appears in his Writings, wherein may be seen, that he had
carefully read all sorts of Books; and that all the Christian Writings, whether
Greek or Latin, were well known to him. He had the advantage of the curious
Library, which the Martyr Pamphilius, his particular Friend, had collected at
Caesarea. Hieron. Ep. ad Chron and Heliod. Antipater Bostrensis in council.
Nicaen. 11. Act. 5.
It Is affirmed, That being become Bishop of this City, he entreated
Constantine, (who passed through it, and who had bid him ask some favor in
behalf of his Church) That he would permit him to make a search into all the
public Registers, to extract the Names of all the Martyrs, and the time of
their Death. However, he has committed Faults enough in Chronology, as Joseph
Scaliger, and a great many other learned Men have observed, and especially in
relation to Martyrs, as Mr. Dodwel has lately shown in his Dissertation, de
paucitate Martyrum. But it was no easy matter to escape these kind of Faults
in such a work as his Ecclesiastical History, which was the first of that sort
that was ever undertaken; the Primitive Christians taking no care of the
History of their Times.

Eusebius, is commonly called the Son of Pamphilius; whether he was really his
Son, as some affirm, or his Nephew, according to the opinion of others; or in
fine, as most believe, by reason of the great Friendship between them. This
Pamphilius was of Beryte in Phenicia, and Priest of Caesarea; he held Origen's
Opinions, for whom he wrote an Apology, of which there remains to us, but a
part of it in Latin, among the Works of Origin and St. Jerome. He made it in
Prison, where he was put in the year 307, under the Emperor Decius, and where
Eusebius did not forsake him. He could write only the first five Books, having
been hindered from finishing Photius. cod. CXVIII.
this Work, by the Death which he suffered for the Gospel two years after he
had been thrown into Prison. But Eusebius finished it, in adding thereto a
sixth Book, and published it after his Death. Pamphilius had for Master,
Pierius Id. Cod. CXIX.
Priest of Alexandria, who likewise suffered Martyrdom, and was also of
Origen's Opinion, whose Assiduity and Eloquence he imitated, which got him the
name of second Origin. It Is not amiss here to relate the Judgment which Photius
makes of his Works.

He advances several things, says he, remote from those which are at present
established in the Church, perhaps ac-cording to the Custom of the Anoients:
Yet he speaks after a pious manner of the Father and the Son, excepting that he
assures us, They have two Essences, ((...)) and two Natures, ((...)) using the
words Essence and Nature, as it appears by what precedes, and follows in this
Passage, for that of Hypostasis, and not in the sense of the Arians. But he
speaks of the Holy Spirit in a dangerous manner, for he attributes to him, a
Glory inferior to that of the Father and the Son; yet he was Catechist of
Alexandria under the Patriarch Theonas, who was consecrated in the year 282.

Pamphilius being dead, as has been said, Eusebius retired to Paulinus Bishop
of Tire, his Friend; where he was witness, Lib. 8. c. 7.
as he tells us himself, of several Martyrdoms, the History of which he has
left us, in his Book of the Martyrs of Palestine. From thence he went into
Egypt, where he found the Persecution yet more violent, and where he was thrown
into Prison. But this Persecution having ceased, he was set at Liberty, and a
while after elected Bishop of Cesarea, after the death of Agapius. It Is not
certainly known in what year this Election was made, but at least, he was
already Bishop, when Paulinus dedicated a stately Church in the City of Tire,
which he had built there, which was in the year 316, in the 10th year of
Constantin's Reign; for it was the custom of the Christians, An^. Diss. bypat.
par. 11. c. 3. n. 12, 13.
as well as of the Pagans, to consecrate their Churches in the time of the
Decennales of the Emperors, or of any other Solemnity. Eusebius recites a fine
Oration, spoken at this Dedication, Lib. x. c. 4.
and though he does not say, that it was he himself that spoke it, yet the style
of this Oration, and the modest manner after which he mentions him that made
it, gives one reason to believe, that he has suppressed his name only through
Modesty. One might imagine, that he was then but Priest, were it not manifest,
that it was very rare in that Age for Priests to speak in public, where there
were Bishops present.

It was about this time, that Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, had a bickering
with one of his Priests named Arius, touching the Divinity of Jesus Christ,
which gave Birth to Arianism. Eusebius having had a great share in the Disputes
of Arianism, we cannot recount his Life without writing the History of it; and
to know wherein consisted these Disputes, we must necessarily ascend higher,
and enquire what Principles of Philosophy were in use in that time among the
Christians, and how they came to be introduced. This is so necessary a
Digression, as will appear in the Sequel, that it is to be supposed, the Reader
must approve of it.

There was never any Philosopher that made himself so famous as Plato, and no
Books read with more pleasure than his, whether from the Subjects, and lofty
Thoughts found therein, on by reason of the Elegancy and Nobleness of their
Style, which never any Philosopher could equalize. He was born under the Reign
of Artaxerxes, Sirnam'd Long-hand, 426 years before Christ, and died aged
fourscore years, in the time when Philip of Macedon made himself to be feared
of all Greece. Alexander his Son having made himself master of Asia, which his
Successors divided among them; one may reasonably believe, that the Sciences of
the Greeks there, established themselves with their Empire, and their Customs.

Ptolomy the Son of Lagus, one of Alexander's Successors, undertook to collect
into his Library of Alexandria, all the Books he could find, and drew thither
several learned men of Greece. Vid. Hody de 70. Int. c. 9.
He was learned himself, and omitted nothing, for the inspiring into his Sons
the love of Learning.

His Son Philadelphus marched, in this respect, in his Fathers steps, as all
those who have any knowledge in the History of this Prince, do well know. The
Syrian Monarchs seem likewise to have cultivated the Sciences, seeing that
Suidas relates, that Euphorion of Chalcis in Eubea, Poet and Philosopher, was
Library Keeper of Antiochus the great, two hundred years before our Savior's
time. Plato was too famous then, and his Works in too great esteem, not to have
had Place in these Libraries. One may also believe, that Asia, which was then
full of Greek Philosophers, wanted not Platonists.

Among the Opinions of Plato, there are not any more remarkable, than those
which he had touching the Divinity, the Prae-existence and Immortality of the
Soul. He held that there is only one Supreme, Spiritual, and Invisible God,
whom he calls The Being, or, the Being it self, the very Being, The Father, and
cause of all Beings, etc. He placed under this supreme God an inferior Being,
which he calls Reason, ((...)) The Director of things present and future, the
Creator of the Universe, etc. In fine, he acknowledged a third Being, which he
calls the Spirit or Soul of the World. He added, That the first was the Father
of the second, and that the second had produced the third. We may consult
hereupon his Timoeus, to which we should adjoyn his II. and VI. Letter. In the
second, which is directed to Denis, who complained, that Plato had not
sufficiently instructed him touching the first Nature, or first Being, this
Philosopher thus expresses himself. Every thing is about the King of all
things, and every thing is because of him; he is the cause of all good things:
The things of the second Order, are about the second; the things of the third,
are about the third. He calls this a Riddle; forbids Denis to speak of it
before the ignorant; enjoins him to burn his Letter as soon as he has read it,
and protests he will never write again of this matter. In his sixth Letter, he
enjoins Hermias Erastus and Corisca to swear, in taking to witness, the God who
is the Director of things present and future, and the Lord, who is the Father
of this Director and of this Cause. The Obscurity which he affects in this
occasion, lest he should draw on him the Rage of the Superstitious Populace,
hinders us from understanding what he would say, unless we collate together all
the Passages wherein he speaks of the Divinity, and consult his Interpreters
and Disciples.

Here Is how one of 'em Hierocles de provid. apud Photium. Cod. CCLI.
explains his his Masters meaning: Plato believed, that God the Creator
sustains the visible and invisible World, which was made out of nothing; That
his Will suffices to make Beings exist; That by the conjunction of a corporal
Nature, and another incorporal, he has made a most perfect World, which is
double and single at the same time, in which one may distinguish the high, the
middle, and the low; That he calls high, the Heavenly Beings, and the Gods; The
middle, the Ethereal Intelligences and good Demons, which are the Interpreters
and Messengers, in what relates to the good of men; The low, the terrestrial
Intelligences, and the Souls of men, or men Immortal; That the superior Beings
govern the inferior, but that God who is the Creator and Father of 'em, reigns
over all; and that this paternal Empire, is nothing else but his Providence, by
which he gives to every sont of Being what belongs to it. We may hereby
understand what Plato calls the things of the second and third Order. We shall
not busy our selves in seeking from whom Plato might have learnt this Doctrine,
whether from the Caldeans, or from the Old Testament, as some of the Fathers
have believed.

Although Plato's Disciples are agreed with their Master, in respect of these
three Principles, yet there is to be found in their Writings diverse Enquiries
touching their nature, and diverse ways of speaking, which are not to be seen in
those of this Philosopher, who never dared to write all he thought on this
subject. Plotinus particularly, who lived in the beginning of the third
Century, has treated of them, in several places of his Enneades, Praesertim En.
V. lib. 1. a cap. 3. ad 8.
but especially in the Book which is entitled of the three Hypostases, which
are the three Principles of all things. Here Is whereunto his Doctrine may be
reduced. I. There are three Principles: The Being, the Spirit, or the Reason of
the Being, and the Soul of the World, which is the Reason of the Spirit. There
is also, according to him, a Reason of the Soul of the World, but it is a
Reason obscure; (...). II. The Being has begotten the Reason, not by an act of
his will, or by a decree, but by his nature, as fire begets heat, or as the sun
produces light. The Reason has also begotten the Soul of the World, and perhaps
termed Father in this respect. III. These three Hypostases differ in number,
although there be a most strict union between them; which makes, that one may say
at the same time, that they are different, and that they are the same thing.
The first is more excellent than the second, and the second more excellent than
the third. IV. The terms which Plotinus uses, are worth observing. 1. He calls
not only essence ((...)) after Plato, the nature of the being, of the reason
and of the soul of the World, but he likewise uses the word (...), matter, and
says, that the matter of the one is more perfect than that of the other. Having
pretended that Parmenides had said before Plato, that there are three
Principles, he expresses himself in these terms: Parmenides holds likewise the
Opinion of the three Natures. 2. It Is observable, that the word hypostasis
((...)) signifies two things with this Philosopher; first, the existence of a
thing, considered abstractedly; and in the second place, the thing it self
which exists, as it is taken in the Title of this Book, of the three Hypostases,
which are the Principles of all things, (...), and in the Title of the third
Book of the same Enneade, of intelligent Beings. 3. As he says, That the Reason
is the Father of the Soul, he says likewise, that the Reason begets, and makes
the Soul; for we must observe, that in this matter, Plato and his Disciples use
indifferently the words, to beget, to make, to produce, etc. and that begotten
and made, is the same thing here, in their mouths. We need only read Plato's
Timaeus. 4. Plotinus says, that the Father and the Reason are one and the same
thing (...), because they coexist and for sake not one another. He says, that
the Supreme Being, and whose essence consists in existing, in a manner wholly
particular, has begotten by his Nature the Spirit, and that he cannot be
without him, no more than a luminous body can be without light.



The Spirit on his part, whose essence consists in having perpetually a lively
conception of the Being, cannot exist ((...)) without this. They cannot be
separated ((...)) one from the other, because there is nothing between them, as
there is nothing between the Spirit and the Soul. 5. He says, that that which
is begotten, resembles ((...)) its cause just as the Light resembles the Sun.
6. He says, that the Spirit is the Image ((...)) of the Being, as the Soul is
the Image of the Spirit.

St. Cyril of Alexandria, in his Eighth Book against Julian, cites a passage of
Porphyry, out of his Third Book of the Philosophical History, whence it appears
That the Platonists disputed among themselves, whether there could be more than
three Hypostases in the Divinity; Plato, says Porphyry, has taught, that the
Divine Essence may extend it self even to three Hypostases; to wit, the Supreme
Divinity, or the good it self; after it, the Creator, who is the second; and
the Soul of the World, which is the third, etc. But there are Men who pretend,
that we must not reckon the very good, or good it self, among the things which
he has produced, and that being of a perfect simplicity, and incapable of
accidents, he has communion with nothing: so that it is by the Spirit that we
must begin to reckon the Trinity (...), etc.

However, Porphyry's Master, whom we have already cited, seems Ennead. V. lib.
8. c. 12.
to say, that there may be more than three Hypostases, in these remarkable
words:

God has begotten an excellent Being, and has brought forth all things in him.
This production has cost him no pain, for pleasing himself in what he beg at,
and finding his productions good, he has retained them all in himself,
tempering his brightness and theirs. Those which have there remained being more
excellent, there is only his only Son ((...)) Jupiter who has appeared without,
by whom as by the supreme Son of the Divinity, and as in an Image, one may see
what the Father is, and the Brethren which have remained in the Father, (...).

The Platonists likewise used, in speaking of the Union which they conceived to
be between the different Orders of their Divinities, the Terms of (...), of
different Essence, and (...), Co-essential. By the first, they denote the
different sorts of Beings, and by the second, what is of the same kind. Here Is
a Proof taken out of Jamblichus, in his Book of the Mysteries of the Egyptians,
Sect. 1. chapter xix. He speaks of the manner after which the Superior Gods are
united to the Inferior, according to the Platonic Philosophy: The Divinities,
says he, of the second Order, turning themselves toward the first intellectual
Beings, and the first giving to the second, the same Essence, ((...)) and the
same Power; this entertains their Union. What we call Union in the things which
are of different kinds, ((...)) as the Soul and the Body, or which are diverse
Species, ((...)) as material things; or which are otherwise divided, this
Union, I say, happens to 'em from superior things, and destroys it self at a
certain time. But the more we elevate our selves to superior things, and to
the Identity ((...)) of the first Beings, and in regard of the Species, and in
regard of the Essence; when we ascend from the parts to the whole, the more we
acknowledge the Union ((...)) which is eternal, and the more we see what is the
Union properly so called, and the Model whereon all the rest have been formed,
and that it has about it, and in it self, the Diversity ((...)) and the
Multiplicity.

Porphyry had asked, whether a kind of Being is formed, ((...)) mixed with our
Soul and Divine Inspiration, which made the Prophets able to foresee the
future. Jamblichus Sect. 3. c. 21.
answered, no; and gives this reason for it; which is, that when one only thing
is formed of two, the whole is of one and the same Species, of the same Nature,
and Co essential, ((...)) and that this does not happen in the case proposed by
Porphyry.

One may see hereby, the Subtilty with which the Platonists handled these
Matters, and the Terms they used. But we should take notice of two things, in
endeavoring to form to our selves an Idea of their Sentiments. The first, that
we must not always suppose they had a clear and distinct knowledge of what they
would say themselves, and that they saw all the consequences of their Opinions:
So that it would be perhaps in vain, to endeavor to draw out of their Writings
a clear Idea of their Sentiment, touching the three Principles of all things,
because, perhaps they themselves conceived not clearly what they said; at
least, their Style is so different on this Occasion, from that which is
observable in the Passages of their Writings, wherein they speak of things
which they may know, that it is apparent, they contained not the subject of the
three Principles, like an infinite of others, which they have known how to
express in an even, clear, and elegant manner. The second thing we should
observe, is, That in so difficult a matter, we must content our selves with
what they say positively, without attempting to draw far-fetched Consequences
from their Principles, which we cannot understand but by halfs; otherwise we
are in danger of attributing to them, such Notions as they never had. Neither
must we endeavor to reconcile in so abstracted a subject, the contradictions
which seem to appear in their Doctrine, nor conclude, that they could not mean
things in such a manner, because then they must contradict themselves. It was
the custom of these Philosophers to affect certain apparent Contradictions, in
using the same Terms in diverse Senses. Besides, its obvious enough to imagine,
that they may have sometimes contradicted themselves, on a subject whereof they
had no distinct Idea.

These two Remarks were necessary to prevent the questions which might be
offered on these matters, and to show that in writing the History of these
Doctrins, one should keep wholly to Facts, and the Terms of the Authors we
treat of.

A second Opinion of the Platonists, which has made a great noise in the World,
is that of the Prae existence of Souls, in places above the Moon, Vid. Plato's
Timoeus.
of the faults which they may have there committed; of their banishment from
these happy Abodes, to come to inhabit in differently disposed Bodies,
according to the different merits of these Souls; in fine, of their return into
places whence they drew their Original. We shall not trouble our selves to
explain this Doctrine, because it belongs not to the Relation in hand, having
only made mention of it, for a particular Reason which will appear in its Place.

The Kings of Egypt and Syria, having carried the Sciences of the Greeks into
Asia, the Jews, who were in great numbers in these two Kingdoms, and who were
obliged to converse with them, learnt of them their Opinions; and made no
difficulty of embracing those, which did not appear to 'em contrary to their
Religion. Their Books containing nothing inconsistent with sundry of the
Platonic Doctrins; they believed therefore, that these Doctrins might be true,
and received them so much the more easily, in that they thought, they might
hereby defend their Religion against the Pagans, and make them relish it the
better. Plato every where affirmed the Unity of the supreme Being, yet without
denying that there are other Beings, which may be called Gods; to wit, the
Angels, which is agreeable to the Expressions of the Old Testament. And this is
apparently one of the things which made the Jews better relish the Opinions of
this Philosopher.

But we should give some particular Proofs of this* The Author of the Book of
the Wisdom of Solomon, was plainly of the Opinion of the Prae existence of
Souls, as it appears from these Words of the viii Chapter 19, and 20 verses, For I
was a witty Child, and had a good Spirit. Yea, rather being good, I came into a
Body undefiled. The same Author has used the Word, (...), Reason, in some
places, where Plato would have used it, were he to have said the same thing.
Thus in the 18 chapter 15, 16, v. in speaking of the Deliverer of the Israelites,
he says, Thy Almighty Reason descended from Heaven, out of thy Royal Throne, as
a fierce Man of War into the midst of a Land of Destruction, and brought thine
unfeigned Commandment, as a sharp Sword, and standing up, filled all things
with Death; and it touched the Heaven, but it stood upon the Earth. In the ix
Chapter 1 v. He says, that God has made all things by his Reason. It cannot be
alleged, that he has been the only one of the Jews that has spoke in this
manner, seeing that Philo, who lived a little while after our Savior, is full
of the like Expressions, as several of the learned have observed. It Is known
that this Author has so well imitated Plato, that he has been called the Jewish
Plato. He believed that there was one only supreme God, as all the rest of the
Jews do, whom he calls, TO ON, the being through Excellency: But he farther
acknowledged a Divine Nature, which he calls LOGOS, the Reason, as well as
Plato; and another whom he calls likewise the Soul of the World. His Writings
are so full of these manners of speaking, that there is no need of offering
Instances.

The Jews were of these Opinions when our Savior and his Apostles came into
the World; and this is perhaps the Reason why we find, accordingly as it has
been observed by several learned Men, several Platonic Phrases in the New
Testament, especially in the Gospel of St. John.

It Is well known, that Amelius the Platonic Philosopher, having read the
beginning of this Gospel, remarked, that this Apostle spoke like Plato. In
effect, this Philosopher might have said, according to his Principles, The
Reason was in the beginning with God, and was God: She it is who has made all
things, who is life, and the light of Men, etc. We find several Passages in
Philo, like to this. This Jewish Philosopher calls Reason, the Priest, the
Mediator between God and Men, the eldest Son of God, etc. wherein it is
observable, that he mixes his Jewish Notions, with the manners of speaking of
Plato. He has likewise used in one Place the Term, Paraclete, De Vit, Mos. p.
521. Edit. Genesis Graeco. Lat
Intercessour, in speaking of the Reason: It was necessary* said he, that the
High Priest who is to offer Sacrifices to the Father of the World should have
for Intercessour -- him of his Sons, whose Virtue is the most perfect, for to
obtain the pardon of Sins, and abundant Graces. He had said, ^uod det. pot.
insid. p. 137.
that Moses denoted by the Manna, and by the Rock of the Desert, the same
Reason: The Prophet, says he, calls elsewhere this Rock Manna, a name which
signifies the same thing, to wit, the Divine Reason, the most ancient of
Beings. Our Savior Christ calls himself in St. John, Paraclete, chapter xiv 16.
when he promises his Apostles to send them another Paraclete; he says likewise,
that he is the true Bread, in opposition to the Manna, which could be no more
than a shadow of it; and St. Paul says, That the Stone of the Desert was
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. These ways of speaking which are found in St. John, to be
the true Bread, the true Vine, and which denote, that he to whom they are
applied, is able to produce in men's Spirits as much efficacy, in another kind
of things, as the Bread and Wine produce in the Body; these ways of speaking, I
say, were particular to the Platonists, as has been observed elsewhere.

We might give several other Examples of Platonic Phrases, to be met with in
the New Testament; but it will be sufficient to remark here, that the Apostles
apply to our Savior Christ Passages of the Old Testament, which Philo had
applied to the Reason, and that this Jewish Philosopher has given to this same
Reason most of the Titles which the Apostles have given to Jesus Christ.

The Pagans, who had then embraced the Gospel, and who were in some measure
verst in the Heathen Philosophy, remarking this resemblance of Terms, persuaded
themselves, that the Apostles believed the same things, in respect of these
matters, as the Platonic Jews and Pagans. And this seems to be that which drew
several Philosophers of this Sect into the Christian Religion, and given such a
great esteem to the Primitive Christians, for Plato: Justin Martyr, in his
first Apology, says, that P. 48. Ed. Col. An. 1686.
Jesus Christ was known in part by Socrates; for the Reason was and is still
the same, which is in every man. It is she that has foretold the future by the
Prophets, and who being become subject to the same Infirmities as we, has
instructed us by her self. He says moreover, P. 51. Ejus. ed.
That the Opinions of Plato, are not remote from those of Jesus Christ. And
this has made likewise St. Austin to say, That if the ancient Platonists were
such as they were described, and were to rise again, they would freely embrace
Christianity, in changing De Ver. Rel. c. 3. Vid. and Ep. IVl.
some few Words and Opinions, which most of the late Platonists, and those of
his time have done, paucis mutatis verbis atque sententiis, Christiani fierent,
sicut plerique recentiorum, nostrorumque temporum Platonici fecerunt.
Tertullian affirms in his Apology, C. XXI.
that when the Christians say, That God has made the Universe by his Word, by
his Reason, and by his Power, they speak only after the sage Heathens, who tell
us, That God has made the World by his ((...)) Word or Reason. Clement
Alexandrin has likewise believed, that Plato held the Doctrine of the blessed
Trinity. Origin against Celsus does not deny, but that Plato spoke the truth,
in speaking of God, Lib. 6 p. 276, and 280.
and of his Son; he only maintains, that he did not make such a just use as he
ought of his Knowledge. He does not say, that the Foundation of the Christian
Doctrine is different in this from that of Plato, but that this Philosopher had
learnt it from the Jews. Constantin, in his harangue to the Saints, Cap. IX.
after having praised Plato, in that he was the first Philosopher, who brought
men to the contemplation of intellectual things, thus goes on: He has spoken of
a first God, who is above all Essences, wherein he has done well. He has
likewise submitted to him a Second, and has distinguished two Essences in
number, ((...)) the Perfection of the one being the same as that of the other,
and the Essence of the second God taking his Existence from the first. For it
is he who is the Author, and the Director of all things, being above all. He
that is after him, having executed his Orders, attributes to him, as to the
supreme cause, the production of the Universe. There is then but one, to speak
properly, who takes care and provides for all, to wit, the Reason, who is God,
and who has set all things in their order. This Reason being God, is likewise
the Son of God; for who can call him otherwise, without committing a great
fault? He that is the Father of all things, is justly said to be the Father of
his own proper Reason. HITHERTO PLATO HAS SPOKE LIKE A WISE MAN, ((...)) but he
has varied from the truth, in introducing a multiplicity of Gods, and in giving
to each of 'em his form. We might cite several other such like Passages,
whereby one might see, that several among the Fathers of the first three
Centuries have believed, that the Opinion of Plato and that of the Apostles was
the same.

If we consider, that the Question here is about things of which we have
naturally no Idea, and which is even incomprehensible, supposing revelation;
and of which one can only speak in metaphorical and improper Language, it will
then appear to us no wonder, if since the Apostles times, there have arose
several Opinions on this Subject. Thus the Ebionites are charged, to have
denied the Prae-existence of our Savior's Divinity, and to have held, that he
was only a mere Man. These Ebionites have remained a long time, seeing that not
only Justin Martyr and St. Irenaeus do mention them, but St. Jerome seems to
take notice, that they were in his time. It Is affirmed, That Artemon, under the
Emperor Severus and Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch under the Emperor
Aurelius, maintained the same Opinions. Cerinthus, on the contrary, held the
Prae-existence of the Reason, which he called the Christ, and affirmed, that
she had descended on Jesus, in the form of a Dove, when he was Baptized, and
that she ascended up into Heaven, when he was crucified. It is indeed very
difficult to affirm, that this was precisely the Opinions of these Heretics,
because we have nothing remaining to us of them, and that we cannot fully trust
those who speak of 'em only with detestation, seeing it might easily be, that
their great Zeal has hindered them from well comprehending them. And this is a
Remark which we must make in respect of all the ancient Heretics, whose
Opinions are denoted to us only from the Writings of their Adversaries.

About the middle of the third Century, Sabellius produced a new Opinion, which
was condemned in Egypt, and afterward every where. He was charged with Synod.
Constable. ap Theod. lib. 5. c. 9. Damascus apud cundem, c. 11.
confounding the Hypostasis, and denying the Properties which distinguish the
Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, and for having said, that the Father is the
same as the Son. Whereas Plato and his followers reckoned three numerical
Essences. It seems, that Sabellius would acknowledge but one, whom he called
the Father, the Son, or Holy Spirit in diverse regards. It Is said, that some
others had maintained the same thing before and after him, as Noet and Beryllus
of Botsra.

A while after Sabellius, appeared Paulus Samosatenus, Bishop of Antioch, who
was, as we have said, of the Ebionites Sentiment, in relation to our Savior's
Divinity. Although the word (...) had been used in the Platonic Philosophy, to
signify what is of the same kind, as has been observed already, and as may be
seen in Bull's Defense. Nicene Council, Sect. 2. chapter 1. Yet the Council which
met at Antioch, to condemn Paul of Samosatia, condemned likewise this term. But
it is hard to find in what sense it was taken, because the Acts of this Council
are lost, and we know nothing of them, but by what St. Athanasius and some
others extremely interessed to uphold this word, have said in their Disputes
against the Arians. If we believe them, the Fathers of the Council of Antioch
said, that the Father and the Son were not consubstantial, in the same sense
wherein we say, that two pieces of Money made of the same Metal are
consubstantial, because that these pieces suppose a praeexistent matter, of
which they have been both formed; whereas the Father and the Son do not suppose
the like substance. Paulus Somosatenus said, that if the Son had not been made
God, we must suppose, that he is of the same kind of effence as that of the
Father; and that thus there must have been an anterior substance to the one and
to the other, of which they must have been formed. St. Athanasius assures us,
In lib. de Syn. Arim. etc. Seleue. II. p. 919. Seq.
that the term of homoousios was condemned at Antioch, in as much only as it
might include the Idea of a matter anterior to things which we call coessentials

These are the chief heretical Opinions, touching the Divinity of Jesus Christ,
which appeared before the Council of Nice. As for the Fathers, which are
respected as Orthodox, they have not varied from the Expressions of the
Platonists; and as these have sometimes said, that the Reason is different from
the Supreme Being, and sometimes, that they are both one: The Fathers have
expressed themselves in the same Terms. The Platonists have said, That the Father
could not be without the Son, nor the Son without the Father; as the Light
could not be without the Sun, nor the Sun without Light; and the Fathers have
said the same thing. Both one and the other have acknowledged, that the Reason
has existed before the World, and that she has produced it; and as Plato speaks
in his Timaeus, and Plotinus in his Enneades of the Generation of Reason, as if
the good it self had produced it, to create and govern the World: So the
Fathers have said, that the Son has proceeded in some manner from the Father,
before the Creation of the World, to manifest himself to men by his Production,
and that hence it is, that the Scripture calls him the Son of God, and his
First born.

Sometimes they say, there was a time in which the Son was not; sometimes, that
he was from Everlasting as well as the Father; sometimes they affirm, they are
equal; and elsewhere they say, the Father is greatest. Some of 'em believe,
that the Father and Son are two Hypostases, two Natures, two Essences, as
appears from the Passage of Pierius, related by Cod. CXIX.
Photius; others deny it. To bring Instances of all this, would be too great an
Enlargement for this Place; and there being enough to be seen in Bulls Book,
which we have already cited.

If it be demanded at present, what Ideas they fixed to these Expressions, it
cannot be affirmed that they have been clear: First, because whatever
endeavors are used to understand what they say, a man can get no distinct
Notion thereof; and secondly, because they acknowledge themselves, that it is a
thing incomprehensible. All that can be done on this occasion, is to relate the
Terms which they have used, to the end, that it may be seen, how they have
heretofore expressed themselves on this matter. However, learned Men have given
themselves a great deal of trouble to explain the Passages of the Fathers, who
lived before the Council of Nice, without considering, that all their
Explications are fruitless, seeing the Fathers, in acknowledging that what they
said was incomprehensible, acknowledged at the same time, that they fixed no
Idea on the Terms they used, unless such as were general and confused.

Had the matter staid here, there had never been such great Disputes on the
Sentiments of the Ancients, touching this Mystery, seeing the Dispute does not
so much lie on the Terms they have used, as the Ideas they have fastened to
them, which cannot be reduced to any thing that is clear. Sometimes they use
Terms, which seem perfectly to agree with those which have been used since; but
there is found in some other places of their Works, Expressions which seem to
overthrow what they had said, so that one cannot form any Notion of what they
thought. Lactantius, for Example, answers thus to the Heathens, who asked the
Christians, how they said they acknowledged but one God, seeing they gave this
Name to the Father, and to the Son? Instit. lib. 4. cap. 29. page 403. Ed. Oxon.
When we call the Father God, and the Son God, we do not say, that each of them
is a different God; and we do not separate them; because the Father cannot be
without the Son, nor the Son separated from the Father: He cannot be called
Father, without his Son, nor the Son be begotten without his Father. Seeing
then that the Father makes the Son, and that the Son is made; the one and the
other has the same Intellect, one only Spirit, and one only Substance;
VNAVTRIQVE MEN'S, VNVS SPIRIT US, VNASVBSTANTIA. These are Words which seem to
be decisive; and had Lactantius held to these Expressions, he had never been
accused of Heterodoxy; but if he be questioned what he means by the Word Vnus,
whether it be a Numerical Unity, or an Unity of Consent and Resemblance, he
will appear determined to this latter Sense: Ib. p. 404.
When any one, says he, has a Son whom he dearly loves, and who dwells in the
House, and under the governing Power of his Father, although the Father grants
him the Name and Authority of a Master; yet in the Terms of Civilians, here is
but one House and one Master. So this World is but one House belonging to God,
and the Son and the Father who inhabit the World, and who are of one Mind,
(Unanimes) are one only God, the one being as the two, and the two as the one.
And this ought not to appear strange, seeing the Son is in the Father, because
the Father loves the Son, and the Father is in the Son, by reason of his
faithful Resignation to his Fathers Will; and that he does nothing, nor ever
did do any thing, unless what the Father has willed, or commanded him. We may
read farther, the vi. Chapter of the iv. Book, which begins thus: God who has
conceived and produced all Things, before he began this curious work of the
World, begat a Spirit Holy and Incorruptible, that he might call him his Son.
Although he has produced infinite others, whom we call Angels, for his
Ministry, yet has he vouchsafed to give the Name of Son to his only Firstborn,
who is clothed with the Virtue and Majesty of his Father. That which is
particular in this, is, that though Lactantius says, that the Son is Coeternal
with the Father, yet he says, there was a time when he was not. Lib. 2. c. 9.
in Ed. Betuleij.
Sicut matter sine exemplo genuit auctorem suum; sic ineffabiliter Pater
genuisse credendus est Co aeternum. De Matre natus est qui ante jam fuit; de
Patre qui aliquando non fuit. Hoc fides credat, intelligentia non requirat, ne
aut non inventum putet incredibile, aut repertum non credat singular. It Is
true, this Passage is not to be found in some Manuscripts, and that several
learned men have fancied, that some sly Heretic has corrupted Lactantius
Works: but in other places, wherein all the Manuscripts do agree, Lactantius
expresses himself after the same manner; and it may be replied with as much
likelihood, that it has been the Orthodox Revisors who have cut off what they
thought not fit to be made public. Lactantius has been long since charged with
Heterodoxy; but in this respect, he has been no more faulty than other Fathers,
who lived before the Council of Nice, whose Expressions are as different as
those of the Platonists, in matter of the Trinity. And this has made Father
Peteau and Mr. Huet, to charge them with favoring the Arian Sentiments, whilst
other learned Men have maintained, that they have been far from them. Each of
them cites his Passages, which examined apart, seem to decide for him: But
when one comes to compare these Passages with one another; it cannot be
comprehended how the same Persons could speak so differently. In this
Comparison, their Expressions are found so obscure, and so full of apparent
Contradictions, or real ones, that a man feels himself obliged to believe, That
the Fathers had done a great deal better in keeping themselves to the Terms of
the Apostles, and to have acknowledged, that they understood them not, than to
throw themselves into such Labyrinths, by endeavoring to explain them.

To show farther, that the Expressions of the Fathers are only fit to produce
confused Notions, and such as are contrary to those, which all Christians at
this day hold; we need only read Tertullian, who having said in his Apology,
Chapter xxi. That the Nature of Reason is spiritual; adds, Hunc ex Deo prolatum
didicimus, and prolatione Generatum and idcirco Filium, and Deum dictum ex
unitate substantiae, nam and Deus Spiritus est: But what means Prolatum
genitus? The Terms of Unity of Substance, may signify, not only of the same
Substance in Number, but moreover, of a like Substance, that is to say,
spiritual and equally perfect: And what he adds, seems to favor this last
sense; Etiam cum radius ex sole porrigitur, portio ex summa, sed Sol erit in
radio, quia Solis est radius; nec separatur substantia, sed extenditur. The
substance of a Ray, after what manner soever we conceive it, is not the same in
Number as that of the Sun; and Tertullian says, that it is the same of the Son.
Ita de Spiritu Spiritus, and de Deo Deus; Thus a Spirit is born of a Spirit,
and a God of a God. Vt Lumen de lumine accenditur, manet integra, and indefecta
materiae matrix, etsi plures inde traduces qualitatum mutueris; as when we
light one Torch by another, the Light which has lighted the other, remains
entire and without being wasted, although we light several Torches, who have
the same qualities. Ita and quod de Deo profectum est, Deus est, and Dei filius
and unus ambo. Ita de Spiritu Spiritus, and de Deo Deus modulo alternum numerum
gradu, non statu fecit, and a matrice non recessit, sed excessit: So what
proceeds from God is God, and Son of God, and both are but one; so the Spirit
which is born of a Spirit, and the God who is born of a God, makes two in
respect of Degree, but not in respect of his State; he has not been separated
from the Womb, or from his Original, but is gone out of it.

These Words of Tertullian, do not appear at first sight agreeable with Arius's
Opinion; but at most, they contain nothing that is clear, for one might have
demanded of Tertullian, whether by this Prolation he speaks of, the Reason has
existed as Light from a Torch, lighted by another Torch exists, as soon as it
is lighted? Should he allow it, he might have been told, that to speak
strictly, there must then have been two Gods, seeing that, in fine, two
Spirits, though exactly equal, and strictly united, are two Spirits. If this be
so, the second Spirit being not formed of the same numerical Substance, as that
of the first, one might say with Arius, that he has been extracted from
nothing; and there would be in this regard, nothing but a Dispute about Words,
between Arius and Tertullian. But if it be answered for Tertullian, that his
comparison is not good, it will be asked, why he made use of a comparison which
may lead into Error, especially having said before, that he was of Plato's
opinion touching the Reason? If he meant, that the Father has produced in his
proper Substance, without multiplying it, a Modification, in respect of which,
one may call the Substance of the Father, Son; why does he say, Spiritus ex
Spiritu, ex Deo, Deus? For to speak properly, the Father has produced neither a
Spirit, nor a God, but a new manner of being in his proper Substance.

It is farther to be observed, that this Comparison is not of Tertullian alone,
but of Justin Martyr, and a great number of Fathers besides, before and after
the Council of Nice; and that there is no Passage which appears of greater
force than that, yet the Equivocation of it is apparent.

The Fathers have likewise used the Term Hypostasis, as well as the Platonists,
in two senses; sometimes for the Existence taken in an abstracted manner, and
sometimes for the thing it self, which exists. The Equivocation of this Term,
and that of the Words, One and Many, which, as has been showed, are taken
sometimes from the Unity, and the Plurality Specificals, and sometimes from the
Unity and Plurality Numericals, have caused great Controversies among the
Fathers, as diverse learned Men have (a) Petavius, Curcellaeus, Huetius, etc.
observed. But it is fit we should take notice of one thing, which is, that
Bull who has writ Prolixly on this matter, has not a word of the Numerical and
Specific Unity; without which, a man cannot comprehend what the Fathers mean,
nor draw any Conclusions from them against the Heretics. Yet when they say
there are three Hypostases, or three Essences, or three Natures, he constantly
takes it as if they said, there are three Modifications in one only Numerical
Essence. He supposes, that the (...) Essence, and (...) Nature, signify
manners of existing of one Numerical Essence, only because that without this,
those who have thus spoken of it, would not have been Orthodox, or of the
Opinion at present received, which the Council must have approved of, seeing
other wise it would not have been admitted as it is. He supposes on the
contrary, for the same Reasons, that when the Fathers deny there are three
Hypostases, they do not barely mean, that there are not three Essences of
different kinds, but that there are not three in number. But others will deny
there is any place, where the Words Nature and Essence can be taken for what we
at this day call Personality, which is to say, for a Modification; and that it
appears from the Passages which he cites, that the Fathers held the Numerical
Unity.

And this was the condition of the Christian Church, when the quarrels of Arius
disturbed it; Whence may be seen, that it was no hard matter for the two
Parties to cite Authorities of the Ancients, whose Equivocal Expressions might
be interpreted in diverse Senses. The Obscurity of the Subject, the vain
Subtilty of humane Understanding, which would know every thing, the Desire of
appearing able, and the Passion which mingles it self in all Disputes, gave
Birth to these Controversies, which for a long time tore Christianity into
pieces.

Arius being a Priest of Alexandria, about the year 3 8, undertook, as it
seems, to explain more clearly, the Doctrine of the Divinity of Jesus Christ,
which had been till that time taught in the Christian Church, under the Veil of
those Terms which we have recited. He said, that to beget in this Subject, was
nothing else but to produce; whence he concluded, that the Divinity of Jesus
Christ had been extracted out of nothing by the Father. Here Is how he expresses
himself, in a Letter which he wrote to Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia: We make
Profession to (a) Ap Theod. lib. 1. cap. 5.
believe, that the Son is not without Generation, and that he is not a part of
that which is unbegotten, nor of any other Pre existent matter whatever; but
that by the Will and Council (of God) he has been perfect God, ((...)) before
all Time and Ages; that he is his only Son, and that he is not subject to
change; that before he was begotten or created, he was not. Arius was counted
an able Logician, (b) Sozo^. lib. 1. c. 15.
and was in good esteem with his Bishop Alexander; but speaking freely his
mind, he drew on him the hatred of one Melece (c) Epiphan. in Haet. LXIX.
Bishop in Thebaida, who had caused a Schism in Egypt, although he did not much
vary from the common Opinions; only because he would not receive into Communion
the Priests who had fallen in the Dioclesian Persecution, but after a long
Penance, and would have them for ever deprived of their Office.

One may say, the History of this in St. Epiphanius, who accuses him for having
an affected Devotion, and taking up a particular way of living to make himself
admired by the People. Arius had moreover another Enemy, named Alexander, and
Surnamed (a) Philost. lib. 1. c. 4.
Baucalas, who was also an associate Priest with him. He joined himself to
Melece, to complain to the Bishop of Alexandria, that Arius sowed a new Doctrine
touching the Divinity of our Savior Christ. He could the better spread his
Opinions, in that having a particular Church at Alexandria committed to his
Care, He preached there what he thought fit. (b) Epiph. Sozom.
He drew such a great number of People into his Opinions, that there were 700
Religious Votaries who had embraced them, and consequently, a greater number
among the ordinary People. It Is said, that he was a man of large shape, of a
severe Countenance, yet of a very agreeable Conversation.

Alexander thought, that in a matter wherein one might easily equivocate, it
were best to let the two Parties explain themselves, to the end it might
appear, that he had accorded them more by Persuasion than Force. He brought the
two Parties to a Conference, in demanding of them, the Explication of a Passage
of Scripture in the Presence of the Clergy of his Church; but neither one nor
the other of these Parties would yield, endeavoring only to vanquish. Arius
his Advensaries maintained, that the Son is of the same essence ((...)) as the
Father, and that he is eternal as he is; and Arius pretended that the
generation denoted a beginning. There was another meeting called, as fruiless
as the first, in respect of the dispute; but by which it seems Alexander, who
had before not any precise determined sentiment on this matter, was induced to
embrace the opinion of Arius his adversaries. He afterward commanded this
Priest to believe the same thing ((...)) and to abandon the opposite opinion.

But it being seldom known that Men yield obedience to these kind of
Injunctions, Arius remained still in the same opinion, as well as several other
Bishops and Ecclesiastics who had approved of it. Alexander angry at his not
being obeyed, excommunicated him, with all those of his party, and obliged him
to depart out of Alexandria. There were among others, five Priests of this
City, and as many Deacons of the same Church, besides some Bishops of Egypt, as
Secondus and Theonas, To them were joined a great number of People, some of
which did in effect approve the doctrine of Arius, and others thought that he
had been condemned with too high an hand, without entering into the discussion
of the controversy. After this severity, the two Parties endeavored to make
their opinions and conduct be approved by Letters which they sent every where.
They exposed not only their reasons, but endeavored to render odious the
opposite Party, by the consequences they drew from their opinions, and in
attributing to them strange expressions. Some Bishops, as Eusbius of Nicomedia,
exhorted Alexander to reconcile himself with Arius; and others approved his
Conduct, and advised him not to receive him into communion till he retracted.
The letters of Alexander and Arius are too considerable to be disregarded;
Here Is then the sum of them.

Arius wrote to ap. Ephiph. in Hes. LXIX. and Theodor. lib. 1. C. 5.
Eusebius of Nicomedia, to entreat his Protection against Alexander who had
excommunicated him and driven him out of Alexandria, because he could not grant
him, that the Father and the Son are coeternal; that the Son coexists with the
Father without generation, having been always begotten, and not begotten at the
same time, without letting it be imagined that the Father has existed so much
as one moment before the Son. He added, that Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea,
Theodotus of Laodicea, Paulinus of Tire, Athanasius of Anazarba, Gregory of
Beryta, and Aetius of Lydia, condemning the sentiments of Alexander, had been
likewise struck with an Anathema, as well as all the eastern People who were of
the same opinions, except Philogonius Bishop of antiach, Hellanicus of Tripoly,
and Macarias of Jerusalem, one of which said that the Son was an Eruclation,
the other a Projection, and the other that he was not begotten, no more than
the Father. To this Arius added the explanation of his opinion, which we have
already related.

The Bishop Sozom. II.
of Nicomedia having received this Letter called a Synod of his province of
Bythinia, which wrote circular Letters to all the Eastern Bishops to induce
them to receive Arius into communion, as maintaining the truth, and to engage
Alexander to do as much. We have still a Letter of Eusebius to Paulinus Bishop
of Tire, wherein he not only entreats Paulinus to interceed for Arius; but
wherein he exposes and defends his sentiments with great clearness. He says he
has never heard there were two Beings without Generation, nor that the one has
been parted into two, but that this single Being had begotten another, not of
his Substance, but perfectly like to him, although of a different Nature and
Power; That not only we cannot express by Words the beginning of the Son, but
that it is even incomprehensible to those intellectual Beings, which are above
men, as well as to us. To prove this, he cites the 8th of the Proverbs, God the
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his Ways, before his Works of old, I was
set up from Everlasting, and he has begotten me before the Mountains were
brought forth. He says, that we must not search into the Term of Begetting any
other Signification than that of Producing, because the Scripture does not only
use it in Reference to the Son, but moreover, in speaking of Creatures; as when
God says, I have begotten Children; and I have brought them up, but they have
rebelled against me.

But these Letters not having had the Success which Arius expected, he sent to
get leave of Paulinus, of Eusebius, and Patrophilus Bishop of Scythopolis, to
gather those who were of his Opinion into a Church, and to exercise among them
the Office of a Priest, as he was want to do before, and as was done at
Alexandria. These Bishops having Convocated the other Bishops of Palestine,
granted him what he demanded, but ordered him however to remain subject to
Alexander, and to omit nothing to obtain Communion with him.

There is extant a Letter of Arius, directed to this Bishop, Apud Epiph. II.
and written from Nicodemia, which contains a Confession of Faith, according to
the Doctrine which Arius affirmed that Alexander himself had taught him;
wherein, after having denoted his Belief touching the Father, which includes
nothing Heterodox; he adds, That he has begotten his only Son before the times
Eternal; that it is by him, that he has made the World; that he has begotten
him, not only in Appearance, but in Reality; that this Son subsists by his own
Will; that he is unmovable; that he is a Creature of God that is perfect, and
not as other Creatures; that he is a Production, but not as other Productions;
nor as Valentinian said, a Projection of the Father; nor as Manes affirmed, a
Consubstantial Part of the Father; nor as Sabellius called him, a Son Father;
((...)) nor as Hieracas spoke, a Lamp lighted by a Lamp, or a Torch divided
into two; That he did not exist before he was begotten, and became a Son; that
there are three Hypostases (that is to say, different Substances) the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and that the Father is before the Son, although
the Son was created before all Ages. Arius adds, That Alexander had several
times preached this Doctrine in the Church, and refuted those who did not
receive it. This Letter is Signed by six Priests, seven Deacons, and three
Bishops, Secondus of Pentapolis, Theonas of Lybia, and Pistus whom the Arian
Bishops had Established at Alexandria.

Alexander Socrat. lib. 1. c. 6.
wrote on his side circular Letters, wherein he sharply censures Eusebius of
Nicomedia, in that he protected Arius, and recomended him to others. He joins
to this the Names of those who had been Excommunicated, and explains their
Doctrine, wherein he contents not himself to set down what we have seen in Arius
Letters, touching the beginning which he attributes to the Son; he says
moreover that this Priest maintained that the Son is one of the Creatures, that
we cannot call him the Reason and Wisdom of the Father but improperly, seeing
that he himself has been produced by the Reason and Wisdom of God; that he is
subject to change, as other intelligent creatures; that he is of another
Essence than God; that the Father is incomprehensible to him, and that he knows
not himself what is his proper substance; that he has been made for our sakes,
to serve God as an Instrument in creating us, and that without this, God had
never begotten him Alexander adds, That having assembled near an hundred
Bishops of Egypt and Lybia, they had Excommunicated Arius and his Followers, by
reason of his Opinions. He afterward comes to prove his, and shows first, The
Eternity of the Son by this Passage of St. John, In the Beginning was the
Reason. 2. That he cannot be reckoned among the Creatures; because the Father
says of him in the 45. Ps. My heart has uttered (eructavit) a good Word. 3.
That he is not unlike the Essence of the Father, of which he is the perfect
Image, and the Splendour, and of whom he says, He that has seen me, has seen the
Father. 4. That we cannot say, there was a time in which he was not, seeing
that he is the Reason, and the Wisdom of the Father; and that it will be absurd
to say, there was a time in which the Father was without Reason and Wisdom. 5.
That he is not subject to change, because the Scripture says, He is the same
yesterday and to day. 6. That he was not made because of us, seeing St. Paul
says, that it is because of him, and by him that all things are. 7. That the
Father is not incomprehensible to the Son, seeing he says, As the Father knows
me, so I know the Father.


This Letter wherein Eusebius of Nicomedia is extremely ill treated, shockt
this Bishop to the utmost Point, and having great access to the Court, because
Constantine made then his abode at Nicomedia, this occasioned diverse Bishops to
be at his Devotion; but he could not engage Alexander to forget what had past,
to speak no more of this Controversy, and to receive Arius into Communion. The
quarrels every day grew hotter, and the People were seen to range themselves,
some taking Arius side, others Alexanders; and the Comedians being Gentiles,
this gave them occasion to make a Sport of Christian Religion on their Theaters.

Each side treated one another with the odious Name of Heretic, and
endeavored to show, that the Sentiments of the opposite Party overthrew the
Christian Religion; but it appears, that neither the one, nor the other Party,
could yet persuade the Emperor, seeing he wrote to Alexander and to Arius, a
long Letter, of which Hosius Bishop of Cordovia was the bearer, wherein he
equally chides them: He says, he found that the Controversy Apud Eusebius. de
vit. Constable. cap. 64. and Seq. and Socrat. lib. 1. c. 7.
had begun in this manner; That Alexander having demanded of each of his
Priests, what they thought of a passage of Scripture, or rather, on an idle
sort of Question? ((...)) Arius inconsiderately answered what he should have
thought, or rather concealed, if he had thought it, That from thence had come
his Excommunication, and the Division of the People. And therefore, he exhorted
them to a mutual pardoning of one another, and to receive his Opinion, which
was, That it had been better not to have troubled the Ecclesiastics with this
Question; and that those who were asked it, should have held their Tongues,
because the matter concerned what was equally incomprehensible to both Parties,
and which served only to raise Disturbances among the People. He could not
conceive, how for a Question of very small Importance, and in which, if they
well understood one another, they would find they agreed in the main, they
should make such a bustle, and divide themselves in so scandalous a manner.

I do not say this, adds he, as if I would constrain you to think the same
thing on a most vain Question, or however you will please to call it. For one
may without dishonouring the Assembly, and without breaking the Communion, be
in different Sentiments in such inconsiderable things. We have not all the same
Wills in all things, neither are we all of us of the same temper of Body and
Humors. The Emperors Letter, says Socrates, gave them admirable Advice, and
full of Wisdom; but the Mischief was grown too great, and neither the Emperors
Endeavors, nor his Authority, who brought the Letter to Alexandria, could
appease it. Alexander had taken care to write every where, to hinder the
spreading of Arius his Opinions. We have still a long Letter which he wrote to
the Bishop of Constantinople, wherein he vehemently inveighs against the Arian
Faction, and endeavors to render it odious; in saying, That Arius maintained,
that the Son was of a Nature capable of evil as well as of good, although it
actually remained without sin, and that it was for this, that God had chosen
him for his eldest Son. He proves the Eternity of the Son, and that he was not
extracted from nothing, because he was in the beginning, and that all things
have been made by him. Yet he holds* that the Son has been begotten, and that
only the Father is without Generation, although that the Subsistence, or
Substance of the Son, ((...)) be incomprehensible to the Angels themselves, and
that there is none but melancholy Persons who can think of comprehending it. He
afterward shows, that the manner after which Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
is infinitely more excellent than the manner after which Men are, seeing he is
so by his Nature, we only by Adoption. He accuses Arius with following the
Doctrine of Ebion and Artemas, and for having imitated Paul of Samosatia, Bishop
of Antioch, whose Doctrine had been embraced by Lucien, (Martyr) who by reason
of this, had separated himself from the Communion of three following Bishops of
this City. He joins to him three Bishops of Syria, who seem to have been,
Paulinus, Eusebius, and Theodotus, and reproaches them with using Passages,
which relate to the Humiliation of Christ, to attack his Divinity, and to have
forgotten those which speak of the Glory of his Nature, such as this is; The
Father and I are one; which the Lord says, adds he, not to denote that he is
the Father, nor to say, that two Natures, in respect of the manner of existing,
((...)) are but one; but because the Son is of a Nature, which exactly keeps
the Paternal Resemblance, being by his Nature like to him in all things, the
unchangeable Image of his Father, and a Copy of this Original. He afterward
defends himself largely against the Consequence which Arius drew from his
Adversaries Sentiments, which consisted in accusing them, for denying the
Generation of the Son, in making him Eternal. He affirmed, That there is an
infinite difference between the Creation, of the World, and the Generation of
the Son, although this last be wholly incomprehensible, and that he cannot
explain it.

In the mean time, the Division increased so greatly among the People, that in
some places, it came to a Sedition, wherein the very Statues Eusebius. de vit.
Cons. lib. 3. c. 4.
of the Emperor were thrown down, who appeared to favor the Arians, because he
would have 'em tolerated. There was moreover, the Controversy about Easter,
the one denying that it should be celebrated at the same time as the Jewish,
and the others affirming it; but this contest, had not produced a Schism, as
Arianism had done.

Constantin seeing that these Letters had been fruitless, thought there was no
better way to allay these controversies, than to call a Council, from all Parts
of the Roman Empire. It was perhaps Hosius who gave him this advice, at least
if we may believe Philostorgus, lib. 1. c. 7.
the Bishop of Alexandria being gone to Nicomedia, there assembled some Bishops
of his opinion, with whom Hosius and he consults, to find out means to set up
their opinion and to make that of Arius condemned; and a little while after the
Emperor called a Council at Nice, a Town of Bithynia. Eusebius. in vit. Constable.
lib. 3. c. 6.
This was in the year 325, and to the end that nothing might hinder the Bishops
from coming, Constantin took on himself the charges of their journey. The
Histori ans are not agreed in reference to the number of them, some setting down
more than 300 Eustathius of Antioch says there were 270. Theod. 1. and.
Constantin 300 Socr. 11.9. Eusebius 250 vit. Constable. lib. 3. c. 9. S. Athanans.
318.
and others less. We must not wonder at this diversity, seeing there are few
passages in Ecclesiastical History, wherein appears more confusion and neglect
than in the History of this famous Council. And there fore have we been obliged
to extract what we are going to say, out of diverse Historians, because none of
the Ancients has been complete in his relations. As to the diversity observable
among the Historians on the same facts, we have followed either the most
ancient, or those which have appeared most probable. Eusebius who was present
at the Council, has past very lightly over the Circumstances of this History
apparently, lest he should either offend the Arians, or the Orthodox. This
affair has never been since discoursed of with an entire disinterest, reports
having been often related as certain facts. In a word, there has never any
thing happened, whereunto one may apply with more reason these words of Tacitus:
Maxima quaeque ambigua sunt, dum alij quoquomodo audita pro compertis habent,
alij vera in contrarium veriunt, et gliscit utrumque posteritati. Eusebius
vaunts very much of the Bishops which were here, but Sabinus Socrat. l. 7.
a Macedonian Bishop of Heraclea a Town of Thrace, treats them as Ignoramusses
in his collection of Councils. There was likewise a great number of Priests and
Deacons, who came in Company with the Bishops.

The Council opened the 14th. of June, and therein were regulated several
things, which we shall not here take notice of, designing only to remark what
past in relation to the principal question therein decided, to wit Arianism.
As Soon as ever the Bishops were arrived, they made particular Assemblies
without discountenance, and sent for Arius Sozom. l. 17. and 19.
to them to inform themselves of his opinions. After they had heard from him
what he thought, some of 'em were for condemning all sorts of novelties, and to
content themselves in speaking of the Son, in the same terms their predecessors
had used; and others affirmed that the opinions of the Ancients were not to be
received without examining. There were seventeen Bishops according to Sozomen
ib. cap. 20.
who favored Arius his new explications, the chief of which were Eusebius of
Nicomedia, Eusebius of Cesarea, Menophantes of Ephesus, Patrophilus of
Scythopolis, Theognis of Nice, Narcissus of Neroniadas, Theonas of Marmarica,
and Secondus of Ptolemeida. These Bishops drew up a Confession of Faith
Theoder. lib. 1. c. 7. ex Athanasio.
according to their sentiments, but they had no sooner read it in the Assembly,
but it was cried out upon as false; 'twas torn in pieces, and they were
reproacht with it as Persons who would, as they said, betray the Faith and the
Godhead of Christ, A Letter of Eusebius of Nicomedia, wherein he expressed his
thoughts, had the same lot.

In fine, a Creed was undertaken to be made, wherein the opinions contrary to
those of Arius were established. It was immediately observed that the new ways
of speaking which the Arians used, were to be condemned, That the Son had been
extracted from nothing; that he was a Creature; that there was a time wherein
he was not, etc. and Scripture Phrases were to be used, such as these; Only
begotten Son, the Word, Power, Wisdom of the Father, the brightness of his
Glory, and character of his Power. The Arians having showed that they were
ready to admit a Confession expressed in these terms; the Orthodox Bishops feared
lest they should expound these terms in an ill sense. And therefore they were
for adding that the Son is of the Substance of the Father, because this is that
which distinguishes the Son from the Creatures. Hereupon the Arians were asked,
whether they acknowledged, That the Son is not a Creature, but the Power, the
only Wisdom and Image of the Father; that he is Eternal, and like to the Father
in all things; in sine true God. The Heterodox haven spoken among themselves,
believed that these expressions might very well agree with the notion they had
of the Divinity of the Son, and denoted they were ready to receive them.

In fine, it being observed that Eusebius of Nicomedia, in the Letter which was
read, rejected the Term of Consubstantial, ((...)) it was thought, that the
Orthodox Doctrine could not be better expressed, and all Equivocation excluded,
than in making use of it; and so much the rather, in that the Arians seemed to
be afraid of it. This Circumstance is owing to St. Ambrose, Lib. 3. de fid. ad
Great. cap. ult.
whose Words are these: Auctor ipsorum Eusebius Nicomediae Episcopus, Epistola
sua prodidit, dicens; si verum inquit, Dei filium increatum dicimus,
homoousion, Consubstantialem cum Patre incipimus confiteri. Haec cum lecta
esset Epistola in Concilio Nicoeno, hoc verbum in tractatu sidei posuerunt
Patres quod viderunt Adversariis esse formidini, ut tanquam evaginato ab ipsis
gladio ipsum nefandae caput Haereseos amputarent.

The Orthodox conceived then their Sentiment, touching the Divinity of the Son
in these Terms: Socr. lib. 1. c. 8.
We believe in one only Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, only Son of the Father,
that is to say, of the Substance of the Father, God, born of God, Light of
Light, true God, born of the true God, begotten, not made, Consubstantial with
the Father.

The Arians in vain complained, that these Words were not to be found in
Scripture; They were told, that those they were wont to use, were no more there
neither, being wholly new; whereas it was near six-score years since, that
several Bishops had used the Word, Consubstantial.

The Fathers of the Council, during this Time, were not so busied in
vanquishing the Arians, and in making several Regulations, but that they
remembered their private grudges. Several Churchmen, says Sozomen, Lib. 1. c. 1^
as if they had been assembled to prosecute their particular Affairs. as it
commonly happens, thought this a fit time to get those punished who had
offended them. Each of 'em presented Requests to the Emperor, wherein they
accused one or other, and signified the wrong they had done them* This happening
every day, the Emperor set one a part in which they were every one of 'em to
bring his Grievance. The day being come, the Emperor took all their Requests,
and caused 'em to be thrown into the Fire, and exhorted them to a mutual
Forgiveness, according to the Precepts of the Gospel. He afterward enjoined
them to labor in clearing up the Points of Faith, of which they were to be
Judges, and a fixed day, wherein the Question of the Consubstantiality should be
decided.

The day appointed Eusebius. vit. Constable. lib. 3. c. 10.
being come, Constantine convocated all the Bishops into an Hall of the Palace,
where he had caused Chairs to be set on both sides. The Bishops entered first,
and the Emperor came in afterward, and did not sit down at the Head of the
Assembly on a gilded Seat, which he caused to be there placed, till the
Bishops, by Signs had given him leave. Being set down, Eusebius of Cesarea, who
was at his Right Hand, harang'd him, and thanked him, for the care he had taken
to preserve the Purity of the Catholic Faith. Constantin, afterward began to
speak, and made a Discourse in Latin, wherein he represented. That he had no
greater Affliction than the Divisions he observed among Christians, exhorting
the Bishops very earnestly to Peace. An* Interpreter afterward turned the
Speech into Greek, for the Eastern Bishops understood not Latin.

Although it seems, that Business was prepared in particular Assemblies before
hand, yet there arose at first a great Controversy; and Constantine had the
patience to hear long Contests, wherein he exercised the Office of Moderator,
in endeavoring to accord those, whose Sentiments or Expressions appeared
remote, in upholding the Arguments which seemed to him weak, and in giving
Praises to such, who seemed to speak well. Eusebius of Cesarea long held our
against the use which they would Socrat. lib. 1. c. 8. etc. Theod. lib. i. cap.
12.
make of the Word Consubstantial. He offered another Confession of Faith,
wherein it was omitted, and wherein he called the Son barely, God born of God,
Light of Light, Life of Life, only Son, first born of all Creatures, begotten
of his Father before all Worlds. The Emperor approved this Confession of Faith,
and exhorted the Fathers of the Synod to follow it, in adding thereto only the
Word Consubstantial.

Afterward the Confession was read, which had been drawn up with this Word,
the Terms of which have been already recited. Anathema's were joined thereto,
against those who should use on this Occasion other Terms, than those of the
Holy Scripture, which must be understood, with an Exception of those, which the
Council thought fit to confecrate. This Proposition was particularly condemned,
That the Son existed not before he was begotten. Eusebias, and others
requested, That the Terms of the Symbol, and Anathema's might be explained. 1.
It was said, That the Word Begotten, was used and not made, because this last
Word expresses the Production of Creatures, to which the Son has no likeness,
being of a Substance far more excellent than they, begotten by the Father in an
incomprehensible manner. 2. As for the Word Consubstantial, it is proper to the
Son, not in the sense wherein it is taken, when we speak of Bodies, or mortal
Animals, the Son being Consubstantial with the Father, neither by a Division of
the Divine Substance, of which he possesses a part, nor by any change of this
same Substance. The meaning of which is only this, That the Son has no
Resemblance with the Creatures which he has made, but, that he is in all things
like to his Father, by whom he has been begotten; or that he is not of another
Hypostasis, or Substance, but of that of the Father. 3. Those were condemned,
who said, that the Son was not before he was born, seeing that he existed
before his corporal Birth, and even before his divine Generation, according to
Constantin's Argument. These Words of Eusebius's Letter, are not to be found
but in Theodoret, Socrates having retrenched them.
For before, said he, that he was actually begotten, he was in Power in his
Father, in a manner unbegotten, the Father having been always Father, as he is
ever always King and Savior, and all things in his Power, being eternally in
the same Condition.


It will perhaps seem, that this is pure Arianism, and that this is to deny the
Eternity of the Son; but we must observe, that in the Style of that time, to
exist before the World, and to be eternal, is the same thing; seeing, that to
prove his Eternity, this Passage is cited, Vid Ep. Alexandri Ep.
In the Beginning was the Word; and it sufficed to show, that he was begotten,
before there was any time. So that we must not reject these Words, as
suppositious, merely for this Reason; and it is so ordinary to find hard
Expressions, in those who attempt to explain, in any sort, this
incomprehensible Mystery; that if one might hence judge of them, one would be
apt to declare them all Heretics, which is to say, to anathemize the greatest
part of the Ancients, Besides this St. Athanasius who De. Deret. Nican. Tom. l.
page 251.
openly treats Eusebius as an Arian, makes allusion to one part of this
passage, and draws thence a consequence which Eusebius without doubt would not
have owned, which is, that the Arians believed that the Divinity of Jesus
Christ did not exist before his corporal Birth.

After these explications Eusebius subscribed, as he himself testifies in the
Letter above recited, Athanas. ibid.
although he had refused it the day before. The long and formal opposition which
he had made against the word Consubstantial, caused it to be suspected that
there was want of sincerity in this subscription. In fine Arius and his Party
were anathematized, and all their Books condemned, and particularly a Poem
which Arius had entitled Thalia. Most of the Arian Bishops subscribed, after
Euesebius his example, to this confession of Faith and the Anathema's after the
explications above mentioned. Yet there were some of 'em, who refused at first
to sign, Socr. lib. l. cap. 8.
the principal of which were Eusebius of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nice, Maris of
Calcedon, Theonas of Marmarica and Secondus of Ptolemaida. They were
immediately Excommunicated by the Council, and were to be sent afterward as
well as Arius, into Exile by Constantin. The Council wrote a circular Letter
Socr. lib. l. Cap. 9.
to the Churches of Egypt, denoting to 'em in what sort they had carried
themselves in the business of Arius, and what had been ordered touching Melece
the Schismatical Bishop, and the observation of Easter. Constantin wrote also
to the Church of Alexandria, to assure it that after a full and mature
examination, Arius had been condemned by the common consent. He greatly vaunted
of the moderation and learning of the Bishops, making no mention of their
quarrels, according to the Custom observed in public Acts, and such like
occasions, where every thing is suppressed which may give an ill opinion of the
Decrees of these kinds of Assemblies. In another Letter directed to the Bishops
and Churches, he enjoins the name of Porphyrus to be given to Arius, and his
followers to be called Porphyrians. This Porphyry was a famous Platonist, who
had written against the Christian Religion, and whose Books Constantin had
caused to be burnt. Lucas Holstenius has written his Life, which is to be found
at the end of the Book of the Abstinence of Animals. Constantin designed to
declare hereby Arius an Enemy to the Christian Religion, and not in any manner
reproach him with being a Platonist, touching the Trinity, seeing Constantin
did not disapprove, as we have seen, the sentiments of Plato. It Is true the
Arians have been upbraided with their too great application to the reading of
this Philosopher, and other Heathen Authors: Revera de Platonis et Aristophanis
sinu, says St. Jerome, Advers. Lucif. T. 2. p. 142.
in episcopatum alleguntur. Quotus enim quisque est qui non apprime in his
eraditus sit? Accedit ad hoc quod Ariana haeresis magis cum sapientia seculi
facit, et argumentationum rivos de Aristotelis fontibus matuaetur. Thus the
Orthodox and Heretics equally approved the sentiments of Plato, each of them
apparently explaining them, according to his Hypothesis. Constantin further
ordered in the fame Letter to burn all Arius his Books; to the end that not
only his perni^ions Doctrine be destroyed, but that there remain no monument of
it to posterity. He likewise declared that if any one concealed any of his
Books, and did not bring them to be burnt, he should be put to death after it
had been proved upon him. There is moreover another Letter of this Emperor,
wherein he enjoins all Churches to celebrate Easter, according to the Canons of
the Council.

Eusebius and Theognis, either effectually believing that the Creed of the
Council might admit an Arian sense, Soctat. lib. 1. cap. 14.
or affrighted by the Emperors severity, offered to sign the Creed, but refused
to anathematize Arius, affirming that opinions were attributed to him which he
never did one; Eusebius so ordered, by the means of his Friends, about the
Emperor, ex. Epist. Constable. ad Nicomed. ap. Theal. lib. 1. cap. 20.
that what he desired was granted him, which is to say, that they were
contented with his subscription to the Creed. Theognis and Maris did as much;
and the Letter of the Council to the Churches of Egypt mentions only Theonas,
and Secondus who had absolutely stood out. Phylostorgus likewise acknowledges
lib. 1. cap. 8. and 9.
that all the Arian Bishops subscribed except two; and reproaches the rest,
with their insincerity in that they had explained after the Arian fashion the
terms of the Council, by the advice of Constantia the Emperors Sister. He adds
that Secondus setting out to go into his Exile, said to Eusebius; you have
subscribed, Eusebius, that you might not be banished, but for my part I believe
what God has revealed to me, which is, that you shall be carried into Exile,
before the year comes about.

Arius, if we believe the Orthodox; had not the Courage to resolve on
Banishment, with Secondus and Theonas. He pretended a desire to be better
instructed, and sought an occasion of conferring with Athanasius, Deacon of
Alexandria, Athan. T. 1. p. 111.
whose Acts are still extant. If this Relation be true, one may conjecture,
That Arius designedly defended himself but ill, the better to yield to his
Adversaries Reasons, as he did, to obtain his Grace. He acknowledges at the end
of this Conference, the Equality and Consubstantiality of the Son with the
Father; after which, he shows himself entirely reclaimed from his Error. The
Fathers of the Council received him, as a Penitent, without settling him in his
Employ; and the Emperor only forbad him to go to Alexandria. Euzoius and
Achillas colleagues of Arius were also pardoned; and St. Jerome adds In Lucifer
p. 145. T. 2.
to them eight Bishops, of which he names but three, and one Priest, Eusebius
of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nice, Saras, Priest of Lybia; and Eusebius Bishop of
Cesarea. It appears from the sequel of the Dialogue, that the Arians denied
that the Bishops of their Party were reconciled at Nice, but St. Jerome grounds
himself on the Acts and Subscriptions: of this Council, which yet he had not
then at hand, excusing himself from naming the four other reconciled Bishops by
a Rhetorical Figure, and reliqui, quos enumerare longumest. There needed not so
much time for to set down four names, but without doubt, he did not remember
them.

The first who signed the Council among the Orthodox, was Hosius, Bishop of
Cordova, afterward, Vitonius* and Vincent, Roman Priests, sent by Sylvester;
after them, the Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem; and in fine, the
other Bishops. Those who favor the Pretensions of the Church of Rome, say,
That Hosius signed in Quality of Legate, from the Bishop of that City, but the
most ancient Historians have not a Word of it.

The Council ending the 25th of August, Constantin took his farewell of them, in
a very fine Harangue, Eusebius. in vit. ejus
wherein he exhorted the Fathers to thoughts of Peace, and to a mutual
Forbearance; but which, was of little Effect, as will appear by the Sequel.
Thus ended this famous Council, the Circumstances of which, would be better
known to us, if the fear of offending great Persons, the Zeal of some, the
Passion of others, and the Respect which Posterity has had for the Decisions of
so famous an Assembly, had not hindered contemporary Authors from writing the
History with exactness, and the Disengagement remarkable in good Historians;
and retained those who have lived since, from saying what they knew (perhaps)
that was disadvantagious. St. Athanasius, in a little Treatise already cited,
and where he seems at first to be willing to enter on this History, transported
by the Zeal of which he was full, falls on Controversy and Invectives; when
one might expect him ready to relate Circumstances. Sozomen says, That he did
not dare to relate the Creed of Nice, Lib. 1. c. 20.
because some of his pious and learned Friends in this matter, advised him to
suppress the things, which the Initiates, and the Priests alone should
understand, and that according to their Council, he had concealed what was to
be kept silent.

A while after, the Emperor Sozom. lib. 1. c. 25.
being to celebrate the Feast of his Vicennales, which is to say, of the
twentieth Year of his Empire, invited the Bishops to Byzantia, which he thought
of re-establishing, in giving it the new Name of Constantinople, where he
magnificently treated them, and made each of 'em apart a Present, after which,
they returned to their Bishoprics. It seems, that it was about this time, that
he wrote very obliging Letters to Eusebius of Cesarea, Socr. lib 1. cap. 9.
in giving him order to procure him fifty Copies fairly written, of the Holy
Scripture.

As to Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Theognis his Friend, they were no sooner
returned into their Bishoprics, but they began again to Preach publicly
Arianism, Ex. Epi. Constable. ad Nicom. l.
and received into their Communion some Persons of Alexandria, who had been
thence expelled for this Opinion. Constantin advertised of this, sent them into
Exile, three Months after the Council, and established at Nicomedia one Amphion
for Bishop, and Chrestus at Nice. Thus was Secondus's Prediction accomplished,
and Insincerity punished.

Two Months after, Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, died, which occasioned
great Disturbances in that City. The Orthodox Sozom. II. 17. Philost. III. 11.
say, that Athanasius, Deacon of this Church, whom Alexander had brought along
with him to Nice, by reason of his Knowledge, had been denoted several times by
this Bishop, for his Successor, but that he had hid himself a little before his
Death, for fear of being Elected, and that having been found, he was chosen by
a Plurality of Voices.

The Heterodox affirm, on the contrary, that the Meletians being reunited to
the Catholics, after the Death of Alexander, fifty-four Bishops of Egypt took
an Oath, to elect by common consent his Successor, but that seven among them
broke their Oaths, and chose Athanasius, without the Participation of the rest.
Some even assure, that the Voices were divided, and the Election not being made
quick enough, Athanasius shut himself up with two Bishops, into St. Denys's
Church, and caused himself to be consecrated maugre the other Bishops, who made
the Church-doors be broken open, but too late, the Ceremony being over.
Hereupon they Excommunicated him; but having strengthn'd his Party, he wrote in
the Name of the City to the Emperor, to give him Notice of his Election, which
was approved by this Prince, who believed these Letters came effectually from
the Magistracy of Alexandria. There may have been Passion on the side of the
Heterodox; but heating our selves as we do, for the Truth, as well as for
Error, and upholding sometimes the right side by indirect ways, we may admit
of some things which the Heterodox say, and not blindly receive, whatever the
Orthodox relate.

It seems about this time, Constantin made his Constitution Eusebius. in ejus vit.
lib. III. c. 64.
against the meetings of all Heretics, wherein he forbids them to assemble
either in public or private, gives their Chapels to Catholics, and
confiscates the Houses wherein they are found to meet, performing their
Devotions. Eusebius adds, that the Emperors Edict moreover contained, that all
Heretical Books should be seized on; and that Constantin's threatenings obliged
a great number of Heretics and Schismatics to range themselves on the side of
the Orthodox Church. But some doing of it sincerely, and others by force, the
Bishops applied themselves carefully to distinguish them, and received only
into the Church those who were real Converts. The Arians had been ruined by
particular Edicts, so that all Heresies seemed to be abolished in the Roman
Empire.

But Constantin, who had at first slighted the subject of the Dispute, between
Arius and Alexander, as consisting only of different Expressions, and who
afterward had considered it, as a Point of the greatest Importance returned
again to a good Opinion of Arius; whether he acted according to his present
Interests, or that he suffered himself to be led by those who were most about
him, or that in fine, he really changed his Opinion. Socrat. lib. 1 c. 25. ex
Ruffin.
Constantia, Sister of Constantin and Widow of Licinus, had among her
Domestics, a Priest, a friend to Arius, who held the same Opinions as he did,
and who persuaded this Princess, that Arius held not those Opinions he he was
charged with, in the manner as they were usually expressed, that Alexander had
accused him through Envy, because he was esteemed by the People, and that the
Council had done him wrong. Constantia, who much confided in this Priest,
easily believed him, but dared not speak her Mind to the Emperor; and being
fallen dangerously sick, all that she could do before she died, was to
recommend this Priest to her Brother, as a man highly virtuous, and much
devoted to the service of her Family. A while after she died, and this Priest
having gotten the favor of Constantin, held to him the same Discourse, telling
him, That if he pleased to admit Arius to come before him, and to explain his
Opinion, he would find that at bottom, his Doctrine was the same as that of the
Council which condemned him. Constantin surpised at the oddness of this
Discourse, answered, That if Arius would sign the Nicexe Creed, he would let
him come into his Presence, and would send him honorably to Alexandria. This
Priest having assured him of it, Constantin sent Word to Arius to come to
Court, and Arius not daring at first to do it, the Emperor wrote a Note to him,
in which he ordered him to come immediately at his Charge: Arius obeyed this
reiterated Order, and being come to Constantinople with Enzoius, they presented
to the Emperor a Confession of their Faith, wherein they barely said, They
believed that the Son was begotten of the Father before all Ages, and that the
Reason, who is God, had made all things, as well in Heaven as in Earth.
Constantin was fully satisfied with this Declaration, so that either he had
changed his Mind, or given small Attention, or little comprehended the sense of
the Nicene Creed. However it was, it appears by the Sequel, That the Arian
Bishops came by Degrees into favor, and that the Emperor treated Arius with
great kindness, and permitted him to return to Alexandria.

It Is not punctually known when Arius was re-call'd, but it is certain, he had
been already, when Eusebius and Theognis were, which happened three years after
the Council of Nice, in the year 328, according to the relation of
Philostorgus, Lib. 3. cap. 18.
these two Bishops wrote from the place of their Banishment a Letter, wherein
they complain, Socr. lib. 1. cap. 14.
That they had been condemned without being heard, although their conduct had been
approved of in the Council, where having well examined the word Consubstantial,
they had in fine approved of it. They added, they had only refused to
Anathematize Arius, because they knew he was not such a one as he was
described; and seeing this was acknowledged by his being recalled, it could not
be just that they who suffered only on his account, should remain in Exile
after his Revocation. This Letter was directed to the principal Bishops, whom
Eusebius and Theognis entreated to interceed for them with the Emperor. In
speaking of the Repeal of Arius, they directly attribute it to these Bishops:
Your Piety, say they, has thought fit to treat him gently, and to recall him. A
Learned man Valesius ad locum.
observes in this place, that Eusebius and Theognis attribute to the Bishops
what the Emperor had done, seeing it was he that had recalled Arius; and that
the Ecclesiastical Historians attribute likewise sometimes to the Emperor the
actions of the Bishops, as when Socrates says that the Council of Nice forbad
Arius his return to Alexandria, whereas it was the Emperor. But in truth the
Emperor did then few things of his own pure motion, being only the Church men's
Tool, which falls out but too often, even among the greatest Princes.

The Letter of Eusebius and Theognis produced the affect which they hoped from
it. They were recalled with Theonas and Secondus who would sign nothing. The
two first being returned to their Bishoprics, drove out thence those who had
gotten into their Sees, when they were sent to their places of banishment. They
are charged with having immediately after sought out ways to make Athanasius
undergo the same punishment, which they came from suffering, by getting it
told the Emperor, that he had been elected in a manner little canonical, and
with endeavoring to induce the same Athanasius both by Prayers and
threatenings, to permit Arius to return to Alexandria. However they could not
then accomplish their purpose; and we shall see in the sequel the bickerings
which they had with this Bishop.

Since the Council of Nice had been distmist, and that they had been banished.
This usage, and the decisions of Nice had but only outwardly allai'd the
disputes, which lasts still when they were recalled. Eusebius assures us that
the Bishops of Egypt had been ever since over Head and Ears in quarrels; and
Socrates says lib. 1. c. 23.
that he found from the Letters of the Bishops of those times, that some were
scandalized at the word Consubstantial; examining, says he, this term with too
great application, they fell foul on one another, and their quarrels did not
ill resemble a combat in the dark. It appears they sufficiently bespattered one
another with calumnies, without knowing wherefore. Those who rejected the word
Consubstantial, thought the others hereby introduced the opinions of Sabellius
and Montanus, and treated them as impious, as denying the existence ((...)) of
the Son of God. On the contrary those who stuck to the word Consubstantial,
imagining the others would introduce a plurality of Gods, had as great
aversion, as if they would have reestablisht Paganism. Eustathius Bishop of
Antioch accused Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea for the Nicene Creed. Eusebius
denied it, and charged on the other side Eustathius of Sabellianism; thus the
Bishops wrote one against another. They all accorded in saying the Son has a
particular Existence, and that there is only one God in three Hypostases; yet
they could not agree, nor remain quiet. This is the effect of equivocal terms,
which were introduced into Christianity without well defining them, and the bad
custom of most of the Ancients, who never speak calmly of these matters; who
have thought of nothing less than the expressing themselves clearly, and who
seem to prove they spoke sincerely, when they testified to believe, that the
mystery about which they disputed was incomprehensible; by expressing
themselves thereon in an unintelligible manner. Eustathius Bishop of Antioch
Socr. lib. 1. cap. 24.
accusing of Arianism Eusebius of Cesarea, Paulinus of Tire, and Patrophilus of
Scythopolis; and these Bishops accusing him in their turns of Sabellianism; to
know who had reason on their side, a Synod was assembled at Antioch in 329. the
conclusions of which were disadvantagious to Eustathius. It consisted of
Bishops, who had signed the Nicene Creed only by force, among whom were the two
Eusebius's, Theognis of Nice, Theodotus of Laodicea in Syria, Narcissus of
Neroniada, Aetius of Lydiae, Alphaeus of Apamea, and Theodorus of Sidon. As Soon
as ever they arrived at Antioch, a Woman of ill fame presented her self to 'em
with a little Child, which she said to have had by Eustathius, and desired them
to do her right against him, as refusing to receive his Child. Eustathius made
great protestations of his innocence, but this Woman having been believed upon
her Oath, he was deposed; Theod. and Sozom.
some Authors affirmed that the Arian Bishops had suborned her, to have an
occasion for the deposing of Eustathius; and that the true cause of his deposal
was his adherence to the Nicene Creed. Others say it was the pretended
Sabellianism of which he was accused, and some have contented themselves with
saying there were other accusations, for which he had been deposed, whereupon
Socrates loco. cit.
makes this remarkable reflection: The Bishops are wont to deal thus with all
those whom they depose; accusing and declaring them impious, without showing
wherein.

A Bishop was afterward to be substituted in Eustathius his place, and the
Arian Bishops cast their eyes on Eusebius of Cesarea. But there arose a violent
sedition hereupon; some willing to retain Eustathius, and others accepting
Eusebius. They had come to Fisticuffs, had not the Emperor taken care, by
sending one of his Officers who appeased the People, and made them understand
how Eustathius deserved to be sent into Exile, and in effect he was sent into
Thrace. However Eusebius did a thing, which made him receive very honorable
Letters from the Emperor, which he has inserted in the life of this Prince,
which is, that according to the Canons, he refused to pass from one Church to
another. Constantin heapt up Praises on him by reason of this refusal, and
wrote to the Council, and the Church of Antioch to let him remain where he was.
So that instead of Eusebius, there was elected Euphronius Priest of Cappadocia,
whom the Emperor had named with George of Arethusa, to the end the Council
might choose which they pleased.

Soc. 1.27. and Seq. Soz. Theod.
Having deposed Eustathius, the Arian Bishops labored to procure the return of
Arius to Alexandria, where Athanasius would not permit him to enter, as has
been already said. They engaged the Emperor to write to this Bishop, but
Athanasius still defended himself, in that he could not receive into the Church
those who had forsook the Faith and been excommunicated; so that Constantin
wrote to him an angry Letter, that he should receive into the Church those he
ordered him, under pain of banishment. The obstinacy of this Bishop, who would
part with none of the advantages which the Council of Nice had granted to his
Predecessor against the Meletians, had also drawn on him the enmity of these
Schismatics. The Council had ordained that Melece should only retain the name
of Bishop, without exercising any function of his Office, and without ordaining
any Successor; and that those whom he had ordained should have no part in
Elections. However Melece at his death had ordained one John for his Successor,
and the Meletian Priests would have the same privileges as others. Athanasius
could not consent to any thing of this, and equally ill treated the Meletians
and Arians. This conduct reunited the two parties, who had been till that time
opposite. The Meletians were of the Nicene opinion; but by conversing with the
Arians, they soon entered into their Sentiments, and joined together, to induce
Constantin to accept of several Accusations against Athanasius; as having
imposed a kind of Tribute on Egypt, in ordering it to furnish the Church of
Alexandria with a certain number of Linen Garments; in having supplied a
certain seditious Person with Money; named Philumenus; in having caused a
Chalice to be broken, overthrown the Table of a Church, and burnt the Holy
Books; for having mis-used several Priests, and committed diverse Violences; in
having cut off the Arm of a Meletian Bishop, named Arsenius, and keeping it to
use in Magical Operations. Constantin acknowledged the Innocence of Athanasius,
in regard of the two first Accusations; and for the rest, he referred it to an
Assembly of diverse Bishops, which was at Cesarea in Palestine, where Athanasius
not appearing, he was cited to a Synod at Tire, in the year 334, and which
consisted of Bishops of Egypt, Lybia, Asia, and Europe.

Athanasius was in Suspense, whether he should present himself to this Synod,
which consisted of his principal Enemies? Yet Constantin having threatened him
with Banishment if he refused, he therefore appeared, and justified himself of
the Accusation touching the Arm of Arsinius, by bringing in this Person into
the midst of them, and deriding his Accusers. It Is said moreover, That a Woman
being introduced into the Assembly, accused him for having dishonored her,
after she had entertained him in her House, although he knew she had made a Vow
of Virginity. But it appeared, that she did not so much as know Athanasius,
seeing she took one Timotheus, a Priest for him, who pretended to be the Bishop
of Alexandria.

The business of the broken Chalice, and the mis-using the Priests, was a
little more difficult. Athanasius began by an Appeal from Eusebius of
Nicomedia, and the rest of the Bishops of his Party. He afterward said, That
he, whose Chalice was pretended to have been broken, and whose Name was
Ischyras, was not a Priest. However, without any regard to these Reasons, there
were sent some Arian Bishops, to take Informations against him at Alexandria,
with Ischyras his Accuser; but he protested highly against this Proceeding, and
went to Jerusalem, where the Emperor was. In the mean time, the Informations
from Egypt were received, and Athanasius being loaded with them, he was deposed
in his Absence, and forbid to go to Alexandria. Arsenius having been admitted
into Communion by the Council, and made Bishop of Hypsyle, a Town of Egypt,
subscribed to the Deposition of Athanasius, although he had justified him, in
reference to one of the Accusations brought against him. The Sentence of the
Council bore, that he had slighted the Emperors Orders, and made the Assembly
wait for him in an indecent manner; That he came to Tire with a great multitude
of People, and endeavored to make a Disturbance there; That he had for
sometime refused to purge himself of the Crimes said to his Charge, and uttered
Injuries to diverse Bishops; That he would not submit to their judgment; That he
was convicted of breaking a Chalice, by the Informations made against him at
Alexandria. Thus was Athanasius condemned by his Enemies, who were his Judges,
as Arius had been anathematized by Alexander his Predecessor, and several other
Bishops, who had declared themselves against him, before the Convocation of the
Council. The same usage has been observed in all the Assemblies of Bishops
which have met since; the Clergy having this Advantage above the Laity, that
they can be both Judges and Parties.

After the Deposal of Athanasius, the Emperor wrote to the Fathers of the
Council, to repair as soon as possible to Jerusalem, to celebrare the
Dedication of the Church of the Apostles, which was now finished. Where being
arrived, they were magnificently received, and made several Orations, for the
greater Solemnity of the Festival, which happened to be very luckily, in the same
year in which the Tricennales of the Emperor In the Year, 335.
were to be celebrated, which is to say, the 30th year of his Reign. Eusebius
In vit. Constable. lib. iv. 46, and 33.
particularly made several Harang's before the Emperor, who took a great deal
of pleasure in hearing them, insomuch that he would hear standing a long
Oration, which this Bishop made on the holy Sepulcher. Eusebius well remembers
this Honor the Emperor did him, and the Praises he gave to his Oration
touching Easter, and carefully inserts in the Life of Constantin, all the
Letters he had received from the Emperor; perhaps, not out of Acknowledgment,
but rather to do himself Honor, Baronius ad bac tempora.
as has been reproached him.

The Bishops assembled at Jerusalem, Socr. lib. l. c. 33.
having ended the Dedication of the Church, which Constantin had newly built,
and there received into Communion Arius and Euzoius, on the Emperors
Recommendations. Eusebius and Theognis say, that Arius had been kindly received
by the Bishops, but in no sort, that he was received into Communion, which was,
perhaps, for some years refused him, to try his Sincerity. Afterward they
wrote to the Church of Alexandria, that she might receive them, and be assured,
she would enjoy hence-forward a full Tranquillity, Envy having been driven out
thence, by the Deposal of Athanasius. Sozom. lib. II. 28.
In the mean time this Bishop had gotten to Constantinople, to complain to the
Emperor of what he had suffered; but he could obtain no Audience of him; all
that he could be heard to say, was, That he entreated the Emperor to cire to
Constantinople the Bishops which were at Jerusalem, to have another Examination
of his Affair. Constantin wrote to Jerusalem, and complains in his Letter, that
in a time wherein the Barbarians began to acknowledge the true God; The
Christians, who would be thought to have the My steries of God in their
keeping, (for he durst not say that they kept them,) labored only to entertain
Divisions and hatred among them, not to say, for the Destruction of Mankind.
And therefore he desired that the Bishops assembled at Jerusalem, would meet at
Constantinople, to examine once for all, the Affair of Athanasius, and put some
end to it. This Letter being come to Jerusalem, some of the Bishops returned to
their Dioceses, and others to Constantinople. These last persuaded, according
to some Authors, Id.
the Emperor, that Athanasius had effectually broken a Chalice; or according to
others, Socr. lib. 1. cap. 35.
that he had threatened to stop the Convoy of Provisions which went every year
from Alexandria to Constantinople, of which three Bishops were Witnesses. The
Emperor provoked by these Accusations, ordered him to retire to Treves, a Town
of the Belgic Gaul, where he remained about two years.

The Bishops who were met at Constantinople id. cap. 36.
deposed after this Marcellus of Ancyra, as being fallen into the opinion of
Paul of Samosatia. One Asterius who had taught Rhetoric in Cappadocia, having
embraced the Christian Religion, had wrote some Books, wherein he spoke of the
Divinity of the Son, in the same terms as Arius. Marcellus undertook to refute
them, but far from establishng the Pre-existence of the Son, he denied the
Divinity of Jesus Christ existed before his Birth; or at least expressed himself
in such a manner, that one might believe he regarded the Reason or the Word,
not as a being that has his particular Existence, but as I know not what kind
of accident, such as is the word, or the found which is made in speaking. He
also very ill treated Eusebius. cont. Marcel. lib. l. c. 4.
in the same Book several Arian Bishops, as the two Eusebius's, Paulinus and
Narcissus. He charged likewise Origin for expounding the Holy Scripture,
according to the notions of heathen Philosophers, and especially according to
those of Plato; from whom Marcellus affirmed, he had taken his Doctrine of
Principles, which is to say* of the Holy Trinity, of which he had treated after
the Platonic fashion. The Arian Bishops offended with this Book, had begun to
examine it, when they were as yet at Jerusalem; but having been obliged to pass
over to Constantinople, they had only enjoined Marcellus to alter his Opinion,
according to the Style of that time. He promised he would burn his Book, but
having not done it, and even refusing to do it, his affair was reassumed at
Constantinople, and he was deposed. Eusebius of Cesarea wrote two Books
expressly against him, wherein he criticizes his work, and three others which he
entitled, of Ecclesiastic Theology, wherein he established the opinions which
he thought Orthodox touching the Divinity, and refuted those of Marcellus and
diverse other Heretics. Marcellus was afterward Socr. lib. II. 20. and Sozom.
lib. II. cap. 29.
reestablisht in the Synod of Sardica; because he affirmed his expressions had
been misunderstood; and being an Enemy to the Arians, he insinuated Himself
into the Friendship of Athanasius, who perhaps was surpised by the Equivocal
Expressions used by Marcellus. It Is certain, that if we may judge of him by the
Fragments which Eusebius cites, he scarcely knew what he would say himself, or
else he concealed his Opinions under obscure terms, lest he should fall into
trouble.

After that Athanasius had been sent into Exile, id. lib. I. c. 27. and seq.
Arius had returned to Alexandria; but his presence being likely to cause a
disorder, by reason of the great number of those who followed the sentiments of
Athanasius, the Emperor recalled this Priest to Constantinople, and to assure
himself entirely of his belief, of which the Orthodox still doubted, he offered
him the Nicene Creed to sign, which he did without ballancing, and moreover
swore he was of that opinion. A report ran that he had hid under his Arm a
Writing, which contained his Opinion, and that he barely swore he believed what
he had wrote; but there is no great certainty to be expected in what his
Enemies say of him. Perhaps he thought, like Eusebius of Cesarea, that one
might give to the words of the Creed a sense which amounted to his sentiment,
although he wished they had made use of other terms. What the Fathers of Nice
said more than he consisting in in something absolutely incomprehensible;
perhaps moreover he counted that for nothing. However Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople refused to receive him into Communion, although the Emperor had
ordered him to do it, and a great number of Bishops and of the People urged him
to it. Besides this the Arian Bishops were preparing to hold a Council, to
examine afresh the question agitated at Nice, and had marked a day in which they
were to meet to discourse about it, and to conduct Arius into the Church maugre
Alexander. In this extremity knowing not how to maintain his refusal, the
History tells us that he shut himself up in a Church called Peace, and set
himself very devoutly to pray to God, not that he would convert Arius, or that
he would discover to himself the Truth, but, that if the opinion of Arius was
true, he himself might not see the day set apart to discourse of it; or that if
his own belief were true, Arius who was the cause of so great mischiefs, might
be punished for his Infidelity. A Prayer so little charitable, and whence might
be seen that this Bishop was more concerned for his reputation than the Truth,
failed not of being heard, seeing that the next morning which was Sunday, or
the same day at night, as Arius went to the Church accompanied by those of his
Party, or in some other place, for the Historians vary, in passing by the
Market of Constantin, he had so great occasion to go to ease himself, that he
was forced to betake himself to the common Privies, where instead of finding
ease, he evacuated his Bowels, and thus died suddenly. Since that time
Passengers were commonly showed these places of easement, and no body dared sit
down on the same place where Arius sat. It Is said that a Rich Arian, to abolish
the memory of it, bought afterward this Place of the Public, and there built
an House.

It Is thus that Rufinus, Socrates, and Sozomen relate the last Events of the
life of Arius. But St. Athanasius says that in Epst. ad Serapionem.
having been recalled by the solicitations of those of his Party, he offered
his Confession of Faith to the Emperor, and swore that he did not believe any
thing else; after which those that protected him would introduce him into the
Church, at his going out of the Emperors Palace, but that he died, without
having been received into Communion. De. Valvis.
A Learned Man is of Opinion in this matter, That the Arius who was received
into Communion at Jerusalem, was a Priest of the Party of the famous Arius, and
not he himself, who had already died out of the Communion of the Church; for
without this it must be said that Athanasius has been mistaken. But were it
granted him that this Bishop was mistaken, in speaking of a Man whom he every
moment orewhelmed with injuries, it cannot be found strange, especially not
having been at Constantinople then, when what he relates must have happened. One
may farther say, that Athanasius has related, by way of abridgment, and little
exactly, what he had heard say of Arius, and that he regarded him as an
excommunicated Person, having been only received by a Council whose Authority
Athanasius would not acknowledge, it consisting principally of Persons whose
opinions had been anathematized at Nice. It is far more natural thus to
interpret this passage of Athanasius, than to reject wholly as false an History
so circumstanc'd as that of the latter years of the life of Arius, in respect
of certain facts which the Historians, which we have already cited, had no
interest to alter.

Arius being dead, apparently of a sudden death, peradventure by Poison, which
may have given occasion to the Tragical manner, in which the Historians mention
it, the Disputes started on his occasion dyed not with him: Soz^m. lib. II. c.
31.
Those who were of Athanasius's Party at Alexandria, besought of God his return
in the Public Prayers, and ceased not to importune the Emperor, to make him be
recalled. Constantin was obliged to write to the People of that Town a Letter,
wherein he upbraided them for their Lightness and Folly, and enjoins the
Ecclesiastics to remain quiet, and wherein he declares he would not recall
Athanasius, whom he treats as a seditious Person, and one who had been
condemned by a Council. He answers likewise to Anthony the Hermit; That he
could not slight the Judgment of the Council of Tire, because that supposing
some among the Bishops were passionate, yet it is not probable that so great a
number of Wise and Learned Bishops should all of 'em act by passion; and that
Athanasius was an Insolent Proud and Troublesome Fellow.

Constantin wrote these Letters but a little time before his death, which
happened in the year 337, the circumstances of which may be seen in his life writ
by Eusebius. Yet we must remember, that this is rather a Panegyric than an
uninterest History; whence it is that he says nothing of the death of his two
Wives, and the eldest Son of this Emperor, whom he had put to death through
jealousy or revenge. Eusebius was always of the Arians side. Yet Socrates has
undertaken to justify him, Socr. lib. II. c. 21.
and so does Dr. Cave seem to do, thinking himself thereto obliged through
Christian Charity; whereas the love of truth should oblige all Historians never
to vary from i^. But it is this pretended charity, which extends it self only
to Fathers which are respected as Orthodox, which has been the cause that we
have in a manner only Panegyricks of the Ancients, wherein their defects are
ever suppressed; when they cannot be covered with the mask of some Virtues.

Eusebius, as it appears by the conduct he held at the Council of Nice, was a
dextrous Person, who did not scruple to subscribe to terms which were not
pleasing to him, provided he could expound them in a sense according to his
mind, though little conformable to that of those who set them up. For in fine, a
Man must shut his Eyes, touching what he says in his Letter to the Church of
Cesarea, not to see, that he understood otherwise the terms of the Symbol, than
Athanasius did. He was a great admirer of Origin, several of whose opinions may
be seen in his life; he lived not long after Constantin, for he dyed in the
year 340. St. Jerome in several places calls him Signifer et Princeps
Arianorum; Speaking of the great Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea.

Athanasius in his banishment wrote a Creed at Rome, which he presented to a
Council sitting there, yet that Creed was not published till above three
hundred years after in the Toletan Council, as Baronius himself owns, neither
can any one tell us what that was; for that which passes commonly amongst us
under the name of the Athanasian Creed, and is read in our Churches, was drawn
up by God knows who, as Vossius de Tribus Symbolis, Camerarius, and Ell. du Pin
in his B. des Aut. Eccles. do ingenuously confess. For how durst Athanasius
make a new Creed after the Nicene? Besides, no Writer of that time mentions it,
no not Athanasius himself. It seems to have been broach't above 600 years after
that age, in which time a profound ignorance had overspread Christendom;
however the Eastern Churches would never own it, no not at this day. See more
in the above mentioned learned Authors.

Constantin being dead, Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, a refined Courtier, soon
made himself Master of Constantius, and all the Grandees of the Palace, in whom
he rooted his beloved Arianism; being assisted by Constantia's Priest, the
Empress was soon gained over, and the Roman Empire became for the most part
Arian, Athanasius being condemned not only by many Eastern, but also by several
great Western Councils. Afterward they fell so to Logger-heads, that the
Western Church excommunicated the Eastern, and the Eastern returned the same
Complement upon the Western, and there we'll leave them.

FINIS.

