Dagon's Fall Before the ARK.

OR, The Smoke of the Bottomless Pit scoured away, by the breath of the Lords
mouth, and by the brightness of his coming.

WRITTEN. Primarily, As a Testimony for the Lord, his Wisdom, Creation,
products of his Power; useful and necessary Knowledge, capacitating people for
the concerns of this Life.

Secondarily, As a Testimony against the Old Serpent his wisdom, which is
foolishness with God, his Arts, Inventions, Comedies or Interludes, Tragedies,
lascivious Poems, frivolous Fables, spoiling Philosophy, taught in Christian
Schools.

Wherein, as in a Glass, Teachers in Schools and Colleges may see their
concern, neither Christian, nor warrantable.

By Thomas Lawson.

Qui novit utilia, non qui multa, sapiens habendas.

Orat. D. Rainoldi. Id verum, quod prius, prius, quod ab initio, ab initio,
quod ab Apostolis.

Tertul. Adam nunquam e beatitudinis paradiso pulsus fuisset, nisi, Serpente
Magistro, didicisset scire bonum and malum.

Cornel. Agrip. de Van. Scient. Printed in the year 1679.

THE CONTENTS Of the following TREATISE.
Chap. 1. OF Heavenly wisdom, and her Children, being true and divine
Philosophers. Chap. 2. Of the rise and progress of Serpentine wisdom, that is,
the wisdom of this World. Chap. 3. Of the rise and progress of Pagan
Philosophy, worldly wisdom, crept in among the Professors of Christianity, and
Testimonies of the Holy men of God against the same. Chap. 4. A rehearsal of
Testimonies, borne by several men eminent in the Church, since the Apostles
days, against Heathen learning, or the teaching of it, in Christian Schools, as
of others. Chap. 5. A Memento to Schoolmasters and Tutors, to turn from
Heathen, to the Godly and Christian education of Youth; as also of the rise of
Christian Schools, and how the same came to be corrupted. Chap. 6. Lastly, a
few Queries soberly proposed to the consideration of such as teach Heathen
Authors in Christian Schools.
DAGON'S Fall before the ARK.
CHAP. I. Of Heavenly Wisdom, and her Children, being true and divine
Philosophers.
THere is a wisdom, whose Merchandise transcends the Merchandise of Silver,
whose gain surmounts the gain of the purest Gold, more precious than Rubies,
than the Onyx, Sapphire, Crystal, Coral, or Topaz of Ethiopia; her ways are
ways of pleasantness, all her paths are peace; she is a Tree of Life; By her
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; her fruit is better than Gold, her
revenue than choice Silver; she was from everlasting, or ever the Earth was,
before the Depths, before the Fountains abounding with waters, before the
Mountains were settled, before the Hills towered up, before the Curtain of the
Heavens was prepared, before the Clouds above were established, before the Sea
had its decree, before the foundation of the Earth was appointed, before the
Rain, or pearly drops of Dew, before the Ice, and hoary frost of Heaven, before
the Pleides, and the bands of Orion, before Mazzaroth, Arcturus, and his Sons,
before the Bottles of Heaven were poured out: In this wisdom Adam was created,
in purity, innocence, and righteousness, a noble extract; in this, he had
dominion over the Fish of the Sea, over the Fowl of the Air, over the Cattle,
over all the Earth, and over every creeping thing; through the virtue and
influence of this, he knew his Creator, and had an understanding of the natures
and properties of the Creation, and gave names to all Cattle, and to the Fowl
of the Air, and to every Beast of the Field, and that significant names.

Through this, Adam was all fair, through a Garment conferred upon him, out of
the Wardrobe of Eternity, while in the love and power of this, he was a true
Divine Philosopher; that is, a Lover of wisdom, not tainted by the intermixture
of the Serpent, not his ensnaring inventions. The living God (says the
Paraphrast on the Samaritan Pentateuch) formed Adam, and filled him with the
Spirit of wisdom and knowledge, that from him, as from a Fountain, all useful
Arts and Sciences might flow unto his posterity; for besides the secret virtues
of living Creatures, of Plants, of Stones, of Metals, and Minerals, he
perfectly knew the influences of supernal Bodies, says Theoph. Gale. And if
Adam and his posterity had persevered in that state of Heavenly wisdom,
innocence and sincerity, in which he was created, here had been no defilements
of Astrologers, Charmers, Consulters with Familiar Spirits, Diviners,
Inchanters, Magicians, Nicromancers, Observers of Times, Prognosticators,
Soothsayers, Sorcerers, Witches, Wizards, who all derive their power, and
foolish infernal knowledge, from those lying Lips, which seduced Adam and Eve
from the Royal Court of the Lords blessed presence, into the dead Sea of
delusions, and wicked estrangments from God.

Yea I say, if Adam and his posterity had kept their standing in Heavenly
wisdoms dominion, we had had no lascivious Poems, no wanton Comedies, no vain
Tragedies, no foolish Fables, no bewitching Orations, no spoiling Philosophy,
no Pagan Ethics, Physics, or Metaphysics, which are the infatuating dregs of
the Hellish dead Sea, the smoke of the bottomless Pit, as hereafter may more
fully be touched.

About the tenth Generation after the Flood, Abraham the Father of the
faithful, grew up among the Caldeans, in the saving knowledge of the Lord; he
loved Heavenly wisdom, and the products thereof, the Creation, so was a true
Philosopher; through Faith he obtained a good report, and among other things
this record remains concerning him, Shall I hide from Abraham, says the Lord,
the thing which I do, etc. For I know him, that he will command his children,
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do
justice and judgment, Genesis 18.17, 18, 19. This was the sum of Abraham's
Doctrine to his Family; this he, and the faithful Patriarchs taught, justifying
Heavenly wisdom, and the blessed order of it: Heathenism they kept out, through
the shield of Faith; and who are of Abraham, they do the works of Abraham, and
shun Heathenism.

Moses grew up in the knowledge of the living God, and of the Creation; he
loved the wisdom that was from above, so was a true Divine Philosopher. Clemens
Alexandrinus wrote of him, that he was a Divine and a Prophet.

Now if any allege, That Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
(that is, in profane Arts and Sciences) and was mighty in words and in deeds,
Acts 7.22.

I answer, True it is, Moses was so learned, which Egyptian learning (faith
Pererius) was Pagan Mathematics, Ethics, Physics, Metaphysics, a chief part
whereof was Hieroglyphics; but when he was to be concerned for the living God,
to go his Message, see how his profane Arts and Sciences, the Egyptian
Hieroglyphics, furthered him, he was mute, Exodus 4.10, 11, 12. he said to the
Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent: The Lord said unto him, Now therefore go,
and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say. Here he is
drawn from the dirty puddle of profane Arts and Sciences, Egyptian wisdom,
Pagan Metaphysics, Hieroglyphics: In a word from those lying lips, which
deceived Adam and Eve, and all the inventions thereof, even to the mouth of
God, the Wellspring of pure wisdom, savoury knowledge, and sound
understanding. Thus Moses being brought to that mouth, which taught Adam and
Eve in the state of innocence, he streamed out Heavenly eloquence, saying, My
doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as the
small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
No profane Arts nor Sciences, no Egyptian Mathematics, no Hieroglyphics, no
Pagan Ethics, Physics or Metaphysics dropped out of his mouth.

Though Moses was excellent in the wisdom of the Egyptians, yet he has left us
nothing thereof in writing, nor encouraged any to learn the same: Ambrose gives
the reason of this, because he had received Gods Spirit, and Heavenly wisdom
thereby; so as Gods Servant was faithful in all his house, he preserr'd
Heavenly Truth before vain Earthly Philosophy, and concerned himself only in
things whose tendency were to the furtherance of Faith. Trapp on the Acts.

Further Moses said unto Israel, Exo 23.13. In all things that I have said unto
you, be circumspect, and make no mention of the names of other gods, neither
let it be heard out of thy mouth. He preached not up Egyptian learning, nor the
Egyptian gods, nor any gods of the Heathen, but to raze the memorial of them
from off the face of the Earth, saying, make no mention of the names of other
gods: but Schools and Colleges show forth another Spirit, ringing with the
names of Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, and multitudes more, which I forbear to mention.

Furthermore, Moses speaking of the Statutes, Judgments, and Commandments of
the Lord, received from Heaven, for the edification of Israel, said, Ye shall
teach them to your children; when thou sit in thine house, when thou
walk by the way, when thou lie down, when thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 11.19.
Here was Heavenly wisdom, Statutes, Judgments and Commandments, received from
the mouth of Eternity, to be taught to Children; not Egyptian Mathematics,
Hieroglyphics, Ethics, Physics, Metaphysics, not lascivious Poems,
Comedies. Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy, wherewith Schools and
Colleges, though professing Christianity and Reformation, now abound. Further
Moses said to Israel, When thou art come into the Land which the Lord thy God
gives thee, thou shall not learn to do after the abominations of those
Nations, Deuteronomy. 18.9. Now it is sealed in my inward parts, that Heathen Poems,
Pagan Philosophy, foolish Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, etc. taught in the
Schools of Christendom, are abomination in the sight of the Lord, though of
high esteem among men, and driven as it were vi and armis, by force of Arms
into tender years.

Joshua grew up in the pure knowledge of the Lord, received Heavenly wisdom,
walked in it, prized it above the Gold of Ophir, so was a true Philosopher, God
promised to be with him, as he was with Moses, Jos. 1.5. he taught Israel not
to be defiled with the abomination of the Heathen, nor to make mention of the
names of their gods, Jos. 23. so the Serpent and his inventions he fenced out:
Schools and Colleges now professing Christianity, Scriptures and the Gospel,
teaching the abominable inventions of the Heathen, are not come to Moses, who
forbad these things, death reigns there.

I am easy to persuade (says Theophilus Gale) that the old Egyptians learned
many things of Joseph, concerning the Soul, and the originality, immateriality,
immortality, and state of it after death; and not only from him, but from the
Patriarchs, and from the writings of Moses, they received many things, which
they stained with the excrements of their own inventions, as it is recorded. As
for saving knowledge, pure understanding, sound judgment, these are derived
from the Lord, the Wellspring of life. After that Joseph had given Pharaoh
advice, concerning the ensuing Famine, and other things, Pharaoh prized him
above all the Wisemen of Egypt, Sorcerers, Magicians, Inchanters, saying, Can
we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is? Further he
said unto Joseph, In as much as God has showed thee all this, there is none so
discreet and wise as thou art, Genesis 41.38, 39. Thus the wisdom and discretion
received from the mouth of God, was preferred before wisdom received otherwise.

Bezaleel was filled with the Spirit of God in wisdom, in understanding, and in
knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, to work in Gold, and in Silver,
and in Brass, in cutting of Stones, in carving of Timber, for the building of
the Tabernacle, Exodus 31. Thus he was qualified from Heaven, without Ethnic
education, so was a true Philosopher; implying, that such as under the
Evangelical dispensation, are appointed for the building up of the living
Tabernacle, Sons or Daughters, their qualification for that work is from
Heaven, and not from below.

Solomon, the Lord gave unto him a wise and understanding heart, whereby he
knew the Lord, and had great understanding in the Lords Creation, without
Ethnic education, he was a true Philosopher, 1 Kings 3.12. he builded the
Temple, and overlaid it within with pure Gold, 1 Kings 6. What implies this?
but that such as under the Gospel ministration, are prepared for the building
up of the Spiritual Temple, be they Sons or Daughters, their preparation is of
the Lord; and that he had a clear understanding of the Lords Creation, is
demonstrable from Scripture records, for he spoke of Trees, from the Cedar tree
that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hysop that springs out of the Wall; he
spoke also of Beasts, and of Fowl, and of creeping things, and of Fishes, 1
Kings 1. his wisdom excelled all the wisdom of the East-Country, and all the
wisdom of Egypt; so that the Queen of the South, whom the Ethiopian Chronicles
call Mackeda, came from the uttermost parts of the Earth to hear the wisdom of
Solomon; who was so taken with the Heavenly wisdom that dropped out of his
mouth, that she could have been content to have changed her Throne for his Foot
stool; he sed her not with Ethnic Serpentine wisdom, but with what was
Spiritual and Divine. Trapp on Matthew. 12.

Jehoshaphat taught no Pagan Philosophy, no Heathenism, but the perfect Law,
and pure Statutes of the Lord, the Lord was with him, 2 Chronicles. 17.

Ezra caused no Pagan Philosophy, no Heathenism, no saln wisdom to be taught in
Israel, to old or young; but going from Babylon to Jerusalem, the good hand of
God being upon him, he sought the Law of the Lord, and taught the Statutes and
Judgments of the Lord in Israel, Ezra 7. Now who neglect the wisdom from above,
and propagate Earthly Serpentine wisdom, which is from below, such are in
Babylon, not come to the Jerusalem which is above.

Job of the Land of Vz, perfect and upright, fearing God and eschewing evil, he
knew that his Redeemer lived in the wisdom of his Redeemer; he knew the Lord,
and saw much into the Creation of the Lord, so was a true and Divine
Philosopher. That he was wise in the Creation, it appears, he spoke of Thunder,
of Vapors, of Clouds, of Rain, of Snow, of Hail, of the Sea, of Fountain, of
Metals, as Gold, Silver, Iron, Brass, of Stones, of precious Stones, of
subterraneous Fire, of Stars, of living Creatures, of Earthquakes, of Arcturus,
Orion, and the Pleides, of the Sun, of the Heavens, etc.

Asuph in the wisdom of God, desired that the pure Statutes and Judgments of
the Lord, might be taught to Children, not the ways of the Heathen, Psalm. 58.5,
6, 7. he made Covenant with Jacob, and gave Israel a Law, which he commanded
our forefathers to teach their Children, that their posterity might know it,
and the Children which were yet unborn.

Isaiah seasoned with the inspiration of the Almighty, prized the wisdom from
above; speaking of the Plowman, he said, God does instruct him to discretion,
and does teach him, Isa. 28. So the Plowman that is centered in the fear of
the Lord, is taught of the Lord discretion in his calling, without Heathen
education. Yea, and prophesying of the glory of the Evangelical dispensation,
he testified thus, They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea, Isa. 11.9. Mark, here the knowledge of the Lord is preached up, that
knowledge which he teaches, which he accepts of: this shuts out the knowledge
and wisdom of this world, brought in by the old Serpent, the god of this world.

The living God gave knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom, unto
Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; and Daniel had understanding in all
Visions and Dreams; and this was by the teaching of the Lord, without recourse
to Ethnic study and education, Dan. 1. the King found them ten times wiser
then all his Magicians and Astrologers.

What is the chaff to the wheat, says the Lord? Jer. 23.28. all products of
the Serpent, all lascivious Poems, wanton Comedies, vain Tragedies, frivolous
Fables, spoiling Philosophy, the wisdom of the world, which is foolishness with
God; these are but as Chaff, to be scattered by Christ's Fan.

The Jews under the Mosaical dispensation, had Schools in every City and
Province, built upon Hills, as Writers tell us; there is mention of the Hill
Moreb, that is, the Hill of the Teacher, Judge. 7.1. In these, while they kept
the charge of the Lord, there was nothing taught but the knowledge of the Lord,
and of his Creation: In these (says Theophilus Gale) they taught the Priests
and Levites their Offices, being chosen of God thereunto.

In every Age and Generation, such as were truly made alive unto God, they held
out the wisdom of God, as the only Soulwishing treasure, and bare testimony
against the wisdom of the flesh, pernicious as the poison of Alps.

The fear of the Lord (says Solomon) is the beginning of wisdom, and the
knowledge of the holy is understanding, Pro. 9.10. and who come not to the
beginning of wisdom, the fear of the Lord, such are strangers to Heavenly
wisdom, and to the precious effects thereof; now as for lascivious Poems,
foolish Comedies, vain Tragedies, frivolous Fables, bewitching Orations,
spoiling Philosophy, taught in Christian Schools; these proceeded from men not
centered in the fear of the Lord, the same is foolishness with God. The Law of
thy mouth (said the man of God) is dearer unto me then thousands of Gold and
Silver; Here wisdom, knowledge and understanding, and sound Judgment is
preferred before earthly treasures; mark this, it was the Law of the mouth of
the Lord, that he thus prized, not earthly, sensual, and devilish wisdom, the
muddy and poisonous streams of the Serpent.

We read of certain Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, Cilicians and Asians,
puffed up with the breath of the Serpents bellows, these in the wisdom of the
flesh disputed with Stephen, who was in the wisdom of the spirit and they were
not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke, Acts. 6.9, 10.
Paul held out nothing but Christ, and the same Serpentine-wisdom in Instruments
of all sorts, opposes and gainsays the inbreakings of Heavenly wisdom, in this
our Age, and many witnesses raised out of the dust, notwithstanding on their
feet in the Dominion of Truth; know that the Lord is now at work, and that the
Mystery of iniquity must be cast out, not by outward Sword, Battle, Ax, or any
Instruments of War, but by the breath of the Lords mouth, and by the brightness
of his coming.

Paul though he was profound in natural Parts, Abilities, and acquired
accomplishments, yet when Christ was revealed in him, the Teacher of Heavenly
wisdom, at Rome, as at other places, he Preached the Kingdom of God, and the
things which concerned the Lord Jesus, and plentious redemption in him, not one
word of Pagan Philosophy, Acts. 28.30, 31.

Further Paul who had the mind of Christ, he, at Corinth a City abounding with
Philosophers and Orators, Preached up the wisdom of God, and bare record
against the wisdom of the flesh; Heathen Philosophy, saying, we speak wisdom
among them that are perfect, yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the
Princes of this world, which comes to naught: Further faith he, Which things
also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy
Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 1. and 1 Cor. 2.6.13.

Further, Paul speaking of Christ, said* in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Colos. 2.3. out of Christ, then there is no true wisdom
or solid comfort to be found, the depth says, it is not in me, the worlds
Wizards cannot help any to it, Jer. 8.9. Lo, they have rejected the word of the
Lord, and what wisdom is in them? true it is, who rejected the in-dwelling word
of Faith, or Patience, of Reconcilation, of Heavenly Wisdom, there is no wisdom
in them, but unprofitable dross of foolishness.

Now seeing all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are in Christ, no part of
this treasure is left out, to enrich Heathen Philosophy, which the Gospel casts
out as a sandy, dry, barren, desolate and unprofitable thing, seeing these
treasures, all these treasures are in Christ, the same then are to be sought
of, and in Christ, not as Aristotle, Plato, or any other of the worlds
Philosophers, being but broken Cisterns, not holding the water of life, Solomon
spoke feelingly; the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding, Pro. 2.6

While Adam stood to the Lords teaching. he received the treasures of Heavenly
wisdom, sound knowledge and understanding, peace, joy, and consolation as a
stream; but turning aside to the Serpents teaching, to his mouth, he left his
Dominion in the Lord, his blessed State; and out of the Serpents mouth
proceeded all wickedness, all fleshly wisdom, all frivolous Arts and Sciences
now taught in Christian Schools (so called:) so, who run to Pagan Philosophers,
as Aristotle, Plato, or any lascivious Poet, Comedian, Tragedian, they revolt
from Christ the treasury of Heavenly wisdom: Who gives eternal life, and an
everlasting Inheritance, and run a Whoring after fallen wisdom, so are guilty of
Isreal's sin, Jer. 2.13. Paul was first brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, born
in Tarsus, that had read Aratus, Meander and Epimanides, Authors, is clear by
what he cited; but while he stood in the Ethnic mind, he was a grand
persecutor, idolized his Ethnic education; but Christ being revealed in him,
the Storehouse of Heavenly wisdom, knowledge and understanding; then he
accounted Ethnic Learning as dung and dross, Phil. 3.7, 8. All his idolized,
magnified, and highly prized Arts, Parts and Seize, of fallen wisdom, he
accounted but as dung, wisdom from above being revealed; the Lord called Paul
wise in naturals, and many that were ignorant thereof to Preach the everlasting
Gospel.

Further, Paul in the wisdom from above at the University of Athens, he
reproved their Idolatry, Superstition and Heathenism; he taught nothing but the
living God, and Christ Jesus, Acts 17. In the comprehending life, he saw these
Philosophers, Epicureans, Stoics, and withstood them; but they in the gloomy
region of Heathenism saw not him, nor the Heavenly wisdom that he Preached, so
called him a babbler; yet he fought not in vain but conquered several, so
prevailed, that many renounced their Pagan Philosophy, and curious Artists
burned their Books of earthly Satanical wisdom; thus Paul in the Armor of
righteousness disarmed these pagan Philosophers, the Devils Champions, and
brought them to be Sions Converts to receive her Armor Acts 19.

James one of the Lords worthies, writing to the twelve Tribes scattered, said,
if any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men
liberally, James 1.5. He commends the ignorant to the Lord, not to Aristotle,
Plato, nor to any other Pagan Philosopher.

Further, James the Apostle of the Lamb, describing the nature and quality of
Heavenly wisdom, said, the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy, Jam. 3.17. Now no other wisdom then
this, was taught in the primitive Times, in Christian Churches and Schools,
while the purifying, and Victory giving Faith, was kept: the wisdom of the
world was Preached against as foolishness with God. Now whoever refuses Wisdom,
Knowledge, and Understanding at the mouth of the Lord, such learn Foolishness,
Ignorance, Carnal wisdom and wickedness at the mouth of the Serpent, and his
wisdom, nothing that is good prospers under it.

CHAP. II. Of the Rise and Progress of Serpentine Wisdom, that is the Wisdom of
this World.
A Dam was Created a noble Plant, a blessed Disciple, while obedient to the
teaching of his Creator, among many Pure, Heavenly, Sound, Savoury, and
wholesome lessons, this was one; not to eat of, nor touch the forbidden Tree
lest they die. Now the Serpent filled with subtilty, labored, first to beget
Eve into a questioning of the verity of Gods Heavenly Doctrine; saying, Yea,
has God said, Ye shall not eat of every Tree of the Garden, Secondly, the
Serpent expressly contradicted Gods Heavenly Doctrine, saying, Ye shall not
truly die. Thirdly, The Serpent informed Eve, that by touching and eating of
that Tree, an advantage should accrue thereby to them; Ye shall be as Gods,
knowing good and evil, Genesis 3. the Serpent became prevalent, Gods teaching was
rejected, the Serpents deadly Teachings and Insinuations, Charms and
Enchantments, were entertained, through this compliance; the Serpent got the
Chair (as I may say) and became Teacher, than according to the Lords Heavenly
word, death entered in upon them, even as a Consumption seizes upon man's body
gradually, in this compliance with the Serpent, a seed of enmity was sown in
man's heart, and from that seed sprung another World, even a World of
wickedness, savouring of the nature of the hellish seedsman; Adam had never
been driven out of the Paradise of blessedness but that through the Serpent
being his Teacher, he learned to know good and evil, (says Cornelius Agrippa
of the vanity of Sciences.)

While man kept his Station in the virtue of the ancient of days, he lived,
moved, and had his being in him, he thought, spoke, and acted in him; Yea, his
thoughts, words, and actions, were the thoughts, words, and actions of God, in
him and through him; here was a blessed Sabbath, Christ said unto his
Disciples, traveling unto the pleasant Valley of Adams Innocence; it is not ye
that speak, but the spirit of your Father which speaks in you, Matthew. 10.
yea, and Peter an Apostle of the Lamb, bare Record; saying, Holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. So that all the Holy
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Primitive Christians, Children of Light,
Children of the Day, who thought, spoke and acted, in and through the virtue of
the Lords presence in them; their Language was the Language of the Lord, it is
so now of what Nation, Kingdom or Country soever such be, yet they are living
wirnesses of that Language promised by the Lord, who said, I will turn to the
people a pure Language, that they may call upon the name of the Lord, to serve
him with one consent, Zeph. 3.9.

In like manner Adam back-sliden from the Lord, and complying with the old
thoughts, words and works, from the miry lake of his power, and his posterity
centered in the gloomy region of the same, what proceeds from this hellish
conjunction, is the Language of the old Serpent, the Language of the beast, all
wanton Poets, Comedians, Tragedians, painted Orators, Pagan Philosophers are
here found, thus of Bethel, that is, the House of God, man became Bethaven,
that is, a House of iniquity and vanity.

Thus the Serpent prevailing, and his Kingdom increasing, his hellish Pills (as
I may say) being swallowed, man was wrought out of his right course and
disposition, hence issued a numberless number of internal Diseases.

As in a corporal Imposthume, purulent and foul matter is gathered together in
some part of the body; so through joining with the Serpent, purulent and foul
matter of sin, iniquity, transgression, satanical Arts and Inventions are
brought forth, whereby the Sons and Daughters of men are defiled.

As in an external Atrophy or Consumption, the body through the want of due and
convenient nutriment, by little and little pines way; so through complying with
the Serpent, the mouth of faith came, and comes to be shut, which receives
spiritual nourishment, which not being received, spiritual leanness stepped, and
stepped in, yea a spiritual Consumption.

As in a corporal Lethargy, there is an unsatiable propensity to sleepiness,
drowsiness and forgetfulness; so Adam not keeping his Heavenly Dominion in his
^aker, but attending to the evil one, was thereby brought into a spiritual
Lethargy into a sleepy, drowsy, and forgetful state this was Isaraels which
occasioned the Lords complaint; my people have forgotten me days without
number, Jer. 2.32.

As through a depraved Appetite, wholesome nourishment is refused, nonconvenient,
unprofitable, and Noxious things are desired; even so the mind being carnalized
Heavenly wisdom, Bread of life, Water of life, Honey out of the Rock, the food
of the soul is loathed, and spoiling Philosophy, Satanical Arts, Parts and
endowments; in a word, the wisdom that is from below, is unsatiably sought
after.

Adam entering the barren Borders of Satanism, from a Hellish Lake, in the
increase of that Kingdom, collected, gushed out a muddy stream of Diabolical
Arts, pernicious inventions, and Artists; hence came he ungodly Astrologers,
who from the observation of the Heavens, take upon them to foretell, what good
or evil shall betide Men, States, Persons, People, so to determine things of
future contingence.

Thence crawled out Charms, who use Verses, Words, Ceremonies, Spells, to
produce their desired ends, as to heal, or hurt people, young or old.

Hence crawled out Diviners, Wizards, who by a Diabolical Spirit take upon them
to presage or foretell things to come.

Hence crawled out observers of Times, who superstitiously make difference of
days and times, as good or bad, luckly or unlucky as they say, for the doing of
such a work, or undertaking a Journey, or appointing times for the doing of
things.

Hence crawled out the Consulters of Familiar Spirits, this was Saul's sin, who
sought to a woman that had a Familiar Spirit; for which transgression the Lord
brought this heavy Judgment upon him.

Hence crawled out Inchanters, who by observing the events of things, gather
signs of good or evil, luck, (as they say) to themselves or others, and who by
secret slights and juglings, deceive or delude the eyesight.

Hence crawled out Witches, Sorcerers, having dealings with the Devil by
compact or confedracy, changing any thing before the sight, by a Diabolical
power.

Hence crawled out Necromancers, speaking to the dead, or to the Devil in the
form of the dead, making inquiry of the same, as Saul did.

Hence crawled out the Magician, who through covenant with Satan is skild in
Magic Art.

Hence sprung in the Monthly Prognosticatours, taking upon them to foretell the
occurrents of each Month.

Hence crawled out Southsayers, who from the observation of the sky, or flight
of Birds, take upon them to foretell things to come.

Hence came in Stargazers, pretending knowledge of future events, by the
observation of the courses and conjunction of the Stars; these Artists were
first found among the Heathens, after crept into Israel, though expressly
forbidden by the Lord, and are found also as it is said, among the professors
of Christianity.

The Idolatrous Egyptians were great practitioners of Divination, who (as
Writers affirm) first of all derived their Divination from the four Elements;
some Divined from the observation of Fire; hence Pyromancy.

Some Divined by the Air; hence Aeromancy.

Some Divined by Water; hence Hydromancy.

Some Divined by the Earth; hence Geomancy.

After this, wickedness and Satanical skill increasing, a further progress was
made; For,

Some Divined by Fish; hence Icthuomancy.

Some Divined by Herbs; hence Botanomancy.

Some Divined by Figs; hence Sycomancy.

Some Divined by Eggs; hence Oomancy.

Some Divined by Rods; hence Rabdomancy.

Some by the crowing of Cocks; hence Alectrimancy.

Some by She-goats; hence Aigemancy.

Some Divined by Dreams; hence Oneiromancy.

Some Divined by Insense; hence Libanomancy.

Some by Water in a Basin; hence Licanomancy.

Some Divined by Smoke; hence Capnomancy.

Some Divined by the Bay Tree; hence Daphnomancy.

Some Divined by Wax; hence Ceromancy. Some by the lines of the Hands; hence
Chiromancy.

Some Divined by Sieve and Shears; hence Cosciomancy.

This kind of Divination is (as it is said) much in use now in the Northern
parts, by the frequenters of Horse Courses and Foot Races.

Some Divined by an Ax; hence Axinomancy.

Some Divined by Lots; hence Cleromancy.

Some by the inspection of Flour; hence Alphitomancy.

Some Divined and gave answers out of their Bellies; hence Gastromancy. Some
Divined by the observation of Birds, some by the entrails of Beasts, some of
these, (if not many,) are crept in among the professors of Christianity.
Solomon knew what he said, when he said, God made man upright, but they have
fought out many Inventions, Eccles. 7.

From the very same ground issued in Idolatry, Superstition, damnable Heresies,
pernicious Schisms, strong Delusions, perverse Disputings, vagrant and wandering
Desires, fruitless Janglings, inconvenient Jestings, sinful oppositions of
Sciences, Enchanting Orations, feigned Purgatory, dreamed of by Plato the
Philosopher, and Virgil the Heathen Poet, defended by many in the Apostasy.

Thus you see the wisdom of God being rejected, and the wisdom of the old
Serpent, and his Teaching being entertained, what Hellish Artists and Arts,
what ungodly and unlawful Inventions, what strange and soul-destroying
Doctrines, are crept into the Stage of the World; what an Eclipse is come upon
the Sons and Daughters of men; but the Sun of righteousness is risen, and
rising with an effectual healing virtue, whereby the foggy exhaltation of sin,
iniquity, and transgression of wicked Arts, and frivolous inventions, shall be
scourged away.

CHAP. III. Of the Rise and Progress of Pagan Philosophy, Worldly wisdom crept
in among the professors of Christianity, and Testimonies of the Holy men of God
against the same.
Pagans of several Nations, desirous of wisdom, to some straps of Moses
relating to Morals, Naturals and Supernaturals, added the corrupt ingredients
of their own Inventions and imaginations; so patch up their Ethics, Physics,
and Metaphysics, so triumphed in the splendour of their wisdom, and gained
great esteem thorough the same, and were (as I may say) pointed at by the
fingers of others, and were called Magi, that is, wisemen, whatsoever (says
Andrew Sympson) Orpheus Homer, Solon, Pythagoras, Plato, and other Grecians,
Philosophers, Poets, Historians, have left in Record, concerning God and Divine
things, they took all out of the Books of Moses, whereunto they added the
intermixture of their own Inventions and imaginations, depraved and wrested the
same, August. de Civit. Dei, to say the best Rabbis, and Philosophers says
Trap; sunt bona mista malis, sunt mala mista bonis, that is to say in them,
good is mixed with evil, and evil with good.

The Greeks through this py-bal wisdom were called Sophoi, that is, wisemen;
now Pythagoras refused that Title as too ambitious, and peculiar to Ens Entium,
the being of beings, God alone, and in way of modesty he called himself
Philosophos, that is, a Lover of wisdom; which Title Socrates, Plato and others
assumed, in imitation of these Greeks, the Romans called such Philosophy, and
imitation of the Romans; in the English Orthography, such are called
Philosophers, that is, Lover of wisdom; hence came the Philosophy of the
Egyptians, Phenicians, Caldeans, Phrygians, Lybians, Ethiopians, Scithians,
Thracians, Persians, Indians, Brachmans, Spaniards, Italians, Greeks, Druides,
of Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, of the Cynicks, Stoics, Scepticks,
Epicureans; these say, and many others, received their Philosophy; from the
writings of Moses, by them depraved and wrested, adding the dregs of their own
opinions, inventions and imaginations they received of these things also, one
from another.

And of the agreement or rather disagrement of the Pagan Philosophers among
themselves, Writers are not silent, for not being content with Logomachy, that
is, Verbal altercation; they fell at length to Dagger drawing one against
another, Johan. Franc. Pic. Mizand.

Of the absurd opinions of Pagan Philosophers, as of their Magicks South
sayings, Conjurings, casting of Nativities, their Doctrine of the worlds
Eternity, of the Souls Mortality, of the transmigration of the Soul from one
body into another, of like temperament and quality, I forbear further to
particularise.

How Pagan Philosophy. Arts and Languages, called Handmaids to Divinity, have
been and are courted, embraced and entertained Heavenly wisdom, the Mistress,
has been and is slighted, the wise in heart understand: the Egyptians (says
Theophilus Gales) so pursued the study of the Mathematics, that the Title of
Prophet, Priest, or wiseman, was allowed to none, but such as were profoundly
instructed therein before. Now how spoiling Philosophy, Tongues, Ethnic Arts,
natural endowments and qualifications, are doted upon among the Professors of
Christianity is evident, in that, who without qualifications are fitted by the
Lord, for the work of the Ministry, they are branded as Heretics, and
persecuted.

It was a saying of Solomon, Take away the dross from the Silver, and there
shall come forth a Vessel for the finer, Pro. 25.4. Now if the intermixture of
Paganism, spoiling Philosophy, Satanical Arts; in a word, the wisdom of the
flesh, which is foolishness, with God, were scoured away, and Heavenly wisdom
in its primitive purity in Schools and Churches were restored; happy would the
Nations be, which in measure was attempted; for in the School of Alexandria, an
Eclecktick Sect flourished, so called, because it Selected and picked out the
choice parts of Philosophy, out of all Sects, this laudable attempt was
undertaken by men accounted eminent, Potamon, Plutarch, Ammonius and other
Philosophers, with what issue and success a conclusion may be drawn, for that
so much of the dross of Satanical Art, carnal reason, inventions and imagination
remains, as that it yet remains, spoiling Philosophy; Corruption optimi fit
pessima, that is, best things corrupted, become the worst. Theophilus Gale
advises well that all the placets, or opinions of Philosophers, should be
brought to be tried by the holy Scriptures, that there it may appear, what
should be embraced, and what should be rejected.

Man in the beauty of his Innocence was to eye the Lord, and in his Spirit, the
Creaation, the products of the Lords power and wisdom, for all serious, solid,
sound and justifiable knowledge, relates to the essentiality of God, and to the
Creation, the products of his power, and to useful and necessary concerns;
herein appears true wisdom, primitive Philosophy: Plato though an Ethnic,
through a Divine spark, or through the writings of Moses, in that spark bouldly
and truly called, the knowledge of God, the true Philosophy, how (says
Epinomondas) can God be the Author of all good, if he be not the Author of the
chiefest good, that is, wisdom.

The Serpent being prevalent, disjoynted, dislocated; that is, wrested man out
of his blessed State, and centered him in his own power, whence issued into the
world, a muddy stream of earthly wisdom, inventions, and Idolatry; the
posterity of Noah, (says Theophilus Gale) degenerating from the pure
Philosophy, that is, wisdom of the Patriarchs, plunged into the bottomless pit,
of diabolical Astrology, and Idolatry; for in their contemplation of Celestial
bodies, the feeling of the Creator being lost, they were first of all hurried
to the admiration of them, afterward to the adoration of them; so those
glorious Creatures being lifted up into the throne of the Creator, became the
object of monstrous Idolatry, Romans 1.21. Deuteronomy. 4.19. Job. 31.26, 27.

Geographers affirm that the Valley in which Sodom and Gomorrah were built, was
full of saltish and bituminous pits; the Lake Asphaltites, called also, Mare
Mortuum that is, the dead Sea, because the very Fish cannot live in its foul
gross waters, yea; anp Birds flying over it were smothered and killed by its
exhalations: Adam as Created of the Lord, was a fruitful Valley, plentious,
infragrant, odoriferous, aromatical, balsamical fruits, showing forth the
regency of the Lambs life in him, closing with the deadly whispers of the
Serpent, a muddy Lake (as I may say) gushed into the world, whose exhalations
are pernicious, this may spiritually be called the dead Sea; none can live to
God, to righteousness, in that which the Devil brings in, in the putred or
rotten stock old Adam, all die, in Christ is life.

Obj. We read Philosophers, because many good moral sayings are in them, and we
learn natural Arts to qualify and enable us, for the understanding of Heavenly
things.

Ans. It Is recorded in Scripture, that Christ is the true light, that lights
every man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. Pagan Philosophers, as well as
others, I (said Du Hamel) ascent unto the Platonists, that men's minds are
enlightened with a Divine light; so every man has in himself the ground of
morality, which man turning from within, and fetching in from without, he
continues in Clouds of darkness, and an Eclipse in the world of his heart, what
the Philosophers spoke from that, is found and good, but through a now
perseverance in it, intermixtures entered in, and what proceeded from the mind
thus carnalized, was spoiling Philosophy; Corruption optimi fit pessima, as
before; yea, and the same John bare Record, saying, the light shined in
darkness and the darkness comprehended it not, John. 1.5. this
non-comprehension of Pagan Philosophers, as well as of others, so far
prevailed, that they could in no wise comprehend the sparks of Divine light,
which shined in the darkness of their hearts, but unjustly, and wickedly,
resisted, restrained, and opposed the same, Romans 1.18, 19. etc.

And natural Arts, Parts, Endowments, Languages, Accomplishments, cannot reveal
the knowledge of Heavenly things; Can thou (said Zophar) by searching find
out God? Job. 11.7, etc. No man knows the Father save the Son, and he to whom
the Son reveals him, Matthew. 11.27. and Paul, who was eminent in Tongues,
natural in Parts and Abilities, and knew what Key opened into the rich Cabinet
of Heavenly wisdom, and Treasures, he excluded natural Arts, and Parts to be
that Key; saying expressly, the natural man receives not the things of the
spirit of God, etc. neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. God and the things of God, are known in and by the
spirit, this spirit Paul Preaches up, not natural Arts, Parts, and Tongues;
Plato a Heathen Philosopher, said well, virtue is not acquired but infused of
God, a natural man though he have mounted to the Turret of Philosophic
elevations, and may profess himself to be a great Sophist, that is, wiseman;
yet he is ignorant of the saving knowledge of the Lord, which only comes by the
teaching of the Lord, Romans 1.22. Acts. 17.18, 23.1. Cor. 2.14.

Holy men of God, inspired of God, taught of God, replenished with the virtue,
influence, and sweetness, of Heavenly wisdom, in the Patriarchal, Mosaical, and
Evangelical dispensations, justified the same, and in it, by it, and through
it, grew in clearness of understanding, distinguishing persons, so bare
Testimoy against the old Serpent, and all his products, his spoiling
Philosophy, wisdom of the flesh, introduced into the world, by those lying
lips, that seduced Adam and Eve, from their blessed being and welbeing in the
Lord.

Certain Philosophers of the Epicureans and of the Stoics, in wisdom of the
Serpent, encountered Paul, who was partaker of Divine wisdom, and called him a
babbler, Acts 17.18. and how the Divine wisdom revealed in the lovers of
simplicity, is entertained by Philosophers now; this Nation and others afford
many examples, yet the wisdom of the living God, who are of God, cannot but
contend for, the pure wisdom of the rock of Ages; who said, Heaven is my
Throne, and Earth is my Foot stool, Act. 7.49. there are as Schools
distinguish, Bona throni; the Treasures of Heaven, Christ the repository of
pure, sou-Isaving, soul-refreshing, life-giving wisdom, and knowledge, and
there are Bona Scabelli, that is, the fruits and riches of the Earth; now the
carriage and deportment of multitudes is such, that their very life speaks,
that Earth is their Throne, and Heaven their Footstool; hot in the pursuit of
the Earth, the pleasures and delights thereof, slighting the pearl of Heavenly
wisdom; the Duke of Alva said, he had so much to do on Earth, that he had no
time to look after Heaven: Trapp says, the frame of the spirits of men,
bespeaks them to be thus minded, complying rather with the Divinity of
Sardanapalus, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas, then with the
Doctrine of Christ, who said, learn of me: the beforem-entioned Epicureans,
were a Sect of Philosophers, so called from Epicurus, who was born in Athens,
and lived in the time of Alexander the Great, Ptolomy, Lagus and Philadelphus,
he held that the world came of the Atoms, or Motes in the Sun, that the Souls
dye with the Bodies, that there is no providence, that worldly pleasure is the
Summum bonum, the chiefest good; these with others, Philosophers resisted Paul.

Paul writing to the beloved of God, in Rome called to be Saints, bare this
Record, relating to the wisdom of the flesh, and to the wisdom of the Spirit,
Romans 8.6. to be carnally minded is death, which being truly translated is thus,
the wisdom, desire, or mind of the flesh is death; but the wisdom, desire, or
mind of the spirit, is life, and peace; the wisdom of the flesh is death, and
is not spoiling Philosophy, lascivious Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, frivolous
Fables, Enchanting Orations, the Subject taught in Schools and Colleges of the
wisdom of the flesh; I say yes, and that they are death, and tend to Bind and
Fetter Men in Chains of darkness, in the Dungeon of death, but the wisdom of
the spirit gives the simple a residence in the fragrant Chamber of life and
peace.

Paul further Testified to the Sanctified at Corinth, saying, Christ sent me
not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom words, least the
Cross of Christ should be made of none effect; for it is written, I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise: Here the Serpents wisdom, affected eloquence,
pompous and painted speech, attained by satanical inspiration, orhumane
acquisition, by Study, perusal of Heathen Authors, is decryed, not wisdom of
words, (says he (least the Cross of Christ, the door through which pure,
Divine, Heavenly wisdom enters the Tabernacle of man's heart, should be made of
none effect; Further says he, the world by wisdom knew not God, neither does
the world by its wisdom now know God; to what purpose then are Youth and others
so toiled, for the attainment of that, which is foolishness in the account of
God, and brings not to his knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.17, 19, 20.

Again, this clear-sighted Apostle of the Lamb, through Divine eye salve,
distinguishing between the grounds, natures and effects, of the wisdom from
above, and the wisdom from below; says on this wise, We speak wisdom among
them that are perfect, yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of
this world, that come to naught; but we speak the wisdom of God in a Mystery,
which none of the Princes of this world knew; for had they known it, they would
not have crucified the Lord of Glory: which things also we speak, (says he)
not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Spirit
teaches, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8, 13. Further he says, the Natural man knows not the
things of the spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.
14. The Natural man though mounted to the very Zenith of Philosophic notions,
and stored with the quintessence of fleshes wittiness, which in very deed is
wickedness, filled as a well loaded Vessel, with acquired Arts, and Parts; yet
being a natural man, darkened with the smoke of carnal wisdom, in that State he
cannot receive the wisdom which is from above; in his eye it is foolishness,
the world and its wisdom is a pearl in his eye, the harmless Dove of Heavenly
wisdom enters in at another window, the Cross of Christ, foolishness to them
that perish.

Further, the faithful Ambassador, and true witness Paul, in the wisdom of God
bare Record, against the wisdom of the world; saying, The wisdom of this world
is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 3.19 Adam in the wisdom of God, knew God, and
the Creation; Now the Serpent by his insinuations; working man into a
compliance with his will, brought in a Sea of iniquity and confusion, a world
of unrighteousness, and a wisdom favoring of his Nature, now spoiling
Philosophy, Enchanting Orations, wanton Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, are
a part of of his wisdom, taught in Schools and Colleges, so is foolishness
with God, though highly esteemed among men; yet are they abomination in the
sight of God, Luke 16.15. I am brought into the credence of this, that as the
rays of the Sun of righteousness are displayed in man, as Heavenly wisdom is
exalted, as Nations become seasoned with the salt of the Kingdom, these
abominations will become burdensome; yea and rejected as a Menstrous Cloth;
then shall Composers, Printers, Correctors, Stichers, Binders, Stationers,
Schoolmasters, Tutors, in Colleges, that have Traded in this dead Sea, dregs
of Satanism, turn from their unlawful concerns, as the evil thereof is
discovered, and justify the wisdom that is from above.

Further, this faithful Steward Paul, writing to the Saints and faithful
Brethren at Collosse, exhorted them, saying, Beware least any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, Colos 2.8. thus who keep not in
Christ, the wisdom of the Father, but lend an ear to the Pagan Philosophic
notions of false teachers, they are led by them out of the right path, bound
and Captives; thus Paul in the wisdom from above, cautions them to beware of
wisdom from below.

Again, Paul writing to Timothy his own Son in the Faith, exhortshim, to charge
some, not to give heed to Fables, and endless genealogies, which minister
questions, rather then godly edyfying, which is faith, 1. Tim. 1.3, 4. Now what
a muddy stream of Fables and fabulous Poems, Comedies, and Tragedies, are
gushed into Christian Schools, how the fabulous Pedegrees of the Heathens Gods,
are (as I may say) driven by force of Arms into tender youth, hopeful, if not
depraved and corrupted by Ethnic education, I leave to the wise in heart to
Judge, who have known these things and the burden of them; further he says to
Timothy, refuse profane and old wives Fables, and exercise thy self unto
godliness, 1 Timothy 4.7.

The Apostle James writing to the twelve Tribes, scattered abroad, draws his
Sword (as I may say) against Serpentine wisdom, saying, if ye have bitter
envying, and strife in your hearts, etc. This wisdom descends not from above,
but is earthly, sensual, devilish, James 1.14, 15. Mark, earthly, sensual,
devilish, O that Christendom would consider this, in whom the hellish spark
has not only kindled them into strife and envy, but to be as a prey to the
mouth of the Sword; Christendom is become as Golgotha, a place of Skulls, as
Aceldama, the Field of Blood; the Apostle writing to the Church, said, ye are
taught of God to love one another, 1 These. 4. Now where strife, envy, and
bloodshed is, of whom are they taught? even of the Serpent, who was a Murderer
from the beginning, the Author of that wisdom, which is earthly, sensual and
devilish, a true Character of that wisdom which is from below; it is called
earthly, because it arises from the earth, keeps man in an unregenerate state,
out of Heavenly mindedness, wholly concerning man for earthly ends, sensual, as
wholly concerned in the pursuit of carnal, sinful and transient pleasures,
devilish, as inspired by him, doing his work, and brings to his end, wisdom
from above Rescues from his tyranny.

In the Apostles days, such as knew the Lords call into the Ministry, they were
Stars in Heaven, setlted in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, they had the
Heavenly Key, which opened to them the Royal Cabinet of Heavenly Treasures,
they received no wisdom, in Church or School, but what was Heavenly; but a Star
being fallen to the earth; Mark this, to the earth, then an earthly Key was
thrust into the hand, even the Key of the bottomless Pit; then arose a Smoke
Which darkened the Sun and the Air, what is this Smoke? even Serpentine wisdom
which steamed into Churches and Schools, the gradual rise of this, spoiled the
glory and beauty of Primitive Christianity; at this door crept into the Church
Traditions, Heresics, Scysms, Doctrinal errors, Superstition, Idolatry,
Pardons, Indulgences, Trentals, Soul-masses, Dirgies, Purgatory, Canonization
of Saints; In a word, devilish errors were set a broach, Mabomet steamed out
his Alcoran for Divine Scriptures, into Schools steamed also in spoiling
Philosophy, bewitching Orations, pompous and painted Rhetoric, lascivious
Poems, vain Comedies, foolish Tragedies, frivilous Fables, Pagan Ethics,
Physics and Metaphysics, whereby Youth is corrupted, as the Sea Monster
called Physeter, as naturalists write, mounts above the tops of Ships, standing
upright in the Sea, like a Pillar, and spouts out great floods of water,
whereby it overwhelms or indangers them; so upon the fall of the Star from
Heaven, the Sea Monster Satan, got up into the Church and, spouted out great
floods of errors, false Doctrines, and of earthly wisdom into Schools and
Churches, whereby they sunk down into the depth of ignorance, spiritual
blindness, Idolatry and corruption, but Heavenly wisdom is displaying its
power, virtue and influence, and Serpentine wisdom, be it in Church or School,
must be scoured away.

CHAP. IV. A rehearsal of Testimonies, born by several men eminent in the
Church, since the Apostles days, against Heathen learning, or the teaching of
it, in Christian Schools, as also of others.
By what has been spoken it is evident, that the holy men of God, acknowledged
by all to be inspired of God, bare sound Record and a living Testimony in the
wisdom of God, against the wisdom of the Serpent, the wisdom of the World; many
also who have lived since the Apostles days, yea and since the fall of the Star
from Heaven, in the gloomy night of Apostasy, in that measure of Heavenly
wisdom then made known, have born Testimony against teaching Heathen Authors,
spoiling Philosophy, wanton Poets in Christian Schools or Colleges; Yea, and
have spoken freely against Universities defiled with the same, in confirmation
of this assertion a few Testimonies are presented to the consideration of the
Reader.

Eusebius brings in Plato, sharply blaming that first Education, as
destructive, which was used by the Greeks, in reading the feigned Comical and
Tragical inventions of Poets, Cap. 49. p. 618.

As far as I can gather from the writings of the Ancients, Philosophy is very
hurtful unto him that is much addicted to the study, thereof, Joh. Pic. Mirand.

All the discord of Divines, has proceeded from Philosophers, for as much as
Divines in later Ages, have mixed the muddy water of Philosophers with the
living vein of Divine Oracles, Joh. Pic. Mirand. that is, have mixed Heathen
Philosophic Notions, with the Scriptures of truth: It is known by lamemtable
experience, how dangerous a thing it is, to be exercised in the writings of
Ethnic Philosophers, and how easily the plague of lies, and vanity creeps
through the same into men's minds Theo. Gale.

In the times of the Hasmoneans, this Decreee made, let him be accursed, who
teaches his Son the Philosophy of the Greeks, Theo. Gale.

What but Greek Philosophy, was the first Seminary or seed-Plot of principle
Errors, in the Churches in the Apostles days, and in Churches immediately
succeeding. Whereupon Tertullian called Philosophers the Patriarchs of
Heretics, The. Gale.

It is not hard to show (says the same Author) that the whole Mystery of
iniquity, and the whole System of Antichristianism, which has molested the
Christian Church, for so many Centuries, ought to ascribe their rise and
progress to Heathen Philosophy.

There are (says Andrew Sympson) who spend much precious time upon vile
Pamphlets, curious Arts, profane Stories; lascivious Poems, etc.

Most of the Heresies that have been in the Church, have come in by Learned
men, rather then by Ignorant men. Ed. Calamy.

Jerome a Father of the Church, who lived about the year 384. reading the Book
of Cicero, was (as it is said) rebuked by an Angel, because that he being a
Christian, minded the Fictions of the Gentiles. Jacobus Laurentius de libr.
Gentil. page 41.

Gratian put out a Canon, that a Bishop should not read Heathen Books. Jac.
Laur. page 41.

Gregory the Great (says Jac. Laurentius de libris Gentilium) forbad all
Bishops the reading of Heathen Books. page 41.

Pernicious Books are to be burned, no regard is to be given to the price of
them. Piscat. on Acts.

All the wisdom of a man is in this one thing, that he know and worship Christ.
Lactant. lib. 3. cap. 30.

Vlpian the chief Lawyer, Galen the chief Physician, Porphiry the chiefest
Aristotelian, Plotinus the chiefest Platonist, were professed enemies to
Christ, and his Truth. Trapp.

Augustine Bishop of Hippo in Africa, about the year 399. said, the unlearned
take Heaven by force, but we with our learning are thrust into Hell.

It repented Augustine, that when he was young, he had preached more to please,
then to profit others.

Neither the Jews by their profound Doctors, nor the Gentiles by their Wits and
Wizards, could grope out God. Trapp on 1 Cor. 1.21.

The Greeks sought after wisdom, viz. of this World, so shut out Heavenly
wisdom; Intus existens prohibet alienum, they attained not what they sought.
Trapp on 1 Cor. 1.22.

We that have obtained the knowledge of God, by and through his Grace, are far
more Wise and more blessed then Plato, Aristotle, etc. Piscat. on 1 Cor. 1.

In a natural man there is an impotency, that is, want of power to know and
understand spiritual things. Piscat.

Wisdom that is of the Flesh, serves the Worldling (as the Ostrich wings) to
make him outrun others upon Earth, and in Earthly things, but helps him never
a whit toward Heaven. Trapp on the Corinth.

Constantius the Emperor suspecting Julian's proneness to Paganism, sent him to
be carefully grounded in Christianity to Nicomedia; but he frequented by
stealth the company of Libanius and Iamblichus, Philosophers, who warped him
wholly to their bent, which brake out afterward. Trapp on Colos. 2.

In the year 220. the Artemonites, a certain kind of Heretics, corrupted
Scripture out of Aristotle and Theophrastus, turning all into Questions, as
afterward Schoolmen did, that evil generation of Dunghill Divines, as one
calls them. Trapp on Colos. 2.

The Gentiles could not be saved by their Philosophy, without Christ; and yet
not only the Divines of Cullen, set forth a Book concerning the Salvation of
Aristotle, whom they called Christ's forerunner in Naturals, as John Baptist
was in Supernaturals; but also some of the School Doctors, grave men (says
Acosta) do promise men Salvation without the knowledge of Christ. Trapp on
Colos. 2.8.

The Moral Philosophy of profane Authors, treating of the chiefest good, and
of the happiness of man, and of virtue, is no other thing then vain deceit.
Pisc. Colos. 2.

Seeing we are complete in Christ, they commit folly who have recourse unto
profane Philosophers.

The deep Theorems of Philosophy (said King James) make one learned, but seldom
better; and oftentimes worse, mere Atheists. There is an Arabic Proverb, Cum
errat eruditus, errat errore erudito; that is, a learned man has learned
errors. Trapp on Acts 17.

Aristotle wrote many things most absurdly concerning God, as that he is a
living Creature, that he works not freely, but by a kind of servile necessity;
and that therefore he deserves no praise, since he does but what he must do: yet
at Stuckard in Germany was found a Doctor of Divinity, that preached to the
people, that the Church might be sufficiently well taught and governed by
Aristotle's Philosophy, especially his Ethics Trapp on Romans 1.21.

To use Heathen Authors for oftentation, is to make a Calf of the Treasures
gotten out of Egypt. Trapp of Arts.

Many (says one) through their love to the Tree of Knowledge, lose the Tree of
Life.

Papists say, that we may find their Holy Water, and sprinkling of Sepulchers,
in Juvenal's sixth Satyr; their Lights in Sepulchers, in Suetonius his
Octavius; Lamps lighted on Saturdays, in Seneca's 96 Epistle; distribution of
Tapers among the people, in Macrobius his Saturnals; Purgatory, in Virgil's
Aeneids* Trapp. Thus proving their Doctrines by Heathen Authors, not by
Scripture.

Averroes an Arabian Physician, so madly admired his Master Aristotle, as that
he said, there was no error to be found in his Works, that his Learning was
the chief Truth, etc. When he dyed, he cried out, Sit anima mea cum
Philosophis, Let my Soul be, where the Philosophers Souls are. Trapp.

Justin Martyr tells us, that he left his Gentilism upon reading a piece of
Plato. Trapp of Arts.

Augustine acknowledges, that nothing more cooled his affections toward that
Book called Cicero's Hortensius, then that he found not the name of Jesus in
it; and that on this confideration he was persuaded to the love of Heavenly
wisdom, and contemplation of things above. Trapp.

The knowledge of Christ is the only Learning, without which all other
Learning, does but light men into utter darkness. Trapp of Arts.

As for Aristotle's Divinity, which he calls his Metaphysics, whereof he wrote
14 Books, it is (says Ramus) the most foolish and impious piece of Sophistry,
that ever was written. Trapp of Arts.

Lotamus Lovaniensis wrote, that there was no other Faith found in Abraham,
then was found in Cicero a Heathen Philosopher: whereas Abram saw my day (says
Christ) and rejoiced, he walked with God, and was upright; it was not thus with
Cicero. Trapp of Arts.

Latimer was so wrought upon by Bilney's confession, as that he began to smell
the Word of God, and to forsake School Doctors, and such like fooleries, and
horrible barbarism, which had overspread the eye of whole Christendom. Trapp of
Arts.

The dignity and study of Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, the Holy Spirit seems to
intimate their continuance in the Church, by the Inscription of Christ's Title
on the Cross in those three Tongues, and the utter eradicating of all frivolous
and fruitless School Quirks, Monkish Dotages, Legendary Fables. Trapp.

The Romans one time banished all Philosophers out of their City. Gel. lib. 15.
Trapp of Arts.

Licinius the Emperor called Heathen Learning, the plague and poison of the
Commonwealth. Trapp of Arts.

Pope Paul the second, pronounced all Scholars Heretics, and seriously
exhorted the Romans, not to breed up their Children at School, saying, it was
enough if they could read and write. Trapp of Arts.

The Heathen Romans having conquered this Nation, and inhabiting in it for 500
years, as Histories inform us, they erected Schools in this Nation to teach the
Britains, and brought in their Heathen Poets, Comedies, Tragedies, etc. into
Schools, which to the shame and corrupting of the Nation are yet continued.

Julius Agricola, a Roman Emperor's Lieutenant in Britain, taught the Britains
civility, and prevailed with Noblemen to breed up their Sons in liberal Arts,
and brought them to affect the Roman Eloquence; then they began to imitate the
Roman Fashions, the Gown, proud Buildings, Baths, and Banquetings, which the
foolisher sort called Civility, but was indeed a secret Art to prepare them for
bondage. Milton.

Edgar a Saxon King, put forth a Canon, that on Festival days every one should
abstain from profane Heathen Songs, and from diabolical Games and Pastimes.

Further he enjoined, that every one abstain from the reading of fabulous and
absurd things, and from filthy and blasphemous Ballads: Not well observed now.

I Martin Luther give notice to all, that on Monday, etc. all the Books of the
Pope be burned, and of some of his Disciples. He gives a reason of this thing,
saying that they are mischievous, false, seducing, wicked, etc. Luth. Tom. 2.

Luther speaking of Popish Schools and Monasteries, said, This is my mind and
desire, that these Stables of two-footed Asses, and Schools of the Devil,
should be levelled with the ground, or changed into Christian Schools, by a
Godly transformation. Luth. de institutione puerorum.

Heathen Learning (says Gell) has a ravishing and a bewitching beauty; capta,
capit, being taken, it is much taking also, and wins much upon men's affections:
and great danger there is (says he) lest men court the Handmaid, rather then
the Mistress; Earthly, instead of Heavenly wisdom, to their destruction.

Essential inward knowledge in the secret understanding, is not from flesh and
blood, nor from the multitude of Books, but by a passive reception of Divine
things; not by study, but by patience and submission. Osw. Crollius.

The Academical Spirit cannot understand the mystery of intrinsical Teaching,
only humility is capable of illumination. Osw. Croll.

The Schools of the Gentiles have had their time, wherein they have become vain
in their imaginations, being exercised in vain Philosophy, and opposition of
Science, falsely so called, whereof the Apostle Paul admonished true Christians,
to take heed they were not deceived by it. Thus says the Translator of John
Baptista Van Helmont's Physic Refined, in his Premonition to the Candid Reader.

Further, says he, the Wise men of the East by the direction of the Star, came
to worship the Child, laying down all their wisdom at his feet; for a lively
token, that all true wisdom was to be received from him, in whom all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge dwells.

Further, says he, such has been the subtilty of the fleshly Serpent, that
under a pretense of owning the name of Christ, he has taken up Paganish means
and instruments to build withal, calling the dregs and dross of Heathen
Schools, Handmaids of Divinity.

John Baptista Van Helmont in his Physic Refined, said, Logic is so far from
leading to the knowledge of Universals, that it rather thrusts men down into
errors.

The World (says this Helmont) has suffered it self to be circumvented by
Aristotle, who boasted of Logic to be the Mother of Sciences.

Aristotle (says this Helmont) extolled the method of Disputing invented by
himself, and he takes away all knowledge from a man, unless he has yielded
himself to be instructed in Logic.

Jerome (on Psalm. 140* and 143.) does not unworthily compare the Art of
Syllogizing to the Plagues of Egypt; and he calls Logical demonstrations,
Dog-like discourses. Helmont.

Schools (says this Helmont) supposing Logic as necessary, do oppose
themselves to the commands of the Apostle.

I wonder (says Helmont) at the great blindness of Schools, in so great
magnifying Logic.

Let Schools (says Helmont) tell me, what Science Logic has ever brought to
light, whether Geometry, making of Glass, Printing, Husbandry, Medicine,
conducting of Water, of Minerals, of Arithmetic, of Building, or any
profitable Science; verily none.

Schools of Logic (says this Helmont) must needs confess, that through
boasting, deceit, and ignorance, it has deceived the credulous World.

To say that Logical discourse is very necessary for Divines, to refute the
subtilties of Heresies, that thing (says this Helmont) would be to be wise
above the Apostle, and to commend the abuses of Schools, above the Holy
Scriptures; this were to dethrone Gospel-weapons, and to inthrone Paganism
Steven by the Sword of the Spirit, and by Heavenly wisdom, refuted the
Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, Cilicians, not by Pagan Logic, Acts 6.9,
10. Christ promised his Disciples, saying, I will give you a mouth, and wisdom,
which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist, Luke
21.15. he commended them not to Pagan Schools, to Aristotle, or Plato, or any
other Heathen, to enable them to refute Heresies, but to his own gift, his
wisdom, Armor of proof, his own Sword put into the hands, enabling for his
work.

We read not that the ancient Christians ever taught Philosophy openly, and in
Schools, but that they rather gain-sayed it, Pagan. Gaudentius Theol de moribus
seculi.

Let any one show me (says this Author) that Philosophy was taught by
Christians, in the time of Justinian, or before.

Scarce any one can be persuaded (says this Author) that Christian Emperors
would command, that a Heathen Philosopher, in the Capitol of Rome, should teach
the opinions of Pagan Philosophers, to Christians; this would have been to
introduce, or bring in old Superstition.

Justin passed to the Church, because he found no certainty in the School of
Plato; he turned from Plato, and the rest of the Heathen Philosophers, and
addicted himself to the Scriptures of Truth. Gaudentius de mor. seculi.

L. Celius Lactantius said, I verily cannot call them Philosophers, that study
for wisdom, because by that study they do not attain unto wisdom.

Richard Fitz-Ralph, called Armachanus, in a Sermon preached before the Popes
Cardinals in the year 1360. said, Laymen refrain from sending their Sons to the
Universities, fearing to have them taken from them; choosing rather to keep
their Sons at home, and breed them to Husbandry, then to lose them, by sending
them to the Schools.

In a Synod holden at Guernsey 1576. and confirmed by a Synod held there 1597.
for the Estate of Guernsey and Jersey, it was provided in behalf of
Schoolmasters, that they should instruct their Scholars in the most pure
Authors both for learning and language, lest Children by reading lascivions and
immodest writings, should be infected with their venom; as may be seen in a
Book called, Heylyn's Survey of the State of France.

Georgius Ederus in his Mateologia Haereticorum, greatly inveighs against
Wickliff, and charges him with saying, That Studies were vanities brought into
the Church, and profits the Church no more, then the Devil does.

In the days of Queen Elizabeth, the Lords of her Privy-Councel sent Letters to
her High Commissioners in Causes Ecclesiastical, requiring them to write
Letters to all the Bishops of this Realm, and to require them to give
commandment, that in all Grammar and Free-Schools within their several
Diocesses, Christopher Ockland's Book entitled Anglorum praelia, should be
taught, in place of some Heathen Poets; saying, the Youth of the Realm receives
rather infections in manners, then advancement in virtue, from the Heathen
Poets taught in Schools: They prayed and required, that this might be done for
the encouragement of the said Ockland, and others traveling in the like
Studies, and for the removing of lascivious Poets, taught in Schools. The names
of the Lords of the Privy-Councel, as also of her High Commissioners in Causes
Ecclesiastical, as also their Letters, are to be seen at the beginning of the
Book called Anglorum praelia: The aforesaid Commissioners directed their
Letters to all the Bishops of the Queens Dominions of England and Wales, for
the accomplishment of the aforesaid.

Men have neglected sound, savoury, and useful matter, the very quintessence of
Learning, and have devoted themselves to an excess of fine speaking. Bishop
Wilkins Real Character.

The grand imposture of phrasing, has eaten out all solid learning. B. Wilkins.

Caesar Caracalla so doated upon the name of Alexander, that he was highly
offended that a lewd Murderer called Alexander, should be questioned for his
misdemeanour, saying, Accusest thou Alexander? unless thou be silent concerning
Alexander, thou art an undone man. Beware lest in loving the name of
Philosophy, ye embrace Philosophy with its errors. Orat. Doct. Ran.

Tertullian said, that Heresies are propagated by the Platonists, by the
Stoics, by Epicures, by Heraclitus, by Zeno, by Aristotle, by worldly wisdom.
Orat. Ranoldi.

Ludovicus Vives, Picus Mirandula, Hieronymus Savonarola, taught, that
Christians were not to read Aristotle and Plato, except very warily, Orat.
Ranoldi.

From the Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle, pestilent errors first of all
invaded, and have long possessed, and at this day do waste the Christian
Church. Orat. Ranoldi.

The World is so bewitched by the delusions of Satan, that the errors of
Philosophers, through vain and rotten distinctions, are defended of those
called Christians, in their public Assemblies; hereby they have brought it to
pass, that the Faith of Christ has no residence in the hearts of many who
profess him.

Augustine in his Confessions, accounts Terence a Comical Poet, unworthy to be
read and blames Grammarians for teaching of it. Orat. Ranoldi. This ss
accounted a delicate dish now in Schools, though professing Reformation.

Philosophers of old stained the Greek Church with various errors; in this our
day they have polluted all Italy, with their mischievous opinions, and I wish
it were but Italy only. Orat. Ranoldi.

Far be it from us (says Jerome, who lived about the year 384.) that omnipotent
Jupiter, Mecastor, and other Monsters, rather then Gods, should be heard out of
the mouth of a Christian. Orat. Ranoldi. And scarce any other thing rings in
Schools now.

In the Nicene Council of chosen Cardinals, they called it a grand and a
destructive abuse, that Professors of Philosophy taught wickedness in public
Schools. Orat. Ranoldi.

Under the name of Nature, (says Augustine of old) enemies of Grace lie hid; so
in our days, under the name of Philosophy, the enemies of Faith lie hid. Orat.
Ranoldi.

Where Aristotle reigns, there ungodliness has great dominion. Orat. Ranoldi.

What other thing did Julian the Apostate, when he endeavored to sweep
Christian Religion from off the face of the Earth, then provide that those
opinions should be taught, defended, and declaimed in Schools, which gain-sayed
Christianity. Orat. Ranoldi.

Maximinus a tyrannical Emperor, who reigned about the year 336. was blamed by
Eusebius, because he gave way, or wished, that those things should be taught
and learned in Schools, which were contrary to sound godliness. Orat. Ranoldi.

How foul a thing is it, that that may be spoken against you, which Ambrose
spoke of the Arians, they have deserted the Apostle, and they follow Aristotle.
Orat. Ranoldi.

No honor nor regard was given to the Art of Poetry before; moreover it was
accounted so infamous, that if any man was inclinable to the study thereof, he
was called a Robber. Polydor lib. 1. cap. 8.

Hadrian Saraviah informs us, that the Primitive Christians had no Academical
Schools, like to these now adays: Yet there was one at Alexandria, where they
read only Divinity.

We read not of any Universities among the Waldenses, Albigenses, and
Bothemians, for most of their Ministers were Tradesmen.

Christians in the Primitive times found Sophisters, and Philosophers, to be
the principal enemies of Christianity; upon this account they condemned all
Heathen learning they condemned Comedies and Tragedies, and other Poetical
writings, judging they did not conduce to solid knowledge. Herrald. animad. in
Arnob.

Tertullian judged that Schoolmasters professing Learning, were guilty of great
Idolatry, because they only explained Names and Genealogies, and fabulous Acts
of Heathen gods, Tertul. de Idolatr.

We see (says Gracian) that the Priests of the Lord, neglecting the Gospel and
the Prophets, they read Comedies, and Love Verses out of Bucolicks; they peruse
Virgil: and what is a sin of enforced necessity in Children, is become their
delight: Does he not seem to walk in Vanity, and Darkness of mind, who vexes
himself day and night in the Study of Logic, and charges his Memory with the
distinct knowledge of Verses.

Petrus Bellonius says, that there were many Christians in Creece, but few
Learned men among them; because they esteemed not of it as of necessity to
Christianity: In their Libraries were several Manuscripts of Divinity; but no
Historian, nor Philosopher, nor Poet, for these were Anethemized.

Neither the Greeks nor the Pickards, nor Waldenses in Bohemia, did value
Learning, Luther de institutione puerorum, fol. 444.

It was an Article exhibited against John Wicklif, Condemned at Constance, who
suffered as a Martyr; that Graduations and Doctorships in Universities and
Colleges, then in use, did conduce nothing to the Church of Christ, for Acts
and Monuments.

College Doctors have for their Arms, the Book with seven Seals; and why?
because they are skilled in the seven Liberal Arts, which is absurd, and
foolish, if not Blasphemous; as though the seven Liberal Arts, as Grammar, etc.
could open the Book with seven Seals, it is the Lamb only.

The Council of Carthage had an express Canon against the reading of Heathen
Authors, Conc Carth. Did. cap. 37.

Gregory though a Pope, burnt several Lascivious Authors, as Carden tells us,
de saplib. 2.

In like manner Gregory Nazianzen. the Father, suppressed several Greek
Authors, as Diphiles, Apollodonus, Philemon, Alexis, Sappho, etc.

Machivael testifies, that the first promoters of Christianity, commanded all
Poets and Historians, which treated of the Gentiles vain Conversation and
Worship to be burned, Match. Disp. lib. 2. cap. 5.

It Is written by one in the life of Jerome, that he was a great Student in
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, Caldean, and Syrian Tongues, and much in love with
Tullies Eloquence; being in a Fever he was brought in the Spirit to the
Judgment Seat of Christ; being examined, he said he was a Christian; the Judge
replied, thou seemst to be rather a Ciceronian then a Christian, for where thy
Treasure is, there is thy life also: On this occasion Jerome rejected Heathen
Books and Fables, unprofitable and vain Studies; writing to Pope Damasus, he
reproved Ecclesiastical persons, for neglecting Holy Scriptures, and spending
their time in Heathenish Books and Fables.

Men of unquestionable worth (says Dell) seeing the evil of spoiling
Philosophy, have spoken freely against Universities stained thereby: Wicklif
tells them, Castra Cainitica, that is, Cains Castles, Satan's Synagogues;
affirming that they were never instituted by Christ.

John Hus, or Otho Brunselsius, if he set out the Contents of the Chapter,
calls them Satrapas Antichristi, the Lieutenants of Antichrist.

Luther in his Book against Ambrosius Catharinus, says, that Universities are
an open gate of hell, and that therein the most choice Youth of Christian
people are prostituted, and cast into the open throat of Hell.

Further he says, that whosoever first instituted and confirmed Universities,
he was a Star fallen from Heaven to Earth, from the Gospel of Christ to humane
Learning.

Melancthon termed the Universities, houses of Lies; saying further, that
Students in Universities, are not people of the Gospel, nor yet of the Law, but
are the people of Aristotle's Morals.

Obj. These spoke against Popish Universities, and they are otherwise now. It Is
true (says Dell) the outward form of gross Popery is taken away from them, as
from the Nation; yet the Inner part of it remains as before, the self same
Statutes of the Universities remain in force, which were first given by Popish
Founders; again, the same Philosophy of Heathenism is instilled now into Youth,
as in the darkest days of Popery, the self same outward and Antichristian
Forms and Follies still remain as in the darkest o Popery, even unto their
Hoods, Caps, Scarlet Robes, Doctoral Rings, Gloves, their Doctoral Dinner and
Music.

To this day presently after their Divinity Acts, (said this Dell) they have
their Prevaricator; a notable Varlet, picked out of the Universities, who in
the presence of all the Heads, Students, Scholars, and the great resort of
Ministers and People at their Commencement; Abuses, Derides, and Jeers all
sorts of persons, of all Ages, Sexes, and Professions; such works of Levity
were never allowable among the Holy men of God. Christ said, have Salt in your
selves, Heavenly wisdom, with which those that are seasoned, cannot but savor,
and comprehend such things to be unsavory.

Justin Martyr lived about the year 150. He, (as it is related in his Dialogue
with Trypho) first joined himself to that Sect of Philosophers called Stoics,
after to the Peripatetic^s, after to the Pythagorean Sect, after to the
Platonists; being Converted, he wholly left his Philosophy, and Philosophical
apprehensions, and betook himself to the Scriptures.

Constantine the Emperor took care that the Scriptures might be taught to
people, judging it most meet that Christians should be instructed in the Faith
of Christ, and not in Heathenish Philosophy, Eusebius. lib. 4.

Through this Constantine, the Sufferings of the Church vanished; then
Christians grew more Carnal and secure, even in his days, and began to seek
after spoiling of Philosophy; yet in all Ages God had some witnesses against it.

Berno, who lived in the year 1008. Being furnished with all sorts of Learning,
said, that he for many years had rejected Poetical Fictions, Heathen
Historians, Worldly Learning, as dung, and was wholly minded to search out
Heavenly things, Berno in Epistola ad Magnifred.

Zuinglius in his Youth was exercised in all sorts of Learning: In the end he
entreated the Lord to vouchsafe him his own Light; saying, what he had Learned
before from Philosophers, procured him much trouble: and he rejected
Philosophy, and counted it as dung, Zuingl. de veritate Verbi.

Schools and Universities were at first corrupted, by declining the pure word
of the Gospel, and entertaining Philosophy and Heathen Authors, Dell.

Matthias Parisiensis a Bohemian by Nation, about the year 1580. wrote a Book
against Antichrist; wherein he affirms, that Antichrist had deceived and misled
all Universities and Colleges of the Learned, so that now, says he, they
teach no sound thing, neither give they true light unto Christians by their
Doctrine, Illeryc. Flair. Catal. Test. Veritat.

Antichrist (says John Hus) has drawn men aside from the wisdom of God
replenished with Salvation, and with the Holy Spirit, to the prudence and
wisdom of men, and of the Princes of this World, de Antichristo, cap. 30.

Martin Luther said, whosoever it was; whether Alexander of Hales, or Thomas
Aquine, who first instituted Universities; he was a Star fallen from Heaven to
Earth, Luther de Captiv. Babylon.

Abbas Joachim Calaber about the year 1230. in his Commentary on Jeremy speaks
to this purpose; that the first Angel mentioned, in Revelations the ninth,
opens the bottomless pit, and brings forth Philosophy into the Church; and out
of this smoke of this Doctrine proceeded Locusts, and these Locusts, said he,
are Schoolmen and Masters, who sometime use Flattery to deceive, sometime
Rigor to subvert the simple and unwary.

The Lord stirred up Julian (says he) to put down Heathen Learning in
Christian Schools; that it might appear, that as the true Christian Religion is
not helped by humane Learning, so neither is it hindered by the want of it.
Rainold in his Orations says the contrary of this Julian; but times and ends
being considered, they are easily reconciled.

The Queen of the South neglecting the Magi, Philosophers, Heathen Wisemen,
came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear Wisdom of Solomon; but Schools
and Universities leave Christ, greater then Solomon, in whom are all Treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, and seeks knowledge from the Heathen, as Aristotle,
Plato etc. Dell.

Socrates Scholasticus says, that for Christians thoroughly to imbibe the
Learning of the Heathen, it can no way advantage Christian Religion, for it is
not without danger, for Christians to be instructed in Heathen Learning,
because it teaches a plurality of gods, that there are many gods, lib. 3. cap.
14.

My advice is (says Luther) that Youth shun Philosophy and School Divinity, as
the death of the Soul, Tom. 2. fol. 434.

It is an Error to say, that a Divine is not made without Aristotle, rather a
Divine is not made unless that be done without Aristotle, Luth. Tom. 1. fol. 10.

I truly judge that our English man Wicklif was a wise man; who first of all,
as far as I know saw that Universities were Satan's Synagogues, Melancthon.

Seeing Christ Instituted not those Universities, (says Wicklif,) or
Colleges, it seems evident, that they, as Graduations in them, are vain
Heathenism brought in; in token of this, both Collegiates, and other Graduates
seek themselves. This Wicklif was Master of Baliol College in Oxford, Wicklif
in speculo Militantis Ecclesiae, cap. 26.

We must make inquiry of Schoolmasters and other professors of Learning,
teaching Heathen Gods, their Names, Genealogies, and Fables: Yea we need not
doubt, but that they are guilty of Idolatry of diverse sorts, Tertul de Idolatr.

A Christian Schoolmaster by his frequent reading of Poets, defilements of
Idols; he seems to allow of these things, Regaltius in Tertullianum.

Socrates drove out of the City lewd Demons, and Atchievers of Naughtiness,
handled by Poets, and he taught men to shun Homer, and other Poets; and he
exhorted them after the search of the living God, whom they were ignorant of,
Justini pro Christianis apologio prima.

Abstain from all Heathen Books, says Clemens Romanus, saying further; what is
wanting in the Law of God, that thou should apply thy mind unto Heathen Fables,
lib. 1. cap. 6.

What madness possesses the minds of men, that they should regard Jupiter; whom
they do not only know to be an ungodly man, Wicked, Profane, Whorish, a
patricid; but also sing to him on the Stage: The Ancients denied these things,
but now through a pretense of instructing Youth, the knowledge of these things
is so incorporated in tender and simple minds, as that the same can scarce by
any way or means be rid out of them, Recognit. Clement. lib. 10.

Augustine Bishop of Hippo, commanded Poetry to be driven out of the City of
God, so also did Ethnic Plato, out of his Commonwealth; Cicero forbad the
same to be entertained, Cor. Agrip. Devan. Scient.

Augustine called Heathen Poetry the Wine of Error, drunk of drunken Doctors.

Jerome called it the meat of Devils.

Logic is nothing but the Art of Contention and Darkness, whereby all other
Sciences are made more obsure, and more hard to be known, Cornel. Agrip. de
vanitate Scientiarum.

Almost all the rabble of Scholars busied in the inventions of Philosophers,
or Sophisters, seems to do no more, then learn to commit Error, and to make the
Truth more obscure, or to lose the same, Carnel. Agrip. de vanitate Scientiarum.

Queen Elizabeth enjoined, that Schoolmasters should accustom their Scholars,
reverently to learn such Sentences of Scriptures, as should be most expedient
to induce them to all godliness.

Tindal a Martyr said, whosoever ordained Universities, be it Alexander of
Hales, Thomas Aquinas, or any other, he was a Star fallen from Heaven to Earth;
for there are brought in (says he) Moral virtues for Faith, Opinions for
Truth, and said, they were a confused cloud, Tindal of the Revelation of
Antichrist.

CHAP. V. A memento to Schoolmasters and Tutors, to turn from Heathen, to the
godly and Christian education of Youth; as also of the rise of Christian
Schools, and how the same came to be corrupted.
NOw O Schoolmasters and instructers of Youth, in Schools and Colleges, let me
come nearer unto you, it is not Schools, but corrupting, spoiling and depraving
abuses therein managed, I speak against.

Cicero could say, we cannot any wise do the Commonwealth more service, then
by teaching and instructing Youth, provided (says I) it be in the knowledge of
the Lord, of his Creation, of savoury and necessary things and useful
accomplishments.

Let me tell you, I oppose not Teaching or Learning of Languages, as of Latin,
Greek, or Hebrew, etc. Knowing there may be a service therein, for the
management of Foreign Transactions, and Negotiations, and Correspondence with
other Nations; but it being that all savoury and sound knowledge relates
primarily to God, secondarily to the knowledge of the Creation, and of the
useful and necessary employments My Testimony is, that Children should be
instructed in the aforesaid, in the fear of the Lord, it being the door of
Heavenly wisdom.

How precious were it, if their Souls like Gideons Fleece, did drink up betime
the pearly dew of Divine Grace, and Heavenly virtue: It Is honorable (says
Ambrose) for Youth to be found in the fear of the living God; it is the Devil,
his Books, and his wisdom, which is earthly, sensual, and devilish, I speak
against, if in learning of Languages; useful, profitable, and necessary matter
were learned; a double advantage would accrue unto the learner, cannot
Languages be learned, except in the Devils Books and Arts?

I testify that all lascivious Poems, wanton Comedies, vain Tragedies,
frivolous Fables, enchanting Orations, spoiling Philosophy, Pagan Ethics,
Physics, and Metaphysics, now taught in Christian Schools, are the muddy
streams of the lying Spirit, and to be denied by serious Christians.

You may read that the Patriarchs before the Law, taught their Children and
Households, to walk in the ways of the Lord; they taught them not Heathenism,
nor Serpentine Inventions, Genesis 18.17, 19.

Under the Mosaical Despensation, the Prophets had Schools, wherein they taught
Youth the knowledge of the Lord, the Book of Moses and the Prophets then
extant; they taught no Heathenish learning, no Egyptian Philosophy, nor the
Smaragdine Table of Hermes Trismegistus, during the continuance of that
Ministration.

Oh that there were such an heart in Israel, (said the Lord) to fear me and to
keep all my Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with
their Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 5.29.

Solomon, wise in the wisdom of God, said, Train up a Child in the way he
should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. He
should go in the way of holiness, in which the ransomed of the Lord walk, with
songs of deliverance in their mouths: Children are to be trained up in the
Lords way; not in Heathenism, Serpentine inventions, Heathen Philosophy,
lascivious Comedies, and Tragedies, frivolous Fables; these things are in the
Devils way: I saw it in the glass of Immortality, in the lamp of Eternity, in
the sin-discovering dispensation of the Almighty, that such as teach these
things, they are Satan's Cooks, preparing a deadly dish; Satan's Butlers, making
Youth drunk with the Cup of Abomination, and Fornication, a rusty Channel,
through whom a stream of folly enters into those committed to their charge,
which nothing but a Divine rod can drive out, Prove. 22.15.

David the sweet singer of Israel enquired, saying, Wherewith shall a young man
cleanse his way? in taking heed thereto according to the word, Psalm. 119.9. He
commends young men to the word, the word of Faith, of Patience, of
Reconciliation, of Vivification, that they may be cleansed and purified
thereby; he commends them not to Paganism, Ethnic Education, spoiling
Philosophy.

The Lord (says the holy man of God) established a Testimony in Jacob, and
ordained a Law in Israel which he commanded our Fathers that they should teach
their Children, that Children which should be born, should stand up and declare
it to their Children, Psalm. 78.5, 6. The Testimony and Law of the Lord; was to
be propagated and taught to young and old in that Dispensation, the wisdom of
God which causes the face to shine, and fills the inward parts with joyful
Melody, not Serpentine wisdom, the wisdom of this World, the Dictates of the
Internal Dragon, drowning men in perdition.

Further, the Lord said, Learn not the way of the Heathen, Jeremiah 10.2. Now
all Heathen Philosophy, Ethics, Physics, and Metaphysics, Heathen Poets,
Comedies, Tragedies, and Fables, are the way of the Heathen, so not to be
learned; the language of the Serpent, to be rejected: when Israel was stained
with the Inventions of the Heathen, the Lord raised complaints against them,
Psalm. 106.

As the holy men of God in the Patriarchal and Mosaical dispensations, through
the shield of Faith fenced out the wisdom of the Flesh; So in the Evangelical
dispensation, the Disciples and Apostles of the Lamb, kept the same, and
labored in the virtue and strength of Divine abilities, committed to them, to
bring them to Christ, the Magazine, Repository, and storehouse of Heavenly
wisdom and knowledge.

Christ Jesus (says Hospinian de Origin Scholarum) instituted the first
Academy in the New Testament, and called twelve Disciples, whom he diligently
instructed in Heavenly Doctrine; he taught them no Heathen Philosophy, nor
Traditions of men.

After the Resurrection of Christ, the Apostles being well confirmed in his
School, and furnished with the gifts of the holy Spirit; went out into the
World according to Christ's command, and commended unto others what they had
learned of Christ, Hospinian, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go and teach all Nations, etc.
Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you; what, and
only what they received from Christ; that, and only that they were to teach
others; but no Heathen Philosophy, nor Traditions of men, dropped out of their
Mouths; but their living concerns was to bring them to learn of Christ the
wisdom of God, and to witness Salvation, and Eternal life through him.

Further, Paul said to Timothy, What things thou have heard of me in the
presence of many witnesses, the same deliver to faithful men, which shall be
able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.2. Hosp. But we read not that Timothy
taught Heathen Philosophy to any; which plainly demonstrates, that Timothy
received no such thing from Paul, though he had been brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel.

Further, Paul who had the mind of Christ, writing to Fathers in the behalf of
Children, said, And ye Fathers provoke not your Children to wrath, but bring
them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. Not in wanton
Poets, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, the ways of the Heathen.

The Primitive Bishop or Elders (says one) had tender regard unto the Children
of Christians, and taught them as well as the people the knowledge of God in
Christ, and rejected vain Philosophy, and Traditions of men, till the Mystery
of iniquity began to insinuate it self among them, by the means of humain
Learning. A School in Alexandria was instituted, not very long after the
Apostles days; for about the year 182. one Pantenus brought up among the
Heathen Stoic Philosophers, moderated that School, whereby the Doctrine of
Christ quickly spread over the face of the earth, exercise in Scriptures
flourished among them; at length he traveled as far as India, to confirm them
in the Faith of Christ, Eusebius. lib. 5. Hospinian, we read not that he bred them
up in Heathen Philosophy, Poets, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, etc.

Afterward (says this Hospinian) Monasteries were built through Europe, not
through an opinion of any merit, or through any Superstition; neither that they
should be Stews of lewd Fellows, but that they might be as Schools, in which
not Children only, but such as were grown up, might be instructed in Piety,
Religion, and Heavenly Doctrine, so to be capacitated for convincing,
converting, and building up of others in the saving knowledge of the Lord.

But as John foresaw a Star fall from Heaven unto the Earth, to whom the Key of
the bottomless pit should be given, and that a smoke should arise out of the
pit, Erroneous Doctrines, Humain Traditions, Heathen Learning, spoiling
Philosophy, whereby the Sun and the Air, should be darkened, the purity of the
Primitive Church, and of Schools, should be spoiled, Revel. 9. Now as this was
fulfilled, the Study of true Divinity (says this Hospinian) began by little
and little to grow cold, to be abolished, and altogether to vanish in these
Monasteries or Schools; then they invented new opinions concerning Merits,
Invocation of Saints, of the Popes Supremacy, of Purgatory, of
Transubstantiation; this School Divinity taking root and spreading, the minds
of the simple were entangled and ensnared; the Placeats or Opinions of the
Roman Popes, the Writings of Aristotle's Metaphysics had ingress into Schools,
thus Heavenly wisdom being turned from, the smoke of the pit, earthly wisdom,
Heathen Learning steamed into the Churchse and Schools, through which to this
day they are clouded, stained and corrupted.

But in reference to the Divinity-School of Alexandria; by little and little it
so degenerated and lost the Heavenly Savor; as that, there has not been
(says the Author of the Book called the Naked Truth) a greater plague to
Christian Religion then School Divinity, from which sprung forth, damnable
Heresies, overspreading all Christendom.

Whence did Paulus Samosetanus derive his venomous Heresies against the Son of
God? but from Plotinus, and his Philosophic Disputations in the School of
Alexandria.

Did not Arius, a Presbyter of the Church of Alexandria, imbibe or drink up his
blasphemy against the Divinity of Christ, out of the Divinity-School of
Alexandria, about the year 310. From him sprung the Arians, who overran all
Christendom.

Origin also, and after him Pelagius, derived their Pestilent Errors against
the grace of God, out of the same School.

Thus after the Apostles times, the wisdom from above being turned from, the
wisdom, that is from below, being entertained in Churches and Schools, the
Apostasy and fall from the Primitive order, life, and soundness in Doctrine and
Conversation, was brought forth.

If the pattern of the Primitive Church, rooted and grounded in Heavenly Wisdom,
Heavenly Philosophy, (says Theoph. Gale) had been observed, neither Origin,
nor Arius, nor Pelagius, nor Socinus, nor the Schoolmen, nor any of that
Company, had been overwhelmed in so many monstrous Errors.

Many of the Primitive Doctors and Fathers, (says the Author of the Book
called the Naked Truth) being converted from Heathenism, greatly skilled in
Natural Philosophy, Antiquity, History, Subtle Logic, or Sophistry, were
unwilling to abandom their long studied and beloved Sciences so called; so
translated them into Christianity, applying their School Terms, Distinctions,
Syllogisms, to Divine matters, so defaced Christian knowledge.

Thus through the steaming in of Heathenism, into Church and School, the pure,
sound, savoury Education of Youth in the knowledge of the Lord, was lost, and a
depriving, spoiling, corrupting education entered in, out of lewd Poems,
Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy, continued yet in Christendom.
I doubt not (faith our Country man Dell) but some men show more care and pains,
to teach a Colt to Pace and Amble, then they do to instruct their Children to
walk in the way of Gods Commandments.

Further, you Masters in Schools and Colleges, who instruct Youth in Profane
Authors, Arts and Sciences, as the Lamp of Eternity is lighted in you, you will
see you have been dancing after the Popes Pipe, yea after the Serpents Pipe,
the Author of Heathenism.

You may read, that in the time of the Saxon Heptarchie, Austine the Monk with
others, came from Rome into this Nation; and the Faith, and School-Education of
Papal Rome, was received by the Saxons, so that many Authors came into our
Schools, by and through them, which are yet continued.

Sigebert King of the East Angles, having learned in France the manner of their
Schools, with assistance of some Teachers out of Kent, instituted after the
same Discipline, the University of Cambridge, then first founded, about the
year 630. This Sigebert afterward changed his Royal Robe for a Hood.

About the year 668. by means of Theodore a learned Greekish Monk of Tarsus,
whom Pope Vitalian had ordained Bishop of Canterbury, the Greek and Latin
Tongue with other liberal Arts, as Arithmatick, Music, Astronomy, etc. began
first to flourish among the Saxons, says Milton.

By the Council of four Monks, Scholars of Bid, (says Dell) to wit, Rabanus,
Albinus, Claudius, and John Scotus, the University which had been translated
from Athens to Rome, was translated by Charles the great from Rome to Paris,
about the year 791.

Thus Cambridge was made an University by King Sigebert of the Romish Faith,
and the Lectures there were begun by four Monks; Friar Ode read Grammar,
Tericus read Aristotle's Logicks, Friar William read Tullies Rhetoric,
Dilsebert read Divinity to them on Sundays and Saints days so called.

About the year 895. King Alfred, through the persuasion of Monk Neotus, made
Oxford a public University, and appointed Maintenance for the Professors of
Learning there, as says Georg. Lilius in Chron. Britt.

After both these places of Literature were made or confirmed Universities in
Edward the first his time; by the Court of Rome, as Robert Remington affirms.

The very names of the Colleges discover their Founders, as Christ's College,
Jesus College, Immanual College, Trinity College, Corpus Christi, that is,
Christ's body College, and one in Oxford for the help of all dead Souls, and
for their rescue out of Purgatory, called All Souls College. Now how these
Collegians show forth the Spirit of Christ by their Fruits, and how their
deportment is to such as in faith and patience wait for the Kingdom of Christ,
and the righteousness thereof; or whether they be as the Lilie among the
Thorns, or as the Thorns, Heave another pen to discover.

Universities to gain the greater profit to themselves, give diverse Degrees and
Titles, as Bachelors of Arts, Masters of Arts, Bachelors of Divinity, Doctors
of Divinty; whereby (says Dell) they gain Honor, Reverence, and Reputation,
among all that are under the delusion of Antichrist; true it is, a principio
non it a fuit: 'Twas not so from the beginning, till the Star fell from Heaven
to Earth, and the smoke arose out of the Pit, darkening Sun and Air, these
things were not, in seven years in Universities; they are Masters of Art, as an
Apprentice is Master of his Trade, having served seven years: Papists made
their Ministers in these places, as the Protestants do now; the Philosophy
there taught now, is the same, that the Heathen Roman Emperors set up; they
caused to be taught, Grammar and Logic, and most of the seven Arts, as now.

The Vicechancellor admitting a Bachelor of Divinity to his Degree, uses these
words, We admit thee to preach all the Apostolical Epistles, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Spirit. But,

Admitting a Doctor of Divinity to his Degree, he says, We admit thee to
preach all the Sacred Scriptures, both of the Old, and of the New Testament, in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, cap. 20. de
Ceremoniis in gradibus conferendis, Zuinglius.

In the Primitive times, such as were called of the Lord, they waited for
Heavenly Abilities, to be capacitated to beget others into the life of
Righteousness, and to build them up in the most holy Faith; they did not
ambitioussy affect Titles out of the Godserving life; the Pharisees were guilty
of this, as formal Christians were: After the ingress, and inrode of Apostasy,
Zuinglius on Matthew. 23. said, Thou hear herest, that the Titles of Masters and
Doctors, are not of God, because Christ forbids this thing; and those Titles
that are not of God, nor of Christ, they are of Antichrist, so to be denied by
such as are branches of the true Vine. Further, Wilson in his Complete
Christian Dictionary, said, that ambitious seeking after Titles ought to be
eschewed.

Obj. In the Apostles days there were several Titles, as Evangelists, Apostles,
Prophets, Pastors, Doctors.

Ans. True it is, but these and the rest made use of, or mentioned in the New
Testament, were significant names, names of Office, befitting and expressing
the work they were called unto, and concerned in, as I might particularize; as
for Doctor, it might more properly be translated Teacher; so a name of Office,
Wicklif touching this thing, said, a name of Office differs much from the name
of a School Degree, brought in by the Heathen, Wicklif, in sermon domini in
Monte.

While the Primitive purity, Life, Power, Faith and Order was kept; he that
ministered, he was to do it, out of the ability which God gave, 1 Pet. 4.11. The
power of the Ministry was derived from the pure Spring of Divine ability, but
this ability being lost, Schools were erected, Heathen Learning was
entertained; where men are qualified now for the Ministry, this muddy lake,
open in Rome-Heathen, steamed into Apostatised Rome-Christian, drunk up in
Protestant Countries and Kingdoms now.

To draw to a Conclusion, you Teachers of Schools and Colleges, it being that
the specious Fabric of the World being finished, God looked upon every thing
that he had made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1.31. were it not more
God-like, more Christian-like, to instruct Youth in the knowledge of God, whom
to know is life Eternal, and in the knowledge of his works, being very good,
and useful and necessary things, then in the knowledge of Heathen Arts and
Sciences, brought in by the Serpent, which in every Age and Generation, the
holy men of God; yea and such as have lived in the midnight of Apostasy, with
some glimpses of Divine light in their Goshen, bare Testimony against, as the
forementioned Testimonies, with others that might have been subjoyned
sufficiently evidence.

David in the wisdom of God, said, The works of the Lord are wonderful, sought
out of all them that have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2. Such as have pleasure
in the Lord, cannot but have pleasure in his works: Now you that make
Heathenism your concern, you neither have pleasure in the Lord, nor in his
works, which are very good.

Further, David in the consideration of the Lord; broke out, saying, Lord, how
manifold are thy works, in wisdom thou have made them all, the earth is full of
thy riches, so is the great and wide Sea also, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts, Psalm. 104.24, 25. If man should live
the days of Mathuselah, who lived 969. years, yet is the Lord the Book of life,
and the Book of Creation, sufficient for his observation; I tell you in
downright Terms, the Lord made man to eye him and his Creation, but the
Serpent dislocating man, brought him to eye him, and his products, and all
Heathen Authors, Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy, Pagan
Ethics, Physics, and Metaphysics, are the products of the Serpent, so see
what you do, and where you are.

Rainold in his Orations, said, he is to be accounted a wise man, who knows
things that are profitable; not he that knows many things.

Now if Languages must be Learned, were it not more Christian like, that out of
Latin, etc. Books for that purpose provided, Children and Youth read the
Natures of Trees, Birds, Beasts, Fish, Serpents, Infects, Earths, Metals,
Salts, Stones, Vulgar and Precious, as also rules for Gardening, Agriculture,
Grazing of Cattle, Buildings, Navigation, Arithmatick, Geography, Chronology,
sound History, Medicine, knowledge in Law, Improvement of Lands, Surgery,
Traffic Government, ordering of Bees, Propagation of Plants, by Roots, Seeds,
Slips, Layers, Suckers, by Grafting, Inoculating, Imping, and of Geometry,
which one Proclus ascribes to to the Egyptians, who (the River Nilus now and
then overflowing, confounding and disordering their Landmarks) found out the
use and benefit of Geometry; by means of which, every one came to be settled in
their former and proper right: I say, were it not more Christian like, that
Children and Youth were instructed in the knowledge of the Lord, of his
Creation, and of necessary and useful things, whereby they might be qualified
for the help, benefit, and advantage of others, in their respective
Generations; then to be trained up in lascivious Poems, wanton Comedies,
foolish Tragedies, frivolous Fables, Heathen Orations, Pagan Philosophy, being
the Language of the old Serpent, and of the smoke which darkened Sun and Air,
after the Primitive times: Certainly (says Baptista Van Helmont in his Physic
refined) I could wish that the spring of Young Men, might not hereafter be
seasoned, with such trifles and lying Sophistry; they would learn in the seven
years, Arithmatick, Mathamaticks, Geography, With the Circumstances of Seas,
Rivers, Springs, Mountains; Provinces, Minerals, the property and custom of
Nations, Plants, living Creatures, etc.

So by way of recapitulation let me tell you, the knowledge of the Lord, of his
Creation, and of useful and necessary things, I own and desire propagation
thereof, seeing in measure man's state and concern, before Abbadon, Apollyon,
the destroyer prevailed, but the knowledge introduced by the old Serpent, his
Wisdom, his Poems, his Comedies, vain Tragedies, spoiling Philosophy, Heathen
Ethics, Physics, Metaphyficks, as depriving and corrupting Youth, I utterly
deny: Take the Testimony of the Reformer Martin Luther; who said,

It is a serious thing, a weighty thing, that Youth be instructed in a Godly,
and in a Christian manner.

Obj. Did not thou teach all usual School Authors, how come thou thus to
inveigh against them.

I Answer, true it is, I taught these things, being deeply plunged in the
waters of Marah, waters of bitterness; but I found no peace therein, but always
entering into the Chamber of seriousness, and commencing with the Lord in his
Despensation of Grace to me committed; I found the Mouth of Heaven open against
them, I saw them as the full and loathsome matter of an Ulcer, as the Waters of
Babylon, transporting into the region of the shadow of death; Spiritually a
dead Sea, in which no man can live unto God; and though I used them, after I
knew them to be evil, I had no peace therein, but waited for a deliverance,
desiring of the Lord I might not dye therein, in that heathenish muddy concern;
but he delivered me from the bewitchings of that Dalilah: In secret retirements
spiritual resignation, the abomination and enchantments of the aforesaid, is
more and more discovered; I have put off that Coat, and have entertained a
resolution, never more to put it on, I have washed my Feet, how shall I be
defiled therewith? You that are bound with the delights, bewitchings, or
profits of Heathenism, of the seven liberal Arts, or of any inventions of the
Serpent, as Samson was bound with seven green Wyths, which he broke as a thread
of Tow, when it touches the Fire. I tell you the Truth, as it is in Jesus, as
the light which shines in darkness, arises out of darkness, and clears your
understandings, and gives you the knowledge of the excellency of Heavenly
wisdom, and of the danger of the wisdom from below, in the luster of this, and
in Heavenly strength received in it; you will break asunder the seven green
Wyths of the bewitching delights of Heathenism, of Heathen learning, and bear
Testimony for an education of Youth in the knowledge of the Lord, and of the
Creation, and of necessary things, expedient for the accomplishment of Yougth
for lawful and honest service in their respective Generation, wherein, as the
Lord opens a door, and encouragement is given, I am ready to be serviceable;
being raised to that hope, that Babylon must fall; as in the particular, so
must he in the General, and her Merchants cease Trading in her proud waves, and
that the knowledge which is Heaven-bred, must cover the Earth, as Water covers
the Sea, and that the wisdom which is from below, must be scoured away, as
clouds before the wind; so be wise, and not pillars to support that putrified
structure which the Lord is risen to overturn; it is not learning, but unlawful
learning; not Schools, but abuses and corruptions thereinto crept, that this
Testimony is against, as the Intelligent Reader may understand.

CHAP. VI. Lastly, A few Queries soberly proposed to the Consideration of such
as Teach Heathen Authors in Christian Schools.
IF Adam and his posterity, had kept the state of Innocence, whether ever had
we had wanton Poets, and Poems, lascivious Comedies, feigned Tragedies,
frivolous Fables, spoiling Philosophy; yea or nay?

2. Whether it ought to be the concern of Schoolmasters as of Ministers, to
eradicate, or propagate, what was introduced, by the Author of the fall?

3. Whether to have Teachers in every Parish, vi and armis, as by force of
arms, to drive Heathenism into Youth, be the way to eradicate the same; yea or
nay?

4. Whether man was not created to eye his Creator and the Creation: yea or nay?

5. Whether the Serpent Prevalent over man, laid not the foundation of another
kingdom: yea or nay?

6. Whether wanton Poems, lascivious Comedies, and Tragedies, frivolous Fables,
spoiling Philosophy, taught in Schools, be not the Language of that Kingdom:
yea or nay?

7. Whether it be not a shame to Christian Schools and Colleges, that
Languages cannot, or are not taught, without being beholden to the Heathen: yea
or nay?

8. Whether wanton Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy,
were taught to Youth in the Primitive Church before the fall of the Star from
Heaven: yea or nay?

9. Whether wanton Poems, lascivious Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling
Philosophy, be not of the smoke that arose out of the bottomless pit, which
darkened the Sun and Air: yea or nay?

10. Whether wanton Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy, be
not of the foam of that Sea, which the beast arose out of: yea or nay?

11. Whether the Lord, and his works, which are wonderful, be not sufficient to
take up the short Age of man: yea or nay?

12. Whether wanton Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy, be
not of that knowledge, which puffs up, brought into the World, through the
breath of Satan's Bellows: yea or nay?

13. Whether wanton Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy,
were ever kindled in Christian Churches, before the old Serpent kindled them,
by the breath of his Bellows: yea or nay?

14. Whether lascivious Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling
Philosophy, be not of that wisdom, which is earthly, sensual and devilish: yea
or nay?

15. Seeing all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge are in Christ; are they
not deluded who seek the same at Aristotle's mouth, or any other Heathen?

16. Whether wanton Poems, Heathen Comedies, Tragedies, Fables, spoiling
Philosophy, and Idolatrous Traditions; be not dregs of the Cup of Abomination
and Fornication, wherewith Kindreds, Tongues and People, were, and are made
drunk: yea or nay?

17. Whether such as Teach these things in Schools and Colleges, be not the
old Serpents Cooks, preparing a deadly dish: yea or nay?

18. Whether such as Teach these Heathen things, be not eating the forbidden
Fruit: yea or nay?

19. Whether it be not Idolatry to Teach, that Mars is the god of War, Bacchus
the god of Wine, Apollo the god of wisdom: yea or nay?

20. Whether Teachers of a plurality of Gods, be not transgressors of the Law
of Moses, and of the Gospel: yea or nay?

21. Whether Godfathers and Godmothers so called, that vow that such and such
Children, shall forsake the Devil and all his works, pomps and vanities, yet
concern themselves for their Education in lascivious Poems, Comedies,
Tragedies, Fables, spoiling Philosophy, be Vow keepers or Vow breakers?

22. Whether such as are concerned in Teaching wanton Heathen Authors, are not
concerned to keep that alive, which Christ comes to destroy: yea or nay?

23. Whether such as Teach Heathenism in Schools or Colleges, do not labor to
keep the Sun and Air darkened by the smoke of the pit: yea or nay?

24. What is the great Star called Wormwood, which fell upon the Rivers and
Fountains of Waters; and what are the Waters made bitter whereof many dyed,
mentioned Revel. the 8th.

In Learning of Languages; wholesome, sound, savoury, useful and necessary
matter, being Learned, a double advantage (as was said before) accrues to the
Learner.

Pura decent puerum; faedis eatemperat aetas
A vitiis puerum nil nisi pura decent,
Virtutum dulces pueris infunde liquores
Et mores aetas promet adulta bonos.

T. L.


