THE REVELATION OF Revelations Particularly as an ESSAY Toward The Unsealing,
Opening and Discovering THE Seven Seals, the Seven Thunders, and the
New-Jerusalem State.

The which have not hitherto so far been brought forth to light (except by the
Spiritual Discerner) to any degree of Satisfaction, as to the understanding of
the grand Mystery.

Published by J. L. the Author of the Heavenly Cloud, made mention of,
particularly in the Preparatory Epistle to that late Theosophick Piece,
Entitled, Theologia Mystica. A Work never Extant before.

Rev. 5. 9. And they sang a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book,
and to open the Seals thereof. 1 Cor. 1. 10. For God has revealed them unto us
by his Spirit's for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of
God. London, Printed and Sold by A. Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch. Also by J. Lead at the Carpenters in
Bartholomew-Close; and at Booksellers in London and Westminster, 1683.

H. LION.

To the living Stones gathered, and to be gathered to Christ, the Foundation
Stone, (wherever hid, scattered and dispersed) who are elected in God for the
New-Jerusalem-Glory and Mount-Zion-Church; all Love, Grace, Peace and Joy be
multiplied from him who was, is, and is to come.
THe Establishment of the restored Sion-Church cannot be by Man or after Manly
Wisdom, but by the holy Spirit, which Christ our Prince and Savior has sent
in his own Name, to build upon the Foundation of the Father and the Son; a Rock
indeed, which remains steady and unshaken from Time to Eternity. And indeed,
who else is found sufficient for the gathering and building of these holy
Temple-Stones, that are to be fitly compacted together, to make up this
glorious Church, that may be presented all fair, without Spot, as becomes the
Spouse and Bride of the Lamb, which you will find the whole subject of the
following Revelations tend to, even to the bringing out of all that are found
in Lifeless Forms, into the very substantial Life and Ministration of the holy
Spirit, where the Increase and growing up is known, into that Body, in which
God will move and work all; for the which end all Prophecies that have been
from the foundation of the World, may have their fulfilling in this last Age;
for the which, good Assurance is given, from the fresh springing of the Word of
Wisdom, that may produce a sealed Commission, not only in Letter, but from the
feeling fiery-breath of the true Unction, which is the living Epistle, by which
alone I desire to be made known to you, and from thence do send pure
Love-greeting to them whose Ears are opened to hear and receive what the Spirit
of Truth has declared and unfolded in this little Volumn, which now is
presented to public view, contrary to the intent and purpose of the
subordinate Author hereof, who, as I was waiting in my continued course and
order, upon, the heavenly showring, and to feed, and be refreshed in this
all-fruitful and pleasant Pasture, being satisfied here to take my lengths and
breadths in all free conference with the Lord, the Spirit, whom I did well know
by his inward flaming Body, which at certain times did stir and rise, and then
I could hear and distinctly know the Voice of his Mouth, which came as a soft
melting Fire-breath, and said, Record what since October 1679. has been seen,
heard, tasted and felt, and shun not to declare it, for it has a peculiar
service on Gods behalf to do, though at present hid from thee; only observe and
be watchful, and I will certainly Follow this at the Heels. And thus you may
perceive under what constraint I am, and by whose Commission these deep and
mystical Revelations are now published, who fore-sees what effects they are to
have, and what Souls and Spirits are to be touched and enkindled from the same
burning-Ray, which will surely over-shadow the believing. And for the doubtful,
I have only this Caution, and that from the holy and just One. That henceforth
they cease from rash and uncircumcised Judgment, which does arise from the
rational Will and Spirit, and above all to put on the meek, simple and
child-like Spirit, and so cease to be injurious to their own Souls; for nothing
is more prejudicial to the growing and springing Life and Light, than to give
way to Incredulity, and an evil Suspicion raised from the dark Mists of Sense
and worldly Wisdom, which can never reach the deep things of the Spirit.
Therefore, if there be any force, power or authority in that Word of Life that
was from the beginning, and is now come to bear his own living Record in our
day; which Word and Spirit of Truth and Wisdom let none resist, but open the
everlasting Doors of their Souls and Minds for to take it in, and so you will
of the lively Hope partake, and bear the true and living Testimony with us,
That the Morning Star is risen for to lead us out of our selves, where nothing
but Darkness is, and where the fallen Spirits keep their strong Hold, binding
and putting out the Eyes of Sampson the Nazerite, the figure of the eternal
Spirit, which is in all the Sons of Adam, against which the grand Apollyon
hatcheth his treacherous Conspiracy; for he has great Indignation against us,
because such Love, Grace and Goodness has now abounded to us in Christ Jesus
our Lord, who is come to offer himself an effectual Salvation in all; there is
not a Door that he passes by, but that at one time or other he knocks at it,
and would find entrance in, to redeem and fetch out his own eternal Spirit,
from under Bondage, Death and Misery: But such are the subtle Wiles of that
Enemy of all Mankind, that he provides a Dalilah for some to steal and draw
away their Minds, and to seduce their more Noble part to that which is vile,
base and sensual. And then, another more subtle Bait he casts out for those who
are mortified, and have escaped those worldly Charms, and are come to a sober
and lawful use of the things of this Creation, and yet are held Captives
through the Multiplicity of Mortal Cares, Businesses and Concerns for the
outward Man, whereby they are so overcharged and weighed down in their Spirits,
that they cannot get up to shake off this carthly Dust, to walk with God in
Enoch's state, not observing that counsel of the Lord Christ, First to seek the
Kingdom of Heaven; and with all getting, to get Wisdom: The contrary to which
is most universally practiced, in making sure first of the Beasts Kingdom, and
the perishing Mamon of Unrighteousness; and then if the Kingdom of Heaven will
fall in and be added to them, it shall be welcome; but alas! this will not do,
Christ will not be served last. Wherefore, let not the Serpent beguile any who
seek the Pearl of Christ's Kingdom, but be wise, to avoid the choking Earth and
drowning Floods, and trust the Lord upon his Word, who will certainly make good
whatsoever we part with on his account, as there are some who can witness to
Gods Truth and Faithfulness in this matter.

A Third Caution is, for those who are got out of the Throng and Incombrance of
worldly Multiplicity, and have thrown off all those weights and sins which do
so easily beset them; they must know that all this will not fully secure them,
though it be a very good Groundwork, and greatly advantageous for the rearing
up of Gods perfect Tabernacle within them, for the following Glories to rest
upon it; but be advertised from the holy and true foresight of the Spirit of
Jesus, who knows the Dangers and Perils which attend this state also; which
though they have escaped the worldly Bondage and earthly Pollutions, yet
spiritual Defilements may remain, which are of more dangerous consequence than
briary Cares and worldly Distractions; for we have not only to do with a Birth
of Flesh and Blood, but there are internal Powers and Principalities of an
higher Descent, which join their Forces with the rational Spirit, which is the
more wise and sober part in man, and therefore most readily take upon them, to
prescribe Laws and Rules for the superior Soul to walk by, who finding it self
fallen, stands in great need of an Help and Guide, to bring it out of this
wretched Plunge and confused State, being convinced by Christ the true Life and
Light risen within, how the case stands with it, and thereby made eagerly
desirous to be set free from those inward usurping Powers, which come with all
deceiveableness to circumvent and keep the Soul in the strong hold of a
rational Sense, which must be quitted. And now the enlightened Soul feeling the
Malady so great and so painful, looks out diligently for a speedy Relief, and
is ready to embrace every Physician that does profess to be skillful in the
curing of Souls; whereupon comes in a second danger, of which ye will do well
to take heed, that is, to be cautioned from whom you receive Spiritual
Medicine, and whether they be such who have the true Balsom and Tincture of
Life to give forth from the very Unction of God resting in them; for no other
can be profitable unto you. All who have not this Sovereign White Stone, which
knows only how to pour out his Name as precious Ointment from Vessel to Vessel,
are Physicians of no value. Therefore while ye in the state of Minority are,
and have need to be under Pastors and Teachers, till you are come up to the
highest Form, ready prepared and qualified for the great Master Teacher to
undertake you, even the holy Spirit, who will perfect whatever was lacking in
other Teachings, and through other Mediums, for which direct your Eye, waiting
in a peactable Concord and silent Harmony, in your own Jerusalem within,
whereupon written is to be, Holiness to the Lord in every Property; and then
you will come to know the fresh Pasturesprings, which are only under the
breaking-up-Seal of the holy Unction, where no defiled foot has ever come to
raise the Dust, to discolor this golden Stream. This is the Ministration which
you will find the following Openings to point out and lead to; and though as
yet it be an unbeaten Path, which the Lord has by his Instrument now declared,
and made known in way of Vision and Prophecy; yet it is the true Day Star that
will give its own light and witness: Therefore let the Wonderers, Despisers and
Contemners take heed of making a Mock of that which the Alpha and Omega will
own and stand by, as his express Mind, who prohibited the publisher hereof from
altering the way and manner of the revealing of these great and deep things.
Therefore you have them unpollished, in their own naked Simplicity as they were
every day revealed and given forth, not in the dress of humane Wisdom; no, they
are of another descent, and the spiritual Ones in God will feel, know and taste
from what Treasure-House they proceed: And as for others, we do not heed their
Judgment, only shall be found in hearty Prayer for their true enlightening, that
all may come to know what the Love-Trumpet does now sound for, is it not that
both Earth and Sea may give up their long buried Dead, and that his cursed
Ground may no longer shut up the dead in Christ? Are not these Tidings brought
from the bright East? that the Lord is coming to bring forth himself, in a new
and mavelous. Resurrection, such as never was yet, and therefore has
beforehand, sent his holy Spirit of Prophecy, to proclaim what he intends to
fulfill, according to his ancient Purpose and Decree, and for this end has
showed what Gates are to open, to give entrance into this All-fruitful Sharon,
where the scattered love-Flock has been hunted and chased as panting Hearts,
shifting their Pastares, and yet not finding where to lie down and be at Rest,
which indeed can never be expected, till through the Seven Seals ye do come,
where the full glorious Resurrection Day ye shall witness, through all things
becoming New, where the holy Spirit, your Over-seer, and feeling Life, shall
ever and always be known for fixation in the Resurrection State? And though the
Saduces be numerous, that have no Faith ever to see this first Resurrection,
which is from the Body of Sin to be made free, giving witness hereunto first,
by being begotten alive from the Dead, according to the Scriptures; You has he
quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sin: Therefore it is not incredible
to us that God should raise the Dead, (see Romans 4, 5, and 7 Chapters) but each
one in Christ's Order; for allowance must be given for degrees; for as the
Death is gradually, so is also the Resurrection perfected through received Acts
of Power; a Similitude whereof we may see in the visible Sun, which does not
attain its Meridian height at his first rising; and so the Body of the
Resurrection does not at once, but by degrees, advance to its full height of
Luster and Glory; So as we must give way to Measures and Degrees in all sorts,
whether in dying or rising, all opening one Everlasting Mystery of Glory in the
Powers of our Lord Jesus, who will bring all, one after another up to Glory.
Now then let each one prove his own Work wrought in God, whether in Death,
Resurrection, Ascension or Glorification; for these are all linked together, As
you may see in the Book, entitled, The Heavenly Cloud, by the same Author.
though not attai ned or reached but in their own Order, still going on from
the first Step to the last; the way for the Attainment of which, you will find
described according to the measure of the Spirit, given for Manifestation of
these long hidden Truths that have lain under the Seals, where you will find
the Path that leads into the Death, and the loosing therefrom, through the
seventh Seal, opening for the Resurrection, which the seven Thunders do plainly
express, and so proceed on to the ascending Reign in Christ's Kingdom, which is
great and magnificent, giving its own signal Demonstration, by opening the
divine Magia, whereby the holy Spirit comes to act in his own place, viz. in
the ascended Body of the Resurrection, from thence to go forth and work his
Wonders, such as yet were never wrought, which will be the Introduction into
the fixed Glorification, for to be Co-centred in the ascended triumphant
Spirit, the Glory of which is attributed to the Lamb of God, of whom it is
said, That he is worthy to receive Blessing, Wisdom, Power, Strength and Glory,
for the effecting of so full and perfect a Redemption; all which shall be
assigned to the glorified in Christ, who in the Royal unchangeable Priesthood
shall be confirmed, as going up from Glory to Glory, till swallowed up in
Glory, Power, Might and Excellency, the manner of which is defined as the Close
of all that has been treated of in this Book, as the finishing Testimony which
at present was given me from the Lord of Glory. Therefore so receive them in
Faith and Love, for this is the day of Gods Revelation, who sends forth this as
a foregoing Harbinger, who according to his Promise will soon follow to fulfill
all the rich and precious Things prophested herein; and therefore calls upon
his scattered Stones to get together, to Harmonize in the Eternal Light, Love
and Purity, provoking each other to go on forward in this fourfold Process of
our Lord Jesus, arising out of this long Night of Slumber; for the Day is
broken, and the Morning Star may be discerned. Consider to what a Life of Glory
and Immortality ye are called, it is great and wonderful indeed; yet know, the
Eastgate now will open to those that earnestly knock thereat; so that there is
a certain possibility to get up unto all these Degrees of Glory: Wherefore let
none doubt, but be girded with the Omnipotency of Faith, which will rid the way
swiftly, leaving all unbelieving Loyterers behind. A Race we have to run, some
may not be yet set out, others newly engaged, and others a good way in the
Race; but blessed are they who shall at the Price first come, that so they may
return to strengthen, and encourage their Companions in the Race, who may see
the Rosie-Garland of Victory in their Hands, and the Diadem of precious Stones,
as the Price which they have won, which does well deserve to be run hard for,
not delaying so much time as to look behind, being once set out, but so run
that we may obtain. But it may be questioned, Who, and where those are which
are so resolute and strong in Spirit, as to hold out to the end of the Race?
For this, none can be found indeed, but such as are arisen with Christ from the
dead, he is and must become the Racer in us; for all other Legs we run with
will soon tire and be weary; therefore set not out till Christ your Life and
Strength be risen, as a Giant refreshed, to run out this conquering Race, where
ye may come to lie down under the encompassing Glory, as in an everlasting
pleasant Shade, possessing all those high and wonderful Immunities, Glories,
Crowns, Joys, Gifts, Powers in the Holy Spirit, who will magnify his Office in
acting and working all in the Body of the Resurrection, concerning which I
shall no further enlarge, but refer you to what is treated of in the former,
and this the following Revelations. I shall now cease, and shut up all in that
springing Fountain, from whence this bundle of Revelations did proceed, having
a good Hope and certain Persuasion, that the Lord will be with his own
Testimony in a light Ray, spreading over all the Darkness of those Minds that
shall attend and receive without Prejudice what is written, though to some it
may appear Obtruse, Deep and Mystical, and hard to be understood, yet to
others, who are come under the teaching of the same Unction, it will appear
plain, and easily apprehended, and that the Spirit will bear record with us, of
what was, and is, and yet is to come. Now the things yet to come, is that
Powerful and Princely Reign unto Glorification, which has long been prophesied
of, and now again with an Affirmation, that the Lord will suddenly be upon us,
to take unto him his Kingdom, which nothing of the Beasts Reign shall mingle.
Oh! Holy, Precious and Elect, let us not Sleep, but set our Morning-Watch, for
Tidings are come to make all things ready for him: Let it appear who the Wise
Virgins are, by their making themselves ready to meet the Lord, not only for a
Visit or Salvation, but for an Eternal Marriage, and an un-interrupted Nuptial
Fruition, and so to be ever with the Lord, or rather the Lord to be ever with
us, as his dear Bride, perfectly redeemed from the Earth, as it becomes her
thus Holy and Blameless to be found; for the everlasting Priestly Celebration
and Holy Ministration, in no other Temple but what is called God and the Lamb
where the only true Spiritual Worshippers are found, and from whence our
Praise-Offerings will spring, as from the bright Sphere of Glory, that swallows
up Darkness, Death, Sorrow, Contempt, and the Curse in a full and total
Victory; for the Hopes of which, and first budding Fruits now shall conclude
with high Acclamation, Glory, Salvation and Praise to God and the Lamb, that
comes to Reign evermore; even so and Amen.

Known to be Yours, in the unsealed Book of Life, which none can shut again, J.
Lead and E. H. follows.

The Introduction.
IT was in my purpose to have suspended, as yet, any further manifestation of
the Revelation that still followed me, and would have hid the golden Talent
only for an increase in its own invisible Ground, from whence it opened at
first, till such time is it might come forth in the multiplying Number of the
holy Spirit, to seal up the glory of all that had gone before in Vision and
Prophecy; but Christ, the bright Banner of Glory stood before me, and said,
Keep in Record the Journal of the now raised Life, according to the Profession
then art going on in; and know that what has and it further to be revealed,
shall be sealed with a mighty Witness, conquering all Opposition, wherever it
shall rise: Wherefore, go on, and forbear not writing; for it shall be as the
unclouding of the present dark Day, and many shall come in at the brightness of
its rising, though it now seems to be under an Eclipse.

Thus was I afresh enkindled from the All-pierciug Word of my Lord, who knows
for what end he moves me horeunto, tho I still objected against it, as
foreseeing no Passage for such high Mysteries, nor likelihood of their
Reception in that Love which is void of censuring, and therefore would rather
have hid these heavenly things in their own Center. But seeing it has pleased
the Lord to overruled my Resolution, I shall be obedient to his Word, as
believing it may extend to the benefit of some who are known to himself, who
will not difesteem the preciousness of the Spirit for the Vessels sake;
wherefore, I shall no longer be backward to reveal what is of great weight and
importance, as being well assured, that the Lord Jesus will go along with me,
till I have fulfilled the Declaration of the whole Mystery.

I feel the divine Agent, that works mightily in holy separated Souls and
Minds, driving on to make way for what is yet behind in reference to the
manifestation of that Kingdom, which now the Lord is about to restore in his
Saints; and therefore gives forth fresh and lively Ideas of it, that pure Minds
may be excited to look for its coming in their New Earth and Heavens, which are
to be garnished as with Purity, so with Dominion and Power, even the rising
Body of the holy Spirit, which must restore all things which have been in
Confusion. Now what goes before to make ready for this, has been already set
down by the Golden Pen, which is dipped in the springing Unction, to which more
considerable Meaning the Book of the Heavenly Cloud
Revelations are added by him, who says, He is come to make all things New,
being ready to give forth the Promise of the Father in the Ministration of the
everlasting Gospel. I say, the faithful Witness, and Ground of all Mysteries,
minded me of his Charge to his Disciples, when he was to disappear to the
outward, viz. That they should wait at Jerusalem, the holy City, in Harmony,
Concord and Oneness of Mind, with great confidence and love to Acts 1. 4.
each other. A deeper search the holy one does make in them, who in this last
Age are waiting to be endowed with the full acting Body of the Deity, which
will be manifested in a different manner, than in the days of the Apostles,
that being by way of Gift, coming down as a Shower; but now those who shall be
endowed with this signal Blessing, must have it by way of a Birth in them. The
Apostles were to wait at Jerusalem, which was a figure of the Principle of
Light, where all Natures and Properties are harmoniz'd to an equal Temperature,
all Faculties are spiritualized and purged from their Drossiness, and
reconciled to each other in a sweet Love-accord. It is plainly showed me, that
the holy Spirit will have his Birth in a peaceable Habitation, where the
conquering Life of Jesus, by his dying and rising, has first made its way by
reconciling the Properties of Nature, and bringing them to a divine Harmony, by
which, renewing Nature into a soft and sweet Mildness, causing all
Contrarieties of Spirit to cease, by subduing it to the Light-Principle.
Wherefore it is but in vain to expect the Establishment of that Kingdom, which
the Birth of the holy Spirit will bring to us, till this through Work be
wrought, that we may come to Unity in our selves, and with one another, which
is a very high Perfection. And truly, from hence I have been informed where the
Birth of Power has stuck, and why so many Faculties, fruitless Births, have
been brought forth: Wherefore, let not our bribed Senses, or the Spirit of
Unbelief, so far delude us, to make us believe, that the holy Spirit will open
its Birth, but according to what has been by the Lord himself revealed.

But it may be objected, That if the Terms be so hard, it looks as an
Impossibility to obtain it, because nothing of the evil Qualities and striving
Properties must remain, which are not so quite allayed in any, but may be
stirred up again into Motion: Pray therefore let us know what Provision has
been revealed against this, that it may beg it a Hope and Belief in those who
are yet in the Division and Strife, the Good warring against the Evil, and the
Evil against the Good, being divided betwixt the Night and the Day, as the
greatest Saints are.

For Answer to this Objection; the Spirit of the Lord has searched and found
out a Cure, which will bring the broken and divided Estate of the first
Adamical Birth into Unity, Harmony and pure Liberty; I shall, as I am able,
bring it sorth in the same Model it was given to me, for a true seeing Glass,
by which I was directed to fathom the deepest Ground of my eternal Soul, and to
find out its true essential Properties, as they were derived from the unmixed
Purity of the one pure Element. This pure eternal living Soul, thus breathed by
God, into an Angelical Image, and formed into an Organical Body from the one
pure Element, all which was to be seen in the first Paradisiacal Man: But when
Lucifer prevailed by darting in his hellish Fire, it left such a Sting, which
has poisoned all the inward Essences of of the very Immortal part; and
therefore the Wound is found so deep that no Medicine can be found to reach it;
but Christ, the in-breathed Word, who only can reach the Soul's original
Ground; and being the Creating Fiat can alone make all Nowagain, Ephef. 1. 10.
according to the highest Uniformity of the express Deity. And this comes
first to be known in a fiery Ray of Loue-Light; that discovers where the Root
of sin does lie; and so when the Spirit of the Soul comes, by the Word of Life,
to understand its own Original and by what means it has been corrupted and
captivated, it is made full-willing and eager to strike in with that Christ,
which rises from the Centre-Light in its own Soul, to redeem and reconcile all
to himself, that was alienated from him in the Birth of Strife. Thus Christin
us, is our Peace indeed, who has made of both, and all one New Creature,
having abolished the Law of Enmity, blotting and rcoting out sin, by the same
degrees as his own righteous Nature enters in, which restores all peaceable
Concord. So that the Spirit, who is made Partaker of this Gift of God, has put
on Royal Liberty, and being clothed with Christ's essential Body, finds it self
unloaded of all sinful weights, and moves swifty in the Circle of Light, and
runs its Races through the unknown Spaces and Christaline Spheres, where other
Worlds do appear with all their glorious Objects, Ranks and Orders, which must
needs make this World look base and vile to a Soul that is come naked and free
out of the original Womb, as begotten again from the dead, rising in a perfect
clarified Body of Light, and being quite recovered from that desperate lapsed
state that would have sunk the Soul into everlasting Death. Thus you see by
what means the disagreeing Properties of Nature may come to be harmoniz'd as in
the beginning: God must become Man, and by his consuming fiery Property destroy
original Sin, which is the first Engine that moves the Wheel of Strife and
Division in the Soul, which Fire is Gods choice Instrument, when set and tuned
by his hand, who gave it a Being out of Eternal Nature, into which it must be
dissolved again, that it may be a meet Instrument for the holy Spirit to play
such Tunes and Triumphant Sounds, and teach such new Lessons as have not
hitherto been understood. All which shall be made good when the Soul shall be
brought forth as a well tuned Instrument, new strung and qualified, in the
deified man, where the holy Spirit moves every Property, according to the
central Wheel, in its new begotten Form, which is set free to run its Races in
the Sphere of Light, where weak Mortality, with its sinful Essences are outrun
and left behind in the Fall. Let not this seem strange or impossible; for in
the Deep a Mean is found for the bringing forth of this long buried Seed, which
has long waited to arise in its original Body of essential Perfection and
harmoniz'd Powers, that it may appear that God is come to move and show himself
in the Covenant of his Love, according to the Preordination, in the heart of
Christ; for by him we do obtain this Resurrection, in order to all the
following Glories, which the holy Spirit shall bring with him; even so Anon.

This Instruction being so immediately from the Lord, carried great weight with
it, and made me resolve to wait upon the working Power in my inward Deep, for
the reducing of every divided Property to Unity; for I was fully convinced that
this Uniformity must be the Temple in which the holy Spirit will appear for the
bringing of all working Powers to a heavenly Consort and Agreement: I sat upon
this day by day, and as I found great drivings thereunto from the South Wind of
Heaven, so strong Storms were raised from the North, with roaring Seas that
lifted up their Waves to scatter and make void this holy Enterprise, in
injecting diverse Temptations that such a thing as this could not hold or abide,
but would have its Overturnings and Changes, for that nothing less than a God
can always be in an equal Temperature, and that this was rather the full effect
of the holy Spirits coming, than a Preparation for it. Thus was I puzzled and
tossed to and fro in my Mind, as if I were put upon that which could never be
brought about, or carried through to the desired End. But the Lords Word was
mighty and powerful to press me forward to this sweet and well ordered
Composure of Mind, to abide in an equal Temperature, notwithstanding all that
might come in to discourage me, whether from those visible things or from the
dark Principality, which is much more hurtful, in regard that they, as Spirits
can shoot in their Darts before we are aware; so that this bath been my
watchful Exercise for some days, to resist what would have done Violence to
that, which in Concord and Peace, would ever unshaken remain.

The holy One, according to his friendly way and manner of Visitation, did
after all this, exceedingly comfort and strengthen me to maintain his right of
Conquest, over all that which yet is left to vex and awaken Anxiousness, or any
Fear or Turmoile in the Soul. My Jesus thus spoke, Consider and know thou art
to hold fast what I have purchased by the fore-passed Death in thee, as having
assumed that Body of Sin to offer it up for a consuming Sacrifice, once for
all, as was showed in the Type of the visible Body, which is now done again in
the invisible. So that you are to reckon and account your sins virtually done
away; they can claim no Law either to reign Rom 6. 14.
or condemn: Look upon all Motions of this kind to be at the check of the
Spirit, who has again quickened the dead, and will no more give way to that
which came in to flesh for to destroy; And therefore let none pretend a
necessity of continuing in that which has brought in Confusion and
Disagreement, seeing a Redeeming Spirit is come down to renew, and gather in
the lost again to the divine Being, from whence they did proceed at first,
pure as God is pure; to which degree of Perfection that we may be restored
again, is the end of Christ's Mediatory Office, not only without, but within us,
where the Body of Sin has been yielded up for an Offering. This confirming
Word, Christ the Lord, who is arising, left with me, for them who have been in
the Death with him, that we henceforth may know our selves in him to be
acquitted and released from all Claims, which the evil Powers and Properties
can make for upholding that Kingdom where the Beasts Throne is, which consists
of envy, wrath and strife, from all which, by an eternal Decree of the Lord
Jehovah, you are set free, and brought into the Harmony of that Kingdom, where
the springing Joy; from the Peace of God does run as a River that has its
Division through all Properties, for to bring them to the heavenly Unity,
whereby the Creature is set free from the Bondage of Sin, and a wafaring Life,
according to the Pattern seen in the Mount of Vision, to which my Spirit has
been often taken up to see the wonderful Platform of the New-Jerusalem.

The Vision of the New-Jerusalem.
The Lord took me away from my mortal part, and showed me Rev. 11 10.
the Situation of this great Glory, and said, Behold, and see the Pattern of
the heavenly Houses and Mansions, which make up the New-Jerusalem, where the
Glory of the One only God does fill all with the essential Light and Splendour
of his divine goodness. I shall, as I am able, describe what I did see in the
Heavens of this Mother-City (for so it was named to me) who is to bring forth
her first and freeborn to replenish the New Earth and Heavens. It appeared as
a City sounded upon one square Stone, whose Dimensions were very large; It was
all paved with light flaming Colors, appearing like so many various sparkling
Stones, inlaid on the great Foundation Stone, which gave forth a luster, as if
so many bright Suns had been there: Toward the Verge or outside of this
square Stone were seen many Seraphick Bodies, wreathing Arm in Arm, and several
rows of various spiritual Forms, of different Ranks and Stature: These Rews
appeared like the Stories of a building, which were carried up higher and
higher in a square Figure, till it was wonderful high; and upon the Heads of
the most inward glorified Bodies a Covering was spread by one more Diaphanous,
and of greater splendour than all the rest; the Height of his Person was higher
by the head then all the other, who called to me, out of this most glorious
Building, To take good heed of all I had seen, for it had a further meaning,
which I was to have revealed, when driven by the Spirit into the light Mystery,
where all deep things do open. Oh my dear Lord! be thou an All-springing
Testimony within, and from this New-Jerusalem.

My Spirit being drawn out for a further Enquiry concerning this New-Jerusalem
state, what the Appearance of it to us did signify for this present time? the
Foundation Stone thereof gave forth this Word, That such a City the mighty
Cyrus would himself be the Founder of, upon the visible Stage of this World,
although there be little appearance of it, as yet, because the Elect Stones are
at present lying amongst the Rubbish of Confusion, who in due time are to be
linked together, to make up a strong City of Defense, through the Gates of
which no unclean Vessel shall pass, nor whatsoever is Lame or Blemished,
according as was seen in the Pattern. This the Lord will effect by his Might
and Spirit, and establish this City on Mount-Zion, at which the whole World
shall Tremble.

Whilst the Lord was communing with me about this heavenly City, I saw it
descend and cover the whole Earth; and all those who were not prepared to
enter, and who could claim no Birthright freedom in this Mother-City, did flee
away by Multitudes, Heaps upon Heaps, to hide themselves from the bright
Splendour of the divine Body, with the anointed head in the midst of it. The
Glory was so great, that we can only give an Eclipsed account of what was seen.
But as the descent of this Magnificence did terrify, and cause above three
parts of the World to flee away, as having an irreconcilable Enmity to Spirits
and Bodies of such Purity; so on the other hand, I saw a Numerous Company
gathered to it, from all Quarters; the Trumpet-shout of Jerusalems great King
calling them in from all parts, they were all the firstborn of this
Mother-City, who well knows her own, calling them by that Name which is
impressed upon them in flaming Characters of Love. Multitudes of this kind
encompassed the holy City, but few were admitted to the Seraphick wreathe, even
those only who had put on the glorified Body. Whereupon I asked, Why those who
were called, and had the Name of the heavenly City upon them, were not received
in? And the Lord said, That those who were taken into the Glory, had finished
their inward Transformation, to the utmost Perfection, waiting only for the
Consumation of the Nuptial Glory; but that the rest, though far gone in true
Regeneration, could not be admitted until their Redemption were perfectly
wrought out, to the end that no flaw may be found in the Stones that are to
constitute this divine Building; but as any shall arrive to this degree of
Perfection, so this City shall descend and take them in.

Hereupon followed a further discovery, to let me know the Royal Freedom of the
spiritual Seed proceeding from the New-Jerusalem, as the Virgin Bride of God,
who though come down into this visible Birth of Time, yet was before all Time
in the Substantiality of spiritual Essence, by whom the renewed fruitfulness of
this free Birth shall in this last Age of the World be made manifest; which was
the joyful Message which sounded in my Heavens, with what is further to be
declared for our Consolation. It was thus laid before me, That the Jerusalem
from above has been these many Ages traveling to bring forth her first and
freeborn, according to that divine Likeness, whose Descent is not to be found
within the verge of Time. For here the Gate of Gods deep has been opened to
let us in to see the wonderful Mystery that was foreordained to work through
all the Vicissitudes of Time since the first Creation. Now then let us consider
what the first Plant of Paradise was, from whence we are all sprung; it was but
a flower from the Earth; for out of the Dust of the Earth the Lord God created
man, and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, and man became a living
Soul; which was pure, as immediately proceeding from the most Holy. But how
soon did this Glory fade and return to Earth again; whereas if he had kept his
first Estate, he would have been advanced to higher degrees of Perfection, and
become fruitful in Gods Virgin offspring. All which Design for a limited time
was overturned, but the Foundation of Gods Election stood so firm in the
Essentiality of the out-breathed Word (which was the Light of Adam's Life in
the Center of Immortality) that the same Word will restore all again, according
to the first gracious Intent of the wise Creator, whose purposed Grace shall
renew the face of all things that have been marred in the first Adamiral Image.
But though so desperate a Fall has overtaken the whole Creation, yet is it but
as the fading or cropping of a flower, whose eternal Root remaining, will put
forth and spring a-fresh in a more glorious Beauty and Figure, than the first
ever had. For though by one man's Disobedience all are made subject to Death and
Rom 5. 12
the Curse (which is the bruising of the Heel) yet the Head-Life Gen 3 5.
remains, which will recover, raise and make all sound again; for in this
promised seed the faded Life will be quickened, according to the Election of
Him, who will hereby more Eminently make known the Riches of his Grace and
Glory, in his Vessels prepared thereunto. For though there be in all men an
holy seed remaining whereby they are in a possibility of recovery; yet because
all have not an Heart to improve this Talent, it continues an unprofitable dead
Seed to many, notwithstanding all are called, To take of the Water of Life
freely, that by its quickening Virtue Isa. 55. v. 1.
the buried Seed may be raised to a new Life, in a Body of its own kind, which
Seed through many Deaths does renew its never fading Flower of Life for a
higher degree of Glory in the New Jerusalem state of fixation. Now from what
has been said, we are informed, that there is an Elect Number which is to make
up the New Jerusalem-Bride, here upon Earth, who shall finish the Mystery of
the Seventh Seal, and be all instated in that Kingdom which the Alpha and Omega
has designed for his Virgin-Bride, before Paradise or this World were: And
that I might know that this design and unchangeable purpose of God is still
going on, there was showed me a clear White Stone, in which were engraven
numberless Names, all ordained to make up the Glory of this City of God, which
shall be the Praise and Admiration of the Heavens, and a dread and amazement to
the Earth; for the Revelation of it will bring a Woe upon them, who have no part
in it. This the Lord himself did signify, saying, Henceforth know your
Free-Birth, Name and Place in this City, and be not fearful or unbelieving, but
travel on in the assured Hope, that shall not be made ashamed; for the
everlasting Father has prepared for you this City, of which I am the Builder
in you.

The hand of the Lord was strong upon me still, and took me up into an high and
lofty Place, where I saw a burning Furnace, which appeared all Blew like the
airy Clouds, and the Lord walking in it to and fro, who said, See whether thou
can make thy Pass to me, and abide in this pure everlasting burning Region,
which is the Spirits purging Fire, which will devour whatsoever is not of the
same Essentiality with me. Upon which I replied, Ah! my Lord, I am free to make
my Pass to thee, but how shall I get rid of this Body? I would fain exist in
that pure Essence with thee, where nothing of this lump of Earth might prevent
my constant Walks in those high Places with thee, whose presence will make
these outward Elements to flee away from the superior Spirit. The Holy One
replied, Be not troubled at thy Binding Mortality, for I will descend in this
fiery Cloud into thee as a baptizing Fire, which shall take away the gross
Impurities of the Senses, that thou may be clarified, in order to thy
Codeification, which will manifest the out-spreading Name of thy Emmanuel,
whereby thou shall receive Power to ascend through Fire and Air, and continue
that all-desireable freedom of Communion with the holy Trinity: And though none
in a Body of Flesh and Six can come up to me, yet Grace, Pity and Love do move
to descend in the Spirits flaming Cloud to make the way free, that such may
have a Pass, who account no Place their Rest or Dwelling besides me: Wherefore
pursue and watch to drink in of this pure Spirit of Burning, which will clear
and take out of the way whatsoever has kept from ascending into the Holy City.
Whilst these Words were in spoken from the Anointing, I felt a sensible rising
and spreading over all my Heart, Head and Body, as if all were covered with a
Cloud of Sun-heat, giving out light, by which I could so what was inwardly
done, as well as feel it. Then it was further spoke in me, that I should take
notice that this was also the bright Garment of the Sun. Such is the Nature of
this secret flaming Matter, that it seeds, strengthens and clarifies a naked
Spirit all at once. Then was I inquisitive to know the Substance or Ground of
it, but it was replied; Meddle thou not with that, only receive it passively,
and Cooperate with it when it arises, and then walk with, and draw in the
feeding Fire and Air, and when it rests in its own place, rest thou with it,
and be assured it will not leave thee, till it have concentred thee in the
Deity.

This light flaming Cloud encompassing me, gave this further Revelation, to
show what the Holy One is about to do, in order to the laying of the Foundation
of this strong City, in which the mighty God will pitch his Tabernacle, and
settle his Rest forever. Many Types, Images and foregoing Figures of this
Jerusalem have been given through the several Ages of the World, but the
Heavenly Thing it self has not been brought forth, as no with will be, because
the set time approaches: For the trying burning Furnace is kindled, and the
Wind of the Almighty forcibly blows up the Flames thereof in the center of the
Soul of every one, who are the Elect Members of this Holy Corporation. Now is
the time for the Spirit of Burning and Judgment to prepare each Stone, which is
designed for this super-excellent Glory: No connterfeit Gold, or reprobate
Silver can pass through this Furnace, which is ordained to prove whatsoever
comes to be built on this Foundation. The mighty King sends forth his Decrees
to fulfill the ancient Prophecies, concerning the return of the long Captivity
of these, who belong to this Mother-City, that they may know their original
freedom, and no longer abide as Captive-Exiles among the Babylonians in
Confusion and Reproach: And what sign will the Lord give for this, but by
loosing the last Seal, under which does lie the rich Bank and vast Treasury of
Wisdom, Spirit and Power, which shall so vigorously carry on this
New-Jerusalem-Building, that all the Powers which the Dragon and Beast can
raise by their Agents, visible and invisible, shall but turn to their Shame and
Confusion, when the Lamb arises to open the Seventh Seal, under which the most
precious things, even that fine transparent Matter lies hid, to be manifested
in due time, for the beautifying of this divine Building.

But here an Objection may arise, and question this revealed Grace and
proclaimed Liberty to the Children of the Captivity, who are now called to sit
upon this heavenly Building, which is this; That the time is not yet, and that
the last Seal is not so near breaking open; and who is it that can give a Sign
for a Testimony that this Decree is already gone forth?

To all which the Spirit of Truth gives this Answer, (who best knows what he
has wrought, in order hereunto, in the Central Deep of some Elect Vessels, who
are not to make any outcry until the Mystery be fully finished in them) know
that the time is at hand; wherefore let none look afar off, or run out from
themselves, and neglect their own Vintage at home, but regard how near the
Grape is to ripeness, which contains the Wine that is to be drunk at the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, who charges it as a great oversight upon those
that are Regenerate, that they have put this Day afar off, not discerning the
Lords Body, who is quickened from the dead in them, who are passed from Death
with him, and so are put in Subordinate Commission with the Lamb to break open
all those Seals, which shall make way for the descent of the Holy City. For
what in John's Revelation is mentioned concerning these things, is very obscure
and mystical, and there is no fathoming of it to the utmost, until the Lord
himself come with the Plummet-Line of the Holy Spirit to measure out the
meaning. Though there are some who have been favored with this Light of
Revelation, by means of which they understand what lies hid under those
Allegorical Expressions, and through the opening of the Seals have discovered
those rich Jewels, which were concealed under that dark Covert; the opening of
which Seals I shall set down in order, according as it was acted in my own
particular, through my Soul's waiting with the Lamb's-rising Power, in a
particular experience of my own in the divine Mystery.

At the opening of the first Seal, the Spirit of Faith came forth to encounter
with the fearful and unbelieving Spirits, that set The opening of the first
Seal, Rev. 6. v. 1, 2.
before me an Impossibility of ever reaching to a Paradisical Purity and
Mount-Zion-Dignity, and was kept under a great Fear and Perplexity, under the
dominion of Unbelief, until this first Seal was broke open; for thereupon the
strong Lion of the Tribe of Juda set me free to run the Race of Faith unto the
end, giving in this Caution, to take care to be well mounted on this Horse of
the Spirit of Faith, and to hold fast to him who rides on it, who has the
conquering Bow in his Hand, to shoot his Arrows into those unbelieving Spirits,
that would still keep us in Doubts and Perplexity.

At the opening of the second Seal, all Peace, Pleasure and Joy were taken away
from the Earthly Life, and withal such a Light The opening of the second Seal
Rev. 6. v. 3, 4.
broke forth, which made me see the vile Abomination of an earthly state,
compared with the Perfection of the Divine Life, so that now I rejoiced in
nothing more than to see him who sat upon the Red Horse, slaying with his
Sword the Beasts and creeping things of the Earth; that is, all the moving
stirring Essences, springing from the original source of Evil, and to find him
taking away Peace from the earthly Life, so that the earthly Mind is berest of
all Peace, Rest, Content and Satisfaction in all its goings out, whether in
Thought, Word or Action. But how comes this to pass? Why? because he that sits
on the Red Horse gives a mighty Sword to the Spirit of the Soul, that thereby
it may kill and destroy all the Essences of the earthly Life in joynt-Union
with Christ, which Sword is nothing else but the Power of the Spirit of Life,
which is Christ's Deity in his Eternal Humanity, now fixed in the center of the
Soul. It is Christ's rising Life in his Saints enabling them to conquer the
Essences of the earthly Life (which is the Beast) in themselves. Now this
taking away of Peace from the earthly Life, is a blessed Introduction to its
final Destruction, which is to follow upon it, according to the intention of
the Kingly Redeemer.

The opening of the third Seal, shows Christ in us riding on The opening of
the third Seal, Rev 6. 5, 6.
a black Horse, with a pair of Balances in his Hand, signifying Famine on the
life of the Beast in his Saints, that its day of plenty is passing away, and
that its earthly Essences must be weighed in the Balance of Rightcousness. For
the Lamb's Life rising in his dead and riaug Saints, putting them into one
Scale, weighs all chei. Thoughts Words and Actions, in the weight of
Perfection; Christ, the holy One, in the other, to see whether they be brought
into an even Pois with it; to the end that all Increase and Plenty might richly
abound in the fruitfulness of the Spirit; from which heavenly sowing, such a
Crop does spring as may proclaim a Plenty, that may all former exceed; and thus
it will naturally spring in the Soul, which is even balanced with Christ the
Anointed: And nothing of the Oil and Wine, which from hence shall proceed,
shall ever be hurt or diminished.

At the opening of the fourth Seal, Christ rides in his Saints on a The opening
of the fourth Seal. Rev. 6 7, 8
powerful Horse, whose Name is Conquering Death, and has Hell following him.
But though this Death looks grim, yet it is such a Death as shall only hurt the
fourth part of the Earth, that is, the evil Principle in the earthly Life,
which reigns, and has the dominion until the Life of Christ be risen in his
Saints, till which Time the Beast may be permitted to kill the Life of Christ
in the Soul with Hunger, Famine, and languishing Death; for it is said, that
the Beast shall make War with the Saints, and for a time overcome them, that
is, keep them under by reigning over them in the worldly dominion, which
reaches to their outward Man, as standing in his Elementary Kingdom, where he
has great Power to afflict and famish unto Death, by several Cruelties, when
so far permitted. But I have experimentally found that the greatest Fury,
Hellish Force and Wrath of the Dragon Pa^^icular experiences co^^^rning this
seal opening.
is quelled and overcome by the Blood and inlaid Life of the Holy Lamb of God,
rising in his powerful Might within me, who upon my complaint of the continual
Usurpation of the Beasts Kingdom, has given assurance that there is a Viol of
Wrath preparing to be poured out upon him, which shall drown his Kingdom in
everlasting Perdition, that he may no longer insult over the sealed Ones of
God, to whom Power shall be given to bind him in everlasting Chains. For the
Lord Omnipotent in the Life of the Lamb, is coming to reign over all the Beasts
of the Earth, and to exalt them to a victorious Kingdom, who have been killed
and slain with him.

The opening of the fifth Seal discovers the Souls of the slain Saints under
the Altar of the Deity and Humanity: Here the The open ing of the fifth Seal.
Rev. 6, 9, 10, 11.
Soul witnesses Conformity to the Death of the (...) and lies as a live
burning Coal under his (...) and (...) to rise in such Power of Majesty,
(...)to take Vengeance of those that have killed (...) eternal Generation is to
be counted (...) ^^^^^ced into Nature, who has lain a (...); but as Abel's
Blood did cry for Vengeance, (...) of Jesus cry more strongly in the Soul^ of
them who are (...) with Christ; and the Lord has expressly assured, that when
the rising Incense goes up from the Altar, from the Soul's live Coal, it is a
sure Testimony that the Resurrection is nigh, when the naked Soul shall be
clothed with its long white Robe; and though this has been a long Rest and
Confinement to many, yet it has only been permitted that a stronger Cry might
ascend: Even as we see now that John's long sleeping Prophecy is now by some
strong crying Souls awakened, till all the Seals be made to fly open, to the
end that the imprisoned Souls in Christ may by their opening, come to be set
upon the Throne, where they shall judge the Dragon and the Beast, with all
their Adherents, that formerly exercised Cruelty over them unto Death.
Therefore rejoice all ye, who do find the Effects of the fifth Seal opening in
your selves, for by them ye may know the nearness of the Jerusalem-Kingdom;
look for its fulfilling in the World within, which shall also in due time be
fulfilled in the outward World.

I proceed now to the opening of the sixth Seal, where the first thing
observable, is the great Earthquake, representing the terrible The opening of
the sixth Seal. Rev. 6 14. to the end, and chap 7.
Shakings of the very Foundations of the old Earth, in which is the original
Seed of Sin, the hour of whose Judgment is come, and the Trumpet has founded
for the dissolving this first Earth and Heavens, that their Place may be no
more found; the Wind of the mighty Spirit blows upon all Flesh, to make it dye
and wither. The Sun of the outward Reason is changed into Blackness, and the
Moon of the Senses into Blood, and all the Starry Imaginations drop like
untimely Fruit, and every Island and Mountain of strength meleth away; For
there can be no hiding in this Day, a Consumption being determined upon the
whole Universe, which has been under the Beasts captivity. We may call this a
blessed Ruin and Undoing, to see a destruction come upon all that has kept the
Lamb and his Kingdom out. This causes a great out cry and perplexity in the
Properties of degenerate Nature, where the King of Reason, and the Captains,
the Senses do not know whither to slay from the face of him who is come to make
all things new, which could not be till all of the old Building was broken down
and taken to pieces, where the fretting Leprosy of Sin did still rise. The
Wisdom of God could no better way contrive, for the laying of a sound and
sinless Foundation for the New- Jerusalem, according to this forecontrived
Model, as by express Word it came unto me, that none could or ever should come
to the opening of the seventh Seal, till all this were fully finished; and I
must give Witness that it is a doing, and it does not seem grievous because of
what is to succeed and follow, when the next Seal shall be opened.

Thus I have been driven on according to Experience and Revelation, to open the
mystical meaning of what is written in the Revelation, according as it is to be
fulfilled in Holy and Heavenborn-Saints; though I also well know, that their
opening will cause a terrible Day of Woe to the Rebellious and Unregenerate, for
they who shall then be found in the Beasts Kingdom, must look to fall and go
into Perdition with him; for as there are inward Vials to be poured forth, so
there are outward Vials to be poured forth on the World, which I could enlarge
upon, but that it is not my Commission, being otherwise instigated: Besides,
the Lord showed me, that to every Seal there is an Eye opens within, which is
therefore called upon to look inward, where the great Mystery is to be opened;
and as every Seal has it is Eye, so the Ear has its sounding Horn, which is
filled with Holy Oil, which makes Kings and Priests in Gods Tabernacle: These
are the Trumpets that give the most certain sound for Time to end, and the
everlasting Kingdom of the Alpha and Omega to: begin, in that Soul where the
sixth Trumpet shall sound, upon which so ows the loosing of those Angels that
have been bound, who are to fight the Lamb's Battle, and to revenge his
Quarrel. For the great and last War will be upon this sixth Seal opening; and
the Lord did testify it would be such, as in no foregoing Seal had been
known. But he said withal, I am the Lord strong and mighty, who will prevail,
and wholly overturn the Kingdom of the Dragron and Beast: Continue thou, whilst
I am doing this in the most holy secret of my Being, where the constant
Mediatorship and Offerings may go on, as the strength of an Army that shall all
overcome, through the burning Incense that is mingled by the Angel, whose place
is to stand always at the Altar; no hurt or suffering by all this
Constagration, shall touch the Jewel that lies hid in my Deity, that would
shine forth again in the Body of its Native Virginity, as before time was;
wherefore suffer thou all this Vulence on thy Elementary part, as knowing that
it will not at all disturb the inward Temple-Worship and Communion of the pure
Spirit. But now, as of old time in the first elect Church and People, God was
ministered to, and worshipped in a dark formal, mixed manner, going up and down
in a moveable Tabernacle, till Solomon's day, where the Typical Temple, which
was to be filled with the Glory, was built, even so since the time of the Son
of Man's offering up himself, the holy One has walked in Clouds, and has been
worshipped after an imperfect rate, and therefore he has prepared a burning
flaming Day for all his Vessels to pass through, to know whether they be
Sanctuary proof or no: For the Lord is carrying on a pure Jerusalem-Worship in
truth, and substantiality: Rejoice all ye, who shall stand the trial of this
sixth Seal, in order to it.

Now according to this divine Interpretation of the six Seal, we may know how
near the end of time, and the passing away of the old Heavens and Earth in our
selves are; for that it is we are to look to, at every Seals opening: For from
the first to the last there is a sounding Trumpet to bring Ruin and Desolation,
to the first six days Creation, because of sin and the Curse which came in by
the Serpent's sting, by which means the Beast has created his Kingdom, and
corrupted the whole Principle of time, which the holy One has suffered now so
many thousand Years, during which all Just Men dyed indeed in the Faith of this
Prophecy, but attained not to that degree, which is to usher in the heavenly
new Jerusalem in her Glory. But the Lord is now stirring, and in good earnest
is sounding his Trumpets for Battle; and there is that in us which does witness
he is going on gradually to unmake and dissolve all of the first Creation; for
the Lamb will not much longer carry the weight and burden of a sinful
Creation; he has in some already sounded to Judgment, and will set himself
free thereby, and the Spirits and Souls of those who are resolved to follow him
through every Seal, till they shall overcome. It was given me to observe, that
there are six Engagements, to which six Overcomings do answer, mentioned in the
Revelation, and to every Conquest a most high and wonderful Rev. 2. 3.
Reward promised; all which is to encourage to follow him cheerfully, who is
our Leader, who has sworn that time shall be no longer than till he has
gotten the Victory over the Beast and Whore, and has destroyed the Dragon's
Kingdom in every Property within us, who are elected to reign in his Life with
him on his Throne, with a rain of new created Powers, in the Properties of the
redeemed Earth in the Souls Essence; and then we shall know how unconfined the
Lordly Dominion over all outward things is, even over all the Beasts of this
visible Earth, who must be subjected to the Lamb, who has taken his Victorious
Crown, and put it on the Heads of the holy Warriors, that have passed through
all, and are come to the last Overcoming, that gives entrance into the seventh
Seal.

As I was collecting in my Mind the near approaching time for the manifestation
of this great Overturning, which is to bring in the overflowing stream of
Christ's Kingdom into the Overcomers. Behold I did see and hear the Voice of
him from whom the first Heavens and Earth die flee away, who uttered these
Words; As there has been a long and tedious War between the House of God, and
the Serpent's Brood, together with the Harlot and Beast, who have maintained
their envious War on the Ground of fallen Nature; but now come and see the
Place where they shall lie bound in perpetual Captivity. And immediately I was
all filled with Light from the opened Center of the peaceable Kingdom, that
flows in as a virtual Life, felt in the Quality of the pure glassy Sea, with
Sounds, Powers and Lightnings, as if all of the old Earth were now drowned in
this bright Ocean; and rollowed a bright Star, with a Voice going forth, which
said, The Lamb rising out of this new Elementary Sea, overcomes the Serpent and
Beast, with all their Seed; and this will be their Deluge to an everlasting
Victory. So from hence it was demonstrated, that the Beast has his Sea,
wherein the great Leviathan sporteth himself, and casts out Floods to Persecute
and make War against the Virgin-Seed, whose Element is mild and sweet
Temperature of the glassy Sea: The other, out of which it is said that the
Beast did rise, is a terrible tossing working Sea, where all the worldly
Spirits drive their Traffic, for to make Babylon pompous and great, who ever
loves the Earth, and are admirers of the Beast, who gives Riches and worldly
Honors to such as serve him; but oh! come here and see how he must fall with
his whole Hierarchy. Wherefore let none trust to his Kingdom, which in one day
shall be made desolate through the fiery Judgments. Here are two Seas at strife
one against the other; turn your Eyes inward, you who are the Lamb's Warriors,
and witness bear to these two Seas meeting, within the Ground of Nature. The
Sea of the Beast contains great abundance of Riches, according to its
perishable kind; besides, there is an overflow to the Merchants of it, that are
in a free Trade to uphold that worldly Kingdom, wherein all Nursery of
Sins-Wuchcraft is maintained. But according as I was called upon to come and
see, how the Beast and all his rich trafficking-Sea is to be dried up, as the
Lamb of God shall fill his Vials from out of this glassy Sea, and pour them
upon it, when all its Pomp and Riches shall sink as a Mill stone, never to rise
again. Oh? at this let all our Nations rejoice within us as this Vision is
fulfilling.

Now follows another great Mystery, which I was called upon to look into,
concerning the seventh Seal, wherein lies hid the Reward The seventh Seal:
shown by way of Vision, some space of time after the opening of the other Seal.
and rich Price, which though not yet given in Possession, yet the Holy One
has seen it expedient to reveal it, by breathing sorth this Word in me,
saying, Come thou apart, and Sanctify a Fast, tonelling nothing of the Leaven
which is found in the House of fallen Nature; abstain from any other Cup, but
what I the Anointed shall sill unto thee, from the burning Sea of Glass, which
will be a Lamp to give Light, and perfect Knowledge in the most hidden things
that everlasting Wisdom has hitherto sealed up. For to you who are come to the
sixth Seal, and to your burning Elements in the heat of that melting Furnace,
these further Secrets are disclosed, for the Consolation, who shall hold out in
this last Battel-Race for Conquest: Therefore put on your Life-Armour day by
day, and continue in the Fight for joy of that which is now revealed, as your
Reward; taking all care to abstain from the Leaven of Imaginations, which may
stop the Sluice of Revelation in its Purity. The empty Bowl with light burning
Oil began to come in, and became a rising Spring, which did give light to the
dark Socket of my Understanding within; and the first thing that was showed me,
was an open Book, written within, and every one of the seven Seals broken; and
it was in the Hand of the God-head-man, who said, Come and read what the seven
Wonders, which my faithful Witness did declare of in his day of Revelation,
which were then to be sealed up, because the Day of their fulfilling was so far
off. But now in this present time, there has been such a servent heat of
flaming Intercession, which has made all these Seals to melt away, that the
Secrets contained in the Book might be opened and made known. The seventh Seal
is included in the seven Thunders, opening as the effect of this Seal.


This Living Book, which was presented to my view to read, was the glorified
Person of the Lord Jesus, who did now appear to reveal what was sealed up in
the seven Thunders. His presence was not terrible, as appearing under the Vail
of pure Humanity, where he hides me as in the Clifts of his own Spiritual Body,
whilst he talks with me; who thus said, Thou art come to a deep Knowledge;
for here the greatest Good, and highest Being stands unsealed to the
introverted Eye of thy Spirit, that can enter into the Light of Eternity, where
the Looking-Glass of all Mysteries does stand open.

Now the cry of the first Thunder was this; Behold! how the The frst Thunder
six days Creation is come to its limit, and Man cease to be, being returned
into the Eternity of his own Spirit, there to rest in God, while the Number of
the Beast is summed up, and his Kingdom furnished, with the Ordinances of Day
and Night, which take place in this changeable Element, from whence the Craft
and Subtilty of Reason does arise to uphold and maintain the lapsed earthly
Life. All which there will be no further need of, according to what the second
Thunder does utter.

The second Thunder uttered as follows; Come and see, who out The second
Thunder.
of the Bed of passive stillness do now arise and come forth all new and
immortalized, to rule as Gods in an immutable Creation: These are they who have
been exercised in great Tribulation, and lain as dead under the Seals; but they
are come to live, and take the Lamb's Power to reign in Gods Omnipotency, which
is the only Instrument they shall play upon, to subdue all inwardly and
outwardly: For they are now put in Commission under him, who is come to judge
the Quick and Dead, and to remove all things, wherein the Serpents Brood has
been nourished.

The cry of the third Thunder is this; Ho! come ye whose Names are written in
the Lamb's Book of Life; The way is all cleared, The third Thunder.
and the great River Euphrates is dried up, for to give Passage to the Holy
Land, where the Tree of Life shall meet you with its flowing Fruits, whose
savor leaves a perpetual Sweetness, and such a strength of Joy as will make
you know the Feast of Tabernacles it come indeed with God alone, for to
celebrate and keep. The Walls all ranged are with Seraphims, that are appointed
for your Guard, to usher you into an higher Sphere, and more magnificent place,
than this which was the Seat of the first Paradisival Man, where you are to
make but your forty days stay: For an higher Orb does descend as a Cloud to
take up the Elders, that have their Throne-Seats prepared in the great
Jerusalem City, which is the settled Rest, where no more removing is feared,
for there is an indissolvable Link, all fixed in a Cooperating Power, which
never shuts up.

The fourth Thunder opened thus unto me, by way of Vision; I saw seven Golden
Candlesticks branched out from a Suid of The fourth Thunder.
Gold, and each Socket appeared empty; and there came one in the appearance of
a Jaspher-light, and poured in some sparkling Liquor, and there arose a shining
burning, which sent forth Flakes of light very numerous, running up and down
like Lightning, so as nothing could contain them, nor prevent them from going
whither they would, then was it cried in my hearing, What have thou seen? but
the great Wonder of the fourth Thunder, disclosing the fiery Lamps, that are
appointed to be fixed in renewed Nature, which are so impowering, that on
whomsoever they rest, they may act and do whatsoever they will into. For the
Concord of these seven Spirits is of that force, as they can save or destroy,
bind or loose; they are the seven proper Powers that must make out, who are
God's Co-deified Ones, and commissioned to act in this last Seen of Wonders,
in the wonder-City, that shall be all compacted of pure Spirits: Hear and see,
ye shall be planted there as the great Cannons; for these Powers will multiply
as a great Host, which can cut off this visible World at one stroke: This is
the great reserve to be given as a Reward to the suffering Conquerors.

The fifth Thunder cried, Now unseal the Tabernacle-Testimony; let the eternal
Gospel of Love and Peace go forth in the cloven Tongue, The fifth Thunder.
which can only speak out what springs from the original Law of restored
Nature, to its primary Purity, out of the Fountain of the Deity: Behold, these
are the separated and anointed Ones, who have this Gospel Dispensation as a
perpetual rising spring, proceeding from the holy Spirit, who can indeed
absolve and pronounce Remission of Sins. For Power will rest upon those who can
conveigh the New-Testament-Blood, to heal and deliver from the infective Root
of Sin; not in a painted formal Imitation, but there shall go forth a
Fire-breath, to send this healing Gospel into the very Center-Root of the sick
and sorrowful in Spirit, who under the wound of Sin have laid long for Cure. To
which true Royalty and Priesthood, some shall be more eminently ordained, for
the gathering in of those who lie under the Babylonish Rubbish, who shall be
raised through the out-going Might of the everlasting Testimony in the Blood of
the Lamb's Life, which is the known Character that only shall be given to them.

The Declaration of the sixth Thunder was thus represented to The sixth Thunder.
me; I saw one holding forth a Sapphire Signet, or sealing Stone, with which
were to be marked all the Freeborn that do belong to the New-Jerusalem; for
none but such as are marked can have right to the vast Riches which are
concentred in Wisdom's Bank, who to this day has locked up the Brides Dowry,
and will not part with it, till she can come with this Seal upon her Heart,
which is now brought out to put the highest impress of Saphire-Glory, and
Purity, that may signify, that the Lamb's Bride is all thus dignified. Oh! who
shall henceforth detain those Riches, Wealth and Honor, which have been
treasured up from before the Foundation of the World? For all must now be given
up to her command, whether it be in Heaven or Earth, or in the glassy Sea,
whether in Heights, or in Depths, or in any of the Eternal Spears. The sealing
Name is every where the Authority, that must set all open, which has been
locked up hitherto, because none could bring alone with them the Seal which is
now freely brought down of God's own ingraving, and therefore can never be
counterfeited; for it bears the lively Portraiture of Father, Son and Spirit,
to whom all Riches Power and Glory are given.

The last Thunder comes in great Power, to declare the Great The seventh
Thunder.
Day of the Marriage Feast of the Lamb; The Fountains run now with that Spirit
Wine, that was in the Grape before all Time; the choice and precious Fruits,
ripened by the Serene and Pure Elements, are prepared, and the Table is covered
with all Replenishments, that God himself can set out, to express the Content
and Joy he takes to see this consummating Day, wherein I saac has brought home
his Rebecca into God the Father's and Jerusalem's Glory, where henceforce a
perpetual Feast of Joy forever is to be kept. Angels now sound your,
Trumpet-Songs, because the Harvest is reapea, and God's Kingdom come. The Lamb
and Bride are now met to maintain a living Fame in another Creation. The
Redemption is finished, Salvation is witnessed, and the Mystery of God is
unsealed. The Harpers are summoned to the Holy Quire, with their Sounds and
fiery Tongues, that may proclaim the Lamb has given up the Kingdom consisting
of perfect Spirits, that God only may be the top covering of great Majesty,
Strength, Wisdom and Glory, in and over all the Inhabitants of this Holy City,
which bears this Name. The Almighty creating Power ^^^ileth and takes up his
abode here.

Henceforth bless the Lord on High,
Its he that has unsealed, Treasures richly.
What can them hide from the Spirit's Eye,
That pierced have into the Heart of the Deity
Tribute-Offerings pay to our God and King,
Who has revealed Wonderful Things.
Oh what Seraphick Sounds do I hear!
Are they not the Thunders of the Celestial Sphere?
Calling for an attentive Ear Spirit to hear over,
Which as the Doors be to the Golden Ore,
Where vast Treasures land up are in store;
But sound are only by Spirit's Pore.
This is the state in which the Souls blessed Eye
May see God without Thought intellectually.
Though Speech and Converse away may fly,
The thunder of his Power abides essentially;
This is the Day we rejoice to see,
Even the acting Power of the Deity.
What is it but the fiery piercing Eye,
That can the unsealed Book untye?
Wherein the perfect Number Seven lie;
Blessed is that Power from on High,
That has struck the Crystial Rock,
From whence the Thunders did fly.
I feel the gushing in of Crystial Springs,
That whirleth as upon Cherubim Wings:
No more to look down to Earthly Things,
The Glass so clear through which I see,
Beholding glorious Objects variously,
That snatched away before I am awake.
Pass we on to the Sea of Glass;
Through all Worlds we make our Pass.
Brought we are to our own Land,
Where all Wonders in order stand;
Rewing what the Mortal cannot endure,
Even those Coelestials that are ever pure.
Blessed are those in whom the wonder
Of the seven Thunders uncloaked be,
That feel, that see, that possess God in Unity,
Raised high into the Heart of the Deity;
Whereout Spring secret pleasant things,
That swallows up in Joy that has no end.
Thus were the seven Thunders opened and interpreted to me from the springing
Word, upon which I closely waited, and witnessed and felt a sweet and precious
anointing and refreshing Joy to come in from every Thunder-Cry. Oh! this is so
great, so weighty and rich, and such surprising Goodness, which in this Book of
Life is found, which is now unsealing, that no other things any more ought to
be minded by us.

Thus the triumphant King and Conqueror (who is possessed of all these Royal
Powers and Dignities, that are infolded in these seven Thunders) has given his
Word, that none of these shall fail in any one that has the mark of the
seventh Conquering-Seal broken up in themselves, to whom joynt-power and
authority will be given, in order to the beginning of that Reign, which is to
be settled here on Earth, according to the Prophecy in John's Revelation, which
presses hard upon me from the Fiery Cloud, that circles round my Spirit for a
defensive Banner, which will let nothing of the eclipsing dark Principle come
in, whilst the Center deep from the Soul's fiery Essence opens, and the bright
Streamers, from the Heart of the glorified Jesus, who meets me in such a
peaceable Love-paved-Walk, into which none can come to see or hear what passes
by way of Prospect or Communication; but what, and so much as I am ordered to
declare, I shall faithfully give out, according to the mind of my Lord, who
sees the effect that shall follow all these Revelations given by him.

The Prophecy of the Thousand Years Reign, mentioned in the Revelations, was
set before me and opened. As to the Time, Persons and Place, much Controversy
has been concerning this Mystery, which I shall not meddle with, but shall
only faithfully declare what the Morning Star has expressly revealed from his
own Mouth, who with this Salutation began; Awake ye, who have been under Death
and Judgment; know ye not that my Reign is near? The foregoing Prophecy must
have its fulfilling, and there are those who are a ripening for it, upon whom
my Kingdom shall be fixed. Wherefore do thou warily observe the following
Particulars, which are the foregoing Signs of my Personal Reign, whereby it
may be known how near it is.

The first particular concerns those Persons in whom this Reign is to begin,
who are such as have been Beheaded, suffering an inward spiritual Martyrdom,
for the hope of a Resurrection in a God-head-Body and Spirit. The manner of
Death is here to be taken notice of; they are said to have been Beheaded, that
is, who have their Head Life, where the rational Understanding is seated, and
from whence all sensible operation go forth, cut off, and separated from them,
because by means of it the Dragon and Beast have found place to establish their
Kingdoms in Man, and have been hereby in all Ages upheld; the main of the
Serpents strength having always lain in the Craft and Subtilty of Reason,
which is the Forehead mark of the Beast. Who then are they who have known this
honorable Death from the flaming Sword in the Hand of the Cherubim, but those
who shall heat the Resurrection-Trumpet, to let them know their Thrones are
set, and their Conquering-Crowns to their new-risen Heads are fitted, and that
all Power and Judgment is given unto them, to personate the mighty King Jesus
here upon Earth. For Christ the Lord shall have no need in his own particular
glorified Person to come down amongst the Inhabitants of the Earth. There is
something to be done first by them, who are to Personate him in the Kingly
Dominion; his transparent Body is such, as will not (till this first Reign be
finished) be any way bearable to the present consistency of things, which must
be first sublimed. It is sufficient that the Lord is come in his witnessing
Power and Presence, through a new-risen Life with and in his Elders, for to
reign in the Majesty of his all-governing Eye, which pierces as devouring
Flames, and burning Coals of Fire, which run from each to other, and from one
end of the Earth to the other. If the Lord will but supply the visible Humanity
with a mighty flow from the Deity, and with a witnessing Omnipotency, it will
be sufficient and considerable Glory. Next, we are to consider where the Reign
of Christ is to be manifested, to wit, in renewed Natures center, which is made
all Seraphick, in the Souls inward Essence, from whence the Serpent and Beast
are cast out, and have no more place; they are in this latter Reign chained up,
though in the foregoing dominion which the Lord had in the Soul, he was
always in Contest with these potent Adversaries, who exerted all their
strength to keep their hold in the mixed frame of Nature; all of which being
now overturned, they have no place where to establish their Dominion: So that
now all Strife cease, because the Lord alone does reign in Peace over all the
Region of Light. For now the Soul is Born a new into the light World, and is
most firmly established in its Kingly Power, which is not from received Gifts
or Powers, as in the day of Penticost, but all comes in with the risen Birth,
from whence the Powers do naturally and uncessantly flow, and therefore out of
all danger of mutability, which might threaten a disappointment of any thing,
that is agreed upon by the Kingly Soul, with his seven counselling Spirits,
which do continually stand before the Thorn in the inward Heavens; which by
the scattering Coals from the Deity are made as an enduring burning Element,
where the Glory of Christ's Personality may be seen, but no otherwise detained
as to his individual Person, but as the same likeness is risen by virtue of the
creating Word in his. Members, who are entrusted with this active powerful
Body, suitable for the management of such a Kingdom, in which the Soul at first
reigns invisibly over all its inward Motions and Properties, as over People,
Nations and Languages, all which by Wisdom's Power are kept in a God-like
temperature, such as may express the Lord is come to Personate himself in a
righreous and peaceable Government, such as never yet has been in the World
since Adam lost Paradise.

Objection. But shall this be an Universal Reign? And after what manner shall
it be Modalized in this visible Creation? That which is Internal and Spiritual
will not be so much taken notice of, though it comes to this height of
Perfection, for it may be hid amongst a small Number, yet may be known but only
to one another, the generality still abiding under the Beasts Power and Name,
which is his accursed Nature.

This Query was answered me in plainness of Truth, thus; That this glorious
Reign would not be Universal, nor break out all at once, but gradually from the
burning Unction, which prepares Christ's way, and makes room for his Kingdom:
There is much to be done first, and here must a Beheading go before, and a
plucking up all that has made desolats, and after all this a coming up again
in the Resurrection, which is a rare attainment indeed; for it is a
Resurrection to a state wholly sound and sinless, even the same to which our
Lord was raised after Death. The Prophecy does not say, That all the dead were
raised up to reign with Christ a Thousand Years; but it is expressly declared,
that the rest of the Dead did not rise till the Thousand Years were expired;
from whence it was cleared up to me, that many may be going through this
Spiritual dying, and yet continue dead, whilst others are raised, according to
that Word, Blessed are they who are partakers of this first Resurrection; so
that it will not be Universal. But besides this, there are those who are
Unrighteous, of whom it is Prophesied, Let him that is unjust, be unjust still;
these shall in no wise enter into Christ's Kingdom, but be shut out of the holy
City, which shall rule over them. For this Kingdom shall not only be inward, in
the Properties of the Soul, but shall also exercise its dominion over this
visible Principle; and those who are unconverted shall be as Stubble before the
bright flaming Cherubims, who in the Lamb's Power shall reign on the Earth: The
Elect shall reap and long enjoy the creating Works of their own Hands; for with
no less Power shall the Representatives of Christ the Lord be invested. This
declared, must be throughout all Worlds, that Christ will appear in his Saints
that are risen again to bear the Tropky of a Death-Conquering Power.

Now the next enquiry is, When is the time that this may be expected, because
hitherto there is but very small appearance of any such thing? that is, Who is
it qualified in such a high degree as this heavenly Kingdom requires? Who are
willing to be Beheaded, and through Death to be made partakers of this Reign?

But yet notwithstanding all these Objections of Fear and Unbelief, and the
whole throng of discouraging Spirits of the sensible Life, whose cry is, Who is
able to suffer all this? Faith and Love are given to the worthy pretenders to
this Kingdom, whereby they are carried as with Wings, over all the Floods of
Fear and Discouragement; neither shall they want either Resolution or Valor to
wade through the greatest opposing Difficulties, who are designed for it, and
found in the Lamb's Roll. A double and trebble portion of his Spirit the Lord
has said he will add to them, who first shall abrogate the Law of Sease, which
has been the chief hinderance of his Kingdom, which therefore is to be made
void, because it diverts the Soul from fetching all its Supplies from the Rock;
neither can Faith arrive to its full strength, till Sense be led into
captivity, and cast into a dead Sleep.

Now as to the time of the Lord's Reign, when it shall be, you will be apt to
say, That this is an unknown thing, and that none can prefix the time. It is
true that many have Calculated, and puzzled their Spirits about it in vain: But
if we will know how near the time is, we must not look without us, but in the
unsealed Book of Life within us; there you will find the foregoing Signs,
which are first to be accomplished in your own Heavens and Earth: We may try
and prove our selves by what has been already revealed from the seven Seals
and Thunders, how near the Kingdom of our Lord is approached unto us. Let each
of us examine our selves, how far the preparative work is advanced in us: We see
what the Beast and Dragon's Kingdom must suffer in us, to make way for this
Reign, which cannot be established till all this Trash be taken out of the way.
Therefore we shall only know the time by such an one, who shall give the first
deadly stroke, and come forth a Conqueror over the whole sensitive Life, and
this outward Kingdom, which stands divided between Good and Evil; in such an
Overcomer as this my Jesus expressed, he would appear and personate a Kingly
Reign; and that we are not to look out for any other Sign at this time, but the
Manifestation of this conquering Life: And further said, There would go forth
an Arrow from the Word of Revelation, which should so closely stick in some, as
to pierce through the Heart of the Beast, who has warred to hinder the Lord's
triumphant Reign in his Saints. By all which it is clear, that there is no
surer sign of the approaching Personal Reign of Christ, than to see the Beast
wounded to the Heart; for no sooner will the Beast be removed, but his Kingdom
will appear, whose right it is to rule in Heaven and Earth. Who is it now that
will suck in the Marrow of these precious things, which is the dropping Oil
which distills from the Olive Tree, to make our way smooth, light and clear,
and to preserve us from being daunted, though our Portion should be a draught
of Blood? for the life of the Beast must be taken away, before the Lord appear
in us like himself, in Power, Glory and Majesty. Oh! what Drawings and Desires
may these weighty sayings from the Lord, enkindle in us from his coming to
reign in absolute dominion within us!

The Word came to me, Run hard, there is a rich Prey to be taken, by treading
down of the Beast, which may be taken, if pursued to the Victory: Wherefore be
valiant in the Faith, for all Might is in God, to overcome whatsoever opposes
his Reign and Personal Kingdom.

Much and free Communication I had with the Lord this Night, and a Cloud of
Light appeared in me, which raised my January, 2d, 1682.
hope higher; I had also many Queries satisfied. Then there appeared to me a
pitched Standard, which reached from the Earth to the Heavens, where its top
was hid; it resembled a strait ascending Flame; and it was signified, that this
was the Standard of overcoming Power, which no earthly Warrior would venture to
engage with; for its Dominion reached from the Earth to the Heavens; and this
Word was added, Stick close to it, and move not from under it, for it will be a
shelter from the Storm which is coming on, with a flowing Sea of Troubles,
raised by the wrathful One, whose Kingdom is Division.

This Motto and Inscription was given out from the sealed Book within, as
follows; In Christ I live, in Christ I dye, that I may cease from Sin and
beastly Properties, that so the first Ground of Life may rise over all, to
immortalize the Reign of Christ. Words no more as empty Sails spread out shall
be, but become the thundering Air of an Almighty Power, which is Christ in his
essential Spirit, who wanders from the Heights above and Depths below, will in
his time show: Look and read the circle Line, and the most marvelous things may
further know and find.

Upon some inward Conference with my Lord about the Shipwracked-Bark of Nature,
which still upon the foreign Coast does lie, and is often in Jeapordy by
reason of some Tides, which might make the Vessel spring-a-Leek; the Lord did
immediately come in with these Words, saying, Make reflection, and ponder well
my Grace and Love, which has been so great, as to lay in my Life so deep with
thine, that thou can suffer nothing but I do call it mine. Thy broken Vessel
shall be renewed into its Original, when all of sinsul Properties shall be
drowned in the Alpha and Omega, who is the beginning and end of Time, and who
will open the sealed Mine, where the unsearchable Riches shall freely abound as
in the state of Innocence, where nothing of necessity or want was known: All
this is going on, und advancing in the moving Circle of the Duty: all that is
required of thee, is to be steady in the highest float of Earth.

My Spirit was let down into the deep Center and Circumserence, where the
personal Glory met me, with whom I had great Felicity to behold the Shepherd
with his Fold, who friendly faluted me; for though a naked Spirit, I was not
despised by such dignified Bodies, though I was made very sensible of the So
soon as desired, that is to be understood, carried up in a Spiritual
Transportation.
want of such a glorious Body; and as soon as I desired it, I was forthwith
imbodyed as in the same Glory, and was joined to the heavenly Train. I rejoiced
greatly that I had made a slip out of the vile Garment, though but for a while,
though I was to take it up again, and appear amongst the Inhabitants of time,
till my course was fulfilled: This bright Clothing is only bearable by
Jerusalem Natives; and though these were the all desirable Flocks, that I would
choose to abide withal forever, yet I found a prohibition at the present, that
it must not be desired This royal Priestly Garment being reserved till we be
called into view, and have communion with the most Holy of Beeings, who did not
bring me hither to send me away empty, but gave me to taste of the choice
Fruits of that unknown Climate, the refreshing take of which is left upon the
Center-Mouth of my Heart, from whence the Life-Fruits should spring evermore,
as was said to me, with an Advertisement to wait till Wisdom's Garden in the
Soul be planted, and richly furnished with those blossoming Powers that may
draw the high and lofty One to look down and walk there.

Oh! what are these forcible Powers which I feel winding my Spirit deeper in;
where enquiry was made, What would be the sign of the Center-dwellers in the
most holy of Beeings, which should need no Witness from Man, for that was poor
and insufficient? Wherefore be quiet and still, and cease from all Creaturely
Evidence, and look for the Witness of the unsealed Book, to exert the seven
flowing Properties of the holy Ghost, which will out-vive all worded
Testimonies that are so fluent in this Age: Wherefore a more sure Seal is
provided, that will remove all Doubts and Suspicions, of which feastival Cup I
was called to drink, from the Hand of him who is appointed to fill it out, as
the last and great Reserve which shall silence all Controversies, and doubtful
Disputations, and ratify and confirm who they are that are Born again to act,
move and live from a new generating Spring, that works away every thing that
defiles and makes obstruction: Which seven evidencing Powers were revealed to
me, in which the Personal Reign of Christ would consist.

THe First was a circuling Cloud of Light, from whence uncessant First Property.
Revelation would spring, and open what was never known before, concerning the
invisible Scenes of Glory, to which the mortal Man has been altogether a
stranger, not having understood his original Royalty. But where Christ, the
central Light, is entered into the Soul's Essence, there everlasting Light does
break, which shows invisible things in their first pure Ground, where the
eternal Fire-Soul moves strong to come out of an impotent weak Life, that has
been shut up in this vile Body of Sin; the Light of Revelation making it
restless any longer to abide therein, and so it is made to pursue another
beginning from a new-rising-Spring, flowing from the Godhead, that affords
strength for a Co-deified operation, which may give a living Testimony, that a
new Spring is appearing out of an old Tree, whose Sap is renewed to bring forth
the second Property of the holy Ghost, as another Fruit bearing Branch.

Which Branch is put forth from the all-encompassing-Element, wherein the Soul
is baptized, as in a Cloud of Fire; whoever they Second Property.
be that come to know this, need no greater Witness, as to their own
particular, for they know their dwelling is in the very center Heart of God;
they are fed and cherished with the Blood of Life, and oily Lamp that makes all
the Body within to be as a burning Cherubim, that at times and season can mount
and fly into the very Heavens: Though this be yet a mystical and dark Speech,
and little experienced, yet know, the time of Elijah is nigh, and a Whirlwind
is descending from the Alpha and Omega, to take up the stain Witnesses, who
have been in the World so undervalued. The Ascention-Gate by this bright Key is
unlocked, to go in after him, who was translated from among Men, so as not to
be yet hid in the Mystery: And thus shall it be again, though in another Form
and Model; for these Elijah. Prophets, though they shall be redeemed from every
thing which is of the (...) Nature, yet in this shall differ from Elijah, for
whereas he was taken up, and seen no more among Men, those in their visible
Persons shall remain on the Earth, and every where carry along with them their
encompassing Charriots of hire, which shall be discoverable to none but the
Ministering Elijah's, they will not safe to follow fully, where the Life-Witness
does remain after this sort and kind.

The Third out flowing Poperty of the holy spirit, which pshers Third Property
in Christ's Reign, is this, that a simplified raked Some, coming forth from the
baptizing Cloud, puts on a Clothing of impregenable defense and power, viz. a
mere (...) such as the Lord Christ had after his Resurrection, (...) of the one
pure Element, which can swallow up the visible gross substance of Flesh, that
it may no longer be an Impediment to the Soul's running its Race: Indeed such a
Body is very suitable for the great things that are to be wrought by the
christed Kings on Earth; for if provision of such a Body were not made by
Christ, it would be in vain for him to go about to settle his Kingdom, where
the Beast and Dragon have had their Dominion so long, and who will not now be
dethroned upon a slight account: They will hold their Propriety in the outward
Husk of the Body, when they can find no place for themselves in the Soul:
Therefore the Lord has revealed, That he will turn the very Body into its
Paradisical Property again, that the dark Prince and his Agents may not be able
to overthrow the Lord's personal reign in his Saints; who would desire no
fairer mark to shoot their Arrows at, than a frail mortal Body of Flesh.
Wherefore the Lord has said, That he will raise a firm Tabernacle, which no
earthly Weapon shall be able to pierce, which will be a fit Garment to last out
the thousand Years: Let the Just and Holy believe this, and see at this
finished first, in the Kingdom that is within the Soul's Essence, and then such
may conclude that they shall assume a whole Power and Right to reign with
Christ, over all Kingdoms of this World in Magical Might.

The Fourth out going Power of the holy Ghost, sets the Soul Fourth Property.
free in the eternal liberty, here all Conflicts which the Dragon, or the
starry Region has introduced; for the soul now is influenced by those superior
Planets, to which these outward Planets are subject. The Soul and Christ are in
a mutual agreement, to break a way from the (...) Rays of Time and Mortality;
being encompassed (...) that will set no more, nor withdraw; for it is the
glory of (...) Days, that runs its Circle without the least (...) Light, and
fixes the Soul in its pure splendorious Body; when (...) shall find it self in
another form of Life, and (...) Principality before Jehovah's Throne, attend
(...) to know the counsel and decrees of the Sovereign Majesty, under whom is
managed all inferior Government, which shall be committed to those who reign
with Christ the Lord: Oh! this will be a wonderful time indeed! For while the
Lord is opening these things to me, I am as one sunk into the Abyssal Ground,
where I am as nothing, till he put forth a piercing Ray from his flaming Eye,
to fetch my Spirit up again; who thus spoke unto me, Stand thou up, and hear
and declare the new Model of my Reign, and let it be published; for it is time
to awaken those who are ordained for the first Resurrection, that they may no
longer sleep in the day break of my appearance: And do thou solemnly see thy
Heart to the great Immunities that are revealed, not only for speculation,
(...) for sulfilling, where great Earnestness shall be found. Thus the (...)
One set home his Word, and causes it to pass through a Vessel that is nothing
to be accounted of, whereat my self stands amazed, what should move the Lord
thus to appear, and hold such a free Converse, and leave such weighty things in
trust with me? Oh! What can be said, but that it is the Good Will and Pleasure
of my Christ and King, who will change Tin and Dross into Gold, as it pleases
him?

The Fifth Property of the Holy Ghost is, that whereby the Soul gets free from
the striving Elements, and comes to Rest and Fifth Property.
Peace, all Wars and Combats ceasing. The Soul having got up these four
ascending Steps toward the Throne, can now look down like a Tower of strength,
terrible to all the lower Inhabitants round about: It is a Palace compacted
within it self, knowing nothing but a serene Peace and Concord; neither Dragon
nor Beast do so much as attempt to come here, for Love and Peace is their Hell
and Torment. Christ's personal Reign in his Saints consists of Peace, Power,
Love and Joy; the holy Ghost moves in the mild and meek Property from the
Water of Life, that captivates the Enmity and Strife, and shuts up the dark
Center with all its Spirits: This carries a twofold meaning, for first it is
to be understood of that Love and Peace which possesses the whole inward
Hemisphere of the Soul; and in the next place of the same Love flowing forth
and diffusing it self through all the Subjects of that peaceful Kingdom, which
Christ will establish in the high Angelical Harmony of Love.

The Sixth out-flowing Property, is the Omnipotence of God exerted in the
renewed part, in an absolute and Almighty Dominion, Sixth Property of the Soul.
that admits of no control. Here is no need of going out to borrow Gifts or
Powers, which are now fixed in the Soul to manifest the Wonders of the Magia,
which has been shut up in Wisdom's Principle, whose Virgins Crown of Power is
sent down as a signal Testimony of the Kingly Reign that must prevail over all
the Earth. The bright flaming Standard of Christ's Personality will be of that
Magnificence, as to draw home the dispersed and scattered Flock, which has
suffered Violence in this Babylonish Kingdom: A Jubilee will be proclaimed by
them, to whom this Dominion shall first come. They, the Head-Kings and Leaders
are appointed to shine forth as Stars, that shall bear such sway in God's
Omnipotency, as shall make all the Elect to haste and fly to this Kingdom, as
Doves to the Windows, where all occasions of complaint about the Necessities of
Life shall be cut off, because Wisdom's Storehouse shall from the Inherent
Omnipotency, abundantly supply whatsoever is needful of this kind. The
Paradisical lost Power shall be restored in a higher degree than ever, to the
end that Self-Love and Propriety may be taken away, which cannot enter into
Christ's Kingdom; for the Lord has averred, That none who are thus spirited
shall ever his Kingdom inherit. The vast and inexhaustable Treasure of divine
Riches cannot be enjoyed in Propriety, but only in Loves Communion.

The Seventh and last Property of the holy Ghost, that gives witness to
Christ's Reign, does consist in a Life of Praise and Exaltation, Seventh
Property.
which goes forth in the Angelical Tongues, Powers and Sounds of so many
persumed Offerings, paying an everlasting Love-Tribute of Joy to the Ancient of
Days, by and in whom they are come to reign over all Kingdoms in this World,
in Christ's personal Power: The New Hallelujahs from the Fire-breath of the
Holy Ghost shall be the Holy Sport and Celestial Play of the Children of this
Kingdom: All their Works shall speak forth the Praises of the Most High; for
Wisdom's Spirit will act so high, and in such a mysterious manner, as hitherto
has not been known; all which miraculous Powers have been reserved to make up
the Glory of Christ's second coming in his Representatives here on Earth: For
if the Lord should not in this manner demonstrate his God-head-Power in his
Saints, they would be set very light by, and it would be a vain thing to assume
the Title and Name of Kings without anointing Power suitable to it. No
Dominion, whether inward or outward, can be maintained without
Loves-Omnipotency. And truly, my Lord has assured me, that he has made large
and full Provision for this Day, who upon some private Objections of my own,
said to me, Be thou nothing doubtful concerning all the great Things of my
Kingdom, which have been opened to thee from the Center of Light; they have
been revealed for a ground of Faith: The Head of the Dyal is moving toward the
fixed Hour, which will manifest all these working Powers of the holy Ghost:
Wherefore do not streighten thy self, nor any to whom this Word shall come, but
run out in a spacious large Belief, answerable to Loves-Power, and the ability
of the object, to whom the Eye of Faith is directed: For wonderful things are
upon the Wheel, by which you may know it is high time to put forth your Hands
to raise and awaken that which has been so long asleep. This was the
concluding Word of Counsel from the Lord.

The foregoing Properties, is that which makes way for the Reign of Christ in
personal Power and Glory, which is now the great thing to be waited for, as the
End and Consummation of all that has been revealed, in the bare discovery of
which we are not to rest, but we are to press forward to enjoy the Fruit or
Product of it in the inward Center, where Christ will be manifested in his
Personal Glory and Power: For the driving seeking Spirit will not be at rest,
till it can put on its Resurrection-Body: It knows that hitherto,
notwithstanding all its Refinings and Dyings to sinful Self, and the World, it
yet remains a naked Spirit, which must return into the Virgin-Womb of Eternity,
there to be regenerated into an heavenly Corporeity, from the one holy Element,
out of which Christ's holy Personality is taken: This is the rich Garment with
which the Sion-Kings are to be arrayed, and thereby will be distinguished from
those who stick fast in corrupted Nature, and are not regenerated into this
bright Image, and from those also who though they are regenerated according to
the inward man, yet being entangled in the Thickest of the many things, are
fain to stay behind, till those who by their hard pressing forward have
overcome the World, Beast and Dragon. Therefore be first instated in the Lord's
personal Power; for the Lord assured me, that this would be the way he would
take in this present Age, to instate some who are known to him, in his Personal
reign, that they may enjoy here on Earth their first Heavens, to the terror,
grief and envy of such, who have been hard, cruel in the dealt's Kingdom,
restraining their good things from the Lambs of Christ's Fold. Here it will be
as in the case of Dives and Lazarus, they shall see those who were most
despicable in their Eyes, to be greatly beloved and honored, as being
entrusted with a Kingdom, in which they shall reign as the true Born Coheirs
with their Head, Christ; bearing rule over all those who have been their
Oppressors in this World. It was also revealed to me, That there were others
which stood in a mixed state, and divided between the two Kingdoms of Light and
Darkness, but yet followed after the Mark and Crown; these would scarce believe
that such a Commission as this would ever be given to any appearing in a mortal
Form, to be crowned as Coheirs with the Lord in his Personal Glory: But the
just One has showed that thus it shall be to convince and provoke to Emulation
these last spoken of, that they also may make haste to be made Kings and
Priests to God.

The grand Query after all that has been revealed concerning the Reign of
Christ in his Saints, is this, Where this Government shall be pitched? It is an
ancient Scripture-Prophecy, that Judah shall reign with God, for he is faithful
with the Saints. The Scepter shall not depart till Shiloh come, who is the King
and Lawgiver, that is, was, and is to come. And to whom will he come first of
all, but to those pure Virgin-Spirits, who travel to bring forth Christ
spiritually, as the product of an invisible Almightiness, which will appear to
be that Man-Child which is to rule the Nations with the Rod of God's Power, in
this World, and do far greater Wonders with it than Moses ever did with his.
For the eternal Magia shall bring forth all her Plants of renown. The highest
Wisdom shall be brought into manifestation, and replenish the Earth anew, that
God may walk in the midst of it, and no longer be unknown to its Inhabitants,
who are refined from their Dross, and thereby got a free and open entrance into
the Jerusalem from above. The partition Wall must be broken down, that Christ
above and Christ beneath may joy n together for mutual Joy and Fruition.

But here it may be objected, How can this be as long as the Body is yet
Terrestrial; for an Earthly Body cannot ascend to the Lord's Glory?

I Answer; That therefore a new Body is prepared, even a Heavenly, such an one
as Christ had, who could change his Form how and when he pleased: So he
appeared to Moses and Elias in his transfigured bright Body, and then came down
again in a terrestrial Body to the sight of Mortals; which Power shall be
renewed again in those who shall personate Christ upon the Earth, they shall
ascend and descend at pleasure, and transmute themselves readily, which state
will much excel all Visions of the glorified Person of Christ; for without
this Celestial Body we cannot hold out in that Sublime and Seraphick Communion
hid with Christ, which shall be in this Kingdom of the Saints: Wherefore there
is such a Body prepared, which shall be able to pass into the invisible Orb
where the King of Glory dwells: It is given me to see this approaching day in
the Spirit: if the Representation thereof be so glorious, what will the thing
it self, when actually accomplished? This report which the holy Ghost does give
of it, does powerfully constrain the Soul to put in its whole stock of faith
for it.

The sum of all these Discoveries concerning the Reign of Christ, must be
terminated in the Virgin seed. Eve's lost chastity will produce a new
Generation, to whom this Kingdom shall be committed in trust. This was revealed
from that Vision Rev. 121.
which Holy John saw, of a great wonder in Heaven, a Woman clothed with the
Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and a Crown of twelve Stars on her head. Many
interpretations have been made of this Vision, which here I am neither to
approve of or condemn, but to mind the opening of the living Word, who is
present to explain, whatsoever is obscure, to those who turn aside from the
Wisdom of the flesh, and receive the united drops, as they fall from the
Heavenly Cloud; to which is required a well purified vessel, in which no taint
of putrefaction does remain. This was a Proviso given me to observe throughout
all this Ministration, which made me set time apart to prepare the vessel,
before I could see the Cloud break, and send down its shower upon my ground:
This I mention for their sakes who are in this Ministration of Revelation. Now
to proceed to what the Lord has opened to me, from this figure of the Woman,
who is represented here as traveling in Birth; intimating to us that as by a
Woman a finful offspring was brought forth, in which Sorrow, Sin and the Curse
had dominion; so from this Eternal Virgin-Wisdom, a birth is to be born in
which nothing but Joy, Life, Blessing and Eternal Power and Dominion shall take
place. This Virgin Adam had in himself, before ever Eve was taken out of him,
but she withdrew as soon as Adam looked outward, as if he were not sufficient
of himself to increase and multiply for the replenishing of Paradise, God
having created him Male and Female in himself. But this design was overturned,
and Eve's Generation is now multiplied over the face of the whole Earth, from
whence Paradise with the Virgin is fled; yet a wonder is now again seen in the
Heavens, which we are to declare to our own little flock, which brings such
tidings of Joy, as does far excel that of Gabriel, to her who was the blessed
amongst Women, as being defigned to be the Mother of our Jesus in his fleshly
appearance. But now, by this Virgin he is brought forth in another appearance,
as a mighty Ruler and Potentate over this Earth, who is really and truly to
fulfill whatsoever was tipified in Solomon's Reign. David's Wars must cease,
which cannot be till this everlasting Virgin has brought forth her Manchild,
who is to possess what Adam and Eve have lost of Paradise and Mount-Zion
Kingdom: All which is to be restored by the Virgin, who is not limited to Male
or Female, for she may assume either according to her good pleasure, for she is
both Male and Female for Angelical Generation.

But here it may be asked, What is this Virgin? Whence is she? How can she
introduce her self into that Nature, where her pure chastity has been violated?

This last indeed may be accounted a wonder above our hopes and expectation,
which yet she is in a rendiness to do, as is well known to them, who have
understood her, and preferred her above all things, as being well assured, that
like as all Bliss and Peace sted away with her, so upon her return, all good
will come back Meaning Wisdom, who is God's esposed Virgin.
with her again. As to her Nativity, it is from everlasting, before the
Creation of Heaven or Earth. She was before all, as being the Co-essential
creating Power in the Deity, which formed all things out of nothing, and has
given a dignified existency to all those Seraphick Glories which move within
her own Sphere, who are the product of an unsearchable Wisdom, for the
replenishing of those superior Worlds which are little known in this, where we
are outcasts; neither can we be acquainted with much glories, till we be born
again out of her Virgin-Womb; for so it must be before ever we come to be
Christ's, in conformity with Christ our Head.

A Marvelous thing the Lord has revealed to me, concerning this Woman which
holy John saw, viz. that she represents Gods Spouse and Mate, from whom the
highest Birth, the Eternal Word of Wisdom did go forth, as the mighty Alpha and
Omega, in a distinct glorious personality, known to himself in God, and the
Everlasting Virgin, before any thing of the heavenly Hosts were created. For he
stood equally in the Counsel of the Father and Virgin, for the bringing of the
whole Creation into a figurative manifestation. Now for what is all this, but
to discover the mystery of this Woman, that she is the eternal Virgin, who will
essentially introduce her self into those who are prepared and appointed to
enjoy her? She will confer her Sun and Crown of Stars upon her Representatives.
Here will be brought down the one elemental Robe, and the quint Essential Root
will again be found, which will give a most glorious Luster, and all renew the
gross vile matter as heing the acting Wisdom to show forth Gods wonders; all
which reserved are until her day. She is looked for as Gods fruitful Bride to
bring forth Christ's personality in plurality, as so many immaculate Princes,
ruling in God. Just cause will be found, if we consider this Principle, wherein
the Serpent with so much bitterness wars against the Virgin and her Seed, why
her Offspring, as soon as born, is caught up to Heaven, from whence the Dragon
is cast out, and where the Iron Rod will crush him, and be too hard for him and
his adherents. Her Offspring will appear all Virgins, with her own lustrous
Son, who is the firstborn amongst the Kings of the Earth and Heavens. Oh the
high and majestical Glory, which shall proceed from the Virgins Womb, with whom
is the blessing that will abound in fruitful Gifts and high working Powers from
the Magia ground. Eve's Conception in Sorrow shall not here be known; for this
Virgin never was disobedient, or broke Faith with God, who is her Husband; the
fruit of whose travel is Blessing and Joy through the whole Generation that
shall be Born of her: She shall be the Mother of the true Virgin-Church,
wherein no mixture of Will Worship or False Doctrine shall be found.

But it may be queried, How can this heavenly Virgin endure to come down upon
this defiled Earth, for to multiply her Offspring in it? For without doubt the
Serpent and Dragon will violently rage against her, which we have experience of
in our selves, when he crowds into our very Heavens, with all evil Beasts at
his Heels, waging War against us.

Yet nothing of all this shall be able to prevent God's purpose, who will
appear with his Virgin in the divine Body, and cover her with the one Element,
which will torment all evil-Spirits, and wear them out, who can as little
endute her Virgin-Purity, as the Virgin-Spirit can bear their Poison. Therefore
a separation is made, as we read, that the Woman had a Place prepared for her
in the Wilderness, which signifies the Spirit of Faith, which carries it from
off the sensual Ground, where the Concourse of fluttering Spirits of all kinds
are; wherefore this is no place for God's Virgin to stay in, she may be in
danger of having her Chastity violated, or of being drowned with the wrathful
Floods of the Dragon. The Serpent will not cease to make his attempts with more
subtilty than eyer, because by this introduced Virgin-Spirit, his Head-power
shall be crushed, and his Seed dis-inherited; but the Virgin-Spirit shall mount
like an Eagle, and so escape the Dragon's deluge. A Fountain is opened in the
Desert, of which the Soul, which is in union with the Virgin, shall drink,
instead of the muddy Waters of the Earth, which she loathes: Pleasant Food is
provided in this Wilderness by God himself, and his Christ. The Lord affords
these Dainties to the abstracted Life, where the Virgin-Spirit is a stranger to
sensitive Self within, as well as to the enchanting World without. Here it
wants no good company, for its never without heavenly Visitants, because it
reserves it self chiefly for converse with the Deity, from whom she expects all
her Blessing and Increase: And thus the Soul shall spring and multiply, where
the Virgin has realized her self. Her Wilderness shall become a rich
Sharon-Pasture, a Land of unknown Plenty, where Gold, Silver, and precious
Stones shall be as the Dust under the Feet of these holy separated Virgins:
Also within and without, their feeding shall be on Power, Joy and Peace, till
the division of Time shall come to an end, in which a further Mystery will be
understood. But oh! let all this be first sully witnessed.

Here follows a further Advertisement from him, who is come to fulfill old
Prophesies in the substance of his own Person, that is Born of the Virgin; from
whom we may expect the perfecting of that, which all foregoing Ministrations
and Manifestations have left short, in regard of those wonders which shall be
effected in this latter Age. To which end Christ has opened the Center-Eye,
that can pierce as deep as the Deity, where this Virgin lies with all her
Glory, who, ever since Adam's day has been obscured, because she would not
trust her self with any Mortal, only some of her shining Rays have now and then
been scattered into holy Souls, a taste of which has been given, as the first
Fruits of what is reserved for Christ the Lord's second Birthday, where shall
be provided a Penticost-Feast, according to the royal and heavenly state of
Jehovah's Bride and Mate. Oh! how unable am I to bring forth in Words what has
been showed me! of the later Fruits that Wisdom's Children shall feed upon in
that day; the discovery of which we will pass by at present, and first define
what wonderful Virgin this is, and of how noble an Extract, who is taken into
God's Bosom, in a mutual Love-imbracing, and therefore may be termed the
eternal Goddess, in a high and sober sense; and it is an evil and sinful thing
to give this Title to any other, as it is too frequently done. But to proceed
to describe this Virgin, according to the delineation which God has given of
her; as first to its Matter and Substance, it is of that thin pure airy
subtlety, so as nothing of the gross and ponderous outward Elements can mix
with it; for they would but For this Virgin-Nativity, see into she Wisdom of
Sedemon, Chap. 6. 7.
tarnish her Clarity, which is ever conversant with the Deity, which was
signified by the Sun and Stars which were seen about the Head of the Woman in
the Revelations, signifying those superior Planets, which cannot be adulterated
with the Desilemonts of this inferior Orb, as possessing far higher and more
exalted Powers, carrying dominion over all that is beneath them. For as the
lower Planets hold down in subjection to the Curse, so these deliver and set
free from it: Wherefore it is all-worthy to be enquired, in what Planet the
Nativity of the Virgin may be again renewed? which must be by bright Venus,
which must bring forth the mighty Birth under Sol, in Conjunction with the rest
of the superior Planets, which are all harmoniz'd in one; for they agree to
bring forth the Mother, and then the Son in the Virgin-Humanity, that bears
from the heavenly Matter both Figure and Form Organically for operation in
their various Properties, which are deciphered by the highest Wisdom to
illustrate the only true. Virgin in her beautiful Form. The divine Mould for
her Shape is again found, according to what was before either Angels or Man
were formed, which is not to be portrayed, till she come to be essentially
manifested within; only her Organical Faculties are unto us described, thereby
to know what makes out the Virgin's high Descent, in these several Faculties,
as follow.

The first Faculty set before me, was that of Seeing, seated in her Eye, which
appeared like a fiery Ray, and sparkled as a Star, piercing all things in the
Heights and Depths. An Eye that slumbers not, but watches at each
Centers-Gate, to spy what goes in and out, to prevent all violation of her.
Virgin-Chastity, that her Vow may not be broken, by which she stands engaged to
her Husband.

The second Faculty is that of Hearing, seated in the Ear, which must be so
Chaste as to turn away from all corrupt and unsavory Language, which speaks
not God forth in his immense Love and Goodness, or in his Greatness and
Soveraignity. The true Virgins Ear is turned inward, to listen to the sweet
Voice of her Bridegroom; she waits for the dropping of his Lips, whose Words
are the strength and marrow of her Life; she is in such union with the Deity,
that she cannot hearken to any strange Voice, left she should be desiled
thereby: The greatest danger and hurt she feels from the talking Spirits, from
the dark center in the Soul, from which her Virgin-Ear turns away, and dare in
no wise stay in their astral counsel; and therefore turns her Ear to those
Eccho's, Voices and Sounds, which leave a sweetness, which resists the taking
of delight in corrupt and impertinent Communications from without: Thus
reserving both Eye and Ear, she still moves forward in her heavenly Sphere.

The third organical Faculty is that of Smelling: This may be understood in a
twofold sense; the first is a drawing in of the Paradisical Perfumes, and
those sweet ravishing Odours, which are sufficient to renew languishing Life,
and to make it strongly active and vigorous: Secondly, the Virgin is in her
self an high sented Odor; her Garments send forth a Fragrancy far surpassing
all the spicy Compositions of this earthly Climate: How Vile and Despicable
does every thing, that has lost its Paradisical Property, appear to those who
sometimes draw in these ravishing Odours, which might they but continue, they
would never desire any other Food. Shall I declare what is made known to me of
the Virtue of these Virgin Perfumes? It is aver'd to me, they will recover a
putrified Soul, and eat out all the Poison of Original Sin, and recover dead
flesh, and keep it from Putrefaction; it is a Balsom endued with so penetrating
a Spirit, that it can go through Stone and Iron, Flesh and Bones. None can know
this till they have passed the Virgins Womb, and then they will double this
Witness. Now it is to be considered how unsupportable all rank Plants of the
Earth are to the Virgin, who continually breathes this perfumed Air: When ever
she makes a swift pass through this noisome Kedar, what a strong sented Garland
does she need, that nothing of Infection may hurt her Virgin Purity: To which
end, this Provision is made to keep out the evil Scents, which every where meet
us in the Walks of this World.

The fourth Faculty is that of Tasting. Here we find what it is that nourishes
the Virgin; her Food is in her self, and it is no other than pure Deity, which
rises as a flowing Spring from her own deep: She lives upon Spirit of Air,
which maintains and blows up the Quint-Essential Fire, as the first
Virgin-matter out of which the Soul was made, which in Adam became adulterated
by eating of the forbidden-fruit, who might have lived upon the Root of eternal
Life which he had in himself; he might have tasted the Paradisical Fruits at
pleasure; but what was palpable without, he had essentially in the Virgin
within himself, so that he might choose whether he would eat of them or no in a
corporeal way. This has been a secret hitherto little understood; but God in
Christ, through his appearance has revealed it, and for this end to let us
know what we are to feed upon at the return of our Virginity, whose Life's
Nourishment will be in itself, without any dependence upon any thing from
without. Oh! there will quite another thing be known in the Virgin Soul, when
she is espoused to her, though she has liberty to eat, as Adam had before the
fall. So here the outward Month may taste of these mortal Fruits, but not of
necessity, because the Life is centred in, and maintained from the heart of the
Deity, for the enereass and growth of pure Virgin Nature. And truly nothing but
God can be the Virgins Food, nothing is so well digested by her, for it is a
flowing source of Almighty strengthening, and pleasant tasting, according to an
infinite variety. This being once found, the Soul can no more eat down the
Fruits of the mixed Tree, in whose Root the Curse is, whereby Death comes in,
which hides the Virgin from the Soul's Essence.

The fifth Faculty is the saper-sential Feeling: What Sense more excellent than
this? Can there be a greater Confirmation than a feeling Life, out of which
Joy, Peace and Assurance do spring? The Virgin feels her self in the Center of
the Deity; she handles what does not appear to be tangeable, viz. Breath,
Spirit, Fire and Air, in all these her feeling-motion is in great Serenity. A
Center-Life, that burns from the Mirror of the Deity, boyles Love up to that
height, as nothing is felt but Pleasure and ravishing Delight; it is the Heat
and Blood that runs through every Vein of the Virgin-Body, and is an Antidote
against all Fear and Pain, which is felt in the mortal Sense: Oh! what Deaths,
Akings and Griefs have we felt in our Souls, as well as in our Bodies! our
Minds being in continual Anxiousness and Trouble, to see what we are fallen
into; I speak of such who have been touched with the Fire-Stone of the Virgin,
which must go before her healing Medicine. And blessed are they who have first
known the painful feeling under her severe Discipline; for such shall be her
polished Pillars on which she will engrave her Virgin Name, as he says, who is
the true and faithful Witness, who is come to take off the Virgins Vail, that
we may see her in the Glass of perfection, and come to know and feel her, not
as distinct and apart from us, but all Virginized in her essential Deity, that
the joyful feeling in breath of Fire and Air may be witnessed, and then we
shall see what shall follow the Harmony of these Senses, which is the Character
of the Virgin-Nature, the Pattern we are to try our selves by, for which end we
are also called to look into her Mirror, that so it may stir up all favor of
desire in us, to have those Senses in their excellency awakened in us. Oh,
great Goddess and Queen of all Worlds! will thou, after so long a time of
Desertion, once appear again! Who is it that has entreated thy Favor, and
gained a Promise from thee, of a Visit, though this be too short, because
nothing now will satisfy, unless thou bestow thy self, with all thy divine
Senses, as a co-deified Life, to show that thou art now prevailed upon, to join
with the Redeeming Blood, to restore thy own Virginity, where thou find
Humility and Importunity in that Personality which is all beloved of the
highest Wisdom, and only Spouse of God; know and remember us who are brought to
thy feet, and have been under thy severe Discipline; therefore allot thy self
to be our Garland and Crown!

Now we are advanced one step higher toward Wisdom's heavenly Throne, from
whence her Golden Scepter is stretched forth to lay hold on, which passes
through and beyond every elementary Cloud, which the sensitive Life has
raised, so as we could not see our way to that sparkling Rock of the Deity; for
which cause the bright Sun now shines from her eternal Orb, through the dark
Clouds, that we might see every ascending degree, twisting and winding so
intricately, that without a Guide expressly sent down from that Sphere, there is
no possibility ever to come to any one of her Gates which lead to the New -
Jerusalem. These are set before me to be in number Which five Gates were the 5
Senses spoken of before. Now proceed we to the following Gates.
Twelve, five of which were spoken of in the foregoing Chapter, and now we
repair to her Oracle as our Guide for the revealing of the other seven Gates,
together with the Way which leads from one to to the other, where the hidden
Track of the Virgins Way may be found, treading upon that unknown ground, under
which is found a rich and precious Stone, from which the highest blessing will
abound.

The Way to the first of these seven Gates is very solitary and lonely; it is
very rare to meet with two agreed to hold out in it to the end, it is so full
of rending Thorns and affrighting wild Beasts; for herein lies the design of
the horned Beast to scatter and divide such who are agreed to travel in Wisdoms
Path: Also, the Nimrod Hunters of this World send out after them, either to
divide or bring them back again. These are the Oppositions we may expect in
this Way, against which we must be provided and fore-armed; that our entrance
by this Gate may not be prevented. The Inscription of this Gate is Abnegation
or Renunciation of this outward Principle. The first Question which is asked by
the Angel who keeps this Gate, is, Are you come away as Strangers and Pilgrims?
Will you no more return to the Traffic of Babylon? For the Prince of this City
will only admit of such as shall abjure all Commerce with the Merchants of
Tarshish, though by this means all earthly Riches are gained, to keep up a
Worldly Reputation and Fame; but the Angel of this Gate will have good
Assurance that whoever comes up hither be quite broken off from, and have no
further dealing with the Harlot daughter of Sidon, who has deceived the
Kingdoms of this World with her Sorceries. Whoever they be that get through
this straight Gate, for them a sure and good Foundation is laid, to walk
forward toward the second Gate. But here another thing is to be considered,
before entrance can be given; for this Angel is charged not to take any ones
single Security, but enquires whether Christ's Spirit in them, and his Person
for them will stand engaged to perform all this Agreement? For she dares not
trust the Soul upon a single Promise, though fervent and unfeigned, and full of
good Will, yet it is not sufficient, if he be not able to maintain the Gate
ground against his Enemies, that will attempt to circumvent him. Therefore we
that are come hereunto, are to give in the Name of our Security, and so pass on
freely to the second Gate.

The second Gate is called the wrestling or struggling Gate; it is the Gate of
Probation, before it stands a Center-Gulf: Here will rise what will countermand
the Pilgrim back again into the worldly Principle, which he had abjured and
left behind. Wisdom stands by her Angel to call and invite to come through; but
the Gulf swells so very high, that it appears impossible to get over. Legions
of Spirits here do follow, crying out, What mean you to run so great a hazard,
as to have a place, where is store of all good things for Supply and
Maintenance. Thus Temptations and Assaults will beset the Pilgrim, threatening
hard and bitter things to him who is a seeking his own Native Country and
original Virginity, and endeavors with great wrestling to get rid of all these
knawing Vipers. What! say they, will you turn quite away from those pleasant
Joys in which others live, spending their days in Gods Love and Peace, and
therein rest contented, not attempting the passing of this Gulf, till the limit
of your Life requires it? All this and much more will press in to turn away the
Soul from pursuing after its Virgin Crown; and therefore this Gate is called
the Probation Gate. Now if the Spirit of Christ be so powerful in the Soul, as
not to regard these Temptations, being resolved to venture through the fiery
Gulf, that Soul will win the Virgins Heart. For here indeed is manifested a
full proof of Love's affiance, by coming out from, and renouncing all the
Charms of the Daughter of Babylon, who has used all her Art to fright her from
attempting ever to enter this Gate: She has through all Ages rescued from the
Serpent's twisting toil, and brought many back to enter into her Gates again.
Wonderful it will be to see any one come of a Conqueror here; for this is the
most perilous Gate, because of the Gulf which stands before it. The mortal
Spirit, whose Affection is joined to gross Elementary things, cannot pass this
Gulf without suffering loss; it is a Life that cannot be saved, but must be
swallowed up. But Christ, our Life, will swiftly pass through, as a fiery
Chariot, and the naked Soul with him, who has resisted all those Temptations
which would have hindered his entrance into this Gate, which is the very winning
of that Field, where Wisdom's Gold of Opher, and unknown rich Substance does
lie. Oh! who is it that will hold out the Encounter at this Gate? It may be
truly said; That many have striven to enter, but because they would or could
not leave behind all mortal Burdens, and come quite naked out of Babylon, they
were not able to enter. This is that which has dis-enabled many to enter, and
will continue to do so, except the Christ of the mighty God enable us to pass,
and then we shall with freedom and ease come up to the third Gate.

The third Gate is Translation, by Fixation in Wisdom's Land or Principle. The
Center of the Virgin Wisdom may often open and take up the Soul and Spirit into
it, and then be shut again, and the Soul let down into Babylon's Principle:
This, I say, may happen often before the Soul comes to be fixed in Wisdom's
Orb. But when the Soul is fixed in the Heavenly sprouting life of its Emmanuel,
and translated into a pure Nazarite Virginity, which knows nothing more of the
fallen Birth. Here the Soul stands in another Principle, having got firm
footing in Wisdoms Land. Here a goodly Lot is cast for the conquering Soul, who
will find all riches stand before her in Wisdoms Treasury, without either
bounds or limits. Whatsoever is of use or service is there laid down at the
feet of a translated Spirit, as the return of her Adventure and Trust in that
day, whilst she was under the Temptation of the glistering Stars of this
Elementary Region, all whose Promises were but as a snare and bar to keep from
knowing this high Translation.

Oh! what a welcome Feast do I see already prepared within this Gate, to
satiate both the Eye and Taste! The Virgin comes and salutes the Soul with a
Loves intercourse, saying, Come now and inherit Substance with me, ye who have
been in weary Travel to attain this fixation Gate, I behold you in the face of
the Bridegroom, by whose means you are arrived here: Now in his Name ask and
have. See now what Honor and Preferment you shall have in my Kingdom, which
will recompense a thousand Fold for the loss you have sustained in the World,
from whence you are come out. As you did give credit to me upon the Word of my
Testimony, and the fame which was brought to your Ear, though as yet you
possessed nothing of what is intended for you. But here is now what will weigh
down and recompense all your Sufferings, when you resisted manfully those busy
Spirits that would have blocked up your way; but in strong Faith you have broke
through all. Let your Victory be assigned to him who has the opening Key for
to let in from Gate to Gate. All this is from the By Sophia is meant
Virgin-Wisdom.
dropping Lips of Sophia and her Bridegroom, who now stand ready to open the
fourth Gate.

The fourth Gate is called the Bountiful Gate. From hence the richest Gift is
brought forth, that ever has been received since Adam lost his Virgin, who now
here gives her self again to the Soul. Oh, great is this Benignity! who could
ever have hoped for such degrees of Advancement, after so long a day of
Desertion and night of Apostasy? An Echo sound we now do hear, that she will
appear in her Bounty. But to whom shall this Gate open stand, to receive this
Liberality from her hand? Is it not for Ruth, who has forsaken the Moabitish
Land, and come to be fixed there, whence her eternal Nativity is derived, where
she is no sooner arrived, but she is decked with all the Virgins Ornaments,
which are the various Accomplishments in all supernal Powers and high
Abilities, to act in a divine Omnipotent manner, whether in a corporeal form,
or out of it, as shall be judged moet, with reference to Place, Time or
Persons, and according to the Region where the Bridegroom, with his Bride,
shall be, whether in the Heights above or Depths beneath, where his and her
rejoicing shall be in each other, through the breaking opening of the Center,
from whence the Virgin-Tincture, as a warm Fire-blood, does flow in every Vein,
and a nourishing Life is felt passing through every sense. This is that Gift
which the Virgin will bestow upon the fixed Soul, for a greater Manifestation
of God's manifold Wonders throughout the habitable part of this Earth, where
the whole Trinity in Wisdom will assume a Virgin-humanity, to bring all what
hitherto has been confused into-order again. The Government of the brutish
Spirit must give way to her day, who comes to overturn all Merchants with their
Merchandise. No Wares of the Assyrian shall be brought through her Gates,
neither shall any Sale of the Harlot's goods be mingled with her Treasures, but
a vast separation there shall be, as between Paradise and this World, where all
things stand in an anxious Birth; but that other Sphere is blessed with a
perpetual Spring of all pleasant things, which we shall know and understand in
their variety in the next Gate, which now we are, by the steady hand of Christ,
led up to, that we may see the utmost Latitude of Wisdom's inward City, and
come to know all the goings in and comings out at these Mystical Gates.

The fifth Gate bears the Title of Wisdom's Factory of all that is managed by
her Magia, from her own stock and Principle, being very different from all the
Merchandise which is used in this visible World, which is wholly shut out of
her Gates; for none can drive an earthly Trade, but such as bear the Mark and
Number of the Beast here in this outward Principle: Wherefore Wisdom will take
none to be her Factors, but those who have renounced all Babylonish Trade,
which is maintained by bearing the Mark of the Beast, from the introduced
subtilty of Reason. A new and wonderful Way is prescribed to them who shall
have the Mark and Name of the Virgins white Stone, by which they shall be
empowered to drive a free and mighty Trade within this heavenly City, which
shall make all Babylon's Wares grow out of request, both as to spiritual Wares
or bodily Sustenance, as soon as some Virgin-Passengers shall have entered this
Gate, who shall be so highly favored for having here broke through, that they
shall have liberty to open this high Factory to the rest of their
Fellow Members, that yet are Captives in the Assyrian Land, and were there
brought up according to the Laws and Customs of the Babylonians, which could
not be avoided, during their time of Captivity. But now Babylon's Sun is going
down, and the Night of Death and Darkness is spreading it self over all the Sea
Rev 18. 11, 12, etc.
pompous state of the Merchants of the Earth. All this will be seen upon the
breaking in of the Bridegroom's Spirit, and his The word Magia is the created
Power of the-Holy Ghost, so to be undestood as often as named.
Virgin, who will deliver the exile Captives, and clasp them close within
themselves, and exercise the Soul in another Science: Its skill and wisdom in
the divine Magia will actually go forth from this Co-essential participation of
the Virgin-Nature, to renew all good and pleasant things, according to the
first Paradisical Property, as in the following Gate will be made out, where
the Virgin will particularly exercise her Magia for Redemption out of the
present Captivity, under which the Israelites as well as Ethiopians do groan,
being beset with the effects of Sin and Mortality, which this sixth Gate does
deliver us from.

The sixth Gate is called the transferring Gate, where the most choice and
noble Gifts are transferred from the Palace of the glorious Majesty, as the
Foundation of Wisdom's factory, managed by Wisdom's Correspondents, who are
skilful in the working Wheel of the divine Magia. Oh! what transferring Powers
will pass from one to the other! to bring forth the flourishing of Eden, that
it may again appear in this habitable World. Wisdom's Lovers now must dig deep
to find this Kernal, which has lain hid in the Ground of Virgin-Wisdom, from
whom it must be transmitted to them, who shall plant Paradise in a greater
Latitude in this World: For which a sure and unalterable Decree is gone forth:
for it is affirmed by the living Word, who declares beforehand the truth of
these things, which are already begun, and shall be finished as soon as all the
Virgin's Gates are past and entered. And this is more considerable, where such a
mutual constant Correspondency is betwixt those two Kingdoms, Paradise and
Mount-Zion, all rich things will be transferred from each to other; yea, an
immortal Factory is here to be maintained, betwixt the Inhabitants of these two
heavenly Countries, and so transferred still into this lower Orb, as occasion
shall be. For though some part of this Earth, by virtue of the Virgin-Stone,
may be tinged into a Paradisical Property, and thereby made capable of Commerce
with the superior Worlds, yet there will be a race of Vagabond Cains, that will
abide still under the Curse. Tho Paradise be made visible in this World, yet
all will not suddenly thereby be brought to leave Babylon's Merchandise,
neither will the divine Arts and Mysteries be transferred commonly, but upon
such who have sought them diligently, and have let all other Arts and Callings
to for them, being resolved to know no other but the heavenly Magia. This is
the invisible Stock which the Virgin does traffic with, to gain Honor,
Wealth, Renown, and a Crown of Glory to her God and Bridegroom.

Now it may be asked, What matter is here to work upon for such abundant
increase? Where lies the Mystery of this Art, that must be transferred by her
as a Gift.

I Answer; That this is a great Secret, which cannot be revealed all at once,
and so deeply Mystical, that none but Wisdom's exercised Magicians have ever
founded it, and found the matter hereof. Yet we must not deny the great favor
which the Most-High has afforded for the opening of this secret thing, through
the very Person of Christ's glorified Humanity, that so we might know what will
make mortal Dross become like the fine Gold of Opher. But to give an answer to
that Question. What that matter is, which in Wisdom's Principle we are to work
upon? I say, first negatively, That it is no gross tangible Matter, that we
shall traffic with; we shall need no Barns or Storehouses to lay it up in: To
describe it according to what is revealed, we say, it is a rushing Breath, a
tincturing Blood, a running flash of Light and Fire coagulating together; in a
word, it is the Power of the Deity transferred to a Virgin-Spirit, on God's
behalf, as in the Person of Christ and his Virgin, transmitting themselves as a
spiritual Root, from whence all fruitful Powers of the holy Ghost may be
proved; for otherwise all fore-passed things will bring little Glory to our
mighty King and Savior.

The seventh Gate is the Gate of Projection, which will take off all Vails that
have been upon the most Holy Place, where we may enter, as all knowing in
Wisdom's Mysteries and Wonders. But here lies the difficulty, how to attain the
skill to stir up the precious Gift, that according to what was before
described, from the tincturing Blood of the divine Virgin, we may be able to
bring forth Matter, Form and Color, according to the Quint-essential Spirit,
transferred from the highest Being.

But it may be asked here, How, or in what manner does this Projection operate?

I Answer; Several ways, all which may be referred to these two Heads, viz.
Transformation and Transfiguration; in which two great effects, Projection will
be known in its essential Virtue, flowing out and entering in where the Venom of
the Serpent is, which poisonous matter is transferred in the Soul by means of
this Projection, from the Tincture of Wisdom's Stone, which causes an
unalterable Transmutation of all gross Matter, and the vile Body's shape into
a bright heavenly Consistency: Such a Celestial Body Wisdom's Virgin shall
have power to put on, when called up to the Seraphick Thrones, and to appear
before the highest Majesty, to receive new Commissions what to act further,
according to the Counsel and Will of the Holy Trinity, who will greatly delight
to put them upon working what is Noble, Great and Wonderful, which none can
parallel, except they have first passed all the forementioned Gates.

If it be asked, What Works and Signs shall follow Wisdom's Projections?

I Answer; They are such as Jews will not believe before they see them; nay,
even Wisdom's Disciples, who have been gathered under her Wing, and drunk of
her tincturing Blood, will be sometimes in doubt of these things, whilst they
are yet but Passengers from Gate to Gate: Wherefore we must not expect to be
believed by those who are yet without the Gates. However, we will, according to
what has been revealed by the supreme Magns, declare and set forth what God
can do by his Instruments, who are thus highly and divinely qualified.

In the first place, they will be able to act from a creating Power, the
Virgin's Omnipotency will enable them to give a new Form, Virtue and Purity to
all things now existing in gross Corruptibility. For as Transformation first
passes upon all the fallen Properties of the Soul's Essences, so it will go
out and renew whatsoever does stick in the Curse, even all Vegetable, Animals
and Minerals, together with the Body of fallen Man. All these, I say, shall be
sublimed and transmuted into a simple, pure and paradisical Figure, Color and
Taste, quite of another Nature than what they now have. Thus the Disciples of
Wisdom, by means of this tincturing Spirit, shall bring in a new Creation by
way of Transformation: The Mystery of which none can ever find out but Wisdom's
Magia, who are under her Discipline, and do lie in her Bridegroom's Bosom.

In the second place, they who are transformed into the Virgin's Nature, will
not only be able to separate the Curse from the outward Creation, so as Death
and Corruption shall be tasted no more, because healing Waters will flow from
the glassy Sea, and encompass every place where Wisdom's Offspring, shall
pitch their Habitation; but they shall also be able to trans mute all gross
Metals into transparent Gold, so as it shall be far more plentiful than in
Solomon's time. This very gross Earth on which we nowtread shall be made
Chrystalline. The River that was divided into four Heads, which have been cut
off ever since Adam was turned out of Paradise, shall now be made to return
again with a full Stream to bring forth the Seed of Gold, Bedellium, and the
Onyx Stone in a sparkling Glory. Mansion-Houses here shall be built, and goodly
Tents pitched, which shall excel all the Structures which ever yet have been;
for these dwelling places shall be Magical, sometimes visible, and at other
times invisible, according to the pleasure of the blessed Inhabitants, who
dwell therein in everlasting Security: These shall live alone, and shall not be
numbered amongst the Nations who live without Wisdom's Gates. If any Sodomites
shall attempt to break in upon them, devouring Coals shall be scattered to
terrify and consume them; though destroying of any be their strange work, and
also disagreeable to the Nature of Love, and the peaceful Region wherein they
live; yet upon just occasion, Power will go forth in this way for their
defense. Moses was a meek and peaceable Man, and yet he was made a terror to
Egypt: He had no way to subdue Pharaoh, but by shaking his Magical Rod, which
alone could do more than whole Hosts of armed Men, And this will be the way of
God's appearance, to keep under the wild and brutish sort of Men, who are as
ravenous Beasts, greedy of Prey. Wherefore the Paradisical Planters will know
how to deal with such, whilst they are commissionated to go in and out amongst
them; and it will be their daily business to deliver the Israelites from
bondage and thrall, and that by displaying Jehovah's Wonders in such a manner
as that Age shall require, which shall be in an higher degree than ever has
been done here before. For though the Miracles of former days were great and
excellent, as those which were wrought by our Lord, and by the Prophets before
him, as well as Apostles after him, such as were the healing of the Sick, the
raising of the Dead, the restoring of the Lame, the making of the Dumb to
speak, the Deaf to hear, and Blind to see; all which were both inwardly and
outwardly performed by our Lord upon the Soul as well as the Body; yet the Lord
has given full assurance, that not only all these shall be revived, but that
the Magical Center shall open in a greater degree of variety than heretofore.
So that the greatest Wonders are yet to be manifested, which we are appointed
to wait for, till this Projecting Gate shall open upon us, where all Miracles
will be brought forth a fresh, for the Crown and Glory of the Virgin-Bride and
her followers: Which Gate, Lord Jesus, hasten to open for such who are under
thy strong and powerful Drivings!

In thy Light, sweet Sophia we are come to a discovery,
Where long have lain our lost forgetten Doury.
Those Celestial Gates, which now open stand
Has given us a view into the wealthy Land,
Where all things in the divine Magia stand;
In that place there is no working with Tool or Hand,
For all in Spirit there do act from that Power,
Which naught of the Earthly Craft can Severe.
Joy we then now in sight of this blessed Day,
Wherein Wisdom's Wonders so richly display.
But is may be asked, When shall this be?
And who amongst the now Living shall see?
I tell thee for surety, some there are in Corporeity,
To whom she will with her golden Key in Soveraignity,
Thus shall unlock the precious stoney Rock fully,
Where the Ocean-Treasury of her Deity lies hiddenly.
Oh! hear Virgin-Wisdom's call and cry,
Who skilled would be in her Mystery:
A new Way of Manifactory stands open, I see
Such Treasures as the World's Wonder be;
A Ship laden within, that God himself again
Will enter in to seize upon those heavenly Gems;
Ah, blessed sale for such rich Goods embarked here,
For what less than the acting stone will appear?
Is there Merchants as are not Transitory,
That understand Wisdom's Manifactory?
Who hiddenly have increased their Store,
And do studdy these Sciences yet more and more,
That so they might to those eternal Gems reach,
Or else Redemption will not be complete,
For putting an end to the Toil, Care and Sweat,
By passing through all of Wisdom's twelve Gates.
Come then away, holy Souls, and separate
From all drossy Things that do captivate;
And you will find such a Pearly Price,
That will make you flourish as in Paradise;
The golden River therefrom will flow,
That all the essential Goodness ye will know:
For in Wisdom's Principle there does lie
That which will make the worldly Craft to flyc.
Upon the close of this subject, I had renewed again from the Person of my
Lord, a firey Shower that did fall as the dropping Rain from the holy Ghost, to
refresh and bring up what has been sown by the former Revelations, which is to
be looked for as the effect of every true discovery: And I desire the same
plentiful Shower may come down upon them, who shall receive and read the Words
of this Prophecy: For a most wonderful and strange time is at hand, and does
call upon us to leave the Moabitish Land, and to engrave our Names on every one
of Wisdom's Gates, that so we may claim a right to enter, and not be only
Spectators and Admirers without of the great Riches and Glory to which Magical
Spirits are advanced. But we are yet to open a more inward Ear: to hear the
Message which the Lord has expressly (...) for his Elect, who are watching at
Wisdom's Gates, from thence to ascend one step higher, that they may be
enclosed in the Magical Eye of the holy Ghost, where the highest Wisdom is to
be learnt and understood, and actually practiced, for the planting of a new
Paradisical Nursery, and its never fading Beauty and Glory. By which means the
Deity may be invited to renew his Walks with Men, as at the beginning, who will
take great delight to see the Children of Paradise acting Magically under the
Conduct and Government of the Eye of the holy Ghost: For no work or action is
so agreeable to the Trinity, as that which is wrought from the Magical seeing
Eye, where God beholds and views himself in his manifold Wonders of Wisdom in
Nature's Virginity.

But now the great Question of those who are willing to be Wisdom's Disciples,
is, Which way they may ascend up to this Globe-Eye, to become Magicians in the
holy Ghost's Property?

This Question is deep and weighty, and shall be answered according to the Gift
of Revelation received; Know then, that the way to ascend to the Globe-Eye, is
through its descending down into the Root-Essence of the Soul, and contracting
with it Philosophically, turning it into a Magic Eye; where then it may most
easily ascend, and fly to be an Eye, in the Globe-Eye, before which all stands
naked and open, whatsoever has proceeded from the Center - Ground of God's
Globe of Eternity. Therefore they who shall find such favor, as to be
introverted and environed with this Eye, may well come to understand the
grounds of the divine Magia, and be able to exert it from the Co-essential
Power of the holy Ghost, without which all attempts for it will lie in Scorn
and Derision. Hence we may understand where the Groundwork for divine
Philosophy does lie; whereby great Overturns and mighty Changes may be effected
in this Worlds Region, where God will have great occasions for divine Magia to
act in his behalf: And truly somewhat begins to work in order hereunto; for the
Magic Eye has cast forth an enticing Glance to draw up unto it, and there to
stand a while as locked up in it, as a close working Philosopher, that
carefully tends his Furnace, where the Celestial Fire burns softly to bring
forth a transparent Stone, in which the firstborn Magic of the holy Ghost
does consist: But here we may be said to lanch so deep into the Abyssal Eye, as
to lose our selves whilst we are seeking this one precious thing, that can
make this old wrinkled Face of the Creation to become young and fresh, as
Paradise in its first springing. But who will grieve at the loss of this gross
Matter? the true Philosopher well knows, that this is the gross Body which the
Fire is to kindle upon, being of that penetrating Nature, as to dissolve the
whole bulk of Sensuality, with the strong twisted band of Rationality: For when
the great Artificer, the holy Ghost, comes to set his Furnace at work in very
deed, in the Soul, all gross thick matter does by degrees transpire. For what
is so great an Enemy to the divine Magia, as the rational Wisdom, which is in
strong Combination with the humane Sense? It is as an Inundation of Waters
which has prevailed like Noah's Flood, to drown the Fire-spark of Faith, so
that it is scarce to be found alive in any ones Earth: All Furnaces have
hitherto been too weak; the strong Tide of the rational Mind has broke in like
a Sea, to chill and damp what the Spirit of God would have still blown up unto
Victory. For whosoever shall attain to be an Adiptist in the Magical Eye of
Sophia, must watch the Mouth of the Furnace continually, that the Spirit of
Faith may work high through the gentle heat and constant supply of that Matter
which maintains the heavenly Fire, which can only master and get dominion over
all the thick dark Body of Mortal Sense, which has long been the grand
Adversary of Virgin-Wisdom's Magicians, and has kept them from attaining the
Gate of Projection. Now what is there to be considered further, to help us
forward in this high point of Magical Philosophy, seeing the Benefits are of so
great import, and serve for the repairing of a ruinous state of things within
our selves, and every where round about us. We are to observe these Orders and
Rules, which go along with Faith's Magia.

First, There must be an absolute trust reposed in Christ the essential Deity,
as contacting and coagulating with our soulish Essence, and thereby recover our
unipotency. The depth of those Sayings of our Lord, when personally upon the
Earth, who still invited and called upon all to believe on him, as Co essential
with the Father, and thereby entrusted with all that Power and Sufficiency
which can be called God's. Now here is given us to understand a deep and
mystical Sense, how that the Lord did not limit or shut up the Faith to his
particular Personality and appearance on the Earth; for that was not to abide,
but directed to the exerting forth of our Faith to the Lo I am, in whom there
is no change to the end of all Worlds. He is now therefore to be believed on,
as introduced into our soulish Essence; for there he brings in the Globe-Eye,
as the sure Groundwork for all the various operations of the holy Ghost to act
out the great Magical Powers from: Thus our Faith is directed to a God like
Almightiness within our selves. If we can but find the Incarnation of Christ,
the Lord in us, we then have a sure and steady Anchor for our Faith to hold by,
and work out our freedom Magically, having somewhat of subtle pure Matter to
work upon, we may go on forward to Projection.

Another Rule is, the going forth in the prerogative Royal of the Will, that is
immerced into, and become one with the Power of the holy Ghost. We may remember
that Christ the Lord, upon doing any great or mavelous Cure, put forth the
soveraignity of his Will, as when he said to the Leper, I will be thou clean:
And sometimes he put it to those, who, he perceived had Faith in him, saying,
What will ye that I should do unto you? And no less was effected for them than
they desired the Lord should do for them. These expressions of our Savior may
be a grand Rule for us to follow, and ought well to be regarded by us, for in
the Will is the highest Magic, when it is united with the Will of the Highest;
when these two Wheels meet in one, they are the swift running Chariot, which
nothing can cross or stop, in which the Bridegroom, with his Bride Sophia, ride
most triumphantly together over all things, viz. over Rocks, Mountaints and
Hills, which are all made a Plain before them, and Seas dried up. What is able
to resist a Will that is united with God's Will, before which every thing must
stoop and bow? which Will, when ever it goes forth, always accomplisheth its
Enterprise. Its not a naked Will that wants its Garment of Power, impregnable
Almightiness is with it, to pluck up, to plant, to kill, and to make alive; to
bind and to loose, to save and destroy: All which Power will be centred in the
royal freeborn-will, which we shall come fully to know, and to understand, as
we are made one in the holy Ghost; then may we go forth safe and secure in the
Magic Will, to glorify the great Elohim, whether in Body visible or
invisible; all is and shall be acted forth according to the foresight of the
Magical Globe-Eye, and carried on, in and through the operation of the holy
Ghost in impotent and despicable Vessels in the Eye of the world. These are
they whom God will take into his high School of divine Wisdom, there to be
brought up in the deep Wisdom, and to be so perfectly accomplished, as that
nothing may be beyond their art and skill to perform, to exalt and magnify
their God and King, by whom alone they shall be enabled to do all marvelous
things.

Now from the foregoing Rales, we are taught to drown the many Wills, that
have been generated from the mixed Essence of the Soul, and to loose them in
the Abyssal-Deep, from whence then may spring the Virgin-Will, that never was
in Bondage to any thing of degenerate Man, but stands free and clear in
Conjunction with Almighty Power, which will most certainly produce answerable
Consequences, as kept fixed in the Socket, where the burning Oil of the holy
Ghost flames out in sparkling Magic, operating here and there upon Persons and
Things, for Change and Renovation, yet none can pierce the way, but such as are
become Masters of his high Art. I know nothing more worthy for the single Eye
to look into, and contend for, than the Magia of Faith, which was once
delivered unto, and exerted by the Saints of former Generations; and why we
should give it for lost now, I see no cause, but should be earnest for the
reviving of it, and calling it up from the Dead.

I shall not here determine whether for want of this Power, we may not lie under
the charge of having lost our first Love, but sure I am, that this Magical
Power of Faith is in a manner quite lost, for the re-attaining of which, the
holy Ghost is awakening Wisdom's slumbering Virgins? And therefore the Lord
has appeared in his own glorified Humanity to reveal these Mysteries, and that
by one who is as the smallest Dust, that lies under the trampling Power of the
earthly Wise, and those that are mighty in Reason. Yet here the Way is laid
open to attain to this All-powerful Activity in the Magia of the holy Ghost, to
encourage and provoke us to set upon the work, giving Praise unto him, who has
been pleased to reveal where the Key of the Magia does lie, which will open
that Treasury that can fully enrich all impoverished Souls: Wherefore it is
worth the lending our Ear to Wisdom's renewed Call and Cry, and no longer to
delay, but hasten to get through all her Gates, and to be Planters of a new
Paradisical Earth, through the Magical Operation of the holy Ghost, which is
the absolute employment and business of some known to God, who if they continue
faithful, shall never have reason to be ashamed, or repent of their being
engaged therein; notwithstanding they may meet with great Treats and Sufferings
at first from Nabal, the churlish Spirit of this World, that can love or favor
naught but what is of its own liking: But Wisdom's Children shall be able to
set themselves free, as they become Studients in the Art of this divine Magia.
Rebecca the true Virgin Mother, is ready to give such advice as will supplant
Esau, that Jacob may carry away the Blessing. Oh! what is like to the Magical
Stone, for the bringing in of a superabundant increase from the right golden
Grain, by which all excellent and perfect things did at first spring: At the
return of which a new and marvelous Change every where will appear in the
highest Unity and Community, in all those Celestial Immunities which the
Most-High is invested withal. Thus having brought forth, in some part, what
has been showered down from the heavenly Powers, at several Seasons upon me,
with a command to publish it, I have nothing more but to Pray, we may obey all
these precious Rules.

A further Revelation upon the last subject, which I thought had been
concluded, but the running Oil does spring a fresh for an addition, that so all
help might be ministered, by way of manuduction, to such high spirited Souls as
shall resolve to separate themselves, that they may be meet to intermeddle with
all Wisdom, and thereby be enabled to stand before the Globe-Eye of Almighty
Soveraignity, which is a peculiar Prerogative, appropriated only to the wise
and pure in heart, who shall set themselves apart to follow the Track of the
divine Magia, which by the holy Ghost is prescribed, that so we may once more
again stand upon Paradisical Earth, with our impregnable Circle drawn about us,
to keep the Serpent and all his brood of wild Creatures out from us. It will be
well worth our waiting for every drop of pure Unction, which shall now fall for
fuller Instruction, and be distributed forth, as the Sping-Tide of the Spirit
does in us rise, which was renewed in this Word; Learn to live God, and God A
weighty Expression from Emmanuel.
shall live thee; his most holy Tabernacle shall be thy Covert, which shall be
visible to the Sons of Men, that they may know the most holy One, in the waste
and desolate places of the Earth, with his own will dwell. Urging that
foregoing Rule for this end, that the Magical attraction of Faith, which rises
from the burning Love, must bring God down to be all in all, that so the
Humanity may be covered over with the Tabernacle of the Deity, which will be
our House that cannot be dissolved, though the Starry Heavens, together with
the four Elements, and all their product do pass away; for though they take
their original from the holy Being, yet they cannot abide forever, because
they cannot incorporate with the pure Deity. Therefore they must have their
time to expire, when God shall descend in his most holy Tabernacle; what will
it be less than the rending away the vail of these visible Heavens, in their
first and second Administration, and all shadowed Presentations and
Figurations, wherein somewhat of Glory, as a twinkling Star, in this benighted
Day, does appear. All which have but made way for the opening of the
everlasting Tabernacle, where we may be clothed upon with the Magical Body of
the holy Ghost, that so we may know what it is to live God. Oh! what weight
does this Word carry with it? Let us not suffer it to go lightly off, but take
in what the Urim and Thummim does advertise about this high Contaction. But
here may be enquired, What it is that may qualify to possess Gods living
Tabernacle? Verily no less is required than for us to live God, and for God to
live us; which is the wonderful Hypostatical Union, which Christ our Lord spoke
of in his day. We shall know him in the Father, and so reciprocally the Father
swallowing up into himself the whole Body of the Sonship, which is the height
and luster of that Kingdom which is to come, and is to be yielded up to the one
God, who is over all: Not that he will be a living Tabernacle to all, but only
to those who are meetly qualified. Who are they then who may expect to be
rearers up of this Tabernacle, which the Majesty of the Glory will fill? They
are pure, holy and separated Souls, set apart for this very purpose, bearing
the Inscription of Heavenly Magicians, as being principled in that great
Mystery, and being made all knowing through the friendly Counsel and Revelation
of the Virgin-Wisdom, who is the great Revealer of these Mystical Sciences and
Magical Arts, such as were practiced before this World or its Craft were in
being. But now the Wisdom of this World is needed and universally exercised by
all ranks and degrees under the present Fall: Regenerate and Unregenerate do
both agree in this matter, and do make use of Reason for the supply, succor
and support of the mortal Spirit and Body.

But what will you say, if this good old Magical way, from which the whole
Creation is turned, shall in this last Age be restored and found again, for the
redeeming out of the Care, Sorrow and painful Exercise of Mind and Body? This
will be worth lending an Ear to, it being such a mysterious and advantageous
Art, as will sufficiently pay the Cost of what we shall be out in attaining it.
The ground we go upon for this new way of living, after a God-like manner, are
the many Scripture-Prophecies that run all in this Sense, with which agrees
what is of late-renewed to some, who are waiting for their Lot within this New
Paradisical Scene, being under the Dispensation of such Revelations as are in
order to give entrance into the Tabernacle of God, where it will be natural to
produce all things Magically, beginning first to exercise this Mystical Wisdom
and Power upon it self, as having an old Creation which must be dissolved, that
a new one may take its place. The Physician must first give proof that he can
heal himself, before he undertake others. So in this matter, the true Magus is
taught to make a trial of his skill upon his own inward and outward Defects,
and thereby gain the Fearful and Unbelieving, that they also may come and enter
through this everlasting Gate, where the New Jerusalem Magicians are in their
first Paradisical Callings, which the holy Ghost has received Commission to
put some holy qualified Souls afresh Methinks I hear some say, This is such a
new Model as is wonderful strange; Pray open the Mystery of it yet more fully.
upon, that they may be leading Presidents to others.

But it may be further enquired, What this Magia is? And how it may be acted
forth, to alter the whole state of things Internally and Externally?

It is thus made out to us, That it is arising Infinitum, that forms it self
into a Birth, the matter of which can no otherwise be described, than the
unknown Being of God himself, who is Answer; I only can give out what the
Measuring Line of the Spirit has fathomed, and no more.
a mere virtual working Power, in a finite Being; from whence a flowing source
of generating Powers do act forth, from what lies hid so unconceiveably, as
cannot be either seen, felt or heard out of it self, but only as it produces
great and marvelous Effects upon whatever it does move: This is that which is
called the Magia of the holy Ghost, so defined, as he has pleased to reveal it
unto us.

Now it remains to enquire, By whom? and how this is to be acted forth? and for
what end it is to be manifested after such an high degree?

As to the first, By whom this is to be exerted, or acted forth? of this much
has been said already; we shall only mention one thing, which is the principal
Qualification of those to whom this Honor shall be given, viz. They are to
take up a firm and fixed Resolution to follow this Magical Vocation only, and
to reject all others that proceed from the Astral Birth, that do pour in whole
Floods to drown the little spark of Faith, from whence Magia is the Faith of
the operation of the Holy Ghost.
the Magia Tree must first grow, and appear in all its various Fruits. This I
say, is that which is to be done on our parts, as we would be Adeptists in the
supersensual working Wheel, which will run us into our lost Dominion, to be in
God again. But then watchfulness is required to repel and judge down every
whirling Motion and Thought, that shall rise to thwart the Magia Way, which
indeed is nothing else but a most pure single act of Faith, heightened to that
degree, as to become a kind of Omnipotency; if they can but get free from the
Life of Sense, which is its great and home-born Enemy, which will hardly suffer
the Soul to make its pass away, but follows still at the Heels, till the Hand
of Faith grows strong enough to use the Magical Rod, which may break their
binding Circle, that so we may get a swist pass into the boundless Liberty, and
some to be expert in the Theosophical Science, which is not of Man, nor after
any rational Wisdom of Man, but as the pure fiery Breath of the holy Ghost,
does incorporate with the Fire-Essence of the Soul, and so drive it up into a
Body of all-Magical operation. For the free actuation of which Life, we are
warned to cease from all other ways and employs, and upon this only to fix our
Minds, and to stop our Ears to the pleas and cries of the Senses, that would
still have us to lie at the Breast of the Creature, when as nothing but Death,
Sorrow and the Curse can be sucked from it; It is indeed but natural so to do,
as long as we stand in the first Birth, from which it will be hard to get
loose, till the other come to rise in the Soul's center. For in this second
Birth, there is a strong force, which is able to overcome and break that Yoke,
which has been so often near strangling this Magical Birth of Life, that it
could not display its free Breath; wherefore let us now take heed and ny away
from our mortal Senses, and totally exclude them from that new erected Throne,
Council and Court wherein pure Austraction and Child-like posture of Spirit we
may wait to learn how to act forth each one according to his Gift in this high
land supernatural Magia. That we may speak out what Lineage and Birth we are
brought forth in, after Gods own likeness in Power, Wisdom and Purity, to
glorify him in a new Tabernacle-Body, Magically raised, which being
consummated within the outward form of visible Corporeity, the unchangeable
Priesthood begins within the most holy Place, and is carried on not as in the
figurative and fleshly Administration, wherein was need of Attonements and
Offerings for Sin; which in this great and more perfect Tabernacle there will
be no occasion for, Sin being ended, and the holy Ghost having obtained a more
excellent Ministration in us, to wit, Offering the first Fruits of Redemption,
which in no foregoing Ministration was ever reached unto.

But here it may be asked, What manner and kind of Offerings will those first
Fruits of Redemption be?

This is a Question which cannot be so fully answered, till we are completely
perfected in this Tabernacle, which hitherto is only a rearing. But what of
these Immunities has been expressed by the great Priest, and opened from the
Tabernacle-Testimony unto me, shall be given forth for their sakes who may have
right to bring in such perfect Offerings, to the most holy and separated place,
in the day of their Restoration mutually with us, who are expecting the
accomplishment in all its divine Ordinances and Consecrations, for the
perfecting every Comer hereunto. But now to define what kind of Offerings we
shall bring as Priests to God; they are the Fruits of the Magia, in their
out-flowing Operation, which actually send out a most powerful Spirit, from its
own essential Spring of Spirit, wherein God is the only pure Original of it.
What is sent forth to effect, but a new Generation of Heavens and Earth? The
Magia works in this manner, saying, Let the old Tabernacle, with all its
shadowy Appearances, pass away and be no more: And it is so, for the force of
the out-going Spirit incorporates with the Word, and makes it Essential,
whether it be expressed Vocally or no; the Co-centred Decree passes into, and
though the Spirit carries all Power with it, either to nullify or make void,
or to give a new Plantation, and an heavenly splendorious Formation upon
Creatures and Things, for a lustrious Transformation of what is fading and
dying, that so Immortality may be renewed, whether in Rationals, Animals or
Vegetables. The matter of the one Element is so immerced and coagulated in a
Magical Spirit, that it is able to give a Life, where the very Face of Death
does appear, whether dead, as to a Spiritual Life, according to that saying,
And you has he quickened, who were dead in Trespasses and Sens. Who is this in
the Person of Christ, but the same holy Ghost in his out-going Power, that
through our Persons so influencing and given a Resurrection to a dead Life,
whether in our selves or others, as cause requires: Then also as to the very
mortal Life, to prolong it, and to secure it from Pain and Sickness, Yea, from
Death it self. But this quickinmg Spirit is only appropriated to such as have
dyed and suffered with Christ in the Flesh, and thereby have overcome the
World. Therefore let none think that they can come to this degree of Power,
Might and Dignity, till they are Born again from the Dead, that is, a cessation
to the enkindled Life, from the Stars which generate earthly Motions and
Thoughts, which work in a way of Sensuality, from which there must be a
departing, in reference to those great Things which are to succeed. I have been
often brought to see the limit of the first Born Life, that does consist
between Time and Eternity, in the stirring Essences of Sin; whereby I am made
so wisely knowing, as not grieve, or to have any Reluctance upon the sentence
of a total Expiration of such an injurious Life, as keeps me out of God's
Tabernacle-Body, where I can no more dye. Whereupon the holy Ghost, out of the
Virgin-Body, does cry and call to such, who would come to be all Magical, to
offer up their Firstborn rational Life for a Sacrifice: And then of a truth we
shall bring other kind of Fruits and Offerings, and no more as Tributaries and
Servants to Sin, Beast or Dragon, but be freed, through the rising Birth, that
will mount and fly over all those, who kept the other under great Fear and
Bondage; but in this we shall come to be Kings in God's House, and of his own
Family. Oh! what has been here let down by Golden Drops from the
Head-Fountain! Let it O God, mingle all forcibly for Life contaction, with the
more noble part within us, that so this great and perfect Tabernacle may be
according to its own secret way compacted indissolvably, where we may securely
dwell, and nothing of Violence, Oppression or Fear, but receive Power from the
rising Body of the holy Ghost to bear down and expel whatsoever is against us.
This is what the Lord has by a signal Word averred, and he will see it
fulfilled, as in any one such a Spirit of Resolution shall be found, to go
forward in this great Enterprise to encounter, and rush through every Throng,
that would stop and put them by, who are ready to venture their All for it.

Now somewhat may be said as to those high Ends, for which God is resolved to
raise his principal Magia.

First, to redress, comfort and relieve the groaning Creation, which is in
spiritual travail; even such who are in Famine and Death, in Agonies, Sorrow and
Heaviness through diverse Temptations, and the Buffetings and Wiles of Satan: To
these the Magical Balsom shall be given for Cure, from such as are first risen
in the Tabernacle-Body of God: They shall bind all evil Spirits, and there
shall go forth a virtual Power from them to do, as if Christ were in person
there.

And in the second place, this Power shall extend it self to the taking away of
all outward Maladies of the Body, and all Sufferings relating to Penury and
Want, and all Weariness, Toil, and anxious Care for the Needs and Requirings of
the Body.

A further addition to the former subject; Know then, that as A fresh
Prophetical opening upon this subject
in a miraculous way, this will be made as healing Waters from out of the
Threshold of the Sanctuary, that shall recover the dry and parched Earth, to
make it bud and flourish, as it did before the Curse did overflow it: Take it
inward as to spiritual Fruitfulness, or otherwise as to the outward Elementary
state. Great also will be the Trust that will be granted by the mighty Jehovah,
for mannagement for his little Flock sake, and put into the Hands of some that
are to be set apart, as good and principal Shepherds indeed, who can both let
out, and lay down their Life for the elect Sheep, which are to be gathered in,
not by Sounds or Words, but by a Magical Impregnation, which can send in a
Breath of Life, to quicken what is as dead. This is now what we are in a daily
expectation of from the rich Furniture, which will come down with the
Tabernacle-Body. Oh come holy Souls! and let us be in a watchful posture; for I
do see in Spirit, that the Morning of this Day begins apace to clear, the
bright Clouds do open, the face of our Heavens appear, the separating Vail is
all rending away, that out of the first Tabernacle we may pass, and within the
most holy place fixedly stay, where we shall have no cause to fear, that God
will henceforth move away; because we our selves shall be brought up to that
height of Purity, that all Offerings shall be most pleasant and powerful from
the everlasting Flame of the holy Altar; from whence ascending Powers will go
up, to bring down such Gifts as will all abundantly enrich, more than came down
in the day of Penticost; for they were but the first Fruits, and did but
continue a little while; but here is such a Shower of the Eternal Powers to
fall down upon this second Call to the Jerusalem waiters, as shall bring forth
the Harvest of the Lord's Joy, whose Spirit, for the ripening of these Fruits
does work most powerful. What is to be done by us? but only to drink in the
falling Dews, and dropping Showers, and to grow as Lillies that may know
neither Heat nor Draught, Toil nor Care. Hasten, oh God! and send thy Angel
Reapers, for some Fields do begin to (...) White, whose ripe Fruits may into
thy Storehouse be brought as the first Offerings for the consvmmating of all
those great and mighty things, which thou have taught us in this little Volumn
of thy Life (...)!

Here follows a high ravishing Communion with the Trinity enjoyed, but receive
it not as an Elivation, but from a Spirit ^^^^^ated as into another light
Region, the half of which is not to be expressed which was here enjoyed.

Some Throne of the most Holy is now pitched in the center of the Heart of
Jesus, as in conjunction with my Heart, from whence such issues of Life do
flow, which renew a perpetual Spring of Joy. For the Lord pronounced the
fullness of all Blessing from the circle Throne of his Presence, bedewing me
with the Water of Life from the glassy Sea, mingled with the Fire of Love,
assuring me, that the Curse, which is annexed to fallen Nature, should now flee
away from God, and the Lamb's Throne; which Throne, the Lord has chosen me to
be unto him, in which the Scepter of his Kingdom should rule over all in the
divine Omnipotence. Upon which Thunder-cry, which passed through my Heavens,
all Nations, Tongues and Languages, Spirits and Powers, did give up to him, who
is come to fix his Throne, and to create all things new, and to confirm his
Covenant in the newness of the Spirit, and to nullify all of the dead and
fruitless-Life, which stands in the Letter-Precept, which could never destroy
the Root of Sin. It is now made known from the Word of Truth, that nothing else
shall ever fetch out the Serpent's Sting, but the overflowing of the burning
Oil from the Sea of Glass, which is broken up by the violent stroke of the holy
Ghost: All Sanctifications and Renewings are imperfect and changeable, till
this does come to rise as a covering, to make the gross Body transparent. So
now then we are to observe, that whenever God shall come in very deed to
enthrone himself in any, there will be felt this burning Sea, from which the
firey Lamps do proceed, which guard the Throne. Oh! it is the great and high
attainment, that a Spirit veiled with Corporeity can look for, to have God come
down in his Throne-dominion, and to cast down all other Thrones, in which the
dark firey Spirits have acted their part in the inward Tent of the Mind; all
which now to be destroyed and consumed by the pure flaming Throne, will
sufficiently witness, that God's Kingdom is now got beyond Words, and is sprung
up in a feeling Power. Oh! the Joys and Pleasure, which my Soul does feel in
its first rising, which is infinitely more precious than has been related,
though by Christ's own Personality, whose appearance did so variously describe
the Glory of his Kingdom to me; but now to come and bring it into me, will in
due season produce other things, than what has been believed or expected by
the Staggering and Fearful, who have cried, The Lord does yet delay his coming;
so upbraiding and beating his fellow Servant, crying for Signs and Wonders,
without which they can own nothing. But let all such slighting Spirits know,
that the Throne and Kingdom of the Lamb may for some considerable time be
forming, fashioning, furnishing and enriching with Glory; and all this carried
on very secretly, till the whole Mystery of the Kingdom be first inwardly
completed, before it come to make a visible Show, by a terrible acting of
Wonders. And know, that such as are come to feel the Kingdom in its invisible
Powers, and the seven Lamps of Fire burning, and are set down with Christ upon
the Throne, reigning over, and judging down all Nations in themselves, shall
have Judgment and Power given them over all, that have villified and set light
by them, in the day of their outward Rule and Authority, whilst the suffering
Lambs of God were in their Minority. But careful we will not be concerning
Judgment given, or Dominion exercised as yet out of the Throne of the Lamb in
our selves, but must follow on till it be fully perfected, and the Kingdom
established. It is the present Business of our Day, to watch to have every Lamp
fed from the glassy Sea, that so springing in the Light and Love-Flames, a
Chrystaline Throne may be maintained for the whole Deity: For verily whilst
such a thing as this is felt and witnessed, there is a most ravishing
Tranquillity. Oh! what is greater than to have Christ seated upon his Throne
within us? All things then must needs be in a peaceable and holy Order, and
blessed Subjection: Happy are they whose inward Eyes are opened all this to
see, possess and enjoy, even when retired out from all Creaturely Society, and
so translated into and among the Seraphick Spirits in heavenly Places.

Since my apartment to be alone, a full Concourse does now continually meet me,
even such Company, as makes me spend my hours and days with all spiritual
Mirth and Joy: For I am now come in truth (without Flattening, or crackling
Sparks, that go out again) unto the everlasting burning Throne of the Deity,
where just and perfect Spirits do use as so many lesser Flames, most
numerously, as God's encompassing Host, ministering all that may delight me: So
that I find I am to be reserved for God's Throne-Conversation, which is as the
seven days Feast of Tabernacles, wherein nothing of servile work Seven days of
Solitude from all of mortal Society as might be avoided.
is to be thought upon. This is a time of an holy Convocation, and for
celebrating the Praises of the Lamb, who alone has wrought the Victory for us.
Oh! what shall let now, but that all within me may give the Trumpes-sound, and
great shout, that the Lord Omnipotent is come to Reign: Rejoice ye Heavens
without, within, and round about, for the Lord Jehovah has only done it: He
has made Wars to cease, and keeps the Enemy without the Gates. Oh mighty
Prince and Savior! thou art entered into thy Throne-rest! Thou art become Lord
of the Sabbath indeed, and therefore thou have Power to Eternalize it; as a
Memorial of thy redeeming Blood, which is become the quickening and reigning
Life: Maintain my Love evermore in this new governing Sphere with thee; for
never knew I such a pleasant state, as since the time thou have brought thy
Kingdom into me, to rule over all in Peace and Love, and keep every Spirit
under check and in awe: Thy Throne is set, thy Council is fixed, the Urim and
Thummim of sound and right Judgment is come down, and Decrees are gone forth,
which all powerful Might will see executed within this hidden Kingdom of my
Soul and Mind. The Prospect of all this which now is come, the Spirit in
Christ, my Lord's Personality did give me to see, and therefore to Prophecy,
as hoping the Time is at hand, which is so in good earnest: for I am made to
understand, that the holy and just One is come, in his first and early Reign to
put all things to rights, that were found in confusion, in the fallen
Properties of Nature, and to Harmonize whatsoever did put forth from the bitter
Root Essence in Jars and Strife. Oht to have a Cure come in to relieve this
fallen, weary, tired-out Life, that was in perplexed Strife, can do no less
than give cause of Triumph, wherever such a Dominion is known, and entered
upon, though invisible: None is privy to what is done or acted there, but the
obedient Subjects that do wait upon the Throne, and are ready to fulfill all
royal Laws that are expressed from the counsel of the Trinity. And truly, I do
find great Joy in keeping up to this Restriction and Ordinances which do
appertain to the Lord, Christ's Kingdom, although they be quite different, and
of another kind, than what was allowed to be, and by the just One winked at,
before that Word, which is Spirit and Life did protest to me, That he was come
to make a total alteration, and to throw out all the Forms and Constitutions,
which have passed for a heavenly Formation, which yet never reached to this
new, most perfect and excellent Kingdom, which is so Chrystaline, as that the
Spirit and Soul are realized in a circuled Glory, and so shut up as no more to
look out or come down from off this high mounted white Throne; whereon the
Reigns of a great and wonderful Government are to be held fast: For which many
cautional Words I have received, for it is the abiding that will work out the
most glorious Victory; for no one that is shot up to the highest Stature in
Christ, and so ripe for the Government, is yet come to be exempted from
Assaults and Temptations, that will put forth from the satanical earthly
Kingdom, where all carnal earthly Senses, and rational Subtilty do still lie
lurking, that if the exalted Spirit that does sit upon the Throne with Christ,
should but venture down and debase it self, by complying with what it has
rejected of this world's Laws and Rudiments, it is possible the Kingdom may be
rent away, as in Readiness case; nay, in Solomon himself, God would not remit it,
when he departed from the Lord in any degree, but received a Rebuke to purpose
for it; all which was laid before me, for the holding fast the Scepter in
Humility, Purity, Fear, Righteousness and holy Couragiousness, that I might so
hold out in this first and invisible Reign of the Lamb of God, that he may come
to be visibly magnified, for the Conviction of those that are yet alienated by
a Spirit of Unbelief, not knowing the peaceable Fruits of this Kingdom within,
which in no wise can mingle with what is of the Starry Government, as being
quite of another Spirit. It neither cares nor seeks for Regency or Dignity
from these inferior Planets, which give the World's Wealth and Honor to the
vilest and basest of Men. Wherefore it is little regareded by such, who have
Eyes to see the workings of the superior Constellations, which move in the
third Heaven, remote from all mortal sight, from which alone I have sought for
Honor, Credit and Reputation: And now I am greatly satisfied to be esteemed of
no Repute, and to be as a poor Lazarus for the joy of that Kingdom, which is
already possessed by me: Yet not here so resting, as not to expect and believe,
but that this invisible Kingdom will so work out visibly, as it may make the
Sun, Moon and Stars of this inferior Orb to bow before it; for the assurance of
which, we can desire no fuller nor better Evidence, than the total and
victorious Reign of God over all the Sin-infected Properties: For let this be
but finished, and it will be a certain Introduction to the manifestative Reign
of the holy Ghost, who will not fear to face the Locusts of the Earth, that
have had their Fullness and Blessings from the Beast's Kingdom, whose Glory will
certainly wither and dye away. Nay, they who are of the number of Israelites,
and yet abide in the Abomination of Self-Love, will be so ashamed and
confounded at the opening of this plentiful Store, that will so abundantly
shower down upon them that sit on the Throne with Christ, that all those who
have detained these worldly Goods, shall have such Indignation against
themselves for it, that they shall throw their Gold and Silver to the Bats and
Moles of the Earth, and take hold of the skirts of the Throne-Princes, and cry
to partake of their Lot and Portion. For it will be of that Quality and daily
increasing Substance, for the satisfying of all kind of Requirings of the
outward Body, that Jacob's All and Enough will most surely be possessed without
Curse or Sorrow, which we know have attended the whole visible Treasury gotten
by the outward Wisdom and Art of Man; who have thereby so Idolized the Works of
their Hands, that they have quite run themselves out of those Blessings, which
come in by giving up their whole Mind and Will to be the Lord's dominion.

This is the surviving Kingdom that shall spread from the root of Christ risen
up in his perfect stature, within and throughout the Souls Essence to deifie
it, so that it may abide in the unalterable Substance of a Godded Nature,
without the hazard of ever relapsing into Sin, Curss or sorrowful Weakness,
which will be the most wonderful Salvation that ever yet was brought to
manifestation. For which cause it will necessarily follow, that this visible
Kingdom will be also established and become as a listed up Ensign, that all
flesh may tremble and fall before it, which did so insult and lift up it self
in Arrogance. Where the Lord was but as yet come in his first Reign, no show of
Glory was seen to outward appearance; but rather dark Clouds of Sufferings;
which being rightly improved makes meet for the full possession of the first
and second Kingdom, each one in their high graduation, for coming forth to
Glorification; as are now in the hidden Spears, where the high Throne-Glories
are manifested in another manner, of Kingly Pomp and Splendour, than what ever
has, or indeed could possible be figured out here, till the Kingdom it self do
work out visibly, and then we shall know what we at present are known of our
God for, in order to this excelling Reign, which is to answer to the Royalty,
Purity and Pomp, that God himself is now with all in his glorified Saints and
Angels. It is fully assured me that God has taken into his Eye and Love
election at this very day, those who shall come to sit in Princely Majesty and
great Dominion in the inward Regency of the Soul, conquering the thwarting
motions of sin and their own Passions; for Faithfulness, Truth and Love to
carry through here, will be signs and evidence sufficient what God will further
exalt unto. In the interim, whosoever have attained to the first Kingdom, in
Wisdom, Sanctification, and in the excelling Charity; know that these will give
the mighty onset for entrance, into the utmost bounds of this overlasting
Kingdom, which we shall not think it only sufficient to pray for, but to be
doing all that is required for it, in all comely order and fixed resolution, to
hold fast what we have already gotten, that none may supplant us, of that which
will be the lifted up Crown, to be seen every where upon the heads of the
anointed Ones.

Here follows divine Openings of the Reign and Kingdom of the Love.
Having been exercised for some considerable time, in the Prophetical Office
and Ministration, from the spirit of Revelation, as my writings bear witness;
concerning the Kingdom of Christ in its suffering state first of all, then in
its rising up through tribulation unto victory, for dominion and glorification
through the Love. Now the degrees which lead hereunto, have been sufficiently
described in The Heavenly Cloud, Printed in 1680, by the Author; which has had
most forcible effects, for the bringing in and establishing of this Kingdom;
wherein and to whom this Spirit of prophecy was given for a sealing evidence,
that the Spirit of Truth being the Spring of those foregoing Revelations, which
are now to be confirmed by the present Reign of a risen Christ, in some
personalities, which are and shall be taken up for this end, to show it forth
by that most excellent and perfect thing coming in, which is the Love Dominion,
which has exalted the same Propetical Spirit, now with Christ upon the Throne,
and does absolutely rule in Gods meek Love over the whole Region, even to the
utmost parts of the Souls inward Earth, where now great peace is found, the
Government being carried on sereinly and calmely through the conquering Love,
which has, like a River, overflowed the whole Earth. But this was not so fully
felt, known and witnessed as of late. The former Reign was maintained in an
imperfect degree; the spirits within were indeed under awe and check, and
unwillingly made subject to the Kingdom's Laws, that were renewed, suitable to
this most eminent and singular Ministration. While sometime I was under it,
which was looked upon as sharp and severe, the whole man being rein'd in very
Straight, would have gone forth into a reluctance, and so break all Harmony in
the properties, that should be found abiding in a new Model. And thus indeed
the Kingdom has suffered violence, and has been hid in great strife, as many
Holy Souls may witness with me in the same case, who are come thus far to the
Dominion: Which is a good and hopeful introduction to the ruling Scepter of
Love, in which will be found a far more pleasant and joyous Kingdom, when all
and every Spirit is brought over, and subjected to the Love's Soreraignity, in
their order and place to their superior Governor, to wit, the Heaven-born
Spirit, who personates Christ upon the Throne. Now to come to have every motion
tinged with the fiery Love Balsom, how will they run and fly, at the very look
of the Kingly anointed Eye, where Love's rays are so vehement, as to captivate
every thought to the obedience of the Lords Anointed King, not in some, but in
all and every thing; which will indeed make every Saint that has attained
hereunto, walk worthy of God, whose being consists in the Essentiality of
Love, and admitted for to be Gods fellow companion, being in the center-Life of
a Love dominion: There must necessarily follow all Holy Boldness to come into a
Christ propriety with God the Father, as Heirs of all Kingdoms, that are worthy
of inheriting, whether in the Mystery, or out of it. Love's Center opens
through all, and brings in an endless pleasure and Joy, which cannot be by any
worldly craft stolen away. Therefore it is that most excellent thing, that will
heal and cure all within the Soul, reconciling what was at variance, whether in
relation to God, or to any of our fellow Members. Therefore what is to be more
desired, or to be paralleled with? I must solemnly profess that I have found
such sovereign power and sweetness in the opening of this Love center, that I
cannot but commend it to others, and seek earnestly to have more
fellow-Commoners with me at Gods Table, that there we may sit down together and
feed upon the fruits of Love, which are the Wine and Strength of the Kingdom.
For in very Truth I am come to witness Holy Paul's conclusion of it, that it is
the absolute perfect thing, that works out all imperfection, removing all
sorrow and grief from the mind and heart. For it is a strong and vehement heat,
that devours fear and anxity. Oh! how does it shelter and secure from all blood
sucking vipers, that they cannot prey upon the inward part of the Soul. Because
this is a love which cannot imagine into any evil thing, and therefore nothing
of the Serpent Venom can mingle with it, which makes the Soul to know it self
to be returned to its priminary concord and Virgin Simplicity.

But now it may be queried, Whether I give forth the commendation of this High
and perfect Love, from Revelation, or from divine and pure sensation? I must
acknowledge it is from both, they are met together, as proceeding from one Love
Center, which is the first glass wherein I saw the aimable Beauty, and
worthiness of this most excellent thing, with all those advantages and great
prerogatives attending it; for it brings in no less than a Kingdom of sweet
peaceable Amity and Love, whereby I now sind an unspeakable benefit.

But it may be asked farther, How comes this most precious and worthy thing to
be wrought so essentially in the Soul, as to be evermore ruling upon the
Throne, and as having got absolute conquest over whatsoever would stir up
Trouble and Sedition? In answer to this I shall give my own experience, as one
who has obtained Grace of this kind, after it was begotten by Species and
Revelation, and formed in me, as a true Essential life Birth, which I did sind
daily grow up and increase in Wisdom and Strength: But then after that this
Love was grown up to such a vehemence toward my God, as known to me in the
person of my Lord Christ, from and through frequent visits, and very intimate
conversation, which I did daily enjoy in an unknown and most singular way,
which in very Truth was so grateful and sweet that it drew up my superior vital
spirit after him, that all places and companies became very tedious and
unpleasant to me, where I was prevented of feeding the flame of my Love, from
the beautifical enjoyment of his presence. The truth is, I had sucked in such a
sweet Savor, through a most intimate Friendliness, to which my Lord
condescended, for the Joy and Love-delight of my Soul, that I could scarcely
admit the giving my Conversation to any, in whom I could not see his
all-aimable Spirituality, for which alone I reserved my self; For indeed I
could willingly have attended it day by day continually, without any
intervening Night. But my Bridegroom after all this ingratiating of himself to
me, did often prove those two great Witnesses in me, of Faith and Love, which
as two twins did grow up out of the fresh Sharon, which was renewed within,
from whence they did with great strength and loveliness spring. But many hard
Encounters and rude Assaults they were fain to bear; and first in this respect,
my Lord Jesus having begotten his own lively Signature in me, by his often
appearing, and so passing in himself, as an Essential rising Body, that
naturally cared only to move and act in the Sphere of High and Heavenly things,
and at no time to be found out of that Circumference, in which to be thwarted
and prevented was my very great trial, having reference only to God in this
matter, on whom my Faith and Love was exercised; for having all outward
vacancies and advantages, that might cherish and nourish up this Lilly-Birth,
according to its native kind, which neither could agree to go out into the
gross muddy and infectious Air of this noysom Keder, or Worldly Region. But so
it was that my Lord suffered it thus, by reason of many temporal necessities,
wherein I was constrained to spend my time, which should wholly have been
employed upon a more worthy and considerable account, than to serve the Table
of the outward Man; which I looked upon as very low and mean in comparison of
that Highborn Heir, whom I carried as an invisible Glory, under the Vail of
contemptible Corporeity. And upon this consideration God tried his own begotten
Love, whether it would hold out under all damps, checkings and suppressings,
both inward and outward, which it met withal; for I apprehend, I had so great
an interest and hold of the Almighty, that it had been an easy thing to have
had all needful things to come to serve the free born Spirit, and not be
engaged in the Toil and servile Care after the Rudiments of the present fallen
and self-ingrossing Generation; the Customs and manner of which, my Spirit had
long since been made to descent from, in obedience to the Law of Faith, which I
continue to keep up unto, expecting all Income of Blessing therefrom. And
though hitherto the Lord has exceedingly proved me herein, yet now the
thousand-fold is beginning to break in, even by that pure and only
Love-dominion, which I do feel opens in the highest leavening Property; for it
reaches to the Bounds of the everlasting Mountain of God's immutability of
Love, from whence it springs: And what? may it not multiply and produce, as it
goes on, still conquering all Enmity, wherever it meets it, as having
overcome it in its own The which has induced the Author to publish these
divine Secrets
soulish Essence; and so may do the same in others, who groan and travail for
the same, being but weak in Love, and so not able to out-wrastle Love's
opposite: This is, and will be the signal Motto, whereby that perfect thing
called Charity will be known, which seeks not its own Dignity and Tranquillity
in heavenly Places, there to reign in the Love alone, but most ardently seeks
it for its Fellow Members, even when rejected and fought against; for this is
the new Gospel-Law, so urged and pressed by the Lord, and his Apostles in their
day, as knowing it was the only means to plant us again in our own pure eternal
beginning, where nothing but perfect Love was known. Oh! this is of such import
and weight, as I cannot but from the feeling sense hereof, set forth the
exceeding Sweetness that is to be found in it, when it comes of a Conqueror, as
having been tried by God himself, and by our fellow Disciples, which is more
piercing than any Trials from others. Yet all this will not quench the right
Spirit, which is tinctured with the Godhead flame of Love: It is so strong,
that it works over all Choakings, and Water-Floods that would drown it.

Thus having given a most true and experimental Account, how the Kingdom of
Love came to reign in Dominion; for all Shakings of this pure Plant, rooted and
fastened it as an invincible Rock, as in reference to God, the Being of Love,
so likewise toward all my Fellow Members, growing up in all their various
degrees in this Body of Love, fulfilling that Royal Law, which is to love one
another from a pure Heart; not superficially or feignedly, but with such a Love
as wherewith God our Father has loved us; who caused his Love to enter in our
Enmity, and did thereby slay it, and reconcile a depraved Nature, which stood
out in all Refractoriness against his Grace and Kindness: Now after this sort
we are to love one another, even where we meet with Reluctance and
Gain-sayings, to the killing and opposing of this pure thing; yet Charity, that
is begotten of God in us, will suffer, and bear and rise up a Conqueror through
all Beatings and Quenchings: And truly, whosoever hereunto arrive, and can
fixedly keep upon the Throne, and uncessantly Reign over all Assaultings and
Contradictions of this kind in themselves, and out of themselves, they may well
and really conclude, that the perfect thing is come, that will redeem from all
Evils, even from the wrathful Root of Enmity, from whence all Self-Love, Envy,
Haughtiness, Covetousness and Bitterness do proceed. Now Love's-Birth rising in
its strong Might in the Soul, as that eternal anointed Christ, who is come to
condemn Sin in our Flesh, yea, the very Root and Source of all Sin, and we
shall certainly know the falling away of the Man of Sin thereby; for Love is
that which irrecoverably sinks him into his own bottomless Lake, from whence he
can never rise any more. But it may be said, this is a rare and wonderful thing
indeed; But is it attainable during this time of Mortality? Yea, assuredly, or
else the Lord, Christ, would never have urged it, and commanded it so
frequently, both in leaving it as his last Charge, and suming up the whole Law
of Perfection, in love to God and our Fellow Members; preaching the same
Doctrine by his Spirit in the Apostles after his Ascension, according as it is
by St. John Col. 3 12. The General Epistle of John, chapter 16. 17. and ch 4. 7. 8,
^, 10, 11.
and St. Paul abundantly recorded: Read their Epistles, and you will find what
an Eminency is put upon this Gift, more than all others.

Now the holy Ghost brings in Charity, as distinct and more excellent than them
all. The holy Inspiration thus opened it, That Charity is of that high
Extraction, and so purely descended, that no defiled thing can ever enter it;
Its consistency is an invisible Body, as thin as Air, as piercing as a Flame,
an all-moving, acting and vigorous Spirit of Power and Life, that can go in and
out as an invisible Breath, which no mortal Eye can see, only its force may be
felt as a Seraphick Heat, that burns as a Refiners Fire in our Corporality, to
the end that it may tinge it with the holy Ghost's property. This is the true
and faithful delienation of this perfect thing, called by the Apostle, Charity.
Wherever this comes, it makes all imperfect things flee before it, but it
strengthens and confirms every Plant that is sown by the Spirit, and makes them
appear above Ground, which have long lain buried under it: It is the
King-flower of the whole Paradisical Spring, that protects the whole,
transmuting all into one entire Body of Love, that does extend and give forth
it self in all spiritual Bountifulness, according to its high Nature and
Property. It is not shut up to it self upon any consideration, as to what it
poslesseth and enjoys; for it holds nothing in Propriety, whatever its Lot is,
but all is free to the Disciples of the same descent and birth with himself;
this Love cannot withold from any of their Necessities, for it seeks not its
own. Then it has also a virtual Power, as made to inherit the best of Riches
and Substance of the everlasting Kingdom, to conveigh and freely distribute of
this inexhaustable Treasury to impoverished Souls, and to relieve them that are
in great Distress; which Power can pass in as an high virtual Balsom, to heal
the Wounded, who are under the striking of the Scorpion-Sting of the Serpent.
For this Love is a ministering Flame, where holy Passiveness and Humility are as
the open-Door for its access, and there cherish and feed it with what its
present degree does require. Charity is furnished with all sorts and stores; it
is God's Steward upon Earth, whom he dare trust with the Care of his Household,
who are in spiritual Hunger and Nakedness. It is a most infallible truth, that
God will appoint such holy Overseers in his newborn Church, that shall recover
the Apostolical Spirit and Power, that has been lost out of the Earth, and it
shall rise as a more bright Morning Star, and multiply it into a Generation
that will be all lovely, in which God may see himself. For which end, the
Kingdom and Dominion is already come into some, and prospering to this expected
degree, treasuring up now for a full Bank in store against that Day, in which
our Son of Man will again appear in the Heavens, for the delivering up the
Kingdom to the Father, that so God, who is Love, may be all in all. But in
order to the accomplishing of this last and finishing Mystery, there shall
arise a Melchizedeck Priesthood, which shall know the way into the Holiest of
all, concerning which, we shall come to declare after this subject is finished;
for it springs out of Love's-Root in us. For this is the most clear and
undeniable witness of Truth, when Light and Revelation, and Life of Enjoyment
meet together, then Declaration carries Power and Authority with it. But to
return to the present thing, what can be said sufficiently of it, that so, if
possible, the reign of Love might come to spread it self as a Net, to gather in
for the Priestly Kingdom?

Some other Motions may be further urged, as these; Would you be always in a
serene, quiet and peaceable Frame and Constitution of Mind, so as no
vicissitude working-Cross, or Turbulency toward you, whether from Gentiles,
Barbarians or Israelites, all which may give nothing of Disturbance, where
Charity is predominant; and why so? This is very marvelous, never to be
perplexed, and never to be put out of Harmony!

Objection. But how can this agree? When as our most perfect Pattern was said
to be troubled, and his Soul was sorrowful unto Death; as also, that
Afflictions are not joyous for the present?

First, We will Answer this main Objection, as to Christ our Lord in his
Agonies; You must know, that all this was on this side his Resurrection,
[observe that] and it was to show, that he had the sensible Passions of our
Humanity, and that he was on our behalf to feel a sinless Grief and Sorrow, and
to be really touched with these kind of Infirmities; or else how could he make
Provision through and by Love's Conquest? If he had not been in Temptation, and
in Encounter with all Despite and Defamations, but yet he maintained his own
Peace, which was the Fruit of Love, through all, and was reconciled to all the
cross Dispensations, that met him in the World. For it was this perfect Love
that carried him through to bear and suffer all things, and was for our Example
and Encouragement to express, during the time of his humane Minority, those
sensible Dolours and Passions; but he comes of a victorious Champion, and tells
us, That he had overcome, and assures us, That in him we shall have a most
fixed and firm Peace, though in the World exercised with Tribulation. So from
hence it is to be admitted and allowed, that in the time of our Minority,
before Love is in its perfect degree risen, it cannot be otherwise expected,
but we may be liable to Grief, Sorrow, Commotion, Fears and Jealousies, and so
up and down in an uncertain Motion, tossed to and fro in our Minds, and all
this because Love is but little, weak, and low of Stature; it is not got up
into the Throne of Dominion, so as to govern all by the Law of Love; yet such
are not to be hopeless, or of doubtful Mind, as desponding ever to see the
Resurrection of Love, so as to possess its peaceable Immunities.

Know, whoever you be, that are made willing to venture the loss of all for to
arrive at this Pearl of Charity, that you shall most surely find it; and great
rejoicing there will be at the finding of this lost Groat. Indeed the House of
the Soul must be first thoroughly searched, and the natural Self-love must be
swept out. For what is that which we must lose, but even all Rubbish, Filth and
Dross? that so our Hearts being emptied and cleansed from all these, the King
of Love may enter in with his full Train, wherein we may know nothing but
Concord, Tranquillity and a springing Treasury of all Goodness? Wherefore let
all holy and pure Minds be stirred up to wait for the dropping Dews, which fall
from the one eternal Element, to bring this Plant of Loves Kingdom forward,
even unto its full height of Perfection; and be tender of its first Buddings,
for it has many subtle Enemies, both at home and abroad. It is the Heir, and
therefore is conspired against; for can but the envious Spirits find out where
its Birth does spring, they will attempt to kill it whilst it is but an Infant;
for which cause it must be hid That is, Love's Infancy, before it grows strong.
in the Clefts of the eternal Rock, there to be fed and nourished with its own
Nature-Milk, and Honey of Love, till it become strong and able to encounter and
overcome all its Opposites, that it may reign alone, as Monarch of the Soul. My
Friends, who-ever you be that shall read this experimental Writing, know
assuredly, that if you can but find this burning Star of Love risen; nay, if
you can but feel the Glowings and Enkindlings of heat in the center of your
Hearts, it is more to be valued than all other spiritual Gifts, Powers and
divine Ornaments, which pertain to the new Creation; then we may boldly despise
and contemn all worldly Dominions, and all the Joys and Delights of sensual
Love. For you must know, it is such a Sacred and Celestial Seed, coming
immediately from the heart of the Deity, as cannot admit any thing of
defilement or pollution to abide with it: It soon leaves the Soul, if any thing
be taken in which cannot abide the burning touch of this Altar Coal.

But here it may be asked, What is this Love, which is so highly exalted above
all Heavenly and Earthly things? Sure there must be some rare transcending
Quality in it, not commonly known, that makes you press it so vehemently.

Truly, well I may, yet not I, but the essential Love it self does move me to
open the Mystery of it, which happily has not been understood as now, by
breaking up the Fountain of it, that so it may plentifully run forth; for
giving the Light of the Knowledge of it, does but make way for the very
substantial Body it self, to rise sensibly in its flaming Quality. Take this
further account of it, that it is known for to be the most holy and pure
Generation of the immaculate Virgin of God, for which is prepared a
Virgin-Womb, that this Birth might be the choice and and undefiled One of her
that brings it forth. It will not be now at Christ's second Birth, as it was at
his first; then his Vissage was marred more than any man's; he was a Man of
Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, and there was no Form or Comeliness in him,
which made him to be set at naught, and greatly despised, though without Sin or
Guile; but being found a Sufferer under it, therefore could not be exalted till
he had slain the Enmity, and wrought out Victory; and thus he has his first
Birth in us, which must precede his second. But there is a vast difference
between Christ's first and second Coming. Many Ages are passed, wherein the
Saints have only known the Birth of Christ in them after this weak, suffering,
dying and reproachful state. The Apostles, upon whom the holy Ghost was poured
forth after a most signal manner, by which Christ gave witness in them of his
Victory and Exaltation, enabling them to work miraculously; yet notwithstanding
they were not got beyond the suffering Birth of Christ in themselves; for they
only had the Revelation and Foresight of his appearing in Power and great
Glory; but they departed this Life, and did not see the sign of the Son of Man
to take up in them for a visible Reign and Kingdom, that might redeem out of
all Tribulation, and so it has continued until this day. But yet there is not
to be found a Generation so prepared and made ready for the second Coming of
Christ, as was in that day, which might make us doubt, whether the coming of
Christ be so nigh, because this Birth of Love is so hardly found in any, risen
up to an absolute Dominion, which is a sure Introduction to the Omnipotent
Reign of Christ, in this visible Earth, in the inward Properties of the Love
Flock.

But you will say, The Apostles, and those that were Converted by their
Ministry, were all in the Dispensation of Love, and were in expectation of
having the Kingdom restored to Israel in their day; and what was the reason
then that Christ's second Birth did not rise in them?

To which I Answer, That it was thought meet by the Father of Wisdom, that all
of that Generation should drink of their Lord's suffering and dying Cup, as he
often hinted unto them, when Personally with them, though they had a general
Spirit of Prophecy concerning his glorious Reign, in which he would appear in
his Saints. And then again, it may be demur'd upon, Whether those Elders
themselves had completed their own Regeneration, and so were perfectly arrived
to the Throne-Do minion of Love, as fixed Overcomers? St Paul, Peter and John
that were most eminent amongst them seemed to have somewhat more in their Eye,
than to what they had attained, and so were still a pressing after it. But
however, it may be concluded, that they had gotten the Start before any that
are known this day, yet it seems that hitherto Love's Womb has been shut up
from bringing forth Children of the Resurrection, at least to any thing that is
manifestly known. But for this we may have good hope, that if indeed it be Born
in any one, and made strong to maintain its Right and Superiority over the
whole inward Creation, ruling as God, by whom it is certainly avouched, that a
Virgin Spirit shall be given to such for eternal Generation, who shall be able
to raise and quicken the holy Grain of Love, that lies as dead, that so Love
may see her Offspring to multiply exceedingly unto all perfect Purity. Such an
holy Congregation and Society being once raised to reign upon Love's-Throne
together, they will be as so many raised Banners, which will be terrible to the
Nations which stand without the circle of Love. Now by all this we see what
has hitherto put a stop, and caused the Lord to delay his coming, and will
still, till perfect Love be come to burn up every Image in the Mind, that is
not engraved by God's own Finger. It is certainly to be concluded, that Charity
is the golden Wash and baptizing Pool, out of which Souls do come all Ruddy and
White, Clear and Bright, to whom the Lord may say, My Dove, my fair One, my
Undefiled, come away; the Love-Scarlct-Dye has washed thy Blackness away, so
that now thou art all fair in my Eye. This is a Prophecy which has now in some
its fulfilling, and will have more abundantly, as this Spirit of burning Love
takes possession of Hearts; and then the very Face of God will be the Covering,
by which we shall see and know, what before we were ignorant of, as to our own
pure Love's-Nativity, which was fore-known in Christ, before the World of Wrath
and Bitterness did show it self. And thus by the first and second Birth of
Christ in us, all will come to be restored to a glorious new Creation, where
Love shall dye no more, nor Sin live, which brought in Curse and Sorrow, and
estranged God from us. Now is not all this a most persuasive Motive, to the
Love-Flock, wherever scattered, that God intends to bring them to this
Love-band of Perfection, that so we may know one another as God's enkindled
Sparks, increasing to Flames, which are to consume all envy and wrath as
Stubble and Dross. The Trumpet sounds from Mount-Zion, and waxes louder and
louder, we daily hear it, from which we have declared the most excellent things
concerning the eternal Love-fellowship in Gods own clearness, in which no spot
of Darkness is to be found. You will say, Where are such to be found, according
to this degree, which you have here described? All vsiible Churches and
Societies are far too light, when weighed with this golden Grain, and Shekel of
the eternal Sanctuary. We know it to be so from the all-piercing Eye, which
does try all degrees of Love, and it may be universally bewailed, that so much
superficial, formal and dead Love is found both to God and one another. Hence
we do not wonder that the Bridegroom makes no more haste, his Bride wanting as
yet her full Vesture or Robe of pure Charity, without which she can never be
said to be ready; for this is to be all her Glory both within and without, and
to adorn her for love and delight. Therefore all Pre-eminence and Honor give
to Love, taking all care to nourish it up in God, and there abound in it
toward one another. This high, pure and mystical Unity of Love has been yet
very little understood, and less practiced; that Leaven-born-society is much
scattered: Where is Love's paved habitation to be found, in which fervent
Charity does wholly act and move, loving and admiring, as God appears and looks
forth through the Lettice of Humanity in each one? Oh! how should it draw out,
and open the Springs of Love, as God himself, who is the Spirit and Life of
Love, which moves and rises in holy Souls! And therefore it becomes us to be
tender of it, not to grieve it or quench it in one another, for that may cause
it to sink and dye away in our selves, and then the very Ark of our strength
departs from us, and the heat and vigor of all spiritual Life declines with
it. Upon which consideration, O ye Heaven-born, out of the Womb of eternal
Love, wherever dispersed, let your Gatherings be to this lifted-up-Standard,
where Love's Kingdom is known and possessed in all Peace, Joy and Tranquillity.
The Trumpet from Mount-Zion does found, to call you away from all worldly,
drossy, perishing Loves, which are not Supersensual and Celestial; nay,
further from all lukewarm supperficial Loves; for Love's workings must be
fervent, strong and immutable, for the making meet for the rising and abiding
Powers of the holy Ghost to work from. All which will be brought out of the
firey Furnace of Love, for the great and mighty things that give Testimony of
Christ's Kingdom in his Saints being come; for it will surely open from this
Center. Now, who-ever ye are that feel the touch of this Celestial Fire-Stone
send forth your warming Sparks, to set one another in an holy Flame, know your
own Mother's Children, hide not your selves from them, be no longer Strangers
toward them; sind them out from North to South; revive yet once again the
Apostolical knot and band of unfeigned Love, that may fore-run the Bridegroom's
return to dwell amongst us, that so we may no longer Fast and Mourn, but be
ever feasted with Love's multiplyings from the Fountain-Deity: Even so confirm
it, O Lord Jesus accordingly!

Oh God! inspire with thy Love-Fires
That we may abide with Angelical Quiers.
The Lamb's Trump does sound to call us up,
To drink of this Love-flaming Cup:
The Spirit thereof does so sweetly burn,
That Mortals into Seraphims does turn:
Is not this the transforming thing,
Which to a God-like Being will bring?
Oh Charity! What can be said of thee?
Do thou not proceed from the Deity?
Henceforth I must proclaim Love's Fame
To all that bear that living Name.
Who would not in love be with Love also?
For its force is greater than all Foe;
How does it expel all Fears, that they fly,
Because of sweet Peace and Serenity?
Love born of God, Heir to all Goods,
Steward of his House, giving out Food:
Is not this the one only excellent thing,
Which will fetch out the Serpent's Sting?
Nay, more than this I clearly see,
Love will enter the secret of the Deity,
Where ye will see Love a burning Lamp,
Upwards flying, never choked or dampt.
Wind we up our Angels to God above,
Where we may drink our fill of Love,
And feast on those fat and pleasant things,
That are within the Gardening Springs,
Where the everlasting Gates open stand,
For such as be united in Love's hand:
Come, enter then as Chariot burning Flame,
Into that holy Place which known is by Name.
We feel Love like a bubbling Spring,
Which make us the new Song ever sing.
All Praises we will give to Elohim,
Who rides on the Seraphims:
Floods of Joy, with Celestial Praise,
Shall now out-flow to the Ancient of Days;
For while we feel and taste Love's Fire,
It does extinguish all earthly Desire.
Let thy Love stream forth as a Shower,
Let it flow forth in Life and Power;
This is the thing that is most pure,
It can all of our Desires fully cure.
Oh! let the Kingdom of this Love come,
That we may reign with God the Son
In everlasting Love's sweet Harmony,
Hereby conquering all of the Enmity.
Love is the Lamb's pure Virgin-Bride,
She is all Fair and Comely
So sweet, so mild and ravishing in his Eye,
That in his Love-imbraces she must lie,
There possessing such pure Celestial Joy,
As none can know, nor come to annoy.
A Bed of Rest here for her is found,
That makes Love's-Trumpet ever found.
Having passed through Love's Region and Dominion, we are come to set forth
(according to the Gift still bestowed upon us) the glorious state of the
everlasting Priesthood of Christ, carried on in his most holy Temple, Body and
heavenly Sanctuary, which is framed for it by the Love-Power: and Wisdom of the
Most-High, who will have a Kingdom of Priests elected, and set apart for this
purpose, To draw near in full assurance of acceptance with him in all their
holy Offerings, each one from their consecrated Tabernacle, to minister to the
mighty Jehovah. For the which is required a special Ordination, which none can
be capable of, but such as first are all purified in the burning Springs of
Love, that so they may become Holy, Merciful and Compassionate, to intercede
for the Ignorant, and such as are turned aside from the tract of the just and
perfect One. Now then, to be called and anointed of God to this holy Function,
is the greatest spiritual Dignity and Honor, that can be conferred upon the
Love-Flock; it excels both the Prophetical and Kingly Dominion, all which
intrinsically do agree together, only the Priestly Office does outshine in
Glory, being the last and finishing Ministration, which shall reconcile and
gather into the Unity, with the most holy and ever blessed Trinity, where
fixation within the Temple-Body of the holy Ghost shall ever more be enjoyed.

Now in order to the revealing and making out this high and peculiar
Priesthood, it is expedient I should declare, in what a living figure it
appeared to me, or rather to somewhat which was raised up to be as a clear
burning Lamp of Love, which was capable of this great and marvelous sight,
which did open from the very Godhead Being, in whose Body of Light and Glory
this Priesthood in the Heavens was clearly manifested to my Eye sight, which is
the ground work I shall go upon, according to the express which the great
Melohizedeck Priest has set open, and made teachable hereby for the benefit
and service of that Holy and Royal Tribe that shall hereunto be numbered. For in
the present Age, wherein the most precious have their Call to come out from
what is vile, temporary and Soul cankering against the Love, minding of Earthly
things; and as to the more refined religious dress (where the Viper of sinful
Hypocrisy which has had a fair covering spread over it) in every changeable
Ministration, which refers to an outside Holiness, till from this there be a
departing, and entering into Love's substantiality, there can be no bearing
part in this peculiar and Royal Priesthood. But let us go on to describe it
according to the Mount Zion Pattern, which we have seen, and the Words which
were heard from thence.

The Vision of the Heavenly Tabernacle.
I was carried in Spirit, where I saw a light flaming Glory unfolding and
opening it self larger and more conspicuous, and in the midst of it an Abysical
Deep, from whence there was a working flowing Sourse, in a restless Motion,
flashing up transparent Matter, so sparklingly glorious for Colors, as if all
manner of precious Stones had been comixed in the Matter; then did appear
numerous Persons gathered to the Glory of this flowing Sourse, from the Virtue
and Power that rose out of the Deep, which was as the Resurrection of pure
heavenly Bodies, bright and clear, that stood there to receive and drink in
from this Abysical Deep; then was it asked by that translated Spirit that saw
all this, What was to be understood by all this? and it was answered, It is the
flowing of the Deity, that is ever generating forth, for begetting and renewing
what is like to its own Being, and the sparkling Matter that so continually
flashed out, was to consecrate the heavenly Order of Kingly Priests, which
would be the very Tabernacle-Glory upon them, for this Priestly Kingdom, under
the highest degree of anoiming are for to be: And who-ever can pure and
abstractedly come up and lie near the flowing of this Abysical Deep, are under
the Ordination for Kingly Priests, and so near to God, as nothing shall them be
denied, for which they shall interceed; for great Power, they will have within
their own command, for they are Spirited very high, by daily drinking in this
deified Matter.

In this Vision there was no formal Temple, Tabernacle or Alter to be seen, but
God in his Virtual Power, Light and Purity, For the Kingdom was here delivered
up, and God became all in all.
filled the numerous company that made up the Priestly Body, which was termed
the Godhead Fraternity. No particular Christ here I did see, but as he was
said to be the Head and the Power that made them shine as so many burning Lamps
before the Throne of the Fathers all-piercing Eye of Glory. There were degrees
amongst this Holy Preistly fellowship, some in a higher, others in a lower
order; But the Testimony of Truth, Love and Purity did open through all, as one
entire Ark of the Heavenly Body compacted together, sounding forth New and
wonderful Laud and Praises, different from all others, who in the Heavenly
places did worship the Lord God Almighty.

This was a lively express and manifestation of the Everlasting and
unchangeable Priesthood, which the Holy Ghost will build up, and appear all in
it, and therefore is come before hand to open the Scene of it, and to give
Rules to direct in the Way, which leads thereunto, according to this
substantial ground which opens from the Central Eternity, from whence all
perfect things must spring out again, in this faded and corrupted Region, For
which a most Holy and Royal Priesthood is ordained, that is to be the Salt of
the Earth, to send forth their seasoning for Life, where Putrefaction unto
Death has reigned. Now we shall proceed and give forth, what has run in as a
Fountain, sending forth its Springs. It is then assured to us by an
irreversible Covenant, that a Kingly Priesthood shall in this latter day stand
upon the Earth. An Election and Call from the Holy Ghost is going out for to
effect the same, who only knows where the true born Nazarites are, and where
the sanctified in the Water of Life do lie, who will be brought out as baptized
Ones, into this Holy Priestly order, so that it may be evident to all to know
who they are, and to acknowledge their Priestly Royalty, each one in their
various order and degree for power and eminency; for which there are several
Rules, Characters and holy Missions, that will make out where all these pure,
clear, lively Stones are connexed together, for a ruling and governing
Priesthood in this visible Earth: These are of the Election hereunto, that may
yet be hid amongst the Stuff of Babylon's confusion. A David may be keeping of
Sheep, an Elisha Plowing with a yoke of Oxen, till a special ordination come
forth for anointing to a more high, worthy and honorable Employ, in which the
business will be only to have to do with God, and therefore is set apart and
sanctified only for that use, ceasing from all througing Cares and seculiar
Services, and a withdrawing from all defiling things of this kind. Whoever
feels the touch of the Life-coal, that sets the only matter of the Souls
eternal Essence a burning, they will soon find what separation is made, and can
henceforth no more favor the low, vulgar, gross and Earthly concerns; from all
which this Priestly Function does set free, as called and anointed by the most
Holy, that is head of this separated Congregation; therefore it is but meet
that the Body should answer hereunto, that as our great High Priest is passed
into the Heavens, being found perfect, separate from sin and Sinners, so
likewise all appertaining to this heavenly order will be known in their pure
consecration. For the Spring of the Spirit will rise from within, to cleanse
every instrument that must be used about the Tabernacle service, because God
will have nothing to come near Him, but what has Holiness engraved upon it,
which does imply a coming out of what is common and defiling, that nothing of
this corrupting Nature may be found amongst the Priestly Tribe. For these are
designed and appointed to deal with God in all weighty Spiritual matters,
belonging to the Restoration, and that may erect the New Jerusalem state in
this very World. Therefore there is to be an extraordinary Call of the holy
Ghost, for the impowering and fitting out hereunto; for else it will be
impossible to carry this Evangelical Ministration in such an evil Region, where
the Cry and Plea of mortal necessities are continually heard, as making it a
lawful imposition upon the very illuminated Saints to puddle about Earthly
things; by which indeed the wayunto the most Holy has been blocked up; no open
Face of God could through this muddy glass be seen, as being the dark side of
the Cloud which keeps from God by many removes and distances. Therefore a
healing Balsom, for a continual bleeding wound, the great and merciful High
Priest has sent down, even the victorious reconciling Crown, of the Priestly
anointing, which is in very truth his Essential Diety, which rises as a
Fountain of purity, overspreading the whole Humanity, and consecrates it for
both Tabernacle, Ark and Altar, in which the Holy Ghost officiates, and
accomplisheth the whole Divine service. Now whatever Soul and Spirit shall be
thus taken up, and arrested upon Gods account, to serve and minister about the
Heavenly and most excellent things, which belong to the Everlasting Priesthood,
for it is not to be thought that the most holy will allow or permit such to
profane what he has Sanctified, or the Living to be entombed with the Dead,
or the high sented Oil which springs from the Holy Ghost to let in the noysom
putrifactions from the loathed Kedar, where all unclean Spirits do dwell. Here
is an absolute command to have no touch, nor intermedling withal, so as to
ensnare, or come into hazard of breaking the consecrated Vows; For it is a true
saying of that great Saint, That we in this consideration do cease to be our
own, we cannot according to the Law of the Spirit dispose of our selves, no,
not for an hour or day, from our Lord and Master's Employ and Business, further
than as good and faithful Stewards, we can give a satisfying account, according
to those Spiritual Circumstances, we are bound in, unto him. The great and
mighty King loves to see all his Priestly train and attendants still about
him, in such an Holy order, and Heavenly posture, as they may be ready to be
sent forth upon the most eminent services, who can find employment enough for
his Subjects and Ministering Spirits, and who takes it as a great dishonor, to
have this holy order bring their high profession to be brought into contempt,
by running into the cloud, and thickest of vain rudimental things. Nay, more
than this, the restitution extends to the ordained and called ones, upon whom
the anointing has been poured forth; for the most Holy incense Offering, they
cannot be at liberty to fall in with those lawful and necessary concerns which
pertain to the feeding and clothing of the Body, but if here at any time
engaged, the Spiritual part suffers hurt, because it acts out of its own
Sphere, and divine property, which should stand in Faiths essentiality, where
all our motions should be accompanied with the Principle of Faith, in the
Priestly Ministration; for the supplying what is needful to the true Temple
worshippers, whereunto keeping and walking with God, in a perfect way,
fulfilling all his Sanctuary institutions, such are as Lillies to Spring and
grow without toil or care. The blessings of the Deep shall ever more abound and
flow in, while there is an abiding in the Faith hereof, giving God full credit,
and running all fully upon his acconnt, in this case. The Truth is, the Lord
stands engaged to provide all sufficiency for his Servants, whom he has called
from all other low inferior Services and Employes, being himself in Covenant
with the Priesthood of his own ordination. Holy Paul makes use of it from the
unchangeable Law, that runs from Shadows and figurative Services, till it comes
to the Life and Substance. Do you not know (says he) that they which minister
about Holy things, live of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with it; They have a right hereunto, according to a Law of
divine Institution. But the Proprietors of these worldly Goods, do uot hold
themselves obliged hereunto; but do engross and take up all; and if they let go
any thing, it is rather by constraint, than a free and voluntary Offering. But
we are not to search too deep into this matter, for Faultiness may be found
among our own Tribe, that lie within the circle of the Priestly Covenant, in
whom much Remisness and Shortness has been found, as to the ministering to the
Necessities of the true dedicated Nazarites. But we hope to see another Power
and Spirit, that shall bear rule, which shall make the fast clasped Proprietors
to become all free and openhanded, according to the foregoing Prophecy, that
the Churl shall be made liberal, yea, so as to reckon nothing to be his own.

But here it may well be asked, What is it that must come to loosen from this
Self-bottom, so as to unhinge this strong Gate, that has kept out from the
Land of eternal Store and Blessing, whereof Abraham's Seed in the Faith are
Heirs?

This does in part answer the Question, which may produce the great change in
narrow Spirit's, which is the Gift of the Faith of the operation of God, which
opens from the Springs of Love, which are spread abroad by the holy Ghost,
and kept as a live Coal that can multiply it self into a strong and vehement
flame of Love, which is the cherishing Root that makes Faith to become all
fruitful, beyond all exterior sense and sight, resting and considing in the
creating Fiat, which can call those things that are not to be, and make a
something of nothing: This we may call the Riches of Faith, that can make an
increase where no visible Matter appears. This is no common Faith, it is no
where found, but where the holy Ghost has planted himself for a Blessing and
growing Revenue: Who ever shall receive of this Gift, and taste the Power of
it, will soon cease to grasp and love earthly and perishing things; they will
be constrained to offer and consecrate all that may be for the service and use
of the holy royal Melcbizedeck Priesthood. And though at this time little of
this Spirit and Power does appear in the World, yet know of a truth, from the
Witness of Jesus, that the long tircling Motion of the holy Anointing, (which
has hitherto but scattered his Sparks of Light) is now in very deed upon the
outbreaking Day of Life, that what has been only in sweet Love-Movings, and
transcient passing Powers, that have in the very Altar-waiters ceased. But we
shall say now again, Behold, come and see, the burning ghostly Body is risen
that will turn all uncertain Motion into a fixed act of all flowing generating
Powers. But this the Lord has showed me, This will be first appropriated to
the high Priestly Order, that can pass beyond the Vail, to whom the Holy of
Holiest stands open: For there are different Degrees, States and Oders in this
last and new erected Priesthood, in which the holy Ghost will appear to be all;
which according to our received Instruction, I shall give a description of, and
how it may be known, who are the called and chosen of God hereunto. For each
one ordained hereunto will have the Foundation Seal, the Priestly Mark, which
shall be the known Character, which no one shall obliterate or deny. And as to
the outward Sex, there shall be no distinction, though the Typical Priesthood
admitted none but Males in its day: All of that is done away, for Signs and
Figures in this Ministration do fly away like a Cloud: Male and Female are
alike here, therefore the holy Ghost does include both in one, swallowing up
all in the Newness, Strength, Power and Glory of his own springing new Birth,
according as it is witnessed, Where there is neither Male nor Female, but
Christ is all, and in all; who is the quickening Spirit, and the true Evidence,
that will show forth it self, according to their grown up measure and degrees.
For Persons here signify little, Wisdom's Purity and Power in the Spirit is
all that God respects in his Priestly Offerings. We must know that these
Priests are of three Ranks or Orders, constituted and ordained by the great
high Priest, who yet continues in his mediating Kingdom, till the whole be
brought up and finished for mutual Glorification with him.

The first and lower Rank is of those, who are not yet got beyond the Son's
Ministration, who are yet conscious of Sins and Transgressions, committed under
the first Covenant, according to the similitude of Adam's Transgression,
running from that putrified Line, for whom a necessity there is to come under
the diverse Watchings and Separations, Attonings, Blood-sprinklings, that so
they may be qualified to come within Mount-Zion's circle, where no Sin-offering
is needed, but in order unto the rising up to the successive degrees of the
Melchizedeck Order, the whole Burnt-offering is required; the Goat must dye,
and the sinful infected Life must expire amidst the Altar-Flames: For a
continual Offering of this kind must be, till the whole Body of Sin be
consumed; for whilst any thing of that abides and works in its circling Motion,
there are required new and fresh Attonings, Pacifications and
Blood-sprinklings, till the one Offering comes it self to be offered up once
for all, which acquits from all Sin, and makes meet and prepared Vessels, to
come to in the first degree of Purity, whose Consciences being purged
therefrom, all consciousness of Sin may come up with boldness and full
assurance of Faith, in that anointing which is shed forth to cleanse from all
Sin, reconciling and making all Scores and Reckonings even, as in reference to
God the most holy and justifier of those who are made partakers of Christ in
his Prophetical, Kingly and Priestly Office. For wherever the Lord comes to
offer himself up through the eternal Spirit, by his own Body that are fully
perfected: For as under the Levitical Ordinances prescribed by God, it was
appointed for the Priests only to bear the Ark; so under this
Covenant-Ministration, none but the spiritually consecrated Which Body is the
Ark of the living presence, soto be understood.
Priests, that are of this Order, can bear the living Testimony of Christ's
risen and spiritual Body, which goes forth with great Power, wherever it
comes, to make Rocks break, and Islands flee away, and Waters to divide; all
which makes way for the bringing up to the last step of the all Priestly
Throne, to sit down with Christ in heavenly Places at the Right Hand of the
Majesty on high, where we are to consider those, who of this holy, high and
separated Order, are here become the Tabernacle, Ark and Altar, and the most
inward holy place, where Christ the anointed has so poured forth himself, that
he is to be known in them as no other than God the holy Ghost, officiating and
accomplishing the most holy Service, as in the Person of the great high Priest,
who having perfected Holiness, comes in the open Face of the most inward
separated place, where God is manifest, and no Spirit nor Soul can ever come to
know, or meet God but here, according as we have it from the Mouth of the Lord
himself, who told Moses, That here in this holy place he would commune with
him, and appear in his Glory. But alas! who is able to see at first glance into
this high exalted degree, of an high Priestly Calling? It is so great and
wonderful, that it makes the Light of all foregoing Ministrations to look dark
and dim, as far excelling all, as the Substance does the the Shadow. But before
we proceed to set forth this third and last degree, that brings so into God,
let us consider further of the two lower Orders, which to this Priesthood do
belong, what their Qualifications are, and from whence called out? The first
Rank is of those aforementioned, who have been under the Altar-Purifyings, and
diverse Washings, and blood Sprinklings, and perfuming Oils, by which they are
made perfect and clean, and become such who have no more Conscience of Sin; for
the Fountain-spring of the Lifeblood stands ever open, Christ in his bubling
Spirit, by which he maintains a sinless Purity, of which sort God chooses and
ordains his Tabernacle-Ministers, who are made meet to officiate about the holy
things, offering up the holy Incense and Heave-offerings, keeping all the Laws
and charge of the Sanctuary, presenting only what is consecrated unto the Lord,
in order to the expelling of every defiled thing. Now great is the Dignity of
this very lowest degree, forasmuch as they are made partakers of Christ, and in
him are become Mediators of the New Covenant, wherein great strength is found;
inasmuch as Christ in Spirit is made the surety of this faultless Testament,
which gives great boldness, to plead for Remission of Sins, in the behalf of
others, who yet remain in the sinful imperfect state, who being ready and free
to intercede, from the pure unfeigned-Love on their behalf, may come up to be
the highest also in this divine Function.

Now to mention the Service and Office of the second Order, who are such as
take not this Honor unto themselves, but are chosen, anointed and separated,
by the heavenly Ordination; these are those who are set apart for God's
Sanctuary to be pitched in the midst of them, out of which they are not to
depart, because the Crown of the anointing Oil has been poured forth upon
them, which is no less than the Sanctification in the holy Ghost. Here waiting
in their perfect God-like Order, who can set no desiled thing before their Eye;
as David speaks, Thou have set the Godly Man apart for thy self. God
appropriates all that are of the Priestly Order to himself, he forbids them to
be Servants to men; nothing of a divided Service is here to be pleaded for; no
going back to bury their Dead, or to be defiled with them. It was the blessing
which Moses pronounced upon the Tribe of Levi; Let thy Urim and thy Thumim be
with thy holy One, who said of his Father and Mother, I have not seen them,
neither did he acknowledge his own Brethren, nor know his own Children;
signifying that there was a coming out from, and forgetting whatsoever was of a
mortal Birth, and all external Bonds and Obligations. It is like God's taking
up of Enoch; a cessation from a worldly Being presently follows this separate
Order. God will have none come near him, that shall look back to the Customs,
Traffic and Immercements of this World, though lawful to others, yet not to
these that are under this anointing; for God, who is the most high Purity, soon
smells an Esau-hunter, and a worldly Demas, with whom the holy Ghost can have
no communion. Nor will he take any to officiate in the holy Priestly
Ministration, till separated from these gross and servile things.

But here now follows an Objection; How such shall be provided for, that must
discharge themselves from all secular Callings, having no Propriety in the
common Mammon, stock and store, and yet have Bodies which stand in need of
Temporal things? What way do you propose for their outward Subsistence?

As to this, we refer you to what the Almighty provider and overseer has
settled as a standing Rule, throughout the holy Priestly Generation, that God
himself is to be their Portion and Inheritance; and therefore they were to have
no Inheritance with their Brethren; the Sacrifices of the Lord God of Israel
made by Fire, are given them for their portion. How is that to be understood?
Thus, they which wait at the Altar, are to receive of the Gifts of the Altar,
which none other has right to partake of. There is a further meaning in this,
than what we have License yet to declare, only thus much we may glance out in
this gloomy Day, that there is a Vein which runs under Ground, within the holy
place, that to the Priests Revenue does belong; the Vulter's Eye has it not
descryed; neither can any Artificer among the Sons of men this golden Mine
find, the everlasting precious Rock a covering is upon it, and still will be,
till the third Rank of this high Priestly Order into manifestation shall be
brought, in the Conquest and sealing Power of the holy Ghost, and then you will
see what force Aaron the high-Priest's Rod has to rule and pierce this long
hidden Vein, from whence will flow forth an inexhausted Treasury. Gold and
Silver in this time will be of little regard, the Ingrossers of which tormented
will be, when they shall see their Coin out of date. For the great Melchizedeck
will the absolute Monarch be, and a new Coin shall stamp, which shall currantly
pass through all the Earth. But be this Secret what in Wisdom's Glass we have
seen, it is not yet our time any thing further to disclose; but let us go on to
the highest degree in this Tabernacle, in the holiest of Beeings to pitch,
improving all present advantages here for in a pure Nazarite dedication. This
only observe, If we feel in our selves such an impulsive Power from the holy
Spirit, strongly carrying out hereunto, this will be a sign of a divine
Ordination, and Call hereunto. We need nothing of man's Approbation or
Installation to this holy Melchizedeck-Order, in which Christ is to be known
the same yesterday, to day, and forever, tarrying on this everlasting
Priesthood, from his own eternal Loins, in the spiritual Generation, of which
no account can be given, being chosen of him hereunto before the Foundation of
the World, which is not to vanish away, but that way may be made for the new
Creation, which shall consist of these three degrees of Kingly Priests.
However, let all be cautioned not to presunie to thrust themselves into this
sacred Function, before the Melchizedeck-King in his true eternal spiritual
Birth, do spring in the Soul, where true Regeneration, and pure and high.
Illuminations have passed before, in way of preparation for this
Priestly-Star's rising: Therefore what manner of Abnegation and holy Separation
is hereunto required? This one Service and Work is to be followed and minded.
Whoever are entered into this most high and holy Profession, must cease from all
other rudimental earthly Services. The Temple-Service is to be managed by
clean and Sanctified Vessels, set apart for that use. Now here it will be
convenient to show the Necessity of having all things ministered to such in
their Attendance, by those who endowed are with these worldly Goods. There is
an Obligation lies in special manner upon all true Israelites, to bring their
Gifts to those who are called out from amongst them, to serve at the Altar, for
whom Provision should be made for their necessary supply, that they may have
nothing of Care or Encumbrance upon them in their first entering thereupon; all
which is a most acceptable Offering, if any shall freely communicate upon this
consideration, which may not of this kind be always required; for as this royal
Priesthood gets up to their all powerful Degrees, and princely Dignities, they
will have no need of any creaturely Contributions; for to them the Door of all
heavenly Store shall stand open, from whence they shall not only have to answer
their own Requirings, but also those of the whole oppressed and groaning
Creation. Wherefore what more acceptable for the present Distress can there be,
then to promote and help forward this Priestly Dedication, which may bring so
great a Blessing upon the Earth?

But it may be objected, How shall we know infallibly, such who under this
Nazarite Vow and holy Anointing are, that we may minister to them of our
Substance? there being at this day so many rising Stars, which the Serpent's
Tail has plucked down to the Earth? Know that it is a principal Gift to have
an impartial Spirit of discerning in this matter, before the holy Ghost comes
to give the undeniable Witness; but now to know them whilst they are in their
Minority and suffering state, going on in the process of Christ, who himself
was questioned and doubted of sometimes, by them who were daily conversant with
him; the same Spirit of Incredulity and suspicious Fear may have a great
Predominancy now among Christ's Disciples, as not discerning the Lord returned
in Spirit, though yet in weakness of Flesh, for the abolishing of the Sin and
Curse out of it; which while this is but a doing, in order (...) the holy
Priesthood entering upon, all aid, support and encouragement ought to be
ministered by those who are in more enlargement, as to these outward things, and
to lay aside all Jealousy, Fear and Suspicion; for it is much better to be
found in the excelling Spirit of Charity, which hops and believes the best
of things, and thinks no Evil, and yet does not take away right and found
Judgment, but that they may discern, who the Lords true anointed Ones are.
There are several characters by which they may be known, before they reach to
the high priestly mark: We will mention one or two, as the forerunning ground
work. In the first place, they are crucified to all mortal and temporal things,
that would invite and steal away the Mind, and weaken the strength of Love to
God, that are perfectly unhinged and loosened from all of this kind, which is
so great a Sorcery and Witchcraft, by which Millions of Souls have been bound
down, so that they could never expect this Resurrection state for to reach it.
A second Character is this, That as they are become dead to all the evil
appearance of things, so in some respect to the show and seeming Godliness, and
formal state of the first Temple-building, with all its Ceremonial
Ministrations, which can never make the Comers thereunto perfect. Till these be
removed no place for the Temple-Body and Tabernacle of God to come down, from
whence the everlasting burnning Incense, and Praise-Offerings are to ascend.
Now from these two Branches numerous Fruits of the Spirit will spring, by which
you may know the high Priestly Off spring, who must needs appear as bright and
terrible as an Army with Banners, eschewing and denying all of the changeable
state of things, whether considered in the heavenly Constellation, or in the
earthly Retinue, nor staying in any state or Ministration, till got-up to dwell
in the munition of Rocks, where neither Water nor Bread shall ever fail. This
and much more might be enlarged upon, as the first Buddings out of the Priestly
Lillies, which are to grow without care and toil, and therefore all-worthy to
be cared for; and if there shall be a carelessness or neglect of this Duty, as
to the present Season, wherein outward things may be for the promoting of this
high Priestly fraternity, if no open heart here for shall be found, God would
not fail to bring in by some other way, and shut out the earthly Proprietors,
that may overslip their Day, in that they have omitted to consecrate their
principal Substances, to the use and service of this holy Stock, through which
their blessing would have been. For the Lord, who is King of the whole
Creation, observes well who bring their free will Offerings of this kind. Let
not this seem as a Dare tinkling Sound, for the weight of a God is in it, who
will certainly flow in through this rising Priesthood, with such fruitful
Powers and Gifts, as they may be able to bless many with the Blessings from the
holy Ghost, and know the Temple-Body is here, for a raising the golden Nail, is
fixing, wherein the Soveraignity of a Kingly Priesthood in this approaching
time and age, is coming to be established. The Lvon out of Zion is roaring, to
gather in his Priestly Prey, blessed are they who are come to know the Thunder
of his Power, and do it obey, taking hold of that Horn that is filled with the
Priestly Oil, which may give true separating Mark to the elect Sheep, the time
being far spent in the hopeful expectation, for all these great things to be
fulfilled. No other thing will now suffice; after all this Light and
Revelation, but to be found the living Epistles, which is the sure engraving of
the holy Ghost, as it was said, that the writing of the Law was by the finger
of God; even so, yet once more again, God will copy out himself, not in a dead
Draught, but in a lively acting Power. For this end, a strong gust of Wind from
the third Heavens does blow, to open this fair Rose and Lilly, which is yet in
its bud; and although long it has been hid, and kept under by the Thicker of
wild Plants, yet now the Love devouring flame is come forth to kindle upon
them, that this holy thing may come to stand single and alone, from every
twisting Bryar and Thorn, that has shaded and overtopped this sprout of Life,
which is to run up unto the high Throne of the everlasting Priestly Dominion,
where all Boldness and Freedom is to enter the most holy place; and what is
that but the most secret Tabernacle of the most High, wherein all pleasant Joy
and Rest in Love-Communion is known? Can we but come to put on this Priestly
Robe, Admittance then we may have to speak with God at any time. But who is it
that can be priviledg'd for such an immediate Access, but such as wear the pure
Ephod, and the most holy Breast-place, where is that Urim and Thummim, the
shut-up Oracle, all open to such does stand, through which Gods Mind is well
understood. Of such Qualifications as these, is that third and top stature of
the Melchizedeck-Priesthood, in which the Ark of the Testimony does open, that
all difficult Points will decide, either in reference to God or Man. This is
that last and wonderful Ministration, beyond which nothing is to be looked for;
for it brings fallen Man back again, to what he was designed before this
visible Creation was brought forth. May it not be permitted us to say, and that
not without good Authority, That fallen Man is to be restored to a degree above
the Angels? for unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee? And, Let all the Angels of God worship him. What
is here appropriated to Christ, the same appertains to all that are of his
Life-Line begotten, from the same incorruptible Word, to the same join
Pre-eminence, at which the fallen Angels, to this day, great Indignation have,
and therefore they are so busy and active in this present proving Time,
watching to beguile, tempt and supplant all of this Priestly Crown, as those do
well know, who to any good degree of this new springing Birth are come; they
have Thousand Wiles and subtle Baits to tempt withal, from this present World,
by which they have great advantage to bind still under their Power, striving to
keep the Creature still in Enmity with themselves, to God their Creator,
introducing still of their poisonous Sting, which is become the bitter Root of
Sin, which the holy Ghost can only pluck away, and heal again the infected
part; for what but a Spirit can enter into that deadly thing for Cure and
Restoration? against which all the fallen Angels do greatly war and struggle?
for they would still keep in their Scorpion Sting. But the Love-Compassion of
the everlasting Father has made such Provision, as to have it drawn out, where
Foundation building is laid for an holy royal Priesthood. The Sovereign
Ointment is all compounded and made ready for the perfecting this Cure, at
which all evil Angels, whether visible or invisible, who in the earthly sinful
Principle do remain, may envy and be in pain, but no power have to hurt, or
thrust in their Leviathan Hook, to wound again; such a defensive Virtue there
i, found in this boiling Ointment, which works it self to such an height of
Spirit, as no malignity of sin is able to abide with it: So penetrating it is,
that it throws out every black Moat, that from this low blustering Region is
blown in upon it And thus the holy Ghost is become the true working bubling
Spring, that maintains a divine clearness with wonder, in which God, the holy
Ghost, will make himself manifest in a more full and perfect manner, than what
ever in former Ages has been witnessed. Wherever this powerful and piercing
anointing shall first work through, it will do no less than produce those
creating Powers, that shall another World renew. God yet once more is to move
himself in this Mystery, from which such a Conflagration is expected, that
nothing more of the old Earth or Heavens shall remain. For there is a Day that
must burn as an Oven, blessed are those in whom it shall have its enkindling,
wherein all dead fruitless Works shall be burnt up, which makes room for the
seven governing Powers of the holy Ghost to go forth, whether in the Archangel
Trumpet-Sounds or Lightning-Voices, Earthquakes, Bindings, Loosings, Shuttings,
Openings, working on this and on that hand, as unperceiveable, yet all things
effecting through the impregnable motion of this invisible Operator. Of this
sort will be the New heavenly Hosts, that created are again by the holy Ghost,
all lively sparkling Stones, that are in their invisible Nature, as fiery
Flames that can go hither and thither, to act according to the will of the
great Elohim. This is now the thing that we are day by day looking out, for its
all-powerful springing; all other flourishings in the very Courts of Holiness,
in the use and exercise of divine Ordinances and solemn Convocations, they are
not to be staid in, though they seem to be as the goodly Tents of Jacob. God,
the holy Ghost comes to move higher, from his own essential creating Word, by
which he makes New Heavens, that shall forever remain, and no more subject be
to vanishing. It will be the last and greatest proving to the Saints
themselves, to have their Heavens not only shaking, but melted all away, which
may be compared to an out spreading Garden of various Flowers, which look
pleasant and delightful, but they are what must fade and dye; these Garnithings
are not to be trusted to, for as Grass they will wither: Something else that is
stable and durable Iam taught and made to look for, which is nothing less than
the Creating Word of the holy Ghost, that may be as a New Coined Mint, that
will an ever alting Treasure renew, which the Sun and Moon of these visible
Heavens must bow unto. All the Glory of Flesh rejected is, when pure Breath and
Spirit, in a Body of Air, shall, as out of the Valley of dry Bones, appear, and
move, as a Celestial Wheel, both upward and downward, carrying and bearing up
as an anointed Cherub, that may mount and ascend, and face the supreme Glory of
the Lord Almighty. This is the high Adoption, that the Spirit in the living
Creatures, do move from the earthly Center up straight forward, being circled
about with the unfadeable Body of the immutable Heavens, to whom the Heaven of
Heavens will open, and descend to take in such Royal clothed Priests, that have
put off their changeable Heavens, and are all clothed with substantial Power.
If any one ask, How this shall be, and when? We can only direct you to wait at
the High-Priest's Gate, by whom our inlet into all of this high inconceiveable
working Powers in the holy Ghost, which will the separating Description make,
and show by real Evidence, who it is, that from men and the Earth are in truth
all fully redeemed.

Before we can give over this subject, we are to make known, for the Priestly
Election sake, that they may be strengthened, supported and encouraged in their
process, from the knowledge of these special Royalties, which to them do
belong, it having been specified what are the high Qualifications of this high
Priesthood, who must no more look down toward the creeping things of this
Earth; for here you must consider the Enochian translation, these Priests being
designed for the company of God, the most holy separated Being; for there is a
real taking into God to be experienced, and a ceasing from the Life of Sin. Now
for the bringing up hereunto, there must be a passing through, until the
Holiest of all be entered into.

But now come we to describe what this holy Function stands chargeable withal,
as also the Dignity, Power and Pre-eminence which does attend it. Every
High Priest, taken from men, is ordained in things pertaining to God, that he
may offer Gifts and Sacrifices for Sin. This is a Charge, which to this New
Covenant Priesthood does still belong; for whosoever meet to deal with God, and to
make intercession as the Pure and Merciful, who have themselves been
encompassed with Infirmity, and passed through diverse Temptations, who but
these can know how to have Compassion of the Ignorant and Knowing also, that
have turned aside from the Sanctuary of Gods Presence and Walks, and thereby
have lost their peace and joy? therefore God has as well provided in this
case, Priests and Mediators on the Earth, as he has provided that great
High Priest, who is entered into the Heavens; for the self-same Prevailency and
Power will be found in and amongst this holy and undefiled Priesthood, because
wherever Christ in his spiritual Body is present, with the breathing Power of
the holy Ghost, it implies great Efficacy in every Oblation and Prayer, which
in their behalf shall be put up. Thus a Spirit of attoning is appropriated Mal.
18. 18.
unto the Melchizedeck-Pristhood, from whom more fruitful Powers must branch
forth, for further service in their Joh. 20. 23.
Place and Office. There is also an Absolving Commission given, That
whosoever's Sins they remit, they are from all Guilt discharged, as pronouncing
it in the Person and Power of him to whom the holy Ghost was given without
Measure, and who after his Resurrection breathed forth this Power upon his
Disciples, That whatever they bound on Earth should be bound in Heaven. Hereby
communicating his Priestly Power and Authority, that as he, the Son of Man, had
power to forgive sins, so might they also have on Earth after his Departure, to
carry on their Apostolical Dispensation, which only lasted for a while, and
being lost, a feigned Form was set up in stead of it, without any sealing
Effects of Spirit or Power. Thus the Shadow has held up, without any living
presence, in Babel, which boasts of a Key, which never yet could open, nor give
Enlargement to those who were bound in the Cords of Iniquity: for how should
they, who are not purified themselves, help or succor their Brethren? And
though this true thing has been abused by the Arrogant and Self-exalting
Spirit, that with this Priestly Robe covers all manner of filch and
Uncleanness, all of which will come to bear its shame, and have its Overthrow,
as this True and Royal Priesthood shall rise in Power in the true Tabernacle,
where the holy Ghost will present the Priestly Offerings; and this is that,
which upon sure grounds, we know is now reviving again; the most Holy will
bring forth his Priestly Unction, which will take the Chair, that so this holy
Ordination may take place in great Soveraignity. The holy and just One has
reserved his last and most wonderful sealing Testimony, for to go forth from
the Unity of an holy Priestly Spirit, which is so far perfected, as to stand no
more in need of Offerings for Sin, because he who sanctifies, and they who are
sanctified, are made all one in this Ministration; for if they come not to a
sinless state, they cannot be of this high Priestly Order, because to it a Key
is given, That is, by incorporation with Christ, their sinless Life, all Purely
acting in them.
which must open all the twelve Gates beforementioned. And without all
Controversy, great is that Power that shall be here concentred; for our
exalted Christ, who is passed higher than the Heavens, has recovered Power to
transfer himself in his divine Purity and excellent Might, unto this elected
Priesthood, which shall be visible here on Earth. This is the true Mount-Zion,
from whence Decrees, Laws, Judgments and holy Statutes shall go forth from the
Urim and Thummim, sound Knowledge and Understanding, and the Certainty of the
words of Truth hence shall proceed, so that it will be a most sure and safe
Oracle in all difficult Soul-cases, and to determine all Doubts and
Difficulties; for of Old the Israel of God would not venture upon any Concern,
nor attempt any Design, without having first enquired at the Priests Mouth, who
only was to give forth the Mind of God, which will now be again renewed, for
those who are not admitted to this high Calling of the holy Priesthood; for
such honor these Saints shall have above the lower Ranks, as being not
ordained by man, nor after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but by the
impressed Seal of the mighty God. Here need no Epistles of Commendation, the
Powers of this Priestly Dignity will be sufficient Orators to recommend them;
for great Signs and Wonders will be acted forth when the Temple-Body of the
holy Ghost shall come down and open it self in the Priestly Ministration, every
Branch of which will have its multiplying Fruits for the Praise-Offering of the
Sanctuary. I shall now declare what the Testimony of Truth has spoken in me,
which is this, That whatever God is or can do, the same will appear in and
amongst this Priestly Order; Visions, Proverbs and Similitudes must cease,
which as leading stars have been under the Son's Ministration, this being the
fullness of time, in which the Father will show himself plainly, without any
Figures or Shadows, in the substantial Body of Power, uncessantly flowing, from
which the New Creation must bud out in a fresh Glory, and all of the old fade
and dye away.

But here it may be objected, Where are there any to be found of this Royal
Priesthood, who may give forth a Sealing Evidence in this present time? They
have indeed been long predicted of, but we would fain see some really instated
in this high Order.

For Answer to this, I say, there may possibly be some who are advanced to a
good degree of this high state, and who have passed through the first and
second Order; all which is an inward, secret, purifying work from Sin, and holy
Ground made ready for the Righteous Branch, in its Lilly-beauty to spring,
which may be done without any great noise; for where Christ is come to offer
himself once for all, then the next thing that follows is the coming of the
holy Ghost to reign all in all: wherefore we will believe and hope, there may
be some under this peculiar Ordination though dispersed and unknown, who are
all ready to enter upon the third Degree, which is the spriritual Rule and
Authority; for it is no less than a perfect Regeneration that brings to this
Gate, because whoever enters here, must first have shaken hands with a worldly
Conversation, no more touching any dead thing; wherefore this state is not
common or easily attained, but by such who are touched by Love, and anointed
for this holy Melchizedeck Order, of their calling to which, none shall ever
have cause to Repent; for great are the Royalties that will follow, according
as has been declared.

The Spirit of Prophecy spoke thus to me expressly, as the close of this
subject, saying, I will choose a Disciplehood yet upon the Earth a gain, who
shall know me in my inward spiritual figure; as in former time I was known in a
visible Humanity, by Voice and Shape; but now I am come to appear and walk upon
invisible Earth, which none but the spiritual Man understands my Speech, or
sees my transformed Shape to such who my chosen Disciples are, I will
familiarly appear; for behold, I upon a new Election am, who the Alpha and
Omega is to call together such whose Names are sound in the Crown Number Roll,
one by one, till to the hundred and forty four Thousand for the increase and
manifestation of this most holy Priesthood; blessed are they that shall be the
first Foundation Pillars hereof, so says the Yea and Amen; for this will be
the Virgin Church, upon whom no Spot ar Wrinkle shall be found, for if found
faulty, I cannot be their Priestly head for the case is clean altered of what
it was in the day of my visible Corporiety, which was the first dawning of my
Day, in which the mixed and imperfect things among my Disciplehood, could not
so suddenly fly away; therefore a suffering state was to succeed after me, that
so sin, by its daily dyings might expire, which among my old Disciplehood, in
that Age, great effect did take, but yet deceasing before reaching to the full
and perfect date of what was to be the Churches primitive state, now something
greater and more perfect is to be revealed, after so long and cloudy a Night of
Apostasy, where there has been a going back, instead of going forward; but
there is a Star that shall arise out of the same light Orb, whereof it shall be
said, Behold, Wisdom's Day through dark Clouds does appear, out of whose Virgin
Womb bright Stars of Glory generated are, innumerably, to make up that
Temple-Church, all fair and christaline, terrible as an Army with Banners, that
shall display my Strength and Power. This is the Trumpet sound of Christ, the
Lords Spirit, to such who of this high and holy Order are, that they may break
away from their Iron Yokes; and be unbound from all Terrestrial things, for to
come to be received into this new Disciplehood, and with the Lord to have all
freedom of Speech. Oh! where shall we find any that shall, for this high and
spiritual degree, all they have and are here for to resign, that as fixed
Pillars for this first born Church, they may come so to be. Lord Jesus, it is
thy golden Crook that must take hold, I see, for such a Priestly Ministry.

I shall, before I conclude, answer some Queries that may arise in the Minds of
some, as they read these Prophetical Revelations, who may require some further
satisfaction concerning the truth of these things.

The first Objection that meets me, asking, How and after what manner are these
great and deep Mysteries revealed and made known? for we are in doubt whether
any since the Apostles days can have so pure and clear a Discovery of the Mind
of God, by way of Vision or Revelation.

As to this, I Answer; The thing is weighty, and may be allowed of to search
and follow this Query close and home; for too many there be that are Pretenders
to the Gift of Prophecy and Revelation, whereby they put a cheat upon
themselves and others, and bring themselves under that Woe of taking up the
Lords Spirit for their covering, which is the greatest of all Evils, to be
under a spiritual Fraud: Therefore I say, let every one search, try and
examine, from what ground and spirit they come forth as the Oracles of God, to
give his Mind out; for assuredly they will be called to a severe Account by the
Spirit of Truth. Now as to this I will assure thee, (O Querior) whoever thou
art, it was my great fear and jealousy, even upon my first entrance into this
Ministration, and was made well aware of the wiles and subtilties of Satan,
that was ready enough to mingle his Deceits with Truth; but divine Wisdom was
my Counselor and Cautioner, and her Spirit became the Conduct to Truth, and
Separater, she still throwing out what would not bear the touch of the burning
Stone, which Wisdom had placed in the Center of my Heart, by which a wonderful
Light of Manifestation did spring, for the knowledge of the Truth, in the deep
Essentiality of it; the Way, Method, Measure and Rules of it, as experienced by
me, I shall demonstrate, for the service and benefit of such as are true
Seekers and fervent Lovers of Truth, how they may come to know the true
Revelation of the Spirit of Christ, from those mixed Spirits that are apt to
inject their Motions, and so mudy the pure Springs of Revelation; for know, it
is a nice and difficult matter to know the Spirit's speech and voice in his day
since Christ the Lords ascending, than what it was before, when as the Word of
the Lord came expressly to the Patriarchs and Prophets, articularly, by
immediate Voice; God was very familiar in way of Speech, as with Araham, Moses,
and so to the Prophets, till Christ's time; but now in these last days he
speaks to us by the Spirit of his Son, which is the Spirit of Truth and
Comforter, that is the Spirit we are to try, and to be proved by, whether or no
he is come into us, as a Spirit of Prophecy and Revelation, which you shall
know first by way of Preparation of the inward Mind; for the speaking Word or
Oracle of God must have a most holy separated place, distinct and apart from
the outward Man; for there is to be prepared an inward Temple body, else no
expectation of the holy Ghost, without a suitable Body be prepared for him, as
the living Ark, in which the Oracle of Truth may open, and show the Records of
the Heavens.

But it may be further queried, How can this Temple. Body be raised up and kept
so spiritually, as to be distinct and separated from the mortal body, with its
senses and earthly Motions?

I Answer; Herein indeed lies the great Mystery of all Mysteries, how to keep
the spirit of the outward birth, with all his infecting Multiplicities, from
rushing into the inward Court, where the Soul and God are to be in private
Counsel together; for if there be a breaking in of the troubled Sea of
thoughts, this is that which adulterates the pure revealed things, and brings a
false covering upon them; therefore I shall give these following Rules, as they
were given me by the holy Anointing, when I first sought this Privilege, of
divine Inspiration, I was counseled, as to the outward state of things, To
avoid, as much as I could, the choking intangling Cares of this Life, and also
to sequester my self from all wordly Conversation, and give up Spirit, Soul and
Body in pure dedication; the which I can say, in my measure I have been
obedient to, and have found good things, as to the spiritual part, have accrued
thereby, which I shall never have cause to repent of, let my losses be what
they can be, as to the worldly lot of things. Now the next Rule, which is more
interior and Evangelical, as to the inward and holy place of the Mind, For this
take more special care, and keep the outward Birth at distance from the
superior and inward birth; call in your heavenly guard upon it; enter into no
Parley with the outward Man of Reason, concerning spiritual matters, for you
will find him a false Prophet, and no way consonant to this Ministration the
Soul is waiting upon, therefore to watch and be in a defensive Posture against
all invasions of this kind. Then again take a further Caution concerning a more
finer subtiltier sort of imaginariness, which comes in the appearance of
spirituality; here lies the greatest danger for mistake, when seeming good
Motions do rise and spring, and yet but from the Astaral Kingdom, but they are
sometimes so divine as you can hardly discern them from the true teaching of
the holy anointing; there are Spirits that will put on such a Priestly dress,
like those that rose up against Moses, the Lords infallible Prophet, saying,
Are not we spiritual, and therefore may be admitted into the secret of God with
you, and there give our Verdict as front the Oracle of God? Thus we are in
danger to be encompassed with Spirits so finely clothed, as they would think
much to be refused, but where the Urim and Thummim of sound judgment in such is
come, that can only discern and taste Spirits of all sorts of Qualities,
Natures and Degrees; for I well know, a Mind may be replenished with knowledge
and understanding of divine Mysteries from the outward Tongues received and
taken in, and yet have been kept strangers to the flowing Springs of Wisdom and
Revelation within, from whence the certainty of the true Prophet is to be
known; therefore let every one look to it, what they speak teach or write; for
it will pass through the inward ground for trial, where the fiery Region will
prove it.

But now I shall come to describe the true and more certain way of divine
Openings and Revelations; know then, where holy Consecrations and special
Separations, as the foregoing Preparation to this high Ministration, those are,
as such may come to feel in themselves one essential Birth of Life to spring,
which is not to be catched in by verbal Comprehension, Knowledge or
Understanding; No such thing. But the Spirit of Truth and Revelation opens
himself in the fiery Essence of the Soul, in a sweet silent stillness, where
out all thoughts are excluded; then does the light Ray of the Deity rise, and
overshadow and fill the Temple of the Mind with light and glory, then will the
soul sink away deeper and deeper into the abyss being, where the greatest of
Wisdom's secrets are to be known, when the spirit of the Soul can, after this
manner steal and How blind to time, must that eye be, Who would see the glories
of Eternity? Sure those who Heaven most desire, They from all of the Earth do
most retire.
slide away from time and mortal day, then open stands that gate that given
entrance to behold the glorisi'd beings, and to hear the languages of that
light world, which none else can hear but them that are got out of the noise of
all other hearings, into that still and silent deep, where most pleasant joyful
Voices and Sounds are heard, which entering through the several Orgains, as a
siery Bresth, and nothing of vocal Words is either required or needed there:
Now then by this you may judge, that pure and unadultered revelation and vision
of a true sight, is not so quickly rushed into, nor easily attained; it is a
great and peculiar Gift, and also requires great watchfulness, and attenders
upon it, if any would enjoy and hold it incorruptedly: And that there may be no
deceit in this matter, when you come to try your own and other Spirits, take
this observation further with you, If any one brings out a Prophecy or
Revelation, take notice what defensive power and guard it has upon it. The
beloved John, when he had all those visions and revelations, he gives an
account how they were seen and heard by him; for says he, I was in the Spirit
on the Lords day (and a good proof there was of it) as much as if he had said,
That it was neither Man's nor Mortals day that did rise and enclose upon him,
but the one everlasting Day, or Ancient of Days, in whose Light he had the
glorious Prospect of heavenly things themselves. Thus he was in the Spirit,
which was his defensive power and guard, to keep out all either trifling
Spirits. Observe this further, it is a much different thing for the Mind and
Spirit of the Soul to be caught and taken up into the spirit pure and
abstractedly; for then it is secured from mixtures; but when the holy Spirit is
come only into the Property of our Souls, giving sorth lustrous Light and
Revelation, and in speaking fluently, yet hazardable to be twisted about from
the self-promoting Essence, that ready and apt is to dash in upon the divine
inspiring, as soon as it arise from its own center deep. This I speak
knowingly, having traced through the deep Meanders, before I arrived to know
the true and certain way of Revelation, by which now I am put out of doubt
concerning the true Oracle speaking in the Soul, as to my own particular,
watching thereunto with heedfulness, for the keeping out all fluttering Spirits
that have their birth and nourishment from the astaral and elementary Region,
that can go in and out for proving, till we are got beyond their Kingdom Now
indeed when the spirit of the Soul meets with such a pull up into the Spirit,
as the beloved Disciple, then it is out of all fears; but this is very rare,
they are high favorites that do frequently meet with such transportations; but
the other is more common and frequent to Saints, that lovers and enjoyers are
of that Ministration, for whose sakes I have been impulsed to open these secret
things, that they may put on their impregnable strength of defense, for the
preserving this great immunity, as the choicest of all of Gods favors, and
that incorruptedly, as from the pure spring of the Spirit, then you will find
every faculty tinged with the fiery Glance of the holy Ghost, as you see by the
dark and hard body of Iron, being enclosed with Fire, it is so penetrated
therewith, as it becomes as one and the same fire flame; but you must keep and
feed it there as the Salamander, which always lives in the fire; after this
manner does the holy Ghost, with his invisible flaming Body, penetrate through
the spirit of the Soul, that it is encompassed with Light, as the Angel, which
is said ( Rev. 19. 17.) standing in the Sun, all appearing as the very Sun of
glory; therefore highly valuable it is, for any Saint to get such a clothing of
the Spirit upon them; for nothing of Adam's weak or impotent Nakedness can here
be seen, but all glory, strength and power will be your habitation; therefore
these are gifts to be much set by and desired, and not slighted or despised.
Now having given a plain and experimental account of this nice and difficult
Point, which I hope may have reached to the satisfaction of the doubtful, I
shall now, by virtue of a heavenly Commission given me from the Lord, give
counsel and caution to three sorts and degrees of Persons.

The First of this is to them that do question, Whether there be any Spirit of
Prophecy or Revelation given forth since the Apostles deceased, as believing
all dyed with them? This would be a sad and deplorable thing, if God should
since that Age cut off the spring of Revelation from its original, that so the
Sheep and Lambs of Christ's flock should no more expect to be fed from the fresh
springing Pastures, where no footing has been, as also to drink of those
flowing Rivers of Life that renew daily from the fount of the God head; let
such but call to mind and consider those many Scripture-Prophecies and Promises
concerning the continuation of this Gift unto the very end of time, both in the
old and new Testament; I shall mention only some of the latter; John 14. 16,
17, 18. 2 Cor. 4. 8. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. John 2. 28. Heb. 8. 9, 10,
11. Many more than these Scriptures could call up for confirmation of the
continued run of the Spirit throughout all Ages, Christ by his Spirit
comforting us, saying, Lohe would be with his to the end of the World, Now, as
from the Lord, I beseech you, not to eclipse the light of the Day Star (2 Pet.
1. 19.) in your own Souls, nor quench the Spirit, nor despise Prophesying, then
may the witness of Jesus rise in you, to confirm this most glorious
Ministration, as a burning Lamp of Revelation.

A word of Love-caution is to another sort of Persons, who are entered into this
Ministration, in its first degree, and are under the Spirits discipline and
teaching; the word of Counsel, from the Father of Spirits, is this, That they
keep precisely to the Rules and Laws of the Spirit; for there will be expected
from such more shining and singular Conversation, showed forth in a
self-denying Life, dying to all of those mortal things and sensual enjoyments,
that strangle and choke the fiery Breath of the holy Spirit, to stop it from
kindling further and deeper in the Soulish Essence, that so there may be a
coming up to a mighty Increase and Fruitfulness in the love and unity of the
Spirit, having all tenderness to support, love and cherish each Olive Plant
that springs out of this Eden Garden, which is watered by the holy Mists and
dropping Dews of the Spirit.

Now to the third sort, this word of Wisdom and Counsel does greet them, whom
we discern to be of a high and lofty stature, having shot forth their Branches
in great luster and glory, as having got beyond all declarative Revelations and
Teachings, as not receiving or needing any but what their own center of Light
will supply them withal, here-from inclining to slight what lies in bank and
store with their Fellow Laborers for this same Treasure, to such this word is
sent, that they carry it in great humility and lowliness of Mind, prefering
each ones gift before, or as their own, maintaining all sweet and lovely
Fellowship, with those of lower or higher degrees, in mutual Concord and
Harmony, for the maintaining a holy Fraternity and spiritual Neighborhood,
although each Saint may have a full Provision and plentiful Portion of Spirit
in themselves, so as they have no dependence on another, yet love is freely
communitive, and disperseth it self in great variety, so as what one Saint is
gifted and furnished with, the other may want of that sort and kind, and so a
heavenly Traffic and Correspondency may be maintained, feeding and feasting
with each other, on the various Fruits, as all springing from one Stock and
Tree of Life; for it is experienced, that much increase of the holy Anointing
has flown forth by the converse and declaration of divine Inspirations, from
one Saint to another, the which has begotten a new and spiritual Generation,
as in former Ages, so in this, sending forth divine sparks of Light and Love,
for the gathering in of the holy priestly Train, that are to make up the
Temple-Glory, till the which shall come to be completed, there will be all
need of this holy in spiring Breath to be breathed from one to another, whether
by vocal Voice, inspeaking or converse, as the holy Spirit shall go forth in
its various operations, for the edifying of the Body of Love, for a holy
Convocation to the Lord.

In the hopeful Expectation of which, I have been driven to disclose these
great and deep secrets, being assured, That this Generation shall not pass away
before there shall be a fulfilling of what has been revealed and prophesied of
in this little Tract; and blessed are they that shall have their lot and
portion herein: There is a rich Bank yet behind, from whence the oily Springs
do fill, that may be emptied forth, when Vessels are made more fine, and ready
thereof to take in; for the which we shall wait and seek to find some such for
to partake of that rich and weighty Prize, that yet lies in the secret and
eternal Mine; for there is Valley deep, which under, the Water of Life does lie,
that will bring forth the fruitful Olive Plants, that shall be there fed and
nourished hiddenly, till of a strong and full grown stature in Spirit and Power
they may come for to be; then will they show themselves to the true Israel of
God universally, that the Priestly Kingdom may come for to spread and flourish
every where, in power and great glory, sealed with Mission of the holy Ghost,
acting and going forth in signal miraculous working Powers, for confirmation of
the truth of this Dispensation, in such a way as none shall resist, nor any
dark Magician shall be able to counterfeit; for so strong and impregnable is
the Foundation of this Temple-body of glory, that neither Dragon, Beast or
false Prophet shall be able it to undermine, it being built and compact
together of precious Sapphire Stones, transparent for Beauty and Glory, the
Jasper Stone being both Foundation and Covering thereon, then will the shout of
a King be heard in the Land of Salvation.

Oh! ye holy and elect of God, wherever you have been hid, appear, if you
have put on your anointed Shield, promote and help forward this royal
Priesthood, wherein the lively express of the holy Ghost is to be manifested:
Oh! that some fitch might be known, that hereto do give themselves, and mind no
other thing, as the Lords approved Workmen, that may come to build up the
inward Priestly Temple, whose Furniture and Glory shall be the Gifts and Powers
of the holy Ghost. And now, what have I more to do, but to wait in hope, that
the pure flaming Spirit may henceforth go forth to gather in this Priestly
Host, who, as in a reathed Chain of Love, united may be inseparable, that so we
may come to take our degrees of Prophets, Priests and Kings, for the making
good what has been in this Treatise revealed; which though in the form of a
dead Letter, yet O God, as the Auther hereof, did in the writing meet with a
mighty flow of the anointing Presence; so let the same out-flowing Spring
accompany such whom thou have ordained to be taken into this holy Priestly
Order, to which give thy Amen, O great High Priest, to whom the Glory hereof
does belong. Even so let that Kingdom come into this World, that shall consist
of Kings, Priests and Prophets; with all such Righteous Plants, let the whole
Earth be plantd, for Joy and Praise to him who is the Ancient of Days.
Hellelujah to him who is KING of Kings.

THE END

