THE EXERCISE OF THE SPIRIT IN Spiritual Things: AND The many good and
peaceable Fruits of Righteousness Experimentally Witnessed in that great Work
of God upon my Soul and Spirit, in the time of my first Convincement of the
Truth, and Since.

With some Experiences in the time of my Travel and Exercises therein: To those
whose Faces are turned Zion-ward, and Traveling on toward their Eternal and
Everlasting Rest.

And for all People to Try and E^amine themselves, by that Manifestation of the
Spirit that is given to every Man to profit withal,

1 Cor. 12.7. No Chastning for the present seems to be Joyous, but grievous:
Nevertheless, afterward, it yields the peaceable fruit of Righteousness, unto
them that are Exercised thereby,

Heb. 12.11. Bodily Exercise profits little: but Godliness is profitable unto
all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and that which is to
Come,

1 Timothy 4.8. Printed in the Year, 1686.

The Exercise of the Spirit in Spiritual Things, etc.
Dear Friends,
IN Dear and tender Love, do I communicate these things following unto you; who
have traveled and are Witnesses with me herein: and not only unto you my
Friends is this given forth, but in that universal Spirit and love of God,
really intended for the good of all People; and more especially unto those
whose desires are real and sincere after the living God, and his Eternal Truth.

And be it further known unto all, that great has been the work of the Lord in
this the day of his Power; and many the great and weighty Exercises, that the
dear Children and People of the Lord has been Exercised in, since God in his
Everlasting Love, did first Visit our Souls, and Convince us of our lost and
undone State and Condition, because of Sin, and Transgression, which we had
long lived and delighted in for many Years; yea, I say, when the Lord our God
did first awake our Souls out of Sin, and call us to Repentance by his Light
and Spirit in our Consciences; Oh, then was the time of Sore. Travel, and great
Lamentation, and Mourning, finding our Souls in a lost and undone Condition,
without a Savior: Till at length God in his infinite Love, and great Mercy,
unto our Immortal Souls opened a door of hope unto us; even that great Mystery
that was hid from Ages and Generations, but now made known unto us, the
believing Gentiles, Christ in you the hope of Glory; and believing in him, and
joining to his Light which shined in our hearts, our faith and hope increases
more and more: and though at the first, this our Estate was not joyous unto us;
yet afterward it brought forth the peaceable fruits of Righteousness as we
were Exercised thereby.

First then, As one of those good and peaceable fruits of Righteousness that
was brought forth, in this our sore travel and Exercise in Spirit; the Lord did
beget a true tender breathing desire in our Hearts and Souls after himself, and
the true knowledge of his way: which desire in us could no way be satisfied by
any external visible thing, but our Souls and Spirits still breathed and
thirsted after him, as the thirsty Heart after the water Brooks; yea, more then
after our daily Food: until the Lord in his good time satisfied our ^ungring
Souls with good things, and did Administer Rest and Peace unto our troubled
Spirits.

2. Another good and peaceable fruit was brought forth, the Holy fear of the
Lord; and Oh, the Awe, and Dread, and Fear, that was upon us, in the time of
our first Convincement. And not only of things unlawful, but even those things
that were lawful in themselves, and in meat, drink, and apparel, buying,
selling, and otherwise; and if I should here declare and speak, of what God
has made some of us Witnesses of, there is many that could not believe: But
this we may say, as we have been kept in this holy fear, we have been preserved
out of much Evil; And as the fear of God increased in us, the fear of Man
deceased: and we grew bold and strong in the Lord.

3. Another good and peaceable fruit, the Lord did not only beget good desires
in our hearts, and a fear to offend him, but he has also raised a love in our
Souls unto him and his precious Truth; which love did far exceed our love to
all Natural and Earthly things. So that by this love we have been Constrained
to part with all other things, tho formerly never so near and dear unto us:
yea, I say, because of that superabounding and overcoming love which God had
shed abroad in our hearts.

4. Another good and peaceable fruit has been Exp(...)rienced; Oh how has the
mighty power of the Lor(...) broken our hard Hearts, and Mollified, and Tendered
ou(...) Spirits in a deep sense of our own Nothingness, and God(...) great love
and mercy unto our Souls; yea, with wha(...) Mourning and Lamentation have we
besought the Lor(...) many time in secret, going weeping on our way, and
seeking the way to Zion with our faces Thither-wards tho despised and rejected
of the world, yet the Lord has remembered us in this our low Estate: and turned
ou(...) Mourning into Joy, and our heaviness into rejoicing Yea, he has bound
up the Brokenhearted, and comforted the sorrowful Soul: Blessed be his holy
Name.

5. Another good and peaceable fruit was brough(...) forth, that true Humility
and self denial, when we became little and low in our own Eyes, and of mean
Account in the Eyes of the World; being made willing to do, or to suffer any
thing for the Lord and his Truth thinking no Pains too much, nor Labor too
hard, that w(...) might meet with the beloved of our Souls; waiting and
depending upon the Lord alone, that he which ha(...) thrown down, would raise
up again: and he that ha(...) killed, would make alive: and he that (...)
wounded (...) sin, that he would seal our wounded Spirits. And how has he
poured Oil into our wounds, and lift up th(...) hands that hung down, and
strengthened the feeble Knee(...) and been a present help unto us in the time
of our grea(...)est need.

6. Another good and peaceable fruit was Experienced in this our holy Exercise
in Spirit, that tho our Peace was lost, yea, that Peace we had in our former
vai(...) Conversation in the World, while we lived and delighte(...) therein;
in their worship and going after their Teacher(...) and in the Forms, Fashions,
Customs, and followship thereof, and not redeemed therefrom; neither knowing
the true Worship, nor right Teachers, nor yet the the holy Union and fellowship
in the holy Spirit, until the Lord by his dreadful and awakning Call, reached
unto our Hearts, and gave our Spirits no rest, often moving of us to come out
from among them, least we die in our Sins; to come out of our vain
Conversation, and come into the Holy Life and Godly Conversation: to come out
of their Worship, and to come into the true Spiritual Worship; which Christ
himself had set up and Established above Sixteen Hundred Years since, Jo. 4.
which is in the Spirit, and in the Truth: and to come out from their Teachers
unto that Teacher, that cannot be removed into a Corner. Isa. 30.20. And know
the Lord to be your Teacher, which was and is the Teacher of his People in all
Ages and Generations. Genesis 15.1. Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.10, 11.

And so come out of the Forms, Fashions, Customs, and Fellowships of the World
into the Saints Fellowship, which the Apostle declares of, 1 Jo. 1.3, 5. That
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you: that ye also may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ. And as we hearkened unto this Holy Call, and obeyed the Spirits
Motions, we came to know the right way, and walking therein. Then we which had
long doubted in Religion, and Worship, came to be fully satisfied and resolved.

Having often livingly enjoyed Gods Heavenly power and divine Presence, in our
blessed Assemblies, and Meetings to our great Comfort, Souls Satisfaction, and
Refreshment; and thus we came to discern between the precious and the vile,
both in our selves and others; and those that had the form of Godliness, from
them that had the power: and turning away from them that had the form only,
being made witnesses of the power, and then coming out from the Worlds
fellowship both of Professors and Profane, and into the true Unity and
fellowship in the Holy Spirit, and waiting low therein, our peace did spring
and increase like good David, who said, Great peace have they that love thy
Law, and nothing shall offend them. And then we witnessed the saying of Christ
fulfilled in our hearts, My peace I give unto you, not as the world gives
peace, the worlds peace often arising from the increase and enjoyment of
worldly things; like that rich man spoken of by Christ, Luke 12.19. Which had
goods laid up for many Years, said, Soul take thy ease: but that peace Christ
gives unto his, is divine and spiritual; arising from a living sense and
feeling of the love and favor of God, through Jesus Christ our Savior, and
Reconciliation unto him thereby.

7. Another good and peaceable fruit has followed a holy War, made in truth
and Righteousness, against those great and grand Enemies of our Souls, the
Devil, the world and the flesh; and all that does spring up and arise from
these evil grounds, and would make a Separation between our Souls and the Lord,
and grieve and offend his holy Spirit, against these our Spiritual Enemies, and
no other, daily do we make war.

And our weapons are not Carnal but Spiritual, yea, mighty and powerful for the
subduing and overcoming of the man of sin.

And as for carnal weapons, we have laid them down long since, and can no more
take them up again, having made them useless and unfit for that service,
according to that Ancient Prophecy of old, and now in a good measure fulfilled
in many in this our day, Isa. 2.4. They shall beat their Swords into
Plowshares, and their Spears into pruning Hooks, and learn war no more.

And blessed be the God of Heaven that has redeemed our minds out of Wars and
fighting, and brought us to live and dwell (...)n love and peace with all Men,
according to Christ's Doctrine, Mat. (...).44. where he says, Love your
Enemies, bless them them that curse (...)ou, and do good to them that hate you;
and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you: and herein we
have found much Peace and Comfort to our Souls, praises to the God of peace.

8. Another good and peaceable fruit has been Experienced, that tho sorrow and
sadness did continue upon us for a time, yet joy and gladness followed: yea,
that joy that did exceed the joy of Harvest; being of that heavenly quality, to
ascend upwards with high praises to the God of Heaven: singing and making
Melody in our hearts unto the Lord. And according to David, that Man of G^d,
who in his experience says, Light is sown for the Righteous, and joy for the
upright in Heart; and how did Christ comfort and encourage his, before his
departure from them, John. 16. telling them they shall be sorrowful, but says
he, Your sorrow shall be turned into Joy, and I will see you again: and your
heart shall rejoice; and your joy no Man takes from you: as he had said unto
them before. It is expedient for you, that I go away: for if I go not away, the
comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. Oh
the great love and tender care of Christ over his little Flock, and many
(...)re made witnesses hereof in this our day, praises to our God for ever.

9. Another good and peaceable fruit has been witnessed, a (...)oly growth and
blessed increase unto God in that great work of Re(...)eneration, and
Sanctification; for nothing does more make for (...)his our inward and
spiritual growth in the things of God, then this (...)ur spiritual Exercise:
this is not like that outward and bodily ex(...)se the Apostle speaks of, that
profits little: but here is true Godness which is profitable unto all things,
having the promise of the (...)fe that now is, and that which is to come.

Lastly; Another good and peaceable fruit has been brought forth (...) many,
whose hearts, and minds, souls, and spirits, are come to be (...)tled, and
established upon that sure Rock against all the temptati(...)ns and assaults of
the Enemies of their souls peace, both inwardly (...)nd outwardly; and these
are the grown members of the true Church of Christ, against which the gates of
Hell do not prevail; Glory, glory, to our God, and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ both (...)ow and for evermore, Amen.

(...)rom Dailehead near ^eswick (...) Those Laythes Given forth from that
experience God has given me of (...)


