Some Questions and Answers concerning Religion, AND THE WORSHIP OF GOD.
THE only Living and Eternal God that made Heaven and Earth, and all Mankind,
it is he that requires Religion, Worship and Service, from all People, having
given them a Gift and Understanding whereby to know and discern Good from Evil,
and Right from Wrong: And seeing there are so many Religions, Professions and
Worships in the World, it is very necessary to know which is that True Religion
and Worship the Lord has a Regard unto, and does Accept of.

Quest. 1. From whence comes, and what is, the true and sound Religion and
Worship?

Answ. The true and right Root, from whence sound Religion springs and arises,
is from that precious Incorruptible Seed, sown by Christ the good Seeds-Man in
the Hearts of the Children of Men, whereby they are Renewed and Born again unto
a firm Faith, and sure steadfast Belief in God the Father, and in his Eternal
Son Jesus Christ for Life and for Salvation; and in this living and true Faith,
we sincerly serve, honor and obey God, in a holy Living with him in his Fear,
and a daily waiting upon him, and a humble Walking before him, and reverend
Worshipping and Serving him in the Spirit and in the Truth, Jam. 1.27. Joh.
4.24. Pet. 1.23.

Quest. 2. What is the difference between the true Religion and the false?

Answ. The true and sound Religion having for its Ground and Foundation a pure
Principle of Truth, which leads into all Truth in the Hearts and Consciences of
the Children of God, whereby they are acted, led and guided in the things of
God, and in all there religious Services to God: Then the fruits and effects
therefrom, is Meekness, Patience, Temperance, Love, Peace and Good Will unto
all: And such as are led and guided by this good Spirit, they are firm, and
sure, and steadfast in their Religion and Worship, and cannot forsake the
Assembling themselves together in the time of Persecution and Suffering, as the
manner of some has been. -- And the Ground and Foundation of false Religion,
is Darkness, Ignorance and Unbelief, Pride, Blind-zeal and Self-conceitedness,
begotten by the Spirit of Enmity in the Hearts of the Children of Darkness and
Disobedience to the Light and Grace of God; and from this ground arises all
that confusion in Religion and Worship, and those many Inventions and
Traditions in pretense of the service of God: And from this vain Religion, and
unbridled Tongue, arises much Discord, Strife and Contention, from such as
conceit they know that which they rightly know not, and so are wise in their
own Imaginations, and puffed up with their own Conceivings, to contend and
dispute in the Spirit of Enmity, and not of Love; and when this does not
prevail, then sometimes they go on to Persecution, Imposition and other
Cruelties, about Religion and Worship; and such are not conscientious for any
Religion at all, but can easily comply and conform to any Religion and Worship
whatsoever, being from the meek and peaceable Spirit of Christ Jesus.

Quest. 3. Among all sorts of People, who may be said to be likest the Ancient
and Primitive Christians?

Answ. Those may be said to be likest the Ancient and Primitive Christians, who
do believe in, and receive the Light and Spirit of Grace in their own Hearts,
and are thereby taught in Doctrine and Practice, in Humility, Charity and
Self-denial, being made willing patiently to suffer Reproach and Persecution
for God and Christ's sake, and walk according to Christ's Example, who went
about doing good, and when he was reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22,
23, Act. 10.38.

Quest. 4. Who are the best Ministers?

Answ. Those may be said to be the best Ministers that convert and turn most
Souls unto God, according to that in James 5.20. He that converteth a Sinner
shall save a Soul: Then let us see who these are; they are not the Proud and
Lofty, they are not the Light and Airy, nor the Wild and Wanton, they are not
the Hirelings, who seek their Gain from their Quarter, they are not the envious
Persecutors, nor the vain and unprofitable Talkers.

Quest. 5. Who are they then?

Answ. They are such as have freely received the Gifts of God's Grace, and
according to the Ability thereof, do freely Minister unto others, what they
have heard seen and handled of the Word of Life in themselves and live
accordingly, whereby they are made Instrumental to turn many from Darkness to
Light, and from Satan's Power to God: These are the best Ministers.

Quest. 6. And who is the best Teacher?

Answ. The best Teacher is Christ Jesus, who by his Light and Grace teaches to
deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts. And who are they that are taught and guided
by him? Not the Profane, Drunkards, Liars, Swearers, Whore-mongers and
Adulterers, nay these God will judge: It Is those that live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2.11, 12.

Quest. 7. And which may be said to be the best Meetings in relation to the
Worship of God?

Answ. Those may be said to be the best Meetings, wherein the Lord most appears
by his Heavenly Power and Divine Presence to humble the Hearts, and mollify
and tender the Spirits of his Children, and enlarge them to run the way of his
Commandments with great Delight: These are certainly his People, and these are
the best Assemblies and Meetings.

Let Truth and true Experience speak to these few Things.

From Dailhead in Cumberland, 18 th 11 th Mo. 1691. Written by a Friend to
Truth, and a Well-wisher to all People, Thomas Laythes.


