THE Complete Surgeon: OR, The whole Art of Surgery explained in a most
familiar Method.

Containing An exact Account of its Principles and several Parts, viz. Of the
Bones, Muscles, Tumors, Ulcers, and Wounds simple and complicated, or those by
Gunshot; as also of Venereal Diseases, the Scurvy, Fractures, Luxations, and
all sorts of Chirurgical Operations; together with their proper Bandages and
Dressings.

To which is added, A Chirurgical Dispensatory; showing the manner how to
prepare all such Medicines as are most necessary for a Surgeon, and
particularly the Mercurial Panacaea.

Written in French by M. le Clerc, Physician in Ordinary, and Privy-Counsellor
to the French King; and faithfully translated into English.

LONDON, Printed for M. Gillyflower, in Westminster Hall; T. Goodwin, and M.
Wotton, in Fleet Street; J. Walthoe, in the Middle Temple Cloisters; and R.
Parker, under the Royal Exchange, in Cornhill, 1696.

THE PREFACE.
SO great a number of Treatises of Surgery, as well Ancient as Modern, have
been already published, that a plenary Satisfaction seems to have been long
since given on this Subject, even to the Judgment of the most curious
Inquirers: But if it be considered that a young Surgeon ought always to have in
view the first Principles of this Noble Art explained after a familiar and
intelligible manner, it will be soon acknowledged that there is good reason to
set about the Work anew: For besides that the Writings of the Ancients being so
voluminous, are not portable, they are also very intricate and confused; nay
the whole Art has been so far improved and brought to perfection by able
Masters in the present Age, that they are now almost become unprofitable.

Some Modern Authors have set forth certain small Tracts, which only explain a
few Chirurgical Operations, and on that account deserve only the Name of
Fragments. Indeed the Works of some others seem to be sufficiently complete,
but are printed in so large Volumes, and contain so many Discourses altogether
foreign from the principal Subject, that they have almost the same
Inconveniences with those of the Ancients. Therefore the Reader is here
presented with a small Treatise of Surgery, yet very plain and perspicuous, in
a portable Volume; being free from a Multiplicity of impertinent Words, and
containing every thing of moment that has been produced by the most approved
Authors both Ancient and Modern.

An Introduction is made into the Matter by small Colloquies or Dialogues, to
the end that the young Student may be at first lead as it were by the Hand; but
as soon as he has attained to a considerable Progress in these Studies, this
innocent and puerile manner of speaking is abandoned, to conduct him in good
earnest to the most sublime Heights of so admirable an Art; to which purpose,
after having penetrated into its first Rudiments and Grounds, he is well
instructed in Anatomy, and furnished with a general Idea of Wounds and Tumors,
which are afterward treated of in particular: He is also taught a good Method
of curing Wounds made by Gunshot, the Scurvy, and all sorts of Venereal
Diseases: From thence he is introduced into the Practice of all manner of
Chirurgical Operations in Fractures and Luxations; together with the use of
their respective Dressings and Bandages.

At the end of the Work is added a complete Chirurgical Dispensatory, showing
the Method of preparing such Medicinal Compositions as are chiefly used in the
Art of Surgery; so that upon the whole Matter; it may be justly affirmed, that
this little Manual has all the Advantages of the Ancient and Modern Writings on
the same Subject, and is altogether free from their Superfluities and Defects.

THE Complete Surgeon: OR, THE Whole ART OF SURGERY Explained, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Qualifications of a Surgeon, and of the Art of Surgery.
WHO is a Surgeon?

A Person skilled in curing Diseases incident to Humane Bodies by a methodical
Application of the Hand.

What are the Qualifications of a good Surgeon in general?

They are three in Number: viz. Skill in the Theory, Experience in the
Practical part, and a gentle Application of the Hand.

Why ought a Surgeon to be skilful?

Because without a discerning Faculty he ca^ have no certainty in what he does.

Why must he be experienced?

Because Knowledge alone does not endue hi^ with a dexterity of Hand requisite
in such (...) Person, which cannot be acquired but by Experience, and repeated
Manual Operations.

Why must he be tender-handed?

To the End that by fit Applications he man assuage those Pains which he is
obliged to cau^^ his Patients to endure.

What is Surgery or Surgery?

It is an Art which shows how to cure the Diseases of Humane Bodies by a
methodic^^ Manual Application. The Term being deriv^^ from the Greek Word
(...), signifying a Ha^^ and (...), a Work or Operation.

After how many manners are Chirurgical O^^rations usually performed?

Four several ways.

Which be they?

I. Synthesis, whereby the divided Parts (...) reunited; as in Wounds. II.
Diaeresis, t^^ divides and separates those Parts, which, (...) their Union,
hinder the Cure of Diseases, s^^^ is the continuity of Abscesses or Impostu^^
which must be opened to let out the pu^^^ lent Matter. III. Exaeresis, which
draws ou^^^ the Body whatsoever is noxious or hurt^^^ as Bullets, Arrows, etc.
IV. Pros^^^sis adds some Instrument or Body to sup^^^ the defect of those that
are wanting; such are Artificial Legs and Arms, when the Natural ones are lost.
It also furnishes us with certain Instruments to help and strengthen weak
Parts, such as Pessaries, which retain the Matrix in its proper place when it
is fallen, Crutches to assist feeble Persons in going, etc.

What ought to be chiefly observed before the undertaking an Operation?

Four things; viz. 1. What the Operation to be performed is? 2. Why it is
performed? 3. Whether it be necessary or possible? And 4. The manner of
performing it.


How may we discern these?

The Operation to be performed may be known by its Definition; that is to say,
by explaining what it is in it self: We may discover whether it ought to be
done, by examining whether the Distemper cannot be cured otherwise: We may also
judge whether it be possible or necessary, by a competent Knowledge of the
Nature of the Disease, the Strength of the Patient, and the Part affected:
Lastly, the manner of performing it may be found out, by being well versed in
the Practice of Surgery.

What are the Fundamental Principles of Surgery?

They are Three in number: viz. 1. The knowledge of Man's Body. 2. That of the
Diseases which require a Manual Operation. 3. That of proper Remedies and Helps
upon every Occasion.


How may one attain to the Knowledge of Humane Bodies?

By the study of Anatomy.

How may one learn to know the Distempers relating to Surgery, and the Remedies
appropriated for them?

Two several ways; viz. 1. By the reading of good Books, and Instructions
received from able Masters of that Art. 2. By practice and the Observation of
what is performed b^ others upon the Bodies of their Patients.


What are the Diseases in general that belong (...) Surgery?

They are Tumors, Impostumes, Wound^ Ulcers, Fractures, Dislocations, and
generall^ all sorts of Distempers whereto Manual Operations may be applied.

What are the Instruments in general which a^ commonly used in Surgery for the
curing of Diseases?

They are Five; viz. the Hand, Bandages Medicines, the Incision-Knife, and Fire.

What is the general Practice which ought to be observed in the Application of
these different helps?

Hippocrates teaches us, in saying, that when Medicines are not sufficient,
recourse may b^ had to the Incision-Knife, and afterward t^ Fire; intimating
that we must proceed by degrees.

Are there any Distempers that may be cured (...) the Surgeon's Hand alone?

Yes, as when a simple and small Dislocation (...) only to be reduced.

CHAP. II. Of Chirurgical Instruments, portable and not portable.
WHAT do you call portable and not portable Instruments?

Portable Instruments are those which the Surgeon carries in his Lancet-Case
with his Plaister-Box; and not portable are those that he does not carry about
him, but is obliged to keep at home; the former being appointed for the ready
help which he daily administers to his Patients, and the others for greater
Operations.

What are the Instruments which a Surgeon ought to have in his Plaister-Box?

These Instruments are a good pair of Sizzers, a Razor, an Incision-Knife
straight and crooked, a Spatula, a greater Lancet to open Impostumes, and
lesser for letting Blood. They likewise carry separately in very near
Lancet-Cases, a hollow Probe made of Silver or fine Steel; as also many other
Probes, straight, crooked, folding, and of different thickness; a Pipe of
Silver or fine Steel, to convey the cauterizing Button to a remote Part,
without running the hazard of burning those that are near it; another Pipe or
Tube serving instead of a Case for Needles, which have Eyes at one end for
sowing; a Carlet, or thick triangular Needle; a small File; a Steel Instrument
to cleanse the Teeth; a Fleam; a pair of crooked Forceps to draw a Tooth; a
Pelican; a Crow's Bill; several sorts of Raspatories; a Hook to hold up the
Skin in cutting, etc.

What are the Instruments which a Surgeon ought to keep in his Repository to
perform the greater Operations?

Some of them are peculiar to certain Operations, and others are common to all.
The Instruments appropriated to particular Operations, are the Trepan for
opening the Bones in the Head or elsewhere: The Catheters or Probes for Men and
Women afflicted with the Stone, or difficulty of making Water. Extractors, to
lay hold on the Stone in Lithotomy, and to gather together the Gravel; large
crooked Incision-Knives, and a Saw, to make Amputations of the Arms or Legs;
great Needles with three Edges, to be used in making Setons; small Needles to
couch Cataracts; other Needles; thin Plates and Buckles to close a Hair-Lip,
etc.

May not the Salvatory be reckoned among the portable Instruments?

Yes, because the Balsams, Ointments, and Plasters contained therein, are
means whereof the Surgeon makes use to restore Health.

CHAP. III. Of Anatomy in general; and in particular of all the Parts whereof
the Humane Body is composed.
WHAT is Anatomy?

It is the Analysis or exact Division of all the Parts of a Body, to discover
their Nature and Original.

What is requisite to be observed by a Surgeon before he goes about to dissect
a Body?

Two things; viz. The external Structure of the Body, and the Proportion or
Correspondence between the outward Parts, and those that are within.

Why so?

Because without this exterior and general Knowledge, the Surgeon would be
often mistaken in the Judgment he is to pass concerning a Dislocation or Wound,
inasmuch as it is by the Deformity which he perceives in the Member, that he
knows the Dislocation, as it is also by the means of the Correspondence which
the outward Parts have with the inward, that he is enabled to draw any certain
Consequences relating to a Wound, which penetrates into the Body.

What is a Part?

It is that whereof the whole Body is composed, and which partakes of a common
Life or Sensation with it.

How many sorts of Parts are there in a Humane Body?

We may well reckon up Fifteen distinct Parts, which are the Bone, the
Cartilage, the Ligament, the Tendon, the Membrane, the Fiber, the Nerve, the
Vein, the Artery, the Flesh, the Fat, the Skin, the Scarf-Skin, the Hair, and
the Nails.

What is a Bone?

It is the hardest and driest Part of the whole Body, and that which
constitutes its principal Support.

What is a Cartilage or Gristle?

It is a yielding and supple Part, which partakes of the Nature of a Bone, and
is always fastened to its Extremities, to mollify and facilitate its Motion.

What is a Ligament?

It is a Membranous Contexture usually sticking to the Bones to contain them;
as also sometimes to other Parts, to suspend, and retain them in their proper
place.

What is a Tendon?

It is the Tail or Extremity of the Muscles, made by the reunion of all the
Fibers of their Body, which serves to corroborate it in its Action, and to give
Motion to the Part.

What is a Membrane?

It is a Nervous Part, the use whereof is to adorn and secure the Cavities of
the Body on the inside, and to wrap up or cover the Parts.

What is a Fiber?

They are fleshy Lines of which the Body of a Muscle is composed.

What is a Nerve?

It is a long, white, and thin Body, consisting of many Fibers, enclosed within
a double Tunick, and designed to carry the Animal Spirits into all the Parts,
to give them Sense and Motion.

What is an Artery?

It is a Canal composed of Four Coats, that carries with a kind of Beating or
Pulse even to the very Extremity of the Parts, the Blood full of Spirits, which
proceeds from the Heart, to distribute to them at the same time both Life and
Nourishment.

What is a Vein?

It is a Canal made likewise of Four Tunicles, which receives the Arterial
Blood, to carry it back to the Heart.

What is Flesh?

It is a Part which is formed of Blood thickened by the natural Heat; and that
constitutes the Body of a Muscle.

What is Fat?

It is a soft Body made of the Unctuous and Sulphurous part of the Blood.

What is the Derma or Skin?

It is a Net composed of Fibers, Veins, Arteries, Lymphatick Vessels and
Nerves, which covers the whole Body, to defend it from the Injuries of the Air,
and to serve as an universal Emunctory: It is very thin in the Face, sticking
close to the Flesh, and is pierced with an infinite number of imperceptible
Pores, affording a Passage to insensible Transpiration.

What is the Epiderma, or Scarf-Skin?

It is a small fine Skin, transparent and insensible, having also innumerable
Pores for the discharging of Sweat, and other Humors by imperceptible
Transpiration: It is extended over the whole inner Skin, to dull its too
exquisite Sense, by covering the Extremities of the Nerves which are there
terminated. It also renders the same Skin even and smooth, and so contributes
very much to Beauty.

What is the Hair?

The Hairs are certain hollow Filaments planted in the Glandules of the Skin,
from whence their Nourishment is derived. They constitute the Ornament of some
Parts, cover those which Modesty requires to be concealed, and defend others
from the injury of the Weather.

What is a Nail?

The Nails are a Continuity of the Skin hardened at the end of the Fingers, to
strengthen and render them fit for Work.

CHAP. IV. Of the general Division of a Humane Body.
HOW is the Humane Body divided before it is dissected, in order to Anatomical
Demonstration?

Some Anatomists distinguish it into Similar and Dissimilar Parts,
appropriating the former Denomination to all the simple Parts of the Body taken
separately, as a Bone, a Vein, a Nerve, etc. but they attribute the Name of
Dissimilar to all those Members that are composed of many Similar or Simple
Parts together; such are the Arms, Legs, Eyes, etc. wherein are contained all
at once, Bones, Veins, Nerves, and other parts.

Others divide it into containing and contained Parts, the former enclosing the
others, as the Skull includes the Brain, and the Breast the Lungs; whereas the
contained Parts are shut up within others; as the Entrails within the Belly,
the Brain within the Skull, etc.

Others again divide the whole Body into Spermatick and Sanguineous Parts; the
former being those which are made at the time of Formation; and the latter all
those that are grown afterward by the Nourishment of the Blood.

Are there not also other Methods of dividing the Humane Body?

Yes: Many Persons consider it as a Contexture of Bones, Flesh, Vessels and
Entrails, which they explain in four several Treatises, whereof the first is
called Osteology, for the Bones; the second Myology, for the Muscles; the third
Angiology, for the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, which are the Vessels; and the
fourth Splanchnology, for the Entrails.

But lastly, the most clear and perspicuous of all the Divisions of the Body of
Man, is that which compares it to a Tree, whereof the Trunk is the Body, and
the Branches are the Arms and Legs. The Body is divided into three Venters, or
great Cavities, viz. the Upper, the Middle, and the Lower, which are the Head,
the Breast, and the lower Belly. The Arms are distributed into the Arms
properly so called, the Elbow and Hands; and the Legs in like manner into
Thighs, Shanks, and Feet: The Hands being also subdivided into the Carpus or
Wrist, Metacarpium or Back of the Hand, and the Fingers; as the Feet into the
Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Toes. This Division is at present followed in the
Anatomical Schools.

CHAP. V. Of the Skeleton.
WHY is Anatomy usually begun with the Demonstration of the Skeleton, or
Contexture of Bones?

Because the Bones serve for the Foundation, Connection, and Support of all
other Parts of the Body.

What is the Skeleton?

It is a gathering together, or Conjunction of all the Bones of the Body almost
in their Natural Situation.

From whence are the principal differences of the Bones derived?

They are taken from their Substance, Figure, Articulation, and Use.

How is all this to be understood?

First then, with respect to their Substance, there are some Bones harder than
others; as those of the Legs compared with those of the Backbone. Again, in
regard of their Figure, some are long, as those of the Arm; and others short,
as those of the Metacarpium. Some are also broad, as those of the Skull and
Omoplatae or Shoulder-Blades; and others narrow, as the Ribbs. But with respect
to their Articulation, some are joined by thick Heads, which are received into
large Cavities, as the Huckle-Bones with those of the Hips; and others are
united by the means of a simple Line, as the Chin-Bones. Lastly, with relation
to their Use; some serve to support and carry the whole Body, as the Leg-Bones,
and others are appointed to grind the Meat; as the Teeth; or else to form some
Cavity, as the Skull-Bone, and those of the Ribs.

What are the Parts to be distinguished in the Bones?

They are the Body, the Ends, the Heads, the Neck, the Apophyses, the
Epiphyses, the Condyli or Productions, the Cavities, the Supercilia or Lips,
and the Ridges.

The Body is the greatest Part, and the middle of the Bone; the Ends are the
two Extremities; the Heads are the great Protuberances at the Extremities; the
Neck is that Part which lies immediately under the Head; the Apophyses or
Processes are certain Bunches or Knobs at the Ends of the Bones, which
constitute a Part of them; the Epiphyses are Bones added to the Extremities of
other Bones; the Condyli or Productions are the small Elevations or
Extuberances of the Bones; the Cavities are certain Holes or hollow places; the
Supercilia or Lips are the Extremities of the Sides of a Cavity, which is at
the End of a Bone; the Ridges are the prominent and saliant Parts in the length
of the Body of the Bone.

How are the Bones joined together?

Two several ways, viz. by Articulation and Symphysis.

How many sorts of Articulations are there in the Bones?

There are generally two kinds, viz. Diarthrosis and Synarthrosis.

What is Diarthrosis?

Diarthrosis is a kind of Articulation which serves for sensible Motions.

How many kinds of Diarthroses, or great Motions are there?

There are Three, viz. Enarthrosis, Arthrodia, and Ginglymus.

Enarthrosis is a kind of Articulation which unites two Bones with a great Head
on one side, and a large Cavity on the other; as the Head of the Thigh Bone in
the Cavity of the Ischion or Huckle-Bone.

Arthrodia is a sort of Articulation, by the means whereof two Bones are joined
together with a flat Head received into a Cavity of a small depth. Such is the
Head of the Shoulder Bone with the Cavity of the Omoplata or Shoulder Blade;
and that of the Twelfth Vertebra of the Back with the first of the Loins.

Ginglymus is a kind of Articulation which unites two Bones, each whereof has
at their Ends a Head and a Cavity, whereby they both receive and are received
at the same time, such is the Articulation in the Bones of the Elbow and the
Vertebrae.

What is Synarthrosis?

Synarthrosis being opposite to Diarthrosis, is a close or compacted
Articulation, destitute of any sensible Motion.

How many sorts of Synarthroses, or close Articulations are there?

There are Three, viz. Sutura, Harmonia, and Gomphosis.

A Suture is that which joins together two Bones by a kind of Seam or Stitch,
or by a Connection of their Extremities disposed in form of a Saw, the Teeth
whereof are reciprocally let one into another: Such are the Sutures of the
Skull-Bones.

Harmonia is the uniting of two Bones by a simple Line; as the Bone of the
Cheek with that of the Jaw.

Gomphosis is a kind of close Articulation, which unites two Bones after the
manner of Nails or Wooden Pins fixed in the Holes made to receive them: Such is
that of the Teeth in their Sockets.

What is Symphysis?

Symphysis is the uniting of two Bones by the interposition of a Medium, which
ties them very straight together, being also threefold: Such is the Connection
of the Knee-Pan or Whirl-Bone of the Knee, and the Omoplata or Shoulder Blade.

Are not these three kinds of Articulations or Symphyses distinguished one from
another?

Yes; for though they are all made by the means of a third Body intervening,
which joins them together; nevertheless every one of these various Bodies gives
a different Denomination to its respective Articulation: Thus the Articulation
which is caused by a Glutinous and Cartilaginous Substance, is properly called
Synchondrosis; as that of the Nose, Chin, Os Pubis, etc. But an Articulation
which is made by a Ligament is termed Synneurosis, as that of the Knee-Pan.
Lastly, that which is wrought by the means of Flesh, bears the Name of
Syssarcosis; as the Jaw-Bones, the Os Hyoides, and the Omoplata or
Shoulder Blade.

Have the Bones any sense of Feeling or Motion?

They have neither; for their sense of Pain proceeds from nothing else but
their Periostium, or the Membrane with which they are covered, and their Motion
is performed only by the Muscles that draw them.

Does the Marrow afford any Nutriment to the Bones?

No, all the Bones are nourished by the Blood, as the other Parts; but the
Marrow is to the Bones what the Fat is to the Flesh; that is to say, it is a
kind of Oil or Unctuous Substance, which moistens, and renders them less
brittle.

Are all the Bones of the same Color?

No, they follow the Temperament and Constitution of the Persons.

How many in number are the Bones of the Humane Skeleton?

There are two hundred and fifty usually reckoned, viz. 61 in the Head, 67 in
the Trunk or Chest, 62 in the Arms and Hands, and 60 in the Legs and Feet; but
the true Number cannot be exactly determined, by reason that some Persons have
more, and others fewer; for some have more Ossa Sesamoidea, Teeth and
Breast-Bones than others: Again, some have many indentings in the Lambdoidal
Suture, and others have none at all.

Can you rehearse the Number of the Bones of the Head?

There are Fifteen in the Skull, and Forty six in the Face.

The Fifteen of the Skull are the Coronal for the forepart of the Head; the
Occipital for the hinder-part; the two Parietals for the upper part and each
side; the two Temporals for the Temples; the Os Sphenoides or Cuneiforme, which
closes the Basis or bottom of the Skull; the Os Ethmoides, or Cribriforme,
situated at the Root of the Nose; and the four little Bones of the Ear on each
side, viz. the Incus or Anvil; the Stapes or Stirrup; the Malleolus or Hammer;
and the Orbiculare or Orbicular Bone.

Of the Forty six of the Face, Twenty seven are counted in the Upper-Jaw, viz.
the two Zygomatick, or the two Bones of the Cheek-Knots; the two Lachrymal in
the great Corners of the Eyes toward the Nose; the two Maxillar, that receive
the Upper-Teeth, and which form part of the Palate of the Mouth, and the Orbits
of the Eyes; the two Bones of the Nose; the two Palate-Bones which are at its
end, and behind the Nostrils; the last being single is the Vomer, which makes
the Division of the lower part of the Nostrils; and there are generally Sixteen
Upper-Teeth. The Lower-Jaw contains Nineteen Bones, viz. sixteen Teeth; two
Bones that receive them; and the Os Hyoides, which is single, and fixed at the
Root of the Tongue.

How are the Teeth usually divided with respect to their Qualities?

Into Incisive or Cutters, Canine or Dog-Teeth, and Molar or Grinders: There
are eight Incisive, and four Canine, which have only one single Root; as also
twenty Molar, every one whereof has one, two, or three Roots.

Can you recite the Number of the Bones of the Trunk or Chest?

There are generally thirty and three in the Spine or Chine-Bone of the Back,
viz. seven Vertebra's in the Neck, twelve in the Back, five in the Legs, five,
six, and sometimes seven in the Os Sacrum, three or four in the Coccyx, and two
Cartilages at its end.

There are twenty nine in the Breast, viz. twenty four Ribs, two Clavicles or
Channel-Bones, and commonly three Bones in the Sternum. The Hip-Bones are
likewise divided into three, viz. Ilion, Ischion, and Os Pubis.

Do you know the Number of the Bones of the Arms?

There are thirty and one Bones in each Arm, that is to say, the Omoplata or
Shoulder Blade; the Humerus or Shoulder Bone; the two Bones of the Elbow called
Vlna, and Radius; eight little Bones in the Carpus or Wrist; five in the
Metacarpium or Back of the Hand; and fourteen in the Fingers, three to every
one except the Thumb, which has only two.

Can you give us a List of the Bones of the Leg in their Order?

There are thirty Bones in each Leg, viz. the Femur or great Thigh Bone, the
Knee-Pan or Whirl-Bone on the top of the Knee; the Tibia, greater Focile, or
Shin-Bone; and the Perone or Fibula, or lesser Focile, which are the two
associated Bones of the Leg; seven little Bones in the Tarsus; five in the
Metatarsus; and fourteen in the Toes; that is to say, three to every one,
except the great Toe, which has only two.

Thus the Number of Bones of the Humane Skeleton amounts to two hundred and
Fifty, without reckoning the Sesamoides, the Indentings of the Skull, and some
others which are not always to be found.

CHAP. VI. Of Myology, or the Anatomy of the Muscles of a Humane Body.
WHAT is a Muscle?

It is the principal Organ or Instrument of Motion; or it is a Portion of
Flesh, wherein there are Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and Fibers, and which is
covered with a Membrane.

How many parts are there in a Muscle?

Three, viz. the Head, the Belly, and the Tail: The Head is that part through
which the Nerve enters; the Belly is the Body or Middle of the Muscle; and the
Tail is the Extremity, where all the Fibers of the Muscle are terminated to
make the Tendon or String which is fastened to the Part whereto it gives Motion.

Have all the Muscles their Fibers straight from the Head to the Tail?

No, some have them straight, others transverse, and others oblique or
circular, according to the several Motions to which they are appropriated.

How many sorts of Muscles are there with respect to their Action?

There are two different kinds, viz. the Antagonists and the Congenerate; the
former are those that produce opposite Motions; as a Flexor and an Extensor, a
Depressor and a Levator. The Congenerate are those that contribute to one and
the same Action; as when there are two Flexors or two Extensors, and then one
supplies the defect of the other; whereas when one of the Antagonist Muscles is
cut, the other becomes useless, and void of Action.

How is the Action of a Musole performed?

It is done by Contraction and Extension; the former causes the Anargonist to
swell, and the other compels it to stretch forth in length.

What is Aponeurosis?

It is the continuity of the Fibers of a Tendon which makes a Connection that
serves to strengthen the Muscle in its Motion.

CHAP VII. Of the Myology, or Anatomy of the Muscles of the Head.
HOW many Muscles are there appointed to move the Head, and which be they?

The Head is moved by the means of fourteen Muscles, seven on each side; of
these, two serve to depress it, eight to lift it up, and four to turn it round
about.

The two Depressors are called Sternoclinomastoidei; they take their Rise in
the Sternum, at the Clavicles, and proceed obliquely to join the Apophysis
Mastoides.

Of the four Elevators on each, side the first is the Splenius, which begins at
the five Vertebrae of the Back and the three lower ones of the Neck, and
ascending obliquely, cleaves to the hinder part of the Head. The second, named
Complexus or Trigeminus, having its beginning as the Splenius', sticks in like
manner to the hinder part of the Head, and they form together a figure
resembling that of S. Andrew's Cross. The third is the Rectus Major, which
proceeding from the second Vertebra of the Neck, shoots forward to join the
hinder part of the Head. The fourth is the Rectus Minor, which begins at the
first Vertebra of the Neck, and ends likewise in the hinder part of the Head.

The two Muscles on each side, which move the Head circularly, are the Obliquus
Major and Minor; the greater Oblique taking its rise from the second Vertebra
of the Neck, goes to meet the first; but the lesser Oblique has its Origin in
the hinder part of the Head, and proceeds to join the other obliquely in the
first Vertebra.

How many Muscles are there in the Lower-Jaw, and which be they?

The Lower-Jaw has twelve Muscles which cause it to move; that is to say, six
on each side, whereof four serve to close and two to open it.

The first of the Openers is the Latus which beginning at the top of the
Sternum, Clavicle, and Acromion, cleaves on the outside to the bottom of the
Lower-Jaw-Bone. The second of the Openers is the Digastricus, which takes its
rise in a Fissure lying between the Occipital-Bone and the Apophysis Mastoides,
from whence it passes to the bottom of the Chin on the inside.

The first of the Shutters is the Crotaphites or Temporal Muscle, which has
its Origin at the bottom, and on the side of the Os Coronale, the Os
Parietale, and the Os Petrosum, from whence it is extended till it cleaves to
the Apophysis Coronoides of the Lower-Jaw, after having passed above the
Apophysis of the Zygoma: Its Fibers are spread from the Circumference to the
Center and it is covered again with the Pericranium, which renders its Wounds
very dangerous; so that the least Incisions as can be, ought to be made therein.

The second is the Pterygoideus or Aliformis Externus, whose rise is in the
Apophysis Pterygoides, from whence it sets forward till it stick between the
Condylus and the Coronal of the Lower-Jaw.

The third is the Masseter, which has two Sources or Beginnings, and as many
Insertions; the first Source thereof is at the Cheek-Knot or Ball of the Cheek,
and the second at the lower part of the Zygoma. The first Insertion is at the
outer Corner of the Jaw, and the second in the middle part, by that means
forming the Figure of the Letter X.

The fourth is the Pterygoideus or Aliformis Internus, which has its beginning
in the Apophysis Pterygoides, and is terminated in the inner Corner of the Jaw;
so that Mastication or Chewing is performed by the means of these four Muscles.

How many Muscles are there in the Face, and which be they?

There are two for the Forehead, called Frontal, whose Origin is in the upper
part of the Head, from whence they descend by straight Fibers, until they are
fastened in the Skin of the Forehead near the Eyebrows, where they are
reunited: Their Action or Office is to draw the Skin of the Forehead upward,
whereto they stick very close.

There are also two others called Occipital, which have their Beginning in the
same place with the preceding, but they descend backward, and cleave to the
Skin of the hinder part of the Head, which they draw upward.

There are two Muscles to each Eyelid, one whereof is termed the Attoll^ns or
Elevator and the other the Depressor. The Elevator takes its rise in the bottom
of the Orbit of the Eye, and is fastened by a large Aponeurosis to the edge of
the upper Eyelid. The Shutter or Depressor, called also the Orbicular, has
its Origin in the great Canthus, or Corner of the Eye, passes over the
Eyelid upward, and is joined to the lesser Corner of the same Eye, being
extended along its whole Compass.

The Eyes have each six Muscles, viz. four Recti and two Obliqui; the Recti, or
straight Muscles are the Elevator, the Depressor, the Adductor, and the
Abductor. The first of these called Elevator, or Superbus, draws the Eye
upward, as it is pulled downward by the Depressor or Humilis; the Adductor or
Bibitorius draws it toward the Nose, and the Abductor or Indignarorius toward
the Shoulder: All these small Muscles have their Originals and Insertions in
the bottom of the Orbit through which the Optic Nerve passes, and are
terminated in the Corneous Tunicle, by a very large Tendon.

The first of the Oblique ones is termed the Obliquus Major, and the other
Obliquus Minor, because they draw the Eye obliquely. These Muscles cause
Children to squint when they do not act together. The Obliquus Minor is
fastened to the outward part of the Orbit near the great Corner, and draws the
Eye obliquely toward the Nose: But the Obliquus Major is fixed in the inner part
of the Orbit, and ascends along the Bone to the upper part of the great Corner,
where its Tendon passes through a small Cartilage named Trochlea, and is
inserted in the little Corner with the lesser Obliquus Minor, to draw the Eye
obliquely toward the lesser Corner.

The Ear, although not usually endu'd with any sensible Motion, nevertheless has
four Muscles, viz. one above, and three behind; the first being situated over
the Temporal, and fastened to the Ear to draw it upward: The three others have
their beginning in the Mammillary Apophysis, and are terminated in the Root of
the Ear, to draw it backward.

There are also three Muscles in the inner part of the Ear, whereof the
external belonging to the Malleus or Hammer lies under the exterior part of the
Bony Passage which reaches from the Ear to the Palate of the Mouth, being fixed
in a very oblique Sinuosity which is made immediately above the Bone that bears
the Furrow, into which is let the Skin of the Tympanum or Drum. The internal
Muscle lies hid in a Bony Semi-Canal, in the Os Petrosum; one part of which
Semi-Canal is without the Drum, and closed on the top with a Passage that leads
from the Ear into the Palate. But the other part within the Drum advances to
the Fenestra Ovalis, and is inserted in the hinder part of the Handle of the
Malleus. The Muscle of the Stapes or Stirrup is also hid in a Bony Tube, almost
at the bottom of the Drum, and fixed in the Head of the Stapes.

The Nose has seven Muscles, that is to say, one common and six proper; the
common constitutes part of the orbicular Muscle of the Lips, and draws the Nose
downward with the Lip. Of the six proper Muscles of the Nose, four serve to
dilate it, being situated on the outside, and two to contract it, which are
placed in the inside.

The two first Dilatators of a Pyramidal Figure, take their rise in the Suture
of the Forehead, and are fastened by a large Filament to the Alae of the Nose.
The two other Dilatators resembling a Myrtle-Leaf have their Source in the Bone
of the Nose, and are inserted in the middle of the Ala.

The two Restrictors are Membranous, beginning in the internal part of the Bone
of the Nose and adhering to the inner Ala of the Nostril.

The Lips have thirteen Muscles, viz. eight proper, and five common: Of the
proper there ar^ four for the Upper-Lip, and as many for the^ Lower; with two
common for each, and the odd one.

The first of the proper of the Upper-Lip^ bears the Name of the Incisivus, its
Origin being in the Jaw, in the place of the Incisive Teeth and its Insertion
is in the Upper-Lip.

The second is the Triangularis, Antagonist t^ the former; its Rise is on the
outside, at the bottom of the Lower-Jaw; and it is implanted in the Upper-Lip,
near the Corner of the Mouth.

The third being the Quadratus, springs from the bottom of the Chin before, and
cleav^ to the edge of the Lower-Lip.

The fourth is the Caninus, Antagonist to the Quadratus, beginning in the
Upper-Jaw-Bo^^ and being terminated in the Lower-Lip near t^^ Corner of the
Mouth.

The first of the common is the Zygoma^cus, the Origin whereof is in the
Zygoma, a^ its Insertion in the Corner of the Mouth, (...) draw it toward the
Ears; so that it is the Muscle which acts when we laugh.

The second of the common is the Buccina^ or Trumpeter, which is swelled when
one sounds Trumpet. It has its rise at the Root of (...) Molar Teeth of both
the Jaws, and is extend^ quite round about the Lips.

The odd Muscle, or the thirteenth in number, is the Orbicular, which makes a
Sphincter round about the Lips to close or shut them up.

The Uvula or Palate of the Mouth has four Muscles, whereof the two first are
the Peristaphylini Externi, taking their rise from the Upper-Jaw, above the
last Molar Tooth, and being tied to the Palate by a thin T^^don.

The two others are the Peri^^phy^ini Interni, which have their beginning in
the Apophysis Pterygoides on the inside, and likewise ^^ck (...) the Palate.

The Tongue, although all over Musculous and Fibrous, yet does not cease to have
its peculi^^ Muscles, which are eight in Number.

The first of these is called Genioglossus, taking its rise in the lower part
of the Chin, from whence it is extended till it cleave to the Root of the
Tongue before, to cause it to go out of the Mouth.

The second is termed Styloglossus, its Rise being in the Apophysis Styloides,
from whence it passes to the side above the Tongue, to lift it up.

The third bearing the Name of Basiglossus, commenceth in the Basis or Root of
the Os Hyoides, and thence insinuates it self into the Root of the Tongue, to
draw it back to the bottom of the Mouth.

The fourth is the Ceratoglossus, deriving its Original from the Horn of the Os
Hyoides, and cleaving to the side of the Tongue to draw it on one side: The
Action of these Muscles of both sides together, causes an Orbicular Motion in
the Tongue. To these some add a fifth Pair of Muscles, called Myloglossus,
which serves to draw it obliquely upward.

What is the Action of the Os Hyoides in the Throat, and how many Muscles has
it?

The use of the Os Hyoides is to consolidate the Root of the Tongue; and it
has five Muscles on each side, which keep it as it were hung up.

The first of these, called the Geniohyoideus has its beginning in the Chin on
the inside, and adheres to the top of the Os Hyoides, which it draws upward.

The second is the Mylohyoideus, whose Origin is in the inner side of the Jaw,
from whence i^ cleaves side-ways to the Root of the Os Hyoides, which it draws
upward, and to one side.

The third is the Stylohyoideus, which after it has taken its rise in the
Apophysis Styloides, is fastened to the Horn of the Os Hyoides, to draw it
toward the side.

The fourth is the Coracohyoideus, which springing up from the Apophysis
Coracoides of the Omoplata, cleaves to the Root and side of the Os Hyoides, to
draw it downward and to the side.

The fifth is the Sternomohyoideus, that has its beginning in the Bone of the
Sternum on the inside and is inserted in the Root of the Os Hyoides, which it
draws downward.

How many Muscles has the Larynx?

There are fourteen, viz. four Common, and ten Proper. The first Pair of the
Common is the Sternothyroideus or Bronchycus, which proceeding from the inside,
and the top of the Sternum, ascends along the Cartilages of the Windpipe, and
is terminated in the bottom of the Scutiformis or Buckler-like Cartilage, which
it draws downward. The second is the Hyothyroideus, which arises from the Root
of the Os Hyoides, and is inserted in that of the Scutiforme. This Muscle
serves to lift up the Larynx, as also to dilate the bottom of the Scutiformis,
and to close its top.

The first Pair of the Proper is the Cricothyroideus Anticus, which deriving
its Original from the hinder and upper part of the Cricoides, or Ring-like
Cartilage, is fixed in the upper and lateral part of the Scutiformis, to close
or shut it up.

The second is the Thyroides.

The third is the Crioarytenoideus Lateralis, which proceeds from the side of
the Cricoides within, and is fastened to the bottom and side of the
Arytenoides, which it removes to dilate the Mouth of the Larynx.

The fourth is the Thyroarytenoideus, which arirising from the forepart on the
inside of the Scutiformis, is terminated on the side of the Arytenoides, to
close the Orifice of the Larynx.

The fifth is the Arytenoideus, which having its Source in that place where the
Cricoides is united to the Arytenoides is inserted in its upper and lateral
part, to close the Larynx.

How many Muscles has the Pharynx?

It has seven, the first whereof is the Oesophagieus, which takes its rise
from the side of the Scutiformis or Buckler-like Cartilage, and passing behind
the Oesophagus or Gullet, is fastened to the other side of the Cartilage. It
thrusts the Meat down by locking up the Pharynx as a Sphincter.

The second named Stylopharingaeus, springs from within the Acute Apophysis of
the Os Sphenoides, or Cuneiforme, and is inserted obliquely in the side of the
Pharynx, which it dilates by drawing it upward.

The third, called Sphenopharyngaeus, proceed^ from the Apophysis Styliformis,
and is terminate^ in the side of the Pharynx, which it dilates by drawing its
sides.

The fourth Pair is the Cephalopharyngaem. which arises from the articulation
of the. Head with the first Vertebra, and closes the Larynx.

How many Muscles are there in the Neck, a^^ which be they?

There are four Muscles in the Neck (...) each side, viz. two Flexors, and two
Exte^sors. The Flexors are the Scalenus and the Rectus or Longus; and the
Extenders are the Spinatus and the Transversalis.

The Scalenu or Triangularis has two remo^ Sources, viz. one in the first Rib,
and the oth^^ in the Clavicle, and is fastened to the third an^ fourth Vertebra
of the Neck.

The Rectus or Longus begins in the side of th^^ four upper Vertebra's of the
Back, and is join^^ to the upper Vertebra's of the Neck, and the hinder part of
the Head.

The Spinatus has its Origin in the fourth an fifth upper Vertebra's of the
Back, and is fasten^ to all the six lower Vertebra's of the Neck.

The Transversalis springs forth out of the upp^^ Vertebra's of the Back, and
cleaves to the Ext^^mity of the four Vertebra's of the Neck.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Myology or Anatomy of the Muscles of the Chest; or of the
Breast Belly, and Back.
HOW many Muscles are there in the Breast, and which be they?

The Breast has fifty seven Muscles, that is to say, thirty that serve to
dilate it, twenty six whose Office is to contract it, and the Diaphragm or
Midriff, which partakes of both Actions.

The thirty which dilate the Breast are equally placed to the number of
Fifteen, viz. the Subelavius, the Serratus Major Anticus, the two Serrati
Postici, and the eleven external Intercostals.

The twenty six which contract the Breast are likewise equally ranked to the
Number of thirteen on each side, viz. the Triangularis, the Sacrolumbus, and
eleven internal Intercostals.

The Subclavian takes up the whole space between the Clavicle and the first
Rib: Its Original being in the internal and lower part of the Clavicula, and
its insertion in the upper part of the first Rib.

The Serratus Major is a large Muscle having seven or eight Indentings or
Jaggs. It takes its rise in the interior Basis of the Omoplata or
Shoulder Blade, and its Jaggings are inserted in the five lower true Ribs, as
also in the two upper spurious Ribs.

The Serratus Posticus Superior, begins wi^^ a large Aponeurosis in the
Apophyses of the th^^ lower Vertebrae of the Neck, and of the first (...) those
of the Back; then passing under the Rhomboid, it is joined obliquely by four
Indentings (...) the four upper Ribs.

The Serratus Posticus Inferior, commence^ in like manner with a large
Aponeurosis in the Apophyses of the three lower Vertebra's of the Back, and of
the first of those of the Loins, an^ is afterward fastened by four Digitations
to the four lower Ribs.

The eleven External Intercostal Muscles are situated in the spaces between the
twelve Ribs passing obliquely and on the outside from the bad part to the fore
part. They take their rise below the Upper Rib, and have their Insertion above
the lower Rib.

The Triangularis is the first of those that contract the Breast, and
possesses the inward part of the Sternum: Its Original is in its lower part
and its Insertion in the top of the Cartilages of the two upper Ribs.

The Sacrolumbus has its Source in the hinder part of the Os Sacrum, as also
in the Vertebra's of the Loins, and ascending from thence, insinuates it self
into the hinder part of the Ribs to every one of which it imparts two Tendons
one whereof sticks on the outside, and the other on the inside. This Muscle is
fleshy within, and fibrous without.

The Eleven Internal Intercostals, contrary to the External, derive their
Original from the top of every lower Rib, and ascend obliquely from the
back-part to the forepart, till they are joined to the lower Lip of every
upper Rib: Thus these Internal Muscles, with the External, form, by the
opposition of their Fibers, a Figure resembling a Burgundian Cross.

The Diaphragm or Midriff is esteemed as the fifty seventh Muscle of the
Breast, and serves as well for its dilatation as contraction. It separates the
Thorax or Chest from the lower Belly, and is tied circularly to all the
Extremities of the Bastard Ribs, immediately under the Xiphoides, or Sword-like
Cartilage.

Modern Anatomists have discovered that the Diaphragm is composed of two
Muscles, viz. one Upper, and the other Lower; so that the Upper cleaves to the
Extremities of the Spurious Ribs, and is terminated in a flat Tendon in the
middle, which has been always taken for its Nervous part. The Lower begins
with two Productions, the longest whereof being on the right side, arises from
the three upper Vertebra's of the Loins, and the other on the Left from the two
Vertebra's of the Back, till it is lost in the Aponeurosis of the Upper Muscle.

How many Muscles are there in the Back and the Loins, and which be they?

There are three in each side, viz. one for Flection, and the other for
Extension.

The Triangularis is the Flexor, taking its rise in the hinder part of the Rib
of the Os Ilion, and the inner part of the Os Sacrum, in passing from whence it
is joined to the last of the Bastard Ribs, and to the transverse Productions of
the Vertebra's of the Loins.

The Extensors are the Sacer, and the Semispinatus, which make the Waste
straight, and are so interwoven along the Backbone, that one would imagine
that there were as many Pairs of Muscles as Vertebra's, affording Tendons to
all.

The Sacer springs from behind the Os Sacrum, as also from the hinder and upper
Extremity of the Os Ilium, and is inserted in the Spines of the Vertebra's of
the Loins and Back.

The Semi-spinatus has its Source in the Spines of the Os Sacrum, and is
joined to all the transverse Productions of the Vertebra's from the Back to the
Neck, being exactly situated between the Sacer and the Sacrolumbus

CHAP. IX. Of the Myology, or Anatomy of the Muscles of the lower Belly.
HOW many Muscles are there in the lower Belly, and which be they?

There are generally ten, five on each side, that is to say, two Obliqui, one
ascending, and the other descending; one Transversus, one Rectus, and two
Pyramidal, of which last, nevertheless, there is sometimes only one, and
sometimes none at all.

The Obliquus Descendens, which is the first, has its Original by digitation
in the sixth and seventh of the true Ribs, in all the spurious Ribs, and in the
transverse Apophyses of the Vertebra's of the Loins, and comes near to the
Serratus Major Anticus of the Breast; from whence it proceeds to the external
Rib of the Os Ilion, and is terminated by a large Aponeurosis in the Linea Alba
or White Line, which separates the Muscles that are on each side of the Abdomen
or lower Belly.

The Obliquus Ascendens arises from its Source in the upper part of the Os
Pubis, and in the Ridge of the Hip-Bone, till it cleaves to the Apophyses of
the Vertebra's of the Loins in the Extremities of all the Ribs, and in the
Xiphoides or Sword-like Cartilage, and is terminated in the White Line by a
large Aponeurosis.

The Rectus being situated between the Aponeuroses of the Obliquus, takes its
rise in the Cartilages of the Ribs, in the Xiphoides and the Sternum, and
enters into the Os Pubis, having many nervous parts to corroborate it in its
length.

The Transversus having its beginning in the transverse Apophyses of the
Vertebra's of the Loins, is fastened to the internal Rib of the Os Ilium, and
within the Cartilages of the lower Ribs, and is terminated by a large
Aponeurosis in the Linea Alba, passing over the Re^lus, and sticking to the
Peritonaeum.

The Oblique Muscles, and the Transverse, have Holes toward the Groin, to give
Passage to the Spermatick Vessels of Men, and to a round of the Matrix in
Women; so that Ruptures or Burstenness happen through these par^^ in both
Sexes, although the Holes of these three Muscles are not situated one
over-again^ another.

The Pyramidal, so named by reason of its Figure, is situated in the lower
Tendon of the Rectus, its Origin being in the upper and external part of the
Os Pubis; but it is terminate in the White Line, three Fingers breadth abo^^
the Pubes, and sometimes even in the Navel felf. These Muscles are not found in
all Bodies for there are sometimes two, sometimes only one and sometimes none.

The use of the Muscles of the lower Belly to compress all the contained parts,
in order (...) assist them in expelling the Excrements.

How many Muscles are there in the Testicles?

They have each of them one, called Cremaster this Muscle takes its rise from
the Ligaments of the Os Pubis, and by the dilatation of i^^ Tendon covers the
Testicle, which it draws upward.

How many Muscles has the Penis?

It has two Pair, viz. the Erectores or Di^^ctores, and the Dilatantes: The
Erectores ari^^ from the internal part of the Os Ischion, und^^ the beginning
of the Corpora Cavernosa, whe^^ they are inserted, and retake their Fibers i^
their Membranes. The Dilatantes or Acceler^^tores have their Source in the
Sphincter of the Anus, and slipping from thence obliquely under the Vreter, are
joined to the Membrane of th^^ Nervous Bodies.

How many Muscles are there in the Clitoris?

It has two Erectors which spring forth from the Protuberance of the Os
Ischion, and are inserted in the Nervous Bodies of the Clitoris. There are also
two others supposed to be its Elevators, which proceed from the Sphincter of
the Anus, and are terminated in the Clitoris.

How many Muscles are there in the Anus?

There are three, viz. the Sphincter, and two Levatores. The Sphincter is two
Fingers broad, to open and close the Rectum. This Muscle being double, is
fastened in the forepart to the Penis in Men, and to the Neck of the Matrix in
Women, as also behind to the Coccyx, and laterally to the Ligaments of the Os
Sacrum, and the Hips.

The two Levatores arise from the inner and lateral part of the Os Ischion, and
are fastened to the Sphincter of the Anus, to lift it up after the expulsion of
the Excrements.

The Bladder has also a Sphincter Muscle to open and shut its Orifice.

CHAP. X. Of the Muscles of the Omoplatae, or Shoulder-Blades, Arms, and Hands.
HOW many ways does the Omoplata or Shoulder Blade move, and what are its
Muscles?

The Omoplata moves upward, downward, forward, and backward, by the means of
four proper Muscles, which are the Trapezius, the Rhomboides, the proper
Levator, and the lesse^ Pectoral, or Serratus Minor Anticus.

The Trapezius or Cucullaris has its beginning in the back part of the
Occiput, or hinder part of the Head, in the Spines of the six lower Vertebra's
of the Neck, and of the nine upper of the Back, in passing from whence it is
implanted in the Spine of the Omoplata or Shoulder Blade, and the external part
of the Clavicula, as far as the Acromion. This Muscle produces many Motions by
reason of its different Fibers drawing the Shoulder Blade obliquely upward
downward, and forward.

The Rhomboides is situated over the Trapezius its rise being in the Apophyses
of the three lower Vertebra's of the Neck, and of the three upper of the Back,
but it is afterward joined to the whole Basis or Root of the Omoplata, which it
draws backward.

The proper Levator commenceth in the Tr^^verse Apophyses of the four first
Vertebra's of the Neck, by different Progressions, but is afterward reunited,
and inserted in the upper Corner of the Omoplata, which it draws upward.

The lesser Pectoral, or Serratus Minor Anticus, is situated under the great
Pectoral, its rise being by Digitation or Indenting in the second, third, and
fourth of the upper Ribs, and its Insertion in the Apophysis Coracoides of the
Shoulder Blade, which it draws forward.

How many Motions are there in the Humerus, or Arm; which be they, and what are
its Muscles?

The Arm performs all sorts of Motions by the help of nine Muscles: For it is
lifted up by the Deltoides and the Infra-Spinatus; it is depressed by the
Largissimus, and the Rotundus Major; it is drawn forward by the Pectoralis
Major, and the Coracoideus; it is drawn backward by the Infra-Spinatus, and the
Rotundus Minor: It is drawn near the Ribs by the Subscapularis, and its
circular Motion is performed when all these Muscles act together successively.

The Deltoides or Triangular has its beginning in the whole Spine of the
Omoplata, the Acromion, and half the Clavicula, and by its point cleaves with a
strong Tendon to the middle of the Arm.

The Infra-Spinatus takes its rise in the Cavity that lies above the Spine of
the Omoplata, which it sill ^^^ssing over the Acromion, until it is joined to
the Neck of the Shoulder Bone, which it surrounds with a large Tendon.

The Largissimus, otherwise called Ani-scalptor, covers almost the whole Back,
proceeding from a large and Nervous Stock, in the third and fourth lower
Vertebra of the Back, the five Vertebra's of the Loins, the Spine of the Os
Sacrum, the hinder part of the Lip of the Hip-Bone, and the external part of
the lower Bastard-Ribs, in passing from whence it insinuates it self into the
lower Corner of the Omoplata, as also into the upper and inner part of the
Humerus.

The Rotundus Major, or Teres Major, having its Origin in the external Cavity
of the lower Corner of the Omoplata, is confounded with the Largissimus, and
adheres with it by the same Tendon to the upper and inner part of the Humerus,
a little below the Head.

The greater Pectoral has its Source in hal^ the Clavicula, on the side of the
Sternum; covers the forepart of the Breast, and is fastened by a short, broad,
and nervous Tendon, to the to^ of the Shoulder Bone, on the inside, between the
Biceps and the Deltoides.

The Coracoideus or Coracobrachyaeus, beginning in the Apophysis Coracoides of
the Omoplata o^ Shoulder Blade, adheres to the middle of the Arm on the inside,
which with the Pectoral (...) draws forward.

The Infra-Spinatus fills the Cavity which lies below the Spine of the
Omoplata, its Origin being in the lower Rib of the Omoplata, from whence it
passes between the Spine and the Rotundus Minor, to cleave to the Neck of the
Shoulder Bone, which it embraces, and draw backward.

The Rotundus Minor, or Teres Minor, proceed from the lower Rib of the
Omoplata, and adheres to the Neck of the Shoulder Bone with the Infra-Spinatus
to draw it in like manne^ backward.

The Sub-scapularis or Immersus is situated entirely under the Omaplata,
proceeding from the internal Lip of the Basis or Root of the same Omoplata, and
being terminated in the Neck (...) the Arm-Bone, which it causes to lie close
(...) the Ribs.

How many Motions are there in the Cubitus (...) Elbow, and what are its
Muscles?

The Cubitus or Vlna is endu'd with two sor^^ of Motions, viz. that of Flection
and that (...) Extension, the former being performed by the help of two
Muscles, that is to say, the Biceps, and the Brachiaeus Internus; and the later
by eight others, which are the Longus, the Brevis, the Brachiaeus Externus, and
the Anconcus.

The Biceps is a Muscle with two Heads, one whereof proceeds from the Apophysis
Coracoides, and the other from the Cartilaginous edge of the Glenoid Cavity of
the Omoplata or Shoulder Blade: These two Heads descend along the forepart of
the Arm, and are united in one and the same Body, from whence springs forth a
Ligament, which is inserted in a tuberosity situated in the upper and forepart
of the Radius.

The Brachiaeus Internus is a small fleshy Muscle, lying hid under the Biceps,
which takes its rise in the upper and forepart of the Humerus, and is
implanted in the upper and innerpart of the Radius, to bend the Elbow with the
Biceps.

The first of the four Extenders is the Longus having two Sources, viz. one
situated in the lower Rib of the Omoplata, near its Neck, and the other
descending to the hinder-part of the Arm, till it is tied to the Olecranum or
Ancon, by a strong Aponeurosis, which is common thereto, with the Brevis, and
the Brachiaeus Externus.

The Brevis or short Muscle of the Elbow arising from the hinder and upper part
of the Humerus, is fastened to the Olecranum with the Longus.

The Brachiaeus Externus is a fleshy Muscle which proceeds from the hinder part
of the Humerus, and adheres to the Olecranum with the Brevis and the Longus.

The Anconeus or Cubitalis being situated behind the Fold of the Cubitus, is
the least Muscle of all; it springs from the Extremity of the Arm-Bone, at the
end of the Brevis and the Longus, and in descending is inserted between the
Radius and the Cubitus or Vlna, three or four Fingers breadth below the
Olecranum.

How many Muscles has the Radius, and wh^^ are its Motions?

The Radius is endu'd with a twofold Motion by the means of four Muscles: Of
the^^ the Rotundus and Quadratus cause that of Pronation, as the Longus and the
Brevis that of Supination.

The Pronator Superior Rotundus, or round Muscle of the Radius, commenceth from
the inne^ Apophysis of the Shoulder Bone, in a very fleshy Stock, and is
terminated obliquely by a Membranous Tendon in the middle and exterior part
(...) the Radius.

The Pronator Inferior Quadratus; springing fort^ from the bottom and inside of
the Cubitus, i^ fixed in the lower and outward part of the Radius by a Tail as
large as its Head. This Muscle lying hid under the others near the Wrist, (...)
that which jointly with the Rotundus, turns the Arm with the Palm of the Hand
downward, which is the Motion of Pronation.

The Longus is the first of the Supinators, whose Origin is three or four
Fingers breadth above the external Apophysis of the Arm-Bone; from whence it
passes along the Radius, and cleaves to the inner-part of its lower Apophysis.

The Brevis, or the second of the Spinators arising from the lower part of the
Inferior Condylus, and the external of the Humerus, is twisted round about the
Radius, going forward from the hinder-part till it is united to its upper and
forepart. This Muscle, with the Longus, serves to turn the Arm and the Palm of
the Hand upward, and produces the Motion of Supination.

How many sorts of Motions belong to the Wrist, and what are its Muscles?

Two several Motions are performed by the Wrist, viz. one of Flection, and the
other of Extension, three Muscles being appropriated to the former, and as many
to the later: But it ought to be observed, that a strong Ligament, called the
Annular, appears here, which, surrounding all the Tendons of the Muscles as it
were a Bracelet, holds them together, and elsewhere serves to unite the two
Bones of the Elbow. The three Flexors or Bending Muscles of the Wrist are the
Cubitaeus Internus, the Radiaeus Internus, and the Palmaris.

The Cubitaus Internus derives its Original from the part of the Arm-Bone,
passes under the Annular Ligament, and is tied by a thick Tendon to the small
Bone of the Wrist, which is placed above the others.

The Radiaeus Internus proceeds from the same place with the Cubitaeus, and is
fastened to the first Wrist-Bone which supports the Thumb. It lies along the
Radius, and passes under the Annular Ligament.

The Palmaris is reckoned among the Flexors of the Wrist, although situated in
the Palm of the Hand. It arises from the inner Process or Knob of the
Arm-Bone, and is united by a large Tendon to the first Phalanges of the
Fingers, sli^ping under the Transverse or Annular Ligame^^ and sticking under
the Skin of the Palm of the Hand.

The three extending Muscles of the Wrist (...) the Cubitaeus Externus, and the
Radiaeus Extenus or the Longus, and the Brevis.

The Cubitaeus Externus taking its rise from (...) hinder-part of the Elbow,
passes under the Annular Ligament, and adheres to the upper a^^ outward-part
of the Bone of the Metacarpus the stays the little Finger.

The Radiaeus Externus, or the Longus, havin^ its Origin in the edge of the
lower part of the Arm-Bone, slides from thence along the Rad^^^ on the outside,
extends it self under the Annul^^ Ligament, and cleaves to the Wrist-Bone,
whi^^ stays the Forefinger.

The Brevis or short Muscle of the Wrist spring from the lower part of the same
Edge; afterwa^^ it runs along the Radius, passes under the An^^lar Ligament,
and is terminated in the Bone^ the Carpus or Wrist, which stays the Middle
Finger. But we must take notice, that beside these six Muscles, there is also
Caro quaedam qu^drata, or a square piece of Flesh under the P^^maris, which
seems to arise from the Thenar, an^ sticks to the eighth Wrist-Bone. It is
suppo^^ that this Musculous piece of Flesh serves with the Hypothenar of the
little Finger, to make the which is called Diogenes's Cup.

How many Motions are there in the Fingers, a^ what are their Muscles?

The Fingers are bent, extended, and turned from one side to the other by the
means of twenty three Muscles, whereof ten are proper, and thirteen common: The
former are those that serve all the Fingers in general, and the other those
that are particularly serviceable to some of them: The Common are the Sublimis,
the Profundus, the common Extensor, the four Lumbricales, and the six
Interossei.

The Sublimis or Perforatus, arising from the internal part of the lower
Process of the Humerus or Shoulder Bone is divided into four Tendons, which run
below the Annular Ligament of the Wrist, and are inserted in the second Phalanx
of the Bones of the four Fingers, after having stuck in passing to those of the
first Phalanx, to help to bend it. It is also observed that every one of these
Tendons has a small cleft in its length, to let in the Tendons of the
Profundus.

The Profundus or Perforans lies under the Sublimis, deriving its Original from
the top of the Cubitus and Radius. It creeps along these two Bones, and is
divided into four Tendons, which pass under the Annular Ligament, and slip into
the Fissures of the Tendons of the Sublimis, to adhere to the third Phalanx of
the Fingers, which they bend with the Sublimis: So that these two Muscles make
together the bending of the Fingers.

The Extensor Magnus is that which extends the four Fingers. It springs from
the external and lower Process of the Arm-Bone, and is divided into four flat
Tendons, which pass under the Annular Ligament, and cleave to the second and
third Phalanx of the Fingers.

The four Lumbricales or Vermiculares are (...) the Palm of the Hand, to draw
the Fingers (...) the Thumb: They proceed from the Tend^^ of the Profundus, and
the Annular Ligamen^ extend themselves along the sides of the Finge^^ and are
inserted in their second Articulation, (...) cause the drawing toward the Thumb.

The three Interossei Interni, and the three E^^terni, are situated between the
four Bones of t^^ Metacarpium, as well on the inside of the Ha^^ as without:
They have their beginning in (...) Intervals or Spaces between the Bones of the
Metacarpium, are united with the Lumbrical, a^ fixed in the last Articulation of
the Bones of (...) Fingers, to produce the Motion of drawing ba^^ or removing
from the Thumb.

The Thumb is moved by five particular M^^cles; one whereof serves to bend it,
two to ^^tend it, one to remove it from the Fingers, a^^ another to draw it to
them.

The Flexor of the Thumb takes its rise from the upper and inner part of the
Radius, passe^^ under the Annular Ligament, as also under (...) Thenar, and
adheres to the first and second Bo^^ of the same Thumb to bend it.

The two Extensors of the Thumb are (...) Longior and the Brevior: The former
proceed^ from the upper and outward part of the C^^tus, ascends above the
Radius, and is tied w^^ a forked Tendon to the second Bone of (...) Thumb. The
Brevior has the same Orig^^^ with the Longior, keeps the same Track, pass^^^
under the Annular Ligament, and is terminated (...) the third Thumb-Bone.

The Thenar removes the Thumb from the Fingers, and forms that part which is
called the Mount of Venus: It has its Source in the first Bone of the Carpus
or Wrist, and the Annular Ligament, and is inserted in its second Bone.

The Antithenar draws the Thumb to the other Fingers, having its Origin in the
Bone of the Metacarpus, that stays the middle Finger, and its Insertion is in
the first Bone of the Thumb.

The Muscle which serves to extend the Forefinger, is called Indicator: It
proceeds from the middle and outer part of the Cubitus, and is fixed by a double
Tendon in the second Articulation of the Forefinger, as also in the Tendon of
the great Extensor of the Fingers.

That which draws the Forefinger to the Thumb is termed Adductor: It
commenceth in the forepart of the first Thumb-Bone, and is terminated in the
Bones of the Forefinger.

That which removes the Forefinger from the Thumb is known by the Name of
Abductor, which arising out of the external and middle part of the Bone of the
Elbow, and passing under the Annular Ligament, cleaves to the Lateral and
outward part of the Bones of the Forefinger.

The Little-Finger has two proper Muscles, viz. an Extensor and an Abductor.

The Extensor springs from the lower part of the Condylus of the Arm-Bone, and
is fastened by a double Tendon in the second Articulation of the Little-Finger,
and in the Tendon of the Extensor of all the others.

The Abductor, called also Hypothenar, has (...) beginning in the small Bone
of the Wrist, which is situated over the others, and is terminated (...) the
first Bone of the Little-Finger on the ou^ side.

CHAP. XI. Of the Muscles of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet.
WHAT are the Motions of the Thighs? The Thigh performs five kinds of Mo^^ons;
for it is bent, extended, drawn within si^ and without, and turned round: All
these Mo^^ons are produced by the means of fourteen Mu^cles, viz. three
Flexors, three Extensors, thr^^ Adductors, three Abductors, and two Obturat^^
for the Circular Motion.

The Flexors of the Thigh are the Psoas, Ili^cus, and Pectineus.

The Psoas or Lumbaris is situated inwardly the Abdomen, on the side of the
Vertebra's. proceeds from the transverse Apophyses of (...) two lower
Vertebra's of the Back, and of (...) upper of the Loins, and lying on the inner
Fa^ of the Os Ilion, sticks to the lesser Trochanter (...) Rotator.

The Iliacus Internus has its Origin in all (...) Lips of the inner Cavity of
the Os Ilion, and b^^ing joined by a Tendon to the Lumbaris, is inse^^ed with
it in the lesser Trochanter.

The Pectineus takes its rise from the forepart of the Os Pubis, and is united
before to the Thigh Bone a little below the lesser Trochanter.

The Extensors of the Thigh are the Glutaeus Major, Medius, and Minimus.

The Glutaeus Major springs forth out of the lateral part of the Os Sacrum, as
also the hinder and outer part of the Os Ilion and Coccyx, and e^ters into the
Thigh Bone, four Fingers breadth below the great Trochanter or Rotator, being
the thickest of all the Muscles of the Body.

The Glutaeus Medius, deducing its Original from the hinder and outward part of
the Os Ilion, is inserted three Fingers breadth below the great Trochanter.

The Glutaeus Minimus arises from the bottom of the Cavity of the Os Ilion,
and is fastened to a small Hole near the great Trochanter.

The Adductors of the Thigh are the Triceps Superior, Medius, and Inferior.

The Triceps Superior has its beginning in the top of the Os Pubis, and is
terminated in the top of a Line, which is on the inside of the Thigh.

The Triceps Medius proceeding from the middle of the Os Pubis, is inserted in
the Thigh Bone a little lower than the Triceps Superior.

The Triceps Inferior has its Source in the bottom of the Os Pubis, and is
implanted in the Thigh Bone, a little lower than the Triceps Medius. Some
Anatomists make only one Muscle of these three, attributing thereto three
Originals and three Insertions. These Muscles serve to draw the Thighs one
against another.

The Abductors of the Thigh are the Iliacus Externus, or Pyriformis, the
Quadratus, and the Gemelli.

The Pyriformis arising from the upper and lateral part of the Os Sacrum, and
the Os Ilio^ cleaves to the Neck of the great Trochanter.

The Quadratus or square Muscle of the Thig^ takes its Origin from the
external Promine^^ of the Os Ischion, and adheres to the outward p^^ of the
great Trochanter.

The Gemelli or Twin Muscles arise from t^^ small Knobs in the hinder-part of
the Ischi^^ and insinuate themselves into a small Cavity (...) the Neck of the
great Trochanter.

The Circular Motion of the Thigh is pers^med by the means of two Muscles,
named (...) Obturatores Externi and Interni.

The Obturator Internus springs from the i^^^ Circumference of the Oval Hole of
the Ischi^^ and its Tendons passing between the two Gem^^ are inserted in a
small Cavity at the Root of (...) great Trochanter or Rotator.

The Obturator Externus arises from the o^^ ward Circumference of the same
Hole of (...) Ischion, and is terminated in the side of the oth^^ near the
great Trochanter.

What are the Motions of the Leg, and what (...) its Muscles?

The Leg is moved four several ways, that (...) to say, it is bent, extended,
and drawn inwa^^ and outward, by the means of eleven Mus^^ viz. three Flexors,
four Extensors, two Adduc^^^ and two Abductors.

The three Flexors of the Leg are the ^^ceps, the Semi-nervosus, and the
Semi-mem^nosus.

The Biceps has two Heads, the longer wh^^ of comes out of the bottom of the
Promin^^ of the Ischion, and the other from the middle and exterior part of the
Femur, and is terminated in the outward and upper part of the Epiphysis of the
Perone or Fibula.

The Semi-nervosus has its Origin in the Knob of the Ischion, and is joined
backward to the top of the Epiphysis of the Tibia. These three Muscles are
placed in the back-part of the Thigh below the Buttocks.

The four Extensors of the Leg are the Rectus, the Vastus Internus, the Vastus
Externus, and the Crureus.

The Rectus or straight Muscle of the Leg takes its rise from the forepart and
the bottom of the Ilion, and descends in a right Line: It covers with its
Tendon, which is common to the three following, the whole Knee-Pan, and adheres
to the top of the Tibia, on the forepart.

The Vastus Internus, being situated on the inside of the Thigh, has its
beginning in the top of the Thigh inwardly, and a little below the lesser
Trochanter or Rotator: Afterward it is tied to the Tibia by a large Tendon,
common thereto with the preceding.

The Vastus Externus is placed on the outside of the Thigh, springing from the
top and the forepart of the Femur, being united by the same Tendon with the
two preceding.

The Crureus proceeds from the top, and the forepart of the Thigh Bone,
between the two Trochanters; then covering the whole Bone, it is also fastened
to the Leg-Bone with the three preceding Muscles, after having covered the
Knee-Pan with their common Tendon, which serves likewise as a Ligament the Knee.

The two Adductors of the Leg are the S^^torius and the Gracilis.

The Sartorius or the Longissimus draws the (...) inward, deriving its Original
from the upp^^ Spine of the Ischion; from whence it desce^ obliquely through the
inside of the Thigh, a^ cleaves to the top on the inside of the Tibia.

The Gracilis has its Origin in the sore-pe^^ at the bottom of the Os Pubis,
and its Inse^^ in the top of the Tibia on the inside.

The two Abductors of the Leg are the Fas^^ lata, and the Poplitaeus.

The Fascia lata, or the Membranosus, is as were a kind of large Band, which
covers (...) the Muscles of the Thigh. It proceeds from (...) outward Lip of
the Os Ilion, is tied by a la^^ Membrane to the top of the Perone or Fi^^ and
sometimes descends to the end of the Fo^^^

The Poplitaeus, or Sub-poplitaeus, ari^^ from the lower and external Condylus
of (...) Thigh Bone, passes obliquely from the ou^ to the inside, till it is
lost in the upper and in^^ part of the Leg-Bone under the Ham.

What are the Motions of the Foot, and (...) are its Muscles?

The Foot performs two Motions by the (...) of nine Muscles, as being bent by
two, and (...) tended by seven.

The two Flexors are the Crureus Anticus, (...) the Peronaeus Antieus.

The Crureus or Tibiaeus Anticus, is placed long the Tibia, and takes its rise
from its upon and forepart: Afterward it is bound by (...) Tendons to the
first Os Cuneiforme, or Wedgelike Bone, and to that of the Metatarsus or
Instep, which stays the great Toe, after having passed under the annular
Ligament.

The Peronaeus Anticus springs from the middle and outward-part of the Perone
or Fibula, and insinuating it self through the Cleft which is under the external
Malleolus before, sticks to the Bone of the Metatarsus that supports the little
Toe.

The seven Extensors of the Foot are the two Gemelli, or the Soleus, the
Planta^^s, the Crureus Posticus, and the two Peronaei Postici.

The Gemelli are the Interior and the Exterior; the former having its Source in
the inner Condylus, and the other in the outward and lower of the Thigh Bone;
from whence they extend themselves till they are fastened to the Talus or
Ankle-Bone by a Tendon common to them, with the two following.

The Soleus arises from the top on the backpart of the Leg-Bone and Perone,
and confounding its Tendon with that of the Gemelli, sticks close to the Talus.

The Plantaris, which lies hid between the Gemelli and the Soleus, has its
Origin from the Exterior Condylus of the Thigh Bone; then uniting its Tendon
with the preceding, it adheres to them; and this common Tendon is called
Chorda Achillis.

The Crureus or Tibiaeus Posticus, springs from the back-part of the Leg-Bone,
from whence extending it self downward, it passes through the Fissure in the
Internal Malleolus, and cleaves to the inner-part of the Os Scaphoides.

The Peronaei, or Fibulaei Postici, are otherwi^^ called the Longus and the
Brevis, whereof o^ proceeds from the upper and almost forepart (...) the
Perone, terminating in the upper part of (...) Bone, that supports the great
Toe in the M^tatarsus, and the other from the lower p^^^ of the Perone,
adhering in like manner to (...) Bone with which the little Toe is sustained.

With what Motions are the Toes endu'd, how many Muscles have they, and which
be they?

The Toes are bent and extended, as al^ drawn inward and outward, by the means
(...) twenty two Muscles, of which sixteen are Common, and six Proper. The
former are t^^ Flexors, two Extensors, four Lumbricales, a^^ eight Interossei.
The first Flexor is named S^limis, and the other Profundus.

The Sublimis or Perforatus derives its Orig^nal from the lower and inner-part
of the Ta^^ and is fixed in its proper place by four c^^ Tendons, which are
inserted in the upper part (...) the Bones of the first Phalanx of the four
To^^ It is situated under the Sole of the Feet.

The Profundus or Perforans has its beginning in the top and back-part of the
Leg-Bo^^ and Perone, slips under the Malleolus Inte^^^ through the Sinus
Calcaris, and makes four Tend^^ which pass through the Fissures of the Tendon of
(...) Sublimis, and cleaves to the Bones of the (...) Phalanx of the Toes, to
bow them.

The first Extensor is called the Common, (...) the other the Pediaeus.

The Common Extensor, or the Longus, ta^^ its rise from the top and forepart
of the Ti^^ in the place of its joining with the Perone Fibula, and divides it
self into four Tendons, which after having passed under the Annular Ligament,
are inserted in the Articulations of every Toe.

The Pediaeus or the Brevis, being placed over the Foot, proceeds from the
Annular Ligament, and the lower-part of the Perone, and sends forth four
Tendons, which are sixth to the first Articulation of the four Toes on the
outside, Thus this Muscle, together with the Longus, causes their Extension.

The four Lumbrical Muscles of the Toes arise from the Tendons of the
Prosundus, and a Mass of Flesh at the Sole of the Feet. They are joined by
their Tendons with those of the Interossei Interni, and adhere inwardly to the
side of the first Bones of the four Toes, to incline them toward the great Toe.

The Abductors, or those Muscles that remove the Toes from the great Toe, are
the eight Interossei, whereof four are called Externi, and as many Interni. The
former take their rise in the Spaces between the Bones of the Metatarsus, and
are terminated outwardly in the side of the first Bones of the Toes. The
Internal lie in the bottom of the Foot, and take up the Spaces between the five
Bones of the Metatarsus. They arise from the Bones of the Tarsus, and the
Intervals between those of the Metatarsus, and are implanted with the four
Lumbricales inwardly, in the upper part of the Bones of the first Phalanx of
the four Toes.

Of the six Proper Muscles of the Toes, there are four appointed for the great
Toe, which cause it to perform the Motions of Flexion, Extension, and drawing
forward or backward The two others are the Adductor of the second Toe to the
great Toe, and the Abductor of the little toe, called Hypothenar.

The Proper Flexor of the great Toe, arising from the top of the Perone or
Fibula, on the ba^^ part, passes through the Ancle-Bone on the inside to the
sole of the Foot, and is fastened to the Bone of the last Phalanx.

The Proper Extensor of the great Toe spring from the middle of the forepart
of the P^rone, passes over the Foot, and has its Insertion in the upper part
of the Bone of the great Toe.

The Proper Adductor of the great Toe, (...) the Thenar, taking its rise
inwardly on the side of the Talus, the Ossa Schaphoidea and Innomin^ta, extends
it self over the outward-part of the Bone of the Metatarsus, which stays the
great Toe, and adheres to the top of the second Bone of the great Toe, which it
draw inward.

The proper Abductor of the great Toe, o^ the Antithenar, draws it toward the
other Toes. It derives its Origin from the Bone of the Metatarsus, which
supports the little Toe, slides obliquely over the other Bones, and cleaves to
the first Bone of the great Toe on the inside.

The Adductor appropriated to the second Toe has its Source in the first Bone
of the great Toe, on the inside, and sticks close to the Bones of the second
Toe, which it draws to the great Toe.

The Abductor of the little Toe, or the Hypothenar, proceeds from the outward
part of the Bone of the Metatarsus, that stays the little Toe, and is
inserted in the top of the little Toe, on the outside, to remove it from the
others.

A List of all the Muscles in the Humane Body.
The Forehead has two Muscles 2 The hinder-part of the Head 2 The Eyelids 4
The Eyes 12 The Nose 7 The Ears on the outside 8 The Ears on the inside 6 The
Lips 13 The Tongue 8 The Uvula, or Palate of the Mouth 4 The Larynx 13 The
Pharynx 7 The Os Hyoides 10 The Lower Jaw 12 The Head 14 The Neck 8 The
Omoplatae or Shoulder-Blades 8 The Arms 18 The Elbows 12 The Radii 8 The Wrists
12 The Fingers 48 The Breast, or the Parts of Respiration 57 The Loins 6 The
Abdomen or lower Belly 10 The Testicles 2 The Bladder 1 The Penis 4 The
Clitoris 4 The Anus 3 The Thighs 30 The Legs 22 The Feet 18 The Toes 44 Total
425
CHAP. XII. Of the Anatomy of the Nerves, Arteries, and Veins in general.
WHAT is the Structure of the Nerves?

The Nerves are round white Bodies enclosed in a double Membrane, communicated
to them from the two Meninges of the Brain: Their Office is to convey the
Animal Spirits into all the Parts.

Where is the Root and first beginning of all the Nerves?

All the Nerves take their Original from the Medulla Oblongata, and that of the
Spine.

How is the distribution of them made through the whole Body?

It is directly performed by Conjugations o^ Pairs, whereof one goes to the
Right Hand, and the other to the Left: There are nine Pairs o^ them that
proceed from the Medulla Oblongata and enter into the Skull; and a Tenth that
comes from the Marrow which lies between the Occipital and the first Vertebra
of the Neck. It passes through the Hole of the Dura Matter, through which the
Vertebral Artery enters, to distribute its Branches into several Parts.

To what Use are the nine Pairs of Nerves appropriated, which proceed from the
Root of the Brain?

They are chiefly designed for the Senses, and also for the Motion of their
Organs, of which the Ancients discovered only seven.

The first Pair of Nerves is called the Olfactory, and serves for the Smelling.

The second Pair is the Optici or Visorii Nervi, and bestows upon the Eyes the
Faculty of seeing.

The third is termed Motorii Oculorum, being serviceable for the Motion of the
Eyes.

The fourth Pair is named Oculorum Pathetici, which shows the Passion of the
Mind in the Eyes, whereto it imparts a String as well as to the Lips.

The fifth is called the Gustative, and appropriated to the Taste, because it
sends Twigs more especially to the Tongue, as also to the Forehead, Temples,
Face, Nostrils, Teeth, and Privy-Parts.

The Sixth is likewise for the Taste, and goes to the Palate.

The seventh is the Auditive Nerve, that enters into the Os Petrosum, where it
divides it self into many Branches, which when gone forth, are distributed to
the Muscles of the Tongue, Lips* Mouth, Face, Forehead, Eyelids, etc.

The eighth is the Os Vagum, or wandering Pair, which is united to the
Intercostal Nerve, as also to the Recurrent, Diaphragmatick, Mesenterick, etc.

The ninth Pair, after having formed a True with the eighth, disperseth its
Twigs sever ways, whereof one is joined with the Twig (...) the tenth, to be
distributed together into (...) Muscle Stern^hyoideus, and into the Tongue.

The Intercostal and Spinal are not Pairs Nerves, but only Branches or Twigs of
other Pairs.

What is the Distribution and Use of the th^^ Pairs of Nerves that proceed from
the Spinal M^row?

There are seven that go forth from the sev^^ vertebra's of the Neck, twelve
from those (...) the Back, five from the Loins, and six from the Os Sacrum,
according to the following Pr^gression.

The first of the seven Pairs of Nerves of (...) Neck proceeds from between the
Occipital Bo^^ and the first Vertebra, named Atlas, its Fibers b^ing lost in
the Muscles of the hinder-part of (...) Head and Neck.

The second Pair springs from between the f^^^^ and second Vertebra of the
Neck; the Fibr^^ whereof are lost in the Muscles of the Head, a^^ in the Skin
of the Face.

The third Pair issues from between the seco^^ and third Vertebra of the Neck;
and its Fib^^^ are lost in the Flexor Muscles and Extensors (...) of the Neck.

The fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Pairs p^^ceed from between the
Vertebra's, as before, (...) their Fibers are lost in the Neck of the Omo^^ta,
in the Arm, and in the Diaphragme or M^^riff. Here it ought to be observed by
the w^^ that the Arms receive Branches not only from (...) four last Pairs of
the Nerves of the Neck, but also from the two first Pairs of the Back, which
are extended even to the end of the Fingers: Whence it happens that in the
Palsy of the Arms, Remedies are usually applied to the Vertebra's of the Neck;
and that in Phlebotomy or letting Blood, care must be taken to avoid pricking
the Nerve, which accompanies the Basilick Vein in the Elbow.

The twelve Pairs of Nerves that have their Beginning from between the
Vertebra's of the Back, are each of them divided into two Branches, as the
others; and their Branches are distributed in like manner to the Muscles of the
Breast, and to those of the Back and Abdomen.

The five Pairs which take their Rise from between the Vertebra's of the Loins,
have thicker Branches than the others, and the distribution of them is made to
the Muscles of the Loins, Hypogastrium, and Thighs.

Of the six Pairs of Nerves that proceed from the Os Sacrum, the four Upper
with the three Lower of the Loins, send forth Fibers of Nerves to the Thigh,
Leg, and Foot; and the two last Pairs impart Nerves to the Anus, Bladder, and
privy Parts.

What is the Structure of the Arteries?

The Arteries are long and round Canals, consisting of four sorts of Tunicks or
Membranes, which have their Rise from the left Ventricle of the Heart, from
whence they receive the Blood, and convey it to all the Parts of the Body for
their Nourishment.

What is the Construction of these four Tunicks or Membranes of the Arteries?

The first being thin and Nervous in its outward Superficies, is in the Inside
a Plexus or Interlacement of small Veins and Arteries, and Fibers of Nerves,
which enter into the other following Tunicks, to nourish them.

The second sticking close to the former, is altogether full of whitish
Glandules, that serve to separate the serous Particles of the Blood.

The third is entirely Musculous, and interwoven with Annular Fibers.

The fourth is very thin, and has its Fibers all straight.

Whence proceeds the Pulse or beating of the Arteries?

It is derived from the Heart, and exactly answers to its Motion of Diastole
and Systole.

By what Name is the first Trunk of the Arteries called, and what is the Effect
of the Distribution made thence to the whole Body?

The first Trunk of the Arteries is named Aorta, or the thick Artery, which
proceeds immediately from the left Ventricle of the Heart, whereto it
communicates before its departure from the Pericardium, one or two small
Branches called the Coronary: Afterward it is divided into two Branches,
whereof one goes upward, and is termed the Ascending Artery; and the other
downward, under the Denomination of the Descending Artery.

The Ascending Artery arises upward along the Aspera Arteria or Windpipe, to
the Clavicles, and is there divided into two Branches, called the Subclavian
Arteries, one whereof goes forward to the Right side, and the other to the
Left; and they both send forth on each side diverse Branches, which take their
Names from the several Parts, whereto they are distributed; such are the
Carotides or Soporales Interni and Externi, which pass to the Head; the
Mediastina; the Intercostal; the Axillar, and others.

The Descending Artery, before its departure from the Breast, affords certain
Branches to the Pericardium, Diaphragm, and lower Ribs; afterward it penetrates
the Diaphragm, and constitutes seven double Branches. The first is of those
that are called Coeliack, and which go to the Liver and Spleen. The second
Branch contains the Upper Mesenterick. The third the Emulgent, which pass to
the Reins. The fourth the Spermatick, which are extended to the Genitals. The
fifth the Lower Mesenterick. The sixth the Lumbar. And the seventh the
Muscular. But as soon as the great Trunk is come downward to the Os Sacrum, it
divides it self into two thick Arteries named the Iliack, which are distributed
on both sides, each of them making two Internal and External Branches, which
likewise impart Sprigs or lesser Arteries, to the Bladder, Anus, Matrix, and
other adjacent Parts: Then the Master-Branch forms the Crural Arteries on the
inside of the Thighs, which are communicated by multiplying their Number even
to the ends of the Toes, in passing over the External Ancle-Bones of the Feet.

What is the Structure of the Veins?

The Veins are long and round Canals made of four kinds of Tunicks or
Membranes, whose Office it is to receive the Blood that remains after the
Nourishment is taken, and to carry it back to the Heart to be revived.

What is the Form of the four Tunicks that make the Canals of the Veins?

The first is a Contexture of Nervous and straight Fibers. The second is a
Plexus of small Vessels that carry the Nourishment. The third is all over beset
with Glandules through which are filtrated the serous Particles of the Blood
contained in the Vessels of the second Tunicle. The fourth is a Series of
Annular and Musculous or Fleshy Fibers.

Which are the-most numerous, the Arteries or the Veins?

The Number of the Veins exceeds that of the Arteries; and there are scarce any
Arteries without Veins accompanying them.

Where is the Beginning and Original of all the Veins?

All the Veins have their Root in the Liver, and two of the three great Trunks
that proceed from thence, are called Vena Portae, and Vena Cava; and the third
is twofold, viz. the ascending and the descending.

The Vena Portae is distributed to all the Par^^ contained in the lower Belly,
and terminated i^ the Fundament; where it makes the Internal Haemorrhoidal
Veins.

The Vena Cava is immediately divided into two thick Branches, one whereof
arises upward to the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and form^ the ascending
Vena Cava; as the other goes downward to the Feet, and constitutes the
descending.

What is the Distribution of the ascending Ven^ Cava?

It perforates the Diaphragm, goes to the Heart, and ascends from thence to the
Clavicles after having communicated to the Midriff in passing, a small Branch
called the Phrenicus; as also one or two to the Heart, named the Coronary; and
some others to the upper Ribs, besides the single Branch, termed Azygos, only
on the right side. But the Trunk of the ascending Vena Cava, being once come up
to the Clavicles, is divided into two Branches, well known by the Name of the
Subclavian, one whereof Shoots forth toward the Right side, and the other
toward the Left; and they both make various Ramifications like to those of the
thick ascending Artery, by producing the Cervicalis or Soporalis, and the
Internal and External Jugulars that go to the Head; as also the Axillars, which
pass to the Arms and Shoulders, forming the Cephalic, the Median, and the
Basilick on the inside of the Elbow.

The descending Vena Cava in like manner accompanies the Ramifications of the
Aorta, or thick descending Artery, to the fourth Vertebra of the Loins, where
it sends forth two Branches, named the Iliack, one whereof goes to the Right
side, and the other to the Left, both inwardly and outwardly; imparting diverse
Twigs or lesser Branches to all the Parts contained in the Abdomen or lower
Belly, even as far as the Fundament, where it makes the External Haemorrhoidal
Veins. Afterward the outward Branch of the Iliack descends in the Thigh, to
form the Crural, and others, as far as the Saphaena, together with those that
are situated at the end of the Feet.

CHAP XII. Of the Anatomy of the Abdomen, o^ lower Belly.
WHAT is the clearest Division of the Hum^^ Body into various Parts, and that
which (...) most followed in the Anatomical Schools?

It is that which constitutes three Venters, tha^ is to say, the Upper, the
Middle, and the Lo^er, which are the Head, the Thorax or Breas^ and the Abdomen
or lower Belly, together wi^^ the Extremities, which are the Arms and Legs*

What is the lower Belly?

It is a Cavity of the Body that contains the nourishing parts, as the Reins,
the Bladder, an^ all those that are appropriated to Generation (...) both Sexes.

What is to be considered outwardly in the low^^ Belly?

Its different Regions, and the several pa^^ therein contained.

What are these Regions?

They are the Epigastrick, the Vmbilical, an^ the Hypogastrick.

What is their Extent?

It is from the Xyphoides or Sword-like Cartilage to the Os Pubis, the division
whereof in^^ three equal Parts, constitutes the three different Regions; the
Epigastrium being the first upward, the Vmbilicus the second, and the
Hyp^gastrium the third.

What are the Parts contained in the Epigastrium, and what Place do they
possess therein?

The Parts contained in the Epigastrium are the Liver, the Spleen, the Stomach,
and the Pancreas or Sweetbread, which lies underneath: The Stomach takes up
the middle before, the Liver being placed on the Right side, and the Spleen on
the Left; so that these two sides of the Epigastrick Region, are called the
Right and Left Hypochondria.

What Parts are there contained in the Vmbilical Region, and what is their
situation?

They are the most part of the thin Intestines or small Guts, viz. the
Duodenum, the Jejunum, and the Ileon, which have their Residence in the middle,
where they are encircled with a Portion of the two great Guts, Coecum and
Colon, that take possession of the Sides, otherwise called the Flanks. The
Reins or Kidneys are also in this Place, above, and somewhat backward.

What Parts are there contained in the Hypogastrium, and of what Place are they
possessed?

The greater part of the thick-Guts, Coecum, and Colon, are enclosed therein,
with the entire Rectum; there is also a Portion of the Ileon, which hides it
self in the sides of the Ilia, or Hip-Bones: In the middle under the Os Pubis,
the Bladder is situated on the Gut Rectum in Men, and the Matrix in Women lies
between the Rectum and Bladder.

After what manner is the opening of a Corpse or dead Body performed at a
public Dissection?

It is begun with a Crucial Incision in the Skin from underneath the Throat
downward, traversing from one side to another in the Umbilical Region; then
this Skin is pulled off at the four Corners, and the Panicula Adiposa is
immediately discovered: Under this Fat lies a Fleshy Membrane, called Membrana
Carnosa; and after that, the common Membrane of all the Muscle^ of the lower
Belly. Thus we have taken: View of what Anatomists commonly term the five
Teguments, that is to say, the Epiderma o^ Scarf-Skin, the Derma or true Skin,
the Panicula Adiposa, the Panicula Carnosa or Membrane Carnosa, and the common
Membrane of the Muscles.

The five Teguments being removed, we meet with as many Muscles on each side,
viz. the descending Oblique, the ascending Oblique, the Transverse, the
straight, and the Pyramidal, by the means whereof the Belly is extended and
contracted. Afterward appears a Membrane named Peritonaeum, which contains all
the Bowels, and covers the whole lower Belly, being strongly fastened to the
first and third Vertebra's of the Back. The Fat skinny Net which lies
immediately under the Peritonaeum, is called Epiploon and Omentum, or the Caul;
it floats over the Bowels, keeping them in a continual Suppleness necessary for
their Functions, maintains the Heat of the Stomach, and contributes to
Digestion.

It remains to take an Account of the Bowels viz. the Stomach, Mesentery,
Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Bladder, and Guts, together with the Parts appointed
for Generation, which in Men are the Spermatick Vessels, the Testicles, and the
Penis; and in Women, the Spermatick Vessels, the Testicles or Ovaries, the
Matrix, and its Vagina or Neck.

What is the Stomach?

It is the Receptacle of the Aliments or Food conveyed thither through the
Oesophagus or Gullet, which is a Canal, or kind of straight Gut that reaches
from the Throat to the Mouth of the Stomach. The Stomach it self is situated
immediately under the Diaphragm or Midriff, between the Liver and the Spleen,
having two Orifices, whereof the Left is properly called Stomachus, or the
Upper, and the Right (at its other Extremity) Pylorus, or the lower Orifice.
Its Figure resembles that of a Bag-Pipe, and the greater part of its Body lies
toward the Left side. It is composed of three Membranes, viz. one Common, which
it receives from the Peritonaeum; and two Proper; the two uppermost being
smooth, and the innermost altogether wrinkled.

What is the Pancreas or Sweetbread?

It is a Fat Body, consisting of many Glandules wrapped up in the same Tunicle,
being situated under the Pylorus or lower Orifice of the Stomach: It helps
Digestion, and has diverse other uses; but its principal Office is to separate
the serous Particles of the Blood, to be conveyed afterward into the Gut
Duodenum, by a Canal or Passage, named the Pancreatick. This Juice serves to
cause the Chyle to ferment with the Choler, in order to remove the grosser
Particles from those that ought to enter into the Lacteal Vessels.

Into how many sorts are the Guts distinguished?

There are two sorts, viz. the thin and the thick.

How many thin or small Guts are there?

Three; that is to say, the Duodenum, the Jejunum, and the Ileon.

How many thick Guts are there?

Three likewise; viz. the Coecum, the Colon and the Rectum.

Why are some of them called thin Guts, and others thick?

Because the thin are smaller, being appointed only to transport the Chyle out
of the Stomach into the Reserver; whereas the thick are more large and
stronger, serving to carry forth the gross Excrements out of the Belly.

Are the six Guts of an equal length?

No, the Duodenum, which is the first of the thin Guts, is only twelve Fingers
breadth long* The Jejunum, being the second, so called because always empty, is
five Foot long: The third is named Ileon, by reason of its great Turnings which
oblige it to pass to the Os Ilion, where it produces a Rupture; it extends it
self almost twenty Foot in length.

The first of the thick Guts, known by the Name of Coecum, is very short, and
properly only an Appendix or Bag of a Finger's length That which follows is the
Colon, being the largest of all, and full of little Cells, which are filled
sometimes with Wind and other Matters that excite the Pains of the Colic. It
encompasseth the thin Guts, in passing from the top to the bottom of the Belly,
by the means o^^ its great Circumvolutions, and is from eight to nine Foot
long. The last is the Rectum o^ straight Gut, so named, because it goes
directly to the Fundament: It is no longer than ones Hand, but it is fleshy,
and situated upon the Os Sacrum, and the Coccyx or Rump-Bone.

What is the Peristaltick Motion of the Guts?

It is the successive Motion and Undulation, whereby the Guts insensibly push
forward from the top to the bottom, the Matters contained in them; and that
Motion which on the contrary is performed from the bottom to the top, is termed
the Antiperistaltick, as it happens in the Iliack Passion, or twisting of the
Guts, called Domine Miserere, by reason of its intolerable Pain.

What is the Mesentery?

It is a kind of Membrane somewhat fleshy, which is joined to the Spine in the
bottom and middle of the Belly, and by its folding, keeps all the Guts steady
in their place; it is all over beset with red, white, and Lymphatick Vessels;
that is to say, those that carry the Blood, Chyle, and Lympha, which serves to
cause this last to run more freely, and to ferment. Three notable Glandules are
also observed therein, the greatest whereof lies in the middle, and is named
Asellius's Pancreas; the two other lesser are called Lumbar Glandules, as being
situated near the Left Kidney. From each of these Glandules proceeds a small
Branch; and both are united together to make the great Lacteal Vein, or
Thoracick Canal. This Tube conveys the Chyle along the Vertebra's of the Back
to the Left Subclavian. Vein; from whence it passes into the ascending Vena
Cava, and descends in the Right Ventricle of the Heart, where it assumes the
form of Blood; fro^^ whence it passes to the Lungs through the Pulmonary Artery;
then it returns to the Hear through the Pulmonary Vein, and goes forth again
through the Left Ventricle of the Heart, between the Aorta or great Artery, to be
afterward distributed to all the Parts of the Body. This i^ the ordinary
Passage for the Circulation of the Chyle, and the Sanguification of the Heart.

What is the Liver?

The Liver, being the thickest of all the Bo^^els, is placed in the Right
Hypochondrium, at the distance only of a Fingers breadth from the Diaphragm;
its Figure much resembling that of (...) thick piece of Beef: It is Unequal on
the outside, and Concave within; its Substance is so^ and tender, its Color
and Consistence being lik^ coagulated Blood: It is cleft at bottom, and divided
into two Lobes, viz. one greater, an^ the other less: Its Office is to purify
the Man of Blood by Filtration; and it is bound by two strong Ligaments, the
first whereof adheres (...) the Diaphragm, and the second to the Xiphoid^ or
Sword-like Cartilage. Two great Veins tak^ their Rise from hence, viz. the Vena
Portae, an^ the Vena Cava, which form innumerable Branches, as it were Roots in
the Body of the Liver. The Gallbladder is fastened to the ho^low part thereof,
and discharges its Chole^ into the Gut Duodenum, through the Vessels that be^^
the Name of Meatus Choledochi, or Ductus Bi^^ares. This Choler is not a mere
Excremen^ but on the contrary of singular Use in causin^ the Fermentation of
the Chyle, and bringing to perfection.

What is the Spleen?

The Spleen is a Bowel resembling a Hart's Tongue in shape, and situated in the
Left Hypochondrium, over against the Liver: Its length is about half a Foot,
and its breadth equal to that of three Fingers; its Substance being soft, as
that of the Liver, and its Color like dark coagulated Blood: It is fastened to
the Peritonaeum, Left Kidney, Diaphragm, and to the Caul on the inside; as also
to the Stomach by certain Veins, called Vasa Brevia; nevertheless these
Ligatures do not hinder it from wandering here and there in the lower Belly,
where it often changes its place, and causes many dreadful Symptoms by its
irregular Motions. Its Office is to Subtilize the Blood by cleansing and
refining it.

What are the Reins?

The Reins or Kidneys are Parts of a Fleshy Consistence, harder and more firm
than that of the Liver and Spleen: They are both situated in the sides of the
Umbilical Region, upon the Muscle Psoas, between the two Tunicks of the
Peritonoeum; but the Right is lower than the Left: Their Shape resembles that
of a French Bean, and they receive Nerves from the Stomach, whence Vomitings
are frequently occasioned in the Nephritical Colicks: They are (...) asten'd to
the Midriff, Loins, and Aorta, by the Emulgent Arteries; as also to the Bladder
by the Vreters. The Right Kidney likewise adheres to the Gut Caecum, and the
Left to the Colon. Their Office is to filtrate or strain the Urine in the
Pelves or Basins, which they have in the middle of their Body on the inside,
and to cause it to run through the Vessels called Vreters into the Bladder.

Immediately above the Reins on each side, is a flat and soft Glandule, of the
thickness of (...) Nut; they are named Renal Glandules, or Ca^sulae
Atribiliariae, because they contain a blackish Liquor, which (as they say)
serves as i^ were Leaven for the Blood, to set it a fermenting.

What is the Bladder?

It is the Basin or Reserver of Urines, of a Membranous Substance as the
Stomach, bei^^ placed in the middle of the Hypogastrick Region; so that it is
guarded by the Os Sacr^^^ behind, and by the Os Pubis before: Two Part are to
be distinguished therein, viz. its Botto^ and Top; by its Membranous Bottom it
(...) joined to the Navel, and suspended by the mea^ of the Vrachus, and the
two Umbilical Arter^^ which degenerate into Ligaments in adult P^^sons: As by
its fleshy Neck, longer and crooke^ in Men, and shorter and straight in Wom^ it
cleaves to the Intestinum Rectum in the former, and to the Neck of the Womb in
the later. Lastly, its Office is to receive the Uri^^ to keep them, and to
discharge them fr^^ time to time.

What are the Genitals in Men?

They are the Spermatick Vessels, the Tes^cles, and the Penis. The Spermatick
Vessels a^ a Vein and an Artery on each side; the form proceeding from the
Aorta, or thick Artery the Heart; and the other from the Branches the Vena Cava
of the Liver. These Arte^^ and Veins are terminated in the Body of (...)
Testicles, which are two in Number, enclosed within the Scrotum

The Office of the Testicles is to filtrate the Seed, which is brought thither
from all the parts of the Body, through the Spermatick Vessels, called
Praeparantia, and afterward to cause it to pass through others named Deferentia,
to the Vesiculae Seminales, from whence it is forced into the Vreter, through two
small and very short Canals.

The Penis or Yard is a Nervous and Membranous Part, well furnished with Veins
and Arteries, containing in the middle the Canal of the Vreter: Its Extremity,
which consists of a very delicate and spongy sort of Flesh, is called Balanus,
or Glans, and the Nut, the Skin that covers it being named the Praeputium, or
the Foreskin. Thus by the means of this swelled Part, and stiff through the
affluence of the Spirits, the Male injects his Seed into the Matrix of the
Female, to propagate his Kind.

What are the Parts appropriated to Generation in Women?

They are the Spermatick Vessels, the Ovaries or Testicles, and the Matrix. The
Spermatick Vessels are a Vein and an Artery on each side, as in Men: The
Ovaries or Testicles, situated on the side of the bottom of the Matrix, are
almost of the same bigness with those of Men, but of a round and flat Figure.
The Vesiculae, or little Bladders which they contain, are usually termed Ova or
Eggs by Modern Anatomists; and the Vessels that pass from these Testicles or
Ovaries to the Cornua of the Vterus, are called Deferentia or Ejaculatoria.

The Matrix, Vterus or Womb, is the principal Organ of Generation, and the
place where it is performed, resembling the Figure of a Peat with its Head
upward, and being situated between the Gut Rectum and the Bladder: It is of a
fleshy and membranous Substance, retained in its place by four Ligaments,
fastened to the bottom; whereof the two upper are large ones, proceeding from
the Loins, and the two lower round, taking their Rise from the Groin, where
they form a kind of Goose-Foot, which is extended to the Os Pubis, and the flat
part of the Thighs; which is the cause that Women are in danger of Miscarrying
when they fall upon their Knees.

The Exterior Neck of the Womb, called Vagina, is made almost in form of a
Throat or Gullet, extending it self outwardly to the sides of the Lips of the
Pudendum, and being terminated inwardly at the internal Orifice of the Matrix,
the shape whereof resembles that of the Muzzle or Nose of a little Dog. The
outward Neck of the womb is fastened to the Bladder and the Os Pubis before,
and in the hinder part to the Os Sacrum: Between the Lips of the Pudendum lie
the Nymphae, which are placed at the Extremity of the Canal of the Bladder, to
convey the Urines; and somewhat farther appear four Caruncles, or small pieces
of Flesh, at the Entrance of the Vagina, which when joined together make the
thin Membrane called Hymen.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Anatomy of the Thorax, Breast, or middle Venture.
WHAT is the Breast?

It is a Cavity in which the Heart and the Lungs are principally enclosed.

What is to be considered outwardly in the Breast?

Its extent, and the situation of the Parts therein contained.

What is its extent?

It is extended from the Clavicles to the Xiphoides, or Sword-like Cartilage on
the forepart, and bounded on the hinder by the twelfth Vertebra of the Back,
having all the Ribs to form its Circumference, and the Diaphragm for its Bounds
at bottom, separating it from the Abdomen or lower Belly.

What is the situation of the Parts contained in the Breast?

The Lungs take up the upper Region, and fill almost the whole Space,
descending at the distance of two Fingers breadth from the Diaphragm; the Heart
is situated in the middle, bearing its Point somewhat toward the Left side,
under the Lobes of the Lungs, which are divided by the Mediastinum that
distinguishes them into the Right and Left Parts.

How is the Breast Anatomized or opened?

After the dissection of the five Teguments, and the removal of the Muscles, as
in the lower Belly, the Anatomist proceeds to lift up the Sternum or
Breast Bone, by separating it from the Ribs; then it is laid upon the Face, or
else entirely taken away to the end that the internal Parts of the Breast may
be more clearly discovered; whereupon immediately appear, the Heart, the Lungs,
the Diaphragm, and the Mediastinum, which sticks to the Sternum throughout its
whole length.

What is the Heart?

It is a most noble Part, being the Fountain of Life, and the first Original of
the Motion of a^^ the others; on which account it is called Prim^^ vivens, and
ultimum moriens; that is to say, the first Member that begins to live, and the
la^^ that dies.

What Parts are to be considered in the Heart?

Its fleshy Substance, with all its Fibers turn^^ round like the Skrews of a
Vice; its Basis, Poin^ Auricles, Ventricles, large Vessels, Pericardium and
Ligatures or Ties: The Basis is the uppermost and broadest part; the Point is
the lowermost and narrowest part; the two Auricles (...) small Ears being as it
were little Cisterns (...) Reservers, that pour the Blood by degrees it to the
Heart, are situated on each side abo^^ the Ventricles. The Ventricles, which
are likewise two in Number, are certain Cavities (...) its Right and Left
Sides. The large Vessels (...) the Aorta or great Artery, and the Vena Ca^^^
together with the Pulmonary Artery and Ve^^^ The Pericardium is a kind of Bag
filled wi^^ Water, wherein the Heart is kept; which (...) fastened to the
Mediastinum by its Basis, and to the large Vessels that enter and go out of its
Ventricles.

What are the Terms appropriated to the continual beating of the Heart?

They are Diastole and Systole, from whence proceed two several Motions, the
first whereof is that of Dilatation, and the other of Contraction, communicated
to all the Arteries which have the same Pulse.

To what use serves the Water contained in the Pericardium?

It prevents the drying of the Heart by its perpetual Motion.

What are the Lungs?

They are an Organ serving for Respiration, of a soft Substance, and porous as
a Sponge, being all over beset with Arteries, Veins, Nerves, and Lymphatick
Vessels, and perforated with small Cartilaginous Tubes, that are imparted to it
from the Windpipe, and are called Bronchia. Their Natural Color is a pale
Red, and marbl'd dark Brown; and their whole Body is wrapped up in a fine smooth
Membrane, which they receive from the Pleuron. They are suspended by the
Windpipe, by their proper Artery and Vein, and by the Ligatures that fasten
them to the Sternum, Mediastinum, and frequently to the Pleuron it self: They
are also divided into the Right and Left Parts by the Mediastinum; having four
or five Lobes, whereof those on the Left side cover the Heart. Their continual
Motion consists in Inspiration, to take in the Air, and Expiration, to drive it
out. The Larynx makes the Entrance of the Windpipe into the Lungs, and the
Pharynx that of the O^sophagus or Gullet, at the bottom of the Mouth to pass
into the Stomach.

CHAP. XV. Of the Anatomy of the Head, or upper Venture.
WHAT is the Head?

It is a bony Part, that contains and encloseth the Brain within its Cavity.

What is most remarkable in the outward parts of the Head?

The Temporal Arteries, the Crotaphitae, of Temporal Muscles, and the Sutures
of the Skull.

Why are these things considerable?

The Temporal Arteries are of good Note because they are exposed on the
outside, lying even with the Skin. The Crotophite Muscles are so likewise, in
regard that they cannot be hurt without danger of Convulsions, by reason of the
Pericranium with which they are covered. And the Sutures, because the Meninges
of the Brain proceed from thence to form the Pericranium.

What is the Pericranium?

It is a Membrane that lies under the thick hairy Skin of the Head, and
immediately covers the Skull.

What are the Meninges?

They are two Membranes that enclose the Substance or Marrow of the Brain.

What is a Suture?

It is a kind of thick Seam or Stitch, that serves to unite the Bones of the
Skull.

How many sorts of Sutures are there?

There are two sorts, viz. the true, and the false or Bastard.

What are the true Sutures?

They are three in number, namely the Sagittal, the Coronal, and the Lambdoidal.

What is the disposition or situation of the true Sutures?

The Sagittal is straight, beginning in the middle of the Forehead, and
sometimes at the root of the Nose, and being terminated behind, at the joining
of the two Branches of the Lambdoidal Suture?

The Coronal appears in form of a Crown, passing to the middle of the Head, and
descending through the Temples, to finish its Circumference in the Root of the
Nose.

The Lambdoidal Suture is made like an open Pair of Compasses, the Legs whereof
are extended toward the Shoulders; and the Button is in the top of the Head
backward.

What are the Bastard Sutures?

They are those that are called Squamous or scaly, What is the disposition or
natural situation of these false Sutures?

They are placed at the two sides of the Head, and make a Semicircle of the
bigness of the Ears, round the same Ears.

What difference is there between the true and spurious Sutures.

The true Sutures are made in form of the Teeth of a Saw, which enter one into
the other; and the false or Bastard ones are those that resemble the Scales of
Fishes, which are joined together by passing one over the other.

What is the Use of the Sutures?

The Ancients were of Opinion, that they were made to hinder the Fracture of
one Skull-Bone from passing through the whole Head; but there is more reason to
believe that they have the three following Uses, that is to say, 1. To promote
the transpiration of the Brain. 2. To give Passage to the Vessels that go to
the Diploe. 3. To retain the Meninges, and to support the Mass of the Brain,
which is covered by them.


What are the Names of the Bones that compose the Skull?

The Bone of the forepart of the Head is called Sinciput, or the
Fore-head-Bone, as also the Frontal or Coronal Bone. The Bone of the
hinder-part, enclosed within the Lambdoidal Suture, is termed the Occipital.
The two Bones that form the upper part, and are distinguished by the Sagittal
Suture, bear the Name of Parietals, one being on the Right side, and the other
on the Left. And those behind the Ears are called Temporal, Squamosa, or
Petrosa. These also are distinguished into the Right and Left Temporals, and
are joined to the bottom of the Par^etal by a bastard squamous Suture.

What is most remarkable in the thickness of the Skull-Bones?

The Diploe, which is nothing else but a Plex^^ or Contexture of small Vessels,
that nourish the Bones, and in the middle of their thickness make the
distinction of the first and second Tablature of the Bones; whence it sometimes
happens that an exfoliative Trepan, or Semi-Trepan, is sufficient, when the
first of these two Tables is only broken, the other remaining entire.

Is the Brain which is preserved in the Skull all of one Piece, or one equal
Mass?

No, it is distinguished by the means of the Meninges into the Brain it self,
and the Cerebellum or little Brain; the Brain, properly so called, takes up
almost the whole Cavity of the Skull, and the Cerebellum is lodged altogether
in the hinder-part, where it constitutes only one entire Body; whereas the
former is divided into the Right and Left Parts by the Meninges, which cut it
even to the bottom; whence these Foldings are called Falx; i. e. a Scythe or
Sickle.

What is chiefly remarkable in the Substance of the Brain?

The Ventricles or Cavities which are found therein, together with the great
Numbe of Veins, Arteries, Lymphatick Vessels, and Nerves, that carry Sense to
all the Parts of the Body, and Spirits for their Motion.

An exact Historical Account of all the Holes of the Skull, and the Vessels
that pass through them.
To attain to an exact Knowledge of all the Holes with which the inside of the
Basis of the Skull is perforated, they are to be considered either with respect
to the Nerves, or to the Sanguinary Vessels.

There are nine Pairs of Nerves that arise from the Medulla Oblongata, and go
forth out of the Skull through many Holes hereafter named.

The first Pair is that of the Olfactory Nerves, appropriated to the Sense of
Smelling, which are divided below the Os Cribiforme, or Sieve-like Bone, into
dive^s Threads, that passing into the Nose through many Holes with which this
Bone is pierced, are distributed to the inner Tunick of the Nose.

The second Pair is that of the Optic or Visual Nerves, that pass into the
Orbits of the Eyes, through certain peculiar Holes made in the Os Sphenoides, or
Wedge-like Bone, immediately above the Anterior Apophysis Clinoides.

In the Portion of the Os Sphenoides, that makes the Basis of the Orbit, lies a
Fissure about seven or eight Hairs breadth long, which is to be observed
chiefly at the bottom, that is to say, below the Hole, through which the Optic
Nerve passes; where it is almost round, and larger than at the top, where it
is terminated in a very long and acute Angle.

There are many Pairs of Nerves that enter into the Orbit through this Fissure,
viz. 1. The third Pair, called the Motorii Oculorum. 2. The fourth Pair, named
Pathetici, by Dr. Willis. And 3. The whole sixth Pair.
Besides these three Pairs, which go entire through this Cleft, there is also a
Passage for the upper Branch of the foremost Fiber of the fifth Pair, which the
same renowned Physician calls the Ophthalmick Branch Beyond the lower-part of
the said Fissure, toward the hinder-part of the Head, is to be seen in the Os
Sphenoides on each side, a Hole that does not penetrate the Basis of the Skull,
but makes a kind of Ductus, about an Hair's breadth long, which is opened
behind the Orbit on the top of the Space between the Apophysis Pterygoides, and
the third Bone of the Jaw; through this Ductus runs the lower Branch of the
foremost Fiber of the fifth Pair.

About the length of two Hairs breadth beyond these Ductus's, we may also
discover in the Os Sphenoides, or Wedge-like Bone, two Holes of an Oblong and
almost Oval Figure, which are placed in the hindermost sides of that of the Os
Sphenoides, and gives passage to the hindermost Fiber of the fifth Pair.

The Hole through which runs the Auditory Nerve, that makes the seventh Pair, is
in the middle of the hinder-part of the Os Petrosum, that looks toward the
Cerebellum: This Hole being very large, is the Entrance of a Ductus that is
hollowed in the Os Petrosum, and which sinking obliquely from the forepart
backward, for the depth of about two Hairs breadth, forms as it were the bottom
of a Sack, the lowermost part whereof is terminated partly by the Basis of the
Cochlea, and partly by a Portion of the Mouth of the Vestibulum. At the bottom
of this Ductus are many Holes, but the most considerable is that of the
upper-par^^ through which passes a Portion of the Audito^^ Nerve. This is also
the Entrance of another (...) made in the Os Petrosum, which is opened b^^^^
(...) the Apophysis Mastoides and S^^^des: The other Holes afford a Passage to
the Br^^^ (...) of the soft Portion of the same Auditory (...).

Below this Ductus there is a remarkable Hole formed by the meeting of two
hollow Cuts the larger whereof is in the Occipital Bor^ and the other in the
lower-part of the Apophysis Petros^: From the middle of the upper-p^^^ of this
Hole issues forth a small Prominence (...) bony Point, whereto is joined an
Appendix o^ the Dura Matter, which divides the Hole in^^ two parts; so that
through the foremost Orifice passes the Nerve of the eighth Pair, and th^^ which
is called the Spinal Nerve. We shall have occasion hereafter to show the Use of
the hinder Orifice.

Near the great Hole of the Occipital Bone from whence proceeds the Medulla
Oblongata, we may observe a Hole almost round and oblong through which passes
the Nerve of the ninth Pair This Hole is entirely situated in the Occipi^^
Bone, and making a little Way in the Bone passes obliquely from the back-part
forward In the inside of the Skull this Hole is sometime double, but its two
Entrances are reunited (...) the outward-part of the Skull; and the tw^
Branches that form the Origin of this Nerve and which pass through these two
Holes, are likewise reunited at their Departure, These a^^ the Passages of the
nine Pairs of Nerves th^^ proceed from the Medulla Oblongata, and it remains
only to show the Paths through which the Intercostal Nerve goes forth, as also
that of the tenth Pair. The Intercostal runs out of the Skull through the Ductus
that gives Entrance (...) the Internal Carotick Artery. As for the ten^^ Pair,
in regard that it arises from the Marrow which is enclosed between the
Occipit^^ Bone and the first Vertebra, it goes forth through the Hole of the Dura
Matter, where the Vertebral Artery enters.

To know well the Holes through which the Vessels that belong to the inner-part
of the Head enter, and issue forth, it is requisite to distinguish them into
those which are distributed to the Dura Matter, and those that are appointed for
the Brain. The Vessels of the Dura Matter, are Branches of the Carotick or
Vertebral Arteries.

In the Os Sphenoides, or Wedge-like Bone, behind the Hole through which passes
the hindermost Fiber of the fifth Pair of Nerves lies another small Hole,
almost round, that gives Entrance to a Branch of the External Carotick Artery,
which in entering, immediately adheres to the Dura Matter, and forms many
Ramifications to overspread the whole Portion of this Membrane, which covers
the sides, and the upper part of the Brain.

At the bottom and top of the lateral outward part of the Orbit of the Eye,
above the acute Angle, for want of the Os Sphenoides, there is a Hole through
which passes an Artery, being a Twig of a Branch of the Internal Carotick,
which is diffused in the Eye, and distributed to almost the whole Portion of
the Dura Matter, that covers the forepart of the Brain.

The Vertebral Artery in entering into the Skull, furnishes it on each side
with a considerable Branch, which is dispersed throughout the whole Portion of
the Dura Matter that covers the Cerebellum.

As for the Veins that accompany these Arteries, they almost all go out of the
Skull through the same Holes where the other enters.

There are four thick Arteries which convey to the Brain the Matter with which
it is nourished, and that whereof the Spirits are formed, viz. the two Internal
Caroticks, and the two Vertebrals.

The Internal Carotick Arteries enter into the Skull through a particular Ductus
made in the Temporal Bone, the Mouth thereof being of an Oval Figure, and
situated in the outward part of the Basis of the Skull, before the Hole of the
Internal Jugular. This Ductus extends it self obliquely from the backside
forward, and after having made about three Hairs breadth i^ length, is
terminated in the hinder-part of the Os Sphenoides. The Artery traverseth the
whole winding Compass of this Ductus, which resembles the Figure of the Roman
Letter S. and at the Mouth of the same Ductus runs under the Dura Matter along
the sides of the Os Sphenoides to the Anterior Apophyses Clinoides, where it
rises up again, to perforate the Dura Matter, and to adhere to the Root of the
Brain. These Vessels, in like manner, after their departure from the Bone of
the Temples to the place where they pierce the Dura Matter, make a second
Circuit in form of the Roman Character S. At the place where these Carotick
Arteries penetrate the Dura Matter, they send forth a thick Branch, which enters
into the Orbit of the Eye, by the lower-part of the Hole, through which the
Oprick Nerve has its Passage.

The Vertebral Arteries proceeding from the Holes of the transverse Apophyses
of the first Vertebra, turn about in passing under the upper oblique Apophyses
of the seven Vertebra's: Afterward they perforate the Dura Matter, and running
under the Marrow, enter into the Skull through the Occipital Hole; then inclining
one toward another, they are reunited, and form only one single Trunk.

The Veins that bring back the Blood from the Substance of the Brain, are
emptied into the Sinus's of the Dura Matter, which are all discharged into those
that are called Lateral, which last go out of the Skull immediately under the
Nerves of the eighth Pair, through the hinder-part of the Hole made by the
meeting of the Occipital Bone, and the Apophysis Petrosa. These Lateral Sinus's
fall into the Internal Jugulars, which are received into a considerable Sinking
hollowed on each side in the outward part of the Basis of the Skull, which is
named the Pit or Hole of the Internal Jugular.

In the upper and hinder-part of the Hole, from whence the lateral Sinus's
issue forth, is to be seen an opening in the Extremity of a Ductus, the Mouth
whereof lies behind the Condyli, which are on the sides of the Occipital Trunk:
This Ductus is extended about the length of two Hairs breadth in the Bone, and
the Canal enclosed therein is opened immediately into the Vertebral Sinus: So
that one might affirm it to be as it were its Original Source. Whence it
appears that the Blood contained in the lateral Sinus's is emptied through two
places; the greater Portion thereof descending in the Jugulars from the Neck,
and the other in the Verteb^^ Sinus's: Sometimes those Ductus's are fou^ only
on one side, another while both are stop up, and then the Blood contained in
the lateral Sinus's is discharged into the Internal J^gulars.

Behind the Apophysis Mastoides on each sid^ is a remarkable Hole, through which
passes thick Vein, which brings back part of the Blood that has been
distributed to the T^guments and Muscles, which cover part of t^^ Occiput or
hinder-side of the Head: This V^^ is opened into the lateral Sinus's at the
pla^^ where they begin to turn about. But in the Heads of some Persons, this
Hole is found ^^ly on one side, and even sometimes not at all in which case the
Blood contained in the Vessels falls into the External Jugulars, wi^^ which the
Branches of this Vein have a Communication.

In each Parietal Bone on the side of the S^gittal Suture, at a little distance
from the La^deidal, appears a Hole, through which passes Vein, that brings back
the Blood of the Tegments of the Head, and discharges it self in the upper
Longitudinal Sinus. These Holes a^^ sometimes stopped up on one side, and
sometimes on both; and then the Blood contain in the Branches of this Vein runs
into the Eternal Jugulars.

In the middle of the Sella of the Os Sph^noides, we may observe one or two
small Hole through which (according to the Opinion (...) some Modern Anatomists)
the Lympha co^tain'd in the Glandula Pituitaria is thrown i^ to the Sinus of
the edge of the Os Sphenoides; nevertheless it is certain, that these Holes are
filled only with Sanguinary Vessels, which carry and bring back the Blood of
the Bones and Membranes, whereof those Sinus's are composed; besides that,
these Holes are rarely found in adult Persons.

Between the Spine of the Coronal Suture and the Crista Galli, is a Hole which
serves as an Entrance for a Ductus, which sinks from the top to the Bottom, the
length of about two Hairs breadth in the thickness of the inner Table of the
Coronal: The Root of the upper Longitudinal Sinus is strongly implanted in this
Hole, which also affords a Passage to some Sanguinary Vessels appointed for the
Nourishment of this inner Table.

Many other small Holes are found in diverse places of the Basis of the Skull;
the chief whereof are those that are observed in the Apophysis Petrosa, and
give Passage to a great number of Vessels that serve for the Nutriment of that
part of the Temporal Bone which is called the Tympanum, or Drum: The other
Holes are principally designed for the Vessels that are serviceable in the
nourishing of diverse parts of the Basis of the Skull.

After what manner is the opening of the Head or Skull performed?

It is done by sawing it asunder round about and above the Ears; then it is
taken off, after having before cut off the Hair, and made a Crucial Incision in
the Skin from the forepart to the hinder, and from one Ear to the other; as
also after having pulled off and laid down the four Corners the bottom.

How is the Brain anatomized?

It is done by cutting it Superficially, a^ by Leaves, in order to discover by
little (...) little the Ventricles, Vessels, and Nerves, w^^ their Original
Sources, etc. Or else it is take entire out of the Skull, (the Nerves havi^^
been before examined) and laid down; so t^^ without cutting any thing, all the
parts of (...) Brain may be set in their proper places, to f^^^ out those that
are sought for.

A TREATISE OF Straps, Swathing-Bands, Bandages, Bolsters, Splints, Tents,
Vesicatories, Setons, Cauteries, Leeches, Cupping-Glasses, and Phlebotomy.
CHAP. XVI. Of Straps, Swathing-Bands, Bandages, and Bolsters.
WHAT is a Strap?

It is a kind of Band commonly made use of for the Extension of the Members in
the reducing of Fractures and Luxations; or else in binding Patients, when it
is necessary to confine them, for the more secure performing of some painful
Operation: These sorts of Ligatures have different Names, according to their
several Uses, and often bear the of their Inventer.

What is the Matter whereof these Straps are ^^pos'd?

They may be of diverse sorts, but are usual made of Silk, Wool, or Leather.

What is a Swathing-Band?

It is a long and broad Band, that serves (...) wrap up and contain the Parts
with the Su^^^ons Dressings or Preparatives.

Of what Matter are these Swathing-Ba^^ made?

They are made at present of Linnen-Clo^^ but in the time of Hippocrates, were
made Leather or Woollen-Stuff.

How many sorts of Swathing-Bands are there general?

There are two sorts, viz. the Simple (...) Compound; the former are those that
(...) smooth, having only two ends; and the oth^^ are those which are trimmed
with Wool, C^^ton, or Felt, or that have many Heads, that to say, Ends,
fastened or cut in diverse place according as different Occasions require.

What are the Conditions requisite in the Linen Cloth, whereof the
Swathing-Bands are ma^^

It must be clean, and half worn out, no^^ving any manner of Hem or List.

What are the Names of the different Swat^ Bands?

There are innumerable, but the greater pa^^ them take their Denominations from
their ^^gure or Shape; as the Long, Straight, Tri^^gular, and those which have
many Heads, are trimmed.

What is a Bandage?

It is the Application of a Swathing-Band to any Part.

How many sorts of Bandages are there?

As many as there are different Parts to be bound; some of them being Simple,
and others Compound: The former are those that are made with an uniform Band;
as the Bandage called the Truss, and diverse other sorts: The Compound are those
that consist of many Bands set one upon another, or sewed together; or else
those that have many Heads. They have also particular Names taken from the
Inventers of them, or from their Effect; as Expulsive Bandages to drive back,
Attractive to draw forward, Contentive to contain, Retentive to restrain,
Divulsive to remove, Agglutinative to rejoin, etc.

There are others whereto certain peculiar Names are appropriated; as Bridles
for the lower Jaw, Slings for the Chin, the back part of the Head, Shoulder,
and Perinaeum; Scapularies for the Body, after the manner of the Scapularies of
Monks; Trusses for Ruptures; Stirrups for the Ankle-Bones of the Feet, in
letting Blood, and upon other Occasions. Lastly, there are an infinite Number
of Bandages, the Structure whereof is learnt by Practice, in observing the
Methods of able Surgeons, who invent them daily, according to their several
Manners; and the first Ideals of these can only be taken in reading Authors
that have treated of them.

What are the general Conditions to be observed in the Bandages?

There are many, viz. 1. Care must be taken that the Bands be rolled firm, and
th^^ they be not too straight nor too loose. 2. They are to be untied from time
to time in Fractures they must also be taken away every three o^ four Days, to
be refitted. 3. They must b^^ neatly and conveniently rolled, that the Patien^
may not be uneasy or disquieted.


What ought to be observed in fitting the Basters?

Care must be taken to make them even soft, and proportionable to the bigness
of the Part affected; to trimm them most in the uneven places, that the Bands
may be better rolled over them, and to keep them continually moistened with
some Liquor proper for the Disease as well as the Bands.

In treating of every Disease in particular we shall show the manner of making
the particular Bandage that is convenient for it.

A TREATISE OF Chirurgical Diseases.
CHAP. I. Of Tumors in general, Abcesses or Impostumes, Breakings out,
Pustules, and Tubercles.
WHAT is a Tumor?

A Tumor is a rising or bloated Swelling raised in some part of the Body by a
Settling of Humors.

How is this settling of Humors produced?

Two several ways, viz. by Fluxion and Congestion.

What is the Settling by Fluxion?

It is that which raises the Tumor all at once, or in a very little space of
time, by the Fluidity of the Matter.

What is the Settling by Congestion?

It is that which produces the Tumor by little and little, and almost
insensibly, by reas^^ of the slow Progress and thickness of the Ma^^

Which are the most dangerous Tumors, the that arise from Fluxion, or those
that derive the Original from Congestion?

They that proceed from Congestion, becau^^ their thick and gross Matter always
renders (...) obstinate, and difficult to be cured.

Whence do the differences of Tumors proceed

They are taken, first, from the Natural Humors, Simple, Mixed, and Altered:
Simple, the Phlegmon, which is made of Blood, and (...) Erysipelas of Choler:
Mixed, as the Erysipelas Phlegmon, which consists of Blood mingled w^^ a Portion
of Choler; or the Phlegmonous Erysipelas, which proceeds from Choler intermixed
(...) a Portion of Blood: Altered, as the Meli^^^ which is composed of many
Humors, that (...) not be any longer distinguished by reason of the too great
Alteration. Secondly, the difference Tumors is taken from their likeness to
some ^ther thing, as the Carbuncle and the Talpa, (...) former resembling a
burning Coal, and the o^^^^ a Mole, according to the Etymology of their (...)
tin Names. Thirdly, From the Parts when they are situated; as the Ophthalmy in
the E^^^ and the Quinsey in the Throat. Fourthly, from Disease that causes
'em, as Venereal and Pestilential Buboes. Fifthly, from certain Qual^^^ found
in some, and not in others; as the ^^sted Tumors, which have their Matter
(...) closed within their proper Cystes or Membra^^ and so of many others.

How many kinds of Tumors are there that comprehend at once all the particular
Species?

They are four in Number, viz. the Natural Tumors, the Encysted, the Critical,
and the Malignant.

What are natural Tumors?

They are those that are made of the four Humors contained in the Mass of the
Blood, or else of many at once intermixed together.

What are the four Humors contained in the Mass of the Blood?

They are Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, every one whereof produces
its particular Tumor: Thus the Blood produces the Phlegmon, Choler the
Erysipelas, Phlegm the Oedema, and Melancholy the Scirrhus. The Mixture of
these is in like manner the Cause of the Erysipelatous Phlegmon, the Oedomatous
Phlegmon or Phlegmonous Erysipelas, and the Phlegmonous Oedema, according to
the quality of the Humors which are predominant, from whence the several
Tumors take their Names.

What are the Encysted Tumors?

They are those the Matter whereof is contained in certain Cystes, or
Membranous Bags; as the Meliceris, and the Struma or King's Evil.

What are Critical Tumors?

They are those that appear all at once in acute Diseases, and terminate them
with good or bad Success.

What are Malignant Tumors?

They are those that are always accompanied with extraordinary and dreadful
Symptoms, and whose Consequences are also very dangerous; as the Carbuncle in
the Plague.

What are Impostumes or Abcesses, Breakings or and Pustules?

Indeed, it may be affirmed, that all these kind of Tumors scarce differ one
from another, ^^cept in their size or bigness; nevertheless, (...) speak
properly, by the Names of Impostumes (...) Abcesses are understood gross
Tumors that (...) suppurable, or may be dissolved, and by th^^ of Breakings
out and Pustules, only simple Pust^^ Wheals, or small Tumors, that appear in
gre^^ Numbers, and which frequently do not co^^ to Suppuration; some of them
consisting of ^^ry few Humors, and others altogether of dry Matter.

What difference is there between a Tumor (...) an Impostume or Abcess?

They differ in this particular, that all T^^mours are not Impostumes nor
Abcesses; (...) there is no Impostume nor Abcess that is n^^ Tumor: As for
Example, Wens and Gang^^^ are Tumors, yet are not Abcesses nor Im^^stumes;
whereas these last are always Tumor in regard that they cause Bunches and
Elevatio^

CHAP. II. Of the general Method to be observed the curing of Tumors.
WHAT ought a Surgeon chiefly to observe Tumors, before he undertake their
Cu^^.

He ought to know three things, viz. 1. (...) Nature or Quality of the Tumor.
2. (...) time of its formation. And 3. Its situation: The Quality of the Tumor
is to be known, because the Natural one is otherwise handled than that which is
Encysted, Critical or Malignant.
As for the time of its Formation, it is fourfold, viz. the Beginning,
Increase, State, and Declination, wherein altogether different Remedies are to
be applied. The Situation of the Tumor must be also observed, because the
dressing and opening of it ought to be as exact as is possible, to avoid the
meeting with an Artery or neighboring Tendon.

How many ways are all the Tumors that are curable, terminated?

They are terminated after two manners, viz. either by dissolving ^em, or by
Suppuration.

Are not the Scirrhus and the E^thiomenus or Gangrene, two means that ^^^etimes
serve to terminate and cure Impostumes?

Yes, but it is done imperfectly, in regard that a Tumor or Impostume cannot
be said to be absolutely cured, as long as there remains any thing of the
Original Malady, as it happens in the Scirrhus, where the Matter is hardened by
an imperfect dissolving of it, or when the Impostume degenerates into a greater
and more dangerous Distemper, as it appears in the Esthiomenus or Gangrene that
succeeds it.

Which is the most effectual means of curing Impostumes, that of dissolving, or
that of bringing them to Suppuration?

That of dissolving 'em is without doubt the most successful, and that which
ought to be used as much as is possible; nevertheless some Cases are to be
excepted, wherein the Tumors or Abcesses are Critical and Malignant; for then
the way of Suppuration is not only preferable, but must also be procured by all
son^ of means, even by opening; which may be done upon this occasion, without
waiting for their perfect Maturity.

What are the Precautions whereto a Surge^^ ought to have regard before he
undertake the opening of Tumors?

He must take care to avoid cutting the Fibers of the Muscles, and in great
Abcesses, to cause all the corrupt Matter to be discharged at once, to prevent
the Patient's falling into a Swoon.

Ought the opening of Tumors always to be made longitudinally, and according
to the direct Course of the Fibers?

No, it is sometimes necessary to open 'em with a Crucial Incision, when they
are large, or when a Cystis or Membranous Vehicle is to be extirpated.

How many sorts of Matter are there that iss^^ forth in the Suppuration of
Tumors?

There are four sorts, viz. the Pus, Ichor, Sanies, and Virus.

What is Pus?

It is a thick Matter, and white as Milk.

What is Ichor?

It is a thick Matter like the Pus, but of diverse Colors.

What is Sanies?

It is a watery Matter that rises up in Ulcers, almost after the same manner
as the Sap in Trees.

What is Virus?

It is a kind of watery Matter, being whitish, yellowish, and greenish at the
same time; which issues out of Ulcers, very much stinking, and is endu'd with
corrosive and malignant Qualities.

How many general Causes are there of Tumors?

There are three. viz. the Primitive, the Antecedent, and the Conjunct: The
Primitive is that which gives occ^sion to the Tumors; as for Example, a Fall
or a Blow received. The Antecedent is that which supplies it with Matter, such
is the Mass of Blood that thickens and maintains the Phlegmon. Lastly, the
Conjunct Cause is the overflowing Blood or Matter, which immediately forms the
Tumor.

What regard ought to be had to these three sorts of Causes in the Cure?

The Primitives Cause may be prevented by avoiding the Falls, Blows, or other
Hurts, and the Antecedent by diminishing the Plethory of the Blood, and cooling
the whole Mass by Phlebotomy. The Conjunct Cause, which is the overflowing of
the Blood, may be also removed in dispersing it by dissolving, or else in
discharging it by Suppuration.

What is a Crisis?

It is a sudden settling of Humors, which happens in Diseases, whereby they are
usually terminated.

How are these Critical Setlings effected?

By the Strength of Nature, which either expels the peccant Humors through the
Belly, or carries them to the Habitude of the Body; for in the former she
causes Fluxes of Humors, Urine and Blood; as in the other she excites
Sweatings, Tumors, and even a Gangrene it self.

In what Parts do the Critical Tumors usually arise?

In the Glandules, which the Ancients called the Emunctories of the Brain,
Heart, and Liver; for they gave the Name of Emunctories of the Brain to the
thick Glandules which lie under the Ears, that of the Emunctories of the Hean
to those that are under the Armpits; and that of the Emunctories of the Liver
to those under the Groin. Now Malignant Tumors may arise in all these parts,
but the Venereal happen only in the Groin.

CHAP. III. Of Natural Tumors.
ARTICLE I. Of the Phlegmon and its Dependancies.
WHAT is a Phlegmon?

It is a red Tumor occasioned by the Blood diffused in some part, wherein it
causes extension, pain, and heat with beating.

Are Aneurisms and Varices, which are Tumors, made by the Blood, to be
reckoned among the Phlegmons?

No, because the Blood that forms the Aneruisms and Varices is not extravasated
nor accompanied with Inflammation, but only a Tumor of Blood proceeding from
the Dilatation of the Arteries and Veins.

May Echymoses or Contusions consisting of extravasated Blood, be esteemed as
Phlegmons?

By no means, in regard that it is not sufficient that the Blood be
extravasated for the producing of a Phlegmon; it must also cause Pain, Heat,
and a Beating, with Inflammation, which is not to be found in the Echymoses,
except in great ones, after they have been neglected for a long time; where the
corrupted Blood ought to be let out immediately, to prevent the Inflammation,
overmuch Suppuration, and many other ill Consequences.

Is the Phlegmon always composed of pure Blood?

No, it may happen sometimes to partake of Choler, Phlegm, or Melancholy; on
which account it is named an Erysipelatous, Oedomatous, or Scirrhous Phlegmon,
always retaining the Name of the predominant Humor, which is the Blood; and so
of the others.

REMEDIES.
What are the Remedies proper for a Phlegmon?

They are of two sorts, viz. General and Particular; the former having regard
to the antecedent cause, and the other to the conjunct. The Phlegmon is cured
in its antecedent Cause, by Phlebotomy or letting Blood, by good Diet, and
sometimes by Purgations, by which means the Plethory, Heat, and Alteration of
the Blood is diminished; But Fomentations, Cataplasms and Plasters facilitate
the Cure in the conjunct cause, either by dissolving the Tumor, or bringing it
to Suppuration.

At what time is the Opening of a Vein necessary?

In the Beginning and Increase.

What are the Remedies proper to be used immediately upon the first appearing
of the Tumor?

They are Resolvents and Anodynes; such as those that are prepared with Chervil
boiled in Whey, adding a little Saffron to wash the Tumor, and soak the Linen
Clothes applied thereto, which are often renewed, and may be laid on with the
Chervil.

Or else take the Urine of a healthful Person, wherein is boiled an Ounce of
Saffron for a Glass, and bath the Tumor with it.

The Sperm of Frogs is also made use of to very good purpose, either alone, or
with Limewater and Soap mixed together; or Oak-Leaves and Plantane beaten
small, and applied. But Care must be more especially taken to avoid cooling
Medicines, Oils, and Grease, which are pernicious in great Inflammations.

What ought to be done in the increase of the Tumor and Pain?

They are to be asswag'd by mollifying and dissolving; to which end a Cataplasm
or Pultis is to be made with the Leaves of Elder, Wall-wort or Dwarf-Elder,
Mallows, Violet-Plants, Camomile, and Melilot; whereto is added beaten
Line-seed; causing the whole Mass to be boiled in Whey, and allowing to every
Pint, or thereabout, a Yolk of an Egg, twenty Grains of Saffron, a quarter of a
Pound of Honey, and the Crum of (...) Bread, till it comes to a necessary
Cons^^ence. Or else take Cow's Dung instead of the abovementioned Herbs, and
mix with it all the other Ingredients, to make a Cataplasm, which must be
renewed at least every twelve Hours.

What is to be done in the State?

If the Tumor cannot be dissolved (as was intended) it must be brought to
Suppuration by Cataplasms, consisting of these Ingredients, viz. Garlic, White
Lillies roasted under Embers, Milk, and Vnguentum Basilicon.

Or else only take a Glass of Milk, in which an Ounce of Soap is dissolved, to
wet the Linen applied to the Tumor; and let it be often reiterated: Otherwise
make use of Sorrel boiled with fresh Butter, and a little Leaven or Yeast. The
Plaster Diasulphuris is also most excellent either alone, or, if you please,
mixed with Diachylon and Basilicon.

What is to be done in the Declination after the Suppuration?

The Ulcer must be at first gently dried with a Plaster of Diasulphuris or
Diachylon, and afterward that of Diapalma may be used, and Ceruse or White Lead.

What Method is to be observed in case there be any Disposition toward a
Gangrene?

It is requisite during the great Inflammation to make use of good Vinegar, in
an Ounce whereof is dissolved a Dram of White Vitriol, with as much Sal
Ammoniack, to bath the Tumor: Or else take the Tincture of Myrrh and Aloes,
with a little Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and afterward make a Digestive of
Turpentine, the Yolk of an Egg, and Honey, mingling it with a little Spirit of
Wine, or Brandy, if there remains any Putrefaction or Rottenness.

Remedies for Aneurisms and Varices.
What is to be done in order to cure an Aneurism?

When it is little, as that which happens after an Operation of Phlebotomy or
letting Blood ill performed, it may be sufficient to lay upon the affected Part
a thin Plate of Lead, or else a Piece of Money or Counter wrapped up in a
Bolster, and to bind it on very straight: But a Piece of Paper chewed is much
better for that purpose.

If the Anuerism be considerable, an Astringent Plaster may be used, such as
the following.

Take Bolus, Dragon's Blood, Frankincence, Aloes, and Hypocystis, of each a
Dram; mingle the whole with two beaten Eggs, and add Wax to give it the
consistence of a Plaster, which may be applied alone, or mixed with an equal
Portion of Emplastrum contra Rupturam, always making a small Bandage to keep it
on. Emplastrum de Cicuta has also a wonderful effect.

When the Aneurism is excessive, it is absolutely necessary to proceed to a
Manual Operation, the manner whereof shall be shown hereafter in the Treatise
of great Operations.

What is requisite to be done in the Varices?

Varices are not generally dangerous, but even conduce to the preservation of
Health; nevertheless, if they become troublesome by reason of their greatness,
and the Pains that accompanie'em, they may be mollify'd with the following
Remedy.

Take the Mucilages of the Seeds of Psyllium and Line, of each two Ounces; of
Populeon two Ounces; Oleum Lumbricorum and Hyperici, of each one Ounce; and of
the Meal of Whear one Ounce, adding Wax to make the Consistence of a Plaster;
part of which spread upon Linen or Leather, must be applied to the Varix, and
tied thereto with a small Band.

If the Blood abound too much, it may be discharged by the Application of
Leeches, or by a Puncture made with a Lancet: Afterward lay upon the Part a
Piece of Lead sowed up in a Cloth, and let it be kept close with a proper
Bandage. Otherwise you may make use of an Astringent, such as this.

Take a Pomegranate, cut it in pieces, and boil it with as much Salt as may be
taken up with the Tip of your Fingers, in a Gallon of strong Vinegar; then dip
a Sponge in this Vinegar, apply it to the Varix, bind it on, and continue the
use of it twice a Day for a Month together.

Remedies for Echymoses, Contusions, or Bruises.
How are Echymoses to be treated?

All possible means must be used to dissolve 'em, by laying Slices of Beef upon
the Part, renewing 'em very often, or applying Linen Rags dipped in Spirit of
Wine impregnated with Saffron.

They may be also dissolved with the Roots of Briony grated and applied
thereto, or else with Plaster or Mortar, Soot, Oil of Olives and Vnguentum
Divinum, a Mixture whereof being made, is to be put between two Rags, and laid
upon the Tumor or Swelling.

If the Echymosis happens in a Nervous Part, Balsam of Peru may be used, or,
for want thereof, Oleum Lumbricorum and Hyperici, with lukewarm Wine, with
which the Bolsters must be soaked, to be laid upon it.

When the Echymosis is great, and much Blood is diffused between the Skin and
the Flesh, the safest way is to make an Opening to let it out, lest a too
plentiful and dangerous Suppuration should ensue, or even a Gangrene it self.
However, a Surgeon ought to proceed in the curing of an Echymosis in the Face
with great Circumspection, which must be always prepared for Incision.

Of phlegmonous Tumors or Impostumes, and of Remedies proper for 'em.
What are the Tumors or Impostumes that partake of a Phlegmon?

They are the Bubo, Carbuncle, Anthrax, Furunculus, Phyma, Phygeton, Panaritium
or Par^nychia, Burn, Gangrene, and Kibe or Chilblain.

What is a Bubo?

A Bubo is a Tumor which arises in the Groin, being accompanied with Heat,
Pain, Hardness, and sometimes a Fever.

What is a Carbuncle?

A Carbuncle is a hard Swelling, red, burning, and inseparable from a Fever: It
is covered with a black Crust or Scab, that afterward falls off at the
Suppuration, leaving a deep and dangerous Ulcer, and which sometimes does not
suppurate at all.

What is an Anthrax?

The Anthrax is very near the same thing as the Carbuncle, only with this
difference, that the latter always appears in the Glandulous Parts, and the
Anthrax every where else.

What is a Furunculus?

It is a kind of Boil, or benign Carbuncle, which somewhat resembles the Head
of a Nail, and is on that Account called Clou by the French, causing Pains, as
if a Nail were driven into the Flesh.

What is a Phygeton?

The Phygeton is a small, red, and inflamed Extuberance, situated in the
Miliary Glandules of the Skin, where it causes a pricking Pain, without
Suppuration.

What is a Phyma?

The Phyma appears after the same manner as the Phygeton, and suppurates.

What are the Remedies proper for all these sorts of phlegmonous Tumors and
Impostumes?

They are Cataplasms and Plasters Anodyn, Emollient, Resolvent, and
Suppurative, which are used proportionably as in the Phlegmons.

What is a Gangrene, Sphacelus, or Esthiomenus?

The Gangrene and Sphacelus signify the same thing, nevertheless are commonly
distinguished; the former being a Mortification begun, and the, Sphacelus an
entire or perfect Mortification; called also Nec^^is and Si^^ratio. An
Est^^om^nus is a Disposition to M^^^^^^on, discovered by the sof^ness of the
^art; and a Gangrene is defined to be a Mortification of a Part, occasioned by
the Interception of the Spirits, and the Privation of the Natural Heat.

What are the causes of a Gangrene in general?

Every thing that can hinder the Natural Heat from exerting it self in a Part;
as strong Ligatures, astringent or resolvent Medicines, not conveniently used
in great Inflammations; a violent Haemorrhage; or Old Age, whereby the Spirits
are exhausted; the bitings of Mad Dogs; excessive Cold, etc.

By what Signs is the Gangrene known?

It is discovered by the livid Color of the Skin, which departs from the
Flesh, the softness, coldness, and insensibility of the part; and sometimes by
its dryness and blackness, from whence exhales a cadaverous Stench, with Sanies
issuing forth after Punctures or Scarifications made therein. Lastly, a
Gangrene is perceived by the cold Sweats, Swoonings, Syncope's, and Delirium's
that invade the Patient, and which are all the Forerunners of approaching
Death.

Is a Gangrene only found in the Flesh, and soft Parts of the Body?

It happens also in the Bones; and is then called Caries.

How is this Caries or Gangrene of the Bone discovered, when it lies hid under
the Flesh?

It is known by the black Color of the Neighboring Flesh, the Stink of the
Sanies that comes forth, the intolerable Pains felt thereabouts, which are
six'd and continual before the Impostume and Ulcer appear; but when the Ulcer
is made, a kind of roughness may be perceived in the Bone.

REMEDIES.
What are the Remedies proper for a Gangrene?

They are those that take away the morrify'd and corrupt Parts, and recall the
Natural Heat; both which Indications are exactly answered in the Extirpation of
what is already corrupted, with the Incision-Knife; and the Restoration of the
Natural Heat by the following Remedies.

Take an Ounce of good Vinegar, steeping therein a Dram of White Vitriol, with
as much Sal Ammoniack: Let it be used in bathing the Part; and apply thereto
Bolsters well seak'd in the same Liquor. This remedy is convenient in the first
Disposition toward a Gangrene: Or, if you please, you may make use of the
Yellow Water, which is made with Corrosive Sublimate and Limewater; taking,
for Example, half a Dram of Corrosive Sublimate to be infused in a Pint of
Limewater.

But a Tincture of Myrrh and Aloes is more efficacious, wherein Vnguentum
Aegyptiacum is steeped; or else Limewater kept for that purpose, in which have
been boiled two Ounces of Sulphur or Brimstone, with two Drams of Mercurius
Dulcis; adding four Ounces of Spirit of Wine, to make an excellent Phegedaenick
Water, with which the Part may be bathed, and the Bolsters soaked.

If the Gangrene passes to the Bone, the Ulcer must be immediately cleans'd
with Brandy, and Euphorbium afterward put into it, laying also some upon the
Bolsters, and abstaining from all sorts of Oils and Greases. But if these
Remedies prove unprositable, recourse is then to be had to the Incision-Knife,
Fire, or Amputation; the manner of performing which several Operations, is
explained hereafter.

What are Kibes or Chilblains?

They are painful Tumors, which are often accompanied with Inflammation; they
happen more especially in the nervous and outward Parts, as the Heel, and are
so much the more sensibly selt, as the Air and Cold are more sharp and Ve^ement.

What is to be done in order to cure these Kibes or Chilblains?

The Heel or affected Part must be washed and dipped in Wine boiled with Alum
and Salt, whereof a Cataplasm may be afterward made, by adding Meal of Rye,
Honey, and Brimstone. The Juice of a hot Turnep applied with Vnguentum Rosatum,
is also very good, or Petroleum alone.

What is a Panaritium.

Panaritium or Paronychia, is a Tumor which generally arises in the Extremity
of the Fingers, at the Root of the Nails: It is red, and accompanied with very
great Pain, even so exquisite, that the whole Arm is sensible thereof, insomuch
that a Fever sometimes ensues, and a Gangrene; the Humor being contained
between the Bone and the Periosteum, or that little Membrane with which it is
immediately invested.

What Remedies are convenient for the curing a Panaritium?

Anodyn Cataplasms are to be first applied, that is to say, such as serve to
assuage excessive Pain, as that which is composed of Milk, Line-seeds beaten,
large Figs, the Yolk of an Egg, Saffron, Honey, and Oleum Lumbricorum, with the
Crum of white Bread. Afterward you may endeavor to dissolve it, by applying
Oil of Almonds, Saccharum Saturni, and Ear-Wax, or else Balsam of Sulphur. The
Plaster of Mucilages, and that of Sulphur or Brimstone, dissolved in Wine, is
also a most excellent Resolvent and Anodyn

If it be requisite to bring this Tumor to Suppuration, white Lillies roasted
under Embers may be added to the preceding Cataplasm; or else a new Cataplasm
may be made with Sorrel boiled, fresh Butter, and a little Leaven.

What is a Burn?

A Burn is an Impression of Fire made upon a Part, wherein remains a great deal
of Heat, with Blisters full of serous Particles, or Scabs, accordingly as the
Fire has taken more or less effect.

What are the Remedies proper for a Burn?

A Burn is cured by the speedy Application of fresh Mud re-iterated many times
successively; by that of peeled Onions, Vnguentum Rosatum, and Populeon, mixed
with the Yolk of an Egg and unslack'd-Lime: Cray-Fishes or Crabs pounded alive
in a Leaden-Mortar; and a great Number of other things.

If the Burn be in the Face, you may more especially take the Mucilages of the
Seeds of Quinces and Psyllium, and Frog's-Sperm, of each an equal quantity,
adding to every four^ Ounces twenty Grains of Saccharum S^tu^ni. This
Composition may be spread on the Part with a Feather, and covered with fine
Brown Paper. It is an admirable and approved Receipt.

If the Burn has made an Escar or Crust, it may be removed with fresh Butter
spread upon a Colewort or Cabbage Leaf, and applied hot. But in Case the Scab
is too hard, and does not fall off, it must be opened, to give passage to the
Pus or corrupt Matter, the stay of which would occasion a deep Ulcer
underneath. The same Method is to be observed in the Pustules or Blisters, two
Days after they are raised, applying also the Ointment of quick Lime, Oil of
Roses, and Yolks of Eggs.

ARTICLE II. Of the Erysipelas and its Dependances.
WHat is an Erysipelas?

An Erysipelas, commonly called St. Anthony's Fire, is a small Elevation
produced by a Flux of Choler dispersed and running between the Skin and the
Flesh. It is known by its yellowish Color, great Heat and Prickings.

REMEDIES.
What are the Remedies proper for an Erysipelas?

An Erysipelas that arises in the Head and Breast is not without danger, and
the Cure of it ought to be undertaken with great Care in the Application as
well of internal as external Remedies: For it is requisite to take inwardly a
Dose of the Diaphoretick Mineral, Crab's-eyes, Egg-shels, Powder of Vipers, and
other Medicines; as also Potions that have the like Virtues, such as the
following. Take four Ounces of Elder-Flower-Water, adding thereto a Scruple of
the volatile Salt of Vipers or Hart's-Horn, with an Ounce of Syrrup of red
Poppies.

Phlebotomy or Blood-letting has no place here, unless there be a great
Plethory, but frequent Clysters are not to be rejected, viz. such as are made
of Whay, Chervil, Succory, and Violet-Plants, adding a Dram of Mineral
Crystal-dissolv'd with two Ounces of Honey of Violets.

As for outward Applications, Linnen-Rags dipped in the Spirit of Wine
impregnated with Camphire and Saffron, are to be laid upon the Tumor, and
renewed as fast as they are dried. An equal quantity of Chalk and Myrrh beaten
to Powder, may also be strewn upon a Sheet of Cap-Paper overspread with
Honey, and applied to the Part.

If the Heat and Pain grow excessive, take half a Dram of Saccharum Saturni,
twenty Grains of Camphire, as much Opium, with two Drams of red Myrrh, to be
infused in a Gallon of White Wind: Let this Liquor be kept to soak the Clothes
that are laid upon the Erysipelas, and often renewed. But to dress the Face, a
Canvass Cloth may be used, which has been dipped in a Medicine prepared with a
Gallon of Whey, two Yolks of Eggs, and a Dram of Saffron.

Moreover amidst all these Remedies, it is necessary to oblige the Patient to
keep to a good Diet, and to prescribe for his ordinary Drink a Diet-Drink made
of Hart's-Horn, the Tops of the lesser Centory, Pippins cut in Slices with
their Skins, and Liquorish; A little good Wine may be also allowed, with the
Advice of the Physician.

Of Erysipelatous Tumors or Impostumes, and their Remedies.
What are the Tumors or Impostumes that parrake of the Nature of an Erysipelas?

They are the dry and moist Herpes, the former being that which is called the
Tetter or Ring-Worm; and the other a kind of yellow. Bladders, Pustules, or
Wheals, that cause itching, and raise small corroding, Ulcers in the Skin: To
these may be added diverse sorts of Scabs and Itch.

The Remedies prescribed for the Erysip^les may be used for both these kinds of
Herpes; as also Lotions or Bathing-Liquors made of Limewater, and a Decoction
of. Wormwood and Sal Ammoniack, allowing half a Dram to four Ounces of Liquor.
Or else take half a Dram of Sal Sa^u^^i, and put it into a Glass of the
Decoction of Fumitory or Chervil. You may also make use of the Oil of Tartar
per deliquium, to make a Liniment either alone, or ming'd with the
abovementioned Decoctions.

ARTICLE III. Of the Oedema.
WHat is the Oedema?

It is a white soft Tumor, with very little sense of Pain, which arises from
the Settling of a pituitous Humor.

What are the Rumedies proper for an Oedema?

They are Fomentations, Cataplasms, Liniments, and Pla^sters.

The Fomen^a^ions are made with Bundles of Wall-Wort or Dwarf-Elder, thrown
into a hot Oven after the Bread is baked, and sprinkled with Wine: Afterward
being taken out smoking, they are untied, opened, and wrapped about the Part,
putting a warm Linen Cloth over 'em. This Operation is to be re-i^erated; and
by this means the Humor is dissolved through Transpiration by Swear.

The Cataplasms are composed of Camomile, Melilot, St. John's-Wort, Sage,
Wall-Wort, Pellitory of the Wall, Roots of Briony and Onions, all boiled
together in White Wine with Honey, adding, if you please, a few Cummin or
Fennel Seeds beaten. Cataplasms are also made of Horse-Dung and the Seeds of
Cummin beaten, which are boiled in strong Vinegar, and mixed with Barly-Meal to
the Consistence of Pap.

The Plasters are prepared with an Ounce of Diapalma, half an Ounce of
Martiatum, a Pint of Oil of Lillies, half an Ounce of Cummin-Seeds powdered,
half a Dram of Sal Ammoniack, and an Ounce of yellow Wax to make a Consistence.

If any hardness remains, the Plaster of Mucilages may be applied* or that
which is made of the Gums Bdellium, Ammoniack, and Galbanum, dissolved in
Vinegar. Bu^ Care must be taken not to omit the Purgatives of Jalap to the
quantity of a Dram in a Glass of White Wind; or of half an Ounce of Lozenges of
Diacarthamum, which are effectual in drawing out the bottom of pituitous and
serous Humors that nourish the Oedema's.

Of Oedomatous Tumors and Impostumes.
What are the kinds of Tumors that partake of the Nature of an Oedema?

They are the Phlyctaena, the Emphysema, the Batrachos or Ranunculus, the Wen,
the Talpa, the Bronchocele, the Ganglion, the Fungus, the Scurf, the Scrophula
or King's Evil, and all sorts of Dropsies both general and particular.

What are Phlyctaena's?

They are Pustules or Blisters filled with a white and somewhat yellowish
Humor.

What is an Emphysema?

It is a kind of flatuous Tumor, wherein Wind is contained, with a little
slimy Phlegm.

What is a Batrachos or Ranunculus?

It is a Blister filled with slimy Water, that arises under the Tongue near
the String, and in French is called Grenouillette, or the little Frog; which is
the same with its Greek and Latin Names.

What is a Wen?

It is a Tumor consisting of thick plaistry Phlegm, which is reckoned among
the Encysted.

What is a Talpa?

It is a soft and very broad Tumor, which usually appears in the Head and
Face, containing a white, thick, and pituitous Matter.

What is a Bronchocele?

It is a bunch'd Tumor which arises in the Throat, and causes it to swell
extremely; being composed of thick Phlegm mixed with a little Blood, and ranked
among the Encysted Tumors.

What is a Ganglion?

It is a very hard Tumor, void of Pain and wavering, produced by thick Phlegm:
But it is always found upon some Nerve or Tendon.

What is a Fungus?

It is a spungy Tumor that grows upon Tendons bruised or weakened by some Hurt.

What is the Scurf?

It is a whitish and scaly Tumor raised in the Skin of the Head by a viscous
and mixed Phlegm, having its Root in the bottom of the Skin.

What is the Scrophula or King's Evil?

Scrophulae or Strumae, commonly called the King's Evil, are Tumors that
generally show themselves in the Glandules of the Neck, and in all those Parts
where there are any. They consist of a viscous, serous, and malignant Phlegm,
the Source or Root whereof is supposed to be in the Glandules of the Mesentery.
They are also of the number of the Encysted Tumors.

What is the Dropsy?

It is a soft Tumor occasioned by the settling of abundance of serous Matter in
the Parts where it appears.

How many sorts of Dropsies are there?

There are three general Species, viz. the Ascites, Tympanites, and
Leucophlegmatia.

What is an Ascites?

It is a kind of Dropsy that forms the Tumor or Swelling of the Abdomen or
lower Belly, by a Mass of Water,

What is a Tympanites?

It is a kind of Dropsy, which in like manner causes a Tumor or Swelling in
the lower Belly, with this difference, that a great deal of Wind is mixed with
the Water, which renders the Tumor transparent, and sounding, as it were a
Drum; whence this Disease has taken its Name.

What is the Dropsy called Leucophlegmatia?

It is a Tumor, or, to speak more properly; a general Swelling or Bloating of
all the other Parts of the Body, as well as of the lower Belly. It is produced
by a viscous and mucilaginous sort of Phlegm; whence it happens that the Print
of the Fingers remains in those places that have been pressed.

What are the particular kinds of Dropsies?

They are those that are incident to different Parts, of which they bear the
Names; as the Hydrocephalus, which is the Dropsy of the Head; the Exomphalus,
of the Navel, and the Hydrecele of the Scrotum. There is also a Dropsy of the
Breast, and that of the Matrix.

What are the Remedies proper for all these sorts of Tumors or Dropsies?

They are in general all those that are agreeable to the Oedema, which are
variously used, as Liniments, Fomentations, Cataplasms, and Plasters: Internal
Medicines ought also to be much considered, as Diaphoreticks, Sudorificks, and
Purgatives, when they are assisted by a regular Diet.

A Decoction of the Roots of Briony with Cinnamon and Liquorish, provokes Urine
very much; as well as a Decoction of Turnips and Carrets, and an Infusion of
Sage in White Wind.

ARTICLE IV. Of a Scirrhus, and its peculiar Remedies.
WHat is a Scirrhus?

It is a hard unmovable Tumor, almost altogether void of Pain, and of a livid
dark Color; which is formed of a Melancholic Humor, frequently succeeding
Phlegmons and Oedema's that have not been well dressed with convenient Remedies.

How is a Scirrhus cured?

By mollifying or dissolving it, and seldom by bringing it to Suppuration.

It may be mollify'd by the application of a Cataplasm or Pultis, composed of
the Leaves of Violet-Plants, Mallows, Beets, Elder, Rue, and Wormwood, with
Camomile-Flowers, Horse-Dung, Cow Dung, and White Lillies. The whole Mass is to
be boiled together in Wine, afterward adding Honey and Hogs-Lard, to make a
Cataplasm thereof with the Crum of White Bread.

It is dissolved with Plasters composed of those of Diachylon, Melilot, and
Mucilages, to which is added Oleum Lumbricorum, and Flower of Brimstone. To
render the Remedy more effectual, Oil of Tobacco may be also mixed with it, and
Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar.

Furthermore, these Topical or outward Medicines are to be accompanied with
others taken inwardly, which serve to prepare the Humors for convenient
Evacuations; Such are Crab's-Eyes, the Decoctions of Sarsaparilla, the use of
good Wine, and light Meats of easy Digestion.

Of Scirrhous Tumors, and their Remedies.
What are the Tumors that partake of the Nature of a Scirrhus?

They are the Polypus, Carcinoma, Sarcoms, Natta, and Cancer.

What is a Polypus?

It is an Excrescence of fungous Flesh arising in the Nostrils: But Hippocrates
confounds the Carcinoma and Sarcoma with the Polypus, of which he says they are
only a Species.

What is the Natta?

It is a Tumor or Excrescence of Flesh that appears in the Buttocks,
Shoulders, Thighs, Face, and every where else, the various Figures of which
cause it to be called by different Names. For one while it resembles a
Gooseberry, at another time a Mulberry, and at another time a Melon or Cherry.
Sometimes also these Swellings are like Trees, Fishes, Birds, or other sorts of
Animals, according to the ardent desire that Women with Child have had for
things that they could not obtain when they longed for 'em.

What are the Remedies proper for the Polypus, and other kinds of Excrescences
of the like Nature?

The Polypus may be cured in the beginning, but it is to be feared lest it
degenerate into an incurable Cancer, when it has been neglected or ill dressed.

Besides the general Remedies, which are letting Blood a little, and reiterated
Purgations, with an exact Regulation of Diet, there are also particular
Medicaments which dry up and insensibly consume the Excrescence; as a Decoction
of B^stort, Plantain, and Pomegranate-Rinds in Claret Wine, which is to be
snuff^d up the Nose many times in a Day, and serves to soak the small Tents
that are put up therein, as also often to cool the Part, adding a little Alum
and Honey.

The Patient must sometimes likewise keep in his Mouth a Sage-Leaf, sometimes a
piece of the Root of Pellitory of Spain; and at another time Tobacco or some
other thing of this Nature, which causes Salivation. If the Tumor continues
too long, and does not yield to the abovementioned Remedies, it is nenessary
to proceed to a Manual Operation, which is very often performed with good
Success.

As for the Natta's, it is most expedient not to meddle with 'em at all;
nevertheless these Marks which Infants bring along with 'em into the World, are
frequently defaced by an Application of the After-Burdens, whilst they are as
yet warm, as soon as their Mothers are delivered.

What is a Cancer?

It is a hard, painful, and ulcerous Tumor, produced by an adust Humor, the
Malignity whereof can scarce be suppressed by any Remedies.

How many sorts of Cancers are there?

There are two kinds, viz. The Primitive and the Degenerate; the Primitive
Cancer is that which comes of it self, and appears at first about the bigness
of a Pea or Bean, which nevertheless does not cease to cause an inward Pain,
continual, and pricking by intervals; during this time it is called an Occult
Cancer; but when grown bigger, and opened, it bears the Name of an Ulcerated
Cancer; which is so much the less capable of being cured or asswag'd, as it
makes it self more conspicuous by its dreadful Symptoms, or concomitant
Circumstances.

The Degenerate Cancer is that which succeeds an obstinate and ill-dress'd
Tumor or Impostume, and which becomes an Ulcerated Cancer, without assuming
the Nature of a blind or occult one.

What Remedies are requisite to be applied to a blind Cancer?

In regard that it cannot be known in this Condition without difficulty, it is
often neglected; nevertheless it is a Matter of great Moment to prevent its
Consequences, more especially by a good Diet, and by general Remedies, which
may gently rectify the intemperature of the Bowels: Afterward Baths may be
prescribed, together with the use of Whey Asses-Milk, and Specificks in
general, as Powders of Crab's-Eyes, Vipers, Adders, and others. As for Topical
Remedies, none are to be administered, except it be judged convenient to apply
to the Tumor a Piece of Lead rubbed with Quicksilver; all others serving only
to make the Skin tender, and apt to break. The Patient may also take for his
Drink Water of Scorzonera and Hart's-Horn, with the Flowers of Bugloss or
Borage, and Liquorice: Or else Quick-silver-Water alone, boiling an Ounce of it
in a Quart of Water every time, the Quicksilver always remaining at the bottom
of the Vessel.

What are the Remedies for an ulcerated Cancer?

Besides the general ones, that are the same with those of the blind Cancer,
there are also Topical, which may take place here. The Powders of Toads, Moles,
Frogs, and Crabs calcined, cleanse the Ulcers perfectly well. A Decoction of
Vipers and Crabs may serve to bath 'em, and some of it may be taken inwardly.
Detersives made of Limewater, or Whey clarified, and boiled with Chervil are
very good; and (if you please) you may add Camphire or Saccharum Saturni.

If the Pains grow violent, recourse is to be had to Laudanum, one or two
Grains whereof may be given in a little Conserve of Roses. When the Cancer is
situated in the Glandules or Flesh, the Extirpation of it may also be
undertaken with good Success.

As for the manner of handling Degenerate Cancers, respect must be always had
to the kind of Tumor, from whence it derived its Original.

CHAP. IV. Of Bastard or Encysted Tumors.
WHAT is an Encysted or Bastard Tumor or Impostume?

It is that which is made of a Settling of mixed and corrupt Humors, the Matter
whereof is contained in certain proper Cystes or Membranous Bags.

What are the kinds of these Tumors?

They are the Steatoma, the Atheroma, the Meliceris, the Wen, the Bronchocele,
and the Scrophula or King's Evil.

How is the difference between these Tumors discerned?

The Steatoma is known by its Matter resembling Suet; as that of the Atheroma
resembles Pap; and that of the Meliceris is like Honey: These three Tumors
cannot be well distinguished on the outside, in regard that they do not change
the natural Color of the Skin, which equally retains in all three the print of
the Fingers that press it. But the Bronchocele is discovered by the Place and
Part which it possesses; that is to say, the Throat; as also by its somewhat
hard consistence without the Alteration of the Skin. The Scrophulae or
King's Evil Swellings are known by their unequal Hardness, and their situation
in the Glandules, either in the Neck, Armpits or elsewhere, without alteration
likewise of the Skin.

REMEDIES.
What is the Method to be observed in curing these sorts of Tumors?

An Attempt is to be made to dissolve 'em, as in all the others; nevertheless
the safest way is to bring 'em to Suppuration, and to extirpate the Cystes,
which are apt to be sill'd again after the Dissipation of the Humor.

What are the Medicines proper to dissolve these Tumors?

They are all such as may be used for the Oedema and Scirrhus; but the
Specificks or particular Remedies are these:

Take Rosemary, Sage, Wormwood, Elder, great Celandine, Camomile, Melilot, St.
John's. Wort, and Tobacco; boil 'em in White Wind with Soot and Mercurial
Honey, adding, thereto Cummin-seeds beaten, and Olcum Lumbricorum, to make a
Cataplasm, which is to be renewed twice a Day. Afterward if the Tumor be not
dispersed, you may apply the following Plaster, which has an admirable Effect.

Take an equal Portion of the Plaster of Diachylon, Devigo, and four times as
much Mercury, and Emplastrum Divinum; let 'em be dissolved together; then
intermix Saffron, and Oil of Tobacco, to make a Plaster with the whole Mass,
which may be spread upon thin Leather, and applied to the Tumor, without
taking it off only once every eighth Day, to cool it; so that it must be laid
on again after having washed and bathed the Part with warm Urine or Brine.

But it is to be always remembered that external Remedies take effect only
imperfectly, unless they are assisted by internal, such as in this case are
reirerated Purgations, joined with a regular Diet.

What are the Remedies proper to excite Suppuration?

To this purpose those may be used that serve in other kinds of Tumors: But as
for the extirpation of the Cystis, it is done by dividing the Tumor into four
Parts, by procuring Suppuration, and by consuming the Bag by little and little.
The Bronchocele alone will not admit this Extirpation, by reason of the great
Number of Nerves, Veins, and neighboring Arteries amidst which the Tumor is
settled. However Bronchotomy, or opening the Throat, may be performed; which is
an Operation peculiar to this Tumor.

CHAP. V. Of Critical, Malignant, Pestilential, and Venereal Tumors and
Impostumes.
WHAT difference is there between Critical, Malignant, Pestilential, and
Venereal Tumors?

It consists in these particular circumstances, viz. that Critical Tumors or
Impostumes are indifferently all such as are formed at the End or Termination
of Diseases, in whatsoever Place or Part they appear.

Malignant Impostumes or Tumors are those that are obstinate, and do not
easily yield to the most efficacious Remedies.

Pestilential Impostumes or Tumors are those that are accompanied with a
Fever, Swooning, Headache, and Faintness: They usually arise in the time of a
Plague or Pestilence, and are contagious.

Venereal Tumors or Impostumes are those that appear only at the bottom of the
Groin, and are the product of an impure Coitus.

However, the Critical Impostume may be Malignant, Pestilential, and Venereal;
the Malignant Impostume may be neither Critical, nor Pestilential, nor
Venereal: But the Pestilential and Venereal Tumors are always Malignant.

What are the ordinary kinds of Critical Tumors or Impostumes?

They are the Anthrax, the Boil, the Phlegmon, and the Parotides or Swellings
in the Almonds of the Ears?

What are the kinds of Malignant Tumors or Impostumes?

They are the Cancer, the Scrophula or King's Evil; and others of the like
Nature.

What are the kinds of Pestilential Tumors or Impostumes?

They are Carbuncles that break out every where; a sort of Authrax which
appears under the Armpits, and Bubo's in the Groin.

What are the kinds of Venereal Tumors or Impostumes?

They are Botches or Bubo's and Cancers that arise in the Yard; as also Wens
and Condyloma's in the Fundament.

What is the difference between a Pestilential and a Venereal Buboe?

They may be distinguished by their Situation, and respective Accidents; the
Pestilential lying higher, and the Venereal lower: Besides, a Fever, Sickness
at the Heart, and an universal Faintness or Weakness, are the ordinary
concomitant Circumstances of the former; whereas the Venereal Buboe is always
the consequence of an impure Coitus, and is attended with no other Symptoms
than those of common Tumors, viz. Pain, Heat, Shootings or Prickings, etc.

As for the Remedies, they may be sought for among those that have been already
prescribed for Tumors.

CHAP. VI. Of the Scurvy.
THIS Disease is known by the Ulcers of the Mouth, which are very stinking; as
also by excessive Salivation, great Pains in the Head, Dizziness, frequent
Epilepsies, Apoplexies, and Palsies. The Face, being of a pale red, and dark
Color, is sometimes puffed up or bloated, inflamed, and beset with Pustules:
The Teeth are loose and ^ake, the Gums are swelled, itch, putrify, exulcerate,
and are eaten with the Canker; and the Jaw is almost unmovable: The Members
are bowed, and cannot be extended: The Patients become stupid and drowsy, so
that they fetch their Breath with difficulty, are obnoxious to Palpitations of
the Heart and Coughs, and fall into Swoons: The Ulcers sometimes are so
malignant, that their Cheeks are entirely eaten up, and their Teeth seen: They
are also much inclined to Vomitting, Looseness, and Gripes; and their Entrails
are swelled: They have red and livid Pustules on their Belly and Privy-parts,
which sometimes break out into Ulcers; their whole Body being dried, etc.

This Disease may be easily cured in the beginning; but when it is grown
inveterate, and invades the Bowels, it becomes incurable; as well as when it is
the Epidemical Disease of the Country, or the Persons afflicted with it, are
old, or well advanced in Years.

In undertaking the Cure, it is requisite to begin with a good Diet, and to
sweeten the Blood, let the Patient take the Broth of boiled Fowl; eating
Pullets and Eggs; in the Broth may also be put diverse sorts of Antiscorbutick
Herbs; viz. Cresses, Spinach, Parsly-Roots, Sparagus, Smallage, Scorzonera,
Scurvy Grass, etc. Let him eat nothing that is high seasoned, nor acid or
sharp; let him drink pure Claret, without any adulterate Mixture; let him use
moderate Exercise and Rest; Lastly, let him keep his Mind sedate, and free from
all manner of violent Passion.

The following Remedies taken inwardly are very good for the Scurvy, viz. the
Tincture of Flints from ten Grains to thirty; Diaphoretick Antimony, from six
Grains to thirty; sweet Sublimate, from six Grains to thirty; Mars
Diaphoreteus, from ten Grains to twenty; Crocus Martis Aperitivus, from ten
Grains to two Scruples; prepared Coral, from ten Grains to one Dram; Volatile
Spirit of Sal Ammoniack, from six Drops to twenty; Water of Cresses, from
fifteen Drops to one Dram; Spirit of Scurvygrass, from ten Drops to one Dram;
Tincture of Antimony, from four Drops to twenty; Oily Volatile Sal Ammoniack,
from four Grains to fifteen; Spirit of Guyacum, from half a Dram to a Dram and
a half; Vitrioliz'd Tartar, from ten Grains to thirty; the Volatile Salt of
Tartar, Urine, Vipers, and Hart's-Horn, of each from six Grains to fifteen; the
Spirit of Gum Ammoniack, from eight Drops to sixteen; White Mercury
Precipitate, from four to ten Grains; Mercurial Panacaea, from six Grains to
two Scruples. We shall show the manner of compounding 'em in our Treatise of
Venereal Diseases.

It is also expedient to give Emollient and Detersive Clysters to the Patient
at Night going to bed, his Body being always kept open with convenient
Diet-drinks: Afterward let him take gentle Sudorificks, such as are made of the
Decoctions of Fumitory, wild Cicory, Dandelion, Hart's-Tongue, Scabious, the
lesser House-Leek, Germander, Borage, Scorzonera-Root, and Polypody, with
Flowers of Broom, Elder, and Mary gold.

These are stronger for cold Constitutions, viz. Decoctions of Scurvy Grass,
Lepidium, Arse-smart, the lesser Celandine, Wormwood, little House-Leek,
Trifolium Febrinum, Angelico, Juniper Berries, etc.

Convenient Decoctions to wash the Mouth may be made with Sage, Rosemary,
Hyssop, Oak-Leaves, Scurvy Grass, Cresses, Tobacco, Roots of Bistort,
Aristolochy or Birth-Wort, Tormentil, Flower-de-Luce, Balaustia or
Pomegranate-Flowers, Red Roses, etc.

To corroborate the Gums, Gargarisms are made of Anti-Scorbutick Plants; as of
Spirit of Scurvy Grass two Drams, one Scruple of Spirit of Vitriol, one Scruple
of common Salt, four Ounces of Rose Water and Plantane-Water. But if the Gums
are putrefy'd, they are to be rubbed with Honey of Roses, and some Drops of
Spirit of Salt.

To assuage the Pains of the Members, Bathings and Fomentations are to be used;
and a Decoction of Saxifrage taken inwardly, with some Grains of Laudanum is
good for that Purpose.

To allay the Gripes, Clysters may be given with Whey, Sugar, Yolks of Eggs,
Syrrop of Poppies, and Oils of Earthworms, Scurvy Grass, Camomile, etc.

Against the Scorbutic Dropsy, take the Essence of Trifolium Febrinum and
Elicampane, from twenty four Drops to thirty, and continue the use thereof.

Milk taken inwardly hinders Vomitting; and a Broth or Gelly of Crabs sweetens
the Blood. The Looseness may be stopped with the Essence of Wormwood, and Spirit
of Mastick; as also the Fever with Febrifuges and Anti-scorbuticks.

The Spots may be fomented with Decoctions of Aromatic and Anti-Scorbutick
Herbs and Nitre. For the Ulcers of the Legs, pulverize an equal quantity of
Saccharum Saturni, Crocus Martis, Myrrh, and Mercurius Dulcis, and lay it upon
the Bolsters that are to be applied to the Sores.

To mollify the sharpness of Acid Humors, this is a good Remedy: Prepare half
an Ounce of Spirit of Scurvy Grass, two Drams of tartariz'd Spirit Ammoniack, a
Dram of the Tincture of Worms. Take thrice a Day fifteen or twenty Drops of
this Liquor, in a Decoction of the Tops of Firr.

Against the Tubercles, take two Handfuls of the Flowers of Camomile and Elder,
three Drams of Briony-Root, and an Handful of White-Bread Crum; Boil the whole
Composition in Milk, and make Cataplasms thereof.

To mitigate the Pains in the Head, take twenty or thirty five Drops of the
Tincture of Amber, in Anti-scorbutick Spirits or Waters.

The difficulty of Respiration may be removed by a Medicinal Composition made
of two Drams of an Anti-scorbutick Water, two Drams of the Essence of
Elicampane, and half a Dram of the Spirit of Gum Ammoniack; take three or four
Spoonfuls thereof several times in a Day.

To prevent the putrefaction of the Gums, take one Dram of the Tincture of Gum
Lacca, three Drams of the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, with fifteen or twenty Drops
of Oil of Tartar made per Deliquium, and rub the Gums with this Composition
many times in a Day. Brandy in which Camphire is infused, or Spirit of Wine, is
likewise a most excellent Remedy; as also all Lotions or Washes made with the
Waters or Decoctions of Anti-scorbutick Plants.

For Leanness, Goat's-Milk with the Spirit of Scurvy Grass may be used, and
other Waters drawn from Anti-scorbutick Plants. The Apozemes or Decoctions of
Endive, Cicory, Sorrel, Becabunga, and Snail-Water, are in like manner very
good for the same purpose.

Ointment of Styrax is frequently used in the Hospital called Hotel-Dieu at
Paris, and applied to Spots and callous Swellings that arise in the Legs.

A TREATISE OF Wounds, Ulcers, and Sutures.
CHAP. I. Of Sutures.
SUTURES or Stitches are made only in recent, and as yet bleeding Wounds, when
they cannot be reunited by Bandage, as are the transverse; provided there be
no Contusion, nor loss of Substance, nor great Haemorrhages, as also that the
Wounds were not made by the biting of venomous Beasts, that there be no violent
Inflammations, and that the Bones are not laid open; because generally it is
necessary to cause 'em to be exfoliated; neither is this Operation to be
performed in the Breast, by reason of its Motion.

The Instruments proper for the making of Stitches, are straight and crooked
Needles, with waxed Thread; and these Sutures are of four sorts, viz. first the
Intermittent Stitch for transverse Wounds; the second for the Hare-Lip; the
third, commonly called the Dry Stitch, for superficial Wounds; and the fourth,
termed the Glover's Stitch.

The Intermittent Stitch is that which is made at certain separated Points,
according to the following manner: After having taken away all extraneous
Bodies out of the Wound, let a Servant draw together its Sides or Lips; and let
a Needle with waxed Thread be passed through the middle from the outside to the
inside, several Points being made proportionably to its length. It is requisite
to pierce a good way beyond the Edge of the Wound, and to penetrate to the
bottom, lest any Blood should remain in the Space, that might hinder the
reuniting.

If the Wound has Corners, the Surgeon begins to sow there; and before the
Knot is made, causes the Lips of the Wound to be drawn exactly close one to
another: The Knots must be begun with that in the middle, and a single one is
first made on the side opposite to the running of the Matter; laying upon this
Knot (if it be thought convenient) a small Bolster of waxed Linen, on which is
tied a Slip-Knot, to the end that it may be untied if any bad Accident should
happen. If a Plaster be applied to the Wound after the Stitching, a small
Bolster is to be laid over the Knots, to prevent their sticking to the
Plaster. In case any Inflammation happens in the Wound, the Knots may be
loosened and tied again when the Symptoms cease: But if the Inflammation
continue, the Threads are to be cut by passing a Probe underneath: When the
Wound is closed, the Threads are cut in like manner with a Probe; and in
drawing 'em out, a Finger must be laid near the Knot, lest the Wound should
open again.

To make the second sort of Stitch for the Hare-Lip, a small straight Needle is
passed into the sides of the Wound, and the Thread is twisted round the Needle,
by crossing it above at every Stitch.

To form the Dry Stitch in very superficial Wounds, a piece of new Linen Cloth
is to be taken, wherein are made Digitations, or many Corners; the Selvedge or
Hem ought to be on the side of these Corners or Digitations; and a small
Thread-Lace is tied to every one of 'em. Afterward this Cloth is dipped in strong
Glue, and applied about a Finger's breadth from the Edges of the Wound; so that
a piece thereof being stuck on each side, the Laces may be tied together, to
cause the Lips of the Wound to meet.

To make the Glover's Stitch, the Operator having drawn together the Lips of
the Wound, holds 'em between two Fingers, passes a Needle underneath 'em, and
sows 'em upward all along, after the manner of Glovers.

CHAP II. Of Wounds in general.
WHAT is a Wound?

A Wound is a recent, violent, and bloody Rupture or Solution of the Natural
Union of the soft Parts, made by a pricking, cutting, or bruising Instrument.

What ought to be observed before all things in the curing of Wounds?

It is requisite to take notice of their differences, as well as of the
Instruments with which they were made; to the end that Consequences may be
drawn from thence for the Application of proper Remedies.

From whence arise the differences of Wounds, and which be they?

They are taken either from their Figure or Situation: With regard to their
Figure, they are called Long, Broad or Wide, Triangular Great, Little,
Superficial, or Deep; and with respect to their Situation, they are termed
Simple, Complicated, Dangerous, or Mortal.

What is a Simple and a Complicated Wound?

A Simple Wound is that which only opens the Flesh, and has no other
concomitant Circumstances; but a Complicated Wound, on the contrary, is that
which is attended with grievous Symptoms, as Haemorrhages, Fractures of Bones,
Dislocation, Lameness, and others of the like Nature.

What is a dangerous and mortal Wound?

A dangerous Wound is that which is complicated the Accidents whereof are
dreadful: As when an Artery is opened or pricked, when a Nerve or Tendon is
cut, or when the Wound is near a Joint and accompanied with a Dislocation or
Fracture. A mortal Wound is that which must be inevitably followed by Death; as
is that which is situated deep in a principal Part necessary for the
Preservation of Life.

What are the Parts wherein Wounds are mortal?

They are the Brain, the Heart, the Lungs, the Oesophagus or Gullet. the
Diaphragm, the Liver, the Stomach, the Spleen, the small Guts, the Bladder, the
Womb, and generally all the great Vessels.

Wherein does the Cure of Wounds consist?

In helping Nature readily to procure the reuniting of the Parts that have been
divided, after having taken away or asswag'd every thing that might cause an
Obstacle.

What are the things that hinder the speedy reunion of the Parts? They are
extraneous Bodies found therein, as Bullets, Flocks, and Pieces of Wood or
Stone, etc. As also sometimes the Accidents which attend 'em; as an Haemorrhage
or Flux of Blood, Inflammation, Esthiomenus or Mortification, Hypersarcosis, or
an Excrescence of Flesh, Dislocation, the Fracture of a Bone, the Splinter of a
Bone, and sometimes a contrary Air.

REMEDIES.
What are the Remedies proper for stopping an Haemorrhage or Flux of Blood?

The common Remedy is a kind of Cataplasm, made up with the Powders of Aloes,
Dragons-Blood, Bole Armenick and Whites of Eggs, which are mixed together and
laid upon the Wound. But the following is an excellent one.

Take two Ounces of Vinegar, a Dram of C^ol cothar, two Drams of Crocus Martis
Astringens; beat the wh^^e together, steeping Muscus Quercinus therein; then
throw upon it the Powder of Mushrooms, or of Crepitus Lupi: Apply this Remedy,
and you will soon stop the Haemorrhage, taking Care nevertheless to bind the Part
well, otherwise the Astringents do not readily take Effect.

To this Purpose you may also make use of Cobwebs, Mill-Dust, and the Powder of
Wormeaten Oak; or else take Oven-Soot mixed with the Juice of the Dung of an Ass
or Ox, adding only thereto the White of an Egg.

Besides these Remedies there are also actual and potential Cauteries, or
simple Ligatures, which are infallible. Indeed the actual Cautery is not always
sure; because when the Escar made by the Fire, falls off the Haemorrhage breaks
out again as before: but the porential Cautery is almost always successful;
such as the following.

Take about an equal Quantity of Vitriol and Powder of Mushrooms; apply 'em
upon a little Lint to the Place where the Blood issues forth, and you will see
it stop immediately: But Care must be taken to avoid touching a Nerve or
Tendon; by reason that the Vitriol is apt to excite Convulsions.

How is the Inflammation and Mortification of a Wound suppressed?

If the Inflammation proceeds from the Presence of an Extraneous Body, it must
be taken away as soon as possible with a Pair of Forceps, and if from the
Quantity of Pus or corrupt Matter, it must be let out. But in case the
Inflammation arises from extreme Pains, they are to be assuaged with
Cataplasms or Pultises and anodyn Liniments, such as those that have ^^en
already prescribed in the Cure of the Phlegmon: or else the Part may be bathed
with Camphirated Spirit of Wine, mixed with as much Water: Saccharum Saturni
infused in Limewater, persorms the same Effect, and the Water of Crabs alone
is admirable in its Operation.

Against the Esthiomenus or Mortification, make use of Wine boiled with
Wormwood, St. John's Wort, Rosemary and Aloes; or else take the Tincture of
Aloes and Myrrh, or Spirit of Wine alone impregnated with Camphire and Saffron.

What is to be done in Case a Convulsin happens by reason of a wounded Nerve or
Tendon?

If the Convulsion be caused by the Presence of an Extraneous Body that
bruiseth the Part it must be taken away; and if from the wounding of a Nerve,
pour into the Wound some Drops of the Oil of Lavender distilled, which in that
Case is of singular Use; this Oil may be also taken inwardly in an appropriated
Liquour, such as a Decoction of Wormweod and the Tops of the lesser Centory.
Balsam of Peru used in the same Manner, is an excellent Remedy, and the Oils of
Worms, Snails, St. John's-Wort and Turpentine are frequently applied with good
Success.

If the Convulsion proceeds from the Biting of some venomous Creature,
Cupping-Glasses or Leeches are to be immediately applied, putting into the
Wound Treacle with the Spirit of Wine or even Fire it self, and leaving to the
Physician's Care the Prescription of other vulnerary Remedies proper to be
taken inwardly.

What is to be done to draw the Extraneous Bodies out of a Wound?

When they cannot be taken away with the Fingers or Forceps, the Patient must
be set in the same Station or Posture wherein he was when he received the
Wound, in order to get some farther Light to discover 'em; or else such
Plasters may be used as are endu'd with an Attractive Quality: Particularly
this:

Take an Ounce of Treacle, half a Dram of Gum Ammoniack, one Dram of Baellium,
and two Drams of Bore's Grease, adding a Quarter of a Pound of Wax to make 'em
up into the Form of a. Plaster. It is reported that Hare's Grease alone has
the same Effect, and that it goes for a Secret among the Surgeons but you may
(if you please) mix it with Ointment of Betony. However it has been observed
that Leaden Bullets may sometimes remain in a Man's Body, during his whole
Lifetime without doing any Harm.

How are Excrescences to be taken away?

They may be consumed with Powder of Allom, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, or Lapis
infernalis.

After having removed every thing that hinders the reuniting of the Lips of a
Wound, what is to be done to attain thereto?

The Reunion in Wounds is properly the Work of Nature; but it may be promoted
by putting into 'em a little Balsam of Peru, and drawing together their Lips
with the Fingers: Afterward the Lips must be kept closed with a Bandage, a
Glutinous Plaster or a dry Stitch, provided the Wound be only superficial,
hindering the Air from penetrating into it. For Want of Balsam of Peru, an
excellent one may be made with the Flowers here specified.

Take the Flowers of Henbane, St. John's-Wort, and Comfry and let 'em be
digested in the Sun during the whole Summer-Season in the Oil of Hmp-seed,
which Oil, the longer it is kept, proves so much the better, if it be set forth
in the Sun every Summer, the Vessel that contains it being well stopped. There
is also the Balsam of Balsams, or the Balsam of Paracelsus called Samech.

To avoid the exposing of Wounds to the Air, it is requisite to cover 'em over
the Dressings with some sort of Plaster, which is usually termed the Surgeon's
Plaster, such is that which is effectual in Dissolving, corroborating and
allaying Pain or Inflammation.

Take the Mucilages of the Roots of great Comfrey and Fenegreek, half a Pound
of Ceruse or white Lead, two Drams of Crude Opium, one Dram of Camphire, as
much of Saffron, two Drams of Sandarack, one of the Oil of Bays, one half Pound
of Rosin, and as much Turpentine and Wax. Boil all these Ingredients together
in a sufficient Quantity of Lin-seed-Oyl, and make a Plaster according to Art.

In great Wounds it is expedient to lay over the Dressings a Cataplasm or
Pultiss, such as this:

Take the Leaves and Flowers of Camomile, and Melilot, the Tops of Wormwood,
common Mallows and Marshmallows, with the Seeds of Line and Cummin powdered:
Then boil the whole Composition in Wine, and add thereto Barly-Meal, to give it
a due Consistence. If there be any Cause to fear a Gangrene, you may also
intermix Saffron, Myrrh and Aloes with Spirit of Wine.

Is it necessary to put Tents into all Wounds, and to make use of Digestives
and Suppuratives?

No: It is sufficient to procure the Re-uniting of the Parts simply by the
Means of Balsam in small Wounds; because they ought not to be brought to
Suppuration: so that Digestives and Suppuratives are only necessary in great
Wounds, and those that are accompanied with Contusion, avoiding the ill Custom
of some Country-Surgeons, that stuff up their Wounds too much with Tents and
Pledgets, whereas they might well be content with simple Bolsters or Dossels
which should be dipped in the ordinary Digestive composed of Turpentine and the
Yolks of Eggs with a little Brandy, or else with the Tincture of Myrrh and
Aloes.

Suppuration may also be promoted by mundifying and quickening the Wound,
especially if the Bolsters be steeped in the following Composition.

Take half an Ounce of Aloes and Mirth powdered, two Drams of Sal Saturni,
twenty Grains of Sal Ammoniack, the same quantity of beaten Cloves, a Dram of
Queen of Hungary Water, and half an Ounce of Vnguentum Bas^^con, and let the
whole Mass be mingled together.

In fine, the whole Mystery consists in well clearsing the Wounds with a Linen
Cloth, or with the Injections of the Tinctures of Myrrh and Aloes; or with
simple Decoctions of Wormwood, Sc^^dium or Water-Germander, Bugle, Sanicle and
Hore-Hound in White Wind; as also by prescribing the Vulnerary Decoctions of
Powder of Crab's-Eyes, and Saccharum Saturni, to be token inwardly, to consume
the acid Humors, which are a very great Obstacle that hinders the speedy cure
of Wounds.

What are the Vulnerary Plants, the Deco^ion (...) which is to be taken
inwardly?

They are Alchymilla or Lion's-Foot, Ground Ivy, Veronica or Fluellin, St.
John's-Wort, Wormwood, Centory, Bugle, Sanicle, Chervil, and others. The Broth
of Crabs may also be prescribed, which is an excellent Remedy, and may serve
instead of a Vulnerary Potion.

Sometimes Sutures or Stitches contribute very much to the re-uniting of the
Lips of Wounds, when they cannot be joined by Bandage.

CHAP. III. Of particular Wounds of the Head.
WHAT ought first to be considered in a Wound of the Head?

Two things, that is to say, the Wound it self, and the Instrument with which
it was made; for by the Consideration of the Wound, we may know whether it be
Superficial or Deep; and by that of the Instrument, we are enabled to make a
truer Judgment concerning the Nature of the same Wound.

What is a Superficial, and what is a Deep Wound in the Head?

That is called a Superficial Wound in the Head, which lies only in the Skin;
and that a Deep one which reaches to the Pericranium, Skull, or Substance of
the Brain.

What is to be applied to a Superficial Wound?

It is cured with a little Queen of Hungary Water; or else with a little
Balsam, laying upon it the Surgeon's Plaster, or that of Betony. But if the
Wound or Rent be somewhat large, it must be closed with a Stitch.

What is to be done to a Deep Wound?

If it be situated in the Pericranium, the Wound must be kept open, waiting for
Suppuration; but if it enter the Skull, an Enquiry is to be made, whether there
be a Simple Contusion, or a Fracture also. In the Contusion it is necessary to
wait for the Suppuration, and the fall of the Splint, and to keep the Wound
open; as in ^he Fracture, to examine whether it be in the first Table only, or
in both; it is known to be only in the first, by the Application of an
Instrument, and of Ink; as also in regard that there are no ill Symptoms; but a
Fracture in both Tables shows it self by the Signs; and it may be found out by
making a Crucial Incision in the Flesh, to discover the Fissure.

What are the Signs of the Fracture of the tw^ Tables of the Skull* and of the
overflowing of the Blood upon the Membranes of the Brain?

They are the loss of the Understanding at the very Moment of receiving the
Wound; an Haemorrhage or Flux of Blood through the Nose, Mouth, or Ears;
drowsiness and heaviness of the Head, and more especially Vomitting of Phlegm;
from whence may be inferred the necessity of making use of the Trepan.

What Consequence may be drawn from the Knowledge of the Instrument with which
the Wound was made?

It is according to the Quality of this Instrument; as it is proper to cut,
prick, or bruise; if it be cutting, the Wound is more Superficial, and not
subject to a great Suppuration: If it be pricking, the Wound is deeper, but of
small Moment: If it be a battering or bruising Instrument, the Wound is
accompanied with Contusion, producing a great Suppuration, besides the
Concussion and Commotion of the Part, which are inseparable, and often cause
very dangerous Symptoms.

Inferences may be made also from the disposition of the wounded Person; for a
strong robust Man may better bear the Stroke than a weak one; and even Anger
causes an Augmentation of Vehemence; so that all such Circumstances are not to
be despised, in regard that they give occasion to profitable Conjectures.

What particular Circumstance is there to be observed in undertaking the Cure
of Wounds in the Face?

It is, that a more nice Circumspection is required here than elsewhere, in
abstaining from Incisions, as well as in making choice of proper Medicines,
which must be free from noisome Smells; and it is in this Part chiefly that
Balsams are to be used, avoiding Suppuration, to prevent Scars and other
Deformities.

CHAP. IV. Of the particular Wounds of the Breast.
WHAT is to be observed in Wounds of the Breast?

Two things, viz. whether they penetrate into the Cavity of the Thorax or not,
which may be discovered by the Probe, and by a Wax-Candle lighted, and applied
to the Entrance of the Wound, obliging the Patient to return to the same
Posture wherein he received the Hurt, as also to keep his Nose and Mouth shut:
For then the Flame may be perceived to be wavering, the Orifice of the Opening
being full of Bubbles; a Judgment may be also made from the running out of the
Blood.

What is to be done when it is certainly known that the Wound penetrates into
the Cavity of the Breast?

It is necessary to examine what Part may be hurt, by considering the situation
of the Wound, and its Symptoms: If the Lungs are piered, a spitting of froathy
Vermilion-colour'd Blood ensues, with difficulty of Respiration, and a Cough.
If any of the great Vessels are opened, the wounded Person feels a Weight at
the bottom of his Breast, is seized with cold Sweats, being scarce able to
fetch his Breath, and Vomits Blood, some Portion whereof issues out of the
Wound. If the Diaphragm or Midriff be cut in its Tendinous Part, he is suddenly
hurried into Convulsions: And if the Heart be wounded either in its Basis or
Ventricles, he falls into a Swoon, and dies incontinently.

But if the Probe does not enter, and none of the abovementioned Symptoms
appear, it may be taken for granted that the Wound is of no great Consequence.

What is to be done when the Wound penetrates into the Chest, yet none of the
Parts are hurt, only there is an Effusion of Blood over the Diaphragm?

It is necessary to make an Empyema, for otherwise the diffused Blood in
corrupting, would inevitably cause an Inflammation, Gangrene, and Death it self.

What is an Empyema?

It is an Operation whereby any sorts of Matter are discharged with which the
Diaphragm is overspread, by making a Puncture or Opening in the Breast.

CHAP. V. Of the particular Wounds of the lower Belly.
WHAT is to be done to know the quality of a Wound made in the lower Belly?

It is requisite to make use of the Probe, to observe the situation of the
Wound, and to take notice of all the Symptoms: For by the help of the Probe,
one may discover whether it has penetrated into the Cavity or not, after
having, enjoined the Patient to betake himself to the same Posture wherein he
was when he first received the Wound: By its situation a Conjecture may be made
that such a particular Part may be hurt; and by a due Examination of the
Symptoms, one may attain to an exact Knowledge. As for Example; It is known
that one of the thick Guts is opened, when the Hurt is found in the
Hypogastrium, and the Excrements are voided at the Wound; as it is certain that
on of the thin Guts is pierced, when the Wound appears in the Navel, and the
Chyle issues forth from thence; and so of the others.

What Method ought to be observed in curing Wounds in the lower Belly?

It is expedient at first to prevent letting in the Air, and to dilate the
Wound, in order to sow up the perforated Gut, and afterward to restore it to
its place; as also to bind the Caul, which is let out at the opening, and to
cut it off, lest in putrefying it should corrupt the neighboring Parts. Then
these Parts may be bathed with Lees of Wine, wherein have been boiled the
Flowers of Camomile and Roses with Wormwood: The Powders of Aloes, Myrrh, and
Frankincense may be also thrown upon 'em; and the Wound must be sowed up again
to dress it on the outside, the Patient in the mean time being restrained to a
regular Diet. But Clysters must be forborne on these Occasions, especially when
one of the thick Guts is wounded, making use rather of a Suppository or
laxative Diet-Drinks, to avoid dilatation and straining.

CHAP VI. Of Wounds made by Guns or Firearms.
THESE Wounds are always bruised and torn, with the loss of Substance, and
commonly with the splitting and breaking of a Bone: They are red, black, livid,
and inflamed, not being usually accompanied with an Haemorrhage: They are
generally round, and streighter at their Entrance than at their End; at least
(...) they were not made with Cross-Bar-Shot, or Quarter-Pieces.

Of the Prognostic of Wounds by Gunshot.
When these Wounds penetrate into the Substance of the Brain, or Marrow of the
Backbone, or into the Heart, Pericardium, great Vessels, and other noble
Parts, Death always inevitably follows, and often happens at the very Instant.
But one may undertake the Cure of those that are superficial, and which are
made in the Neck, Shoulders, Arms, and all other parts of the Body.

Of the Cure of Wounds by Gunshot.

For the better curing of these sorts of Wounds, it is requisite to be informed
of the Quality of the Firearms by which the Wounds were made, in regard that a
Musket is more dangerous than a Pistol, and a Cannon much more than a Musket;
as also to examine their situation and concomitant Accidents; for by how much
the more complicated they are, so much the greater is the danger. Then the
Patient must be set (as near as can be) in the very same Situation and Posture
wherein he remained when the Wound was received, in order to discover the
direct Passage of the Wound by the help of the Probe, with which a search is to
be made, whether a Bullet, or any other extraneous Bodies, as Wood, Flocks,
Linen, or Stuff as yet stick in the Wound; so that Endeavors may be used to
take 'em out through the same Hole where they entered, care being more especially
had to avoid making Dilacerations in drawing 'em out: But if the Operator has
endeavored to no purpose to remove these extraneous Bodies, let him make a
Counter-Opening in the opposite Part, where he shall perceive any hardness,
nevertheless without touching the Vessels; thus the Incision being made, he may
readily draw 'em out with his Fingers, or some other Instrument.

If the Bullet sticks so far in a Bone that it cannot be taken away without
breaking the same Bone, it is more expedient to let it lie therein; but if the
Leg or Arm-Bones are very much split or shattered, then the Amputation of 'em
becomes absolutely necessary. The Pain and Inflammation of the Part may be
asswag'd by letting Blood, topical Anodyns, cooling Clysters and Purgations;
but in case much Blood ha^h been already lost, Phlebotomy must be omitted. The
Clysters may be made with Decoctions of Mercury, Mallows, Beets, a Handful of
Barley and Honey of Roses.

Some Surgeons are of Opinion that the Patient ought to be purged every other
Day, and even on the very same Day that he received the Wound, if his Strength
will permit; however very gentle Purges are to be used upon this occasion, such
as Cassia, Manna, Tamarins, Syrrup of Violets, and that of White Roses.

In the mean while Anodyns may be compounded to mitigate the Pain; as
Cataplasms or Pultisses made with the Crum of white Bread, Milk, Saffron, the
Yolk of an Egg, and Oil of Roses used hot; which last Ingredient is of it self
a very good Anodyn. But to assuage great Inflammations, Oil of Roses, the White
of an Egg and Vinegar beaten all together, may be laid on the neighboring
Parts.

At first it is necessary to apply spirituous Medicines to the Wound, and
Pledgets steeped in camphirated Brandy, are admirable for that purpose; but if
there be a Flux of Blood, styptick Waters, or other astringent Remedies may be
used, still remembering that all these medicaments must be applied hot.

To promote the Suppuration of these contused Wounds, a Digestive may be made
of Oleum Rosatum, the Yolk of an Egg, and Venice Turpentine.

If the Wound be in the Nerves, Tendons, or other Nervous Parts, it is
requisite to use spirituous and drying Medicines, never applying any Ointments,
which will not fail to cause Putrefaction in those Parts: But a Cataplasm may
be made with Barley-Meal, Orobus, I upins and Lentils boiled in Claret, adding
some Oil of St. John's-Wort.

The Balsam of Peru, Oil of Turpentine destill'd, Oil of Wax, destill'd Oil of
Lavender, Oleum Phil^sophorum, Oil of Bays destill'd, Balsam of St.
John's-Wort, Spirit of Wine, and Gum Elemi, are excelient Medicaments for the
Nerves: Or else,

Take four Ounces of Vnguentum Althaeae with a Dram and a half of destill'd
Bays; mingle the whole Composition, and apply it: Or else,

Take an Ounce of destill'd Oil of Turpentine, a Dram of Spirit of Wine, and
half an Ounce of Camphire; let all be intermixed, and dropped into the Wound: Or
else,

Take a Scruple of Euphorbium, half an Ounce of Colophonia, and a little Wax;
let 'em be mingled together, and applied very hot to the Nervous Parts.

If the Wounds are deep, Injections may be made with this Vulnerary Water,
which is very good for all sorts of Contusions, as also for the Gangrene and
U^cers.

Take the lesser Sage, the greater Comfrey, and Mugwort, of each four Handfuls;
Plantane, Tobacco, Meadowsweet, Betony, Agrimony, Vervein, St. John's-Wort, and
Wormwood, of each three Handfuls; Fennel, Pilewort Bugle, Sanicle, Mouse-Ear,
the lesser Dazy, the lesser Centory, and All-heal, of each three Handfuls;
three Ounces of round Birth-Wort, and two Ounces of long: Let the whole
Composition be digested during thirty Hours, in two Gallons of good White Wind,
and afterward destill'd in Balneo Mariae, till one third part be consumed.

If a Gangrene happens in the Part, Spirit of Mother-Wort may be put into it,
which is compounded with two Drams of Mastick, Myrrh, Olibanum, and Amber, and
a Quart of rectified Wine, the whole being destill'd.

This Fomentation may be applied very hot to very good purpose, viz. an equal
quantity of Camphirated Wine and Limewater, with three Drams of Camphire.

This is also an excellent Cataplasm: Take a Pint of Lie, and as much Spirit of
Wine, half an Handful of Rue, Sage; Scordium, and Wormwood, a Dram of each of
the Roots of both sorts of Birth-Wort, and two Drams of Sal Ammoniack. Let the
whole Composition be boiled till a third Part be consumed; adding half a Dram
of Myrrh and Aloes, and a little Brandy.

Of a Burn made by Gunpowder.
If the Burn be recent, and the Skin not exulcerated, Spirit of Wine or Brandy
is to be immediately applied; or else an Ointment may be made with Oil of
Olives, or bitter Almonds, Salt, the Juice of Onions, and Verjuice.

If the Skin be ulcerated, and little Bladders or Pustules arise, an Ointment
may be compounded with the second Bark of Elder boiled in Oil of Olives. After
it has been strained, add two parts of Ceruse or White-Lead, and one of Burnt
Lead, with as much Litharge, stirred about in a Leaden-Mortar, to make a
Liniment. But it is not convenient to take out the Grains of Powder that remain
in the Skin, because they are apt to break, and to be more confounded or spread
abroad; so that they must be left to come forth in the Suppuration.

When the Wound is supersicial, and the Skin as yet whole, peeled Onions with
common Honey are an excellent Remedy; but if the Skin be torn, it is not to be
used, by reason that the Pain would be too great; in which case Oil of Tartar
per diliquium has a very good effect.

If the Burn be accompanied with a Fever, it may be allayed with fixed Nitre,
Nitre prepared with Antimony, and Gunpowder taken inwardly, which are very
effectual in their Operation. Crab's-Eyes prepared, and even some of 'em
unprepared, are in like manner admirable Remedies.

As for external Medicaments, when the Burn is only superficial, take Onions
and unslack'd Lime, quenched in a Decoction of Rapes, and apply this Liquor
very hot, with double Bolsters dipped therein. Or else take what quantity you
please of quick Lime well washed, and pound it throughtly in a Leaden-Mortar,
with May-Butter without Salt, to make an Ointment, which may be be laid
altogether liquid upon the affected Part: Or else,

Take as much quick Lime as you can get up between your Fingers at two several
times; Milk-Cream and clarified Honey, of each about half the like quantity;
let the whole be intermixed to the Consistence of an Ointment, and applied: It
is an approved Remedy; as also is the following;

Take unslack'd Lime, and put it into common Water, so as the Water may appear
four or five Finger's breadth above it. After the Effervescence, pour in Oil of
Roses; whereupon the whole Mass will be coagulated in form of Butter, and may
be applied.

A good Lotion or Washing-Liquor may be prepared with the Juice of Garlic and
Onions, in recent Burns; otherwise make use of this Ointment. Take an Ounce and
an half of raw Onions, Salt, and Venice Soap, of each half an Ounce; mingle the
whole Composition in a Mortar, pouring upon it a sufficient quantity of Oil of
Roses, to make a very good Ointment: Or else.

Dissolve Minium or Litharge in Venegar, filtrate this Liquor, and add thereto
a quantity of Rape-Oil newly drawn off, sufficient to give it the Consistence
of a liquid Liniment; then stir it about in a Leaden-Mortar till it become of a
gray Color, and keep it for Use as an excellent Liniment: Or else,

Pound Crey-Fishes or Crabs alive in a Mortar to get their Blood, and foment
the Part with it hot; it is a good Remedy: Otherwise intermix the pounded Crabs
with May-Butter without Salt, and let 'em be boiled up together, and scumm'd,
till a red Ointment be made, which may be drawn off, or strained for Use. And
indeed, all manner of Ointments and other Medicinal Compositions wherein Crabs
are an Ingredient, are true specificks against Burns made by Gunpowder.

The Mucilages of the Seeds of Psyllium, or rather those of Quince-Seeds
prepared with Frog's Sperm, and a little Saccharum Saturni, spread with a
Feather upon the affected Part, have a wonderful Operation in Burns.

A Medicament compounded with one third part of the Oil of Olives, and two of
the Whites of Eggs well beaten and mixed together, is a very simple and singular
Remedy. Otherwise take half an Ounce of Line-seed-Oil infused in Rose Water,
with four Yolks of Eggs; beat 'em together, and let the whole be applied to the
burnt Part.

If the Burn be very violent, and has many Pustules, Etmullerus is of Opinion
that they ought to be opened, and that an Ointment should be applied, which is
made of Hen's-Dung boiled in fresh Butter: Otherwise,

Take a handful of fresh Sage-Leaves, two handfuls of Plantane, six Ounces of
fresh Butter without Salt, three Ounces of Pullet's-Dung newly voided, and the
whitest that can be found; then fry the whole Composition for a quarter of an
Hour; squeeze it out, and keep it for use: Otherwise,

Take two Ounces of sweet Apples roasted under Embers, Barly-Meal, and
Fenugreek, of each half an Ounce, and half a Scruple of Saffron; let the whole
Mass be mingled to make a Liniment or soft Cataplasm, which may serve to
assuage Pain, and mollify the Skin.

If the Wound be yet larger, and has a Scab, open all the Pustules, and
endeavor the two first Days to cause the Escar to fall off by the Application
of a Liniment made of the Mucilages of Quince-Seeds steept in Frog's-Sperm,
with fresh Butter, the Oil of White Lillies, and the Yolk of an Egg: Otherwise,

Make a Liniment with fresh Butter well beaten in a Leaden-Mortar, with a
Decoction of Mallows, which being spread upon hot Colewort-Leaves, and applied
to the Escar, it will fall off.

But if the Escar be too hard and obstinate, it is requisite to proceed to
Incisions to make way for the Sanies, lest a deep and putrid Ulcer should be
engendered Underneath. As soon as the Humor is evacuated, the abovementioned
Emollient Medicines may be used, till the separation of the Escar; then the
Ulcer may be consolidated with Digestives and Mundificatives; such as the
Ointment of quick Lime with Oil of Roses, and the Yolks of Eggs. The white
camphirated Ointments, and that of Alabaster, are also good for the same
Purpose.

If a Gangrene ensues, Sudorificks must be taken inwardly; such are
camphirated Spirit of Treacle, the Essence and Spirit of Elder-Berries, the
Spirit of Hart's-Horn with its own proper Salt, Treacle impregnated with the
Spirit of camphirated Wine, Scorpion-Water, Hart's-Horn, Citron with Camphire,
etc.

As for external Remedies in the beginning of the Gangrene, the Spirit of Wine
applied hot is excellent; and yet better if Aloes, Frankincense, and Myrrh be
intermixed therein. It ought also to be observed, that Camphire must always be
mingled in the topical Medicines for the Cure of the Gangrene.

A Decoction of unslack'd Lime, in which Brimstone has been boiled, with
Mercurius Dulcis, and the Spirit of Wine, is a very efficacious Remedy.

In a considerable Gangrene, after having made deep Scarifications, let
Horse-Dung be boiled in Wine, and laid upon the Part in form of a Cataplasm.
This is an approved Remedy.

If a Sphacelus be begun, scarifie the Part, and apply thereto abundance of
Vnguentum Aegyptiacum over and above the Ointments and Cataplasms already
described; remembering always that when the Gangrene degenerates into a
Sphacelus, all the mortified Parts must be incontinently separated or cut off
from the sound.

CHAP. VII. Of Ulcers in general.
WHAT is an Ulcer?

An Ulcer is a Rupture of the Natural Union of the Parts made a long while ago,
which is maintained by the Sanies that runs out of its Cavity; or an Ulcer
takes its Rise from a Wound that could not be well cured in its proper time, by
reason of the ill quality of its Pus or corrupt Matter.

What difference is there between a Wound and (...) Ulcer?

It is this, that a Wound always proceeds from an external Cause, and an Ulcer
from an internal, such as Humors that fall upon a Part; or else a Wound in
growing inveterate degenerates into an Ulcer

Whence is the difference of Ulcers derived?

It is taken from the Causes that produce 'em, and the Symptoms or Accidents
with which they are accompanied. Thus upon Account of their Causes they are
called Ben^gn or Malignant, Great, Little, Dangerous, or Mortal; and by reason
of their Accidents, they are termed Putrid, Corrosive, Cavernous, Fistulous,
Cancerous, etc.

Do Ulcers always proceed from external Causes, or from an outward Wound
degenerated?

No they sometimes also derive their Origin from internal Causes, as the
Acrimony of Humors, or their Malignant Quality; the Retention of a Splint of a
Bone, and other things of the like Nature. These Ulcers are commonly called
Primitive, and the others Degenerate.

What are Putrid, Corrosive, Cavernous, Fistulous and Cancerous Ulcers?

The Putrid Ulcer is that wherein the Flesh is soft and scabby, the Pus and
Ichor being viscous, stinking, and of a cadaverous smell.

The Corrosive Ulcer is that which by the Acrimony and Malignity of its Sanies,
corrodes, makes hollow, corrupts and mortifies the Flesh.

The Cavernous Ulcer is that the Entrance of which is straight and the bottom
broad, wherein there are many Holes filled with malignant Sanies, without any
callosity or hardness in its sides.

The Fistulous Ulcer is that which has long, straight, and deep Holes, with
much hardness in its sides; the Sanies whereof is sometimes virulent, and
sometimes not.

The Cancerous Ulcer is large, having its Lips bloated, hard, and knotty, of a
brown Color, with thick Veins round about, full of a livid and blackish sort
of Blood. In the bottom a^^ diverse round Cavities, which stink extremely, by
reason of the ill Quality of the Sanies that runs out from thence.

Are there no other kinds of Vleers?

Yes, there are also Verminous, Chironian, Telephian, Pocky, Scorbutic, and
others, which have much affinity with, and may well be reckoned among the five
Kinds already specified.

What are the means to be used in the curing of Vcers?

Ulcers ought to be well mundify'd, dried and cicatriz'd; but with respect to
the several Causes and Accidents that render 'em obstinate, and difficult to be
cured, it is also requisite to make use of internal Medicines, which may
restrain and consume 'em. If their sides grow callous, they are to be
scarify'd, in order to bring 'em to Suppuration; and if there be any
Excrescences, they must be eaten away with corroding Powders, such as that of
Allom; or by the Infernal Cautery.

What are the Remedies proper to cleanse and dry up Ulcers?

To this Purpose diverse sorts of Liquors may be used, as also Powders and
Plasters: The Liquors are usually made of Briony-Roots, the greater Celandine,
Lime, and Yellow Water; a Tincture of Myrrh, Aloes and Saffron, and Whey,
whereto is added Saccharum Saturni; so that the Ulcers may be washed or bathed
with these Liquors; and very good Injections may be compounded of 'em.

The Powders are those of Worm-eaten-Oak, Allom, and Cinoper, the last of these
being used by burning it, to cause the Fume to be conveyed to the Ulcer through a
Funnel. The Country People often make use of Potter's-Earth to dry up their
Ulcers, with good Success; but then they must not be of a Malignant Nature.

The Plasters are Emplastrum de Betonica, Diasulphuris, Dessiccativum Rubrum,
and others; and the Ointments are such as these;

Take three Yolks of Eggs, half an Ounce of Honey, and a Glass of Wine, and
make thereof a mundifying Ointment, according to Art: Otherwise.

Take Lime well washed and dried several times, let it be mingled with the Oil
of Line and Bolus, and it will make an excellent Ointment to mundifie and dry;
a little Mercury Precipitate may be intermixed (if you please) to augment the
drying Quality; and Mercurius Dulcis may be added in the Injections.

For Ulcers in the Legs, and Cancerous Ulcers, take Plantain-Water and
Allom-Water, or else Spirit of Wine, Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, and Treacle; or
else an Extract of the Roots of round Birth-Wort made in the Spirit of Wine.
Gunpowder alone dissolved in Wine, is of singular Use to wash the Ulcers, and
afterward to wet the Pledgets which are to be applied to 'em. But here are two
particular and specific Medicines to mollify a Cancer.

Take Saccharum Saturni, Camphire, and Soot; let 'em be incorporated with the
Juice of House-Leek and Plantain, in a Leaden-Mortar; then make a Liniment
thereof, and cover the Part affected as lightly as is possible to be done, as
with a simple Canvass-Cloth, or a Sheet of Cap-Paper: Or else,

Take the destill'd Water of rotten Apples, and mingle it with the Extract of
the Roots of round Birth-Wort made in Spirit of Wine; reserving this Liquor to
wash the Part, and to make Injections.

CHAP. VIII. Of Venereal Diseases.
Of the Chaude-pisse or Gonorrhaea.
THE Signs of this Disease are a painful Distention of the Penis or Yard, and a
scalding Pain in making Water, the Urine being pale, whitish, and full of
Filaments or little Threads: Sometimes the Testicles are swelled as well as the
Glans and Praeputium; and sometimes there is a Flux of a kind of Matter
yellowish, Greenish, etc.

If there be a great Inflammation in the Yard, endeavors must be used to allay
it by letting Blood; and afterward the Patient may take a cooling and diuretic
Diet-Drink, as also Emulsions made with cold Seeds in Whey. A very good
Decoction may be prepared in all places, and without any trouble, by putting a
Dram of Sal Prun^ll^ into every Quart of Water, whereof the Patient is to drink
as often as he can: This Decoction is very cooling and diuretic; and the use
of it ought to be continued till the Inflammation be asswag'd. Then some gentle
Purges are to be prescribed in the beginning; such as an Ounce of Cassia, and
as much Manna, infused in two Glasses of Whey, which are to be taken one or two
Hours one after another.

Afterward the Patient must be often purged with twelve Grains of Scammony, and
fifteen Grains of Mercurius Dulcis; and these Purgations must be continued,
till it appears that the Fluxes are neither yellowish nor greenish, nor of any
other bad Color. When they are become White, and grown Thready, they may be
stopped with Astringents: Amber and dried Bones beaten to Powder, eighteen Grains
of each, with one Grain of Laudanum, the whole Composition being taken in
Conserve of Roses, are very good for this Purpose. Crocus Martis Astringens, or
else its Extract, taken from half a Dram to a whole Dram, in like manner
performs the same Operation. As soon as the Gonorrhaea is stopped, to be certain
of a perfect Cure, a Dram of the Mercurial Panacaea is to be taken, from
fifteen to twenty Grains at a time, in Conserve of Roses. In the mean while, if
a small Salivation should happen, it must be let alone for the present, since
it may be stopped at pleasure by the Purgations. When it is requisite to restrain
the Gonorrhaea, Mercury must not be given any longer, in regard that it is a
Dissolvent, which is only good when the Glandules of the Groin or Testicles are
swelled, or else when it is expedient to set the Chaudepisse a running, after
it has been too suddenly stopped. At the same time that the Astringents are
taken with the Mouth, Injections also are to be made into the Yard; such as are
prepared with Lapis Medicamentosus, of which one Dram is put into eight Ounces
of Plantane-Water. All Astringents that are not Causticks, are proper for the
Syringe.

Of Shankers.
They are round Ulcers, and hollow in the middle, which appear upon the Glans
and the Praeputium. To cure 'em, they must be touched with the Lapis
Infernalis, and brought to Suppuration by the means of red Precipitate mixed
with the Ointment of Andreas Crucius. Oleum Mercurii laid on a Pledget or
Bolster, is very efficacious to open Skankers, and consume their Flesh. The
Patient must be well purged with Mercurius Dulcis and Scammony, taking twelve
or fifteen Grains of each in Conserve of Roses; and after these Purgations are
sufficiently reiterated, he may take the Mercurial Panacaea's. It is an
excellent Remedy for all sorts of Pocky Distempers not yet consummated, or
arrived at the greatest height of Malignity.

Of Bubo 's.
Bubo's are gross Tumors or Abcesses that arise in the Groin, the perfect
Maturity of which is not to be waited for in order to open 'em; because it is
to be feared lest the corrupt Matter remaining therein too long, might be
conveyed into the Blood by the Circulation, and so produce the grand Pox:
Therefore it is necessary to open 'em betimes with a Lancet, or else with a
Train of potential Cauteries, if they are too hard. They ought to be Suppurated
for a considerable time: The Patient must be well purged with Scammony and
Mercurius Dulcis: He must also take the Mercurial Panacaea's.

Of the Pox.
This loathsome Disease begins sometimes with a virulent Gonorrhaea, and a
weariness or faintness at the same time seizes on all the Members of the Body:
It is usually accompanied with Salivation and the Headache, which grows more
violent at Night: Pricking Pains are also felt in the Arms and Legs, the Palate
of the Mouth being sometimes ulcerated. If it be an inveterate Pox, the Bones
are corrupted, and Exostoses happen therein; diverse Spots with dry, round and
red Pustules appear in the Skin; and the Cartilages or Gristles of the Nose are
sometimes eaten up. But when this Disease is come to its greatest height of
Malignity, the Hair falls off; the Gums are ulcerated; the Teeth are loose, and
drop out; the whole Body is dried up; the Eyes are livid; the Ears tingle; the
Nose becomes stinking; the Almonds of the Ears swell; the Uvula or Palate is
down; Ulcers break out in the Privy-Parts; Bubo's arise in the Groin; as also
Warts in the Glans and Praeputium; and Condyloma's in the Anus,

Indeed the Pox may be easily cured in the beginning; but when it has taken
deep Root by a long Continuance, it is not extirpated without much difficulty,
more especially if it be accompanied with Ulcers, Caries, and Exostoses; the
Person afflicted with it being of an ill Constitution, and his Voice grown
hoarse.

The Spring and Summer are the proper Seasons of the Year for undertaking the
Cure of this Disease: In order to which, it is necessary that the Patient begin
with a regular Diet, lodging in a warm place, and taking such Aliments as yield
a good Juice; as Jelly-broath made with boiled Fowl: Let him drink Sudorifick
Decoctions, prepared with the Wood of Guayacum, China-Root, and Sarsaparella,
and let him abstain from eating any thing that is high seasoned: Let him take
Clysters to keep his Body open; sometimes also he may be let Blood, and purged
with half a Dram of Jalap, and fifteen Grains of Mercurius Dulcis. The
Purgations may be re-iterated as often as it shall be judged convenient; and
then the Patient may be bathed for nine or ten Days, every Morning and Evening;
during which time he may take volatile Salt of Vipers, the Dose being from six
to sixteen Grains; or else Viper's-Grease from half a Dram to a whole Dram in
Conserve of Roses.

Afterward it will be necessary to proceed to Fluxing, which is caused by the
means of Frictions with Vuguentum Mercurii, which is made of crude Mercury
stirred about in a Mortar with Turpentine, and then the whole mingled with
Hog's-Grease, one part of Mercury being usually put into two parts of
Hog's-Grease. The Rubbing is begun at the Sole of the Feet, ascending to the
Legs, and the inside of the Thighs; but the Backbone must not be rubbed at
all; When the Persons are tender, or of a weak Constitution, a single Friction
may be sometimes sufficient. Thus the Patient must be rubbed at the Fire, after
he has taken a good Mess of Broth; but I would not advise it to be done with
more than one or two Drams of Mercury at a time, without reckoning the Grease.
Then the Patient must be dressed with a Pair of Linnen-Drawers or Pantaloons,
and laid in his Bed, where his Mouth may be looked into from time to time, to
see whether the Mercury has taken effect; which may be easily known, by reason
that his Tongue, Gums, and Palate swell and grow thick, his Head aches, his
Breath is strong, his Face red, and he can scarce swallow his Spittle; or else
he begins to Salivate.

If none of these Signs appear, the Rubbing must be begun again in the Morning
and Evening; then if no Salivation be perceived, for sometimes four or five
Frictions are made successively, a little Mercurial Panacaea may be taken
inwardly, to promote it, During the Frictions, the Patient is to be nourished
with Eggs, Broaths, and Gellies; he must also keep his Bed in a warm Room, and
never rise till it shall be thought fit to stop the Salivation, which continues
twenty or twenty five Days; or rather till it becomes Laudable; that is to say,
till it be no longer stinking, nor colored, but clear and fluid.

If a Looseness should happen during the Salivation, it would cease, so that to
renew it, the Looseness may be stayed with Clysters made of Milk and the Yolks
of Eggs; and in case the Salivation should not begin afresh, it must be excited
with a slight Friction: But if it shoul'd be too violent, it may be diminished
by some gentle Purge, or with four or five Grains of Aurum Fulminans, taken in
Conserve of Roses.

Three or four Pints of Rheum are commonly salivated every Day in a Basin made
for that purpose, which the Patient holds in his Bed near his Mouth, so as the
Spittle may run into it. But if the Fluxing should not cease of it self at the
time when it ought, he must be purged to put a stop thereto. If any Ulcers
remain in his Mouth, to dry 'em up, Gargarisms are to be often used, which are
made of Barley-Water, Honey of Roses, or lukewarm Wine.

The Warts are cured by binding 'em, if a Ligature be possible, or else they
may be consumed with Causticks, such as the Powder of Savine, or Aquafortis,
by corroding the neighboring Parts; sometimes they are cut, left to bleed for
a while, and bathed with warm Wine.

When the Patient begins to rise, he must be purged, his Linen, Bed, and
Chamber being changed; and afterward his Strength is to be recruited with good
Victuals, and generous Wine. If he were too much weakened, let him take
Cow's-Milk with Saccharum Rosatum.

If the Pox were not inveterate, the Fluxing might be excited by the Panacaea
alone, without any Frictions: For after the Phlebotomy, Purgations, and
Bathings duly administered, the Patient might take ten Grains of the Mercurial
Panacaea in the Morning, and as many at Night; on the next Day fifteen Grains
might be given, and the like quantity at Night; on the third Day twenty Grains
might be given both Morning and Evening; on the fourth Day twenty five Grains
in the Morning, and as many at Night; and on the fifth Day thirty Grains in the
Morning, and the very same quantity in the Evening; continuing thus to augment
the Dose, till the Fluxing comes in abundance; and it may be maintained by
giving every two or every three Days twelve Grains of the Panacaea. This Course
must be continually followed till the Salivation becomes Laudable, and the
Symptoms cease.

The manner of making the Mercurial Panacaea.
To prepare this Panacaea, it is requisite to take Mercury revived from
Cinnabar, because it is more pure than Mercury which is immediately dug out of
the Mine. The Mercury is revived with Cinnabar, after this manner: Take a Pound
of artificial Cinnabar pulverized, and mighled exactly with three Pounds of
unslack'd Lime, in like manner beaten to Powder: Let this Mixture be put into a
Retort of Stone, or Glass luted, the third part of which at least remains
empty; Let it be placed in a reverberating Furnace; and after having fitted a
Recipient filled with Water, let the whole be left during twenty four Hours at
least; then let the Fire be put under it by degrees, and at length let the Heat
be very much augmented, whereupon the Mercury will run Drop by Drop into the
Recipient: Let the Fire be continued till nothing comes forth, and the
Operation will be performed generally in six or seven Hours: Then pour the
Water out of the Recipient, and having washed the Mercury, to cleanse it from
some small quantity of Earth that may stick thereto, let it be dried with
Clothes, or else with the Crum of Bread: Thus thirteen Ounces of Mercury may be
drawn off from every Pound of artificial Cinnabar.

The Panacaea is made of sweet Sublimate, and the later of corrosive Sublimate:
To make the corrosive Sublimate, put sixteen Ounces of Mercury revived from
Cinnabar, into a Mattress, pour upon it eighteen Ounces of Spirit of Nitre;
place the Matras upon the Sand, which must be somewhat hot, and leave it there
till the Dissolution be effected: Then pour off this dissol^ed Liquor, which
will be as clear as Water; into a Glass Vial, or into a S^one-Jug, and let its
Moisture evaporate gently over the Sand-Fire, till a white Mass remains; which
you may pulverize in a Glass Mortar, mingling it with sixteen Ounces of Vitriol
calcined, and as much decrepited Salt: Put this Mixture into a Matras, two
third parts of which remain empty, and the Neck of which has been cut in the
middle of its height; then fix the Matras in the Sand, and begin to kindle a
gentle Fire underneath, which may be continued for three Hours; afterward let
Coals be thrown upon it till the Fire burn very vehemently, and a Sublimate
will arise on the top of the Matras; so that the Operation may be performed
within the space of six or seven Hours. Let the Matras be cooled, and afterward
broken; avoiding a kind of Flower or light Powder, which flies up into the Air
as soon as this Matter is removed; whereupon you will find nineteen Ounces of
very good corrosive Sublimate; but the red Scoria or Dross which settleth at
the bottom must be cast away as unprofitable. This Sublimate being a powerful
Escarotick, eats away proud Flesh, and is of singular use in cleansing old
Ulcers. if half a Dram thereof be dissolved in a Pint of Limewater, it gives a
yellow Tincture; and this is that which is called the Phagaedonick-Water.

The sweet Sublimate, of which the Panacaea is immediately composed, is made
with sixteen Ounces of corrosive Sublimate, pulverized in a Marble or
Glass-Mortar, intermixing with it by little and little, twelve Ounces of
Mercury revived from Cinnabar: Let this Mixture be stirred about with a Wooden
Pestle, till the Quicksilver become imperceptible; then put the Powder, which
will be of a gray Color, into diverse Glass-Vials, or into a Matras, of which
two third parts remain empty; place your Vessel on the Sand, and kindle a small
Fire in the beginning, the Heat of which may be afterward increased to the
third Degree: Let it continue in this Condition till the Sublimate be made; and
the Operation will be generally consummated in four or five Hours: whereupon
you may break your Vial, and throw away as useless, a little light Earth that
lies at the bottom. You must also separate that which sticks to the Neck of the
Vials, or of the Matras, and keep it for Ointments against the Itch; but
carefully gather together the white Matter which lies in the middle, and having
pulverized it, cause it to be sublimated in the Vials or Matras, as before.
This Matter must also be separated again (as we have already shown) and put
into other Vials to be sublimated a third time. Lastly, the terrestrial parts
in the bottom, and the fuliginous in the Neck of the Vials, must be, in like
manner, separated, still preserving the Sublimate in the middle, which will
then be very well dulcified, and amount to the quantity of twenty five Ounces
and an half: It is an Efficacious Remedy for all sorts of Venereal Diseases;
removes Obstructions, kills Worms, and purges gently by stool, being taken in
Pills from six Grains to thirty.

Of the proper Composition of the Mercurial Panacaea.
Take what quantity you please of sweet Sublimate, reduce it to Powder in a
Marble or Glass-Mortar, and put it into a Matras, three quarters whereof remain
empty, and of which you have cut off the Neck in the middle of its Height: Then
place this Matras in a Furnace or Balneum of Sand, and make a little Fire
underneath for an Hour, to give a gentle Heat to the Matter, which may be
augmented by little and little to the third degree: Let it continue in this
state about five Hours, and the Matter will be sublimated within that space of
time. Then let the Vessel cool, and break it, throwing away as unprofitable a
little light sort of Earth, of a reddish Color, which is found at the bottom,
and separating all the Sublimate from the Glass. Afterward pulverize it a
second time, and let it be sublimated in a Matras, as before: Thus the
Sublimations must be reiterated seven several times, changing the Matrasses
every time, and casting away the light Earth. Then having reduced your
Sublimate to a very sine impalpable Powder, by grinding it upon a Porphyry or
Marble Stone, put it into a Glass Cucurbite or Gourd, pour into it alkaliz'd
Spirit of Wine to the height of four Fingers; cover the Cucurbite with its
Head, and leave the Matter in Infusion during fifteen Days, stirring it about
from time to time with an Ivory Spatula. Afterward set your Cucurbite in Balneo
Mariae, or in a Vaporous Bath, make fit a Recipient to the Mouth of the
Alembick; lute the Joints exactly with a moistened Bladder, and cause all the
Spirit of Wine to be destill'd with a moderate Fire: Let the Vessels be cooled,
and unluted, and the Panacaea will appear at the bottom of the Cucurbite. If it
be not already dry enough, you may dry it up with a gentle Fire in the Sand,
stirring it with an Ivory or Wooden Spatula in the Cucurbite it self till it be
reduced to Powder. It may be kept for use in a Glass-Vessel, as a Remedy of
very great Efficacy for all sorts of Venenereal Diseases, as also for
Obstructions, the Scurvy, Scrophula or King's Evil, Tettar, Scab, Scurf, Worms,
Ascarides, inveterate Ulcers, etc. The Dose is from six Grains to two Scruples,
in Conserve of Roses.

A TREATISE OF THE DISEASES OF THE BONES.
CHAP. I. Of the Dislocation of the Bones.
WHAT are the Diseases incident to the Bones?

They are five in number, viz. Dislocation, Fracture, Caries or Ulcer,
Exostosis, and Nodus.

What is a Dislocation or Luxation?

It is the starting of the Head of one Bone out of the Cavity of another, with
an Interdiction of the proper Motion of the Part: Or else it is the disjointing
of two Bones united together for the Motion of a Part.

How many causes are there of Dislocation in general?

Two, that is to say, one violent, and the other gentle; thus the Dislocation
is made violently in Falls, Strains, Knocks, and Blows; but it is done gently
and slowly in Defluctions of Rheum; as also by an insensible gathering together
of Humors between the Joints, and upon the Ligaments, the Relaxation or
loosening of which gives occasion afterward to the Head of the Bone to go out
of its place; whence this Consequence may well be drawn, viz. that a violent
Dislocation usually depends upon an external Cause, and a gentle Dislocation
upon an internal.

After how many manners does a Dislocation happen?

Two several Ways; viz. the first is called complete, total, and perfect; and
the second incomplete, partial, and imperfect: But both may happen before,
behind, on the inside, and without; and may also be simple or complicated.

What are the signs of a perfect, total, and complete Dislocation?

It is when a hard Tumor or Swelling is perceived near a Hole in the place of
the Joint, great pain being felt in the Part, and the Motion of it abolith'd.

What are the signs of an imperfect, partial, and incomplete Dislocation?

It is when the Motion is streighten'd, and weaker than ordinary, so that some
Pain is felt in the Joint, and a Deformity may be discerned therein, by
comparing the hurt Part with the opposite which is sound: This Dislocation is
otherwise called a Sprain, when it proceeds from an external Cause; or else it
is termed a Relaxation, when it happens by an internal.

What is a simple, and what is a complicated Dislocation or Luxation?

The Dislocation is properly simple, when it has no concomitant Accidents; and
it is complicated when accompanied with some ill Symptoms or Accidents, such as
Swellings, Inflammations, Wounds, Fractures, etc.

What are the means proper to be used in a simple Dislocation?

A speedy and simple reducing thereof, which is performed by stretching out the
dislocated or luxated. Member, and thrusting back the Head of the Bone into its
natural place. Afterward the Joint must be strengthened with a Fomentation made
with Provence Roses, the Leaves of Wormwood, Rosemary, Camomile, St.
John's-Wort, and Oak-Moss boiled in the Lees of Wine and Forge-Water, keeping
the Part well bound up, and sustained in a convenient situation. But if any ill
Consequence is to be feared, apply Emplastrum Oxycroceum, or Diapalma dissolved
in Wine.

What is to be done in a complicated Dislocation?

The Accidents must be first removed, and then the Bone may be set, which is
impossible to be done otherwise; it being dangerous even to make an Attempt
before, by reason of the too great Violence with which it is effected, and
which would infallibly produce a Convulsion or a Gangrene.

If the Dislocation be accompanied with a Wound, must the Wound be cured before
any Endeavors are used to reduce it?

No, but the Symptoms of the Wound, which hinder the Operation, must be taken
away, as the Swelling, Inflammation, and others of the like Nature; and then it
may be reduced, and the Wound may be dressed according to the usual Method.

If the Dislocation be complicated with the Fracture, what is to be done then?

It is necessary to begin with reducing of the Dislocation, and afterward to
perform that of the Fracture, by reason of the Extension which must be made to
reduce the Dislocation, which would absolutely hinder the Settling of the
Fracture.

How is the Inflammation and Swelling to be asswag'd?

With Linen Clothes dipped in Brandy and common Water, which must be often
renewed; or else with the Tops of Wormwood and Camomile, with Sage and Rosemary
boiled in the Lees of Wine, wherein the Bolsters and Bands are to be steeped.
But all Repereussives and Astringents must be avoided.

How does it appear that the Reduction is well performed?

By the Re-establishment of the Part in its natural State; by its being free
from Pain; by its regular Motion; and by its conformity to the opposite Part
which is sound.

What Dislocations of Parts are most difficult to be reduced?

They are those of the Thighs with the Huckle-Bones, which are almost never
perfectly set; that of the first Vertebra's is extremely difficult to be
reduced; and those of the Lower-Jaw and Soles of the Feet are mortal.

The reducing of Dislocations is performed with greate^ facility in Infants
than in Persons advanced in Years; but it becomes most difficult when it is
deferred for many Days, by reason of the overflowing of the Lympha and
nutritious Juice.

If an Inflammation should happen before the Member is reduced, nothing can be
done till it be allayed, as we have already intimated; but to prevent and
mitigate it, the dislocated Joint, and the neighboring Parts, may be bathed
with lukewarm Wine, in which has been boiled the Tops of St. John's-Wort,
Camomile, Rosemary, Stoecas Arabica, and other Ingredients of the like Nature;
the Bands must be also steept in the same Liquor.

If an Oedematous Tumor arise in the luxated Member after the Joint has been
set, it is requisite to take internal Sudorificks, and to apply Liniments made
with the destill'd Oil of Tartar, and of Human Bones, which may be rectified
with burnt Hart's Horn, or some other part of Animals, to take away its stink:
Or else take yellow-Wax, and very white Rosin, melt the whole Mass, and put
into it white Amber and Gum Elemi, a sufficient quantity of each to make a
Composition to be incorporated with Balsam of Peru; a Plaster of which may be
prepared, and applied to the dislocated Member; but the Plaster must not be
laid a cross, lest it should contract the Part too much. The whole Member may
be also anointed with Oil of St. John's-Wort, or with the destill'd Oil of
Turpentine; or rather with a simple Decoction of Nervous Plants in Wine.

If the Bone be put out of its place by a coagulated sort of Matter like Mortar
or Plaster, Resolutives and Attenuants are to be used, such as the volatile
Spirit of Tartar prepared with the Lees of Wine, volatile Spirit of Tartar
destill'd with Nitre in a Retort with a long Neck, or Spirit of Tartar prepared
by Fermentation with Tartar, and its proper Alkali: This last is the best of
all, and the use thereof ought to be continued. The volatile Salt of Human
Bones is also very efficacious; but it is necessary to begin first with the
taking of Laxative and Sudorifick Medicines, appropriated according to the
respective Circumstances. The Spirit of Earthworms may be also applied
outwardly, which is made by Fermentation, and may be often laid on the Part
either alone, or with the Spirit of Sal Ammoniack.

If a dislocated Bone be not set in good time, a Coagulum or kind of curdled
Substance is formed in the Cavity, which hinders the reducing of it to its
place; but this Coagulum may be dissolved with the following Medicament, before
you attempt to set the Bone. Take one part of the destill'd Oil of Human Bones,
two parts of foetid Oil of Tartar; mingle the whole, and add quick Lime to be
destill'd in a Retort: Let the Parts be fomented with this Oil.

If the Dislocation happened by the Relaxation of the Ligaments, recourse may
be had to universal Sudorificks taken inwardly; as also to such Medicines as
are full of an unctuous and volatile Salt, particularly Aromatic Oils, and
Spirit of Sal Ammoniack. In the mean while Aromaticks, Resolutives, and
moderate Astringents may be applied outwardly.

CHAP II. Of the Fractures of Bones.
WHAT is the Fracture of a Bone?

It is the Division of the Continuity of its Parts.

After how many different manners may a Bone be broken?

Three several ways, viz. cross-wise, side-wise, in its length, and perhaps in
Shatters or Splinters.

By what means may a Bone be fractur'd?

It may happen to be done by three sorts of Instruments, viz. such as are fit
for bruising, cutting, or wresting; that is to say, a Bone may be divided in
the Continuity of its proper Parts, by Contusion, Incision, or Contorsion.

How is the Fracture of a Bone discovered?

Diverse ways, viz. by the ill Disposition of the Part, which becomes shorter;
by its want of Motion; by its flexibility or pliantness else^ where than in its
Articulations; by the unevenness that may be perceived in its Continuity; by
the cracking which is heard; sometimes also by the shooting forth of one of its
ends through the Flesh which it has opened; and lastly by a Comparison made
thereof with the sound Part on the other side, as that of the Right Arm with
the Left.

What kind of Fracture is most difficult to be discerned?

It is that which happens in the length of the Bone, commonly called a Cleft or
Fissur^ which gives occasion to very great Symptoms when it is unknown: But it
may be found out by the Pain and Swelling felt at the bottom of the Cleft in
touching it; besides the Conjectures which may be made from the Relation of the
Person who has had a Fall, and might have heard the cracking of the Bone.

What sort of Fracture is most difficult to be cured?

The shattering or splitting of a Bone in Pieces, by reason of the great Number
of Splints which daily cause new Pains and Suppurations.

What is a simple and what is a complicated Fracture?

The simple Fracture is that whereby the Bone is broken, without any other
Accident; and the complicated Fracture is that which is followed by some
Accident; as that in which there is a splitting of the Bone in pieces, or where
the Bone is broken in two several places, or else when the Fracture is
accompanied with a Luxation, a Wound, an Inflammation, or other Circumstances
of the like Nature.

Are old Men or Children most subject to these Fractures of the Bones?

Old Men, because their Bones are dr^^r; whereas those of Infants are almost
Cartilaginous, and yield or give way to the violence offered to 'em; from
whence proceed the ^inkings and hollowness that happen in their Skulls,
especially in the Mould of their Heads, or elsewhere; for which a Remedy is
found out by the means of Plais^ers, Splints, and Bandages, fitted to the shape
of the Parts. It is also on the same Account that Bones are more easily broken
in the Winter than in the Summer.

In what Parts are the Fractures of Bones most dangerous?

They are those that happen in the Skull and Joints; in the former by reason of
the Brain; and in the latter in regard of the Nervous Parts.

What Course is to be taken by a Surgeon who is sent for to cure a Fracture?

He ought to do three things, that is to say, at first he must incessantly
endeavor to reduce it, to the end that Nature may reunite the Parts with
greater Facility, and that its Extremities may be brought together again with
less trouble, before a Swelling, Inflammation, or Gangrene happen in the Part.
Afterward he is to use means to retain the Parts in their proper Figure, and
natural Situation, and to prevent all sorts of Accidents.

How is the setting of a broken Bone to be performed?

When the Fracture is Cross-wise, it must be reduced by Extension and
contra-Extension; and when it is in length, the Coaptation or bringing together
again of the Sides, is only necessary.

What is to be done in a Fracture complicated with a Wound?

The Operator must first reduce it, and then administer the other Helps, as in
a simple Fracture.

How may it be known that the reducing of the Fracture is well performed?

When the Pain cease; when the Part has resumed its natural Shape; when no
Unevenness is any longer perceived therein; and when it is conformable to the
sound Part on the other side.

What are the Signs which show that the Splints remain in the Fracture after it
has been reduced?

They are the secret and continual Workings of the Fibers, or twitchings, that
are felt by Intervals in the Part, with great Pains, which are the Indications
of an Abcess arising therein; and when a Wound is joined to the Fracture, the
Lips of it are puffed up, and become more soft and pale, the purulent Matter
abounding also more than ordinary.

When the Splints appear, must they be drawn out by force?

By no means; for great care ought to be taken to avoid all manner of violent
Operations; it being requisite to wait for their going out with the purulent
Matter; or at most to facilitate their Passage by the use of Injections of the
Tincture of Mirth and Aloes; by the application of Emplastrum Andreae Crucii,
and by the help of the Forceps.

How is a simple Fracture to be dressed, after it has been reduced?

The Parts are to be strengthened and consolidated with Liniments of Oleum
Lumbricorum, or of Oil of St. John's-Wort mingled with Wine, Brandy, or
Aqua-Vitae; with Fomentations of Red Roses, Rosemary, and St. John's-Wort
boiled in Wine; and with Emplastrum contra Rupturam, or de Betonica, carefully
wrapping up the broken Member, but after such a manner that the two Fxtremities
may not cross one another; and that a small Space may remain open between both.
Afterward the Splints and Bands are to be applied, taking care to avoid binding
'em too hard, and to take 'em off every three Days, in order to refit 'em, to
abate troublesome Itchings, and to give Air to the Part; by these means
preventing the Gangrene, which might happen by the Suffocation of the natural
Heat. If the Thighs or Legs are broken, Scarves are to be used to support and
stay 'em in the Bed.

What space of time may there be allowed for curing the Fracture of a Bone?

The Cure will take up more or less time, according to the variety of the
Parts, or the different thickness of the Bones: Thus to form the Callus of the
broken Jaw Bone, twenty Days may well be allotted; for that of the Clavicle, or
that of the Shoulder Bone, twenty four; for that of the Bones of the Elbow,
thirty; for that of the Arm-Bone, forty; for that of the Wrist-Bone, and those
of the Fingers, twenty; for that of the Ribs, twenty; for that of the
Thigh Bone, fifty; for that of the Leg-Bone, forty; for that of the Bones of
the Tarsus and Toes, twenty.

What ought to be done in particular to promote the formation of the Callus?

The fractur'd Part must be rubbed with Oleum Lumbricorum and Spirit of Wine
heated and mingled together: The Decoctions of Agrimony, Savine, and Saxifrage
are also to be used, and the Lapis Osteocolla is a Specific: It is usually
given in great Comphrey-Water, or in a Decoction of Perewinkle made with Wine,
and is often re-iterated.

CHAP. III. Of the particular Fractures of the Skull.
WHAT is a Fracture of the Cranium or Skull?

It is a Wound of the Head complicated with a Fracture of the Skull-Bone.

After how many manners may the Skull be fractur'd?

Three several ways, viz. by Contusion, by Incision, and by Puncture.

What is the most dangerous of these Fractures?

It is that which happens by Contusion; because the Concussion and Commotion is
greater.

Do all the Fractures of the Skull require the use of the Trepan?

No, the Fractures must be deep which stand in need of the help of such an
Instrument; for those that are superficial may be cured by a simple Exfoliation.

What is that deep Fracture, wherein the use of the Trepan is absolutely
necessary?

It is that which is made in the two Tables of the Skull, penetrating to the
Meninges of the Brain; upon which at that time the Blood is diffused, and must
be taken away by the Operation of the Trepan.

How may it be discovered that the ^^o Tables of the Skull are broken?

By the Eyes, and by Ratiocination.

Are not the Eyes sufficient alone, and are they not more certain than
Ratiocination?

Yes; but forasmuch as things are not always seen, there is often a necessity
of making use of rational Deductions to find out that which the Eyes cannot
discern.

When does it happen that the Eyes alone discover the Eracture?

When the Wound is large and wide, so that it may be immediately viewed.

When does it happen that Ratiocination supplies the defect of the Eyes?

When the Wound is so small that the Bone cannot be seen, and nothing appears
but the Accidents.

What are the Accidents or Signs of the Fracture of the Skull?

They are a dimmness of the Sight, and loss of the Understanding, which happen
at the very Moment when the Fall or Blow is received; with the Phlegmatic
Vomittings that follow soon after: These Signs are called Univocal. And there
are others that bear the Name of Equivocal, and which confirm the former; as a
Flux of Blood through the Nose, Eyes, and Ears, redness of the Eyes, heaviness of
the Head, and puffing up of the Face; as also afterward Drowsiness, Shivering
of the whole Body, Fever, Deliriums, Convulsions, etc.

Must all these Signs appear before a Determination can be made of the
necessity of using the Trepan?

No, it is sufficient to have the Univocal Signs to make a Crucial Incision in
the place of the Wound, and to lay bare the Bone, in order to observe the
Fracture, which sometimes is so fine, that the Operator is obliged to make use
of Ink, which insinuates it self into the Cleft, and of a particular
Instrument, wi^h which the black Line that has penetrated to the bottom,
cannot be rubbed out; whereas it may be easily defaced when the Fracture is
only superficial.

How long time is commonly spent before the appearing of the Accidents?

In the Summer Season they appear in three or four Days, and at the latest in
seven; in Winter they are slower, and sometimes do not happen till the
fourteenth Day: But at the end of this term, it may be affirmed that the Trepan
is often unprofitable.

What is requisite to be done in a doubtful Occasion; Must the Trepan be
applied or omitted?

The Surgeon is to have recourse to his own conscientious Discretion, which
ought to serve as a Guide, and requires that we should always act according to
the known Rules of Art; insomuch that after having well considered the
Accidents, with all the Circumstances of the Wound, if there be no good grounds
for the undertaking of the Operation, it is expedient to desist, and in this
case to have deference to the Advice of other able Surgeons of the same
Society, rather than to rely too much upon his own Judgment, to the end that he
may be always secure from all manner of Blame.

Is the Trepan applied upon the Fracture?

No; but on one side of it, and always in a firm place.

What Course is to be taken when a Fracture is found in a Suture?

A double Trepan is to be made, and applied on each side of the Suture, by
reason of the overflowing of the Blood, which may happen therein.

What Method ought to be observed in the curing of the Wounds of the Head, and
Fractures of the Skull?

In simple Wounds of the Head, it is necessary only to make use of Balsams, and
to lay over 'em Emplastrum de Betonica. When there is a Contusion either in the
Pericranium, or in the Skull, the Wound must be kept open till after the
Suppuration or Exfoliation.

When there is only a Bunch without any Wound or Accident, it must speedily be
dissolved with Plaster or Mortar, Chimney-Soot, Oil of Olives, and Wine, laid
upon the Part between two Linnen-Rags; or else with Soot, Spirit of Wine, and
Oil of St. John's-Wort, wherein the Bolsters are soakt, to be in like manner
applied with a Band.

Wounds of the Head accompanied with a Fracture, absolutely require the
application of the Trepan, wherein it is requisite to make use of Oil of
Turpentine to be dropped upon the Membrane of the Brain; or else Spirit of Wine
mingled with Oil of Almonds, and not with the Oil or Syrrup of Roses; and to
endeavor to cause a plentiful outward Suppuration.

Besides, it must not be neglected to enjoin the wounded Person to be let Blood
both before and after the Operation, if he has a Fever or a Plethory; and more
especially it is to be remembered to cause his Body to be kept open at least
every other Day, with Clysters, obliging him to keep a good Diet, and to avoid
all violent Agitations both of Body and Mind, abstaining from eating Flesh till
the Fourteenth Day. All manner of Venery and Conjugal Embraces, which prove
fatal at this time, are to be prohibited during forty Days, to be counted from
the Day of the Operation; as they are also in all other considerable Wounds.

CHAP. IV. Of the Caries or Ulcer of the Bones, Exostosis, and Nodus.
WHAT is Caries?

It is the Putrefaction of the Substance of the Bone, or else its Ulcer or
Gangrene.

Whence does the Caries of the Bone derive its Original?

It proceeds from an internal and external Cause; the former being that which
has been produced at first in the Substance of the Bone; and the other that
which takes its Rise from an inveterate Ulcer in the Flesh, which has
communicated its Malignity to the Substance of the Bone, and by that means
corrupted it.

How is the Caries known which proceeds from an inward Cause?

By the continual and violent Pains which are felt before, and continue for a
long time without diminution; as also afterward by the alteration of the Flesh
that covers the Bone, and which becomes soft, spongy, and livid.

By what means is a Caries that derives its Origin from an outward Cause,
discovered?

By the quality of the purulent Matter that issues out of the Ulcer in the
Flesh, which is blackish, Unctuous, and extremely stinking; as also by the help
of the Probe, that discovers asperity or roughness in the Bone when it is
laid bare.

What Means are to be used in order to cure a Caries proceeding from an
external Cause?

The Powder of Flower-de-luce may be used, and it is sufficient for that
purpose, when the Caries is superficial; but it is necessary to take Oleum
Guyaci, and to soak Bolsters therein, to be laid upon the Ulcer when it is
deep; or else Aqua-Vitae or Brandy, in which have been infused the Roots of
Flower-de-luce, Cinnamon, and Cloves. Lastly, the actual Cautery, which is
Fire, must be applied thereto.

What is to be done when the Caries proceeds from an internal-Cause?

The Flesh must be opened to give Passage to the Sanies that runs out of the
ulcerated Bone, to the end that Exfoliation may be procured; and if the Ulcer
has not as yet laid open the Bone on the outside, the Trepan ought to be
applied; but the Ulcer or Caries must be afterward handled, as we have even now
declared.

What is Exostosis?

It is the Swelling of a Bone made by the settling of a corrupt Humor in its
proper Substance.

What is Nodus?

It is a kind of gummy and wavering Tumor, which is formed by the settling of
a gross Humor between the Bone and the Periosteum.

Are Exostoses and Nodus 's suppurable Tumors?

Yes, because they sometimes produce Ulcers and Gangrenes in the Bone, which
are called Caries, proceeding from an internal Cause; nevertheless they are
generally dissolved by Frictions with Vnguentum Griseum, or by the application
of Plasters of Tobacco, or Emplastrum de Vigo quadruplicato Mercurio; taking
also to the same purpose internal Diaphoretick and Sudorisick Medicines, with
convenient Purgatives.

CHAP. V. Of Cauteries, Vesicatories, Setons, Cupping-Glasses, and Leeches.
WHAT is a Vesicatory?

The Name of Vesicatory may be attributed to every thing that is capable of
raising Bladders of Blisters in the Skin; nevertheless in Surgery, by a
Vesicatory is understood a Medicament prepared with Cantharides or Spanish
Flies dried, which are beaten to Powder, and mingled with Turpentine,
Plasters, Leaven, and other Ingredients.

In what places, and after what manner are Vesicatories usually applied?

They are applied every where, accordingly as there is occasion to draw out or
discharge some Humor from a Part: In Defluxions of Rheum upon the Eyes or
Teeth, they are laid on the Neck and Temples; in Apoplexies, behind the Ears;
and so of the rest, observing always to make Frictions on the places where the
Application is to be made, to the end that the Vesicatory may sooner take
effect.

How long time must the Vesicatory continue on the Part?

The Blisters are generally raised by 'em within the space of five or six
Hours; yet this Operation depends more or less upon the fineness of the Skin;
and when the Bladders or Blisters appear, it is requisite to deferr the
openning of 'em for some time, to the end that Nature may have an Opportunity
to introduce a new Scarf-Skin, by which means the Pain may be avoided that
would be felt, if the Skin were too much exposed to the Air.

What is a Cautery?

It is a Composition made of many Ingredients, which corrode, burn, and make an
Escar on the Part to which they are applied.

How many sorts of Cauteries are there in general?

There are two kinds, viz. the Actual and the Potential; the former are those
that have an immediate Operation; as Fire, or a red-hot Iron; and the others
are those that produce the same Effect, but in a longer space of time; such are
the ordinary Cauteries composed of Caustic Medicaments.

Which are the most safe, the Actual or the Potential Cauteries?

A distinction is to be made herein; for Actual Cauteries are safest in the
Operation, because they may be applied wheresoever one shall think fit, as also
for as long a time, or for any purpose: Whereas the Potential cannot be guided
after the same manner. But in Haemorrhages the Potential Cauteries are most
eligible, by reason that the Escar produced by 'em not being so speedily
formed, the Vessels are better closed, and they are not so subject to open
again when it falls off; as it often happens in the Fall of an Escar made by
Fire.

In what places are Cauteries usually applied?

In all places where an Attraction is to be made, or an Intemperature to be
corrected, or a Flux of Humors to be stopped, by inducing an Escar on the Part:
However they are commonly laid upon the Nape of the Neck, between the first and
second Vertebra; on the outward Part of the Arm in a small Hole between the
Muscle Deltoides and the Biceps; above the Thigh, between the Muscle Sartor,
and the Vastus Internus; and on the inside of the Knee, below the Flexors of
the Leg; observing every where that the Cautery be placed near the great
Vessels, to the end that it may draw out and cleanse more abundantly.

What is the Composition of the Potential Cauteries?

They may be made with quick Lime, Soap; and Chimney-Soot; or else take an
Ounce of Sal Ammoniack, two Ounces of burnt Roman Vitriol, three Ounces of
quick Lime, and as many of calcined Tartar; mingle the whole Mass together in a
Lixivium of Bean-Cod Ashes, and cause it to evaporate gently to a Consistence:
Let this Paste be kept for use in a dry place, and in a well-stopt Vessel. Or
else the Silver-Cautery, or Lapis Infernalis may be prepared after the
following manner:

Take what quantity you please of Silver, let it be dissolved with thrice as
much Spirit of Nitre in a Vial, and set the Vial upon the Sand-Fire, to the end
that two third parts of its Moisture may evaporate: Then pour the rest
scalding-hot into a good Crucible, placed over a gentle Fire, and the
Ebullition being made, the heat of the Fire must be augmented, till the Matter
sink to the bottom, which will become as it were an Oil: Afterward pour it into
a somewhat thick and hot Mould, and it will coagulate, so as to be fit for Use,
if it be kept in a well-stopt Vial. This Cautery is the best; and an Ounce of
Silver will yield one Ounce and five Drams of Lapis Infernalis.

What is a Seton?

It is a String of Silk, Thread, or Cotton, threaded through a kind of
Pack-Needle, with which the Skin of a Part is to be pierced through, to make an
Ulcer therein, that has almost the same effect as a Cautery.

What is most remarkable in the Application of a Seton?

It ought to be observed, that the String must be dipped in Oil of Roses, and
that one end of it must always be kept longer than the other, to facilitate the
running of the Humors.

In what Parts is the to Seton be applied?

The Nape of the Neck is the usual place of its Application, although it may be
made in any part of the Body where it is necessary. It sometimes happens that a
Surgeon is obliged to use a kind of Seton in such Wounds made with a Sword, or
by Gunshot, as pass quite through from one side to the other; then the String or
Skain must be dipped in convenient Ointments or Medicinal Compositions; and as
often as the Dressings are taken away, it will be requisite to cut off the Part
soakt in the Purulent Matter, which must be taken out of the Ulcer.

What is a Cupping-Glass?

It is a Vessel or kind of Vial, made with Glass, the bottom whereof is
somewhat broader than the top, which is applied to the Skin to cause an
Attraction. There are two sorts of these Cupping-Glasses, viz, the Dry, and the
Wet; the former are those that are laid upon the Skin without opening it; and
the latter those that are applied with Scarification.

In what Diseases are Cupping-Glasses used?

In all kinds where it is necessary to make any Attraction; but more especially
in Apoplexies, Vapors in Women, Palsies, and other Distempers of the like
Nature. But the Applications of Cupping-Glasses are altogether different; for
in Apoplexes they are generally set upon the Shoulders or upon the Coccyx; in
Vapors upon the inside of the Thighs; and in Palsies upon the Paralytick Part
it self.

What is a Leech?

It is an Animal like a little Worm which sucks the Blood, and is commonly
applied to Children and weak Persons, to serve instead of Phlebotomy: Leeches
are also used for the discharging of a Defluxion of Humors in any Part; as
also in the Haemorrhoidal Veins when they are too full; in the Varices, and in
several parts of the Face.

What choice ought to be made of Leeches?

It is requisite to take those that have their Backs greenish, and their
Bellies red; as also to seek for 'em in a clear running Stream, and to cast
away those that are black and hairy.

CHAP. VI. Of Phlebotomy.
WHAT is Phlebotomy?

It is an evacuation of Blood procured by the artificial Incision of a Vein or
Artery, with a design to restore Health.

Which are the Vessels that are opened in Phlebotomy or Blood-letting?

They are in general all the Veins and Arteries of the Body, nevertheless some
of 'em are more especially appropriated to this Operation; as the Vena
Praeparata in the Forehead; the Ranulae under the Tongue; the Jugular Veins and
Arteries in the Neck; the Temporal Arteries in the Temples; the Cephalic,
Median, and Basilick Veins in the inside of the Elbow; the Salvatella between
the Ring-Finger and the Little-Finger; the Poplitaea in the Ham; the Saphena in
the internal Malleolus or Ankle; and the Ischiatica in the external.

What are the Conditions requisite in the due performing of the Operation of
Phlebotomy?

They are these, viz. to make choice of a proper Vessel; not to open any at all
Adventures; not to let Blood without necessity, nor without the Advice of a
Physician; whose Office it is to determine the Seasons or Times convenient for
that purpose; as that of Intermission in an Intermitting Fever; that of Cooling
in the Summer; and that of Noontide in the Winter; and lastly, to take away
different quantities of Blood; for in the Heat of Summer they ought to be
lesser, and greater in the Winter.

What are the Accidents of Phlebotomy?

They are an Impostume, a Rhombus, an Echymosis, an Aneurism, Lipothymy,
Swooning, and a Convulsion.

What is a Rhombus?

It is a small Tumor of the Blood which happens in the place where the
Operation is performed either by making the Orifice too small, or larger than
the Capaciousness of the Vessel will admit. The Rhombus is cured by laying upon
it a Bolster dipped in fair Water, between the Folds of which must be put a
little Salt, to dissolve and prevent the Suppuration.

How may it be perceived that an Artery has been pricked or opened in letting
Blood?

The Puncture of an Artery produces an Aneurism; and the Opening of it causes
a Flux of Vermilion Colored Blood, which issues forth in abundance, and by
Leaps.

Are the Leaps which the Blood makes in running, a certain Sign that it comes
from an Artery?

No, because it may so happen, that the Basilick Vein lies directly upon an
Artery, the beating of which may cause the Blood of the Basilica to run out
leaping: Therefore these three Circumstances ought to be considered jointly,
that is to say, the Vermilion Color, the great quantity and the Leaps, in
order to be assured that the Blood proceeds from an Artery.

How may it be discovered that a Tendon has been hurt in letting Blood?

It is known when in opening the Median Vein, the end of the Lancet has met
with some Resistance; when the Patient has felt great Pain, and afterward when
the Tendon apparently begins to be puffed up, and the Arm to swell. A Remedy
may be applied to this Accident thus; after having finished the Operation, a
Bolster steeped in Oxycratum is to be laid upon the Vessel, a proper Bandage is
to be made, and the Arm must be wrapped up in a Scarf: If the Inflammation that
arises in the Part be followed with Suppuration, it must be dressed with a
small Tent; and if the Suppuration be considerable, it is necessary to dilate
the Wound, and to make use of Oil of Eggs and Brandy, or Arcaeus's Liniment,
with a good Digestive; as also to apply Emplastrum Ceratum; to make an
Embrocation on the Arm with Oil of Roses; and to dip the Bolsters in Oxycratum
to cover the whole Part.

Is it not to be feared that some Nerve may be wounded in letting Blood?

No, they lie so deep that they cannot be touched.

Under what Vein is the Artery of the Arm?

It is usually situated under the Basilica.

What Course is proper to be taken to avoid the Puncture of an Artery in
letting Blood?

It must be felt with the Hand before the Ligature is made, observing well
whether it be deep or superficial; for when it lies deep, there is nothing to
be feared; and when it is superficial, it may be easily avoided by pricking the
Vein either higher or lower.

What is to be done when an Artery is opened?

If it be well opened, it is requisite to let the Blood run out till the Person
falls into a Syncope or Swoon, by which means the Aneurism is prevented; and
afterward the Blood will be more easily stopped: It remains only to make a good
Bandage with many Bolsters, in the first of which is simply put a Counter or a
Piece of Money; but a bit of Paper chewed will serve much better, with Bolsters
laid upon it in several Folds.

If the Arteries cause so much trouble when opened accidentally, why are those
of the Temples sometimes opened on purpose, to assuage violent Pains in the
Head?

By reason that in this place the Arteries are situated upon the Bones that
press 'em behind; which very much facilitates their reunion.

Are not the Arteries of Persons advanced in Years more difficult to be closed
than those of Children?

Yes.

Are there not Accidents to be feared in letting Blood in the Foot.

Much less than in the Arm; because the Veins of the Malleoli or Ankles are not
accompanied either with Arteries or Tendons; which gave occasion to the Saying,
That the Arm must be given to be let Blood only to an able Surgeon, but the
Foot may be afforded to a young Practitioner.

A TREATISE OF Chirurgical Operations.
CHAP. I. Of the Operation of the Trepan.
THIS Operation is to be performed, when it is inferred from the Signs of which
we have already given a particular Account, that some Matter is diffused over
the Dura Matter. The Trepan must not be used in the Sinus Superciliares, by
reason of their Cavity; nor in the Sutures, in regard of the Vessels that pass
through 'em; nor in the Temporal Bone without great necessity, especially in that
part of it which is joined to the Parietal-Bone, lest the end of this Bone
should fly out of its place, since it is only laid upon the Parietal; nor in
the middle of the Coronal and Occipital-Bones, by reason of an inner Prominence
wherein they adhere to the Dura Matter; nor in the Passage of the Lateral
Sinus's that are situated on the side of the Occipital.

If the Fissure be very small, the Trepan may be applied upon it, although it is
more expedient to use this Instrument on the side of the Fissure in the lower
part; neither is the Trepan to be set upon the Sinkings; and if the Bones are
loosened or separated, there needs no other trepanning than to take 'em away
with the Elevatory

The Operation must be begun with Incision, which is usually made in form of a
Cross, if the Wound be remote from the Sutures, and there are no Muscles to be
cut, and in the shape of the Letter T. or of the Figure 7. if it be near the
Sutures, so that the Foot of the 7. or of the T. ought to be parallel to the
Suture, the top of the Letter descending toward the Temples; it is also made in
the middle of the Forehead. If it be sufficient to make a longitudinal Incision
in the Forehead; its Wrinkles may be followed, and there will be less Deformity
in the Scar; but it is never done Crosswise in this Part, and the Lips of the
Wound are not to be cut. If an Incision be made on the Muscle Crotaphites, and
on those of the back-part of the Head, it may be done in form of the Letter V.
the Point of which will stand at the bottom of the Muscles; nevertheless it is
more convenient to make a longitudinal Incision, by which means fewer Fibers
will be cut; and it is always requisite to begin at the lower part, to avoid
being hindered by the Haemorrhage. The Incisions are to be made with the
Incision-Knife, and that too boldly when there are no Sinkings; but if there be
any, too much weight must not be laid upon 'em: Thus the Incision being
finished, the Lips of the Skull are to be separated either with the Fingers, or
some convenient Instrument; Then if there be no urgent Occasion to apply the
Trepan, it may be deferred till the next Day, the Wound being dressed in the
mean time with Plasters, Bolsters, Pledgets, and a large Kerchief or upper
Dressing, the use of which we shall show hereafter.

The Operation is begun with the Perforative, to make a little Hole for the
fixing of the Pyramid or Pin which is in the Round; afterward the Round is to
be applied, holding the Handle of the Trepan with the Left Hand, and turning;
but when the Round has made its way, it is lifted up to remove the Pin, lest
this Point should hurt the Dura Matter: Thus the Round being taken off from time
to time, to be cleans'd from the Filings that stick thereto, is set on again,
and the Operator begins his Work of turning anew, which must be carried on
gently when any Blood appears, to the end that the first Table of the piece of
Bone which is removed may not fly from the second: When it comes near the Dura
Matter, the Operator must proceed, in like manner, gently, searching with a
Feather round about the Bone, to observe whether he still continues his Course
in the Skull. He must also often lift up the Trepan to search the Hole, to
cleanse the Instrument, and to keep it from growing hot. As often as the Trepan
is taken off, let him search with a Feather, to see whether the Bone be cut
equally; and if it be not, he must lean more on that side which is least cut.
If it be necessary to make use of the Terebella, the Hole must be made in the
beginning, whilst the Bone is as yet firm; and when the Piece begins to move,
the Terebella is to be put very gently into its Hole, without pressing the
Bone, to draw it out; or else it may be taken away with the Myrtle-Leaf, which
is an Instrument made of a firm Silver-Plate somewhat crooked. When the Piece
is thus removed, the uneven Parts that remain at the bottom of the Hole, are to
be cut with the Lenticula; and if there be any Sinkings, they may be raised
with the Elevatory. Whereupon the Dura Matter may be compressed a little with
the Lenticula, to facilitate the running out of the Blood, the Wounded Person
being obliged to stoop with his Head downward, stopping his Nose and Mouth, and
holding his Breath for a while, to cause the Matter to run out: Then the Dura
Matter may be wiped with Lint; but if any Pus or corrupt Matter lies underneath,
it must be pierced with a Lancet wrapped up in a Tent, that it may not be
perceived by the Assistants. Afterward a Sindon or very fine Linen Rag dipped in
a proper Medicament, is put between the Dura Matter and the Skull; the Hole is
filled with small Bolsters steept in convenient Medicinal Liquors; and the
Wound is dressed with Pledgers, a Plaster, and a Kerchief.

But the Hole ought to be well stopped with Bolsters, because the Dura Matter is
sometimes so much inflamed, that it bursts forth; so that if any Excrescences
arise therein, and go our of the Hole, having small Roots, they may be bound
and cut; but if their Roots be large, they must be pressed close with little
Bolsters steept in Spirituous Medicines. Here it may not be improper to
observe, that the Operation of the Trepan ought to be performed more gently in
Children than in adult Persons, in regard that their Bones are more tender, and
that Oily Medicines must not be used, but Spirituous. The Exsoliation is made
sometimes sooner, and sometimes later; but the Callus usually covers the
opening of the Skull within the space of forty or fifty Days, if no ill
Accident happens. In great Fractures, where there is no longer any connection
between the Bones, it is requisite to take 'em away.

Of the Bandage of the Trepan.
The proper Bandage to be used after the Operation of the Trepan, is the great
Kerchief, which is a large Napkin folded into two parts after such a manner
that the side which touches the Head exceeds that which does not touch it in
the breadth of four Fingers; it is applied to the Head in the middle, whilst a
Servant holds the Dressing with his Hand: Then the two upper ends of the Napkin
being brought under the Chin, the Surgeon takes the two lower, and draws 'em
straight by the sides, so as that side of the Napkin, which is four Fingers
broader than the other, may be laid upon the Forehead: Afterward the two ends
of the Napkin are crossed behind the Head, and fastened at their Extremities
with Pins, without making any Folds, that might hurt the Part; but the ends of
the Napkin which fall upon the Shoulders, are raised up to the Head near the
lesser Corner of the Eyes; and the two ends under the Chin are fastened with
Pins, or else tied in a Knot.

CHAP. II. Of the Operation of the Fistula Lachrymalis.
THIS Operation is performed when there is a Fistulous Ulcer in the great
Corner of the Eye, after this manner: The Patient being pl^c'd in a convenient
Posture, and having his sound Eye bound up, to take away the sight of the
Instruments; the Operator causes the other Eye to be kept steady with a
Bolster held with an Instrument, and makes an Incision with a Lancer in form a
Crescent upon the Tumor, taking care to avoid cutting the Eyelid and the
little Cartilage which serves as a Pulley to the great Oblique Muscle. If the
Bone be putrified with a Caries, an Actual Cautery may be applied thereto,
using for that purpose a small Funnel or Tube, through the Canal of which the
Cautery is conveyed to the Bone. But the Bone must not be pierced, for it is
exfoliated entire by reason of its smallness; and so the Hole is made without
any Perforation.

The Dressing and Bandage of the Fistula Lachrymalis.
The Wound is filled with small dry Pledgets, and covered with a Plaster and
Bolster: The Bandage is made with an Handkerchief folder triangular-wise, the
ends of which are fastened behind the Head. If the Flesh grows too fast, it may
be consumed with the Lapis Infernalis; and if there be occasion to dilate the
Wound, to facilitate the Exsoliation, it may be done with little pieces of
Sponge prepared, and put into it. Afterward Causticks are to be used, to eat
away the Callous Parts, which may be mingled with Oily Medicines, to weaken
their Action, taking care, nevertheless, that the Eye receive no damage by
'em. If the Bone be corrupted, a little Euphorbium may be applied; or else the
small Pledgets steept in the Tincture of Myrrh and Aloes; then the Ulcer may be
handled as all others.

CHAP. III. Of the Operation of the Cataract.
THIS Operation is performed when there is a small Body before the Apple of the
Eye, which hinders the Sight from entering into it; but it is undertaken only in
Blew, Green, and Pearl-colour'd Cataracts, or in those that are of the Color
of polished Steel; and not in Yellow, Black, or Lead-colour'd. To know whether
the Cataract be fit to be couched, the Patient's Eye must be rubbed; so that if
the Cataract remains unmovable, it is mature enough; but if it changes its
place, it is requisite to wait till it become more solid. The Spring and Autumn
are the most proper Seasons for performing the Operation.

To this purpose the Patient being set down with his Eyes turned toward the
Light, and having his sound Eye bound up, the Surgeon must likewise sit on a
higher Seat, whilst the Patient's Head is held by a Servant; and his Eye being
turned toward his Nose, is kept steady with a Speculum Oculi, which is a little
Iron-Instrument made like a Spoon, pierced in the middle, so that the Ball of
the Eye may be let through this Hole: Then the Surgeon taking a a Steel-Needle
either round or flat, accordingly as he shall judge convenient, perforates the
Conjunctive at the end of the Corneous Tunicle, on the side of the little
Corner of the Eye, and boldly thrusts his Needle into the middle of the
Cataract, which he at first pusheth upward, to loosen it with the Point of the
Needle; and then downward, holding it for some time with his Needle below the
Apple of the Eye. If it ascend again after it is let go, it must be depressed a
second time; but the Operation is finished when it remains in the same place
whereto it was thrust; neither is the Needle to be removed till this be done,
and the Cataract entirely couched. In taking out the Needle, the Eyelid must
be pulled down, and pressed a little over the Eye.

The Dressing and Bandage,
Is to cause both the Patient's Eyes to be closed and bound up; then he must be
obliged to keep his Bed during seven or eight Days, and some Defensative is to
be laid upon the sore Eye, to hinder the Inflammation.

M. Dupre, Surgeon to the Hospital of Hotel-Dieu at Paris, a Person well versed
in these kinds of Operations, has observed, that after the same manner as
Cataracts were formed in a very little space of time in perfect Maturity; it
happened also very often, that the Cataracts which were supposed to have got up
again, were not the very same with those that were couched, but rather a new
Pellicula or little Skin, which sometimes has its Origin in the top of the
Vveous Tunicle, and is caused only by a very considerable Relaxation of the
Excretory Vessels from the Sources of the Aqueous Humor which in filtrating
permits the running of many heterogeneous Parts, the Increase of which
produces a new Cataract.

Of other Operations in the Eyes.
Sometimes a sort of purulent Matter is gathered together under the Corneous
Tunicle; so that to draw it out, the Eye must be fixed in a Posture with the
Speculum Oculi, and after a small Incision made therein with a fine Lancet, is
to be pressed a little, to let out the Matter; but if it be too thick, it may
be drawn forth by sucking gently with a small Tube or Pipe, having a little
Vial in the middle, into which the Matter will fall as it is sucked out.

Sometimes a small Tumor arises in the Eye, which being tied at its Root with
a Slip-Knot, to streighten it from time to time, will at length be dissolved:
But if the Tumor lie in the Hole of the Apple of the Eye, this Operation must
not be admitted, lest the Scar should hinder the Passage of the Light.
Sometimes also a somewhat hard Membrane, called Vnguis, appears in the great
Corner of the Eye, which when it sticks thereto, may be cut off by binding it;
this is done with a Needle and Thread, which is passed through the Membrane, and
afterward tied.

If the Eyelids are glu'd together, a crooked Needle without a Point may be
threaded, and passed underneath 'em; then the ends of the Thread may be drawn,
to lift up the Eyelids, and they may be separated with a Lancet.

If the Hairs of the Eyelids or Eyebrows offend the Eye, they must be pulled
out with a Pair of Tweezers or Nippers; and when any small, hard, and
transparent Tumors arise in the Eyelids, they are to be opened, to let out
the corrupt Matter.

CHAP. IV. Of the Operation of the Polypus.
THIS Operation is necessary, when there are any Excrescences of Flesh in the
Nostrils, which, nevertheless, when they are livid, stinking, hard, painful,
and sticking very close, must not be tampered with, because they are Cancers.
But if they are whitish, red, hanging, and free from Pain, the Cure may be
undertaken after this manner: Take hold of the Polypus with a Pair of Forceps,
as near its Root as is possible, and turn 'em first on one side, and then on
another, till it be pulled off. If the Polypus descends into the Throat, it may
be drawn through the Mouth with crooked Forceps; and if an Haemorrhage should
happen after the Operation, it may be stopped by thrusting up into the Nostrils
certain Tents soakt in some Styptick Liquor; or else by Syringing with the same
Liquor.

CHAP. V. Of the Operation of the Hare-Lip.
THIS Operation is performed when the Upper-Lip is cleft; but if there be a
great loss of Substance, it must not be undertaken; neither ought it to be
practiced upon old nor scorbutic Persons, nor upon young Children, by reason
that their continual Crying would hinder the reunion. But if any are desirous
that it should be done to these last, they are to be kept from taking any rest
for a long time, to the end that they may fall a-sleep after the Operation,
which is thus effected:

If the Lip sticks to the Gums, it is to be separated with an Incision-Knife,
without hurting 'em; then the Hare-Lip must be cut a little about the edges
with Sizzers, that it may more easily reunite, the edges being held for that
purpose with a Pair of Pincers, whilst the Servant who supports the Patient's
Head, presses his Cheeks before, to draw together the sides of the Hare-Lip:
Whereupon the Operator passes a Needle with waxed Thread, into the two sides
of the Wound, from the outside to the inside at a Thread's distance from each.
But care mu^^ be had that the two Lips of the Hare-Lip be well adjusted, and
very even; the Thread being twisted round the Needle by crossing it above.

The Dressing and Bandage.
After the Lips are washed with warm Wine, the Points of the Needles must be
out off, small Bolsters being laid under their ends; then the Wound is to be
dressed with a little Pledget covered with some proper Balsam, putting at the
same time under the Gum a Linen Rag steeped in some desiccative Liquor, lest
the Lip should stick to the Gum, if it be necessary to keep 'em apart. Lastly,
upon the whole is to be laid an agglutinative Plaster, supported with the
uniting Bandage, which is a small Band perforated in the middle; it is laid
behind the Head, and afterward drawn forward, one of its ends being let into
the Hole which lies upon the Sore: Then the two ends of the Band are turned
behind the Head upon the same Folds where they are fastened, sticking therein a
certain Number of Pins, proportionably to the length of the Wound.

The Patient must be dressed three Days after; and it is requisite at the first
time only to untwist half the Needle, loosening the middle Thread if there be
three; to which purpose a Servant is to thrust the Cheeks somewhat forward. On
the eighth Day the middle Needle may be taken off, if it be a young Infant;
nevertheless the Needles must not be removed till it appears that the sides are
well joined; neither must they be left too long, because the Hoses would scarce
be brought to close.

CHAP VI. Of the Operation of Bronchotomy.
THIS Operation becomes necessary, when the Inflammation that happens in the
Larynx hinders Respiration, and is performed after this manner:

The Windpipe is opened between the third and fourth Ring, above the Muscle
Cricoides, or else in the middle of the Windpipe; but in separating the
Muscles called Sternohyodei, care must be had to avoid cutting the recurrent
Nerves, lest the Voice should be lost; as also the Glandules named Thyroides.
The Space between the Rings is to be opened with a straight Lancet, kept steady
with a little Band, and a transverse Incision is to be made between 'em: Before
the Lancet is taken out, a Stilet is put into the Opening, through which passes
a little Pipe, short, flat, and somewhat crooked at the end, which must not be
thrust in too far, for fear of exciting a Cough. This Pipe has two small Rings
for the fastening of Ribbans, which are tied round about the Neck; and it must
be left in the Wound till the Symptoms cease. Afterward it is taken away, and
the Wound is dressed, the Lips of it being drawn together again with the
uniting Bandage, which has been already described.

CHAP. VII. Of the Operation of the Uvula.
WHEN the Uvula or Palate of the Mouth is swelled so as to hinder Respiration
or Swallowing, or else is fallen into a Gangrene, it may be extirpated thus:
The Tongue being first depressed with an Instrument called Speculum Oris, the
Palate is held with a Forceps, or cut with a Pair of Sizzers; or else a
Ligature may be made before it is cut; and the Mouth may be afterward gargl'd
with Astringent Liquors.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Operation of a Cancer in the Breast.
THE Cancer at first is not so big as a Pea, being a small, hard, blackish
Swelling, sometimes livid, and very troublesome by reason of its Prickings; but
when it is increased, the Tumor appears hard, Lead-colour'd, and livid,
causing in the beginning a Pain that may be pretty well endured, but in the
increase it grows intolerable, and the Stink is extremely noisome. When it is
ready to Ulcerate, the Heat is vehement, with a pricking Pulsation; and the
Veins round about are turgid, being filled with black Blood, and extended as it
were the Feet of a Crab or Crey-Fish, till Death happen. When this Tumor is
not ulcerated, it is called an Occult Cancer; and an Apparent one when it
breaks forth into an open Ulcer.

To palliate an Occult Cancer, and prevent its Ulceration, a Cataplasm or
Pultis of Hemlock very fresh may be applied to the Part. All the kinds of
Succory, the Decoction of Solanum or Nightshade; the Juices of these Plants,
as also those of Scabious, Geranium or Stork-Bill, Herniaria or Rupture-Wort,
Plantain, etc. are very good in the beginning. River-Crabs pounded in a
Leaden-Mortar, and their Juice beaten in a like Mortar, are an excellent
Remedy; as also are Humane Excrements or Urine destill'd, and laid upon the
Occult Concer: Or else,

Take an Ounce of calcined Lead, two Ounces of Oil of Roses, and six Drams of
Saffron; let the whole Composition be beaten in a Mortar with a Leaden Pestle,
and applied. The Amalgama of Mercury with Saturn is likewise a very efficacious
Remedy.

In the mean while the Patient may be purged with black Hellebore and Mercurius
Dulcis, taking also inwardly from one Scruple to half a Dram of the Powder of
Adders, given to drink, with half the quantity of Crab's-Eyes: But very great
care must be taken to avoid the Application of Maturatives or Emollients, which
would certainly bring the Tumor to Ulceration.

When the Cancer is already ulcerated, the Spirit of Chimney-Soot may be used
with good Success; and the Oil of Sea-Crabs poured scalding hot into the Ulcer,
is an excellent Remedy. But if it be judged expedient entirely to extirpate the
Cancer, it may be done thus:

The sick Patient being laid in Bed, the Surgeon takes the Arm on the side of
the Cancer, and lifts it upward and backward, to give more room to the Tumor;
then having passed a Needle with a very strong. Thread though the bottom of the
Breast, he cuts the Thread to take away the Needle, and passes the Needle
again into the Breast, to cause the Threads to cross one another. Afterward
these four ends of the Threads are tied together, to make a kind of Handle to
take off the Tumor, which is cut quite round to the Ribs with a very sharp
Rasor. The Cutting is usually begun in the lower Part to end in the Vessels
near the Arm-Pit, where a small Piece of Flesh is left, to stop the Blood with
greater Facility: Then having laid a Piece of Vitriol upon the Vessels, or
Bolsters soakt in styptick Water; the sides of the Breast are to be pressed
with the Hand, to let out the Blood and Humors; and an Actual Cautery is to be
lightly applied thereto.

The Dressing.
The Wound is to be dressed with Pledgets strewn with Astringent Powders, a
Plaster, a Bolster, a Napkin round the Breast, and a Scapulary to support the
whole Bandage.

But instead of passing Threads cross-wise, to form a Handle, with which the
Breast may be taken off, it would be more expedient to make use of a sort of
Forceps turned at both ends in form of a Crescent, after such a manner that
those ends may fall one upon another when the Forceps are shut. Thus the
Surgeon may lay hold on the Breast with these Forceps, and draw it off, after
having cut it at one single Stroke with a very flat, crooked, and sharp Knife.
Neither is it convenient to apply the Actual Cautery to stop the Haemorrhage,
because it is apt to break forth again anew, when the Escar, is fallen off.

When the Tumor is not as yet ulcerated, a Crucial Incision may be made in the
Skin, without penetrating into the Glandulous Bodies; then the four Pieces of
the Glandules being separated, the Cancerous Tumor may be held with the
Forceps, and, afterward cut off If there be any Vessels swelled, they may be
bound before the Tumor is taken away; but if the Tumor sticks close to the
Ribs, the Operation is not usually undertaken.

CHAP. IX. Of the Operation of the Empyema.
THIS Operation is performed when it may be reasonably concluded that some
corrupt Matter is lodged in the Breast, which may be perceived by the weight
that the Patient feels in fetching his Breath; being also sensible of the
floating of the Matter when he turns himself from one side to another.

If the Tumor appears on the outside, the Abcess may be opened between the
Ribs; but if no external Signs are discerned, the Surgeon may choose a more
convenient place to make the Opening. Thus when the Patient is set upon his
Bed, and conveniently supported, the Opening is to be made between the second
and third of the Spurious Ribs, within four Fingers breadth of the Spine, and
the lower Corner of the Omoplata; to this purpose the Skin is to be taken up
across, to cut it in its length, the Surgeon holding it on one side, and the
Assistant on the other. The Incision is made with a straight Knife two or three
Fingers breadth long, and the Fibers of the great Dorsal-Muscle are cut
across, that they may not stop the Opening. Then the Surgeon puts the
Forefinger of his Left Hand into the Incision, to remove the Fibers, and
divides the Intercostal Muscles, guiding the Point of the Knife with his Finger
to pierce the Pleuron, for fear of wounding the Lungs, which sometimes adhere
thereto, the Opening being thus finished, if the Matter runs well, it must be
taken out; but if not, the Forefinger must be put into the Wound, to disjoyn
those Parts of the Lungs that stick to the Pleuron.

To let out the Matter, the Patient must be obliged to lean on one side,
stopping his Mouth and Nose, and puffing up his Cheeks, as if he were to blow
vehemently; then if Blood appears, a greater quantity of it may be taken away
than if it were Matter, in regard that a Flux of Matter weakens more than that
of Blood. It is also worth the while to observe, that in making the Incision,
the Intercostal Muscles ought to be cut across, that the side of the Ribs may
not be laid bare, by which means the Wound will not so soon become Fistulous.

If it be judged that purulent Matter is contained in both sides of the Breast,
it is requisite that the Operation be done on each side; it being well known
that the Breast is divided into two Parts by the Mediastinum: But in this case
the two Holes made by the Incision must not be left open at the same time, for
fear of suffocating the Patient.

The Dressing and Bandage.

The Wound is dressed with a Tent of Lint armed with Balsam, being soft, and
blunt at the end, which enters only between the Ribs, for fear of hurting the
Lungs; but a good Pledget of Lint is more convenient than a Linen Tent,
however a Thread must be tied to the Pledget or Tent, lest it should fall into
the Breast; and Bolsters are to be put into the Wound; as also a Plaster or
Band over the whole. This Dressing is to be kepc close with a Napkin fastened
round the Breast with Pins, and supported by a Scapulary, which is a sort of
Band, the breadth of which is equal to that of six Fingers, having a Hole in
the middle to let in the Head: One of its ends falls behind and the other
before; and they are both fastened to the Napkin. Thus the Patient is laid in
Bed, and set half upright. If the Lungs hinder the running out of the Matter, a
Pipe is used, and the Wound afterward dressed according to Art.

CHAP. X. Of the Operation of the Paracentesis of the Lower-Belly.
THIS Manual Operation is sometimes necessary in a Dropsy, when Watery Humors
are contained in the Cavity of the Belly, or else between the Teguments. The
Disease is manifest by the great Swelling; and the Operation is performed with
a Cane, or a Pipe made of Silver or Steel, with a sharp Stilet at the end;
although the Ancients were wont to do it with a Lancet. The Patient being
supported, sitting on a Bed, or in a great Elbow-Chair, to the end that the
Water may run downward, a Servant must press the Belly with his Hands, that the
Tumor may be extended, whilst the Surgeon perforates it three or four Fingers
breadth below the Navel, and makes the Puncture on the side, to avoid the
White-Line; but before the Opening is made, it is expedient that the Skin be a
little lifted up. The pointed Stilet being accompanied with its Pipe, remains
in the Part after the Puncture; but it is removed to let out the Water; and a
convenient quantity of it is taken away, accordingly as the Strength of the
Patient will admit. The Stilet makes so small an Opening, that it is not to be
feared lest the Water shoul'd run out, which might happen in making use of the
Lancet, because there would be occasion for a thicker Pipe. When a new Puncture
is requisite, it must be begun beneath the former; but if the Waters cause the
Navel to stand out, the Opening may be made therein, without seeking for any
other place.

The Bandage and Dressing
Are prepared with a large four-double Bolster kept close with a Napkin folded
into three or four Folds, which is in like manner supported by the Scapulary.

The Operation of the Paracentesis of the Scrotum

Is undertaken when those Parts are full of Water, after this manner: As Soon as
the Patient is placed in a convenient Posture, either standing or sitting, the
Operator lays hold on the Scrotum with one Hand, presses it a little to render
the Tumor hard, and makes a Puncture, as in the Paracentesis of the Abdomen.
In an Hydrocele that happens to young Infants, the Opening may be made with a
Lancet, to take away all the Water at once: But in Men, especially when there
is a great quantity thereof, it is more expedient to do it with the
sharp-pointed Pipe; but the Testicles are to be drawn back, for fear of
wounding 'em with the Point of the Instrument.

If the Hydrocele be apparently Encysted, the Membrane containing the Water is
to be consumed with Causticks, which is done by laying a Cautery in the place
where the Incision should be made, and afterward opening the Escar with a
Lancet.

When the Puncture is made, it ought to be done in the upper part of the
Scrotum, because it is less painful than the lower, and less subject to
Inflammation.

CHAP XI. Of the Operation of Gastroraphy.
THIS Operation is usually performed when there is a Wound in the Belly so wide
as to let out the Entrails. If there be a considerable Wound in the Intestine,
it may be sowed up with the Glover's Stitch, the manner of making which we have
before explained. If the Omentum or Caul be mortified, the corrupted Part must
be cut off; to which purpose it is requisite to take a Needle with waxed
Thread, and to pass it into the sound Part across the Caul, without pricking
the Vessels. Then the Caul being tied on both sides with each of the Threads
that have been passed double, may be cut an Inch below the Ligature, and the
Threads will go through the Wound, so as to be taken away after the Suppuration.
Afterward the Intestines are to be put up again into the Belly, by thrusting
'em alternately with the end of the Fingers. But if they cannot be restored to
their proper Place without much difficulty, Spirituous Fomentations may be made
with an handful of the Flowers of Camomile and Melilot, an Ounce of Anise, with
as much Fennel and Cummin-Seeds; half an Ounce of Cloves and Nutmegs: Let the
whole Mass be boiled in Milk* adding an Ounce of Camphirated Spirit of Wine,
and two Drams of Saccharum Saturni, with two Scruples of Oil of Anise, and
bathe the Entrails with this Fomentation very hot. Otherwise,

Apply Animals cut open alive; or else boil Skeins of raw Thread in Milk, and
foment 'em with this Decoction in like manner very hot.

Before the Suture or Stitching of the Intestines is made, it is expedient to
foment 'em with Spirit of Wine, in which a little Camphire has been dissolved:
But if they be mortified, they must not be sown up again, but fomented with
Spirituous Liquors. No Clysters are to be given to the Patient, for fear
causing the Intestine to swell; but a Suppository may be applied: Or else he
may make use of a Laxative Diet-Drink, if it be necessary to open his Body: He
ought also to be very temperate and abstemious during the Cure, so as to take
no other Sustenance than Broths and Gellies.

If the Intestines cannot be put up again, the Wound is to be dilated, avoiding
the White-Line, and that too at the bottom rather than at the Top, if it be
above. To this purpose the Intestines are to be ranked along the side of the
Wound, and a Bolster is to be laid upon 'em dipped in warm Wine, which may be
held by some Assistant. Then the Surgeon introduces a channel'd Probe into the
Belly, and takes a great deal of care to six the Intestine between the Probe
and the Peritonaeum, which may be effected by drawing out the Intestine a
little; then holding the Probe with his Left Hand, to fit a crooked
Incision-Knife in its chanelling, he cuts the Teguments equally both on the
outside and within, and thrusts back the Entrails alternately into the Wound
with his Forefinger.

The Stitch must be intermitted, being made with two crooked Needles threaded
at each end with the same Thread. The Surgeon having at first put the
Forefinger of his Left Hand into the Belly, to retain the Peritoneaum,
Muscles, and Skin on the side of the Wound, passes the Needle with his other
Hand into the Belly, the Point of which is guided with the Forefinger, and
penetrates very far: Then he likewise passes the other Needle through the other
Lip of the Wound into the Belly, observing the same thing as in the former, and
without taking his Fingers off from the Belly. If there are many Points or
Stitches to be made, they may be done after the same manner, without removing
the Fingers from the Part, whilst a Servant draws together the Lips of the
Wound, and ties the Knots. Afterward the Wound may be dressed, and the
Preparatives or Dressings kept close to the Part with the Napkin and Scapulary.
But the Patient must be obliged to lie on his Belly for some Days successively,
to cicatrize the Wound thereof, or that of the Entrails.

If the Intestine were entirely cut, it would be requisite to sow it up round
about the Wound, after such a manner that some part of it may always remain
open; for if the Patient should recover, his Excrements might be voided through
the Wound; of which Accident we have an Example in a Soldier belonging to the
Hospital Des Invalides at Paris, who lived a long time in this Condition.

CHAP. XII. Of the Operation of the Exomphalus.
THIS Operation is necessary when the Intestines or Entrails have made a kind
of Rupture in the Navel, and may be performed thus: When the Patient is laid
upon his Back, an Incision is to be made on the Tumor to the Fat, by griping
the Skin, if it be possible, or else it may be done without taking it up. Then
the Membranes are to be divided with a Fleam to lay open the Peritonaeum, for
fear of cutting the Intestine; and as soon as the Peritonaeum appears, it may
be drawn upward with the Nails, in order to make a small Opening therein with
some cutting Instrument: Whereupon the Surgeon having put the Forefinger of
his Left Hand into the Belly to guide the Point of the Sizzers, with which the
Incision is enlarged, restores the Intestine to its proper Place, and loosens
the Caul if it stick to the Tumor: But if the Entrails are fastened to the
Caul, it is requisite to separate 'em by cutting a little of the Caul, rather
than to touch the Intestine; which last being reduced, a Servant may press the
Belly on the side of the Wound; so that if a Mass of Flesh be found in the
Caul, which has been formed by the sticking of the Caul to the Muscles and
Peritonaeum, this Fleshy Mass must be entirely loosened, and then a Ligature
may be made to take it away, with some part of the Caul, as we have already
shown in the Gastroraphy. Afterward the Stitch is to be made, as in that
Operation, and the Wound must be dressed, observing the same Precautions. The
Dressing is to be supported in like manner with the Napkin and Scapulary.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Operation of the Bubonocele, and of the complete Rupture.
WHEN the Intestinal Parts are fallen into the Groin or the Scrotum, the
Operation of the Bubonocele may be conveniently performed; to which purpose the
Patient is to be laid upon his Back, with his Buttocks somewhat high; then the
Skin being gripped across the Tumor, the Surgeon holds it on one side, and the
Assistant on the other, till he makes an Incision, following the Folds or
Wrinkles of the Groin; when the Fat appears, it is requisite to tear off either
with a Fleam or even with the Nails, every thing that lies in the way, till the
Intestine be laid open, which must be drawn out a little, to see if it do not
cleave to the Rings of the Muscles. The Intestine must be gently handled, to
dissolve the Excrements; and those Parts must be afterward put up again into
the Belly (if it be possible) with the two Fore-Fingers, thrusting 'em
alternatively; but if they cannot be reduced, the Wound is to be dilated
upward, by introducing a channell'd Probe into the Belly, to let the Sizzers
into its Channelling. If the Probe cannot enter, the Intestine must be taken
out a little, laying a Finger upon it near the Ring, and making a small
Scarification in the Ring, with a straight Incision-Knife guided with the
Finger, to let in the Probe, into which may be put a crooked Knife, to cut the
Ring; that is to say, to dilate the Wound on the inside; but care must be had
to avoid penetrating too far, for fear of dividing a Branch of Arteries; and
then the Parts may be put up into the Belly. If the Caul had caused the
Rupture, it would be requisite to bind it, and to cut off whatsoever is
corrupted, scarifying the Ring on the inside, to to make a good Cicatrice or
Scar.

The Dressing and Bandage.
The Dressing may be prepared with a Linnen-Tent, soft and blunt, of a
sufficient thickness and length, to hinder the Intestines from re-entring into
the Rings by their Impulsion, a Thread being tied thereto, to draw it out as
occasion serves. Then Pledgets are to be put into the Wound, after they have
been dipped in a good Digestive, such as Turpentine with the Yolk of an Egg,
applying at the same time a Plaster, a Bolster of a Triangular Figure, and the
Bandage called Spica, which is made much after the same manner as that which is
used in the Fracture of the Clavicle.

Of the complete Hernia or Rupture.
It happens when the Intestinal Parts fall into the Scrotum in Men, or into the
bottom of the Lips of the Matrix in Women. To perform this Operation, the
Patient must be laid upon his Back, as in the Bubonocele, and the Incision
carried on after the same manner; which is to be made in the Scrotum, tearing
off the Membranes to the Intestine. Then a Search will be requisite, to observe
whether any parts stick to the Testicle; if the Caul does so, it must be taken
off, leaving a little Piece on the Testicle; but if it be the Intestine, so
that those Parts cannot be separated without hurting one of 'em, it is more
expedient to impair the Testicle than the Intestine. If the Caul be corrupted,
it must be cut to the sound Part, and the Wound is to be dressed with Pledgets,
Bolsters, and the Bandage Spica; as in the Bubonocele.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Operation of Castration.
THE Mortification or the Sarcocele of the Testicles, gives occasion to this
Operation; to perform which, the Patient must be laid upon his Back, with his
Buttocks higher than his Head, his Legs being kept open, and the Skin of the
Scrotum taken up, one end of which is to be held by a Servant, and the other by
the Surgeon, who having made a longitudinal Incision therein, or from the top
to the bottom, slips off the Flesh of the Dartos which covers the Testicle,
binds up the Vessels that lie between the Rings and the Tumor, and cuts 'em
off a Fingers' breadth beneath the Ligature: But care must be taken to avoid
tying the Spermatick Vessels too hard, for fear of a Convulsion, and to let one
end of the Thread pass without the Wound. If an Excrescence of Flesh stick to
the Testicle, and it be moveable or loose, it is requisite to take it off
nearly, leaving a small Piece of it on the Testicle; and if any considerable
Vessels appear in the Tumor, they must be bound before they are cut.

The Dressing and Bandage.
The Dressing is made with Pledgets and Bolsters laid upon the Scrotum; and the
proper Bandage is the Suspensor of the Scrotum, which has four Heads or Ends,
of which the upper serve as a Cincture or Girdle; and the lower passing between
the Thighs, are fastened behind to the Cincture.

There is also another Bandage of the Scrotum, having in like manner four
Heads, of which the upper constitute the Cincture; but it is slit at the
bottom, and has no Seams; the lower Heads crossing one another, to pass
between the Thighs, and to be joined to the Cincture. Both these sorts of
Bandages have a Hole to give Passage to the Yard.

CHAP. XV. Of the Operation of the Stone in the Ureter.
IF the Stone be stopped at the Sphincter of the Bladder, it ought to be thrust
back with a Probe: If it stick at the end of the Glans, it may be pressed to
let it out; and if it cannot come forth, a small Incision may be made in the
opening of the Glans on its side.

But if the Stone be remote from the Glans, it is requisite to make an Incision
in the Vreter; to which purpose, the Surgeon having caused the Skin to be drawn
upward, holds the Yard between two Fingers, making a Longitudinal Incision on
its side upon the Stone, which must be pressed between the Fingers to cause it to
fly out; or else it may be taken out with an Extractor. Then if the Incision
were very small, the Skin needs only to be let go, and it will heal of it self;
but if it were large, a small Leaden Pipe is to be put into the Vreter, lest it
should be altogether closed up by the Scar: It is also expedient to anoint the
Pipe with some Desiccative Medicine, and to dress the Wound with Balsam.
Afterward a little Linnen-Bag or Case is to be made, in which the Yard is to be
put, to keep on the Dressing; but it must be pierced at the end, for the
convenience of making Water, having two Bands at the other end, which are tied
round about the Waste.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Operation of Lithotomy.
THIS Operation is undertaken when it is certainly known that there is a Stone
in the Bladder; to be assured of which, it may not be improper to introduce a
Finger into the Anus near the Os Pubis, by which means the Stone is sometimes
felt, if there be any: The Finger is likewise usually put into the Anus of
young Virgins, and into the Vagina Vteri of Women, for the same purpose. But it
is more expedient to make use of the Probe, anointed with Grease, after this
manner: The Patient being laid on his Back, the Operator holds the Yard
straight upward, the Glans lying open between his Thumb and Forefinger; then
holding the Probe with his Right Hand on the side of the Rings, he guides it
into the Yard, and when it is entered, turns the Handle toward the Pubes,
drawing out the Yard a little, to the end that the Canal of the Vreter may lie
straight. If it be perceived that the Probe has not as yet passed into the
Bladder, a Finger is to be put into the Anus, to conduct it thither. Afterward
in order to know whether a Stone be lodged in the Bladder, the Probe ought to
be staken a little therein, first on the Right-side, and then on the Left; and
if a small Noise be heard, it may be concluded for certain that there is a
Stone: But if it be judged that the Stone swims in the Bladder, so that it
cannot be felt, the Patient must be obliged to make Water with a hollow Probe.

Another manner of searching may be practiced thus: Let the Yard be raised
upward, inclining a little to the side of the Belly; let the Rings of the Probe
be turned upon the Belly, and the end on the side of the Anus; and then let
this Instrument be introduced, shaking it a little on both sides, to discover
the Stone.

In order to perform the Operation of Lithotomy, the Patient must be laid along
upon a Table of a convenient height, so as that the Surgeon may go about his
Work standing; the Patient's Back must also lean upon the Back of a Chair laid
down, and trimmed with Linen Cloth, lest it should hurt his Body; his Legs
must be kept asunder, and the Soles of his Feet on the sides of the Table,
whilst a Man gets up behind him to hold his Shoulders: His Arms and Legs must
be also bound with Straps or Bands. Then a channell'd Probe being put up into
the Bladder, a Servant standing upon the Table on the side of the Chair, holds
the Back of the Instrument between his two Fore-fingers on that Part of the
Perinaeum where the Incision ought to be begun, which is to be made between his
Fingers with a sharp Knife that cuts on both sides: The Incision may be three
or four Fingers breadth on the left side of the Raphe or Suture: But in
Children its length must not exceed two Fingers breadth. If the Incision were
too little to give Passage to the Stone, it would be more expedient to enlarge
it than to stretch the Wound with the Dilatators. When the Unequal Part where
the channelling of the Probe lies, shall be well laid open, the Conductors may
be slipped into the same Channelling, between which the Forceps is to be put,
having before taken away the Probe. Some Operators make use of a Gorgeret or
Introductor to that purpose, conveying the end of it into the Chanelling of the
Probe; which is removed to introduce the Forceps into the Bladder: And as soon
as they are fixed therein, the Conductors or Gorgeret must be likewise taken
out. Afterward search being made for the Stone, it must be held fast, and drawn
out of the Bladder: But if the Stone be long, and the Operator has got hold
thereof by the two Ends, he must endeavor to lay hold on it again by the
Middle, to avoid the great scattering which would happen in the Passage. The
Stones are also sometimes so large, that there is an absolute necessity of
leaving 'em in the Bladder. Again, if the Stone sticks very close to the
Bladder, the Extraction ought to be deferred for some time; and perhaps it may
be loosened in the Suppuration. Lastly, when the Stone has been taken out, an
Extractor is usually introduced into the Bladder, to remove the Gravel,
Fragments, and Clots of Blood.

After the Operation, the Patient is carried to his Bed, having before covered
the Wound with a good Bolster; and if an Haemorrhage happens, it is to be stopped
with Astringents, A Tent must also be put into the Wound, when it is suspected
that some Stone or Gravel may as yet remain therein: But if it evidently
appears that there is none, the Wound may be dressed with Pledgets, a Plaster,
and a Bolster, of a Figure convenient for the Part. The Dressing may be staid
with a Sling supported by a Scapulary; or else the Bandage of the double T. may
be used, the manner of the Application of which we have shown elsewhere. The
Patient's Thighs must be drawn close one to another, and tied with a small
Band, lest they should be set asunder again.

The Operation of Lithotomy in Women is usually performed by the lesser
Preparative, which is done by putting the Forefinger and Middle-finger into
the Vagina Vteri, or into the Rectum in young Virgins, to draw the Stone to the
Neck of the Bladder, and keep it steady, so that it may be taken out with a
Hook, or other Instrument.

This Operation may also be effected in Women, almost in the same manner as in
Men; for after having caused the Female Patient to be set in the same Posture
or Situation as the Men are usually placed, according to the preceding
Description, the Conductors may be conveyed into the Vreter, to let in the
Forceps between 'em, with which the Stone may be drawn out: But if it be too
thick, a small Incision is to be made in the Right and Left side of the Vreter.

The lesser Preparative was formerly used in the Lithotomy of Men, after this
manner: The Finger was put into the Anus, to draw the Stone toward the
Perinaeum; then an Incision was made upon the Stone on the side of the Suture,
and it was taken out with an Instrument.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Operation of the Puncture of the Perinaeum.
THIS Operation is necessary in a Suppression of Urine, where the Inflammation
is so great, that the Probe cannot be introduced. Then an Incision is to be
made with the Knife or Lancet, in the same Place where it is done in Lithotomy;
and a small Tube or Pipe is to be put in the Bladder, till the Inflammation be
removed.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Operation of the Fistula in Ano.
FISTULA's are callous Ulcers: If one of these happen in the Fundament, and is
open on the outside, it may be cured thus: After the Patient has been laid
upon his Belly on the side of a Bed, with his Legs asunder, the Surgeon makes a
small Incision with his Knife in the Orifice of the Fistula, in order to pass
therein another small crooked Incision-Knife, at the end of which is a Pointed
Stilet with a little Silver Head which covers it, to the end that it may enter
without causing Pain. When the Surgeon has conveyed his Knife into the
Fistula, having the Forefinger of his Left Hand in the Anus or Fundament, he
pulls off its Head, holding the Handle with one Hand, and the Stilet that
pierces the Anus with the other; and at last draws our the Instrument to cut
the Fistula entirely at one Stroke.

If the Fistula has an Opening into the Inrestine, an Incision is to be made
on the outside at the Bottom thereof, to open it in the Place where a small
Tumor or Inflammation usually appears, or else in the Place where the Patient
feels a Pain when it is touched. If the Tumor be remote from the Anus, it may
be opened with the Potential Cautery, to avoid a greater Inconvenience. After
having thus laid open the very bottom, the little Incision-Knife and Stilet,
with its Head, is to be passed therein, the end of the Stilet is to be drawn
through the Anus, and the Flesh is to be cut all at once. But if the Fistula be
situated too far forward in the Fundament, the Sphincter of the Anus must not
be entirely cut, otherwise the Excrements cannot be any longer retained.
Lastly, when the Fistula has been treated after this manner, all its
Sinuosities or Winding-Passages ought likewise to be opened, and the Wound
being filled with thick Pledgets steept in some Anodyn, is to be covered with a
Plaster and a Triangular Bolster; as also with the Bandage called the T.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Suture or Stitching of a Tendon.
IT is requisite to undertake this Operation when the Tendons are cut, and when
they become very thick. If the Wound be healed, it must be opened again to
discover the Tendon, and the Part must be bended, to draw together again the
ends of the Tendons. Then the Surgeon taking a flat, straight, and fine Needle,
with a double waxed Thread, passes it into a small Bolster, and makes a Knot
at the end of the Thread, to be stopped upon the Bolster. Afterward he pierces
the Tendon from the outside to the inside, at a good distance, lest the Thread
should tear it, and proceeds to pass the Needle in like manner under the other
end of the Tendon, upon which is laid a small Bolster, for the Thread to be
tied in a Knot over it. Then he causes the Extremities of the Tendons to lie a
little one upon another, by bending the Part, and dresseth the Wound with some
Balsam. It may not be improper here to observe, that Ointments are never to be
applied to the Tendons, which would cause 'em to putrisie, but altogether
Spirituous Medicaments; and that the Part must be bound up, lest the Extension
of it should separate the Tendons.

CHAP. XX. Of the Caesarian Operation.
WHEN a Woman cannot be delivered by the ordinary means, this bold and
dangerous Operation has been sometimes performed with good Success. The Woman
boing laid upon her Back, the Surgeon makes a Longitudinal Incision beneath the
Navel, on the side of the White-Line, till the Matrix appears, which he
opens, taking great care to avoid wounding the Child: Then he divides the
Membranes with which it is wrapped up, separates the After-Burden from the
Matrix, and takes out the Child. Lastly he washes the Wound with warm Wine,
and dispatcheth the Gastroraphy or Stitching up of the Belly, without sowing
the Matrix. After the Operation, Injections are to be made into the Matrix, to
cause a Flux of Blood; and a pierced Pessary must be introduced into its Neck.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Operation of Amputation, with its proper Dressings and
Bandages.
THE Leg is usually cut off at the Ham; the Thigh as near as can be to the
Knee; and the Arm as near as is possible to the Wrist: But an Amputation is
never made in a Joint, except in the Fingers and Toes.

In order to cut off a Leg the Patient is to be set on the side of his Bed, or
in a Chair; and supported by diverse Assistants; one of 'em being employed to
hold the J^eg at the bottom, and another to draw the Skin upward above the
Knee, to the end that the Flesh may cover the Bone again after the Operation.
In the mean while a very thick Bolster is laid under the Ham, upon which are
made two Ligatures, viz. the first above the Knee, to stop the Blood, by
screwing it up with the Tourniquet or Gripe-Stick; and the second below the
Knee, ^o render the Flesh firm for the Knife. Before the Ligature is drawn
close with the Gripe-Stick, a little piece of Paste-board is to be put
underneath, for fear of pinching the Skin. Thus the Leg being well fixed, the
Surgeon places himself between both the Legs of the Patient, to make the
Incision with a crooked Knife, turning it circularly to the Bone, and laying
one Hand upon the Back of the Knife, which must, have no Edge. Afterward the
Periosteum is to scraped with an Incision-Knife, and the Flesh with the Vessels
that lie between the two Bones are to be cut. When the Flesh is thus separated,
a Cleft Band is to be laid upon it, with which the Heads are crossed, to draw
the Flesh upward, to the intent that the Bones may be cut farther, and that it
may cover 'em after the Amputation, as also to facilitate the Passage of the
Saw. Then the Surgeon holds the Leg with his Left Hand, and saweth with his
Right, which he lets fall upon the two Bones, to divide 'em asunder at the same
time, beginning with the Perone or Fibula, and ending with the Tibia. But it is
necessary to incline the Saw, and to go gently in the beginning, to make way
for it, and afterward to work it faster. The Leg being cut off, the Ligature
must be untied below the Knee, loosening the Gripe-Stick, to let the Blood run
a little, and to discern the Vessels with greater facility; and then the
Gripe-Stick may be twisted again, to stop the Blood; which some Surgeons
effect, by laying Pieces of Vitriol upon the Opening of the Arteries, and
Astringent Powders, on a large Bolster of Cotton or Tow, to be applied to the
end of the Stump; but if such a method be used, it is requisite that some
Person be employed to keep on the whole Dressing with his Hand during twenty
four Hours. However this Custom has prevailed in the Hospital of Hotel-Dieu at
Paris.

Others make a Ligature of the Vessels, taking up the ends of 'em with a pair
of Forceps, having a Spring; or with the Valet a Patin, which is a sort of
Princers that are closed with a small Ring let down to the bottom of the
Branches. These Pincers being held by a Servant, the Surgeon passes a Needle
with waxed Thread, into the Flesh, below the Vessel, bringing it back again,
and with the two ends of the Thread makes a good Ligature upon the same Vessel;
then he loses the Gripe-Stick and the Band, the Stump is to be somewhat
bended, and the Flesh let down to cover the Bones.

The Dressing and Bandage.
After the Operation, it is requisite to lay small Bolsters upon the Vessels,
and dry Pledgets upon the two Bones, as also many other Folds of Linen strewn
with Astringent Powders; and over all another large Bolster or Pledget of
Cotton or Tow, covered in like manner with Astringent Powders; then the whole
Dressing is to be wrapped up with a Plaster and a Bolster, in form of a Malta
Cross; so that there are three or four Longitudinal Bolsters, and one Circular.

The Surgeon usually begins to apply the Milta Cross and Bolster under the Ham,
crossing the Heads or Ends upon the Stump, and causes 'em to be held by a
Servant that Supports the Part; then he likewise crosses the other Heads, and
lays on the two Longitudinal Bolsters that cross each other in the middle of
the Stump, together with a third Longitudinal, which is brought round about the
Stump, to stay the two former: These Bolsters ought to be three Fingers broad,
and very long, to pass over the Stump. Afterward he proceeds to apply,

The Bandage commonly called Capeline by French Surgeons, or the Head-Bandage.
Which is prepared with a Band four Else long, and three Fingers broad, rolled
up with one Ball, three Circumvolutions being made on the side of the cut Part,
the Band is to be carried upward with Rollers, passing obliquely above the
Knee; and is brought down again along its former Turns; If it be thought fit to
make this Bandage with the same Band, it must be let down to the middle of the
cut Part, and carried up again to the Knee, many back-folds being made, which
are stayed with the Circumvolutions, till the Stump be entirely covered, and
the whole Bandage wrapped up with Rollers or Bolsters.

The Capeline or Head-Bandage, having two Heads, is made with a Band of the
same breadth, but somewhat longer. This Band being at first applied to the
middle of the cut Part or Wound, the Heads are carried up above the Knee; and
one of the Ends are turned backward, to bring it down, and to pass it over the
end of the Stump. At every back-fold which is formed above and below the Knee,
a Circumvolution is to be made with the other end of the Band, to strengthen
the back-folds, continuing to bring the Band downward and upward, till the
whole Stump be covered: Then Rollers are made round the about the Stump, and
the Band is stayed above the Knee. Afterward the Part may be brought to
Suppuration, cleans'd and cicatriz'd.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Operation of the Aneurism.
THIS Operation is performed when the Surgeon has pricked an Artery, or when a
Tumor arises in an Artery.

To this purpose the Patient is set in a Chair, and a Servant employed in
holding his Arm in a Posture proper for the Operation; then a Bolster is to be
laid four double, following the Progress of the Artery, to the end that the
Ligature may better press the Vessel; and the Arm may be also surrounded with
another single Bolster, on which is made a Ligature screwed up with a
Gripe-Stick, provided the Arm be not too much swelled; for in this Case it
would be more expedient to deferr the Operation for fear of a Gangrene. The
Artery being thus well stopped, the Surgeon lays hold on the Arm with one Hand,
below the Tumor, and with the other makes an Incision with his Lancet,
beginning at the bottom of the Tumor, and ending on the top along the Progress
of the Artery. When the Tumor is opened, the coagulated Blood may be
discharged with a Finger; and if there are any Strings at the bottom, they may
be cut with a crooked Pair of Sizzers, to the end that all the Clods of Blood,
and other extraneous Bodies which are sometimes formed in Aneurisms when they
are very inveterate) may be more easily removed. But the Gripe-Stick must be
loosened, to discover the Opening of the Artery with greater facility, and the
Artery separated from the Membranes with a Fleam; for it would be dangerous to
cut it with a straight Incision-Knife: The Artery must also be supported with a
convenient Instrument to divide it from the Nerve and Membranes; and to be
assured of the Place of its Opening, the Gripe-Stick may be somewhat loosened,
and afterward screwed up again. In the mean time the Surgeon gives the
Instrument to a Servant to hold, whilst he passes under the Artery a crooked
Needle with a waxed String, cuts the Thread, and takes away the Needle: The he
begins to make the Ligature beneath the Opening of the Artery, tying at first a
single Knot, on which may be put (if you please) a small Bolster, that may be
kept steady with two other Knots: It is also necessary that another Ligature be
made in the lower part of the Artery, by reason that the little lateral
Arteries might otherwise let out Blood.

The Artery ought not to be cut between the two Ligatures, lest the first
Ligature should be forced by the Impulsion of the Blood; but the Thread must be
let fall, that it may rot with the Suppuration. Then the Wound may be dressed
with Pledgets, Bolsters strewn with Astringent Powders and a Plaster; a
Bolster being also laid in the Fold of the Elbow.

The Bandage
Is made with a Band six Else long, and an Inch broad, rolled with one end,
being at first applied with diverse Circumvolutions under the Elbow, and
moderately bound. Many turns are to be made, and a thick and straight Bolster,
is to be laid upon the Tumor, (as in the Bandage for Phlebotomy) along the
Artery, till it pass under the Arm-Hole: The Arm and Bolster must be surrounded
with the Band, which is brought up with small Rollers, to the Arm-Pit, and
stayed with Circumvolutions round about the Breast. Afterward the Patient is to
be laid in his Bed, with the Arm lying somewhat bended on the Pillow, and the
Hand a little higher than the Elbow.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Operation of Phlebotomy.
TO perform this Operation, the Surgeon holds the Lancet between his Thumb and
Forefinger, and three other Fingers lying upon the Patient's Arm, and thrusts
the Point of the Lancet into the Vessel, carrying the same Point somewhat
upward, to make the Orifice the greater. If a Tendon, which is known by its
hardness; or an Artery, which is discovered by Pulsation, appear beyond the
Vein, and very near it, the Lancet must be only set very forward in the Vein,
and drawn back again straight, without turning it up, otherwise the Artery of
Tendon would be certainly cut with the Point. If the Artery or Tendon lies
immediately under the Vein, the later must be pricked somewhat underneath,
holding the Lancet inclined side-ways, and thrusting it very little forward; so
that the Point will finish the Opening, by turning it upward.

If the Artery stick too close to the Vein, the later is to be pricked higher or
lower than it is ordinarily done; and if the Vein be superficial, and lie close
upon a hard Muscle, the Lancet must not be thrust downright into the Vein, but
it is requisite to carry it somewhat obliquely, and to take the Vessel above,
lest the Muscle and its Membrane should be pricked, which would cause a great
deal of Pain, and perhaps a vehement Inflammation. It is well known that the
Veins of the Right Arm are usually opened with the Right Hand, and those of the
Left-Arm with the Left Hand.

The Bandage
Is made thus: The Surgeon having laid a Bolster upon the Orifice, keeps it
close with two Fingers, and holds the Band or Fillet with the other Hand; then
taking one end of the Fillet with the Middle-Finger, Forefinger, and Thumb,
and applying it to the Bolster, he makes with the longest end of the Fillet
diverse Figures in form of the Letters KY in the Fold of the Arm; as also a
back-fold with the shorter end of the Fillet, held between three Fingers.
Afterward both ends of the Fillet are tied beneath the Elbow.

If an Inflammation happens after the Operation, The Bolsters are to be dipped in
Oxycratum: but if the Orifice were so small as to produce a Rhombus, it would
be requisite to press the Wound often with two Fingers, and immediately to
apply a Bolster dipped in Oxycratum.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Operation of Encysted Tumors.
IF the Tumors are small and hanging, and have a narrow bottom, a Ligature may
be made with Horse-Hair or Silk, dipped in Aquafortis, which will cause 'em to
fall off of themselves after some time; or else they may be cut above the
Ligature.

If the Tumor or Wen be thick, and its bottom large, a Crucial Incision is to
be made in the Skin, without impairing the Cystis or Bagg; and when the
Incision is finished, the Bag may be torn off with the Nails, or with the
Handle of a Penknife; but sometimes it is necessary to dissect it. If there be
any considerable Vessels at the Root, they may be bound, or else cut; and the
Blood may be stopped with Astringents. If any parts of the Cystis remain, they
are to be consumed with Corrosives; and the Lips of the Wound are to be drawn
together without a Stitch, making use only of an agglutinative Plaster. But if
the Tumor adheres very close to the Pericranium, it is most expedient not to
meddle with it at all.

Of Ganglions.
Ganglions are Tumors arising upon the Tendons and Nervous Parts, which may be
cured by thrusting 'em violently, and making a very straight Bandage, provided
they be very recent; a resolvent Plaster is to be also applied to the Part.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Operation of the Hydrocephalus.
THIS Operation is performed when it is necessary to discharge watery Humors
out of the Head: If these Waters lie under the Skin, a very large Opening is to
be made with a Lancet, and a small Tube or Pipe left therein to let 'em run
out. If the Water be situated between the Brain and the Dura Matter, the
Membrane is to be perforated with a Lancet, after the Trepan has been applied,
according to the usual Method, of which we have already given some account:
Cauteries and Scarifications may be also used to very good purpose in this
Disease.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Operation of cutting the Tongue-String.
WHEN the Ligament of the Tongue in Infants is extended to its Extremity, they
cannot suck without difficulty; and when grown up, they have an impediment in
their Speech.

This Ligament may be cut with a little pair of Sizzers; to which purpose the
Thumb of the Left Hand being laid upon the Gum of the lower Jaw, to keep the
Mouth open, the Tongue may be raised upward with the Forefinger of the same
Hand, and the Sizzers may be passed between the two Fingers, to divide the
String as near as is possible, to the Root of the Tongue, avoiding the Vessels:
If an Haemorrhage happens, recourse may be had to Styptick-Waters. Afterward
the Nurse must take care to let a Finger be often put into the Child's Mouth,
to prevent the re-uniting of the String.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Operation of opening stopped Ductus's.
IF there be only one Membrane that stops the Entrance of the Vagina, an
Incision may be made, and a Leaden Pipe put into it, having Rings to fasten it
to the Waste, to hinder the re-uniting of the Wound.

If the Lips of the Pudendum are conglutinated or closed up, the Patient must
be laid upon her Back, and her Knees raised up, in order to make an Incision
with a crooked Incision-Knife, beginning at the Top; and then a Leaden Pipe is
to be put into the Opening.

If the Vagina be filled with a Fleshy Substance, an Incision is to be made
therein, till it be entirely perforated, putting at the same time a Leaden Tube
into the Orifice.

If the Urinary Ductus as well in young Boys as in Virgins, be stopped up, an
Incision is to be made therein with a very narrow Lancet; and if a small Leaden
Pipe can be conveniently introduced, it may be done; but it is not very
necessary, in regard that Children are almost always making Water, which would
of it self hinder the closing of the Orifice.

If the Ductus of the Ear be stopped with a Membrane, it must be perforated,
taking care not to go too far, for fear of piercing the Membrane of the
Tympanum or Drum, and a small Leaden Pipe is to be put into the Opening.

If there be a carnous Exerescence on the outside of the Ear, a Ligature ought
to be made therein, or else it may be cut with a pair of Sizzers, to cause it
to fall off; and the rest of the Fleshy Substance that remains in the Ear must
be consumed with Causticks, conveyed to the Part by the means of a small Tube,
care being had, nevertheless, to avoid cauterizing the Tympanum.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Operation of the Phimosis and Paraphimosis.
WHEN the Praeputium is so straight that the Glans can be no longer uncovered,
this Indisposition is called Phimosis; but if the Praeputium be turned back
above the Glans, after such a manner that it can no longer cover the same
Glans, it is a Paraphimosis. If in the Phimosis the Praeputium cleaves very
close round about the Glans, it is most expedient to let it alone; but if in
handling the Glans it be perceived that it is moveable, or else that some parts
of it only stick together, the Operation may be performed after this manner:
The Patient being set in a Chair, a Servant is employed in pulling back the
Skin to the Root of the Penis, to the end that the Incision may be made
directly at the bottom of the Glans: Then the Surgeon having drawn out the
bottom of the Praeputium, introduces a small Instrument with a very sharp
Point on its flat side, at the end of which is sixth a Button of Wax, pierces
the Praeputium at the bottom of the Glans on the side of the Thread, and
finisheth the Incision by drawing the Instrument toward himself.

The Paraphimosis is cured by making Fomentations on the Part, to allay the
Inflammation if there be any; and it is to be pulled down with the Fingers. But
if Medicinal Preparations prove ineffectual, Scarifications are to be made
round about the Praeputium; and afterward convenient Remedies may be applied to
remove the Inflammation, and prevent the Mortification of the Part; so that at
length the Praeputium may be drawn over the Glans.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Operation of the Varix.
IN order to cure this Tumor, the Surgeon having first cut the Skin to
discover the dilated Vein, separates it from the Membranes, and passes
underneath a crooked Neodle with a double waxed Thread; then he makes a
Ligature both above and below the dilatation of the Vein, opens the dilared
Part with a Lancet, to let out the Blood, and apply; a convenient Bandage: But
without performing this Operation, the Vein might be opened with a Lancet, to
draw out a sufficient quantity of Blood; and then the Varix is to be pressed
with (...) somewhat close Bandage.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Operation of the Panaritium.
THE Panaritium is an Abcess which arises at the end of the Fingers; some of
these Tumors are only superficial, and others penetrate even under the
Periosteum; neverthe^ess after whatsoever manner the Panaritium may happen, it
ought to be opened on the side of the Finger, that the Tendons may not be ^urt.
If the Abcess be extended under the Periosteum, the opening must be made on the
side, and the Lancet thrust forward to the Bone: Afterward the Pus or corrupt
Matter is to be discharged, which would cause the Tendons to putrisie, if it
should remain too long upon 'em.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are made with a Plaster cut in form of a Malta Cross, which is applied at the
middle to the end of the Finger, the Heads being crossed round about. The
Bolsters must be also cut in the shape of the Malta Cross, or of a plain Cross
only; the Band being a Finger's breadth wide, and long enough to be rolled
about the whole Dressing: It must be pierced at one of its ends, and cut the
length of three Fingers at the other; so that the two Heads may pass through the
Hole, to surround the Finger with small Rollers.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Reduction of the falling of the Anus.
TO reduce the Anus to its proper place when it is fallen, the Patient being
laid upon his Belly, with his Buttocks higher than his Head, the Operator
gently thrusts back the Roll that forms the Anus with his Fingers dipped in the
Oil of Roses: Then he applies the Bolsters steept in some Astringent Liquor,
and causes 'em to be supported with a sort of Bandage, the Nature of which we
shall show in treating of the Fracture of the Coccyx, that is to say, the T.
the double T. or else the Sling with four Heads.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Reduction of the falling of the Matrix.
IN this Operation, the Patient being laid upon her Back, with her Buttocks
raised up, somentations are to be applied to the Part; (...) Linen Cloth is to
be laid upon the Neck of the fallen Matrix; and it is to be thrust ^ery gently
with the Fingers, without using ^uch force. If the Matrix should fall out
a^^in, it would be requisite to convey a Pessa^^ into it, after it has been
reduced; and to ^njoyn the Patient to lie on her Back with her legs across.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Application of the Cautery.
THE Cautery is an Ulcer which is made in the Skin, by applying Causticks to
it, ^^er this manner:

The Surgeon having moistened the Skin (...) a while with Spittle, or else
having caused (...) light Friction to be made with a warm ^^oth, applies a
perforated Plaster to the Part, ^^d breaks the Cautery-Stone, to be laid in
the little Hole, leaving it for a longer or shorter time, accordingly as he
knows its Efficacy, or as the Skin is more or less Fine. Afterward he
scarifieth the Burn with his Lancet, and puts a Suppurative, or piece of fresh
Butter into the Part, till the Escar be fallen off.

The Dressing and Bandage.
After the Application of the Lapis Infernalis, or any other Cautery-Stone, it
is necessary to lay over it a Plaster, a Bolster, and a Circular Bandage,
which ought to be kept sufficiently close, to press the Stone, after, a Pea or
little Piece of Orrice-Root, has been put into the Ulcer to keep it open. Then
the Patient is to make use of this Bandage, with which he may dress it himself.
Take a piece of very strong Cloth, large enough to roll up the Part without
crossing above it: And let three or four Holes be made in one of its sides, as
many small Ribbans or Pieces of Tape being sowed to the other, which may be let
into the Holes, as occasion serves, to close the Band.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Application of Leeches.
IT is requisite that the Leeches be taken in clear running Waters, and that
they be long and slender, having a little Head, the Back green, with yellow
Streaks, and the Belly somewhat reddish. Before they are applied, it is also
expedient to let 'em purge during some Days in fair Water, fast half a Day in a
Box without Water. Afterward the Part being rubbed or chafed with warm Water,
Milk, (...) the Blood of some Fowl, the Opening of the Box is to be set to the
Part, or the Leethes themselves laid upon a Cloth; for they will not fasten
when taken up with the Fingers. The end of their Tail may be cut with (...)
Pair of Sizzers, to see the Blood run, and to determine its quantity, as also
to facilitate their sucking. When you would take 'em away, put Ashes, Salt, or
any other sharp thing upon their Head, and they will suddenly desist from their
Work; but they are not to be pulled off by force, lest they should leave their
Head or St^ing in the Wound, which would be of very dangerous consequence. When
they are removed, let a little Blood run out, and wash the Part with salt Water.

Is made with a Bolster soakt in some Styptick Water, if the Blood will not
otherwise stop; or in Brandy or aqua-Vitae, if there be an Inflammation; and it
is to be supported with a Bandage proper for the Part.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Application of the Seton.
TO perform this Operation, a Cotton or Silk Thread is to be taken, after it
has been dipped in Oil of Roses, and let into a kind of Pack-Needle; then the
Patient sitting in a Chair, is to hold up his Head backward, whilst the Surgeon
gripes the Skin transversely in the Nape of the Neck with his Fingers, or else
takes it up with a Pair of Forceps, and passes the Needle through the Holes of
the Forceps, leaving the String in the Skin. As often as the Bolster that
covers the Seton is taken off, that part of the String which lies in the Wound
is to be drawn out, and cut off.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Scarifications.
SCARIFICATIONS are to be made more or less deep, accordingly as necessity
^^quires, beginning at the bottom, and carrying (...) on upward, to avoid being
hindered by ^^e Haemorrhage. They must also be let one to another, that Strings
may not be left in ^^e Skin.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Application of Vesicatories.
VESICATORIES are compounded with the Powder of Cantharides or Spanish ^^es,
mixed with very sower Leaven, or else ^^th Turpentine. Before they are applied,
a light ^^^tion is to be made on the Part with a wram ^eth, and a greater or
lesser quantity is to be ^^d on, accordingly as the Skin is more or ^s fine,
leaving 'em on the Part about seven or (...) Hours; then they are to be taken
away, ^^d the Blisters are to be opened, applying there^^me sort of Spirituous
Liquor.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Application of Cupping-Glasses.
A Good Friction being first made with warm Clothes, lighted Toe is to be put
into the Cupping-Glass, or else a Wax-Candle fastened to a Counter, and then it
is to be applied to the Part till the Fire be extinguished, and the Skin
swelled, re-iterating the Operation as often as it is necessary; and afterward
laying on a Bolster steept in Spirit of Wine. These are called dry
Cupping-Glasses: But if you would draw Blood, every thing is to be observed
that we have now mentioned, besides that Scarifications are to be made,
according to the (...) manner; and the Cupping-Glass is to be set upon the
Scarifications: But when the Cupping-Glass is half full of Blood, it must be
taken off to be emptied, and the Application thereof is to be re-iterated, as
often as it is requisite to take away any Blood. Lastly, the Incision^ are to
be washed with some Spirituous Liquor; and a Bandage is to be made convenien^
for the Part.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the opening of Abcesses or Impostumes.
AN Abcess or Impostume ought to be opened in its most mature part, and in the
Bias of the Humors, endeavoring to preserve the Fibers of the Muscles from
being cut, unless there be an absolute necessity, avoiding also the great
Vessels, Tendons, and Nerves. The Opening must be rather large than small, and
not too much pressed in letting out the purulent Matter. If the Skin be thick,
as it happens in the H^el, it may be pared with a Razor; and if the Matter be
lodged under the Nails, it would be requisite to scrape 'em with Glass before
they are pierced.

A TREATISE OF THE OPERATIONS OF FRACTURES.
CHAP. I. Of the Fracture of the Nose.
WHEN the Fracture is considerable, the Nostrils are stopped up, and the Sense of
Smelling is lost. In order to reduce it, the Surgeon takes a little Stick wrapped
up in Cotton, and introduces it into the Nostrils as gently as is possible, to
raise up the Bones again, laying the Thumb of his Left Hand upon the Nose, to
retain 'em in their place. The Bones being thus set, he proceeds to prepare

The Dressing and Bandage
By conveying into the Nostrils certain Leaden Pipes of a convenient Bigness
and Figure, which serve to support the Bones, and to facilitate Respiration.
But care is to be had to avoid thrusting 'em up too far, for fear of hurting
the fides of the Nose; and they are to be anointed with Oil of Turpentine mixed
with Spirit of Wine: These Pipes are also to have little Handles, with which
they may be fastened to the Cap. If there be no Wound in the Nose, there will
be no need of a Bandage; but if the Fracture be accompanied with a Wound, after
having applied the proper Medicines, it would be requisite to lay upon each
side of the Nose a Triangular Bolster, covered with a little piece of
Paste-board of the same Figure. This small Dressing is to be supported with a
kind of Sling that has four Heads; being a piece of Linnen-Cloath, two Fingers
broad, and half an Ell long; it is slit at both ends, and all along, only
leaving in the middle a Plain of three Fingers, that is to say, a part which is
not cut. The Plain of this Sling is to be laid upon the Fracture, causing the
upper Heads to pass behind the Nape of the Neck, which are to be brought back
again forward; the lower Heads are likewise to be carried behind, crossing
above the upper, and afterward to be returned forward. If the Bones of the Nose
be not timely reduced, a great Deformity soon happens therein, and a Stink
caused by the Excrescences and Polypus's.

CHAP. II. Of the Fracture of the lower Jaw.
THE Operator at first puts his Fingers into the Patient's Mouth, to press the
Prominences of the Bones; and afterward does the same thing on the outside, If
the Bones pass one over another, a small Extension is to be made. If the Teeth
be forced out of their Place, they are to be reduced, and fastened to the found
Teeth with a waxed Thread.

The Dressing and Bandage.
If the Fracture be only on one side, a Bolster sowed to a piece of Paste-board
is to be laid upon the flat side of the Jaw, both being of the Figure and Size
of the Jaw it self. The Bandage of this Fracture is called Chevestre, i. e. a
Cord or Bridle, by the French Surgeons, and is made by taking a Band rolled
with one Head or End, three Else long, and two Fingers broad; the Application
of it is begun with making a Circumvolution round about the Head in passing
over the Forehead; then the Band is let down under the Chin, and carried up
again upon the Cheek, near the lesser Corner of the Eye in passing over the
Fracture; afterward it is raised up to the Head, and brought down again under
the Chin, to form a Roller or Bolster upon the Fracture: Thus three or four
Circumvolutions and Rollers being made upon the Fracture, the Band is let down
under the Chin, to stay and strengthen its several Turns, and is terminated
round the Head, in passing over the Forehead.

If the Jaw be fractur'd on both sides, it would be requisite to apply thereto
a Bolster and Paste-board, perforated at the Chin, and of the Figure of the
entire Jaw; the Bandage which we have even now described, may be also prepared
in making Rollers on both sides of the Jaw: Or else the double Chevestre may be
made with a Band of five Else long, and two Fingers broad, rolled up with two
Balls, that is to say, with the two Ends. The Application of this Band is begun
under the Chin, from whence it is carried up over the Cheek, crossed upon the
top of the Head, and brought down behind the Head, where it is crossed again;
then it is let down under the Chin, crossed there, and carried up over the
Fracture; afterward the Band being passed three or four times over the same
turns, in making Rollers upon the Jaws, is turned upon the Chin, and stayed
upon the Forehead round about the Head.

CHAP. III. Of the Fracture of the Clavicle.
THE Patient is to be set in a Chair, and his Arm is to be drawn backward,
whilst an Assistant thrusts his Shoulder forward: In the mean time the Operator
sets the Bones again in their place, by thrusting the Protuberances, and
drawing out the sunk Bone.

Or else a Tennis-Ball may be taken, and put under the Patient's Arm-Pit, whose
Elbow is then to be pressed against his Ribs, whilst the Surgeon reduces the
Fracture.

Otherwise, the Patient may be laid upon his Back, putting a Unequal Body under
both his Shoulders, as a Bowl, or large wooden Porrenger; and then the
Shoulders may be pressed, to raise up the two ends of the Bones, which the
Surgeon must take care to reduce.

The Dressing and Bandage.
The Cavities which are above and below the Clavicle, are to be filled with
Bolsters trimmed with Paste-boards; another is to be also laid upon the Bone,
which is almost of the same Figure with the Clavicle, and a large Bolster, to
cover the three others: This Dressing is to be secured with the Bandage called
the Cape^ine or Head-Bandage, provided the Fracture ^e in the middle of the
Clavicle. A Band being taken about six Else long, and four Fin^ers thick,
rolled with two Balls; it is applied is the middle to the Fracture; one of its
Heads or Ends is let down upon the Breast, whilst the other is passed behind
the Back, below the Arm-hole, opposite to the indisposed Arm-^ole, and above
the Breast, to be carried o^erthe other end of the Band, which is raised up, to
make a Roller or Bolster upon the Fracture: The other end is passed under the
indisposed Armpit, and upon the Band that made the Roller, which is elevated by
making a third Roller upon the Clavicle: These Circumvolutions ^^nd about the
Body are continued, as also these Rollers upon the Clavicle, till it be
en^irely covered. Some. Circumvolutions are also ^^de upon the upper part of
the Arm, near is Head: The Space that lies between the Rol^^s and the
Circumvolutions of the Arm, and which bears the Name of Geranium or
Stork's-Bill, is likewise covered with some Circumvo^^tions, and the Band is
stayed by making Cir^mvolutions quite round about the Body.

If the Fracture were near the Head of the ^^merus or Arm-Bone, a sort of
Bandage might be prepared, which is called Spica, with a Band ^^ll'd with one
Ball five Else long, and four fingers broad; one end of this Band is passed
under the Arm-pit opposite to the indisposed ^^e behind the Back: The other end
is con^ey'd under the indisposed Arm-pit; the Figure of the Letters KY or X is
made on the Shoulder; the Band is returned below the ^^her Shoulder behind; it
is brought back again before, to form a second KY upon the Fracture; three or
four more KY's are wrought upon the Fracture; two Circumvolutions are made in
the upper part of the Humerus, which constitute a Triangle called Geranium;
this Triangle is covered with Rollers, and the Band is terminated round about
the Breast.

CHAP. IV. Of the Fracture of the Omoplata or Shoulder Blade.
THE Acromion is usually fractur'd, but it may be known that the middle of the
Omoplata is broken by a Numness which is felt in the whole Arm: Whereupon the
Surgeon, after having examined the place of the Fracture, thrusts back the
Prominences of the Bones into their place; and if any Splints happen to prick
the Part, he makes an Incision to take 'em out, or to cut off their Points.

The Dressing and Bandage.
A Bolster is laid upon the Omoplata, as also a large piece of Paste-board of
the bigness and Figure of this Bone, and a sort of Bandage is prepared, known
by the name of the Star, with a Band rolled with one Head four Else long, and
as many Fingers broad. This Band is conveyed behind the Back, one of its ends
lying under the Arm-hole, opposite to the indisposed one; but the other is
passed under the ^houlder, and afterward above it, to make a KY in the middle
of the Back; then passing ^^der the other Arm-hole, it is brought up to (...)
Shoulder, to be let down, and to form a ^^ond KY upon the middle of the Back:
These Turns are continued in making Rollers, ^^ll the Omoplatae are all
covered: Circumvolutions are also made round the upper part of ^e Humerus, as
in the Spica; and the Ba^^^ge is finished by Circumvolutions round about ^e
Breast.

CHAP. V. Of the Fracture of the Ribs.
WHEN a Rib is broken, one of the ends pusheth into the Breast, sometimes on
the outside; and sometimes the Ends lie against each other. In order to reduce
it, the Patient being laid upon the sound Rib, a Plaster of Mastick is applied
to the Fracture; and it is drawn out violently; so that sometimes this
Attraction brings back the Bone, which is ad^anc'd into the Breast; but the
surest way is to make an Incision therein, to raise it up with the Finger.

If the Rib appear without, the Patient is to be set in a Chair, and obliged to
bend his Body on the side opposite to the Fracture, holding his Breath, with
which he must puff strongly, without letting it forth, in order to dilate the
Breast, whilst the Surgeon thrusts the Rib into its place.

The Dressing and Bandage.

A Bolster is to be applied to the Fracture, with two little Pieces of
Paste-board passed in form of a St. Andrew's Cross; and another Bolster upon
the whole Dressing, on which is also laid a large square Paste-board covered
with a Bolster. The Bandage is made with a Napkin folded into three Folds,
which is put round the Breast, being sowed and supported by the Scapulary;
which is a Band six Fingers broad, perforated in the middle, to let in the
Head. The two ends of the Scapulary are fastened before and behind to the
Napkin.

CHAP VI. Of the Fracture of the Sternum or Breast Bone.
TO reduce this Fracture, the Patient is to be laid upon his Back, with a
Unequal Body underneath; both his Shoulders are to be pressed with some weight,
to push 'em backward, and to raise up the Sternum, which is sunk down; or else
an Incision may be made upon the^ Bone, to discover it; and then a Vectis is to
be applied thereto very gently, in order to heave it up into its place.

The Dressing and Bandage.
A Bolster and Paste-board are to be laid upon the Sternum, almost of the same
Figure with the Part; and the Bandage is to be prepared with a Napkin supported
with a Scapulary. Or else the Bandage called Quadriga may be made with a Band
rolled with two Heads, five Else long, and four Fingers broad: The Application
of this Band is begun under-the Arm-pit; the Figure of KY is formed under the
Shoulder; the Band is carried downward with the two Balls, one before, and the
other behind; it is passed under the other Armhole; the Heads are crossed upon
the Shoulder, and it is brought down backward and forward, forming a KY before
and behind. Afterward the Band is rolled about the Breast in making Rollers or
Bolsters; these Rollers are continued till the Band be terminated; and it is
stayed by (...) Circumvolution round the Breast.

CHAP. VII. Of the Fracture of the Vertebra's.
THE Apophyses of the Vertebra's are commonly broken, and their Bodies but
seldom: It may be known that the Body of the Vertebra of the Neck and Back is
fractur'd by the Palsy of the Arm, accompanied with the loss of Feeling; by
the suppression of Urine; and by the Palsy of the Sphincter of the Anus; so
that the Excrements cannot be any longer retained. If these Symptoms appear, it
may well be conceived that the Marrow is compressed, and pricked with Points;
for the removing of which, it is necessary to make an Incision upon the Body of
the Vertebra in the fractur'd Place.

If the Apophyses Spinosae are only fractur'd, these Accidents will not happen,
only some Pain will be felt: To reduce 'em, the Patient is to be laid upon his
Belly, and the Surgeon must use his utmost endeavors to raise up the Bone
again, and to set it in its Natural Situation.

The Dressing and Bandage.
If the Apophysis Spinosa were fractur'd, it would be requisite to apply to
each side of it a small long Bolster, which is to be covered with a Paste-board
of the same Figure with the Bolster; another Bolster lying upon each
Paste-board. The Bandage is to be made with a Napkin sustained by its
Scapulary; or else the Quadriga may be prepared, according to the manner we
have already described in the Fracture of the Sternum.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Fracture of the Os Sacrum.
IT is reduced as the other Vertebra's; but its Dressing and Bandage are made
with the T perforated at the Anus, or else with the (...) or double T. It is
made with a Band two Fingers broad, and long enough to encompass the Body above
the Hips; so that to the middle of this Band is fastened another Band of the
same breadth, and of a sufficient length to pass over the Dressing of the Os
Sacrum, as also between the Thighs, to be joined in the forepart to the first
Cincture. The double T is made by fastening two Bands at a Finger's breadth
distance one from another, to be Band which ought to be rolled about the Body;
and this sort of Bandage is to be supported with a Scapulary.

CHAP. IX. Of the Fracture of the Coccyx or Rump-Bone.
THIS Bone is usually broken by falls, and sinks into the inside; so that to
reduce it, the Forefinger of one Hand is to be put into the Anus or Fundament
as far as the Fracture, to thrust it back again into its place, whilst the
other Hand setleth it on the outside.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are the same with those in the Fracture of the Os Sacrum; but the Patient must
be obliged to lie on one side, and to sit in a perforated Chair, when he has a
mind to rise.

If the Os Innominatum be broken, the Spica is to be used after it has been
dressed, of which Bandage we have given an Account in the Fracture of the
Clavicle.

CHAP. X. Of the Fracture of the Humerus or Arm-Bone.
TO set this Bone, a strong Extension is to be made, if the two ends cross one
another, to which purpose the Patient is to be placed on a little Stool or
Seat, and supported by a Servant, two other Assistants being employed to draw,
one at the upper part, and the other at the lower, above the Elbow, and not
beneath it. In the mean time the Operator reduces the two Bones, by closing
'em on all sides with the Palms of his Hands, and afterward prepares

The Dressing and Bandage.

It is necessary at first to lay round the Fracture a Bolster steept in some
proper Liquor, as Claret or Oxycratum; then three several Bands are to be
taken, three or four Fingers broad, and an Ell and a half long: The first of
these is to be laid upon the Fracture, round which are to be made three very
straight Circumvolutions; then it is to be carried up with small Rollers to the
top of the Arm, and stayed round the Body. The second Band being applied to the
Fracture, on the side opposite to the first, two Circumvolutions are to be made
upon the Fracture; so that the same Band may be brought down along the whole
length of the Arm, making diverse Rollers* and at last stayed below the Elbow,
which, nevertheless, it must not ^over. Afterward four Longitudinal Bolsters
must be laid upon the Fracture round about ^he Arm, which are to be kept close
with a ^hird Band; it being of no great Importance whether the Application of
this third Band be begun at the Top* or at the Bottom; but it ^ay be stayed
round the Body, or else beneath ^^e Elbow. The Arm ought also to be encompassed
with two thick pieces of Paste-board made round at the ends, and of the length
of ^^e Arm; but they must not cross one another. These Paste-boards are to be
fastened with ^^ee Ribbands, and the Arm is to be put in^^ a Scarf made with a
large Napkin, which (...) to be first applied in the middle under ^e Arm-pit,
the Arm resting upon it, so that the four ends may be raised up, and fastened
to the opposite Shoulder; but the Hand must lie higher than the Elbow.

CHAP. XI. Of the Fracture of the Bone of the Elbow.
IF both the Bones of the Elbow be broken, a stronger Extension is to be made
than if only one of 'em were so hurt; to which purpose a Servant is to be
appointed to grasp the Arm above the Elbow with both his Hands, and another to
hold it above the Wrist, whilst the Surgeon sets the Bones with the Palms of
both his Hands, till no unevenness be any longer felt in the Part.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are the same with those in the Fracture of the Arm; but the Bands which are
carried upward are to be stayed above the Elbow. If the Patient be desirous to
keep his Bed, it is requisite that his Arm be laid upon a Pillow, the Elbow
lying somewhat higher than the Hand.

CHAP. XII. Of the Fracture of the Carpus or Wrist-Bone.
^F the Bones of the Carpus, or those of the Metacarpium be fractur'd, a
Servant must old the Arm above the Wrist, and another the Fingers; whilst the
Operator sets the ^^ones in their place, so as no unevenness may ^^pear in the
Part.

The Dressing and Bandage.
Of the Fracture of the Wrist are to be pre^^^'d with a Band rolled with one
Head, be^^g six Else long, and two Fingers broad; so ^^at three Circumvolutions
are to be made upon the Wrist; the Band is to be passed over ^^e Hand, between
the Thumb and the Fore-fin^er, making the Figure of KY upon the ^humb. Then
after having made diverse Rol^^s upon the Carpus, a Bolster is to be ap^^'d,
with a little Piece of Paste-board of the ^ne Shape with the Wrist; several
Rollers (...) to be formed on the top of the Elbow, (...) stay the Band above
it; and the Arm is to (...) put into a Scarf.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Fracture of the Bone of the Metacarpium.
TWO Servants are to hold the Hand, after the same manner as in the setting of
the Carpus or Wrist-Bone, whilst the Surgeon reduces the broken Bone by fixing
it in its Natural Situation.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are made with a Band rolled up with one Head, five Else long, and two Fingers
broad: This Band being fastened to the Wrist, with a Circumvolution, is to be
laid on the Metacarpium, between the Thumb and the Forefinger, and the Figure
of KY is to be made upon the Hand: Then the forming of Rollers and KY's is to
be continued till the Metacarpium be covered; a Bolster and Paste-board are to
be laid upon the same Metacarpium; as also one in the Hand, of the Skape of the
Part: The inside of the Hand is to be trimmed; and the whole Contexture is to
be covered as before, with Rollers; which are continued till above the Elbow,
where the Band is stayed.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Fracture of the Fingers.
A Light Extension is to be made in the Fingers to reduce 'em, and a small
Dressing is to be prepared for every Finger, almost like that of the Arm. The
Fingers are to be somewhat bent, and the inside of the Hand is to be trimmed
with a Bolster, to retain 'em in this Situation. The Bolster is also to be
day'd with a Band, and the Arm to be put ^^^o a Scarf.

CHAP. XV. Of the Fracture of the Thigh.
IF the Thigh Bone be broken near its Head, the Fracture is very difficult to
be discovered; but if the Bones pass one over another, it may be soon known,
because the hurt ^eg will be shorter than the other. Therefore a very great
Extension is to be made; and if the Hands are not sufficient for that purpose,
recourse may be had to Straps and Engines. In the mean time the Operator is to
^ay his Thumbs upon the fractur'd Bone, to thrust it back into its place, and
afterward to apply

The Dressing and Bandage.
The Cavity of the Thigh is to be filled with a thick Bolster, of the length of
its bending; and three Bands four Fingers broad are to be provided, the first
being three Else long, and the second four, as well as the third: Then three
Circumvolutions are to be made upon the Fracture with the first Band, carrying
it up with small Rollers, and it is to be stayed round the Body. The second
Band is to make two Circumvolutions upon the Fracture, and is to be brought
down with small Rollers, which are terminated above the Knee; or else they may
be continued all along the Leg; it is also to be passed under the Foot, and to
be drawn up again upon the Leg: Then a Bolster is to be applied to the lower
part of the Thigh, being thicker at bottom than at top, to render the Thigh
everywhere even; and four Longitudinal Bolsters are to be added, on which are
laid Splints of the same length and breadth, which are to be wrapped up with a
single Bolster. The third Band is to be rolled upon these Splints, beginning at
the bottom, and ascending with Rollers. Then two large Paste-boards are to be
used, which may embrace the whole Dressing, without crossing one another, being
fastened with three Ribbands. Afterward a Pair of Pumps is to be put under the
Foot, and the Heel to be supported with a small Roll, the Thigh and Leg being
let into the Scarves, the inner of which is to extend to the Groin, and the
outermost is to be somewhat longer: Two little Cushions are also to be laid on
each side below the Knee, and two others below the Ankles, to fill up the
Cavities. These Cushions or large Bolsters are to lie between the Scarves; and
a thick Bolster is to be laid upon the Leg all along its length, as also one
upon the Thigh. The Scarves are to be bound with three Ribbands for the Legs,
and as many for the Thighs; the Knots being tied without, and on the side.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Fracture of the Knee-Pan.
THE Knee-Pan is cleft or broken in diverse pieces in its length, and
cross-wise: If it be broken cross-wise or obliquely, the two Pieces fly out one
from another; and on this occasion a strong Extension is to be made; whilst the
Surgeon at the same time thrusts back again the upper part of the Knee-Pan into
its place.

If the Knee-Pan be fractur'd in its length, to Extension can be made, because
the pieces of the Bones remain in their place.

The Dressing and Bandage.
If the Knee-Pan be broken cross-wise, a Band is to be provided three Else
long, and two Fingers broad, which may be rolled with one or two Heads. The
Application is to be begun above the Knee-Pan; the Figure of KY is to be made
in the Ham, and a Circumvolution under the Knee; then the Band is to be
continually carried up and down, till the Knee-Pan be entirely covered.

If the Knee-Pan be fractur'd in its length, that is to say, from the top to
the bottom, the Uniting-Band must be used, being two or three Else long, and
two Fingers broad, perforated in the middle. It is to be at first applied under
the Knee, and one of the Balls is to be passed through the Hole; it must also be
well closed, and diverse Circumvolutions are to be made upon the Knee-Pan, so as
it may be altogether covered.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Fracture of the Leg.
IF the Tibia be only broken, it pushes into the Inside; but if both Bones be
fractur'd they are sometimes separated on both sides, o^ else they pass one
upon another; and in thi^ case the Leg is shorter than it ought to be If the
Perone be broken, it pushes to the outside.

If one Bone be only fractur'd, so strong a^ Extension is not requisite as when
they ar^ both shattered, and it is to be drawn only o^ one side; whereas the
drawing ought to be equa^ on both sides when both Bones are concerned Thus
whilst the Assistants are employed in drawing, the Surgeon performs the
Operation, by laying the ends of the Bones exactly against one another; and
they are known to be reduced when the great Toe remains in its Natural
Situation.

The Dressing and Bandage.
A simple Bolster dipped in a convenient Liquor is at first applied, and three
Bands three Fingers broad are prepared, the first being two ^lls long, the
second three, and the third three and an half. Three very straight
Circumvolutions are to be made upon the Fracture; the Band is also to be
carried up with Rollers, and ^tay'd above the Knee. The Application of the
second Band is to be begun upon the Fracture with two Circumvolutions; it is to
be brought down with Rollers, to pass under the Foot, afterward carried up
again, and stayed where it is terminated. The Leg is to be filled with a
Bolster thicker at the bottom than at the top; and then are to be laid on the
four Longitudinal Bolsters, two Fingers broad, and as long as the Leg; to which
are to be applied the Splints of a pliable and thin Wood: These are wrapped up
with a simple Bolster, and strengthened with the third Band, which is applied
indifferently either at the top or bottom, opposite to the former; so that it
is carried up or else down in making Rollers, and stayed at its end. The whole
Contexture is to be encompassed with large Paste-boards made round at the Ends,
which are not to cross one another, but must be streighter at the bottom than
at the top, and are to be tied with three Ribbands or pieces of Tape, beginning
at the middle; so that the Knots be tied on the outside. Afterward the Leg is
to be put into the Scarves, and the Heel is to be supported with a Linnen-Roll,
to which are fastened two Ribbands that are tied upon the Scarves: These Rolls
are made with a small piece of Cloth, which is doubled, and rolled up with the
ends, in which is contained some Straw, and a little Stick in the middle, to
consolidate 'em. The Foot is supported with a Paste-board or Wooden Sole,
trimmed with a Bolster, or small Quilt sowed over it. Diverse Strings are also
fastened to the middle of the sides of the Sole or Pump, which are crossed to
be joined to the Scarves; and another is sixth at the end of the Sole, which is
tied to a Ribband that binds the middle of the Scarf. These Scarves are
likewise fastened with three Ribbands, beginning with that in the middle, the
Knots being without, and trimmed with four Bolsters, that is to say, two on
each side, to fill up the Cavities that are belo^^ the Knee, and above the
Ankle. Lastly, the Leg is to be placed somewhat high, and a Cradle to be laid
upon it, to keep off the Bed-Cloaths, the Scarves passing over the Knee and
Foot.

The Dressing of Complicated Fractures
Of the Arms, Legs, and Thighs is prepared with a Bandage having Eighteen Heads
or Ends, in order to make which, a Linen Cloth is to be taken of the length of
the Part, and broad enough to cause it to be crossed thereby: It is to be
folded into three doubles, and cut in three places on each side, leaving the
middle plain; so that eighteen Heads or small Bands ^^e formed, every one of
which will be four fingers broad, the upper Heads being a little ^orter than
the lower. This Band of eighteen Heads is to be laid upon the Scarves, and a
Boller is to be applied to it four Fingers broad, ^s long as the Scarves. The
Leg is laid upon ^his Bolster, and it hinders the corrupt Matter ^^om falling
on the Bandage.

When the Wound has been dressed, the fracture is to be incontinently
surrounded with ^ee of the Heads, which ought to cross one another: Then after
the Leg has been bound with the first Heads, two Longitudinal Bollers are to
be applied to the side of it; and the other Heads are to be raised up, with all
the rest of the Dressing, which has been described in the simple Fracture.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Fracture of the Bone of the Foot.
THE Reduction of the Bone of the Foot is performed after the same manner as
that of the Hand.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are made with a Band rolled with two Heads, being three Else long, and two
Fingers broad: The Application of it is begun with a Circumvolution above the
Ankles; it is passed on the Foot, and in like manner makes a Circumvolution
round it: Afterward the same Band is crossed over the Metatarsus, upon which
are made some Folds in form of a Rhombus or Diamond; as also on the Toes, and
it is stayed above the Ankle-Bone; or else it is carried up along the Leg, to
be stayed above the Knee. This Bandage serves for all Fractures of the Bones of
the Foot, and is called the Sandal.

A TREATISE OF THE OPERATIONS Which are performed in LUXATIONS.
CHAP. I. Of the Luxation of the Nose.
THE Bones of the Nose may be separated from that of the Forehead by a Fall,
or some violent Blow; and the Surgeon in order to set 'em, at first ^^^s his
Thumb upon the Root of the No^^^ ^^en he introduces a little Stick trimmed
(...) ^otton, into the Nostrils, and by the (...) ^hereof thrusts back the
Bones in (...) ^lace.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are the same with those that have been already described in the Fracture of
the Bones of the Nose.

CHAP. II. Of the Luxation of the lower-Jaw.
THE Jaw may be luxated either on both sides, or only on one. When the
Dislocation happens on both sides, it hangs over the Sternum or Breast Bone,
and the Spittle runs abundantly out of the Mouth: To reduce it, the Patient
must sit down, and his Head is to be supported by a Servant; then the Operator
or Surgeon having wrapped up his two Thumbs, puts 'em into the Mouth upon the
Molar Teeth, his other Fingers lying under the Jaw, which is to be drawn down
by raising it up, having before set two small Wooden Wedges upon the two Molar
Teeth on both sides of the Jaw, lest the Surgeon's Fingers should be hurt, as
the Bone is returning to its place.

If the Luxation be forward, a Band or Strap is to be put under the Chin, an
Assistant having his Knees upon the Patient's Shoulders, where he is to draw
the Strap upward, to facilitate the Extension; which the Surgeon makes with his
Hands, at the same time thrusting the Bone back again into its place.

When the Jaw is luxated only on one side, the Chin stands across, and the
dislocated side is squash'd down, a small Cavity being perceived in it, and a
Rising on the other side; so that the Mouth cannot be shut close, but reremains
somewhat open, the lower Teeth appear farther out than the upper; and the
Canine or Dog-Teeth lie under the Incisive. This Luxation is reduced by giving
a blow with the Hand upon the luxated Bone which is sufficient to cause it to
re-enter its Natural Place.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are altogether the same with those used in the Fracture of the Bones of the
lower Jaw.

CHAP. III. Of the Luxation of the Clavicle.
THE Clavicle is oftener loosened from the Acromion than from the Sternum; when
it has left the former the Arm cannot be lifted up; the Acromion makes a
Prominence, and the Clavicle descends downward, a Cavity appearing in its
place. To reduce this Luxation, the Patient is to be laid upon some Unequal Body
put between his Shoulders; both which are to be pressed backward, to raise up
the Clavicle* Afterward he is to be set in a Chair, that his Arm may be drawn
backward, whilst the Surgeon is employed in pressing the Clavicle and Acromion,
to join 'em together.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are the same with those that we have already shown, in treating of the
Fracture of the Clavicle.

CHAP. IV. Of the Luxation of the Vertebra's.
IN the Luxation of the Vertebra's of the Neck, the Head stands to one side,
and the Face is swelled and livid, with a difficulty of Respiration.

To reduce this Dislocation, the Patient is to be set upon a low Seat, an
Assistant leaning on his Shoulders, to keep his Body steady, whilst the Surgeon
or Operator draws his Head upward, and turns it from one side to another: Then
if the Accidents or Symptoms cease, the Cure is performed; so that Fomentations
may be applied to the Part; and the Patient being laid in his Bed, must take
care to avoid moving his Head.

When the Vertebra's of the Back or Loins are luxated on the inside, a sinking
of the Bone is soon perceived; whereupon the Patient being laid on his Belly,
the Extension is to be made with Napkins passed under the Armpits, and upon
the Os Ileum, whilst the Surgeon with a strong Extension makes some Efforts on
the Spine, endeavoring to draw back the Vertebra. If that be not sufficient,
an Incision is to be made upon the Apophysis Spinosa of the Vertebra; so that
after having laid open this Process of the Bone, it may be taken out with a
Pair of Forceps. Then the Wound is to be dressed with Pledgets, a Plaster, and
a Napkin, which must not be bound too close, for ^ear of pushing back the Spine.

When the Vertebra is luxated on the outside, a Prominence appears; so that to
reduce this Dislocation, the Extension is to be made as before, the Patient
lying in like manner upon his Belly; but in order to push back the Vertebra,
two little Sticks trimmed with Linen Cloth are to be prepared, and laid along
the two sides of the Spine of the Vertebra; yet these Sticks ought to be thick
enough to remain more elevated than the Apophysis Spinosa; and a large Wooden
Roller is to be often rolled upon 'em, which by its turning backward and
forward, may thrust the Vertebra's inward; so that when all the Vertebra's are
of an equal height, the Reduction is finished. If the Vertebra's are luxated on
the side, the same Extensions are to be made, and the Prominence is to be
pushed, to re-establish the Vertebra in its place.

The Dressing and Bandage.
The Dressing is prepared by laying two thin Plates of Lead on each side of the
Spinous Process of the Vertebra, to maintain it in its Place, and a long
Bolster over 'em. The proper Bandage is the Quadriga, which has been before
described, in treating of the Fractures of the Breast Bone.

CHAP. V. Of the Luxation of the Coccyx or Rump-Bone.
IF the Coccyx be sunk on the inside, it is to be raised with the Forefinger
of the Right Hand put into the Anus; and if the Luxation be on the outside, it
may be gently thrust back again. An Account of its proper Dressing and Bandage
has been already given in the Fracture of the Coccyx.

CHAP. VI. Of the Bunch.
THE Bunch is nothing else but an exterior Luxation of the Vertebra's, and for
the Cure thereof, it would be requisite lo keep Emollients for a long time upon
the Vertebra's, to loosen the Ligaments, and to wear Iron-Bodice; which in
compressing the Vertebra's by little and little, might perhaps drive 'em back
into their Natural Place.

CHAP. VII. Of the Luxation of the Ribs.
THE Ribs are luxated either on the outside, or on the inside: If they be
dislocated on the inside, a Cavity is perceived near the Vertebra's, the
Patient drawing his Breath with Pain, and not being able to bend his Body.

When the Luxation is on the outside, and happens in the upper Ribs, the
Patient's Hands are to be hoisted upon the top of a Door, to raise up the Ribs,
whilst the Surgeon presses the Prominence of the Rib to restore it to its
place.

When the lower Ribs are luxated, the Patient must be obliged to stoop, laying
his Hands upon his Knees, and the Prominence of the Bone is to be thrust back.

If a Rib be luxated on the inside, an Incision is to be made to draw it out
with the Fingers.

The Dressing and Bandage
Are the same with those that are used in the Fracture of the Ribs.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Sinking of the Xiphoides, or Sword-like Cartilage.
TO raise up the Xiphoid Cartilage, it must be fomented before for some time
with Oil of Turpentine, or other Fomentations, made with Aromaticks; then the
Patient is to be laid upon his Back, with a Unequal Body underneath, and the
Shoulders, and Sides of the Breast are to be pressed, to lift up the Cartilage.
When this Operation is not sufficient, dry Cupping-Glasses are usually applied,
till the Bart be elevated, and a strengthening Plaster is afterward laid upon
it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Luxation of the Humerus, or Arm-Bone.
THE Head of the Humerus generally falls under the Arm-Pit, so that the luxated
Arm becomes longer than the other, the Acromion appears pointed on the outside;
the Elbow starts from the Ribs, and cannot be moved without great Pain. To
reduce this Bone, the Patient is to be set upon a low Seat, or else on the
Ground, whilst some Person supports his Body with a Napkin: In the mean time
the Surgeon is to lay hold on the upper part of the Humerus, a Servant kneeling
behind him, who is to hold the Patient's Arm above the Elbow, which is to pass
between the Surgeon's Legs, and is to be drawn down by the Assistant as much as
is possible, whilst the Surgeon in like manner draws the Arm, to remove the
Head of the Bone out of the place where it was stopped; insomuch that the Bone
sometimes makes a Noise in re-entring its Cavity.

Or else the Patient's Arm may be laid upon the Shoulder of a taller Man than
himself, who is strongly to draw the luxated Arm upon the Forepart of his
Breast; during which time, the Operator is to push the Head of the Humerus, to
cause it to re-enter its Cavity.

Otherwise the Patient may lie on the Ground, a Tennis-Ball being put under his
Arm-Pit, which a Servant is to draw strongly with a Handkerchief passed under
the Shoulder, whilst another Assistant stands behind the Patient, to thrust
down the Shoulder with his Foot; at the same time the Surgeon sitting between
the Patient's Legs, is to push strongly with his Heel the Ball that lies under
the Arm-hole.

Or else, a thick Battoon or Leaver may be laid on the Shoulders of two Men,
after a Tennis-Ball has been nailed on the middle of it; otherwise a Bunch*
may be made therein, and covered with Linen Cloth; two Wooden Pins being also
fixed on each side of the Ball: Then the Patient's Arm-Pit is to be set between
those two Pins, and upon the Ball, where he is to remain hanging, whilst his
Arm is pulled down by main force. The same thing may be done by laying the
Patient's Arm-Pit upon a Door, or else upon the Round of a Ladder.

The Dressing and Bandage
A little Ball of Linen is to be laid under the Arm-Pit, and underneath a
Bolster with four Heads, which are crossed upon the Shoulder; as also a Bolster
under the sound Arm-Hole, that it may not be galled by the Bandage Spica, the
Nature of which we have shown in treating of the Fracture of the Clavicle.

CHAP. X. Of the Luxation of the Elbow.
WHEN the Elbow is luxated on the inside, the Arm flies out, and the Hand is
turned outward; but in the Luxation on the outside, the Arm is shortened: If the
Luxation be Lateral, a Prominence appears in the Dislocated, and a Cavity in
the opposite Part.

To reduce the Internal Luxation, the Humerus and Cubitus are drawn, and at the
same time the Surgeon bends the Elbow, by carrying ^he Hand toward the
Shoulder; or else a Ten^is-Ball may be laid in the Fold of the Elbow, ^^ed the
Arm drawn toward the Shoulder.

For the External Luxation, the Extension is (...) be made, whilst the Surgeon
thrusts back ^^e Elbow into its place: Or else a round Stick ^ay be taken, and
trimmed with Linen Cloth, ^ith which the Bone is to be pushed back into (...)
place during the Extension. This Stick may ^e also used in the reducing of the
Internal Luxa^ion.

For the Lateral Luxations, the Extension may be made in like manner; the
Surgeon at the ^^me time thrusting back the Bone into its Natural Situation.

The Bandage
Is made with a Band five Else long, and two Fingers broad, rolled with one
Ball: The Application of it is begun with a Circumvolution at the lower part of
the Humerus, it is passed over the Fold of the Arm; a Circumvolution is also
formed in the upper part of the Elbow, and the Figure of KY in its Fold.
Afterward the Roliers are continued upon the Elbow, and the KY's in the inside
of the Arm, till the Elbow be entirely covered: The Band is likewise carried up
to the top of the Arm with Rollers, and stayed round about the Body. The
Patient must be obliged to keep his Bed, or else his Arm may be put in a Scarf,
after the same manner as in the Fracture of the Arm.

CHAP. XI. Of the Luxation of the Wrist.
IF the Luxation be Internal, the Hand is turned back to the outside, so that
for the Reduction thereof, it would be requisite to cause the back of the Hand
to be laid upon a Table, and the Extension to be made by drawing the Elbow and
Hand, whilst the Surgeon takes care to press the Prominence.

If the Luxation be External, the Hand is bended on the inside; so that to
reduce it, the inside of the Hand is to be laid upon a Table, and the Surgeon
is to press it after the Extension.

If the Luxation be on the sides, the Hand is turned to one side; so that the
Extension must be made, and the Hand turned on the side opposite to the
Luxation. But the Fingers are usually drawn one after another, to the end that
the Tendons may be set again in their Place.

The eight Bones of the Canpus may be in like manner dislocated both on the
inside and without; and to set 'em right, the Hand is to be laid upon a Table,
and the Extension to be made, so as to press the Protuberances on the inside,
if the Luxation be internal, and on the outside if it be external.

The Bandage
Is prepared with a Band six Else long, and two Fingers broad; so that three
Circumvolutions may be made upon the Luxation; as also diverse Rollers in
passing through the inside of the Hand between the Thumb and the Forefinger, and
in forming the Figure of KY upon the Thumb, after having made many Rollers upon
the Wrist. Two Pieces of Paste-board are also to be laid on the sides of the
Wrist, which are bound with the same Band in making Rollers; and the Hand is to
be trimmed with a Linnen-Ball, to keep the Fingers in their mean Situation Then
the Band is to be passed above, to strengthen it, and carried up with Rollers
along the whole length of the Elbow, to be stayed below the same Elbow.

CHAP. XII. Of the Luxation of the Fingers.
IF the Fingers be luxated, it is necessary to make an Extension to reduce 'em,
and afterward to use the following

Bandage.
If the Luxation be in the first Articulation or Joint, the Bandage Spica is to
be applied, being made of a Band rolled with one Head, an Ell long, and an Inch
broad: It is begun with Circumvolutions round about the Wrist, and brought over
the Luxation in passing between the Fingers. These Circumvolutions are also
continued to form a Spica upon the Luxation; and the Band is stayed at the
Wrist.

If all the first Phalanges were dislocated, it would be requisite to make as
many upon every Phalanx, and with the same Band: This sort of Bandage is called
the Demi-Gantlet.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Luxation of the Thigh.
THE Luxation which most commonly happens in this Part, is the Internal; so
that a Protuberance appears on the Hole of the Os Pubis; the indisposed Leg is
longer than the other, and the Knee and Foot turn outward; neither can the
Thigh be any longer bended, nor drawn near the other.

If the Luxation be External, the Leg becomes shorter than the other, the Knee
and Foot turning inward, and the Heel to the outside.

When the Luxation is on the forepart, a Tumor arises in the Groin, so that
the Patient cannot draw this Thigh toward the other, nor bend the Leg; his Body
resting only upon the Heel.

If the Luxation be Posterior, a Tumor is selt in the Buttocks with great
Pain, and the Leg is shorter than it ought to be: There also appears a sinking
in the Groin, the Leg is ^isted off from the Ground, and the hurt Person ^s apt
to fall backward.

To reduce the Internal Luxation, the Patient ^s to be laid with his Back upon
a Table, to which is fixed a thick Wooden Pin, about a Foot long, which is to be
set between his Thighs, ^o detain his Body when his Legs are drawn down; then a
Strap is to be passed above the Joint of the Thigh, to draw the Ischion upward;
and the Thigh is to be drawn down with another Strap fastened above the Knee:
In the mean while the Surgeon thrusts the Thigh upward, to cause it to re-enter
its Cavity, the Straps being somewhat loosened in the time of the Reduction to
facilitate the Operation.

To reduce the External Luxation, the Patient is to be laid upon his Belly; and
the drawing to be performed after the same manner as we have even now shown,
whilst the Thigh is thrust from the outside inward, to cause the Bone to
re-enter its Cavity.

In reducing the Anterior Luxation, the hurt Person is to be laid upon the side
opposite to the Luxation, and Extensions are to be made, by drawing both upward
and downward, as before: Then the Head of the Bone is to be forced, by the
means of a Ball thrust strongly with the Knee, in drawing the luxated Leg
toward the other.

The Posterior Luxation is thus reduced: The Patient being laid upon his Belly,
the double Extension is to be made, and his Knee drawn outward, to set the Bone
in its place. After the Operation has been performed, a Bolster is to be
applied, steept in Spirituous Medicaments; and the Bandage called Spica, of
which we have given an Account in treating of the Luxation of the Shoulder.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Luxation of the Knee.
WHEN the Tibia is luxated behind, its Prominences are in the Cavity of the
Ham, and the Leg flies off, or is bended. If the same Tibia be dislocated on
the side, a kind of Tumor appears in the luxated side, and a Sinking in the
opposite. But if the Condylus of the Tibia remains in the inside, the Leg turns
outward; and if it be in the outside, it turns inward.

The Posterior Luxation is reduced by obliging the Patient to lie upon his
Belly, whilst the Surgeon during the Extensions bends the Leg, in drawing the
Heel toward the top of the Thigh,

If the Tibia be luxated on the side, the usual Extensions are to be made, and
the Bone is to be pushed with the Knee.

If the Luxation were in the forepart, it would be requisite to lay the
Patient upon his Back, to make the Extensions, by drawing the Thigh and Leg;
and to press the protuberant Parts.

The Bandage
Is prepared with a Band three Else long, and two Fingers broad, rolled with
two Balls: A Circumvolution being at first made above the Knee, the Figure KY
is formed underneath, and a Circumvolution above it; then the Band ^s carried
up again over the Knee, in making Rollers and KY's underneath, till the Knee be
entirely covered.

CHAP. XV. Of the Luxation of the Patella or Knee-Pan.
THE Knee-Pan is luxated by starting upward; and to reduce it, the Patient's
Leg is to be held straight, whilst it is thrust back into its place with the
Hands. Then he must be obliged to keep his Bed; and the same Bandage is to be
applied with that which has been described for the Luxation of the Knee.

If the Perone or Fibula be removed from the Tibia, the sides of the Foot are
to be pressed, to draw it back again; and it may be kept close with the Bandage
which is appropriated to the Fractures of the Tarsus.

The Astragalus may be also luxated in the forepart; so that the Operator
ought to thrust it back into its place, and to make use of the Bandage which we
have prepared for the Fracture of the Foot.

The Calcaneum sometimes flies off from the Astragalus both in the inside and
without; and the Bones of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Toes are likewise apt to
be luxated. But a little Circumspection is only requisite to reduce all these
Dislocations.

A TREATISE OF Medicinal Compositions Necessary for a SURGEON.
CHAP. I. Of Balsams.
The Balsam of Arcaeus.
TAKE two Pounds of the Suet of a He-Goat, Venice Turpentine and Gum Elemi, a
Pound and a half of each; and of Hogs-Lard one Pound. After the Gum Elemi,
being cut into shall Pieces, ^ath been melted over a very gentle Fire, and to
it the Turpentine, Goats-Suet, and Swines-Grease; Grease; and when all these
Ingredients are wel^ dissolved, strain the Liquor through a new Linen Cloth, to
separate the Scum and Dregs from it; then let the whole Mass cool, and the
Balsam is made.

This Balsam serves to incarnate and consolidate all sorts of Wounds and
Ulcers: It is likewise used in Fractures and Dislocations of the Bones; as also
to cure the Contusions and Wounds of the Nerves.

The Balsam of Spain.
Take pure Wheat, the Roots of Valerian and Carduus Benedictus, of each one
Ounce, and beat 'em well in a Mortar with a Pint of White Wind; strain the
whole Composition into an Earthen Vessel Leaded, having a narrow Mouth; stop up
the Vessel, and set it upon hot Embers during twenty four Hours: Then add six
Ounces of St. John's-Wort; set the whole Mass in Balneo Mariae, till the Wine
be consumed, and let it be strained and queez'd. Afterward add two Ounces of
Frankincense well pulverized, with eight Ounces of Venice Turpentine, mixing
'em together over a gentle Fire, and the Balsam will be made.

This is the Balsam which was always used by Hieronymus Fabritius ab
Aquapendente, and noted Italian Surgeon, and is excellent for all kinds of
Wounds, even for the Nervous, which (as it is avouch'd by some Persons) may be
cured by it within the the space of twenty four Hours. But the Wound must be at
first washed with good Wite-Wine cold, and afterward anointed ^ith this Balsam
well heated. If the Wound ^^e deep, it may be syringed with the same Balsam
very hot, and the sides of it anointed ^hen drawn together. Then a Bolster
steeped (...) the Balsam is to be applied to the Part, and ^^on that another
Bolster soakt in the Lees of ^ine; as also over this last another dry Bolster.

The Green Balsam.
Take Linseed-Oil and that of Olives, of each ^^e Pint; one Ounce of Oil of
Bays; two Ounces of Venice Turpentine, half an Ounce of ^^e destill'd Oil of
Juniper Berries, three Drams ^f Verdegrease, two Drams of Sucotrin Aloes, ^^o
Drams and a half of White Vitriol, and ^ne of the Oil of Cloves.

Having made choice of the best Olive and ^inseed-Oil well purified and mingled
together ^n a Skillet or Pan over a very gentle Fire, ^^s the Turpentine and
Oil of Bays be incor^orated in it; then having taken off the Pan from ^^e Fire,
and left the Liquor to be well cooled, (...) it be intermixed by little and
little with the ^erdegrease, the White Vitriol, and the Sucotrin ^^oes beaten
to fine Powder: Afterward the ^estill'd Oils of Cloves and Juniper Berries
be^^g added, and the whole Composition well ^ingl'd together, the Balsam will
be entirely compounded according to Art.

This is the Balsam that has been so much ^^lkt of at Paris, and which many
Quack-Sal^ers, pretending to the Art of Physic and Sur^ery, keep as a great
Secret. Indeed it is very ^ood for all sorts of Wounds, whether they be made by
the Sword, or other Iron Weapons, or by Gunshot. But it would be requisite at
first to wash the Wound with warm Wine, then to anoint it with this Balsam very
hot, and to apply Bolsters that have been steept in it, as also a large Bolster
over the other, dipped in some Styptick Liquor. This Balsam mundifies,
incarnates, and cicatrizes Wounds; being likewise good against the Bitings of
venomous Beasts, and fistulous and malignant Ulcers.

Samaritan Balsam.
Take an equal quantity of common Oil and good Wine; boil 'em together in a
glazed Earthen Vessel, till the Wine be wholly consumed, and the Balsam will be
made. I have produced this Balsam in particular, by reason of its simplicity,
and in regard that it may be readily prepared at all times. It serves to
mundifie and consolidate simple Wounds more especially those that are recent.

CHAP. II. Of Ointments.
Unguentum Althaeae.
TAKE of the Roots of Althaea or Marshmallows, six Ounces, the Seeds of Line,
and Fenugreek, and Squills, of each four Ounces; of yellow Wax one Pound;
Colophony and Rosin, of each one Pound; Venice Turpentine, Galbanum, and Gum
Hederae pulverized, two Ounces of each. The Marsh-Mallow-Roots being newly
gathered, are to be well washed and sliced, as well as the Squills. After they
have been put into a Copper-Pan or Skillet, tinned over on the inside, together
with the Seeds of Line and Fenugreek, and a Gallon of fair Water poured upon
'em, the whole Mass is to be macerated during twenty four Hours, over a very
gentle Fire, stirring the Ingredients from time to time with a Wooden Spatula:
Thus they are to be boiled slowly, often reiterating the stirring, till the
Mucilages are sufficiently thickened; then, after having well squeezed and
strained 'em through a strong and very close Cloth, and mingled 'em with the
prepared Oil, they are to be boiled together again over a very gentle Fire,
till the Superfluous Moisture of the Mucilages be wholly consumed: Afterward
having strained the Oil again, the yellow Wax, Colophony, and Rosin cut into
small pieces, are to be melted in it; and if any Dregs appear at the bottom of
the Pan, when the whole Mass is dissolved, it is to be strained anew, or at
least the pure Liquor must be separated from the gross or impure by
Inclination, whilst it is as yet very hot: The Ointment is to be stirred about
with a Wooden Pestle; and when it begins to grow thick, you may add the
Turpentine, the Galbanum purified and thickened, and the Gum Hederae beaten to
fine Powder, all which Ingredients were before incorporated together Then the
Ointment is to be continually stirred, till it be altogether grown cold.

This Ointment serves to moisten, mollify, and heat gently; it also allayes
the Pains of the Side, and softens Tumors, particularly the Parotides. It may
be used either alone, or with other Ointments or Oils.

The mundificative Ointment of Smallage.
Take three handfuls of Smallage-Leaves; with Ground Ivy, great Wormwood, great
Centory, Germander, Sage, St. John's-Wort, Plantain, Milfoil or Yarrow,
Perewinkle, the greater Comfrey, the lesser Comfrey, Betony, Honey-suckle,
Fluellin, Vervein, Knot-Grass, Adders-Tongue, and Burnet, of every one of these
Plants two handfuls; a Gallon of common Oil, white Pitch, Mutton-Suet, yellow
Wax, and Turpentine, of each two Pounds.

Bruise all these Herbs in a Marble-Mortar; let the Wax, white Pitch, and
Mutton-Suet cut into pieces, as also the Turpentine be melted in the Oil, in a
Copper-Pan lined with Tin, over a moderate Fire; put the bruised Herbs in it,
and cause the whole Mass to simmer together very slowly, stirring it about from
time to time with a Wooden Spatula. As soon as it shall be perceived that the
Oil of the Herbs is almost quite consumed, the whole Composition is to be
strained, and strongly squeezed. Then after having let the Ointment cool, to
draw off all the Dregs and Moisture, it is to be dissolved over a very gentle
Fire; and after having left it a little while to cool again and thicken, you
may add thereto Myrrh, Aloes, Florence Orris, and round Birth-Wort pulverized
very fine. When all these Ingredients are by this means well incorporated, the
Ointment will be brought to perfection.

This Ointment is of singular Use to cleanse Ulcers; as also to mundifie,
cicatrize, and consolidate all sorts of Wounds.

The black or suppurative Ointment.
Take a Quart of common Oil, white and yellow Wax, Mutton-Suet that lies near
the Kidneys, pure Rosin, Ship-Pitch, Venice Turpentine, of each half a Pound;
and of Mastick beaten to fine Powder, two Ounces; let all that is capable of
being dissolved, be liquify'd in the Oil; and add the Powder of Mastick to make
in Ointment.

This Ointment searches and opens all sorts of Impostumes, as well as
Carbuncles, and Pestilential and Venereal Bubo's. The use of the same Ointment
is also to be continued after the opening of the Abcesses, till their perfect
Cure be completed.

Unguentum Rosatum.
Take Bore's-Grease well purified, and often washed, and Red Roses newly picked,
of each four Pounds, with the like quantity of White Roses.

The thin Membrane or Skin which lies upon the Bores-Grease, being taken away,
it is to be cut into small pieces, well washed in fair Water, and melted in a
glazed Earthen-Pot over a very gentle Fire: the first Grease that is dissolved
is to be strained through a Cloth, well washed, and mixed with the same quantity
of thick Rose-Buds well bruised. Then the whole Mass is to be put into a glazed
Earthen-Pot with a narrow Mouth; the Pot is to be well stopped, and set during
six Hours in Water, which is between lukewarm and boiling hot. Afterward it is
to be boiled an Hour, strained and strongly squeezed. In the mean while four
Pounds of White Roses newly blown are to be taken, well bruised, and mingled
with the former Composition, the Pot being covered, which is likewise set for
the space of fix Hours in Water, between lukewarm and boiling hot: Then the
Liquor is to be strained and strongly squeezed. Lastly, after the Ointment has
been cooled, and separated from its Faeces or Dregs, it may be kept for use.

If it be desired to give a Rose-Colour to this Ointment, it would be requisite
a quarter of an Hour before it be strained the last time, to throw into it two
or three Ounces of Orcanet, which is to be stirred into the Ointment. If it be
thought fit to retain the White Color, and to produce the smell of Roses, it
may be done with Damask-Roses without Orcanet. If you are desirous to give it
the Consistence of a Liniment, you may add Oil of sweet Almonds to the quantity
of a sixth part of its weight.

This Ointment is a very good Remedy against all manner of external
Inflammations, particularly against Phlegmons, Erysipelas's, and Tetters; as
also against the Headache and Haemorrhoids or Piles.

Unguentum Album, aut de Cerussa.
Take three Pints of Oil of Roses, nine Ounces of white Wax, one Pound of
Venice Ceruse or white Lead, and a Dram and a half of Camphire.

The Ceruse being pulverized by rubbing the pieces upon the Cloth of a
Hair-Sieve turned upside-down; the Powder is to be received on (...) Sheet of
Paper laid underneath, and to be often washed with Water in a great
Earthen-Pan, stirring it about with a Wooden Spatula, and pouring off the Water
by Inclination as soon as the Powder is sunk to the Bottom. When the Water of
these Washings grows insipid, the last Lotion is to be made with Rose Water,
leaving it for the space of five or six Hours, which being expired, it is to be
poured off by Inclination, and the Ceruse must be dried in the Shade, covered
with Paper. Then the broken Wax and prepared Oil is to put into a glazed
Earthen-Pot, and the Pot into the boiling Bath. As soon as the Wax is melted,
the Pot may be taker out of the Bath, and the dissolved Liquor stirred with a
Wooden Pestle till it begins to grow thick. Afterward the pulverized Ceruse is
to be infused, and the Ointment stirred about till it be almost cold. If you
shall think fit to add Camphire, let it be dissolved in a little Oil, and
incorporated with the Ointment when it is cold. The Whites of Eggs may be also
well mixed with the Ointment, by stirring it about, to make an exact union of
the several Ingredients.

This Ointment is good for Burns, Erysipelas's, the Itch, and many Distempers
of the Skin; it allayes the Itchings and intemperature of Ulcers; it dissipates
the Chasings and Redness that happen in the Bodies of Infants; It is of great
efficacy in the ^ealing of Contusions, and it serves to consolidate and cool
light Wounds.

Unguentum Aegyptiacum.
Take eleven Ounces of Verdegrease, fourteen Ounces of strong Vinegar, and
twenty eight Ounces of good Honey.

Let the Verdegrease be put into a Copper-Pan or Skillet over a very gentle
Fire; then bruise it with a Wooden Pestle; work it well in the Vinegar, and
strain the whole through a Hair-Sieve. If a little Verdegrease remains on the
Sieve, it is to be put again into the Skillet, bruised and beaten small
therein, as before, with a Portion of the same Vinegar, straining it through the
Sieve, till the unprofitable drossy parts of the Copper be only left. Afterward
this Liquor is to be boiled over a gentle Fire, with the Honey, stirring it
about from time to time till it has acquired the Consistence of a softish
Ointment, and a very red Color.

This Ointment consumes putrified Flesh, and the Superfluities of Ulcers and
Wounds.

Unguentum Basilicon, or Royal Ointment.
Take yellow Wax, Mutton-Suet, Rosin, Ship-Pitch, and Venice Turpentine, one
Pound of each; with five Pints of common Oil.

Cut the Suet, Rosin, and black Pitch into small Pieces, and let 'em be melted
together, with the Oil, in a Copper-Pan over a very moderate Fire; then after
having strained the Liquor through a thick Cloth, let it be incorporated with the
Turpentine, and the Ointment will be made.

It promotes Suppuration, and cicatrizes Wounds when the purulent Matter is
drawn forth. It is often laid alone upon the Bolsters, and sometimes mixed with
the Yolks of Eggs, Turpentine, and other Ointments, or with Oils and Plasters.

A cooling Cerate.
Take a Pint of Oil of Roses, and three Ounces of white Wax.

Let the whole Composition be put into a glazed Earthen-Pot, and the Pot set in
Balneo Mariae, till the Wax be well dissolved in the Oil: Then take the Vessel
out of the Bath, and stir the Ointment with a Wooden Pestle till it be cooled;
add two Ounces of Water, and stir it about with the Pestle till it be imbibed
by the Cerate; let as much more Water be infused, and again the same quantity,
till the Cerate becomes very white, and has been well soakt with fresh Water.
Afterward all the Water is to be poured off by Inclination, and separated as
much as is possible from the Cerate, which may then be kept for use; but some
Surgeons cause an Ounce of Vinegar to be mingled with it.

This Cerate is usually laid outwardly upon all Parts that stand in need of
cooling, and asswages the Pains of the Haemorrhoids or Piles. It is also good
for Chaps, sore Nipples, and other ill Accidents that happen in the Breast; and
is used for Burns either alone, or mixed with other Ointments. Whenever it is
necessary to apply Desiccatives and Astringents to any Part, this Cerate may be
mingled with Vnguentum de Cerussa.

An Ointment for Burns.
Take a Pound of Bores-Grease, two Pints of White Wind, the Leaves of the
greater Sage, Ground- and Wall-Ivy, Sweet Marjoram, or the Greater House-Leek,
of each two handfuls.

Let the whole Mass be boiled over a gentle Fire, and having afterward strained
and squeezed it, let the Ointment so made be kept for use.

CHAP. III. Of Plasters.
The Plaster of Diapalma.
TAKE three Pounds of prepared Litharge of Gold, three Pints of common Oil, two
Pounds of Hogs-Lard, a Quart of the Decoction of Palm Tree or Oak-Tops; four
Ounces of Vitriol calcined till it become red, and steept in the said
Decoction. Having bruised or cut very small two handfuls of Palm Tree or
Oak-Tops, let 'em be boiled slowly in three Quarts of Water till about half be
consumed; and after the whole Mass has been well squeezed, the strained
Decoction is to be preserved. In the mean time the Litharge is to be pounded in
a great Brass Mortar, and diluted with two or three Quarts of clear Water; but
it will be requisite readily to pour out into another Vessel the muddly Water
which is impregnated with the more subtle part of the Litharge, whilst the
thicker remains at the bottom of the Mortar; whereupon this part of the
Litharge will sink to the bottom of the Water, and the Litharge remaining in
the Mortar is to be pounded again. Then having diluted it in the Water of the
first Lotion, or in some other fresh Water, the muddy Liquor is to be poured by
Inclination upon the subtle Litharge that remained in the bottom of the Vessel:
Afterward you may continue to pound the Litharge, to bruise it in the Water, to
pour it off by Inclination, and to let the Powder settle, till there by left
only at the bottom a certain impure part of the Litharge, capable of being
pulverized, and raised amidst the Water. As soon as the Lotions are well
settled, and care has been taken to separate by Inclination the Water which
swims over the Powder of Litharge; this Powder is to be dried, and having
weighed out the appointed Quantity, it is to be put as yet cold into a
Copper-Pan lined with Tin, and stirred about to mingle it with the Oil, Lard,
and Decoction of Palm-Tree-Tops. When these Ingredients have been well
incorporated together, a good Charcoal Fire must be kindled in a Furnace, over
which they are to be boiled, stirring 'em continually with a great Wooden
Spatula, and constantly maintaining an equal Degree of Heat during the whole
time of their boiling. At last you may add the rubify'd Vitriol dissolved in a
Portion of the Liquor that has been reserved, if you would have the Plaster
tinctured with a red Color; or else white Vitriol melted in the same
Decoction, if it shall be thought fit to retain the Whiteness of the Plaster,
which may be formed into Rolls, and wrapped up with Paper.

This Plaster is used for the cure of Wounds, Ulcers, Tumors, Burns,
Contusions, Fractures, and Chilblains, and is also laid upon the Cauteris. If
you mingle with it the third or fourth part of its weight of some convenient
Oil, it will attain to the Consistence of a Cerate; and this is that which is
called Dissolved Diapalma, or Cerate of Diapalma.

The Plaster of simple Diachylum.
Take of Marsh-Mallow-Roots peeled, three Drams; the Seeds of Line and
Fenugreek, of each four Ounces; three Quarts of Spring Water; two Quarts of
common Oil, and two Pounds of Litharge of Gold.

Let the Mucilages of Marsh-Mallow-Roots, and of the Seeds of Line and
Fenugreek be taken, as has been shown in the making of Vnguentum Althaeae, and
let the Litharge be prepared after the same manner as for the Plaster of
Diapalma. Having at first well mixed the Oil with the Litharge in a large
Copper-Vessel or Pan, Tinned on the inside, being wide at the top, and tapering
like a Cone toward the bottom, as also having afterward added and well
incorporated the Mucilages, a moderate Charcoal Fire ts to be kindled in a
Furnace, upon which the Vessel is to be set, and the whole Mass is to be
stirred about incessantly with a Wooden Spatula; and as fast as is possible. A
gentle Fire is to be maintained, and the Boiling and Agitation to be continued,
till it be perceived that the Plaster begins to sink in the Pan; then the Heat
of the Fire must be diminished one half at the least; and it will be requisite
only to cause an Evaporation by little and little, of the Superfluous Moisture
that might remain in the Plaster, which being consumed, it will be
sufficiently boiled, having attained to its due Consistence and Whiteness.

This Plaster softens and dissolves hard Swellings, and even the Scirrhous
Tumors of the Liver and Bowels; such are the Scrophulous or King's Evil
Tumors, the old remains of Abcesses, etc.

The Plaster of Andreas Crucius.
Take two Ounces of Rosin, four Ounces of Gum Elemi, Venice Turpentine and Oil
of Bays, of each two Ounces.

After having beat in pieces the Rosin and Gum Elemi, they are to be melted
together over a very gentle Fire, and then may be added the Turpentine and Oil
of Bays. When the whole Mass has been by this means well incorporated, it must
be strained through a Cloth, to separate it from the Dregs. The Plaster being
afterward cooled, is to be made up in Rolls, and kept for use.

This Plaster is proper for Wounds of the Breast: It also mundifies and
consolidates all sorts of Wounds and Ulcers, dissipates Contusions, strengthens
the Parts in Fractures and Dislocations, and causes the Serous Humors to pass
away by Transpiration.

Emplastrum Divinum.
Take of Litharge of Gold prepared, one Pound and an half; three Pints of
common Oil; one Quart of Spring Water; six Ounces of prepared Lodestone; Gum
Ammoniack, Galbanum, Opoponax, and Bdellium, of each three Ounces; Myrrh,
Olibanum, Mastick, Verdegrease, and round Birth-Wort, of every one of these an
Ounce and an half; eight Ounces of Yellow Wax, and four Ounces of Turpentine.

Let the Gum Ammoniack, Galbanum, Bdellium, and Opoponax be dissolved in
Vinegar, in a little Earthen Pipkin; strain 'em through a course Cloth, and let
'em be thickened by Evaporation, according to the Method before observed in
other Plasters: Then prepare the Lodestone upon a Porphyry or Marble-Stone,
and take care to bruise separately the Olibanum, the Mastick, the Myrrh, the
round Birth-Wort, and the Verdegrease, which is to be kept to be added at last.
In the mean while, having incorporated cold the Oil with the Litharge, and
mingled the Water with 'em, they are to be boiled together over a very good
Fire, stirring 'em incessantly, till the whole Composition has acquired the
Consistence of a somewhat solid Plaster, in which is to be dissolved the
yellow Wax cut into small pieces. Afterward having taken off the Pan from the
Fire, and left the Ingredients to be half cooled, intermix the Gums, which have
been already thickened and incorporated with the Turpentine; then the
Lodestone mingled with the Birth-Wort, Myrrh, Mastick, and Olibanum; and last
of all the Verdegrease. Thus when all these Ingredients are well stirred and
mixed together, the Plaster will be entirely compounded; so that it may be made
up into Rolls, and preserved to be used upon necessary Occasions.

This Plaster is efficacious in curing of all kinds of Wounds, Ulcers,
Tumors, and Contusions; for it mollifies, digestes, and brings to Suppuration
such Matter as ought to be carried off this way. It also mundifies, cicatrizes,
and entirely consolidates Wounds, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of Cataplasms or Pultisses.
CATAPLASMS are usually prepared to assuage Pain; as also to dissolve and
dissipate recent Tumors, and are made thus:

Take four Ounces and a half of white Bread, one Pint of new Milk, three Yolks
of Eggs, one Ounce of Oil of Roses, one Dram of Saffron, and two Drams of the
Extract of Opium.

The Crum is to be taken out of the inside of a white Loaf newly drawn out of
the Oven, and to be boiled with the Milk in a Skillet over a little Fire,
stirring it from time to time with a Spatula, till it be reduced to a thick
Pap. After having taken the Vessel off from the Fire, the three Yolks of Eggs
beaten are to be put into it, and the Dram of Saffron pulverized; to these
Ingredients may be added two Drams of the Extract of Opium somewhat liquid, if
the Pain be great.

Here is another Cataplasm proper to mollify and to bring to Suppuration when
it is necessary.
Take White-Lilly-Roots, and Marsh-Mallow-Roots, of each four Ounces; the
Leaves of common Mallows, Marshmallows, Groundsel, Violet-Plants, Brank-Ursin,
of every one of these Herbs one handful; the Meal of Line, Fenugreek, and Oil
of Lillies, of each three Ounces.

The Roots when washed and sliced, are to be boiled in Water, and the Leaves
being added some time after, the Boiling is to be continued till the whole Mass
becomes perfectly tender and soft; at which time having strained the Decoction,
beat the remaining gross Substance in a Stone-Mortar, with a Wooden Pestle, and
pass the Pulp through a Hair-Sieve turned upside-down: Then let the Decoction and
Pulp so strained be put into a Skillet, and having intermixed the Meal of Line,
Fenugreek, and Oil of Lillies; let 'em be boiled together over a gentle Fire,
stirring about the Ingredients from time to time, till they be all sufficiently
thickened. These two Cataplasms may serve as a Model for the making of many
others.

CHAP. V. Of Oils.
OILS are made either by Infusion or Expression.

Simple Oil of Roses made by Infusion.
Take two Pounds of Roses newly gathered, and bruised in a Mortar; half a Pint
of the Juice of Roses, and five Pints of common Oil: Let the whole Composition
be put into a Earthen-Vessel, Leaded and well stopped, and then let it be exposed
to the Sun during forty Days. Afterward let it be boiled in Balneo Mariae; and
having strained and squeezed the Roses, let the Oil be kept for use.

Compound Oil of Roses made by Infusion.
Take a Pound of Red Roses newly gathered, and pound 'em in a Mortar; as also
four Ounces of the Juice of Red Roses, and two Quarts of common Oil. Let the
whole Composition be put into an Earthen-Vessel Leaded, the Mouth of which is
narrow, and well stopped; and then having exposed it to the Sun during four Days,
let it be set in Balneo Mariae for an Hour, and then strained and squeezed.
Afterward let this Liquor be put into the same Vessel, adding to it the Juice
of Roses, and Roses themselves, in the same quantity as before: Let the Vessel
be stopped; let the Maceration, Boiling, Straining, and Expression be made in
like manner as before; and let the same Operation be once more re-iterated:
Then let your Oil be depurated, and preserved for use.

These Oils qualify and disperse Defluctions of Humors, suppress
Inflammations, mitigate the Headache and Deliriums, and provoke to sleep. They
must be warmed before the Parts are anointed with 'em, and they may be given
inwardly against the Bloody Flux and Worms, the Dose being from half an Ounce
to a whole Ounce. The Parts are also anointed with 'em in Fractures and
Dislocations of the Bones, and Oxyrodins are made of 'em with an equal quantity
of Vinegar of Roses.

Oil of Sweet Almonds made by Expression.
Take new Almonds that are fat and very dry, without their Snells, and having
shaken 'em in a somewhat thick Sieve, to cause the Dust to fall off; let 'em be
put into hot Water till their Skins become tender, so that they may be
separated by squeezing 'em with the Fingers: Afterward having taken off the
Skin, they must be wiped with a white Linen Cloth, and spread upon it to be
dried: Then they are to be put into a Stone-Mortar, and pounded with a
Wooden-Pestle, till the Paste grows very thin, and begins to give Oil: This
Paste is to be put into a little Linnen-Bag, new and strong, the Mouth of which
has been well tied; and the Bag is to be placed between two Platines of Tin,
or of Wood lined on the inside with a Leaf of Tin, squeezing the whole Mass
gently at first; but afterward very strongly, and leaving it for a long while
in the Press, that the Oil may have time to run out.

This Oil mitigates the Nephritick Colicks, remedies the Retension of Urine,
facilitates Childbirth, allayes the After-Pains in Women after their delivery,
and the Gripes in young Infants: It is taken inwardly fasting from half an
Ounce to two Ounces; and it is used in Liniments to assuage and mollify. The
Oils of common Wall-Nuts and Small-Nuts, may be also prepared after the same
manner as that of Sweet-Almonds.

The Oil of Bays.
Take as much as you please of Laurel or Bay Berries, well cleans'd, perfectly
ripe, and soundly bruised; let 'em be put into a Kettle, and boiled with a
sufficient quantity of Water during half an Hour; then strain and squeez 'em
strongly; let the Liquor cool, and scum off the Fat that swims upon the Water:
Afterward pound the remaining Substance in a Mortar, and cause it to be boiled
again for half an Hour, with some of the first Water which was left, adding a
little fresh; then strain and squeez it, as before, and take off the Oil that
swims on the Top. But the first Oil is better than the second, and therefore
ought to be kept separately. The Oils of Berries of Mastick, Myrtle, and other
oleaginous Plants, may be extracted after the same manner.

The Oil of Bays mollifies, attenuates, and ^s opening and discussive: It is
very good against the Palsy, and the Shiverings or cold Fits of a ^eaver or
Ague in anointing the Back; as also against Scabs. Tetters, etc.

The Oil of Eggs by Expression.
Take newly laid Eggs, and let 'em be har^en'd in Water; then separate the
Yolks, and put 'em into a Drying Pan over a gentle Coal-fire, stirring 'em
about from time to time, and a last without discontinuing, till they grow
reddish, and begin to yield their Oil: Then they are to be sprinkled with
Spirit of Wine, and ^our'd very hot into a little Linnen-Bag, which ^s to be
tied, and set in a Press between two ^eated Platines; so that the Oil may be
squeezed ^ut as readily as is possible.

This Oil mitigates the Pains of the Ears and Haemorrhoids, cures Scabs and
Ring-Worms or Tetters; as also Chaps and Clefts in the Breast, Hands, Feet, and
Fundament; and is made use of in Burns, etc.

CHAP VI. Of Collyrium 's.
COLLYRIVM's are Medicines prepared for the Diseases of the Eyes: The following
is that of Lanfrancus.

Take a Pint of White Wind, three Pints of Plantain-Water, three Pounds of
Roses, two Drams of Orpiment, one Dram of Verdegrease; Myrrh and Aloes, of each
two Scruples.

The Orpiment, Verdegrease, Myrrh, and Aloes are to be beaten to a fine Powder
before they are intermixed with the Liquors. This Collyrium is not only good for
the Eyes, but is also of use to make Injections into the Privy-Parts of Men and
Women; but before the Injections are made, it ought to be sweetened with three
or four times the quantity in weight of Rose, Plantain, or Morel-Water.

A dry Collyrium.
Take two Drams of Sugar Candy; prepared Tutty, Lizard's-Dung, of each one
Dram; White Vitriol, Sucotrin Aloes, and Sal Saturni, of each half a Dram.

Let the whole Composition be reduced to a very fine Powder, and mixed together:
Two or three Grains of this Powder may be blown at once into the Eye with a
small Quill, Pipe of Straw, or Reed, as long as it is necessary; and the same
Powder may also be steept in Ophthalmick Waters, to make a liquid Collyrium.

A Blue Collyrium.
Take a Pint of Water in which unslackt Lime has been quenched, and a Dram of
Sal Ammoniack pulverized; mingle these Ingredients together in a Brass-Bason,
and let 'em be insus'd during a whole Night; then filtrate the Liquor and keep
it for use.

This Collyrium is one of the best Medicines that can be prepared for all
manner of Diseases of the Eyes.

CHAP. VII. Of Powders.
A Powder against Madness or Frenzy.

TAKE the Leaves of Rue, Vervein, the lesser Sage, Plantain, Polypody, common
Wormwood, Mint, Mother-Wort, Balm, Betony, St. John's-Wort, and the lesser
Centory; of every one an equal quantity.

These Plants must be gathered in the Month of June, during the clear and
serene Weather, and tied up in Nose-gays, or little Bundles; which are to be
wrapped up in Paper, and hung in the Air to be dried in the Shade. Afterward
they are to be pounded in a great Brass-Mortar, and the Powder is to be sifted
through a Silk-Sieve.

The Dose of this Powder is from two to three Drams, mingled with half a Dram
of the Powder of Vipers, in half a Glass of good White Wind every Morning
fasting, for fifty one Days successively. It has an admirable effect, provided
the wounded Person be not bit in the Head nor Face, and that the Wound has not
been washed with Water.

CHAP. VIII. Styptick-Water.
TAKE Colcothar or Red Vitriol that remains in the Retort after the Spirit has
been drawn off, Burnt Allom, and Sugar Candy, of each thirty Grains; the Urine
of a Young Person, and Rose Water, of each half an Ounce; and two Ounces of
Plantain-Water: Let the whole Mixture be stirred about for a long time, and
then put into a Vial. But the Liquor must be poured off by Inclination when
there shall be occasion to take any for use.

If a Bolster steept in this Water be laid upon an open Artery, and held close
with the Hand, it will soon stop the Blood; a small Tent may be also soakt in
it, and put up into the Nose for the same purpose. If it be taken inwardly, it
stops the spitting of Blood, and the Dysentery or Bloody Flux; as also the
Haemorrhoidal and Menstruous Fluxes; the Dose being from half a Dram to two
Drams, in Knot-Grass-Water.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS And of the Principal Matters Which are contained in
every Chapter.
CHAP. I. OF the Qualifications of a Surgeon, and the Art of Surgery, Page 1
CHAP. I. Of Synthesis, Diaeresis, Exaeresis, and Prosthesis Page 2 CHAP. I.
What ought to be observed before the undertaking of an Operation Page 3 CHAP.
II. Of Chirurgical Instruments, portable and not portable Page 5 CHAP. III. Of
Anatomy in general, and in particular of all the Parts of which the Human Body
is composed Page 7 CHAP. IV. Of the General Division of a Human Body Page 10
CHAP. V. Of the Skeleton Page 12 CHAP. V. Of the different kinds of
Articulations, Page 14 CHAP. V. Of the Number of the Bones of the Human
Skeleton Page 16 CHAP. VI. Of Myology, or the Description and Anatomy of the
Muscles of the Human Body Page 19 CHAP. VII. Of the Myology or Anatomy of the
Muscles of the Head Page 21 CHAP. VIII. Of the Myology or Anatomy of the
Muscles of the Chest, or of the Breast, Belly, and Back Page 31 CHAP. IX. Of
the Myology or Anatomy of the Muscles of the lower Belly Page 34 CHAP. IX. Of
the Muscles of the Parts that serve for Geration in both Sexes Page 36 CHAP. X.
Of the Muscles of the Shoulder-Blades, Arms and Hands. Page 37 CHAP. XI. Of the
Muscles of the Thighs, Legs, and Feet, Page 48 CHAP. XI. A List of all the
Muscles of the Humane Body, Page 57 CHAP. XII. Of the Anatomy of the Nerves,
Arteries, and Veins in general Page 58 CHAP. XII. Of the Structure of the four
Tunicks of the Arteries Page 61 CHAP. XII. Of the Structure of the four Tunicks
of the Veins Page 63 CHAP. XII. Of the Beginning and Origin of all the Veins
Page 64 CHAP. XII. Of the Distribution of the ascending Vena Cava Ibid. CHAP.
XIII. Of the Anatomy of the Abdomen or lower Belly, Page 66 CHAP. XIII. Of the
Opening of a dead Body at a public Dissection Page 67 CHAP. XIII. Of the
Peristaltick Motion of the Guts Page 71 CHAP. XIII. Of the Parts appointed for
Generation in Men Page 74 CHAP. XIII. Of the Parts appropriated to Generation
in Women Page 75 CHAP. XIV. Of the Anatomy of the Breast, or middle Venture,
Page 77 CHAP. XIV. The manner of opening the Breast in order to dissect it
Ibid. CHAP. XV. Of the Anatomy of the Head or upper Venture, Page 80 CHAP. XV.
An exact Historical Account of the Holes of the Skull, and the Vessels that
pass through 'em Page 83 CHAP. XV. The manner of opening the Head, and
Anatomizing the Brain Page 91 CHAP. XVI. Of Straps, Swathing-Bands, Bandages,
Bolsters, and Tents Page 93
A Treatise of Chirurgical Diseases.
CHAP. I. OF Tumors in general, Impostumes or Abcesses, Breakings out,
Pustules, and Tubercles Page 97 CHAP. II. Of the general Method to be observed
in the curing of Tumors Page 100 CHAP. II. How many several ways may all
curable Tumors be terminated Page 101 CHAP. II. What are the best means of
curing Impostumes, whether to dissolve, or to bring 'em to Suppuration Ibid.
CHAP. II. Of the Circumstances, to be observed by a Surgeon in the opening of
Tumors Page 102 CHAP. II. Of the general Causes of Tumors Page 103 CHAP. III.
Of Natural Tumors, and first of the Phlegmon, and its Dependances Page 104
CHAP. III. Of Remedies proper for the Phlegmon Page 105 CHAP. III. Remedies for
the curing of Aneurisms and Varices Page 108 CHAP. III. Remedies for Echymoses,
Contusions, or Bruises Page 109 CHAP. III. Of Phlegmonous Tumors, and their
Remedies Page 110 CHAP. III. Of a Gangrene Page 111 CHAP. III. Remedies for a
Gangrene Page 113 CHAP. III. Of Kibes and Chilblains, and their Remedies Page
114 CHAP. III. Of the Panaritium and its Remedies Ibid. CHAP. III. Of a Burn
and its Remedies Page 115 CHAP. III. Of the Erysipelas and its Dependances Page
116 CHAP. III. Remedies for the Erysipelas Ibid. CHAP. III. Of Erysipelatous
Tumors or Impostumes, and their Remedies Page 118 CHAP. III. Of the Oedema,
and its proper Remedies, Page 119 CHAP. III. Of Oedomatous Tumors and
Impostumes Page 120 CHAP. III. Of a Scirrhus and its Remedies Page 123 CHAP.
III. Of Scirrhous Tumors Page 124 CHAP. III. Remedies for the Polypus Page 125
CHAP. III. Of Cancers Page 126 CHAP. III. Remedies for Cancers Ibid and Page
127 CHAP. IV. Of Bastard or Encysted Tumors Page 128 CHAP. IV. Of the Remedies
for Encysted Tumors Page 129 CHAP. V. Of Critical, Malignant, Pestilential,
and Venereal Tumors and Impostumes Page 131 CHAP. VI. Of the Scurvy, Page 133
A Treatise of Wounds, Ulcers, and Sutures,
CHAP. I. OF Sutures or Stitches, Page 138 CHAP. II. Of Wounds in general Page
141 CHAP. II. Of Remedies proper to stop the Haemorrhage of a Wound Page 143
CHAP. II. What is to be done when a Convulsion happens in a Wound, by reason of
a Wounded Nerve or Tendon Page 144 CHAP. II. What Course is to be taken to draw
extraneous Bodies out of a Wound Page 145 CHAP. II. Of Vulnerary Decoctions to
be taken inwardly Page 148 CHAP. III. Of the particular Wounds of the Head Page
149 CHAP. IV. Of the particular Wounds of the Breast Page 151 CHAP. V. Of the
particular Wounds of the lower Belly Page 153 CHAP. VI. Of Wounds made by Guns
or Firearms Page 154 CHAP. VI. Of the Prognostic of Wounds by Gunshot Page
155 CHAP. VI. Of the cure of Wounds by Gunshot Ibid CHAP. VI. Of a Burn made
by Gunpowder Page 159 CHAP. VII. Of Ulcers in general Page 164 CHAP. VIII. Of
Venereal Diseases Page 168 CHAP. VIII. Of the Chaude-Pisse or Gonorrhaea Ibid.
CHAP. VIII. Of Shankers Page 170 CHAP. VIII. Of Bubo's Ibid. CHAP. VIII. Of the
Pox Page 171 CHAP. VIII. The manner of making the Mercurial Panacaea Page 175,
etc.
A Treatise of the Diseases of the Bones.
CHAP. I. OF the Dislocation of Bones Page 181 CHAP. II. Of the Fractures of
Bones Page 187 CHAP. III. Of the particular Fractures of the Skull Page 192
CHAP. IV. Of the Caries, Exostoses, and Nodus of the Bones Page 197 CHAP. V. Of
Cauteries, Vesicatories, Setons, Cupping-Glasses, and Leeches Page 199 CHAP. V.
Of the compounding of Potential Cauteries Page 201 CHAP. VI. Of Phlebotomy Page
204
A Treatise of Chirurgical Operations.
CHAP. I. Of the Operation of the Trepan Page 209 CHAP. I. Of the Bandage of
the Trepan Page 213 CHAP. II. Of the Operation of the Fistula Lachrymalis Page
214 CHAP. II. The Dressing and Bandage of the Fistula Lachrymalis Page 215
CHAP. III. Of the Operation of the Cataract Page 216 CHAP. III. The Dressing
and Bandage of the Operation of the Cataract Page 217 CHAP. III. Of purulent
Matter gathered under the Corneous Tunicle of the Eye Page 218 CHAP. III. Of a
Tumor that arises in the Eye, Ibid. CHAP. III. Of the Eyelids glu'd together
Ibid. CHAP. III. Of the Hairs of the Eyebrows that offend the Eye Page 219
CHAP. III. Of hard and transparent Tumors on the Eyelids Ibid. CHAP. IV. Of
the Operation of the Polypus Ibid. CHAP. V. Of the Operation of the Hare-Lip
Page 220 CHAP. V. The Dressing and Bandage for the Hare-Lip Page 221 CHAP. VI.
Of the Operation of Bronchotomy Page 222 CHAP. VII. Of the Operation of the
Uvula Page 223 CHAP. VIII. Of the Operation of a Cancer in the Breast Ibid.
CHAP. VIII. The Dressing for a Cancer in the Breast Page 225 CHAP. IX. The
Operation of the Empyema Page 227 CHAP. IX. The Dressing and Bandage for the
Operation of the Empyema Page 228 CHAP. X. Of the Operation of the Paracentesis
of the lower Belly Page 229 CHAP. X. The Dressing and Bandage for that
Paracentesis Page 230 CHAP. X. The Operation of the Paracentesis of the Scrotum
Ibid. CHAP. XI. Of the Operation of Gastroraphy Page 231 CHAP. XII. Of the
Operation of Exomphalus Page 234 CHAP. XIII. Of the Operation of the
Bubonocele, and of the complete P^^^ture Page 236 CHAP. XIII. The Dressing and
Bandage Page 237 CHAP. XIII. Of the complete Rupture Ibid. CHAP. XIV. Of the
Operation of Castration Page 238 CHAP. XIV. Of the Dressing and Bandage for the
Castration Page 239 CHAP. XV. Of the Operation of the Stone ^^^the Ureter Page
240 CHAP. XVI. Of the Operation of Lithotomy Page 241 CHAP. XVI. The Dressing
and Bandage for the Operation of Lithotomy Page 243 CHAP. XVI. Of the Operation
of Lithotomy in Women by the lesser Preparative Page 244 CHAP. XVII. Of the
Operation of the Puncture of the Perinaeum Page 245 CHAP. XVIII. Of the
Operation of the Fistula in Ano Ibid CHAP. XIX. Of the Suture or Stitching of a
Tendon Page 247 CHAP. XX. Of the Caesarian Operation Page 248 CHAP. XXI. Of the
Operation of Amputation; with its proper Dressings and Bandages Page 249 and
251 CHAP. XXII. Of the Operation of the Aneurism Page 253 CHAP. XXII. The
Bandage for the Aneurism Page 255 CHAP. XXIII. Of the Operation of Phlebotomy
Ibid. CHAP. XXIII. The Bandage in Phlebotomy Page 256 CHAP. XXIV. Of the
Operation of Encysted Tumors Page 257 CHAP. XXIV. Of Ganglions Page 258 CHAP.
XXV. Of the Operation of Hydrocephalus Ibid. CHAP. XXVI. Of the Operation of
cutting the Tongue-String Page 259 CHAP. XXVII. Of the Operation of opening
stopped Ductus's Page 260 CHAP. XXVII. Of an Incision made to open the Vagina
Uteri Ibid. CHAP. XXVII. The manner of separating the Lips of the Pudendum when
conglutinated Ibid. CHAP. XXVII. The manner of opening the Vagina when stopped
with a Fleshy Substance Ibid. CHAP. XXVII. The Method of opening the Vrinary
Ductus as well in Boys as in young Virgins Ibid. CHAP. XXVII. The Method of
opening the Ductus of the Ear, when stopped with a Membrane or a Carnous
Substance Page 261 CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Operation of the Phimosis and
Paraphimosis Ibid. CHAP. XXIX. Of the Operation of the Varix Page 262 CHAP.
XXX. Of the Operation of the Panaritium Page 263 CHAP. XXX. The Dressing and
Bandage for this Operation Ibid. CHAP. XXXI. Of the Reduction of the falling of
the Anus Page 264 CHAP. XXXII. Of the reducing of the falling of the Matrix
Page 265 CHAP. XXXIII. Of the application of the Cautery and its Bandage Ibid.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Application of Leeches, and the Dressing Page 267 CHAP.
XXXV. Of the application of the Seton Page 268 CHAP. XXXVI. Of Scarifications
Page 269 CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Application of Vesicatories Ibid. CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of the application of Cupping-Glasses Page 270 CHAP. XXXIX. Of the opening of
Abscesses or Impostumes Page 271
A Treatise of the Operations of Fractures.
CHAP. I. OF the Fracture of the Nose Page 272 CHAP. I. The Dressing and
Bandage for the Fracture of the Nose Page 273 CHAP. II. Of the Fracture of the
lower Jaw Page 274 CHAP. II. The Dressing and Bandage Ibid. CHAP. III. Of the
Fracture of the Clavicle Page 276 CHAP. III. The Dressing and Bandage Ibid.
CHAP. IV. Of the Fracture of the Omoplata or Shoulder Blade Page 278 CHAP. IV.
The Dressing Ibid. CHAP. V. Of the Fracture of the Ribs Page 279 CHAP. V. The
Dressing and Bandage Page 280 CHAP. VI. Of the Fracture of the Sternum or
Breast Bone Ibid. CHAP. VI. The Dressing and Bandage Page 281 CHAP. VII. Of the
Fracture of the Vertebra's Ibid. CHAP. VIII. Of the Fracture of the Os Sacrum
Page 283 CHAP. IX. Of the Fracture of the Coccyx or Rump-Bone Page Ibid. CHAP.
IX. The Dressing and Bandage for that Fracture Page 284 CHAP. X. Of the
Fracture of the Humerus or Arm-Bone Page Ibid. CHAP. X. Its proper Dressing and
Bandage Page 285 CHAP. XI. Of the Fracture of the Bone of the Elbow Page 286
CHAP. XI. The Dressing and Bandage Page Ibid. CHAP. XII. Of the Fracture of the
Carpus or Wrist-Bone page 287 CHAP. XII. The Dressing and Bandage Page Ibid.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Fracture of the Bone of the Metacarpium or Back of the Hand
Page 288 CHAP. XIII. The Dressing and Bandage Page Ibid. CHAP. XIV. Of the
Fracture of the Bones of the Fingers Page 289 CHAP. XV. Of the Fracture of the
Thigh Bone Page Ibid. CHAP. XV. The Dressing and Bandage Page 290 CHAP. XVI. Of
the Fracture of the Patella or Knee-Pan Page 291 CHAP. XVI. The Dressing anae
Bandage Page Ibid. CHAP. XVII. Of the Fracture of the Leg-Bone Page 292 CHAP.
XVII. Its proper Dressing and Bandage Page 293 CHAP. XVII. The Dressing for
complicated Fractures Page 294 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Fracture of the Bones of the
Foot Page 295 CHAP. XVIII. The Dressing and Bandage Page 296
A Treatise of the Operations which are performed in Luxations.
CHAP. I. OF the Luxation of the Bone of the Nose Page 297 CHAP. I. The
Dressing and Bandage proper for such a Luxation Page 298 CHAP. II. Of the
Luxation of the lower Jaw Bone Page Ibid. CHAP. II. The Dressing and Bandage
Page 299 CHAP. III. Of the Luxation of the Clavicle Page Ibid. CHAP. IV. Of the
Luxation of the Vertebra's Page 300 CHAP. IV. The Dressing and Bandage Page 301
CHAP. V. Of the Luxation of the Coccyx or Rump-Bone Page 302 CHAP. VI. Of the
Bunch Page Ibid. CHAP. VII. Of the Luxation of the Ribs Page 303 CHAP. VII. The
Dressing and Bandage Page Ibid. CHAP. VIII. Of the sinking of the Xiphoider or
Sword-like Cartilage Page 304 CHAP. IX. Of the Luxation of the Humerus or
Arm-Bone, Page Ibid. CHAP. IX. The Dressing and Bandage Page 306 CHAP. X. Of
the Luxation of the Bone of the Elbow Page Ibid. CHAP. X. The Bandage for the
same Luxation Page 307 CHAP. XI. Of the Luxation of the Carpus or Wrist-Bone
Page 308 CHAP. XI. The Bandage Page 309 CHAP. XII. Of the Luxation of the Bones
of the Fingers Page Ibid. CHAP. XII. The Bandage for that Luxation Page Ibid.
CHAP. XIII. Of the Luxation of the Thigh Page 310 CHAP. XIII. Its proper
Dressing and Bandage Page 312 CHAP. XIV. Of the Luxation of the Knee Page Ibid.
CHAP. XIV. The Bandage Page 313 CHAP. XV. Of the Luxation of the Patella,
Knee-Pan, or Whirl-Bone of the Knee Page Ibid. CHAP. XV. Of the Separation of
the Perone from the Tibia Page Ibid. CHAP. XV. Of the Luxation of the
Astragalus Page 314 CHAP. XV. Of the Separation of the Calcaneum from the Ast
^aglus Page Ibid.
A Treatise of Medicinal Compositions necessary for a Surgeon.
CHAP. I. OF Balsams Page 315 CHAP. I. The Balsam of Arcaeus Ibid. CHAP. I. The
Balsam of Spain Page 316 CHAP. I. The Green Balsam Page 317 CHAP. I. The
Samaritan Balsam Page 318 CHAP. II. Of Ointments Page 319 CHAP. II. Unguentum
Althaeae Ibid. CHAP. II. The mundificative Ointment of Smallage Page 320 CHAP.
II. The black or suppurative Ointment Page 321 CHAP. II. Unguentum Rosatum Page
322 CHAP. II. Unguentum Album, aut de Cerussa Page 323 CHAP. II. Unguentum
Aegyptiacum Page 324 CHAP. II. Unguentum Basilicon, or the Royal Ointment Page
325 CHAP. II. A cooling Cerate Page 326 CHAP. II. An Ointment for Burns Page
327 CHAP. III. Of Plasters Page 328 CHAP. III. Of Plaster of Diapalma Ibid.
CHAP. III. The Plaster of simple Diachylum Page 329 CHAP. III. The Plaster of
Andreas Crucius Page 330 CHAP. III. Emplastrum Divinum Page 331 CHAP. IV. Of
Cataplasms or Pultisses Page 332 CHAP. V. Of Oils Page 334 CHAP. V. Simple Oil
of Roses made by infusion Ibid. CHAP. V. Compound Oil of Roses made be infusion
Ibid. CHAP. V. Oil of sweet Almonds made by expression Page 335 CHAP. V. Oil of
Bays Page 336 CHAP. V. Oil of Eggs made by expression Page 337 CHAP. VI. Of
Collyriums Page 338 CHAP. VI. A dry Collyrium Ibid. CHAP. VI. A blue Collyrium
Page 339 CHAP. VII. Of Powders Ibid. CHAP. VII. A Powder against Madness or
Frenzy Ibid. CHAP. VIII. A Styptick Water Page 340
The END of the TABLE.

