A Search after Souls and Spiritual Operations in Man.
SOLOMON was a great Searcher after Knowledge, a Power or Faculty in Man,
capable of being employed about all Created Beings and Things, and of making
Enquiries into their Natures and Actions: and the Qualities, Modes, and Orders
of them. Eccles. 7.25. He says, That he applied his heart to know, and to
search and to seek out Wisdom, and the Reason of Things; and there is
everlasting Employment for all People in this Design: Chap. 8.17. For Man
cannot find out the Work that is done under the Sun, and though a Wise Man
intend to make the Search, yet shall he not be able to find it. But men are not
to be thereby totally discouraged from making Enquiries into the Works and
Natures, amongst which they converse: for he tells us, Prove. 2. That men ought
to seek Knowledge as Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasures, and that
shall lead thee to understand the Fear of the Lord; and to find the Knowledge
of God: viz. As that is discovered in the Greatness, Exactness Order and
Variety of his Works: And though a General Search into Nature, and an Enquiry
into Omne Scibile, be a task over large for any Humane Nature, perhaps a Single
Search, stinted to a particular Subject (however sublime the same may be) will
not be taken for a hopeless, or impossible Project: But that by Divine
Assistance (without which nothing comes to pass) there may be something found
out concerning our present Subject, which may open more fully, or more clearly,
the Genuine Nature of its Being and Working amongst us, and help to clear up
Doubts thereupon depending; by propounding them in the World, and giving
occasions to Men (who are able, or think they are so) for the clearing and
maintaining of that which (concerning the same) appears to their Judgments,
most reasonable, and most true.

In all Material Searches, there seem to be three Degrees of Application
requisite: First, That it be diligent, whence the Woman in who lost one of her
ten pieces, lighted up a candle, swept the house, and searched diligently, and
she found and rejoiced accordingly. Seondly, The Search must be with a great
desire to find; Luke 22.15. Our Lord says, With desire, I have desired to eat
this Passover with you. He grealy desired, and obtained it; and so did the
Prodigal Son return to his Father with unexpected Success. Thirdly, The Search
ought to be importunate and solicitous; the Syrophenician Woman searched
eagerly, and found our Lord, and prevailed, by crying after him, and pleading
to him: so did the importunate Widow upon an unjust Judge, who neither feared
God nor regarded Man: We would not have it seem strange, if our Search have a
participation with all these Qualifications, although the over diligence may
prove tedious, the over great desire to find be offensive, and the importunate
pressure somewhat unmannerly and injurious; and it seems most of these
inconveniences, or even all of them, are incident to such Enquiries; and they
cannot likely be prosecuted without them, to any great degree of Satisfaction.


And as in the Search, so in the Subject of it, there are three special
Requisites; First, That certainly there be the thing in Rerum Natura; or else
it can never be found: but there never was doubt concerning the Being of a Soul
in Man: therefore we may be certain that such a Soul there is, and then our
Labor in the Search after it, is not likely to be in vain. Secondly, The
Subject of our Inquiry ought to be of such worth and value, as the finding it
may be a convenient satisfaction and recompense for all the Study, Time, and
other Expenses and Troubles, which may likely be undergone in the Prosecution
of a difficult Search; and made more so, by a complication with Worldly
Interests, and the power and prejudices of former and radicated Opinions
thereupon. Thirdly, That the Subject of our Search be placed at such a
convenient distance, as we may not have cause to demand, Who shall bring it to
us from Heaven or Hell, or from beyond the Sea? But our Subject is near us, in
our Mouth and in our Heart, in our Hand, and in our Head.


Having in mind, revolvendo, some Thoughts concerning the State of Souls, as
arrived to David's Period of Man's Age, or very near it, there happened to come
to hand, a Book entitled Richard Baxter's Dying Thoughts, a second Edition in
8 vo. printed Land. 1688. There, in his Contents, the very first line, he
resolves, That Souls departed, go immediately to Christ; then the necessity of
believing this. It seemed an over great morsel to swallow all this together,
totidem verbis, without such a rumination as might comminute and separate every
part of it from the other; that being so used, it might be made of easier
concoction and of sounder nourishment. I found the Author speaking himself of
67 years of Age at the writing it; and that for the space of above 43 years, he
had been a Practical Minister of the Gospel, much followed and applauded,
though he says it, who perhaps should not; then in the very first page of his
Book, he stumbles upon a block, which Solomon had long since cast in the way to
his Tenet: Eccles. 3.19. he desires Gods manifestation to Men, that they may
see that they themselves are Beasts; that things fall out alike to Men and
Bests; as the one dies, so dies the other; yea, they have all one breath, all
go to one place; all are of the Dust, and all turn to Dust again: Who knows
the Spirit of a Man that goes upward, and the Spirit of a Beast that goes
downward to the Earth? Our Author is too deliver and active, to stumble at this
Block, but passes as lightly over it as if were but a Straw, by saying, that
Solomon here speaks only of the Time and Things of this World. There are no
words in the Text that mention, or that (it seems) do intend the Authors Sense;
for the Text mentions the Spirits departed, both of the one and of the other,
with a Query upon the places to which they go, and that cannot pass for a
matter of this Life only: this Text therefore stands still in his way, as much
as at first it did, and as if he had said nothing against it; because his
allegation upon it may not pass for true, but for an Answer feigned out of his
own Brain, and with some impeachment to the credit of his Word, for the future.

Page 2. The Author tells us, If our immediate going to Christ, upon out
Deaths, be not soundly (seems fully) believed, a Man must Live besides, or
below the end of Life, and must have a false end; and yet says, he knows it may
be objected, That if I make it my end to please God, to Love, Serve, Worship,
and Obey him, and to do all the good I can for my Neighbor; and that I trust
God with my Soul, and future Estate, as a faithful Creator, who will not suffer
his faithful Servants to go unrewarded, and therefore has promised the
Resurrection, inserted into all our Creeds: Now though I be not certain of my
immediate departing to Christ, at my dissolution; yet I have an end intended,
which will make me Godly, Charitable, Just and Happy, so far as I am made for
Happiness: supposing that to please God is the right end of all. To this he
replies, We must desire to please God better then we can do in this Life. This
I do not grant, for neither Nature, nor Scripture do teach, or require such
desires. Secondly, He says, Its own Felicity is so necessary to the Soul of
Man, as a desire to please God cannot stand without it. This is denied; but yet
we do believe God to be a beatifying Rewarder of them who diligently seek him,
yet not of Debt, but of Grace; and so the Articles of the Resurrection do
prove: being assurances of future rewards and punishments. Page 4. He says, If
a man have not his aim levelled at the reward, he can have no certain end of his
endeavor; as if a design and intention to please God, and serve to his Glory,
were to little or no purpose, without a profitable consequent reward, Page 5.
He says, Men use not to serve God for naught, and specially not to their loss,
and yet, I say, it is the duty of all Creatures so to do; to please God, and
serve to his Glory, without other reward or intention to obtain it; and yet the
Resurrection is for reward and punishment: and they are Lawful, but neither the
only, nor the principal Considerations of Man's obedience to God: And says, If
sin overspread the World, notwithstanding the hopes and fears of a Life to
come; what would it do if there were no such things in that case? I say, Still
it could but overspread the World, and yet I do agree, that hopes and fears are
well grounded upon the Article of our Resurrection. Page 6. He says, No
Blessing of God can be rightly esteemed and used, but by him who sees it leads
to a better Life. I say, Diverse Blessings may be rightly esteemed and used,
without farther references, than the thankful receiving them as Gods Favors,
beneficial to Men in this Life. He says, No wonder if Unbelievers be
unthankful; no nor that Believers are so too; nor that he and his Proselites
take every Blessing and prosperous Success here, for an assurance of Gods Love
and Acceptance, and that their ways and doings are pleasing to him; and an
earnest penny of Eternal Glory, which they earnestly covet, and for which they
slavishly serve, as their Teachers direct them: and without which hopes neither
he, nor they, pretend to serve, or honor God, or to perform any other Duties
of their Christian Religion: And he exclaims against the Miseries of this Life,
not to be abidd'n, but for the hopes of a future Glorious Life; not considering
that this later Life was not revealed to the World 'till our Lord Discovered
it, not 1700 Years ago; and yet Men lived as happily in the World before that
time, as they have done since; and submitted to their several Conditions, and
Circumstances, with as much quietness, and content of mind, as Christians do at
this Day; serving God under enjoyment and expectation of Temporal rewards,
propounded by Moses, and many other Lawgivers of the World: But he (it seems)
found himself apt to murmur against God upon account of Cares, and Worldly
Griefs, and the fears of Death, and future Events, but that was his infirmity
at the best, and perhaps a perverse humor in him: for he might remember that
Moses Laws revealed from Heaven, Propounded no Rewards beyond the Happiness of
this World; nor Punishments, but of the same nature; and yet that People lived
often very Happily under them, and might always have done so, by being Obedient
to them. Page 7. But to his Proposal Concerning the Behavior of his good Old
Women; I say the part which they Acted upon the Stage of this World was very
convenient for their Circumstances, which require of them to take upon Trust,
and the Credit of their Teachers, and other Informers, the Rules both of their
Faith, and Manners; (and likely it is) no more will be required of them at the
Day of the Great Audit: But their constancy in their Opinions, and the sure
expectation of Heaven and Happiness at their Deaths, Creates no manner of
Assurance that they were in the Right, or were not deceived in their most
assured expectations; for Ages, and the present World abound with Evidences
that false Tenets, and very Gross Errors are believed and maintained by
misguided and deceived People, with as much assurance, and established
Confidence, as the very Truth it self can by any means be. Men, Women, and
Children, have died bravely in maintenance of gross mistakes, and evident
untruths: And few Turks are found at this Day, who will not rather part with
Life, and all other Worldly Comforts, then renounce their Mahomet, and his
Alchoran. Arrians were Anciently, and (some of them) in our times, so resolute
in their Opinion, as to submit to Death rather than to recant it: Indian
Idolaters daily offer their Lives in honor of their Idols, as the most assured
means of obtaining a Blessed and Happy State immediately upon their
Dissolution, with as little doubt as any of our Authors Old Women could
possibly attain unto: Hence the Author may persuade himself, that seeing the Old
Women's Confidence is no certain Evidence, that they were not in an Error, and
that their Ignorance was more excusable than his would be; it becomes him
better to enquire after the direct and attainable truth of things, and
particularly concerning Souls, and whether they have a separate subsistence
after Death of the Body, or not, than to sit down contented with his own
present conceit, or apprehensions concerning the same, without making such
farther search as he is able, into the truth and certainty of such Opinions.
Page 8. He says well, That a Faith not upheld by such Evidence of Truth as
reason can discern and justify, is joined with such doubting, as though Men
dare not open, yet they do not therefore overcome; and this doubting may likely
prove prejudicial both to their Faith and Performance. Page 10. And things it
too much trouble to consider how Souls out of the Body do Subsist and Act: But
that the Soul of Man does subsist seperately from the Body, and Act in that
State, he takes upon him to prove. Page 11. To that intent he undertakes to
define what a Humane Soul is, and says, It is a Spiritual, Pure, Invisible
Substance, naturally endowed with the Power, Virtue, or Faculty, of Vital
Action, Intellection, and Volition, not destroyed by separation of Parts, or
loss of Power, Species, Individuation, or Action; and therefore it is an
Immortal Spirit. He says (in proof that it is a Substance) that which is
nothing, can do nothing; but the Soul does move, understand, and will; for that
is done by something in us; and that is some Substance, and this we call the
Soul; it is not nothing, and it is within us. Thus he tells us, a Humane Soul
is an Immortal Spirit. That being denied, he neither proves it, nor offers to
do it, but instead thereof, he offers Proof that it is a substance; for, says
he, it moves and acts within us, and it is not nothing. This we grant, but take
it for no proof at all of the separated subsistence of a Soul; for the Heart,
Brain, Blood and Spirits and Breath, are continually moving and acting within
us, and each of them are substances, but have no subsistence in their Motions
separate from the Body, but all Die with it; and so may that which is called by
the names of Soul, or the Form of a Humane Body, or the Vital Principle of it.
Page 14. He Confesses, That God is the continued First Cause of all Beings; and
that the Branches and Fruit depend not (as effects) so much upon their Causes,
the Roots, Stocks, and Branches; as the Creature does upon God: whence it seems
clear, That God can make an Automaton moving and living, by ways which Men may
not be able to find out, or understand; and perhaps the Life and Actings of
Animals may be such a Secret: and because Men cannot find out, how the Blood,
Spirits, Nerves, Arteries, Veins, Muscles, and other Vital Parts, are acted or
moved, nor the adequate or precise manner how they are all Excited and Actuated
by that Flame and Glowing, of that which is called the Flammula Vitalis (not
quite extinguished in Animals, but with the Life;) how by the Unctuous Spirits
rising from the Blood, Urine, and Humors of the Body, this Flame is
perpetually nourished and maintained, and fanned and kept alive by continual
and lively respiration: nor how the Spirits raised and kindled in and about the
Heart, mount continually to the Head, where in the Brain, and the Ventricles of
it, and Motion or Conveyance of the Arteries thereunto belonging, the Common
Sense is furnished, and excited to Act upon all Objects presented, and to Lodge
them in the Fantasy and the Memory, whence they may be recalled and presented
again to the common Sensorium, or Judicial Power, that it may consider them
better, or work with them, or upon them, as far as its own Capacity, or
Intellect, can advance it self in the Powers and Practices of Arts and
Sciences. Such things we find are transacted and done in the Brain and Body of
Man, and we cannot pervestigate with any exactness how by the Vital Parts and
Spirits of the Body, such effects are particularly and properly Produced; and
this is more hard to be done, because Men can never Compass the sight of a
Dissected Body in the full Life, Vigor, and Motion of the Blood, Spirits,
Humors, Parts and Members of it, but must be content with the view of them all
Dead, Cold, Clammed; whence they may have good pretenses to conclude it very
unlikely, that the Powers of Sense, Fantasy, Intellect, and Memory, should be
Actuated by such Materials, or the Conjunction, or Operation of them; not
enough considering, that the Flamula Vitalis, which is the Acter, and Life of
them all, is extinguished before the beholders can be admitted to the sight and
consideration of the Vital or Principal Parts of a Dissected Body. And yet it
seems, from this want of Conception, how the Parts and Spirits of the Body do,
or after what manner they can, Act after, and in performance of the Faculties
of Sense, Motion, Intellect, Fantasy, Memory, etc. Men take their Principal,
or even only Reason, to Introduce, or Invent a Foreign Government and Governor
for every Animal, or at least Humane Body, viz. a Spiritual Substance (as our
Author calls it) Pure, Invisible, Immortal, others add Indiscerptable; and it
will not be Difficult for Men to add and ascribe to it whatsoever their fancies
happen to Invent, in Cases where we can never expect to have any likely Trial
of the Truth, but this savours: of expounding Obscurum per Obscurius; or the
stopping one Hole, and making many. Wherefore, as to our not conceiving how the
Animal Parts can Work and Act all those Parts which we know are performed
amongst us, we seem to have ground enough to refer them to the Power and Will
of our Creator: That he can by such means effect all Men's performances, no Man
makes doubt, and to many and learned Persons it seems likely that he has done
so, and for those who (merely upon the forenamed reason) will take the
boldness to impose a Super-Humane, or Spiritual Empire upon the Bodies of all
Men, we request them to take (as the Acter or Imposer ought to do) upon
themselves the Onus Probandi, and that they first prove to us, concerning the
Power intended by them to be Introduced amongst and over us, which they call an
Immortal, Spiritual, Substance; 1. Quod sit. 2. Quid sit. 3. Quale sit. 4.
Quando Ingreditur. 5. Vbi residet. 6 Quomodo gubernat and agit, viz.
That there is in Nature such a Humane Soul, able to subsist in Separation from
the Body. 2. What it is in its own Nature, and whether it do pre-exist, a Mundo
condito, or be derived ex Traduce from the Seed of the Parents: or that
Infundendo Creatur, be Created by Gods Power upon every Fruitful Copulation. 3.
With what Qualities such Souls are endowed, whether they are all well inclined,
or some ill, or meeterly? Whether all are of like Power, or some more, others
less potent? Whether they may cause, or can help, or hinder any Bodily Pains,
or Diseases? Whether they can leave their usual place of Residence, and go into
other Parts of the Body, or go quite out of it, a wandering in the World, and
yet return to it again? Whether they feel share of the Bodies Maladies, and
will not willingly consent to have Limbs cut off, or to take strong Purges or
Vomits, for fear of being disturbed in their places of Residence? Whether they
are more pleased, or have a greater desire to be in the Body, or out of it?
Whether the Body be as a Prison to Souls, and they be confined to it, or that
they choose to be there, and leave it unwillingly? And if they be there
confined, by what Power or means are they so? and what other Qualities of Souls
they think fit to communicate to us? 4 When it is, that the Soul enters into
the Body? Whether before or after the Births; and if before, then how long
after the Conception? Whether it enter in its full Dimensions, or grows larger
as the Child grows, or suffer detriment by sickness of the Body, or its
Consumption or Age? Also when it leaves the Body finally? Whether its leaving
do kill, or that it stay till the Flamula Vitalis be quite extinct, and the
Body dead? Or, If this Flame be suddenly extinct by the violent motion of a
blow upon the Head? Whether does the Soul strive to re-kindle this Flame, or
goes suddenly away in a fright? 5. Whether the Soul have a peculiar Place of
Residence in the Body, and where that is; And if that part be ill affected, and
unfit for her, can she change it, and go to reside in another? Or whether is
there more places, or another place in the Body, that can be fit, or can make
room for her to reside and act in, or that she is Tota in qualibet part. 6.
How does she Act, can she do any thing by her self, or her own peculiar Power,
without the Ministry of the Animal Spirits, and other Parts of the Body? Can
she amend any thing that is amiss in the Body, or know any thing without such
Ministry of the Senses? By what force does she move the Bodily Spirits, or can
she inflict Pain or Punishment for their Disobedience? Can she Govern the
Passions by an absolute Sway, or how far can she do it, and by what Means? And
so for the Affections, and whether is not she rather subjected often to their
Power, and how far and by what means that comes to pass?
How, or by what means and ways does she Imagine, Judge, Understand or
Remember? Or can any better, or more Inteliligible Account be given that she
does, and how she does such things? Then how the Spirits, Brain, and other
Organical Parts of the Body do them; actuated thereto by the Impulse of Nature,
and that Flammula Vitalis, which pervades every part of the Body, and most
powerfully Operates in the Heart, and Head, stimulating, and stirring them, in,
and to the performance of Duties, and Powers entrusted to them and Imposed, or
Imprinted upon them by Nature, and the Contriver, who made them for such
purposes, and has appointed their Employment, and the Order and Power by which
it seems they may be, and are continually easily and naturally performed. When
the Introducers and Maintainers of a Spiritual Self-subsisting Soul in Man,
have opened their Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge so largely, as to satisfy
the Curious Inquirers concerning these and the like particular Queries, they
may then with better confidence deny the possibillity of the Animal Spirits,
Blood, and Organical Parts of the Body, their performing such Actions, and
producing such Effects, as are daily done by us, and are continually visible
amongst us; and thence derive their pretentended necessity of introducing
within, upon, and over us, such a Foreign Commander, and Government, as that of
a Perfect, Substantial, Immortal, and Self subsisting Spirit; but withal, we
must desire them to declare, why they do allow the boisterous Affections and
Passions in Man, viz. his Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, Wrath, and Fear, to be
ungovernable by this Imperial Spiritual Power, set over Man, and his Actions;
but that such riotous Actors will oppose, and overruled this Spiritual Power,
and hurry this precious Soul and Potent Governor (whether she will or not) into
very bad and wicked Actions, such as her self does not only resist and condemn,
but even detest and abhor: These Affections and Passions our Spirit-imposers do
commonly grant, have their Rise and Growth from the Animal Spirits,
Propensities and Parts of the Body; but they have not yet set forth any more
rational Account of the Manner how, or the Power by which such Effects are
performed or produced, than they say can be done for those of the Senses,
Fantasy, Intellect, or Memory. They ascribe indeed the Faculties of the Head
and Brain to the Spiritual Power and Government; and the Affections and
Passions they place in the Heart, and suffer their Product and Power to remain
with Flesh and Blood; but they show us no Reason of the Difference, nor how it
comes to pass, and by what Mediums, Flesh, Blood, Spirits, and Animal Parts, do
or can produce one sort of these Faculties in Man, and not the other: It is
true, that after the Notion of a Living Spirit, enlivening and ruling in Man is
admitted and taken for true, we do then easily conceive and believe the
Faculties of the Brain are more suitable to that Nature; and the Affections and
Passions which sure not therewithal, but are apt to resist and overruled that
Government, Men do forwardly ascribe to the Production, Actuating, and
Government of Flesh and Blood; but perhaps more rightly to the same Flame and
animal Spirits which act also in the Head, but more refined there; and meeting
with fit Matter, and Organs adapted, intended by the Artificer, and by him
appointed for more Noble Purposes. And our Experience tells us, That Blood
which produces Barking in a Dog, will by Transfusion cause Baaing in a Sheep,
and likely Bleating in a Calf, Grunting in a Hog; and so will the Sheeps Blood
by Transfusion produce Speaking and Singing in a Man, according to the Matter
and Organs which the Spirits arising from that Blood find in the Places adapted
for such Productions. This farther Piece of Work being cut out for our
Spirit-imposers, it shall here be left upon them to perform, before they be
permitted (as a reasonable Course) to go on in their Pretenses, That because
Men are not able so fully to understand the Course of Natural Proceedings in
the Head and Brain, as to give a rational and satisfactory Account thereof,
that therefore Things cannot be done there, as they are, without such a
Spiritual Power as Men have invented to substitute, rather than confess in this
Case the Truth of their Ignorance, and that God's Works are (in this Case
particularly) past finding out. But if they shall give us as rational and
satisfactory an Account of the Things concerning the Soul they speak of, as
they require other Men to give of the Acts performed in the Head, by the Brain,
and the Membranes, Arteries, and other Parts to the same belonging, and
continually supplied by Animal and Subtle Spirits from the Heart, and quickened
and acted by the Flammula Vitalis: Nay, except they do give a better Account of
their Soul, and its Power and Manner of Acting, than Men can do of the Manner
of Acting in the Head and Brain, by the Animal Spirits, and other Natural Parts
and Powers of the Body, it seems they are not to be believed, or admitted to
impose upon-Men their Doctrine of a Spiritual and Self-subsisting Soul, as a
Distinct Being from that of the Body; and, it seems, they may as well devise
Souls for the Beasts upon the same Grounds: viz. For that they cannot give a
rational or satisfactory Account how, and by what particular Means and Powers
many of their Actions are framed, guided and performed; As how they come every
one of them to know wherein their Prime Forces of opposing others and defending
themselves do consist. The Dog in his Teeth, the Beasts Sheep, Goats, Deer, in
their Horns; the Boar in his Tusks; Cocks in their Bills and Spurs; Porcupines
in their Quills, and the like; and how every Species are taught and guided to
use their several. Weapons the most dexterously, and most to their Advantage;
by what Power, Order or Means, the Subtilties of Hares, Foxes, and other-like
pursued Creatures, are invented and acted; and the like for Apes and Elephants,
and their Docility; and that of Horses and Dogs; and the very Insects, Wasps
and Serpents know their Powers to Hurt, and use them accordingly; without that
any Man is, or ever was able to give a full and true Account of the Means,
Power, and next Natural Causes of such Actions, or by what direct Mediums they
are performed. Shall we then go about to cover our Ignorance of the Immediate
Powers and Actings in Men's Heads and Brains, by inventing for him an unknown
and unprovable Spiritual Being residing in him, we know not where, coming into
him we know neither when nor from whence, guiding and ruling we know not how,
sitting perhaps in Majesty in the Head, but rejected or overpowered in the
Heart by the Natural Inhabitants, the Affections and Passions of it. Solomon
was wiser than so to be entangled, Prove. 20.12. says, The hearing, Ear and the
seeing Eye, the Lord has made, even both of them; seems a tacit Confession
that he knew not how: and, Eccles. 8 17. makes an open Confession, that Man
cannot find out the Works of God; not those which are of thy; World, the wisest
of Men cannot do it: And my Lord Bacon (amongst the wisest of our Naturalists)
tells us, in his Advancement of Learning, Page 200. that a Rational Account of
the Soul cannot be expected from Philosophy, because the thing is Supernatural
and Inspired. Whence it seems we seek in vain to know what it is, or whence it
is, or where it is, or why it is, since we cannot know that it is, but from the
Divine Fountain of Faith and Revelation, in his Opinion. But (says he) Man has
a Sensible Soul, as the Organ to his Rational, which may rather be called a
Spirit; being a Corporal Substance, attenuated by Heat, and made Invisible, of
a Flamy, Airy Nature, nourished, part by an Oily, and part by a Watery
Substance, spread all over the Body, and repaired continually by Spirituous
Blood. We may perceive why he forbears to describe or discourse farther of the
Self-subsisting Soul, because it is not Natural but Inspired; and of which, a
Reason therefore cannot be required, to give any tolerable Account, seems
tantamount, to saying he did not understand the thing, nor would make any
farther Inquiry into the Truth of it, but was content to accept of the Opinion,
as of a Notion which had long gone for current in the World, and was grown the
General, if not the Universal Opinion amongst Christians of the later Ages.
But, if we credit Baxter (our Author) he tells us, Page 72. That some think the
Soul to be Material, of a Purer Substance than Things visible, and that the
common Notion of its Substantiality, means nothing else but a Pure (as they
call it) Spiritual Materiality. And thus thought not only Tertullian, but
almost all the old Greek Doctors of the Church (or Fathers) that write of it,
and most of the Latin, or very many of them; and there are few of the Old
Doctors (or Fathers) who thought that the Soul was not some ways Material. And
now (say I) upon what new Reasons or Revelations, is that Opinion of the Old
Fathers of the Church come to be changed? Why should not we think now of the
Soul, as the Fathers and Primimitive Church and Christians thought of it? It
seems we neither pretend any New Revelation for it, nor have found out any
either Scriptures or Reasons which were not known to them. It may be not
unaptly surmised, that from the Time of Gregory the first (called the Great)
Bishop of Rome, in the end of the Sixth, and beginning of the Seventh Century,
there rose a Conceit in his Church (from a Story told to that Pope by the
Bishop of Centum Cellae) that Christian Souls were put to Penances and
Sufferings, after Death of the Body, for expiating of Sins committed whilst they
were in the Flesh; whence Prayers were made for them, first out of a Charitable
Design; and then Alms came to be distributed likewise on their behalf; then the
Clergy and Poor People began to be hired, and have Money distributed and given
to them for such Purposes: And in time there came a Place to be assigned where
such Penances were thought to be performed; or Penalties for Purging of Sins
were supposed to be suffered; and this Opinion became beneficial to the Poor,
and profitable to the Clergy of that Church, and went on (like such kind of
Projects) increasing, till it grew up to a perfect Purgatorial Fire, over which
his Holiness took the Supreme Command, which he has been reputed to enjoy for
the space of some Hundred of Years last past, to the great Enlargement of his
Reputation and Revenues, and the Benefit of his Sons and Servants, the Clergy
and Ministers of his Church: And this has now continued for about the space of
Eleven hundred Years, time enough to radicate and fix the Belief of a
Self-subsisting Soul, in all Believers deriving under that Church, or that have
been subjected thereunto. But whatsoever the Cause has been of the present
Christians declining and swerving from that of the Primitive Fathers in this
Point, it seems the State of this Question deserves to be diligently reviewed
and considered.

Our Author undertakes to prove this Self-subsisting Spiritual Substance in
Man, from Three Topics or Grounds, viz. 1. From Reason or Nature. 2. From
Moral Congruity. 3. From Express Places and Texts of Scripture.
How concise and short he is, both in the Words and Sense of his Reasoning in
this Point, any who will bestow the pains of perusing him, will evidently and
easily perceive: All that he says in proof from this Topic has been truly
related before, and without farther Descant thereon, it seems less can hardly
be said; than Id aliquid nihil est, and he leaves his important Undertaking,
proving such a Soul in Man, from Reason or Nature, with turning himself about
to Matters and Things, or rather to Conceits and Fantasies of very small
Value; as, Page 13. Whether the Soul be an Individual Spirit, or be an Act or
Emanation of God, or of some Universal Soul, in the Body of Man? Page 15.
Whether the Soul be annihilated by Death, and then, whether it shall be
destroyed by the Dissolution of its Parts? Page 17. Then whether Souls
subsisting after Death do sleep (as the Body does) till the Resurrection? Page
21. Whether Souls subsisting after Death, and not sleeping, shall continue
distinct Beings, or fall into one Common Soul, or be united to God, and so lose
their Individuation and Separated Being? Upon this Question, Page 22. he cites
S. Austin de Anima, putting the Question, Whether Souls are all but one, and
not many? But that he utterly denies. 2. Whether they are many, and not one?
And that he could not well digest. 3. Whether they were (at once) both one and
many? And though this might seem ridiculous, yet he was most inclined to the
Belief of it. Hence we may perceive that our Author, instead of proving by
Reason, or from Nature, That the Humane Soul is an Immaterial Self-subsisting
Spirit, is turned about to vain Jangling, and with a wilful Blindness (such as
will not see) he balks the known and ancient Opinion of the Primitive Fathers
of the Church, before cited by himself, viz. That the Humane Soul was a
Material Spirit, kindled by our Creator in the Body of Man, when he breathed
into Adam 's Nostrils the Breath of Life, and thereby made him a Living Soul.
We read, that when Prometheus had framed and made a perfect Humane Body, he
could not enliven it for want of Heavenly Fire, which he therefore stole from
Jupiter, and was condemned to have his Heart eternally torn and devoured by the
incessant Gripes, and endless Voracity of a Vulture or Raven. Whether this
shadow to us Lucifer's Offense in such Atempt, we dispute not; but apparent it
is, that this is the adequate Emblem of a guilty and tormenting Conscience, for
a Crime of the highest Nature and Provocation that possibly can be committed.
Ezekiel. 37. we meet with an Adumbration of such an enlivening Breath; God directs
his Words: Say to the Wind, thus says the Lord, Come from the four Winds, O
Breath, and breath upon these Slain, that they may live. And the Bodies arose,
and they lived accordingly. 1 Cor. 15.44. There is a Natural Body, and there is
a Spiritual Body. The first Man Adam was made a Living Soul, and the last Adam
a Quickening Spirit. For the truer Understanding of what is meant by the Term,
Living Soul, parallel Expressions of Scripture shall be cited to that Intent.
Genesis 7.22. All in whose Nostrils was the Breath of Life upon the dry Land, died
in the Flood. For the Use of the Word Soul, Levit. 17.11. Ye shall have a holy
Convocation, and ye shall afflict your Souls, viz. your selves. 1 Samuel 10.
Hannah was in bitterness of Soul, and prayed, and wept: she was sore afflicted.
Chapter 2.16. Take as much as thy Soul desires, viz. as much as you will. Chapter
18.1. The Soul of Jonathan was knit with the Soul of David, and he loved him as
his own Soul; viz. his Affection was knit to him, and he loved him as himself.
Chapter 25.29. A Man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy Soul. viz. pursue thy
Person, and seek thy Life. Chapter 30.12. When the Egyptian taken at Ziklag had
eaten, his Spirit came again to him; viz. his Vital Spirit. 2 Samuel 30.39. The
Soul of David longed to go forth unto Absalom, Next Verse, David 's Heart was
toward Absalom, seems, the Heart, Affection, Life, Person, used to be
expressed, by the Term Soul. Job 12.10. In God's Hand is the Soul of every
living thing, and the Breath of all Mankind. Chapter 16.4. If your Soul were in my
Soul's stead, viz. if you were in my Case. Chapter 21.4. Why should not my Spirit
be troubled? viz. why should I not be grieved? Chapter 30.15. Terrors pursue my
Soul, viz. me. And my Soul is poured out upon me, viz. I am exceedingly
afflicted. -- Chapter 33.30. To bring back his Soul from the Pit, to the Light of
the Living; viz. save his Life. Chapter 34.14. If God gather to himself Man's Spirit
and his Breath, he shall turn to his Dust. We have proceeded thus far of the
Bible, to collect Texts to our Intent; and should we go through the Psalms and
forward, it would be hard to recite the Collections; and it seems the Texts
cited are enough to establish the Sense of our Expression: Man became a Living
Creature, or Person. And thus, by the Breath of Life derived from Heaven, was
the Flammula Vitalis, the Promethean Fire, enkindled in the Blood, Spirits and
Parts of Man's Body; and by Breath it has ever since been refreshed and
maintained; and when God takes this from us, we die, and are turned to our
Earth, and all our Thoughts perish; our Fancies, Intellects and Memories, our
Learning and Abilities, as well as our Love and our Hatred, our Passions and
Affections.

The Vital Flame kindled in the first Man, passing intermixed with the Seminal
Substance and Prolifick Virtue, and received in Habitacles fitting and proper
for its Fomentation and Nutriment, is first fermented by the Prolifick Energy,
or Internal Principle of Inclination to be coagulated, and knit one Part of it
to the other, and by Fomentation is strengthened; whence arises a Power of
assimilating to it self such Nourishment as comes within the narrow Sphere of
its Activity; which being, by its own Tendency to Heat, and the Natural Warmth
and Fomentation of its Receptacle, compacted to, and settled in a terminated
Consistency, and somewhat a fixed Unity of Coherence, the Formation of Parts
does consequently commence; and as Men have by a daily Observation found it in
Eggs under a Hen, it likely does proceed, viz. Two harder Accrescencies are
principally framed and compacted, viz. the Primum Vivens, and Vltimum Moriens,
the Triangle of our Hearts, and the Circular or Globular, and Chief Member of
our Bodies, the Head; and these are presently knit together, first, by small
Ligatures, Strings and Films; and from those two Parts, as Principal Pillars
and Fountains of Life, Motion, and Action, there are extruded and produced
first the Fibers and Nervous Parts and Ligatures of the Body; then the
Arteries, Veins and Muscles; and lastly the Flesh and Bones, and such Blood as
may be required in an Embrion State, or a Chile analogous thereunto, proper to
nourish, and apt to be converted into Blood, and to catch and maintain the
Vital Flame, which shall be kindled upon the first: Breath and Fanning of the
Ambient Air, at its coming into the World.

And like to this is the common Fate and Form of all other Animals, and the
Production of Living Bodies whatsoever, if we shall examine them; and begin
with Vegetables; and take for Standards the Acorn and the Mustard Seed, they,
and whatsoever other Seed it be, if it fall upon unnatural, or barren and
unhospitable Places, viz. into Waters, barren and dry Sands, upon bare Rocks,
or salt Marshes, or the like; the Seed missing and failing of a Suitable
Receptacle, and agreeable to its Nature, cannot be expected to, fructify
according to its Natural Inclination and Power, but must needs prove abortive,
unfruitful and improlifick. But where Seeds fall into good and tolerable
Grounds, agreeable to their Seminal Virtues, Inclinations and Powers; and
wherein they may meet with a Nutritive Reception, there they are first somewhat
melted or softened, and then they ferment; and finding a suitable Fomentation in
their Recipient, they germinate and sprout; and as the Sprouts bear upwards, so
from the other end of the Acorn proceed Fibers, or thin very small Strings,
moist and somewhat glutinous or clammy Threads, impregnated not only with its
proper Juice, but endued with a catching and penetrating Quality, enabling it
to fix and fasten it self in its hospitable Recipient; where finding still a
friendly and benign Fomentation and Acceptance, it may yet draw a Plastic
Power from the Seed, enabling it to assimilate to its own Parts and Nature such
Particles as are agreeble to its Constitution, and lie within the Compass and
Reach of its Activity, till the whole Substance or Plastic Power of the Seed
be spent: Thence rises the Frutex from the Mustard Seed, the least amongst
Seeds, in whose Surcrease the Birds of the Air may lodge: And thence the Oaks
of Bashan, and the no less large or useful ones of our own naturally-happy
Country. We know farther concerning such Vegetables, that they have Roots,
which draw and extract Radical Nourishment out of the Earth, each for its
proper Plant, and that their Sap is sent up for Nourishment, betwixt the Bark
or Skin and the Bole or Stalk; and that in the Wood or Stalk there are Pores,
which receive Nutritive Moisture, both for its own Support and Growth, and the
better Nutriment also of the Plant; and thus we know, in gross, many Natural
Parts and Materials, by whose Powers and Means things are acted and done
amongst Plants: But all these things that we named and that we know, are
Parcels of Matter, which our Philosophizing Opposers will flatly deny, can move
themselves. Whence they must and do say, all this Motion and Activity can come
no otherwise but from a Spirit; and if they mean a Natural and Material Spirit,
extracted from the Earth, and percolated in the Root, and alimbeck'd in its
Ascent toward the Branches, where the Leaves and Fruit are expected and
produced; we grant them there is such a Spirit as this in Plants, which
Philosophers have dignified with the Title of a Soul, calling it by Name of the
Vegetable Soul. But I would seek with a Lanthorn amongst them for a Man so
wise, that he could apply the Powers and Working of Plants to their proper
Productions, applicando activa passivis, and make Men comprehend how it comes
to pass (from Intelligible Causes) that Apple Trees or other Fruit Trees, do
bear different Sorts of Apples or Fruits, the same Trees the same Fruits;
whence the thing comes not by Chance, but of Nature. We desire them to show the
Reason and next Causes of this Difference; nay, let them declare to us the true
and next Causes of the Contexture of a Leaf; how, and by what Means, and by
what Causes, or Agent, the middle Stem of it is thrust out into a strait Line,
stiffned and made strong for Support of the Fabric? Whence come, or how are
formed the small Ramuli of such a Leaf, fixed in the middle Stem of it? Whence
all the inferior and little Fibers and Turnings in it, plainly wonderful to
behold, when the upper Case and Covering is worn off? And what is the next
Cause or Material of the upper Covering of such Leaves, and the Nitor or Gloss
of many of them; and whence comes their Shape and Figure, so diverse one from
another? Our Blessed Lord informs us, That if a Man sow Corn, and sleep, and
wake; or rise Night and Day, by turns, to watch it, yet it will still grow up
he knows not how; first the Blade, then the Ear, and then the full Corn in the
Ear. We know that in Nature there are Materials to do all this; and that there
is a Natural and Material Spirit operating, which, we conceive, may and does
effect them. But to find out the proper Materials, and next Causes, and their
Differences from one another, and why, and how, these things, and many more,
are done amongst and in them, shall pass for a Task too hard for the Forces of
any who require to have Men declare by what Mediums, the how, and the why Men
do and can use their Senses, Memories, Phansies and Intellects, by the Material
and Organical Parts of their Natural Constitutions and Bodies.

From Vegetables we may proceed by ascending to the Degree of Animals in the
World distinct from Men, who also are Animals, but something more and above the
Ordinary. Of the Beasts, Moses says, God made the Beast of the Earth after his
Kind. This imports, he furnished them at the same time with the Breath of Life:
For Solomon tells us, that Men and Beasts have all one Breath. And this agrees
with our own Knowledge and Experience, and puts the thing beyond all Question
or Doubt; although though Moses do not relate the Manner how it was done, as he
did in the Case and Creation of Man. But the Beast created and inspired with
this Common Breath, proceeds in the Generating its Like, as has been before
expressed concerning Man If the Seed fall (like that of Onan the Son of Judah)
into an improper or inhospitable Place, whatsoever Fervor of Spirit, or
Prolifick Power there may be in it, all is lost and comes to no Effect, for
wart of a fit Recipient, where it may find Natural Support by a due Fomentation
and Nutriment. But where the Recipient is proper for such Purposes, the Seminal
Matter and Power proceeds to act, as before has been said of Man, the
Prolifick Spirit fomented, ferments the Matter, and levens or seasons it till
it arrive to a Coagulation, and then to a Consistence, which assisted by
Fomentation of its Receptacle, and working of its own Natural Heat and Spirit,
is first determined in Quantity or Bulk, then made more solid, and then follows
the Formation of Parts, and, lastly, of Members, Flesh, Bones, and such sort of
Blood or Chile, of a Mixed Temperature to it; and all endued with an Inclination
and Power of Assimilating to it self such Particles as come within its Reach,
and are proper for its Increase or Nutriment, till it come into the World and
take in the Vital Breath and Air; whose Fanning kindles the Flamnula Vitalis,
in the Blood, Humors, and Spirits of the Body, carrying Life and Motion into
every the most remote Part of it: which, upon the total Extinguishment of the
Flame, dies, and can never he re-inkindled without fresh Fire from Heaven, an
Act of Divine Power and working of a Miracle: A violent Blow upon the Head we
know will work this Effect, without inflicting a greatly visible Wound, done by
the Concussion and fierce Motion procured and following upon the Blow; and
whereby we perceive the hardest Stones in Nature may be broken. And in all
these Particulars, the Nature of Man and Beast seem to be at perfect Accord,
and to have a very near degree of Similitude and Affinity one of them unto the
other; and so (it seems) in their Natural Duration or Continuance. Strong
Spirits, or but that of Wine, never cease flaming, after they are once kindled,
till either the Matter be all spent, or that by some Violence from without, it
be extinguished; or that by some inward Obstruction, Nutriment be hindered and
cut off; or that by some ill Mixture that Nutriment be vitiated and made
improper and insufficient for Nourishment of the Flame once kindled: as by
putting Water, or a like unsuitable Mixture, into the Spirit of Wine, or to Oil,
or other Spirits, proper for nourishing the once kindled Flame, so long as the
Materials shall be able to last or endure; and that, in Men and Beasts, is
their old and decrepit Age, and the utter Expense of that Humidum Radicale,
whereby their Flammula Vitalis might be nourished and maintained, or that it be
corrupted and vitiated by other noxious Humors, and thereby rendered improper
for the Purposes to which it was designed. In Men and Beasts, it seems, there
is a Material Spirit kindled and enflamed, and thereby attenuated to so great a
degree of Subtilty as to become Invisible; and so asserts My Lord Bacon, in the
Place before quoted: And so our Author, Page 72. says, Some think that the Soul
is Material, yet of a purer Substance than things visible: and thus thought
Tertullian, and almost all the Old Greek Doctors of the Church that write of
it; and so most of the Latins, or very many: Some thought the Soul an Igneous
Body, such as we call Ether or Solar Fire, or rather of a higher, purer Kind;
and that Sensation and Intellection are those Formal Faculties which
specifically difference it from inferior, mere Fire, or Ether: And there are
few of the Old Doctors (or Fathers) who thought it not some of these ways
Material. And to all this we do willingly subscribe and agree, believing as the
Primitive Fathers of the Church, both Greek and Latin, have (by our Author's
own Testimony) thought and taught before us. And we conceive that the Beasts
have a like Material Spirit inflamed lambently: but whether altogether so fine
and subtle as that in Humane Bodies, we find not Ground enough to assert or
determine. But Solomon tells us, what befalls Men befalls Beasts; As one dies,
so dies the other: Yea, they have all one Breath; and a Man has no
Pre-eminence above a Beast, their Bodies go all to one Place, they are of the
Dust, and turn to it again, and who knows the Difference of their Spirits; that
of a Beast goes downward to the Earth, viz. dies with the Body, and turns to
Dust; and who knows that the Spirit of a Man does not do so, but goes upward?
Hence it seems there was an Opinion at that time amongst the Jews, that the
Souls of Men did not die with their Bodies like the Beasts. And we find
Solomon, in the Close of this Book, saying, upon a Man's Death, The Dust shall
return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it.
Now whether he was better resolved in the Point at this time, or that he used
this Expression to comply with the Opinion of his Country, we will not pretend
to determine. But it seems plain, that amongst Men and Beasts there is a great
Congruity in their Parts, Frame, and Composition, as that all have different
Members acting suitable to their Kinds, as Head, Feet, Back, Belly; and Inward
Parts, as Heart, Liver, Lungs, Spleen, Brain, and all the Organs of Sense; and
Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Ventricles, Muscles, Joints, and the same Nature of
Flesh, Bones, Blood and Breath, which shall be left here, and changed for the
Consideration of their Internal Powers of Sense, Motion, Fancy, Memory,
Intellect; and of their Affections, Passions, and Powers of Perception,
Utterance, and the like Faculties.

Concerning such Faculties, we begin from the Senses, and do find the Beasts
have all the same with those of Men, and that they can make as accurate and
beneficial Use of them as any Men can do; and in the Perceivance by them,
diverse Beasts do excel Men, some in the Use of one Sense, and some of another;
and every Beast and Bird have Voices, Tones and Notes, all serving to warn and
direct their Young ones, to call for their Food, or complain for the Want of
it; to give warning of Weather or Danger, to call for Company of their own
Kind, to threaten and terrify their Inferiors in Strength; the Birds also to
vie with one another in Melody, delighting therewith the Ears of other
Creatures that can perceive the Suavity and Variety of them. The Affections and
Passions in Beasts are the same with those in Men. We have named five
Principals of them, viz. Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, Wrath, and Fear; the
three last of which are altogether as eminent and active in Beasts as in Men.
Ambition is not so; and yet Beasts and Birds of all Kinds will fight, without
giving quite over, until there be an acknowledged Mastery amongst them; the
Stronger will compel the Weaker to give Way, and to follow and observe him. Nor
is Covetousness in Beasts any thing comparable to that in Man; some of them do
hoard up Provision for their Support in Winter, and others, for whom it is
proper, will steal it from them; or fight for it if there shall be an Occasion.
So as, in Beasts, these Affections are but very feeble, in comparison to what
they are in Man: Whereas Lust, Wrath, and Fear, are equally potent and
prevalent in the one Kind, as in the Other: And for Proof that Beasts have
Fantasies, their Dreams are Evidence, in which sometimes they are vehemently
agitated and affected: and that they have Perfect Memories is proved by a
Horses learning to know a Way but once gone, and sooner than ordinary
Passengers do; by a Cows returning to the Place where her Calf was parted from
her, although she be driven away many Miles from it; by the Docility of Horses,
Camels, Dogs, Apes, Elephants, most knownly, but truly of many other Creatures.
And there seems to be no sufficient Doubt of finding all other Powers that are
in Man, resident in some Beasts, except that of his Intellect, which he can
employ in framing many Notions or Propositions, and drawing Consequences and
Conclusions; such we do not know that any Beasts can do, nor have they Means of
making them known to us. Sometimes we light upon Effects which carry a great
Semblance of Proceeding from such Causes, as in Dogs their Kindness to the
Bodies of their dead Masters, and discovery of their Murderers: That of
Sabinus supported his Master's dead Body in the Tiber till he sunk with it;
Alexander's Elephant, who would never take Food after the Royal Harness was
taken from him and put upon another, but starved and died upon it. Androgeo and
his Lion are reported and made famous in diverse Roman Histories; and other-like
Effects are related, that might serve to this Purpose, but too long and
circumstantial to be here related. But from the Docility of Creatures, Beasts,
we may with some certainty collect that they have an Intellect of simple or
single Notions, what, and when, and how their Directors will have them to act.
And Hares and Foxes do (it seems) invent Means to deceive and baffle their
Pursuers. But of Complex Notions, Discourse or Reasoning in their Minds, we do
not perceive that any Beasts are capable; although they are notable Observers
of their Masters Eyes, and can perceive their Pleasure or Displeasure in them,
and act according as by them directed: Yet that they are capable of a Judgment
arising from a Discourse in their own Minds, we do not perceive, and therefore
will agree, that Men in the Discoursive Part of their Intellect, are very much
beyond and above the Beasts; and so do the Humane Bodies much excel the Beasts
in the Instruments and Operations of their Tongues and Hands: And yet as these
Advantages of their Bodily Organs does not set their Bodies in so much a
superior Orb to the Beasts, as to exempt them from the common Diseases and
Death belonging unto both their Kinds. So, it seems, the Advantage which they
have over Beasts in Strength of Intellect and Discourse in their Minds, may not
be taken for a firm and assured Argument, that there is in the one a Soul
spiritually different from the other; but that perhaps this Difference in
Intellect may be but gradual, and proceed from the greater Subtilty and Tenuity
of the Spirit acting: The Copiousness and Fineness of Matter in the Head and
Brain of Man, and the Largeness and Aptitude of the Organs, which create the
Difference, and give the Superior Quality and Advantage to the Intellect of
Man; as we know it to be in the Body by Aptitude in the Organs of the Hands and
Tongue. Amongst those who argue for the Being of an Immaterial Self-subsisting
Soul in Man, some avoid the Defending their Principle by Arguments drawn from
Reason or Nature, by confessing the thing cannot be so proved, because it is
not made of any Mundane Thing, but inspired, as my Lord Bacon is before cited
to have expressed it. And Sir Kenelm Digby, in his Treatise of the Soul, Fol.
394. tells us, If you ask me by what Artifice a Man is able to perform the
Rational and Discoursive Actions of the Phantasy, Intellect, Memory, etc.? I
will answer, that they are done in an Admirable and Spiritual Manner: But if
you demand what the Manner is, and how produced? I must answer, It is done, I
know not how, by the Power of the Soul: show me a Soul, and I will tell you how
it works. It seems we want some such Evidence for its being what our Arguers
affirm it is. He offers at some parcels of Proof from Effects, but they are
long, not fit for this Place, and how firm the Perusers must judge each for
himself. Our Author, Page 161. confesses he knows not whether Souls do
pre-exist; and if so, Whether they are Individuate in their Pre-existence, or
shall be so after separating from the Body; and whether the Semen in Generation
is animated, and how the animated Semina of two make one? and if animated, then
what becomes of the Anima Seminis Perditi, or of an Abortive? Whether the Body
be animated as Vegetative or Sensitive, before the Entrance of the Rational
Soul? What is an Act or Habit in the Soul, or how, not acting or habited, it
differs from it self acting or habited? How its Acts are Many, and yet but One,
or its Faculties at least; and some other Riddles concerning the Souls of his
Mode? All these Three Assertors of the Immaterial, Self-subsisting Soul
confess, They know neither the Quid, Quale, Quando, Vbi, or Quomodo of their
Sort of Soul, and wave the Proving it from Reason or Nature, or make but some
weak Offers upon that Account, without pretending to a full Conviction of such
as shall peruse their Writings upon this Point. But Dr. More, in his Book of
the Souls Immortality, 8o. Printed Land. 1659. offers to make irrefragable
Proof from Reason and Nature, That there is in Man, an Immaterial and
Self-subsisting Soul; and grounds all his Arguments for that Purpose, upon a
Natural Necessity of the Thing. For that (says he) without such a Soul, it
would not be possible in Nature, for Men to use their Senses, Affections,
Fantasies, Intellects, Memories, and Motions, as they do, if they had not such
an Immaterial Substance and Spirit within them, for the actuating, directing,
and governing of them, and giving to every Part and Organ, that Life and
Vigor, that may suffice to perform the Duty and Function to each of them
belonging. And because his Design is our proper Subject in this Place, his own
Assertions and Words shall be quoted, for the better Assurance of that he has
thereupon delivered. First, he determines, That if in Man there be not such a
Spirit, then there can be nothing in him but Matter. And Page 125. says, Matter
is utterly incapable of such Operations. And we find there is but one same
thing in us, which hears, sees, and tastes, and perceives all the Vanity of
Objects presented to us; and that which is the Common Sense, judging of outward
Objects, must likewise imagine, remember, reason, and be the Fountain of
Spontaneous Motion, and of the like Faculties and Powers in Man. Page 133.
Matter is not affected by any Perception, but of Corporeal Impression, by the
bearing of one Body against another: But the Seoundae Notiones, or Mathematical
and Logical Conceptions, cannot be seated in Matter, but must be in some other
Substance distinct from it. Page 154. says, I have plainly proved, that neither
the more Pure Intellectual Faculties, nor those less pure, of Memory and
Imagination, are competible to mere Bodies; and have convincingly demonstrated,
That not so much as what we call External Sense, is competible unto the same.
Page 227. To the Nature of Sensation and the other Operations, the Animal
Spirits are not sufficient of themselves, nor the Soul, of herself, without the
Assistance of the Spirits. Page 205. Yet the Soul has not any Power, or
exceeding little, of moving Matter, but only of determining Matter in Motion.
Page 298. But the immediate Instrument of the Soul are those Tenuous and Aerial
Particles, called the Spirits, by which the Soul hears, sees, feels, imagines,
remembers, reasons, and by moving which, or directing their Motion, she moves
likewise the Body, and helps to form it in the Womb: but till the Body is
finished, the Soul flutters betwixt it and the Spirit of Nature, or Soul of the
World. Page 329. The Souls most subtle and most intellectual Operations depend
upon the Fitness of Temper in the Animal Spirits; and it is the Fitness and
Purity of them that invites her, and enables her to love and look after Divine
and Intellectual Objects. And the Souls Nature is such, as she cannot act, but
in Dependence upon Matter. Page 330. It is a very wild Leap in Nature, that the
Soul of Man should skip from the impure Body, newly turned to a dead Carcass,
and ascend thence immediately to the highest Heaven, and to the Presence and
Company of God and Angels. From these Quotations Dr. More's Opinions concerning
the Soul may easily be collected, and those which are desirous particularly to
consider of his Arguments at large, may consult his Book, which is but of a
small Bulk. But here Notice only shall be taken of his Principal Foundation,
viz. That no Matter, or Thing consisting of Matter, can have a Principle of
Motion or Activity in it self, or of moving any other Matter whatsoever. It,
seems when he made this gross Mistake, he did not remember that there was an
Element of Fire in the World. For we suppose he could have no doubting but that
Fire was Matter; nor that wheresoever it is found, it shows it self to be a
Self-moving and an Active Principle in Nature; so violent as to disdain
Resistance from any thing: Fortresses and Castles are ordinarily and easily
overthrown by it, Rocks and Mountains cannot enough resist the Force of it. But
it can shake the solid Globe of Earth, making Resistance to the Violent Force
of its Motion and Activity: How extreme easy must it then be for a Principle
of such Mettle and Vigor, to move and actuate, and to enliven and quicken the
adapted Parts, Members and Organs of an Animal or Humane Body, wherein those
Parts and Organs are fitted, by a wise Creator, to those Motions and Purposes,
and for those Offices, in their first Formation intended. It seems an Opinion
of so little Doubt or Question, as scarce leaves Matter or Occasion for any
farther Dispute about the Verity of the Thing. We have spoken before of the
Spirits enflamed to a Tenuity, so rare as it attains to a Degree of
Invisibility: And our Dr. ( Page 149.) tells us of the Intense Heat that is
about the Heart of Man; such as that his Blood there, is in a manner
scalding-hot. So, Page 203. says, The Aetherial Matter is that Fire which
Trismegist affirms is the Vehicle of the Mind, and which the Soul of the World
does most certainly use in all her Acts and Procreations. Page 212. The Spirits
[thus fine and active] move like Light, as that of the Sun to our Sight, the
Motion is propagated, not by Degrees, but at once. Page 214. If one part of the
Blood he more Fiery and Subtle than another, it will be sure to reach the Head.
From these Assertions it appears our Dr. was not ignorant of the Principle of
Fire, and its Activity in the Body and Mind of Man; nor did he forget it. Why
then did he not mention and answer the Objection thence arising against. his
Position, That Matter can neither move it self nor any other Matter? there
seems no Account or Reason to be given. Our Author Baxter takes notice, Page
21. That Life, Intuition, and Love, are Acts as Natural to the Soul, as Motion,
Light, and Heat are Quoad actum to the Fire. This Testifies his Opinion, That
Fire is a a Self-moving Principle, and that it is evident and eminent in the
Composition of the Body and Mind of Man, is too well proved and apparent to be
doubted.

Upon all these Quotations and Arguments, it seems we may say, as we have done
before in the Case of Plants, that in Animals Men do find a proper and
sufficient Original in their Seed, and the Fomentation and Nutriment of it, and
of its Growth and Tendency to the Perfection of its Kind, that there are
naturally produced the Parts belonging to such Bodies, viz. inward, as Heart,
Liver, Lungs, Bowels, Brains, Spleen, Kidneys, Bladder, etc. And outward, as
Head, Feet, Hands, Arms, Shoulders, Neck, etc. Also those which under one Name
contain many Particulars, as the Muscles, Nerves, Veins, Fibers, Arteries,
Films, Membranes, Tunicles, etc. Lastly, such as go through the Composure, and
every Part of it, viz. Flesh, Bones, Blood, and Breath. God, by his Handmaid
Nature, and that Wisdom described, Prove. 8. framed this Compositum at first,
out of the Dust of the Earth: Of which David gives a true Character, when he
says, I am fearfully and wonderfully made: and making, he endowed it with a
Generative Power, to be practiced and used for the Continuance of their
Species, till Time and Place shall fail for such Productions; and has made
such Performances, the most pleasing and delightful Actions of their Lives, to
the intent the Species of Animals might never fail in the World, or be
extinguished. When their Bodies were perfectly framed, and fully finished,
furnished with Blood and Humors fit to be enkindled by the Promethean or
Heavenly Fire, He breathed (says Moses) into Man the Breath of Life: which
(though Moses does not express it) was given and granted to the Beasts of the
Field also, and to the Heirs and Posterities of them all, and by the first
Blast and Fanning of this Breath, were the pregnant Steems of the newly-created
and pullulant Blood and Humors of the Body enkindled and enflamed, with a Fire
of Heavenly Product, Natural and Lambent, like those sometimes found in Ancient
Urns and Sepulchers, ever burning or shining, without Consuming or Perception
of Consuming their Materials. This Fire, Flame, or Glowing, pervades the whole
Body, and every Part and minute Particle and Member of it, whither the Blood
and Humors can and do come, enlivening and actuating the whole and every Part
of the Body, to perform those Purposes for which by Nature they were intended.
But the Power of this Vital Heat and Fire is most apparent in and about the
Heart, where the Blood is most heated, rarefied and refined, to a Spirit of
that Pureness and Subtilty, that like a rorid Steem they become thin to an
Ivisibility, ascending continually from the Heart to the Head, as the Sap does
in Plants, and the Vegetative Spirit from the Root to the Branches: arriving in
the Head, they replenish the Brain and the Ventricles thereof, acting, and
stirring, and enabling all Parts and Organs to and in the Performance of those
Parts and Duties for which, by Nature, they were intended. Our Dr.
before-quoted, P. 298. tells us, That by these Spirits the Soul hears, sees,
feels, imagines, remembers, and reasons, and can do nothing without them. And,
Page 329. The Souls Intellectual Operations depend upon these Spirits, and it
is the Fitness and Purity of them that invites and enables her to love and look
after Divine and Intellectual Objects. But we do not perceive more need of such
a Soul in the Animal, than there was before in the Plant; there we found
Materials and proper Organs for the Nourishment of it, and a Natural Vegetative
Spirit or Soul to enliven it, to stir and actuate the Sap, causing it to ascend
and to spread it self in all Places, even to the uttermost Branches and Twigs
of the largest Trees, where it produces Leaves and Fruit according to its own
proper Nature; and why not the Blood, Humors, and Animal Spirits circulating in
the Body of an Animal? The Blood and Humors, actuated with the Flame of Life,
and the attenuated Spirits actuating and applying to fit Matter and Organs of
the Body, made proper for their several Purposes, and moving and stimulating to
act accordingly, and acting with them and in them, why may not these act in the
Natural Course of a Sensitive Animal, without an Immaterial Self-subsisting
Soul? Our Dr. says, Because you can show me no Way how things can be by such
Means acted and done in the Senses or Understanding, but so as I can make such
Exceptions against your Deductions, as you are not able to give clear Answers
unto, nor can you make plain to Reason the particular Mode of the Operation of
the Senses: less concerning the Imagination, Memory, Intellect, and Affections.
We will not stick to grant all this, and yet reply, by repeating what we have
said. Let the Dr. or any for him, show the particular Reasons, and Causes, and
Manner of Working; how, and why Apple Trees bring forth Apples of such
different Kinds, yet constant each to his own Kind? And why, and how a
Pear Tree is terminated to her Sort and Sorts in like manner; Why, and how a
Thorn must needs bear Haws, and a Vine Grapes, etc.? Why, and how some Plants
and Flowers are sweet, others stinking, or without Smell? Let them answer to
the Queries before made concerning a Leaf, and so as Men cannot make material
and just Exceptions to their Deductions; and then they may more reasonably
pretend to bring in a Self-subsisting Soul to the actuating of the Senses in
Animals, and the Guiding and Conduct of their other Faculties: And till then,
it is to be hoped they will allow Men to think, that the Animal Spirits of a
Sensitive Animal may have Activity, Mettle, and Power enough in them, to move
and employ the Brain, the Senses, the Body, and all their Organs or Instruments
whatsoever, without the Government or Assistance of a Self-subsisting Soul, or
any Extraneous Spirit whatsoever.

Notice must needs be taken of an Objection which our Dr. himself makes or
frames against his own Opinion. Page 238. (says he) There will be an envious
Objection cast in our Way, (Observe, his Epethite is very sharp; but the
Strength of the Objection was the Occasion) viz. Men will say, that all our
Demonstrations are mere Sophisms, because some of them, and the not of the
least Validity, do prove that Souls of Brutes are Substances Incorporeal and
Self-subsisting, after Death of the Body; and consequently, That they have a
Pre-existence before their coming into the Body; and that the Souls of Men have
also the same Pre-existence. Page 240. The Dr. owns these Opinions, and says
they are all true. Page 241. And that the Deriving Souls, ex traduce, viz. from
Seed of the Parents, is a plain Contradiction, and so impossible, for a Body to
beget an Immaterial Spiritual Substance. The third Conceit, That God creates
Souls to supply every Adulterous, Incestuous, Buggering, successful Coition, or
for Monstrous, Deformed Productions, is too Indignous to be imposed upon his
Majesty. And there are but these Three Ways for Production of Souls; and
therefore they must preexist, a Mundo Condito, when many Miriads of Souls were
created to serve in all Future Ages. Pa. 447. Of this Opinion (says the Jews
Cabbala) was Moses. And he names here Seventeen more Ancient Philosophers who
were of this Opinion; and adds, Origin and later Writers. Page 245. says, That
all Philosophers of Note, in all Ages, who have held the Soul of Man Immortal
and Incorporeal, have likewise held the Pre-existence of it; and this must hold
for Beasts as well as for Men. Page 266. As the Souls of Men pre-existing,
slide down out of the Air into fitly prepared Matter, so do the Souls of Brutes
also. Page 271. The Souls of Men and Brutes inhabit Air in a Terrestrial
Vehicle. Page 302. Hence Men will say, the Souls of Brutes will live and enjoy
themselves after Death. To which our Dr. dares boldly answer, That it is a
thousand times more reasonable that they should be believed to do so, than that
the Souls of Men do not. Page 304. There is no Reason to think Brutes cease to
be alive after they are separated from their Bodies. Our Author Baxter,
following (it seems) our Dr. holds the like Opinion, and perhaps doubting to
prejudice the Opinion of a Humane Soul's Self-subsistance. Page 20. He says,
Chamber and some others make Brutes a lower Rank of Rationals, and Man a higher
Rank. Page 38. Though it be but an Analogical Reason that Brutes have, yet the
Difference betwixt Man and them, it more in the Objects Tendency and Work of
Reason, than in our Reason it self, as such. Page 201. Men conclude basely of
the Souls of Brutes, as if they were not an enduring Substance, without any
Proof or Probability. Page 303. Some think too basely of Sense, because they
find it in lower Creatures; they might accordingly deny Substantiality to
Spirits, because Brutes are Substances. Page 380. The Sensible Souls of Brutes
are Substance, and therefore are not annihilated after Death. It seems this
Tenet of the Maintainers of a Separate Subsistence of a Humane Soul, is
calculated for the Solution of an Objection which they foresaw would arise,
from that Power which Beasts evidently have and exercise in the Use of their
Senses, Affections, Fancies, Memories, and Intellect of Simple Notions, whereby
their Actions may be and are directed. How sufficient the Effect of this Tenet
will prove, for the solving or opposing an Argument drawn from this Ground,
will best appear when the Argument it self shall have been produced: in which
we shall proceed as we have done before in the Case of Trees, Plants, and other
Vegetative Creatures.

We say then, That the Beasts are endowed with the like Faculties and Powers
that are found in Men: they have a Local Motion as Strong, Vigorous, and Swift,
as Men; and so for every Limb, Joint, Muscle, Nerve, and Sinew of their Bodies;
acting as Spontaneously therein as can be done by Men: They use and govern the
same Five Senses that are in Man, and enjoy and act them to as great Perfection
and Effect, as Men ordinarily do: and some of them exceed Men in the Natural
Effect, Use, and Vigor, of some of those Senses: They have the same Affections
and Passions reigning in their Minds, Inclinations, and Bodies, as those that
appear in Men; and their Lust, Wrath, and Fear, are as Strong, Vigorous, and
Vehement, as they are in Men. They have very apt and tenacious Memories, and
have signs of Active and Moving Fantasies; the full truth, operation, and
extent whereof we are not able to discover, for want of Dialect in the Beasts
to discover them to us; an Intellect also the Beasts are evinced to have, by
their perceiving Men's temper of displeasure or kindness in their Eyes, Looks,
or Gestures; by their slinking out of sight, crouching, and dejected Looks or
Behavior, when they have done a Mischief; a sign they use reflection upon
themselves, and so much of judgment as to be under Fear and Expectation of
Punishment for the same: even as we find the Servile People amongst Men will
do: a Vivacity also of their Intellect shows it self, in their Docility,
inabling them to practice such Postures and Actions as some more stupid People
could hardly or never attain to perform, to their degrees of Perfection; in the
knowing, understanding, observing, and obeying of a Sign, a Nod, a Gesture, a
Look, the Moving of an Eye, or by an angry or pleased Composure of a Man's
Countenance: Things, which dull, or unbred People do not well perceive, or
understand. Our Author Baxter Page 38. is so moved with the Considerations, as
he there says, That in their own low, Concerns, a Fox, or a Dog, nay even an
Ass, or a Goose, have such Actions as we know not well how to ascribe to any
thing below some kind of Reasoning, or Perception of the same importance:
Whence he infers, That the Difference betwixt Men and Beasts is rather in the
Objects and Work of our Reason, than in our Reason it self, as such: and that
therefore the old difference of Man from Beast in the Word Rationale, should be
changed into Religiosum. That Man's Genus shall be Animal still, but his
Characteristical Difference should be changed from Rationale to Religiosum. We
say further, That in the Beasts there is a Sensitive Soul of a Flamy Airy
Nature, a Material Spirit extracted from the Blood and Humors of the Body,
actuated by Natural Heat and that Flammula Vitalis, which pervades their whole
Bodies, and every part, member, and parcel of them; passing with their blood
into all places whither that can come: This Spirit it is that directs and
actuates the Motions; works by the Senses, forms the Voices; imagines,
remembers, and understands in the Head; inlivens and moves the Heart, and by
which all other Faculties of the Beasts are stirred, actuated, put upon, and
supported in their Natural Employments and Duties, performed according to the
Natural Operations of Spirits, with great Mettle, Quickness, and
Imperceptibility: and this seems to be the State and Composition of the Beasts.
Whence we argue, That all that is thus found in Beasts, and by them performed,
springs from the motions and actings of a Material Spirit, and the force and
power of a Natural Flame: What hinders then, but that a Material Spirit in Man,
may as well perform the same productions in Body and Mind, of those of his Kind
and Species; both his Motions, Senses, Affections, Imagination, Memory, and
Intellect, and all his other Faculties, with some more advantage in the degrees
of them, by how much the Spirits are more pure and subtle in the Humane Bodies;
the matter more fine and copious, the receptacles of them large, and the Organs
every where properly fitted and terminating the product and performance, to the
Effect for which by the Creator they were intended and appointed; and we
conclude in Affirmative, that it is likely to be so in very deed.

But in answer thereunto, our Opposers bring in their lately delivered
Assertion, calculated (as we have said) and set on foot for such a time as
this: Viz. That Beasts do not perform their Functions of the Senses,
Affections, Fantasy, Memory, and Intellect, their Local Motion, or any of
them, by the acting or energy of a Material Spirit: But they soberly say,
Beasts are endowed with, and actuated by, an Immaterial Self-subsisting Spirit,
which pre-existed before it came into the Body of the Beast, and shall subsist
by it self after the death and corruption of its Body. They do but say this,
without making, or offering any Proof at all of it. And one of their Associates
in Opinion, pinched with this Argument of what the Beasts can, and do, perform
in this Kind, takes quite another way and manner of evading from under the
force and pressure of it. Sir K. Digby (to show us there are more ways to the
Wood than one) takes a Course directly contrary to that of our forecited
Authors; for he, fol. 205. and thence to 210. would persuade us, and
demonstrate, as he says, That Beasts are not to be esteemed so much as
Voluntary Agents, or that they have so much as the knowledge of what they do,
or why they do it; but that they act stupidly, by a natural sense of Heat and
Cold; and the density and rarity of their Blood and Members: that they are mere
Automata, without so perceiving by their senses, as to distinguish one thing
from another. He tells us, That in his youth he saw two Machines, the one at
Toledo, for raising Water to a great height, the other at Segovia: ( both set
on work by the Current of a River.) This was used for the Coining of Money, and
of these Machines he gives us there the Description; and then he compares all
sorts of Plants, both great and small, to his Water-Engine at Toledo; and all
Sensible Living Creatures, to his Machine at Segovia. They move and work as
that Machine does, and they do things that are very proper and useful for their
Natures, and contrive, and act things sometimes very artificial and curious; as
he says, we see in Spiders Webs and Birds Nests. But the Animals know not what
it is they do, but are prompted so to act by a temperament in their Bodies,
which makes them uneasy and restless until they do act, and employ themselves
according to a propensity which they have in Nature; but they have as little
choice or perceiving, either why or what they do, as his Machine at Segovia.;
of which he relates many Useful and Artificial Practices, continually
performed, without sense or knowledge of any thing that it did: and this seems
the single Truth of his forecited Assertions. But he proceeds upon a like
Design to many more folio's. It seems evident that these two Opinions of our
Opposers are directly contrary, one of them to the other; and yet, are intended
both for one same purpose; viz. to invalidate such an Argument, as might be
raised from the Nature, Power, and Practice, of a Sensitive Soul, that might
persuade to the belief of what has been before asserted by us; of the Rational
Faculties and Duties being possible, and likely to be acted and performed by a
Material Spirit; if either of the forecited Opinions were true, it were enough
to rebate the edge of such an Argument, and to invalidate the force of it: but
with those who do not believe the truth of either of them, they will be of no
force at all to the purpose: We confide there is no need to labor in the
Confutation of either of them; for that they will hardly be acccepted or agreed
to, by Men of Reading and Reason: and that therefore our repeated Argument will
be of force and continue unimpeachable by either of these Allegations.

Whence we are at liberty to proceed in our farther Inquiries concerning the
Soul. We find that Aristotle (who lived about Two thousand years ago, wrote a
Treatise entitled, Of the Soul, divided into Three Books, and those into
Chapters; the First Book into Nine, and the other Two each into Twelve; and he
treats therein (as we have done) of all the Three Known Souls: viz. The
Vegetative, the Sensitive, and the Rational; and calls his Work, A History of
the Soul; and in the very entrance thereunto, the First Chapter of it, he tells
us, It is extreme difficult to detect the Essence of any thing, or the Quid
sit: Yet that is the most sound Principle of Knowledge, if it can be attained
unto: but the ordinary means of attaining it, is by Searching into all, or the
most of the Accidents unto the same belonging; and so searching, we know not
how to find any Affections or Accidents a Soul has that are proper or peculiar
to her self. Commonly we find she neither does nor suffers any thing without
Copartnership of the Body: The Intellect seems her most peculiar; and yet if
that be a sort of Fantasy, or cannot be performed without the Fancy,
certainly it cannot be acted without the Body neither. Hence he collects and
asserts, That if in the Soul there be any Operation or Affection which is
properly peculiar to its self, viz. its own Nature, it may then be reasonably
taken to have a Separate Subsistence, disjoined from the Body; but if it have
no Operations or Affections so peculiarly proper to its own Nature, then is it
not capable of Subsistence in a State separated from the Body: Also that which
is never found or perceived without a Body, may well pass for inseparable from
a Body: Also in all our Affections the Body joins and operates with the Soul;
for if they were totally or principally from the Soul, they would act in a like
manner, upon all like or equal occasions: But we find that Men will sometimes
bear very great Provocations, or Appearances of great Danger, without any great
emotions of Anger or Fear; and at another time they are apt to fear upon far
less occasions; and to be wrathful and angry accordingly: This shows the
Humors of the Body have a great Share and Power, in producing these
Affections, and that they are Rations Materiales, Effects of a Material Soul
[of which Men say, Dispositio Animae sequitur Temperamentum Corporis] nam Ratio
est forma Rei: Concluding upon the Question, That the Affections of the Animal
are inseparable from the Natural Matter and Composure of it. This is a Summary
of the First Chapter of Aristotle's Book. He questions (as Solomon had done
before him) Whether Souls do subsist in Separation from their Bodies, or not?
And argues, If they have proper Operations or Accidents of their own, it is
likely they do subsist so: and if they have not such, then they do not so
subsist: for Natura nihil facit frustra: And if they neither have Action nor
Passion properly belonging to them, their Subsistence would be Frustra: and
therefore, we have no reason to admit or allow of a Separate Subsistence of
Souls, unless we can prove they have some Operation, Affection, or Accidents so
properly belonging to them, as that they are certainly known to exercise or use
them without any assistance of Body or Matter. We have before quoted our
Doctor, Page 227. to this Point, saying, The Soul is not sufficient of her self
to act, without the Animal Spirits. And P. 298. These are the immediate
Instruments of the Soul, by which she sees, hears, feels, imagines, remembers,
reasons, and moves the Members and the Body; and if they be spent, she can act
no more. But neither Aristotle nor the Doctor here, find any properly peculiar
Operation, or Accidents of the Soul. Aristotle says indeed, That Intelligere is
the most so of any thing, Videtur to be the most so of any other thing; but he
was not convinced that Intelligere was so proper to the Soul, as could give
title to a Separated Subsistence after the death of the Body: nor does he
absolutely conclude to the contrary, but has left us in the open road toward
it; and with fair and forcible Reason so to do.

This way of quoting Aristotle's Book, seems like that of the Israelites when
they compassed the Land of Edom, their Soul was discouraged with the Prospect
and Contemplation of the length of it. But as we find Weariness grow upon us,
long Strides or Skips may happen to be made before the finishing of so
venturous an Undertaking.

Cap. 2. Aristotle proceeding in his History, cites to us all the Opinions that
he knew to be delivered concerning the Soul by Eminent Grecian Philosophers
before his time. First, He states the special Differences betwixt the Animata
and Inanimata, or the Animals and Things that are not so, to lie in Motion and
Sense: All Animals have those two things, and none but Animals have them; and
that Motion is the Prior and Superior Faculty: therefore the First Observers
began from thence, believing, That which could not move it self, could not move
another thing. Whence Democritus collected, That the Soul was a certain Degree
of Heat or Fire, which he took to be kindled and maintained in the Body by such
Atoms, flying about in the Air, as are of a Globular Figure; which he took to
be of a Fiery Nature: such they observed to be in the Air, never resting, but
always in Motion; though the Wind and Air were never so calm and quiet: these
entering into the Body, with the Breath, acted in it, and acted it; every
breathing supplying fresh Atoms, and by that means continuing Life and Motion
in the Body: but on stoppage or failure of Breath, the Animal dies, for want of
fresh Atoms, to heat, move, and actuate the same: [Men were put to it for the
finding a way to kindle this Fire in the Animal Bodies, for want of Moses's
History, and taking the Promethean or Heavenly Fire, but for a Fable] with
Democritus's Opinion Leucippus also agreed: The Pythagorean School, Some said
the Soul was of these Atoms, others, it was of that which moved these Atoms;
and diverse more held the Soul to be an Active Principle, which first moved it
self, and then acted every thing about it; for nothing can move another thing,
that is not first moved it self. Anaxagorus was of the like Opinion; and so
were all they who had principal respect to the Motion of Animals: but other
Philosophers there were who principally respected the Sensitive and
Scientifical Performances of the Soul, and they conceived the Soul to be a
Compositum or Temperament of the Elements; and of this Opinion was Empedocles,
and Plato in his Timaeo: this Compositum they drew out into Four Principles,
after a Mathematical Pattern: the first as a single Unite or Point: and this
they said was the Intellect: then they drew out a Line terminated by two
Unites, and that they called the Number Two; and this they said was Science; of
Lines they produced a Planum, and that they said was Opinion; and thence they
founded and made a Solid Body, and this they said was the Sense, or Sensitive
Power; and that all things were judged and terminated, part by the Intellect,
part by Science, part by Opinion, and part by Sense: and having reduced the
Self-moving Soul to Numbers, they gave it the Term of a Self-moving Number: but
those who compounded it of the Elements, made Fire Principal in that
Composition, it consisting of the most Subtle and Incorporeal Parts, prompt to
and in Motion, and a Prime Mover of other Things. Diogenes thought the Soul to
be Air, as the most Subtle Principle, and easily moved: And Heraclitus called
it an Exhalation, Incorporeal, always moving. Almaeon said, The Soul was
Immortal, like other Immortal Beings, who are always in Motion, as the Sun,
Moon, Stars, and Heaven it self. Other impertinent Philosophers, as Hippo,
said, The Soul was Water, from the Prolifick Faculty. And Critius said, It was
Blood, because that is the Prime Instrument of Sense. But all agree in the
Prime Requisites of it, viz. Motion, Sense, and Incorporiety. Anaxagoras only,
says It is impassible, and has nothing common with any other thing. But if so
it be, neither he nor any else tells us, [can tell us] how or by what Means it
should come to the Knowledge of any thing. We may observe all these
Philosophers, except Three, content themselves with a Subtle, Moving, Material
Spirit. Of the Three, Heraclitus, it seems, aims at the Spirit formerly by us
described. Anaxagorus is not believed by Aristotle, and is but a Negative
Description. The Third, viz. Almaeon, seems the sole positive Assertor, That
the Soul is Immortal, and like other Immortal, viz. Spiritual Beings: The Man's
Name is not otherwise Famous; but his Opinion has had the Fortune to spread it
self in the World, beyond all those whom Aristotle in this Chapter has
nominated to us; and to be come near the Universal of the present Time: Jews
and Gentiles, Mahometans and Christians, professing themselves to be of the
same Faith or Belief: but the more Considerate of them declining a Dispute and
reasonable Examination of the same, the Soul being a Supernatural, Spiritual,
and Inspirited Substance, which Flesh and Blood cannot reveal, no nor
understand. And all this I do willingly agree unto; but do say, We are now,
within the Lists of Humane Reason, entered into against our Author Baxter, and
his Associate Dr. More, who have undertaken, and made Challenge, to prove Man's
Soul must needs be an Immaterial Self-subsisting Spirit, and that upon Grounds
of Nature and undeniable Reason. We are thus far on of our Way in that
Argument, and God send us a good Deliverance.

Chap. 3. Arist. confutes some of the forecited Opinions. And, First for
Motion, says, It seems not essential to the Soul, but that Motion is rather per
Accidens, and according to the Bodies Motion, and it may move the Body without
being moved it self. [as Light directs without its own Motion.] The Bodies
Motion does carry the Soul about with it: but that is not a proper Motion of
the Soul. Nothing can move naturally that is not in some Place; but the Soul is
the Form of the Body; and Forms are properly not in Place, but in their proper
Matter: not like Accidents in Bodies, which are not there as Forms to Bodies,
or Participants of their Motion. Secondly, That which can move Naturally, may
be compelled to move by Force; but the Soul cannot be so compelled. Ergo,
Thirdly, If the Soul were properly moved, it would not be accidentally so; but
it is principally moved by the Sensible Objects. Ergo, Fourthly, That which
moves, leaves its former Place or Qualification. And if Motion were Essential
to the Soul, it so moving must recede from its Essence. Ergo, Motion is not of
its Essence. Fifthly, Democritus thought the Soul, moving it self, did thereby
move the Body, as the Universe moved from the Motion of the Celestial Orbs; but
they never rest: therefore the Soul does not so move the Animal: but by its
Intellect and Choice, the Animal moves or rests. Sixthly, Plato compared the
Soul to the Heavenly Orbs or Circles, first differenced into two Sorts, and
then others, and those divided into seven of the Planets. But hence the Soul
must needs be Bulky, and so capable of Division; and that it is not. But is as
the Intellect or Mind, which, though it reflect upon it self, is not thereby
made Circular any more than the Sense or Appetite, which do not so reflect.
Though the Soul have not a Bulk, yet it is One, first in Number, next by its
Indivisibility, for it has no Parts: but all that have Bulk have Parts. Also
the Motions, viz. that of a Soul and that of a Circle are quite different: That
of a Soul is Intellection, employed about Objects or Things; that of a Circle
is bare Rotation without End. But the Soul moves rationally to a Design, or
End, whence the Soul has a Tendency, as well to Rest and Settlement as to
Motion. Seventhly, If Motion were of the Essence of the Soul, it could never
rest, like the Celestial Orbs: if not essential to it, continual Motion would
be tiresome to it, and it were better be out of the Body. And many say the Case
is truly so with it, and so (for the most part) it is believed: Those who will
rightly treat of the Soul, must join therewithal the Consideration of the Body
also; because of the close Connection that is between them; so as one can
neither act nor suffer without the other: and they are so knit and apted for
one another, that a Man's Soul cannot fit a Beast, nor that of a Beast suit with
the Body of a Man; and the Pythagorical Tenet was but a Fable.
We may observe, that Aristotle treats here of the Soul, as if it were some
Self-subsistent Principle, a Thing that was entire; not as if it were a
Material Spirit, residing chiefly in Vital Parts, and thence diffused over the
whole Body: it seems rather that he did not so apprehend of it, but rather that
it was partible from the Body: For else it could not be considered, whether it
should be better out of the Body or in it. He says, That then many thought it
better to be out of the Body, than in it. And we are told some Men of those
Times killed themselves to enjoy that Immunity the sooner: And yet it is not
thoroughly clear, whether when he speaks of the Souls being out, and in, that be
not intended according to the common Opinion of his Time: For that he knits
Soul and Body so together, as if they were but one same. Let it be called
Animal or Essential Being, which both do and suffer the same, without any
rationally perceivable Difference, although it be easy for posted Fancy to
create Differences: if the Soul be the Material Spirit before described, the
Reason of this Sameness in doing and suffering is evident and clear: But if the
Soul and Body be Separate Subsistences, a Modification of this Sameness in
doing and suffering, is yet to be excogitated.

Chap. 4. Some hold Opinion, That the Body being compounded of contrary
Ingredients, viz. the Four Elements, that Reasonable Proportion, and Equal
Temperament which disposes and preserves all these in their fittest Quantities,
Qualities, and Agencies in the Body, and in their best Consistencies and
Agreements, one of them with the other; that Agent they called by the Name of
Harmony, and counted it for the Soul. This, Aristotle says, cannot be so: For
that this Harmony has not a Power of Motion, which all agree to be in the
Soul. Nor can Men by this Harmony explicate the Affections and Operations of
the Soul. 2. This Harmony is neither a Mixture of Ingredients, or a Composition
of Parts or Members in the Body, as all other Proportions are in their Kinds;
and therefore not properly Harmony. They gave the Amicableness of the
Ingredients a Part in this Work of Operation by Harmony. But whether it be the
same Thing, or one different from it, they do not declare, nor does Empedocles
their Author discover. Now if the Soul be not this Reasonable Proportion and
Temperature of the Mixture in Bodies, why does it appear to be taken away
together with the Body? and what is it that perishes at the Souls Departure, if
this sort of Harmony be not the Soul? Yet concludes it is not the Soul. The
Soul may be moved by Accident, and can move it self so, viz. by moving the
Body; but a Local Motion the Soul of it self has not. This of Local Motion
must be intended whilst in the Body, or is fully contradicted by our Doctor,
Page 266. and so to 296. And we may observe that Aristotle seems to bear much
with this Opinion of the Harmony, though he does not allow of it; and though it
fall short of the Truth, yet it seems to have a good Share of the Truth in it.

Chap. 5. Because that to Rejoice, Grieve, or Discourse, are Motions, and Men
use to say, The Soul Rejoices, is Grieved, or does Ruminate or Study; it
therefore is so moved. One might as well say the Soul Hews Timber, or Weaves:
nor is it proper to say the Soul Learns, or Reasons in Discourse, but that the
Man does so by the Power of his Soul. Not that the motion is in the Soul, but
in some Cases it comes to her, as in Using the Senses; and in some comes from
her, as in Using the Memory; and so for the Intellect, which has a nearer
Relation to her than the Memory; also is a tore Substantial Faculty, and is
less decaying, or subject to be spoiled: The Decays of Age do not reach or
spoil it [so soon as it does the Senses, Memory, or other Faculties.] The Soul
suffers not by Age, but the Body wherein she is; as in Cases of Drink or
Sickness, Intellect and Contemplation will fail also with the Bodily Materials
failing; but the Soul her self is Impassible. And if an Old Man should obtain a
Young Eye, he would be able to see as well as if he were Young. To Love, Hate,
or Remember, are not Works of the Soul, but of him that has it; and they are
Qualities and Powers common to the Soul and Body, and perish with the
Dissolution. Perhaps the Intellect may be a more Divine Thing, and Impassible.
Finally, the Soul can neither be moved, nor move her self, [but by Accident.]

We may observe, That where Aristotle says the Intellect is a kind of
Substance, I render it a Substantial Faculty, more so than the Memory. It seems
intended by the following Words, that Intellect does also fail Men in their
Age, but not so early as Memory; and so Experience confirms to us. For his
(perhaps the Intellect) here intended Soul (but not so before) perhaps it is a
Divine Thing, and Impassible. We say, that what perhaps may be, perhaps may not
be, and compare it with Solomon, who knows, it is left by both as an uncertain
Thing; and we are left to seek for a firmer Fixation of what they in these
Places have not determined.

Chap. 6. Aristotle rejects their Opinion, who thought the Soul to be a Number
which had Power to move it self, and says it is an Impassible Tenet. His
Arguments seem plain, and therefore need not be repeated: but we remark or
observe that he says, Plants and Animals seem to be endowed with the same Soul,
Spirit, or Specifical Soul. Also whether you call Democritus his round Atoms,
Unities, or Minutest Points, they will create that which is Quantum, and then
there will be something that moves, and something that is moved, as there must
be in all Magnitudes, though never so small; and every Unity must have its
Motor, so it cannot be Anima, for that is Motor, and is not moved [but by
Accident.]. They who call the Soul Number, are like them who call it a sort of
a subtle Body, consisting of Parts of a like Nature. But if the Soul be over,
or in, all the Sentient Body universally, and that which enlivens it, here
would be two Bodies one within another. Observe we may, concerning this Subtle
Part, which he calls a sort of a Body, it may intend the Immaterial Spirit
before explicated; and then the having one such Body within another Dense Body,
is but an Exception to the Wording of the Thing, and does not reach to the
Denial of the Matter intended.

Chap. 7. Mentions Three Definitions of the Soul. First, That is, Id quod
maxim vim habet movendi, and therefore is a Self-Motor. Second, That it is a
Body consisting of the most Subtle Parts, and more Incorporeal than any other
Body or Thing. These Two are past. The Third is, That the Soul is a Compositum
of the Elements, and which therefore can perceive and know them, and all that
is made of them.
This Knowledge (says Aristotle) cannot rise from the Composition of Elements
in the Soul, unless the Proportions of the Composition in Things, and their Way
and Manner of Compounding, be also in the Soul: but not compounded Substances
can be in the Soul, nor Quantity, Quality, or other Accidents. Empedocles
thought the Elements, with their Concord and Discord, composed not only the
Humane Soul, but that they and their Concord made up the Divine Intellect,
excluding Discord. Whence (says Aristotle) God knew less than Men: but the
Elements (says he) are Material, and that which by compounding them, makes the
Soul, must be of more Value than the Soul. And what Thing can that be?
Impossible it is that there should be any thing more excellent than the Soul,
or superior to it, especially to its Prime Faculty, the Intellect: For most
agreeable to Reason it is, that this highest Faculty of the Soul be accounted
of the greatest Antiquity, and the highest Dominion or Power, according to
Nature. No; (says Empedocles) for the Elements are the First of Beings; and if
the Soul were not from the Elements, she could not attain to the Knowledge of
them. And here Aristotle lets this Dispute fall, and says no more to any
purpose in this Chapter. We may observe, that Aristotle repeats here again the
Opinion of the Souls consisting of Material but most Subtle Parts, more
Incorporeal or Spiritual than any other Material Thing. He gave no other Answer
to this before, but by his Clinch, That this would be to conceit two Bodies
one within another. To this may be said, one is a Spiritual Body, or a
Celestial Spirit, kindled by the Breath of Life. But withdraw its Pabulum some
few Days, or stop the Fanning, Air from it, but for some few Minutes, this
Flaming Spirit is certainly extingushed, this Material Spirit can act no more
for ever, without a Miracle, Fire from Heaven to re-inkindle it: but for want
of this Subtle Body within, the Gross Body without dies and corrupts, and turns
to that Dust out of which it was first extracted. This either was the Opinion
of Heraclitus, before specified, or very like it.

Chap. 8. Orpheus and Thales thought that there was a Soul of the Universe,
resident every where, and so in the Elements. But Aristotle asks how that can
be, that Air or Fire should have a Soul, without being an Animal? Orpheus held
that Soul which was in the Air to be more Excellent and Immortal than that
which was in Animals. But their Tenet seems absurd, to say that Fire or Air are
Animals; or that, having Souls, they are not Animals: They said Animals lived
by the Air, in which they breathed, and, in Breathing, attracted the Air, which
being animated, caused Life in Animals: but the whole Air is of the same
Species and Nature with every Part of it; therefore the whole Air is animated.
In Souls (says Aristotle) there are dissimilar Parts or Degrees [viz. Reason,
Sense, and Vegetation,] but the Air consists of Similar Parts only: whence Soul
and Air cannot comport together, nor can the Soul be in every Part of the
Universe, unless she do consist of Similar Parts: Concludes, The Soul cannot be
known from its Consistence of the Elements, nor can it be knowingly or truly
said that she is moved. We may observe, as the Occasion of this Argument, that
some Old Philosophers held the World to be animated, and that the Soul of the
World gave to every Nature its ultimate Perfection, that made heavy things
descend, and light to rise upwards; and was the Cause that Animals had Life. So
says Virgil, Jovis omnia plena: And Infusa per Artus, Men's agitat Molem, and
magno se Corpore miscet: But this Opinion Aristotle does disallow, and argues
against it, by this Chapter.

Chap. 9. By Powers of the Soul, Men have Knowledge, Sense, and Opinion, can
Consult, and Desire, and use their Appetites and Local Motion at their own
Liking; and from Her comes their Growth, Continuance, and Diminution: and from
Her our Understanding, and the Use of our Reason, and so all other Powers, and
all that we do or suffer. But Men have doubted, Whether each of these and their
like, do flow from Virtue of the whole Soul, or some from one Part of it, and
some from another? Also, What causes Life in Animals, whether one or more
Parts, or what other Cause it has? also, What Part of the Soul Understands,
and what Part Desires? For (says he) some have thought, that with one Part of
the Soul Men did the one, and with another Part the other: So as the Soul was
partible. And if so, (says Aristotle) What is it that keeps her Parts together?
Not the Body; for that is kept together by the Soul: for upon her leaving it,
ensues Corruption and Dissolution. Plato thought that there were diverse Souls
in a Man. Aristotle still proves all is but One Soul. Against this, some
alleged, That some Insects cut in Pieces, each Piece will move for a Time.
This he denies to come from a Partition of the Soul, and says, The Principle of
Life in Plants is a sort of Soul, and it is common to them with Animals; and
nothing has Sense, which has not that. We may observe the Subject of this
Book to be his History of the Soul, declaring the Former Opinions amongst
Philosophers concerning it, annexing his own Confutations, and not absolutely
approving any one of them.

Lib. II. Chap. I. The Word Substance is a common Genus of such Things as have
a real Subsistence or Being, whose consistent Parts are Matter and Form; whence
results the Compositum consisting of them both united. The Matter is a Power
[or Capacity] of receiving Formation, or being informed: but the Form is (...),
Active Vigor, or Principle of Life, and Activity in the Compositum: and this
(in Humane Souls) is distinguished by the Terms of Science and Contemplation.
Bodies compounded of such Matter and Form, seem to be the Prime Substances in
Nature. Of these, some have Life, and some not. Life consists in Nutrition,
Increase, and Diminution; growing from their own Natural Powers: whence every
Natural, Living Body is a Substance compounded of Matter and Form: and of these
the Form is most properly Substantial, as having Life in it self; whereas the
Matter has only a Capacity, Fitness, and Inclination to receive that Life
which the Form can communicate: (...). This Active Principle is the Active
Principle of the Body. This he changes a little, saying, The Soul is the first
(...), first Prime Act of a Living Organical Body: Takes Plants to have
Organical Bodies: thinks it not proper to say, That the Body and Soul are one.
For that, Things may be said to be, and to be One, after a very multifarious
Manner: says, (...), is the Souls proper Term, or Principal Act, or Actor of
the Compositum: and yet he has not done with it; An Essence consisting in a
fitting or reasonable Proportion: The Soul is such an Essence; and this is the
Thing wherein the Top of its Perfection lies: and this the Forms of Dead
Things, as of an Ax, or other Tools, cannot have; but it belongs only to Things
which have in them a Natural Principle of Motion. If we shall suppose the Eye
to be an Animal, the Sight would be the Soul, Essence, or Form, and the Eye but
the Matter; and without the Form the Eye would be useless. And as it is, in the
Parts, it is in the whole, the Anima Vivens, or Sensitiva to the Compositum,
that has Life or Sense: and as the Eye consists of the firm Pulp and Sight, so
the Animal of Soul and Body: therefore the Soul is not separable from the Body,
or such Parts of it as remain together, and act after the Separation of other
Parts from them. The Eye may lose its Sight, or be pulled out; so the Hand its
Feeling, or be cut off: For such Faculties are not general, viz. of the whole
Body. Whether the Soul can be parted from the Body, he seems not to determine:
but if she may be so, he thinks she is but in the Body as a Pilot in a Ship. We
may observe, he says, as his last and best Definition of a Soul, That it is an
Essence or reasonable Proportion, viz. animating the Body by such a Proportion
of the Natural Heat and Radical Moisture: Whence, the more reasonable, just,
and adequate this Proportion is, the more excellent is the Constitution of the
Compositum like to be: And if he mean thus, it is no wonder he says, The Soul
is no more separable from the Body, than Sight is from the Eye. In Separation
neither can subsist, but are thereby extinguished, unless (as he says) we shall
think the Soul to be in the Body, but as a Pilot is in a Ship, who having
brought it to Shore leaves it.

Chap. 2. The Soul is amongst those things which are called Principles, having
the special Faculties of Nutrition, Sense, Reason, and Local Motion: but there
is doubt whether all these proceed from the whole Soul, or that they are
separated Parts of it: and if separated, then whether in Place, or only in
Imagination, the Vegetative Soul will act in Slips and Branches, and enable
them to grow: but the Soul of Man seems to be of another Sort; and that this
only is capable of a Separation from the Body, as that which is Eternal, may be
separated from that which is subject to Corruption; but all other Parts of the
Soul, except that which is purely Contemplative, are inseparable from the Body.
The Soul is that Principle by which we have Life, Sense, and Understanding, as
from our proper Form and Ratio; and this is not the Body, but belongs to it:
she is not the Body, nor can she be without it. In a Body therefore she is, and
such an one as is suitable to her Operations, and is her proper Matter; whence
she is the Active Principle, bearing a reasonable or natural Proportion to the
Matter which is to be informed by her, or to her Body. We may observe how
warily or uncertainly Aristotle handles the Separate Subsistence of Souls;
saying first, That the Soul of Man is the only Sort that seems capable of it:
and that it does seem capable of a Separate Subsistence, as an Eternal Being.
But this is spoken without Addition of Reason, or farther Dilucidation, or
Confirmation of the Thing; as if in Compliance with Vulgar Opinion: and then
presently subjoins, The Soul is not the Body, but belongs to it; nor can she be
without it: In a Body therefore she is, and likely cannot be without it.
Farther, it may be observed, that in this Chapter we begin to enlarge our
Strides, and omit all such things which do not properly belong to Souls, or is
Declarative of their Natures or Properties: and this Course will be followed in
our future Progression in this Author.

Chap. 3. Where there is Sense there is Appetite, viz. Lust, Wrath, and Will:
also Pleasure and Pain, or that which is Pleasing and Troublesome. Lust desires
that which is Pleasant; and Animals are nourished by Dry and Moist Things, and
by Hot and Cold Things. Hunger and Thirst belong to Lust: Hunger desires the
Dry and Warm Things, and Thirst the Cold and Moist. Man has a Discursive
Understanding, or if there be any thing in Nature above that, Man has it.
Creatures in the lowest Degree Rational, have all things pertaining to
Animation, Sense, Appetite, Motion, etc. and yet they all perish in Death. Of
the Contemplative Intellect, (...), seems there may other Things be spoken or
conceived. We may observe here the same cautelous Expressions of Aristotle,
concerning Subsistence of a Rational Soul, in a State of Separation from the
Body, that has been usual with him.

Chap. 4. It is one of the properest and most natural Qualities of all Living
Creatures, perfect in their Kinds, to generate such another as themselves are:
and the first able Effect of a Soul arrived to Perfection, and the most
universal, is to generate its Like, and support its Species: Whence the Souls
first Denomination may be Generativa, except from her first Acts she should be
called Nutritiva. The Soul is the first Principle and Cause of Life in the
Body, and first of Motion, both as to the what, and why: She is the very
Essence of the Body, or the Causa cur sit: and the Life of Living Bodies is the
very Being of them; and this is of the Soul: and all Natural Bodies are
Instruments of the Soul. Empedocles thought Plants had their Nourishment from
the Earth below, which was carried up by a Power of Heat and Fire. Says
Aristotle, Earth and Fire are Contraries, What keeps them then in an amicable
Temper? This is the Soul, and therefore this is the Prime Cause of Nutrition:
Yet the Fire or Natural Heat is a Concomitant Cause; not yet so Principal as
the Soul, which bounds the Force of the Fire; knowing otherwise no Bounds.
Nothing can take Food or Nourishment, (that is not an Animated Body) so as such
Bodies do; therefore these Actions come from the Soul: therefore the Soul is
such a Principle as has suitable Faculties to preserve the place of her Abode.
If that have no Aliment, it cannot subsist; and therein are Three Particulars,
viz. 1. What must be nourished? 2. With what? 3. What effects the Nouriture?
and that is the Soul.
The other Two are the Body and the Aliment: and all Aliment must be digested,
and all Digestion is effected by Heat; therefore all Living Things have Heat.
We may apply what Aristotle says here of Generation, as the most Natural
Action, viz. to generate another Creature of his own Likeness and Kind: This
imports a Generation of the whole Matter and Form, Body and Soul, according to
Natural Inclination and Power of all other Living Creatures.

Chap. 5. Treats of the Senses, and the Objects of them. The first Motions
toward Sense grow from the Seminal Power; then that which is procreated
obtains Sense, natural to Sensitive Creatures, as Science and Contemplation is
to Man. But Objects of the Senses are external Things, and those of Science (as
Things Universal) are inward, and within Compass of the Soul it self; and it
can understand when it will; not use the Senses without their proper exterior
Objects; not hear without a Noise.

Chap. 6. Each Sense judges of its proper Object, without being deceived in it
[the Distance and Medium being fit, and the Organ found.] But Motion, Rest,
Number, Figure and Bulk, are not peculiar to any one Sense: to the peculiar
Object, the Essence of the Sensible Power applies it self.

Chap. 7. Light is, as it were, the Color of the Perlucid Body, when
enlightened by Fire, or the Heavenly Luminaries: but Light is not Fire, nor
clearly a Body, nor the Effluction of a Body; for then it self would be a Body:
But it is the Presence of Fire, or other Lucid Thing, in the Perlucidum. We may
say, the Presence of that Habit which expels Darkness, is Light; and of that
Habit, Darkness is the Privation. The Perlucid Body has no proper Color,
whence it cannot be seen, as Air, or can hardly be seen, as Water. The Motive
to discern Colors is the Perlucidum enlightened; but the Act of discerning is
from the Light. Fire may be seen both in the Dark and Light, for that it
enlightens the Darkness.

Chap. 8. All Sounds occasion Echoes, though not perceptibly; even as all
Light has its Reflection, which causes the Light where the Sun does not shine,
or in the Shade. The Air seems to be an inane or void Space, fit for Sounds.
The Terms of Acute, and Obtuse or Slack, is derived from Sounds. A Voice is the
Natural Sound of an Animal, and no Inanimate Thing has it: All Animals have it
not, as Fishes, and such other Creatures as do not draw Breath, the Instrument
for which is the Throat; and as the Tongue serves for Speaking and Tasting, so
the Throat for Breathing and Use of the Voice. The Breath or Air has, by Power
of the Soul, acting in those Parts, a Faculty to strike that which is there
called the Artery; and this Collision is, or acts the Voice. Every Noise there,
is not a Voice, not a Cough, but it must be with an Animal Intent, and may be
mixed also with Fancy: whence a Voice is a Sound of some Signification. Whilst
Men draw their Breath they cannot speak; for, that which holds the Breath, is
the Instrument of Speech. Thinks Fishes do neither breath, nor that they have
Throats.

Chap. 9. A Man has but a weak Sense of Smelling in comparison of some other
Creatures, and smells nothing without Offense or Pleasure. But Man has the
Sense of Feeling above all other Creatures, and such Men as have the Finest and
Quickest Touch, are counted and found to be the most Ingenious Persons. Birds
have quick Sense of Smelling, and it seems Fishes also do smell. It is peculiar
to Men, not to smell without Respiration, viz. when he draws Breath, not when
he breathes out or stays his Breath. Smell arises from dry Things, as the Taste
from Moisture.

Chap. 10. No Taste is made without Touching. When the Tongue is over-dry, or
over-moist, there cannot be any Taste. The Prime Species of Taste, are those of
Sweet, and Bitter, then the Fat Taste, then the Salt, then Sharp and Austere,
then the Acid.

Chap. 11. It is doubted, concerning Touching, what is the proper Instrument
for it? Whether the Flesh? or, in other Creatures, that which is in Place of
Flesh [as in Fishes.] But the Prime Sense of Touching, must be an Internal
Principle. Each Sense has its Objects by Contraries: as for the Sight, White
and Black: for the Hearing, is the Acute, or Slow Sound: the Taste has Sweet
and Bitter: but the Touch has many Contrarieties, as Hot and Cold, Dry and
Moist, Hard and Soft, and the like. It seems, Flesh is the Medium for Touching;
but such a Medium as also can judge; and not as Air is, for Sight or Sound.

Chap. 12. All Senses are capable of the Sensible Species in an Immaterial
Manner; and the Sensible Object acts upon the Sense, and one must be
Proportionate to the other: And if the Object of Sense be too small, it is not
perceived; and too great, it spoils the Sense: a vast Noise makes deaf, and the
Suns Splendour blinds, but a Proportionate Measure and Medium is requisite in
the Performances of Sense. Air that has Smell, has in it a Passive Manner,
and is thereby Sensible.

Lib. III. Cap. I. There are but two Simple Bodies Mediums of Sense, viz. Air
and Water. The Pupil of the Eye is Waterish, but Hearing is of the Air; the
Smell is of both: Fire is common to all, for nothing is Sensitive without Heat:
but Earth to none, except that of Touching. The Senses and their Objects concur
in Act, but their Essences are different.

Cap. 2. A Point in the Center is but one in Nature; but in Reason it begins
all the Lines that are drawn to the Circumference: So the Common Sense in the
Animal is but One, to which, as to the Center of Judgment, Lines are drawn from
the outward Instruments of Sense, for a final and true Determination.

Cap. 3. Cites Empedocles and Homer. They and other Ancients, thought that
Intelligere was as Corporeal a Quality as Sentire. Sense is a true Judge of its
proper Objects, and belongs to all Animals: but in Reasoning, Men are often
deceived, and none but Reasonable Creatures can use Reason. Phantasy is
different both from Reason and Sense, yet cannot be without Sense, no more can
Opinion: yet Phantasy and Opinion are different things. Phantasy does not
Please or Affright Men to any great Degree, but Opinion has a great Power over
us in that Kind. There is a Likeness betwixt Science, Prudence, and Opinion;
and yet they are all different Things. Men may order and alter their Fantasies
at their Pleasure, but cannot deal so with their Opinions [and less with their
Science.]

Cap. 4. As Intelligere is different from Sentire, the Phantasy and Opinion are
Borderers to both: but our Faculties of Discerning are Sense, Opinion,
Intellect, and Science; from all of which the Phantasy is different: for the
Senses, Intellect, and Science, rightly constituted and informed, are always
true, and so the same: but Fantasies are various and often false: nor can it
be Opinion, though that may be false: but that has a Belief always joined, or
a Confidence of the Verity of the Thing; and this no Beasts have, but many of
them have Phancies. Opinion is a Belief, and that persuades rationally, and
Beasts have not Reason, but bare Fancy. Phantasy is neither Sense nor Opinion,
nor a Conjunction of them, but is a Motion or Movement arising from the Senses,
and may be acted by them; and none can have it but those who have Sense: and
from the Fancy proceeds a large Sphere of doing and suffering in the World: it
depends not upon any one Sense or Act, but often arises from several Senses at
once. And concerning Motions and Bulks, and other things wherein the Senses may
be much deceived, and specially at great Distances: and Animals act much
according to Fancy, as proceeding from Sense, and being like it; Beasts
because they want Reason, and Men because their Reasons are under
Perturbations, as Diseases, Drunkenness, or other like Inconveniences.

Cap. 5. From that Part of the Soul by which Men understand and know, they are
said to act prudently: and whether this Part, which he calls the Suffering
Intellect, be capable of a State of Separation really or notionally, he means
here to consider: Says, This Intellect is impatible, but apt to receive the
Species presented to it: and as the Senses are to Sensitive Objects, so the
Intellect is to Intellectual Objects, and are both Powers, or in Potestate,
till the Objects are received, and then are Acts; because it is to receive and
understand all things, the Intellect it self must be without Tincture or
Mixture. That Intellect by which the Soul does argue and judge, cannot
reasonably be said to be mixed with the Body; for that then it must needs
partake with it, and be hot or cold accordingly; or might be used by the Soul
as its Instrument: the Body might be so used, but the Body is no Instrument at
all of the Soul. They say well, who call the Soul the Receptacle of the
Species; not actually, but potentially so. The Sense suffers more in the
Perception of its Objects, than the Intellect does in the like Case: For if the
Object of Sense be over-extream or vehement, it spoils the Sense or its present
Action; but so it is not with the Intellect: And this Difference grows from the
Mixture which Sense has with the Body, whereas the Intellect is separable from
the Body: and then when it has obtained Knowledge, ( that being Actu in the
Soul, which before was there but Potentially) the Intellect can understand it
self, and by it self; the Difference made betw^^^ Thing, and the Essence of
that Thing, is but notional; for ^^hing is thereby changed substantially. [
Plato placed Intellect in the Brain, Senses in the Heart, and the Vegetative
Power in the Liver. This was an Error of putting the Thing in one place, and
the Essence of it in another; whereas Aristotle makes the Difference amongst
those Faculties but Notional and not Real, as the different Places would make
them.] And as things that are Real may by Conception be abstracted from Matter,
and made Notional; so may the Intellect be separated. It is still a Doubt,
whether the Intellect be a Simple and Impassible Thing or not: seeing that
Intelligere est pati quiddam: for in Understanding there is something common
between the Intellect and that which it apprehends. It seems if the Intellect
can understand it self, it should always be so employed. We may observe
Aristotle continues still in his former Doubt concerning the Subsistence of a
Soul in a State of Separation from the Body: Either it has something common
with the Body, or it has not; or it uses and needs the Body, or not: and if it
neither use nor need the Body, nor have any Common with it, it self may subsist
in a State of Separation: not so, if it have Need or Use of the Body, or have
any thing common with it.

Cap. 6. Because that universally in Nature there is always something like the
Matter or Subject, and another thing which has the Force of Efficiency, and
works as the Cause of what is produced; like as the Case stands betwixt Art and
Matter (it seems) in the Soul there must be the like different Principles.
[Hence he devises a Difference in the Intellect or Soul it self, viz. that
there is an Intellectus Agens, and an Intellectus Patiens: of the Suffering
Intellect he spoke in the preceding Chapter.] Calls it here, the Means whereby
Acts are produced: But the Active Intellect is the Force Impulsive, why Acts
are produced, in nature of an Habitual Activity, as the Light causes or
produces Colors. This Active Intellect (he says) is separable from the Body,
is an Act Essential, not mixed, but pure and impatible: For the Efficient is
ever of more Value than the Patient, and the Active Principle than the
Material: Where Power toward an Act, and the Act it self are, in uno, in one
Subject or Being, there the Power must precede, as to Time: but if they be not
respected as in uno, the Power has no Precedence at all of the Act, not so
much as in Time, but is every way Inferior to the Act. This Act or Active
Intellect being separated from the Body, [all that can be said of it is] it is
that which it is: and that only [is] (...), Immortal anti Eternal: but because
this Intellect is impatible it cannot have Memory: For the Patible Intellect
(without which the Active Part could not understand) [Worldly Matters] perishes
in B^ We may observe (what is common in the World) Men confess God in their
Words, but in their Works they deny him. So Aristotle seems to do with the
Intellect, or the Soul. First, he divides it (according to the Old Rule) Divide
and Impera: then he appropriates all Ways and Means of Knowing or Knowledge, to
the Suffering Part of it: and this Part, together with the Senses, Affections,
Fantasies, and Memory, do all perish in Death. What is there then left to
subsist in a State of Separation after Death? Why, there is still left an
Active Intellect, Essential, Pure, Impatible, Immortal, and Eternal. If you
enquire what manner of Thing this is? He answers, I can tell you no more of it,
but it is that which it is, and nothing else: and this only which is so, is
Immortal and Eternal. This which has neither Sense, Affection, Phantasy,
Memory, nor Means of Understanding: this, for which he knows neither Name nor
Nature, that can neither remember nor account for any thing; that is impatible
and can suffer nothing, nor feel or desire any thing: this unintelligible Spark
of Activity, is the only thing which is in Man, capable of Separate Subsistence
after his Death, and is his only Immortal and Eternal Part or Principle.

Cap. 7. Simple Apprehensions of the Intellect are commonly true: but in
Compounding them, the Verity and Falsity is soon attendant: and if the Time of
Things be considered, it adds to the Composition, and to Compositions Falsehood
is commonly Incident. That which compounds and makes one Proposition out of
many Parts, is the Intellect. A Thing may be Individuum, potentially or
actually: that which is Actu individuum, may be considered in an Individual
Time: but, if actually divided, it has a double Consideration, and a like
Time, unless a Compositum be made of them. That which is Individuum, by Reason
of its Natural Form, without Respect to its Bulk, is understood in Individual
Time, and by an Individual Part of the Soul, [viz. the Intellect.] Things
Naturally Indivisible, as a Point, are known, as Privations are known, viz. by
their Contraries, ut malum, ex privatione boni. Now that which can so
understand, viz. one Contrary by another, must be one in it self, and have both
the Contraries potentially in it, [and must be the Suffering Intellect, for
that only has Knowledge of the other Contrary, and is potentially all that can
be known.] Apprehensions of the Intellect are not all true: yet where it
apprehends Simple Objects, it seldom fails, but often in Compounds; just as it
fares with the Senses in like Cases. We may observe Aristotle divides his
Individuum into Three Kinds, viz. the Bulkily so, the Formally so, or so by
their Indivisibility. Little we meet with here that concerns the Souls Being,
Nature, or Operations, and might have spared much of this Chapter.

Cap. 8. To be Perceiving by Sense, is a Simple Act, and is in Truth; but so to
perceive with pleasure or trouble, is like an Affirmation or Negation; and
induces to follow or fly from the Object: or to feel Pleasure or Pain, is only
to be drawn by Sensible Means toward Good or Evil, and to pursue or fly
accordingly. And like to such Sensible Objects, are the Phantoms of the
Rational Soul; and this sort of Soul never understands without assistance of
the Phantasmata. The Common Sense is but One, and that which terminates the
Five; and they by this Proportion and Unity, are made agreeable in One: So does
the Intellect deal with the Species amongst the Phantasmata, and thence makes
her Judgment what to seek and what to avoid: And though the Senses have not
perceived the things, yet if they rise and grow up in the Fantasy, or may be
collected from what appears to the Senses, the Intellect is moved and affected
accordingly. Men see a Flaming Brand, their Sense tells them this is Fire; then
they see it waved, and know (from Custom of that time) the Enemies attack the
City or Place; so calling for aid. So from Phancies or Conceits of the Mind, it
discerns, reasons, and consults, concerning Future Events, by considering of
what is (at present) before it; and thence takes resolution to follow it, avoid
it, delay, or prevent it. The Intellect has a Power also of considering Things
or Actions, abstracted from Matter in a Mathematical Manner; as that Art
considers Punctum, Linam, and Superficiem, abstractedly; and it is the Active
Intellect which so understands: but whether this Intellect understand any thing
of Spiritual Beings, when as it self is not separated from Bulk or Matter, or
cannot do so; he leaves to a future Consideration, but never touches that Point
again; but lets it rest, as in this place he left it. We may observe, this
Active Intellect is here left by Aristotle in a State of Connection with the
Body, that which he before styled Immortal and Eternal, is here left not
separated from the Body: and whether it can subsist in such a State of
Separation, or not, is undetermined.

Cap. 9. Knowledge depends upon the Senses, and begins there; and one who has
not his Senses, can neither learn, nor understand: And Fancy to the
Contemplation, is like Sensible Objects; only the Phantasmata are Immaterial.
The first or simple Conceptions of the Intellect, seem not from Fancy, and yet
if so they be not, they are however, not without the Fantasy: so as Fancy to
the Intellect, is as Sensible Objects to the Common Sense.

Cap. 10. The Soul of Animals has been defined chiefly from two
Qualifications; viz. Its Discerning Judgment, and its Power of Local Motion:
Its Judgment is guided and acted, by Sense and Reason, as has been showed. For
Motion, it is doubted whether acted by the whole Soul, or by a part, or parts
of it. If we pretend to divide the Soul into parts, we shall not only find in
it the Rational, the Wrathful, and the Lustful Faculties; into which some have
divided it; or into parts which have Reason, and those which have not (as
others have said.) But there may be other Differences found, infinitely; and
some which differ more than those abovenamed: as the Nutritive, general to all
Living Things; the Sensitive, which Men cannot say are participant of Reason,
nor yet that they are without it: thirdly, the Fantasy, which differs from
the two former essentially: Then is there the Appetite, different from all the
rest. Local Motion is always to some intent, and commonly, to obtain or to
avoid something liked or disliked. But he does not allow the Intellect to be
the next Cause of such Motion, nor the Senses, nor the Appetite: for Men may
and do resist these Powers, and do not move as these may command, or persuade.

Cap. II. He sets down the Intellect and the Appetite to be both the Causes of
Local Motion; then adds the Fantasy, as another Cause; for that many, in
their Motions, follow their Phancies more than tha^ their Reasons: and Beasts
have only Fancy, and Reason; and the Inclination of the Appetite, moves the
Intellect, but this can move little, without the Appetite: the Appetite of the
Intellect is called the Will, but the Sensual Appetite moves without Reason.
The Intellect moves well, but the Appetite and Fantasy move well, or ill, as
it happens; but always the thing desired is the first Motor, and that either is
really good, or seemingly so: yet seems often good to the Appetite, which does
not seem so to the Intellect. The Thing that seems good, moves without its own
Motion, but by being apprehended of the Intellect or Fantasy. In Motion there
are three Observables, 1. That which moves. 2. To what it moves. 3. That which
is moved.
The first, or that which moves, is twofold, The one Immovable, and that is
the Intended Good; the other is both the Moving and Motion, and that is the
Appetite, which moves in Inclination; and being acted, is the Motion or Act it
self. The third, viz. What is moved, is the Animal. The Proper Organ of Local
Motion, is a Corporeal Thing, and common both to Soul and Body. Shortly to
speak of it, it is like the Hinge of a Door, consisting of a Unequal or round
rising in one part, and a Concave or Hollow in the other part of it, well
fitted the one unto, or into the other; one of these rests, whilst the other
is moved; whence one is called the Beginning, and the other the End of the
Motion: and these two are different part, and yet they make but one Hinge or
Connection of Bones, in the Joints and Parts of the Body. All Motion in the Body
is made by Dilatation, which has an Impulsive Force; or by Contraction, which
compresses again, where such Motions are perpetually in the Body, circularly,
and sin fine, in some part or other. The Animal Motion thus grows from
Appetite, and there is no Appetite without Fantasy; and this is Rational or
Sensitive: the Sensitive Fancy is in Beasts, but the Deliberative is only in
Men. To consider if one shall do this or that, or not do, is a Point of Reason;
yet of many things that are in choice, one only can be done at once; whence it
seems Appetite is not allowed to have Opinion; it not being Appetite till
terminated: and therefore has not Power of Deliberation. But the Appetite and
the Will, are often at Contest, and sometimes one prevails, sometimes the
other, not unlike a Game at Tennis: Naturally the Nobler should be prevalent,
but there are three diversities; 1. A Contest between the Appetite and the
Will. 2. The Victory of the Will. 3. The prevailing Power of the Appetite.
Reason can prevail upon the Will, and excite it by Argument: viz. You desire
Health, therefore use a Physician, he advises, Let Blood, Cut off an Arm. This
Reason may obtain of the Will to consent unto, and to desire the Fact for ease
or preservation: though the suffering be certain and present, and the benefit
future and uncertain. We may observe Aristotle has here finished the Examen of
those four Faculties of the Soul. viz. The Vegetative, Sensitive, Intellective,
and Loco-motive, which he propounded, Lib. II. cap. 3.

Cap. 12. Nature makes nothing in vain, and whatsoever lives, has a Soul,
endued with a Nutritive Faculty. No Simple Body has Sense, and therefore is no
Animal; nor can any thing be so, which is not fit and apt to receive the
Species and Forms of Things, without the Things themselves. Also, No Body which
has an Intellectual Soul, can be without Sense: viz. No Generated or Mortal
Body; [he thought Heaven had a Soul, and that, and Celestials, might have
Intelligent Souls, without Sense] but Sense is indispensably necessary for all
Animals; especially those of Touching and Tasting: these are necessary to the
Being of the Creatures; the other three Senses, to their Well-being: for the
Animals can live without them, but not so well. Vehement, excessive Objects of
other Senses do only destroy the present Act, or at most but the Organ: But
such Objects of the Touch may kill, as vehement Heat, Cold, Hardship. Smell or
Taste can also kill: but that comes from their Touches; and such Power as an
Aspect may have to that Purpose, is by Power of what touches. Prove. 2.4.
Solomon directs, Seek Knowledge and Truth as Silver, and search for them as for
hid Treasures. And thus have we ransacked the Treasures of this Philosophical
Treatise and Storehouse, the best furnished toward the present Purpose of any
Magazine which by Art or Nature we know to have been collected: there has no
Part of it been left without our closest Scrutiny, by which we seem to have
found that the Philosopher had made a like Search to this very Purpose, in the
Times, Ages, and Writings of those who had lived before him: and by such Search
had found that Orpheus and Thales held Opinion, That the whole World was
Animatum, and that there was in it an Universal Soul: from whence the
particular Souls were sent out to animate and inform all that were in Capacity
to receive, both the Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational; upon whose future
Dissolution, the Form, Soul, Virtue, or Active Principle returned back to the
Universal Soul, or Spirit, or Power, and mixed therewithal, as the Drops of
Water returning, are received and incorporated into their Ocean or Element. And
if this were true, there must thence follow a Subsistence of Souls after
Dissolution of the inspirited Bodies, but not in their Individuations or
Particulars. Next came Pythagoras, and he taught an Individuation of Souls,
That every Animal had its particular Form, or Soul; and the Souls of Men and
Beasts were all of a Mode, and transmigrated sometimes into Men, and sometimes
into Beasts, according to their Deserts, or as it happened, or there was Need
in the World. This Opinion maintains and requires a Separate Subsistence of
Souls after Death of the Body, and that in every Particular, or in their Proper
Individuations; and necessarily supposes a Pre-existence of Souls: And there
must be a great Stock, Magazine, or Provision of Souls, whence all who have
need may abundantly be supplied. Likewise it supposes an Immortality in the
Souls, or else in length of time they might come to be clean spent and worn
out. Then came Democritus, and he and Leucippus were of another Mind: For they
thought that upon the Aptitude and Fitness of the Body for the Receipt of a
Soul, the Vital Heat required and obtained a Respiration, and therewithal the
Globular or Fiery Atoms which fly about in the Air are drawn in at each
Breathing: and they give continual Supply to such Atoms as were in the Body
before. So long therefore as Animals breath, and draw in such Atoms, they may
live, but no longer, for want of fresh Atoms or Fire for a continual Supply of
their Souls: This Opinion makes a Soul created by the Congregating of Globular
Atoms, not capable of a Separate Subsistence as a Soul, but is again dissolved
into its Atoms, upon Death of the Body. Then the Philosophers who more regarded
Rational and Knowing Faculties in the Soul than its Vital and Moving ones: such
as Empedocles and Plato: They thought the Soul to be a Compositum of the
Elements, amongst which Fire was most eminent and potent: that all being
wrought into an amicable Inclination, and mixed in a suitable Proportion; there
rose from that Mixture a Spiritual Flame which they called a Harmony of them
all, during whose Continuance the Animal lives and has Vigor in a like
Proportion; but in Death it ceases. And if this be not the Soul, which then
leaves the Body, what can Men think to be that Soul that then leaves it? But if
in truth this be the Soul, which in Death leaves the Body: then, first, it has
a Beginning, but together with the Body: and this is taken also away with Death
of the Body: for that there does not come to Humane Perceivance or Knowledge of
any other sort of Soul departing at Death, but this only Flame, by them called
Harmony. Other Opinions of Anaxagoras, Heraclitus, Almaeon, Diogenes, Hippo,
and Critias, are also cited before. And it seems, the Opinion generally current
was, That the Soul was a distinct Principle from the Body, and had a separate
Subsistence after Death: so strongly conceited, as some killed themselves, to
enjoy Soul-felicities the sooner. And this Ancient and General Conceit had so
much Power, even over Aristotle himself, as to induce him to discourse of the
Soul generally after the Mode of his Time, viz. as of a Self-subsisting
Principle, and to affirm, that a Part of it, the Prime and Contemplative Part
of it, the Intellect actu, is Self-subsisting, (...), Immortal and Eternal:
And, to prevent any Bodies demanding what this Soul is? he says, It is that
only which it is, and that only is Immortal and Eternal. But he gives no manner
of Confirmation from Reason, or offers any Dilucidation, or any farther
Discourse upon the Thing. But on the contrary, whenever he comes to argue
from Reason, upon this Point, of Subsistence of the Soul, in a State of
Separation from the Body: all his Arguments conclude against such Subsistence
of a Soul in that Separate State; for that it has nothing to do wherein the
Body joins not with it; nor can do any thing, not so much as move it self, but
by the Body; nor act any thing in the Body but by the Animal Spirits; cannot go
out of the Body, nor alter any thing in it; cannot command the Passions,
Affections or Appetite, but struggles with them after a Natural Manner, and
uses sometimes Natural Means, both outward and inward, to obtain Victory:
cannot punish a rebellious Opposer, nor make a Hair White or Black, or diminish
or increase the Stature: can finally do nothing, but in a Natural Way, and by
Natural Means, by the Organs bodily, and the Animal Spirits: and therefore in
all his Arguments and Collections from Particulars or Experience, the Soul
seems to be a Natural Agent, acting in, and by the Body, and employing chiefly
the Heart as Vital, and the Head as Sentient and Intellectual, and all other
Parts in Passions, Affections, Appetites and Motions. And yet, as this Life of
the Soul is, according to Nature, the same Strength of Reason may seem to
conclude for her a suitable Exit, such as may best agree with a Natural or
Material Spirit.

Des Caries, in his Philosophical Principles, Part 4. Sect. 197. mentions thus
much (shall we say) or thus little, of the Soul: he says, We do well enough
comprehend how by the Bulk, Figure, and Motion of one Body, diverse Motions and
Changes may be excited in another Body [and such as have great Power to affect
the same] by acting upon the Senses. But (says he) we cannot at all understand,
by what Mode these Bulk, Figure, and Motion do produce, or effectually Work
upon other Things that are of a Different Nature from themselves, viz. in those
Things which Men call Substantial Forms, and Real Qualities [or Qualifications]
which (many persuade themselves) are resident, and to be found in the Nature of
Bodies [or Things.] Nor how such Substantial Forms or Qualities have the Force
and Power to excite Local Motion in other Bodies. We know it (says he) to be
the Nature of our Souls, that different local Motions are enough for the
Stirring and Excitation of all our Senses; and that Bulk, Figure and Motion act
upon our Sensual Organs: and this Act or Motion passes from them to the Brain:
and in external Objects we do not perceive any thing but the various
Disposition of the Objects, which affect our Nerves, in various Modes or
Manners. All this seems to import no more concerning the Soul, but that Men
have a Substantial Form called by the Name of Soul. My Copy of Des Carts is in
8o. printed Land. 1664. and contains his Principles, and Diopticks, his
Meteors, and De Passionibus. We proceed to his De Methodo: There, Sect. 4. P.
21. he draws in somewhat abruptly, a farther Consideration concerning the Soul.
Page 22. He derives his Knowledge thereof from his own prime Invention of
Cogito: ergo sum, viz. Existo: And no wonder that he thence derives his
Knowledge of the Soul, since he dare pretend to derive from thence the
Knowledge also which he has of God: As if the Four Rivers of Paradise might
competently be expected to flow from the Narrow and Shallow Fountain of his
Cogitation. But intending to fix his Anchors upon this Axiom, as on a Rock. He
pretends to overthrow (by his bare Authority, his Ipse dixit) all the Ancient
Grounds of Humane Sense and Nature, by believing that he has no Body: (for the
feigning, without believing it, would be but a Dream, and unfit for his, or for
any Purpose.) Then by believing that there is no World, or Place for a Body to
be in: why cannot I as well feign or believe that I have not a Being, as that I
have not a Body, or that there is neither Place nor World? You cannot do it
(says he) so long as you are thinking: but if you slacken the Reins, and give
over Thinking, but for one Moment, you can have no Reason to believe your own
Existence, during the time of your Vacation from Thinking, how short or long
soever that Time may be. And hence (says he) I know my self to be a Substance
whose whole Nature and Essence consists in Thinking. Whence he seems to
collect, that this Thinking Substance has no need of Place, nor Dependence
upon any other Material Thing. Upon this I demand how he knows or can
demonstrate, that he could think at all without a Body and the Spirits and
Organs thereof: this he has not attempted to do, and I take it for an
Impossible upon him. And till that be done, I hold it fit and reasonable to
reject his utterly unproved Assertions, viz. That the Soul is plainly distinct
from the Body, more easy to be known than the Body is, and would be the same
that she is if she had not a Body. These, as they are barely asserted by him,
are as easily rejected and denied by me, with a Cujus Contrarium Verum. He
proceeds to declare by what Degrees he derives the Knowledge that God is, and
what he is, from the Fundamental Rock of his own Cogitation. My Design is not
Opposition to him or his pretended Alterations or Modes of Learning, but only
in Things concerning the Soul: and therefore what he delivers concerning God,
and his Cogitative Knowledge of that Tremendous Majesty, we will not offer to
examine; therefore we go over him, till he return again to the Soul, which he
does. Page 25. He pretends to tell us the true Reason why many persuade
themselves, that the Existence of God, and the Nature of Humane Souls, are
Things very difficult to be known. The Reason (says he) is this: those Men do
not separate their Minds from their Senses, nor raise them enough above
Corporeal Things, believing the Old Philosophical Maxim, viz. Nothing can come
into the Intellect, but by the Passages of the Senses; by which Passages,
neither God nor the Soul are ever like to get into the Intellect: whence it
need be no Wonder that they are no better or more easily understood. We grant
his Reason to be good, viz. That because God and Spirits come not ordinarily by
the Senses into the Intellect: therefore they are Things very difficult to be
apprehended and understood by Men: but that Men shall be able, by forsaking the
Assistance of their Senses, and giving themselves up to unguided and random
Cogitations, to obtain a more full or true Knowledge of God or Men's Souls, I
must take leave to deny. We are told how God first instructed the first People
to know, obey, and worship him: He conversed with our first Parents in the
Garden, and drove them thence by an Angel. He gave Commands for Worship and
Obedience, suitable to the Patterns imprinted upon Man's Reason at his Creation:
he reproved Cain sensibly, and so translated Enoch; directed Noah, saving him,
and drowning all others, in a visible, miraculous Manner: and so was Sodom
destroyed: so Abraham called and supported: Isaac and Jacob chosen and
supported: Joseph sent into Egypt: Moses preserved: and what was done at
Sinai, and the Journey out of Egypt, filled that Nation and all their
Borderers with Acknowledgments, Wonder, and Terrors: the Works and Wonders done
for Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, for Nebuchadnezzar, Belteshassar, and Daniel, for
Cyrus, Alexander, and the Foretellings of their Actions: Then the Angelical
Preparatives for our Lord's Coming, his Extraction, Miracles, Resurrection,
Ascension, Mission of his Spirit to the Eyes and Ears of many Nations resident
in Jerusalem, and Witnesses each to their own People. Then all the Apostles,
the Seventy Disciples, the Seven first Deacons and their Disciples, were
inspired to prophecy, speak with Inspired Tongues, cast out Devils, and to do
miraculous Cures: These Acts testifying a Superior and Supernatural Power to
the Senses and Perceivings of Mankind, suited to the Doctrines therewith
delivered, filled the Earth with the Knowledge of God as the Waters cover the
Sea. Now to the contrary, where shall Men find so much as one single Person
before Socrates, who attained to so true a Knowledge of God, as to determine,
That he was but One. All the roving Cogitations of Mankind never attained to so
much Truth concerning God, as this one most plain and single Assertion, except
in those Families, or People, where God by miraculous Means had made himself
perceptible to the Senses of Men, and by them made himself Way to Humane
Understanding and Intelligence: And from these things (all true and
irrefragable) it seems we may conclude, that to know God, or any Spirit, are
things of very great Difficulty: None knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal him. And God revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloe, by
the Word of the Lord, without such Revelations of God as are miraculous, or are
derived from that Original, it seems so extreme hard to find out God, as that
no Man by Force of Natural Wit, or Intellect, can have the Power to do it: and
if the Soul of Man be an Immaterial Spirit, it will fall under a like
Difficulty.

Page 30. He supposes ( Cogitando as it seems) that God had made a Complete
Body of a Man, without inspiring him with a Rational Soul, but placing about
his Heart an inkindled Heat, or inlucid Fire: This, like the Fuming of moist
Hay, or the heated Steems of working New Wines, would (says he) effect in the
Bodies of Men all that can now by Men be performed, except only their Power of
Cogitation; and that without the Cooperation of any Soul at all. And the like
(he supposes) may be done also in the Bodies of Beasts: but he found not in his
Cogitations, that this was enough to produce Reason in Man, but he dreamed that
the same was fully supplied to Man, when God had created for him a Rational
Soul, and had joined it to his Body, after a certain Manner, such as the Author
had invented for him. Page 34. The Animal Spirits are like the most subtle
Winds, or more like the purest Flames, which continually and plentifully ascend
from the Heart to the Brain, and by these are the Bodily Members moved. Page
36. Says, The Automata made by Man, must all fall short in two Points: 1.
Nothing can be made to answer properly to unforeknown Questions. 2. Nothing can
be made to act Motions beyond what were specially intended.
Not to answer accidental or all occasional Motions. He says, That Beasts
cannot speak, comes not from Defect of Organs in them: witness Magpies and
Parrots: (But we do not admit these Witnesses for Proofs.) But (says he) Men
who are Deaf and Dumb will find and learn Signs to express their Minds, a plain
Sign that Men have Reason, and Beasts have not: And we allow the Sign, and
grant the Thing. And he grants some Beasts excel others of their own Kind in
Sagacity, Apprehension and Docibility: and so some Kinds excel other Kinds in
such Qualities: This (say I) seems a clear Proof that Beasts are not Machines,
but have Perceptive Souls, and are Voluntary Agents, knowing both what they do,
and having an Intent and Design in the doing of it. Page 37. Says, The Humane
Soul cannot be Ex traduce, or grow out of Matter, but must needs be created.
Then says, That the Soul is a thing of great Concernment, and the Error, which
is great, next to the Denial of a God, is the Belief that the Souls of Men and
Beasts are of the same Nature; and consequently that nothing is to be hoped
for, or feared, after this Life, no more than for Flies or Pismires. It seems
the Man's Cogitations upon this Subject were extremely erroneous, and as much
deceived as his Senses ever were, or ordinarily can be, in any competent Sphere
of their Activity; as a Christian and Learned. It seems not to be imagined, but
that he had perused S. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinthians, and had in the
15th Chapter thereof found written, what that Apostle there delivers concerning
the Resurrection of the Dead: and (without the Mention, or least Hint, of a
Soul Separately Subsisting) he puts the whole Weight of Christian Religion upon
the Belief of a Resurrection of the Dead. The Apostle says, Such Resurrection
is as certain as it is, that Christ is risen: And if that be not true and
certain, nothing in Christian Religion is so: But our Preaching is vain, and
your Faith is also vain: Nay, and we are evinced (...) be false Witnesses, and
you are yet in your Sins, and can have no Benefit at all by Christ: and all who
are fallen asleep in Christ are perished: If Men's only Hope in Christ were in
this Life, they were most miserable: but the thing is not so, for Christ is
risen, as the first Fruits, and at the last Trumpet the Dead shall be raised.
And he tells us how and with what Bodies: and concludes, Abound in the Work of
the Lord, as knowing your Labor shall not be in vain: for most certainly this
Resurrection shall come. So, Matthew. 24. Ver. 30. and to 33. Mark 13.24. Luke
21.28. And when that comes, then do you (Christians, and of the Good) look up
and lift up your Heads to the Clouds, and above them. So, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. Those
who are asleep in Jesus will God bring with him: and the Dead in Christ shall
rise first, and then shall be ever with the Lord. Mat. 25.31. shows us the
Method and Proceeds of the Last Judgments, and the Rewards and Punishments then
to be expected, without Word or Mention of a Separate Self-subsisting Soul, or
any thing concerning the same. We need not take the Pains to try our Author's
Cogitations by these Texts of Scripture, because the Clearness and Wideness of
the Difference needs no Dilucidation, but are apparent at the first View.

We proceed to his Treatise De Passionibus, in the very Entrance to which, we
take for observable, That what God has put together, viz. the Soul and the
Body, whilst they are in Composito, our Author Des Carts endeavors to
separate and pull in sunder, taking all Sorts of Cogitation from the Body: and
because there is a Body of very great Motion and Heat, viz. Fire, therefore he
will take all Heat and Motion from the Soul and bestow it upon the Body; both
which Assertions or Propositions we do utterly reject, and do say, That the
Soul does not, nor cannot understand, nor consider without the Animal Spirits,
and Organs of the Body: nor has the Body Heat or Motion without the Soul, and
the Energy and Efficiency thereof; nor can have them without that Assistance
and Conjunction. Artic. 5. Says, Men have thought that Heat and Motion depended
upon the Soul: and yet he shows no Reason to think otherwise, and therefore Men
may think so still, and, it seems, will do it. Art. 6. He says, Death never
comes by any Defect in the Soul. I say, That is more than he knows, though it
should be an Immaterial Spirit: but if a Material one, then it certainly may
cause Death by its Deficiency. Art. 8. Says, There is a continual Heat about
our Hearts as long as we live, and this Fire is the Corporeal Principle of
Motion in the Body. And we say the same of the Animal Spirits, and Corporeal
Flame, which is the Material Spirit. Art. 9. is granted. Art. 10. Says, That
the Animal Spirits are most subtle Bodily Particles, extreme rare, and thin,
moving most swifty, and like the Flames of Fire, and never are at rest: these
rise in great plenty, from the Heart to the Brain, where they are in continual
Action: and they pervade the whole Body and all its Members, and move every
Part of it, as Occasion may require: And for this, we are at Agreement with
him. Art. 11. We do not well understand, nor so, as to say, he is right or
wrong in it. Art. 12. and 13. We observe in the 13. that he says, The Motions
of the Brain do excite diverse Senses in the Soul. This I deny: and he offers no
Proof of any thing that he says, but goes on, and says, That besides exciting
Senses in the Soul, these Spirits can, without the Soul, move the Muscles and
Members of the Body. He offers our Winking in Proof of this: but I deny his
Assertion, and judge his Proof very insufficient. Art. 16. Says, All our
Motions, which are common to us with Beasts, may be done by us without the
Soul, by a common Temperament of the Body, and the Members and Organs of it,
acted by the Animal Spirits, derived from the Heart, and directed in the Brain.
All this I grant: and do take these to be the main Ingredients for the Frame of
a Material Spirit. Art. 17. Says, He has now left nothing for the Soul, save
only Cogitare-Cogitations he divides into two Sorts, one of Actions, the other
of Passions or Affections: the Actions are, what the Soul wills to do; the
Passions are a sort of Perceptions or Apprehensions found in us, which the Soul
does not make, but receive from Representations of outward Things. All these
Cogitations of our Author we do reject; and say, That whilst the Man continues
to be so, the Soul and Body neither do, nor can act, or suffer Separately, but
always in Conjunction one with the other. Art. 18. and 19. He divides his
Cogitative Wills and Perceptions as he pleases. Art. 20. and 21. And so for his
Sorts of Imaginations; and so on to Art. 25. There he says, The Perceptions or
Passions of Joy, Fear, Anger, and the like, are referred only to the Soul,
either not considering, or not enough rembering that these Passions are as
fully visible in Beasts as in Men; and if they be referrable only to the Soul,
then such a Soul as Beasts have, may serve well enough for the Subsistence and
Acting of them. Art. 28. Says, No other Perceptions do so much agitate and
shake the Soul as these Passions do; but Beasts are as much transported by them
as Men. Art. 30. That the Soul is united to every Part of the Body, and to all
Parts of it. Conjunction is granted. And how this is done, in the Case of a
Material Soul, is plain and easy, but not how done in an entire Spiritual
Substance: for that is not yet declared by our Author; and we know not that it
is Intelligible. For he says truly, Such a Soul cannot be conceived by Parts,
nor what Extension it has, or consequently, where it is, and where it is not.
Art. 31. But yet he says, There is a Special Part in the Body, where the Soul
does exercise her Functions more perceivably than in all the rest of the Body.
Some have thought this Place to be the Heart, and others to be the Brain: but
our Author, upon accurate Examination, evidently knows it not to be in either
of these; but that it is in one Part of the Brain only, viz. the Middle or most
Inward Part of it. There, says he, is a very small Glandula or Kernel, seated
in the Middle of the Brain, hanging in the very Channel or Course of the Animal
Spirits, so as the smallest Motions of this Kernel can do much in altering the
Course of these Spirits; and the Mutations of the Soul, by the Courses of the
Spirits, do help much to change the Motions of this Kernel: Parturiunt Montes.
We see here what our Authors vast Cogitations concerning the Soul has brought
forth, viz. a Glandula admodum parva, a very small Kernel, to be the Chair of
State, or the Prime Seat of Judgment for his Imagined Soul. This seems to fall
far short of our Flammula Vitalis, which with the Blood pervades the whole
Body, and actuates the Heart, the Brain, and every other, and most minute Parts
of it, living with, and in the Animal, and not quite extinguished, but with our
latest and last Breath. He offers us not one Word concerning the Immaterial
Soul; of which, if he had any thing to say, though but out of his own
Cogitations, this were the proper Place, and this Time his Kue to produce them:
but his Silence gives consent to an Assertion, That he knows nothing of it,
neither Quod sit, Quid sit, Quando, nor Quomodo, to the Vbi only. He offers
this Guess under the Terms of his believed evident Knowledge. His Friend Dr.
More does profess to disbelieve him in it, and places the Seat of the Soul in
the Fourth Ventricle of the Brain, by diverse Arguments, which I (who believe
neither of them) will not spend Time to examine. Art. 34. Now let us imagine,
says he (as his Mode of Cogitation) that the Soul has her Seat principally in
this Kernel, and thence sends forth her Rays to all the rest of the Body, by
Activity of the Animal Spirits, [hence, whatsoever the Soul her self may be,
her Rays are not an Immaterial, but Material Spirits, and one would think her
Rays should he like her self.] Well, but says he, This Kernel, which is the
Principal Seat of the Soul, can move these Spirits, and can be moved by the
Soul, which is of such a Nature that she can receive into her self various
Impressions, viz. she may have so many Perceptions as there can be various
Motions made in this Kernel. Art. 35. The Animal having two Organs for Seeing
and Hearing, and two Hands, Arms, Legs, and Feet; the two Organs for Sense
receive each the Object, which goes double toward the Brain till they come to
this Kernel, and there they join in one, and the Kernel working immediately in
the Soul, shows it the Figure as now it is become one Object. All this seems to
show no more but the Products of his own Imagination, led by the Affection
which now he bears to this Kernel, as the Embrion of his own Brain and
Invention. Art. 36. If the Objects perceived show Danger, they excite the
Passion of Fear in the Soul. Upon this I demand where Fear is excited in the
Beasts which have not such Souls, and by what other Means then it is excited in
Men? Art. 38. By Motion of this Kernel, Fear is induced into the Soul, and
though the Legs may run away without Knowledge of the Soul, yet this violent
Motion of them makes another Motion in the Kernel, by whose Help the Soul is
made acquainted with its Body's running away. Behold the Natural and Remarkable
Effects of Dividing the Soul from the Body, and ascribing some Actions to the
one, and some to the other separately, and without Concurrence of the other.
Art. 40. The Principal Effect of Passion in Man is to incite and dispose him
for Self-preservation, either by Fight or Flight. [He might have omitted the
Words in Man, for the Case is the very same with Beasts.] Art. 44. The Soul, by
Help of his Kernel, can move the Tongue and Lips: So as this Kernel must be
like a Hand to the Soul, without which it can do nothing of moment. Art. 45.
The Soul cannot excite or remove Passion by its own Power or Will, but is put
to contest with it by Arguments and other Natural Helps. And we know that
oftentimes Passions prevail over the Powers of Reason, as if they grew but out
of the same Root both, viz. the Activity, Life and Motion of a Material Spirit.
Art. 47. In the Contest between Sense and Reason in Man: Here, says he, the
Kernel may be driven by the Soul on the one side, and then by the Animal
Spirits violently set on the other side; or some Spirits may present to the
Kernel, what they can offer for the Passions; others may do the like on behalf
of the Soul, and what it advises and desires; and whither the Kernel inclines,
that side prevails over the other. And if the Case be so, our Author puts
Mankind under the Government of an Unknown, Immaterial, but confessedly a very
Silly Soul, that must apply it self upon all Occasions to a pitiful small Lump
of Matter, a Kernel, without whose Kindness and Inclination it must always
become subject to the Slavery of Sensuality and Passion. Art. 48. One would
think, here, that he would say all Souls are not alike, but some are weaker,
and some stronger: he hints it plainly, yet without positive Assertion. And if
Souls be Immaterial Spirits, then, An recipient magis, and minus, who knows.
Art. 50. Every Motion of the Kernel seems naturally to be knit to every one of
our Thoughts from the beginning of our Lives; and Words which (not naturally,
but only by Institution are significant) can excite Motions in the Kernel.
Says, It is observable in Beasts, that though they want Reason, and perhaps all
Cogitation, yet they have all the Motions of their Animal Spirits, and their
Kernels, whose Motions excite Passions in them as well as ours in us, tending
to the same End of preventing Harms to them. But these he will not call
Affections in the Beasts, but Motions of the Nerves and Muscles; which produce
the same Effects in Beasts, that those which he calls Affections in Men, use to
do in them. Whence, it seems clear, he grants the same Nature in Men's Passions
and those of Beasts, before needlessly and bootlessly denied by him. His Title
to this Article pretends to show how Men's Souls may get the Mastery of their
Passions: but all that he directs upon that Point is, That well-taught Spaniels
are learned to curb their Passions, and to sit, though they have a mind to run.
You see (says he) the Thing is feasible, even by Beasts, and therefore Men may
do it more easily and effectually. But I doubt of that. 1. Whether Humane Power
can do it? 2. Whether Beasts may not as easily and fully be brought to it as
Men?
Art. 51. It is plain, (says he) that the next Cause of Passions in the Soul,
is no other but the Motion by which the Spirits do stir this Kernel, which is
in the Middle of the Brain. He sets down his own Cogitation, or Fiction, as if
the Thing were to pass for a Granted Truth, That this Immaterial Spirit must
rule or be ruled by this Diminutive Kernel. Art. 122. He says, When that Fire
which is in the Heart becomes extinguished, we die beyond Remedy. Art. 137.
Love and Hatred, Joy and Sorrow, Lust, Fear, etc. are all Naturally referred to
the Body, and belong not to the Soul, but as it is joined to the Body. Art.
138. The Beasts direct their Lives no otherwise than by such Corporal Motions
as Men usually do follow, and would draw the Soul along with them, and have her
Consent to such Actions. Art. 139. He says, We ought also to consider these
Passions as they belong to the Soul. But he has before denied, they do
naturally belong to the Soul: And here he does not show that they do depend
upon it. And these are all the Particulars we find in this late Philosopher
concerning the Soul.

And we observe upon them, That all the Particulars which he applies and refers
to the Soul of Man, are applicable to, and agreeable with the Rational Faculty
of his Material Soul. And all those Things, Actions or Passions, which he
applies and refers only to the Body of Man, are applicable to, and agreeable
with the Sensual Faculty of the Material Soul and Spirit of Man; in both which
Faculties, and in the Vegetative, the Body is equally concerned, and so is the
whole Soul and all its Faculties, in all things that pertain or happen to the
Body: and there is no Separation made, or to be made, betwixt the Soul and Body
of Man during his Natural Life: And all, which our Author says of the same, is
feigned out of his own Heart, or is a Fiction of his own Cogitation, utterly to
be rejected, as before has been said. And we do not find that he has said any
thing Material, for Proof of an Immaterial Soul of Man, or that deserves or
requires a more particular Reply, or any farther Consideration.

Hieronimus Zanchius was a Reformed Divine of Strasbourgh, in the later End of
our K. H. 8. and writes upon the Creation, and Gods Works then made: his Books
are in Quarto, Printed Newstadt, in Anno 1602. His Design led him to treat of
Animals, and Souls. And Lib. 7. cap. 2. Sect. 12. he says the Life of Animals
is in their Blood; as Moses says also; and that all Men agree, it subsists by
Heat and Moisture. Sect. 15. page 595. Says, God's Creation ceased not with the
First Week, but he still daily creates Humane Souls, and forms the Bodies of
Animals. Page 598. Every Animal has an Organical Body, and a Soul with
Vegetative, Motive, and Sentient Faculties. Page 599. The Quadrupedes are the
next Sort to Mankind, both for the Parts of their Bodies, and the Strength and
Genius of their Minds or Souls, endowed with Senses both outward and inward, as
Men are, and use the like Actions both as to Life, Sense, and Motion.

Pars 3. Lib. 1. Page 603. He says, The Breath which God breathed into Adam was
a created, but incorporeal Thing; but the Food then granted to Men and Beasts
was alike. And he cites Genesis 7.15. The Beasts went into the Ark, and all Flesh
wherein was the Breath of Life. Yet gives no Answer to it; nor shows how this
Breath, and that breathed into Man, did differ. Yet he would have us learn
hence, Page 617. That our Souls are not from our Parents, per traducem, but
only from God, who breathed into Adam's Nostrils; id est, says he, God made him
respire by his Nostrils; and that is not opposed. Page 618. Again, This Breath
was created, not out of God, but out of some other Invisible Thing: and he then
created and gave it, viz. gave the Soul in that Visible Sign. Shows Plato made
a Difference between (...), Nostram, and (...), but gives no Aswer to it. Says,
Plato, Origin, and many Hebrews, held Opinion, the Adam's Soul and all other
Souls did, and do pre-exist, and are thence called down as new Bodies require,
viz. from Superior Regions: But this (he says) is both false and absurd. And,
to prove this by Reason (he says) Page 619. cites Aristotle, That the Soul is
Actus Corporis Organici, and therefore the Soul cannot be before the Body. To
this we easily assent, and add, That when the Body dies, this Actus Corporis
must cease, for the same Reason. He argues also, That the Soul is a Spiritual
Substance; and it was not needful or proper to put that up at the Nostrils: and
that seems true; but makes against his former Assertions. Still there rises a
new Difficulty, viz. Whether this Soul, if then created, were created first
within the Body, or first without the Body, and then was breathed or blown in?
The Text favors the later, but the Author favors the former, to the Intent
that Men may not think Souls are still, first created, and then infused; but
think rather (as he does) that Souls are created in their Bodies: and to this
end he approves Lombard's Invention of Creando infunditur. Cites Essay 2.22.
Cease ye from Man, Cujus Anima in Naribus ejus est; which we read, whose Breath
is in his Nostrils. Page 620 The Soul of Man came to him from without, although
created within him. He will have from without to signify, of another Nature,
or kind of Thing, and not proceeding from the Body, as the Beasts do. But this
he only says, without offer of Proof for it. Says, The whole Soul comes
together, viz. Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational; whence it must come into
the Body at the first Original of Life: and there seems no doubt but there is a
Vegetative Power and Principle in the Seed, and likely for the Sensual, and
there appears no Reason against a like Course in the Rational: these three
being all Faculties of the same Soul, from which none of them are separable.
Page 621. The Word signifying Spiraculum Vitarum, is used as well concerning
Beasts as Men. Page 624. Souls of Brutes are sometimes called Spirits in
Scripture, but never said to return to God. Page 625. As God breathed into
Adams Body the Breath of Life, who thereupon rose from the Earth where he lay,
so shall his Breath effect Life in Bodies which shall rise at Sound of the Last
Trumpet. And as we read, Ezekiel. 37. Page 667. Cites Genesis 1.28. God blessed the
Man and Woman, and said, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth: as
Ver. 22. he had said to other Creatures. This seems to import, Men do generate
their Like as the Beasts do; and the Creation of Souls for every fruitful
Coition, by Adultery, Incest, or Buggery, is but a Fiction, and not a likely or
reasonable Contrivance.

Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Page 683. Man's Life consists in Heat and Moisture, not simply,
but in Temperament with Cold and Dry, and from the Four Elements The Four
Complexions of Phlegm, Sanguine, Choleric, and Melancholy, Health and
Sickness, Life and Death consist in a good and fit Temperature of these Humors;
and the Soul uses these as Instruments for Conservation of the Compositum, the
General Parts are Bones with their Nerves, knitting them together, and the
Flesh with its Veins, through which the Blood returns; and Arteries, through
which the Vital or Animal Spirits have their Courses: and God has given to Men
a more delicate Flesh, and more Nice and tender Skin than to Beast. Page 685.
And the Temperament and Complexion of their Bodies are much finer. Page 686.
There are Three Principal Faculties of the Soul, viz. Vegetation, Sense, and
Motion. 3. Intellect. The Two later, viz. Sense and Intellect, are chiefly
placed and acted in the Head; and thence grow the Nerves, passing to every Bone
and Member. Page 687. All Anatomists confess, That in an Humane Body there are
Innumerable Parts and Things which Men cannot find out, and which are known
only to God. Page 689. The Common or Internal Sense cannot act without the
Animal Spirits; and the Soul uses these Spirits, both for Understanding, and
for its other Actions which are to be performed in the Head: and the Nerves
which serve both for Sense and Motion through the whole Body, have their
Original from the Brain, and are fixed in it, or to it: There the Soul reigns
most effectually; and who can express the various Instruments which God has
there provided for her Use. Page 693. The Heart is the Original and Prime
Instrument of Vegetation and Life, which it communicates to the whole Body, by
its Intense Heat, Motion, and Rarefaction of the Blood; and specially it
communicates to the Head the Animal Spirits, whereby Motion, Sense and
Cogitation are received and acted. Thirdly, The Heart is the Seat, Fountain,
and Cause of all the Affections; and there are two Principal Motions in it,
viz. that of the Systole and Diastole, or of the Pulse, effecting and Declaring
Life: the other Motion is of the Affections, following the Conceptions or
Intellect, either with extraordinary Dilatation in the whole Body, as in
Accidents pleasing and joyous, or with a like Compression or Contraction in
Case of Accidents sorrowful or dspleasing. Whence, as Motion, Sense and
Intellect have their Original and Activity from, and in the Brain and Head. So
Life and all the Affections are derived and acted from, and in the Heart. And
betwixt the Heart and Head there is a wonderful Correspondence and Agreement,
to the Good and Benefit of the whole Compositum. From the Heart, Vital Spirits
ascend to the Brain, where they become Animal Spirits; and by these,
Intelligence, Cogitations and Notices of Things arise in the Mind, from whence
again, such Cogitations and Notices strike upon the whole Heart, exciting and
stirring there the Affections, and other Vegetative and Natural Motions, which
are either pleasing or displeasing, tending to or toward Joy or Sorrow; the
one a great Help to, and Supporter of Health and Life: and the other great
Hinderance to, or a Destroyer of them both. Page 694. The Liver is the Fountain
of all the Veins, and the Arteries, through which the Vital Spirits do pass,
are always and in all Places conjoined with the Veins; and upon them depend the
Life and Motion of the Animal; and the Soul uses the Blood and Spirits to such
Purposes: The Liver communicates Blood to the Heart, and that again Vital
Spirits to the, Liver. Page 195. And as Blood is never in the Veins without
some Spirits, so neither do the Spirits flow through the Arteries without some
thin Rivage of Blood with them; and as the Veins have need of the Arteries to
stir the Blood in them; so the Arteries of the Veins for Nourishment of the
Spirits. Page 696. Spirits of the Body are Vital or Animal; and the Spirit is a
Vapor drawn by Heat and Concoction of the Heart out of the purest Parts of the
Blood, and then in kindled [or inflamed] first for Conserving of Life, and next
for being a Principle of Motion in the Animal, extending to every Member and
Part of it, stirring them up and inabling them to the Performance of those
Duties for which they were by God intended and ordained. The Vital Spirit is
Flammula quaedam, bred in the Heart out of the purest Blood, and thence by
Vital Heat communicated and conveyed to the rest of the Members, imparting
Power and Activity to them by their Natural Heat and Motion, and stirring them
to act and perform those Duties for which by Nature and Creation they were,
ordained and made. The Organs for conveying this Vital Spirit into all Parts
and Members of the Body, are the Arteries. The Animal does no otherwise differ
from the Vital Spirit, save that in being transferred to the Brain, that has
Power to rarify and make it more Lucid and Subtle, and then, being from thence
infused into the Nerves, it incites and enables them to exercise their
Faculties, Powers and appointed Offices of Sensation and Motion: And by both
these sorts of Spirits, the Principal Actions of Animals, and even of Humane
Bodies are effected: Namely, Life is preserved; and thence proceed Nutrition,
Generation, Sense, Motion, Cogitations, and Affections. Hence it has come to
Pass, that some have thought these Spirits to be the very Soul it self, or at
least the immediate Instruments to it, by which the Body both lives and moves.
Hoc postremum (says our Author) verum est: To which we do not assent, but
rather hold with the former.

Lib. 2. Cap. 2. Page 697. Treats Ex Professo de Anima, and cites out of Tully,
That Dicaearchus [a Peripatetick Philosopher, and Scholar to Aristotle] held
there was no more Soul in Man than in Beasts. This, (says our Author) though it
should be the Opinion of all Philosophers, we ought not to follow or believe
them in it, because the Scriptures (says he) are against it. Page 69^. He takes
it, pro confesso, as agreed on all hands, that Souls of Beasts do die with
their Bodies, without a Principle of separately Subsisting, after Death of the
Body: but there are many Disputes concerning Humane Souls. 1. What a Humane
Soul is. 2 Concerning its Nature [and Operations.] 3 Concerning its Original,
Whether by continual New Creations, or that it grow Ex traduce, from
Generation, [or be pre-existent]
And, if newly created, then whether first created and then infused, or be
created within the Body: Whether the Vegetative, the Sensitive, and the
Rational be all one same Soul in Man; or that they be so distinct, as that the
two first may die, and the third only be that which can separately subsist: but
the Question of the Souls Nature, est per Difficilis, and per Obscura.
Tertullian, S. Austin, and Greg. Nyssen, have written of it largely; and
Pomponacius, and Simon Portius, two famous Italian Philosophers, have since
taught, That Aristotle held the Soul to be Mortal, and that its Immortality
cannot be proved by any sufficient Reasons. But Men must be left to the
Evidence of Faith for that Point: and many there are who think there is not
enough Evidence to be a sufficient Ground for that Faith. Page 699. He
therefore proposes his first Enquiry, viz. What is the Nature and Essence of
the Soul? Upon this Query he propounds the Definitions made of the Soul, by
three Ancient Philosophers and very learned Men, viz. Plato, Aristotle, and
Galen (the great Latin Physician:] but none of them come up to this Point, and
therefore he rejects them all, especially that of Galen, who says, The Soul is
but a Temperature, and suitable Proportion of the Parts and Humors, whereby the
Animal has Life, and the Use of all its Faculties. And this Opinion he took
from his Master Hyppocrates, and endeavors to confirm it with diverse Reasons:
and of this Opinion was then Dynarchus the Philosopher, and Simmias, and diverse
others. The Author brings three Arguments against this Opinion, but they are
rather Sophistical than Solid. He rejects also those of Plato and Aristotle.
But in lieu of them all, he gives us one of his own. Page 705. viz. A Humane
Soul is a truly Spiritual Substance, Incorporeal and Immaterial: Upon this last
Word he lays a great Stress: For (says he) the Souls of Beasts are Essential
Forms, but drawn out of Matter, from which they cannot be separated: And there
are those who think the Soul, which is the Form to our Body, to be neither
Accident, nor Body, and that yet it is Material, so as to depend upon Matter,
from which it cannot be separated, and therefore must extinguish with Death of
the Body. Upon this therefore the whole Stress of the Question lies, concerning
the Mortality or Immortality of the Soul. Whence (says he) this our Definition
ought to be well and fully proved. Says, Humane Souls have the same Essence
with Angelical Spirits; their only Difference being, that the one is Form to a
Humane Body, and the other not.

His Proofs he begins from Texts of Scripture, but we yet in the Bounds of
Nature and Reason, will pass them over, Animo revertendi, and consider here his
Arguments from Reason only, to which he comes. Page 709.

1. He says, The Soul governs the Body, and resists the Passions: Complexion
excites and begets Passions. Here is the Soul contending against Passions, and
Natural Inclinations supporting them: Ergo, here is a Substantial Soul. In
Answer, I say, The Soul has no greater Share in the Resisting, than in the
Exciting of Passions. But that the Soul is the living and moving Principle, in
every Part and Member of the Body, understanding and perceiving, and remembering
in the Head, affecting and passionate in the Heart, feeling and moving in the
whole Body, and in every member of it. The Souls Regard and Care is for the
whole Compositum, to choose the beneficial, and to avoid the hurtful Things.
Hence Intellect and Passion are not one of them of the Soul, and the other not
the Soul, but both are Faculties of the same Soul. The Heart desires one thing,
as vitally Good, or abhors it as Harmful. The Intellect, from common Sense and
Understanding, often opposes such Desires, or Fears, from Considerations more
percipient and duly weighed; and the Contest rises most often from the Nearness
or Distance of what they contend about, viz. Present or Future: one Faculty
affixing chiefly upon the Enjoyment, and the other contemplating the
Consequence withal. Now, if the Soul did govern the Body, as our Author faith
it does, the Contest could not be maintained against it by the Passions, which
should naturally be ordered to yield an easy Submission to it: whereas it is
too evident, that the Passions do often overpower and overrule the Intellect:
And (as Aristotle has told us) their Contest is more like a Game at Tennis
than a Government: sometimes one of them prevails and sometimes the other. So
they look not like a Governor, and a Governed, but rather like Equal
Competitors, sharing in the Command and Government; and this, sine fine. The
Contest has no Determination but by Dissolution of the Compositum; and this
proves the Thing to be of Nature, and so does the Universality of it; there
being not a Humane Soul rightly constituted, wherein this Contest is not fully
evident. Our Author has well foreseen, that his Definition of the Souls being
a true Spiritual, Incorporeal Substance, would be easily granted: But his Word
Immaterial was that which would make the Boggle: and therefore he promised
diligently to prove the same: but in this Argument we meet not with any Mention
of that Quality, and therefore conclude, we are not at all pressed by it. Page
710. --

He propounds Three Rules upon Material Forms. 1. That they act not but when
they are Forms of some Body. 2. They are that Principle by which the Compositum
is acted; and do not work to Effect, but by the Compositum. 3. They are limited
in their Extent, not reaching farther than the Subject in which they are.
And to these we do also agree. He argues, the Humane Soul is not only the
Cause that the Man does understand, but such Soul does understand by her self.
For this he cites Arist. De Anima. Lib. 3. Cap. 4. I have searched that
Chapter, but do not find it there, and however do not grant or believe the
Thing to be true.

2. He argues, The Senses take Harm by an over-vehement Force of their Objects;
but the Intellect does not so. This he has from Aristotle. Hence he concludes
the Soul to be Immaterial, which we pass for an apparent non sequitur.

3. He argues, The less our minds are employed in External Things, the more apt
and ready they are to work. This I deny, and say, the more exercised and
practiced, the more apt and ready they are for those Things, be they Worldly or
Contemplative.

4. He argues, The Soul understands and knows it self, its Powers and Actions,
and that it is a Substance differing from the Body. All this I deny.

5. Argues, The Intellect can apprehend all Finite Things, but if it were
Material it could not discern one Matter from another, nor know their
Differences. This I say the Beasts do easily perform.

6. Argues, The Intellect perceives Abstracted Things, and Immaterial; as God,
Angels, Universals, and Mathematical Notions, therefore it is Immaterial. We
answer, Universals and Notions are derived from Particulars, and Materials; and
what Men know of God and Angels, comes from Revelation and Sense; of all which,
a Material Spirit acting in and with fit Organs, is enough capable.

7. Argues, Quicquid recipitur, fit ad Modum recipientis: but the Intellect
turns all into Universals, and Immaterial Notions. This I deny: can do it, I
grant. It is capable both of Particulars and Universals: seems alike capable;
not one more Natural* than the other: whence the Modus recipiendi is first of
the Particular, by observing and Correction of which, Rules are framed and
Notions raised, by ordinary Proceeding in a Rational Intellect, not needing, or
[to me] proving an Immateriality of the Soul.

8. Argues, The Outward Senses convey the Species of their Objects to the
common Sense; that transmits them to the Fantasy; thence there must be Organs
to convey them to the Intellect; but once come thither, the Intellect orders
them, and judges of them without Help of any Organs at all. This, if he can
maintain by good Proof, Erit Apollo, and shall have the Garland; but till that
be done, we are where we began.

9. Page 713. His Ninth Argument seems to be a Ramble. Page 716. His Tenth
Argument is taken, ex non Concessis.

11. Argues, God is the Souls Chief Good: Therefore the must necessarily have
Means to attain to him: but that she cannot do, whilst she is in the Body,
obstructed by Sensual Powers, therefore she must have a Subsistence out of the
Body, in which she may arrive to that Enjoyment I answer; this beggs the
Question, or presumes the Case determined, that there is such a She as our
Author promised to prove, and now brings her to stand upon a bare Supposal,
with as little Firmness as when he began his Argument. The Subsistence in
Separation is continued to be denied, and, till that evinced to be Erroneous,
this Argument is very Vanity.

12. Argues, That which does really move and act it self, must be Immaterial.
But Men's Souls do so, and have a free Will and Choice, to do, or not to do. I
demand if these Things be not in Beasts? He says the Elements do not move
because they are Material. I demand how he disposes of the Fire, which the
World takes to be always in Motion and that Naturally. He says the Beasts can
make no Resistance to their Appetites, but must needs follow them: yet every
day affords us Proofs that Beasts can, and do resist their Appetites: A
Setting-dog has a great Desire to run, and his Mouth will work, and his Chaps
water, and yet he contains himself, and sits still, in sight of his Game, for a
long time together.

13. Argues, Page 717. Men have Power to choose Loss of their Blood and Lives;
and that shows their Souls Superior, and not dependent upon their Bodies. And
we agree the Soul to be all that, and that the Intellect has a swasive Power
over other Faculties, and sometimes prevails with them to suffer Pains, and
Present Death, in expectation of believed future Rewards: and this by a Power
of Discretion in the Intellect, without Dependence upon the body or
Immateriality in the Soul. Page 718. Says, If the Soul were Material, it would
languish with the Body, suffer in its Sickness, feel its infirmities, and
weaken as the Body grows weak. And all this we say it does, Sequitur
Temperamentum Corporis, and that is a Proof of its Materiality. He says, Men's
Minds in Sickness, and at Death, are more lively sensible of their Sins than in
Health [that grows from Tear of approaching Danger of being taken away in a
State of Sin, for which Punishment is undoubtedly to be awarded at the
Resurrection, without Means or Hopes of any Alteration in the Space
intermediate betwixt Death and that; and not from a Quickness of Mind more
than, or above ordinary; but from the nearness and greatness of the Concern.]
He says, When Men forsake Worldly Business, they are made more apt for
Contemplation: And it is agreed that there are outward Helps, as Abstinence and
Retiredness, which may advance the Intellective Faculty of the Soul, and
strengthen it against the Passionate and Sensual Faculties; and so it may be
assisted by Purging, Bleeding, or other Physic; so by good Air, good Company,
and even by good News; which all are Tokens of the Souls Participation with the
Body, and induce to apprehend its Material Subsistence with, and in the Body.
Our Author concludes, he has enough proved the Souls Immateriality: but we
still deny that he has enough done it; and how much he has done toward it,
shall be left to common Judgment. Page 719. He recites his Objections against
his Tenet.

1. Men observe Children, born like their Parents, not only in their Bodies,
but their Minds: and this seems to grow, ex traduce, from the Seed; and
therefore the Soul grows from that Root as well as the Body. To this he
answers, It is not always so, but often otherwise, and quite contrary: and that
it is so, comes from the Temperament and Humors of the Body, not from the Soul
[unless that be also of Material Parts.] Or if (says he) the Soul have Part in
that Substance, it comes from Bodily Tinctures, with which the Soul is closely
united. [perhaps he might have said inseparably.]

2. Object. Tertullian says the Soul is Material, and propagated from the
Parents. He answers, If Tertullian did think so, he was deceived, as he was
also in some other Things.

3. Object. If the Soul be Self-subsistent, it must have two Natures; one as
Forma informans, of the Body, a chief Part of the Compositum Man: another
Nature, viz. Angelical, subsisting and acting as like Spirits do: whereas the
Soul taken to be Forma Humana, cannot subsist in that Nature out of the
Compositum: her other, yet unproved Nature, will not be granted, nor assented
to. He answers: Grants, Man is not a Body, nor a Soul, but, a Compositum of
both; and that neither Part is the Man; and yet when the Body is dead, and the
Soul subsisting, this may in some respect be counted for the Man; as being his
Principal Part, and all that now remains of him. But if we deny that to remain
of him, his Answer is of no Force.

Page 721. The Soul has three Faculties or Powers, Vegetative, Sensitive, and
Intellective; sometimes called Parts of the Soul, Essential or Substantial: by
others Potential Parts: To these, others have added the Powers Loco-motive, and
Appetative. Thinks the Vegetative comprehends the Appetative; and the Sense^ of
the Local Motion: these two may be admitted as Powers, but not as Essential
Parts: whence he makes five Powers in the Soul, and but three Parts. Page 724.
The Vegetative has three Prime Faculties, viz. Nutrition, Augmentation, and
Generation. Page 725. Says, Generation or the Power of it, is Vere Divinum; so
as we are thereby Quodam Modo Creators of other Men.

Page 728. The Sensitive Part of the Soul is substantial, and therefore not
annexed to Matter, or to the Body, and so for the Vegetative, and they are
Self-subsistent as well as the Intellective Part, and Immaterial and Immortal.
We may perceive by this, the Author is resolved not to stick at Straws, but
rather to swallow Camels. Page 729. Prime Sensitive Faculties are the Powers of
Perception and Motion. The Senses (he says) are External or Internal: the
External are Five, the Internal are Three, viz. the Common Sense, the Phantasy,
and the Memory, whose Organs are placed in the Seat of the Soul, known to us
only by Reason, or Collection. Page 733. These apprehend and judge of Objects
conveyed to them by the outward Organs, but can perceive nothing that has
first been brought to them from the outward Senses. In the Internal is also the
Vis Motrix; thence the Appetites and Passions are excited [although such
Emotions are principally felt about the Heart, and therefore have been thought
to grow from thence, and to reside there.] We agree to our Author in this
Assertion. Page 736. As the Middle Part of the Brain is more or less firm, or
better or worse tempered, in tanto, Men have more or less Ingenuity and
Apprehension; and the like for other Animals. So as this Power of Phantasy
depends upon the Organs, to which it is affixed, as the other Sensitive and
Vegetative Powers also are, although they are Parts of a Humane Soul, they must
not be said to depend upon the Body or its Organs: We say this last Caution is
utterly Vain, and to no Effect or Purpose. The Phantasy has Three Offices, to
receive Perceptions from the Common Sense and to conserve them. 2. To collect
the Dispersed Idea's or Imaginations. 3. To judge of them and discourse upon
them.
And we see, (says he) Dogs and other Animals greatly moved in their Sleeps, by
Dreams arising from such Causes. Page 737. That which Reason does in the Mind,
that does the Phantasy in the Sensitive Faculty, and it comes very near to
Intellect it self, and supplies to it the Matters to be thought upon and
considered of. And as the Phantasy is by its Organ inclined to Vice or Virtue;
so is the Mind [or Soul] easily drawn to give her consent accordingly. The
Tincture or Seasoning of the Phantasy or Imagination is of great Force and
Power: for from thence rise all our Affections, Love, Joy, Wrath, Fear, Grief,
Envy, Jealousy, and the like. Page 737. Memory is the third Internal Sense.
This he divides into Sensitive and Intellective, and says, That (living the
Man) these are so joined or knit together, that they cannot well be discerned
or distinguished, one of them from the other, except Men will distinguish them
from their different Objects: as that Memory Intellective deals in Vniversals;
but the Sensitive in Particulars; or if it do hit upon Vniversals, it is but by
Accident: and by this Means a Separated Soul must always retain its
Intellective Memory. To this I say, this Distinction or Dividing of Memory
seems a Device of our Author's own Coining, on purpose to serve the State of
his Separated Souls. Arist. De Anima, Lib. 3. Cap. 6. where he sets the Soul
highest; Says, That when separate from the Body, it cannot have Memory: for if
it so had, there must be a Patibility in it. And we know Memory is but an
Impress of the Species received, and returned thence to the Intellect,
importing a Patibility and an Organical Operation; and the first Chapter of
Aristotle's Book agrees fully therewithal: and the Author cites no Authority
agreeing with him in this Dicothomy or Division of the Memory; and therefore we
do by no means admit of the same, but take the Memory for an entire Faculty,
which must all stand or fall together; and that the Memory is not capable of
Universals except by Accident, we deny. He says, When the Phantasy delivers
over to Memory, Conceptions of Things, as de Futuro, the Memory retains them
not as Future Things, but as bare Conceptions de Futuro: And this we agree; or
else it cannot not be a true Record: Whence (says he) the Senses apprehend only
Things Present, the Memory records only Things Past; but the Phantasy considers
Things Present, Past, and to Come; and makes Provision accordingly, and
according to the Temper of the Organ: for Heat and Cold, Dryness and Moisture
the Memory is strong and apt, or weak and insufficient: and so it is, Page 738.
with all the Senses both Internal and External: their Excellency depends upon
the good Temperature of the Body and its Organs. He says, Beasts have Memory,
but not Remissness, a Power to recover and recall things obliterated in their
Memories by help of other Circumstances of Time, Place, or Persons, etc. This
we leave as doubtful.

Page 740. There are in Animals Three Sorts of Motion. 1. Vital. 2. Commanding
or Stimulating. 3. Prosecuting or Endeavoring.
That Commanding. Force is in the Sensitive Appetite, from whence all our
Affections do arise; and they reign and command in Animals, Beasts, and Men as
Animal, and act to Motion, the whole Body, or the several Members of it.

The Prime Vital Motion is that of the Pulse, placed in the Heart, the Seat of
Life and Vital Motion, acted by the Soul. Page 741. The Actors in this Motion
are the Inward Heat and Spirits, viz. the Vital Spirits. When this Motion
ceases, all Animals die, and the Vital Spirits vanish. But (says he) it does
not therefore follow that the Soul dies. If he had proved, or shall prove, that
there is a Soul in Man, which did ever live, does live, or can live, in
Separation from the Body, we will admit of this Caution of his, and not infer
Death of such a Soul by the Ceasing of this Vital Motion in the Body:
Palpitations of the Heart, agitated by the Affections, and the Faculty of
Respiration, are also Vital Motions.

Appetive commanding Motion, Page 724. is Vegetative, Sensitive, and
Intellective: It consists in prosecuting things liked, and avoiding things
disliked, with Passion, or at Leisure; cites Matthew. 15. They all proceed from
the Heart, and have their Rise from the Affections: although many Causes may
work in, and upon them, viz. Complexion of the Body, Education, Conversation,
Examples, Doctrines, etc. their general Aspect is upon Pleasure or Pain, to
follow or avoid: the Vigor of their Motion grows from Lust, Wrath, and Fear, or
present outward Sense, greatly affected, the Affections are not ill in
themselves, but useful, helpful, necessary; for nothing is from God, or Nature
which is not Good: the Evil which they produce is but by Accident. Page 744.
The Prosecutive Power lies in Local Motion, This has its Root in the Brain,
whence the Nerves and their Power and Motion are derived, animated, and
enlivened, by Spirits from the Heart. This, (says he) Galen teaches, who is in
that Point to be preferred before any other Testimony. But (it seems) both he
and Hyppocrates his Master, were mistaken concerning Man's Compages of Body and
Soul, if our Author fall out to be right.

The Powers moving the Nerves, and in them, are the Vital and Animal Spirits,
and thence Motion is derived to the Muscles, Bones, Joints, and every Member:
These Spirits, which are partly Corporeal, and partly quasi Incorporeal, [or
Spiritual] excited by the Soul, [omitting how or by what Means] these Spirits
move and guide the Nerves, which are like Reins to the whole Body; and they
quicken and guide the Muscles, and the small Cords or Strings which reach to
them: By these are the Bones, Joints and Members of the Body moved: And thus
the moving Power of the Soul prosecutes the Mandates of the Appetite and
Affections: this seems a weak or foolish Sort of Soul, that will or must use
its Motive Powers to satisfy those Affections, which drive to Action against
the Will and Dictates of the Soul it self. Whence we conclude it more likely,
that all these Motions are Natural and Animal; that Intellect or Reason is one
Natural Faculty in Man, and that it is Chief, and has a Priority of Order and
Power in him; that Sense and the Affections are another Natural Faculty in Man;
and that Vital Inclinations and Powers of Vegetation are another Natural
Faculty in him, not divided by so many Souls, but that one Soul serves all
these Faculties, viz. that Flaming Spirit or Principle of Life, Motion and
Action, first breathed into Man by his Creator, and once quite extinguished,
can never be again rekindled but from Heaven by miracle. A Vital Spark or
Origin of this Fire (likely) may be kindled in Heat of Coition, lodged in the
Matter by Ordinance of Nature and her Director. This has its appointed Natural
Times and Means, first of Vegetation and Motions, then of Sense and Affections,
and lastly of Intellect and Reason. The Matter, Shape, and Organs of the Body,
do by Degrees enlarge themselves, and grow; and they increase the Blood and
Humors, which nourish continually the Vital Active Flame: whence the Increaseof
Body and Soul goes on together, till they arrive to their Fullness of Stature,
Proportions and Activities; and in Ordinary Course of Nature, they grow, stand,
and decay together. This Active is the Motive Principle, enlivening and
quickening all Man's Faculties to act according to their Natural Powers,
Propensities and Appointments. If any Organ or Part of Matter be out of Order,
this Active Power (not being Rational, but in the proper Place for that
Faculty) cannot remedy that Want, but can only put on to Action, all that is in
the Body fit for it; inclining and helping them to and in the Actions that are
proper or peculiar to them; in the Heart, the Primum Vivens, and most Vital
Part of the Body. This Flame and Heat is most Predominant and Intense; there
the Blood is purified, and ratified, and refined; there the Vital Spirits are
generated, and thence they are dispersed to several Parts of the Body, but
chiefly to the Head. In the Heart therefore we place the Chief Seat of Life and
Vegetation, for whose Defense each other Part will be ready to expose it self;
knowing and feeling that the Loss of that Fort destroys the Microcosm. The
Place of next Value to this (but of much greater Activity) is the Head: for
there reside the Senses both Internal and External; and there resides also the
Rational Faculty, viz. the Intellect and the Judgment: so as these two
Faculties of Sense and Reason are very close and near Borderers upon one
another; and although our Author go with the Stream, of deriving Men's
Affections all from the Senses, therein seems to be an apparent Mistake: for as
we do allow to the Intellect a Will, as well as to the Senses an Appetite; so
there must be allowed to Reason a Power of making and gaining the Affections,
of equal or greater Potency and Might, then that which is attributed to the
Senses. Whence, in Contests betwixt Reason and Sense, or Will and Appetite,
that Part which prevails upon the Affections must be Victor over the other: for
the Affections stirred and gained, excite, move, and sway the Heart, which is
drawn and bent by them to resolve and execute accordingly; and there appears no
such Difference between the Prevalency of either of these Faculties, as that
Men can determine which does oftnest prevail, or which of them is naturally
endowed with the most strong and prevalent Power: each have a Power in some
Persons more than in others, and in all Persons more at one Time, or upon one
Occasion, then upon another. In no Persons naturally does the Stream run one
Way: but, as S. Paul says, It Is not of willing, or running, but God gives the
Victory perhaps often. But we cannot confide that so it shall be always, nor
can by Nature be expected often. He who thinks he stands, may be nearer a Fall
than he is aware of. These two Faculties have a natural and durable Contest
from Sunrising to Sunsetting, from the Cradle to the Grave; sometimes one
prevails and sometimes the other, according as Moses's Hands are held up or let
down: whence the Inference seems both easy and strong, That there is no
likelihood of a Rational, immaterially Spiritual Power or Government in Man:
For it seems such a Power or Government would easily and speedily put an End to
such Contests, and not suffer them to continue Men's whole Lives; nay, and from
Generation to Generation, and in all Ages. Aristotle compares the Contest to a
Game at Ball, for the Uncertainty of its Event; and so we find it still; the
Case is nothing altered: which is a plain Argument the Thing is Natural; for
Naturalia non Mutantur. We do not hold fit to make strong or positive
Conclusions in Things of much less Moment and Doubt than the present Question,
and therefore shall leave Perusers to draw out of the Premises such Conclusions
as themselves think reasonable.

Page 742. Our Author goes on, and says, There is a very near Likeness betwixt
the two Faculties, Sensitive and Intellective: so as the Old Philosophers have
called the Intellect by Name of the Internal Sense; so did the Platonicks and
Peripateticks: And thence our Author collects such a Similitude between them,
that he resolves so to divide the Intellective Powers, as he had done the
Sensitive. Thus we see the Ground upon which he goes, in groping out a Means to
say what he pleases of the Intellect. He says, The Intellect has two Parts or
Faculties, viz. the Aprehensive and the Motive: in the first it joins with the
Memory, in the other with the Will; and these two, Apprehension and Motion, are
necessary in all Animals. Page 745. There is a twofold Force in a Humane
Intellect: one, that it has Power to understand Intelligible Things; the other
is the actual and effectual understanding of them: This Difference seems Airy:
for Nature does not act frustra: but if it give a Power, it always provides an
Act or Effect of it. He means by Intelligible Things, Abstracted Substances,
and Universalities, [the same Things which he spoke of at the Beginning,] Page
746. under the Name of a Double Intellect, viz. Agentis and Patientis,
understood a Double Power, by one of them it understands; by the other it does
re-act and judge of its own Understanding. Page 747. Says, The Passive
Intellect is a Part of the Intellect, that it neither needs nor has any
Material Organ. Yet he allows the Intellect and all its Powers are in the Body,
but not affixed to any Organ, or using any. [I demand how does he know, or can
prove that?] Says he, (By way of Reason) If it were any way tied to Organs, it
would perish and extinguish with those Organs. This I grant, and partly believe
that it does so. But says he farther, If the Case were so, then as the Organ
grows old and infirm, the Intellect's Operations should fail accordingly; which
we see (says he) it does not. Which we see (say I) it does evidently. I grant
it lasts as long as any other Faculty, and longer than the most of them do.
Arist. De Anima, Lib. I. Cap. 5. has it both Ways. First, he says, The
Intellect is not spoiled by Age: and therefore that if an Old Man had a Young
Eye, he would see as well as when he was Young: of which there is little
Certainty. Then it follows in the same Chapter, Intellect and Contemplation
(its Prime Part) do decay, [in Man] (...), by the Failing or Corruption of
other inward Parts; as is clear and apparent in such as live to extreme Age;
and till their Organs or Spirits are by such Age either wasted or corrupted. In
Fools and Madmen, he grants, the Fault grows by Defect or Disorder of the
Organs: But this (says he) is only in the Phantasy, and that the Phantasy is a
necessary Organ for the Soul to work by, whilst she is in the Body: And it does
not yet appear that she has any other State; nor that by her own (any thing)
Being, or Power, without Bodily Organs, she either understands her self or any
other Thing, although the Author does here make bold to assert all this without
other Proof than just before mentioned and answered.

Page 748. The Active Intellect (our Author says) is the Splendour of the Soul,
creating Intellectual Power; as Light enables Men to judge of Colors. Then he
cites Aristotle's high Expressions concerning this Part of the Soul; and yet he
refuses to agree with Aristotle, that this Part only of the Soul is Immortal:
but he will have the Suffering Part also to be Immortal; being resolved it
cannot possibly be so by halves, let Aristotle say what he will; but for
Reasons he gives none, relying upon what he had said before. Page 749. Divides
the Intellect into Practical and Speculative: Says, God (when he creates a
Soul) puts two Principles or Sorts of Notions into it; one, a Power to discern
and distinguish Good from Bad; the other, a like Power of discerning Truth from
Falsehood. But we neither consent to his imagined Creation of Souls; nor that
there are such distinct Powers or Principles in it; but do conceive both these
Abilities of Distinguishing, to arise indifferently out of the Humane Faculties
of Common Sense and Reason.

Page 720. He says, There is a Memory peculiar to the Intellect, and not fixed
or placed in any Organ, nor of any Material Nature. But for maintaining this
Dogma, he neither gives Reason, nor cites Authority; therefore it may pass with
us for a Figment of his own Brain, and without any more Consideration. He says,
The Will is the Intellectual Appetite, not fixed or placed in any Organ: And
says, That even the Sensual Appetite is not without Reason for its Guide; and
Men have Reason for Guide of all their Actions: And to this we agree: but do
say, that in the Intellect resides the Reason; or the Intellect is the Humane
Reason, or Rationality residing in the Head, and amongst the Organs of the
Brain, assisted by the Common Sense, Phantasy, and Memory, fixed in the same
Region, and amongst the same Organs used by them: That the Power which it has
amongst them is not Compulsory, but Swasive, or, at the highest, but Judicial.
There seems in the Faculty of Reason to be a Judicial Power, and that both Will
and Appetite (if that be any real Distinction): are attendant upon this Power;
and that neither of them do, or can move toward Execution before they have
obtained a Sentence from the Judgment upon their Side. The Affections,
principally Ambition, Covetousness, Lust; and the Passions, Anger and Fear, and
all their Dependents plead for their Satisfactions, and offer their Reasons and
their Violences, and Dissatisfactions and Desires in Evidence for obtaining
Sentence from the Judgment upon their Sides, or some of them: against which,
the Reason or Intellect offer their Evidence and Arguments for obtaining
Sentence of the Judgment upon their Side: and this Sort of Pleading may depend
before Bar of the Judgment for a longer or shorter Time, and as the Case is
less or more pressing: but before a Judgment be passed, there can be no
Execution in the Microcosm: for both Will and Appetite (which seem to differ
but in Name and Objects, being really both but the same Thing) but they are
both: or that Faculty is estopped from moving in Execution, until the Judgment
have passed Sentence, and given Direction thereupon. To this Sentence the
Voluntary Faculty is naturally, and therefore easily and continually obedient;
setting all instruments at work for intended Performance of such Resolutions,
until the Judgment depart from such Decrees and change them, as many times it
comes to pass; and presently the Voluntary Faculty shifts its Course
accordingly, like Ezekiel's Wheels, as if the Spirit that is in the Judgment,
were also in the Voluntary Faculty: and this, by a Law of Nature, which can by
no Art or Endeavor be altered. And hence we may discharge much of that Load
which is commonly cast upon Men's Affections and Passions; they are doubtless
ill Perswaders and Soliciters, but they can effect nothing without they do
first prevail upon the Judgment, to gratify them in passing Sentence on their
Behalf: for that sets the Voluntary Part at work, and that excites and directs
the Bodily Members and Organs to at accordingly; and casts the real Guilt,
arising from all Crimes, upon the Man in his best and highest Faculty, viz.
that of his Judgment. We have a Maxim in Law, viz. Nou est Reus, nisi Men's sit
Rea: and thence if a natural Fool, or real Madman, do rob, beat, ravish, kill,
the Law will not condemn him for it, because his Mind cannot be Criminal: He is
without Reason, which only can give him a Mind, [and yet, by the Way, if an
Immaterial Soul there be in Men, it seems such Men have that; but the Law looks
upon Reason as the Mind of Man, and will not condemn one who acts necessarily
without it.] It seems, if Affections could drive to Actions, without Consent of
the Judgment. it might be alleged in Diminution of the Crime; but the Case
looks otherwise: for the Judgment may be reluctant in its Consent; but it must
consent, and so become come guilty, or no Execution can follow. And the
Voluntary Part seems to be at no Liberty; but necessarily attached to the
Decrees of the Judgment: For what that Judges best for the whole Man (all
things then appearing in Judgment considered) the Judgment will decree, and the
Voluntary Part must apply it selt toward the Execution of that Decree, as all
Things are done in Nature, and Creatures, by an easy Inclination and
Propensity, free from any Violence or Compulsion: all being acted by the same
Spirit, different Faculties and Inclinations, but all under the Rules of one
Judgment, which seems to be supreme in the Government, and has that one
Rational Faculty for Advice or Counsel, one Voluntary Faculty for Execution, by
moving the Nerves as the Fountains and Reins of Motion: and though diverse
Senses have double Organs, and there be diverse Passions, and many Affections,
not easy to be governed; yet is there but one Common Sense, one Organ or Place
of Phantasy, and but one Memory: and though Passions and Affections at diverse
Times are very Violent, yet are they not able by themselves to bring any thing
into Execution, without first obtaining a Sentence or Consent of the Judgment
or Judicial Faculty, which has yet no Arbitrary or Tyrannical Power, but acts
under the Law and Rule imposed by Nature, of decreeing only that which appears
best for the whole Compositum, the Man, under such Circumstances as then come
under present Survey of the Judgment. It is true, that the Judicial Faculty is
very liable to Mistakes, and to be misguided by the Power and Violence of
Passions or Affections, as well as by its own Ignorance and Infirmity. For
better setting out of which, we may consider an Example or two. S. Peter, we
find, was a true Servant of his Master, and professed with Sincerity a
Resolution rather to die with Christ than to deny him: and yet, when (soon
after) he was snapp'd by a sudden Demand, If he were not one of his Lord's
Disciples, his Passion of Fear rose up against the Truth of his Affection; and
that Passion offered at the Bar of his Judgment, That if a true Confession
were made, the Appearance was likely and strong, that he should be made a
Co-sufferer with his Master, and then it would certainly go very hard with the
whole Compositum. The Judgment decrees (for the Avoiding of this Suffering) as
best for the Man, all things then in Prospect considered; the Voluntary Power
then sets upon Execution, it moves the Nerves of the Tongue (the properest
Instrument) directing first to deny, and then to forswear the Truth in that
Particular. But presently again, upon a Review of what he had done, and the
Fault committed, the Judgment disapproved and changed its overhasty Decree,
and its Executive Power, the Will, directs Motions of Grief, and sends plenty
of Water into his Eyes, as a clear Testimony that his Change and Repentance was
not feigned but real. The Case of Judas was not unlike: his Covetousness
prevailed upon his Judgment to decree it best for the Man to earn the desired
Wages of Iniquity; the Voluntary Power acts in Execution accordingly: it moves
the Feet to go, the Tongue to declare his Design, and his Hands to receive the
desired and promised Reward, and to perform his Bargain: and yet, presently, as
soon as he saw Christ was condemned, he found his Faultiness, and grieved, and
repented, and brought back the Money; Judgment decreeing, and Will executing,
and finding none that would receive it, he by like Powers acted, threw the Money
down with Indignation: then ghastly Fear, and Horror of Conscience tormenting
and instigating the Feebleness, Ignorance and Error of his Judicial Faculty,
induced it to decree, That it was best for the Man in, that Estate to shorten
his own Life; and the Attendant Mill, moves his Hands to tie and fasten fit
Materials, then to put his Head into the prepared Noose, and the Execution was
performed accordingly. And there seems to be nothing done in Man, or by him
voluntarily, and as a free Agent, but what first passes the Judgment with its
Approbation. And yet these Passages cannot appear to Men's Feeling or Sense,
except there be a considerable Time allowed for Rumination; for then the Debate
and Resolution are somewhat perceivable. But in short or sudden Cases and
Occasions, all pass within us after a Spiritual Manner, and unperceived. The
Spirits acting are Thin and Pure, to an Ivisibility and Imperceptibility, quick
as the Flame; or even as Lightning. So as the Dispatch of these Proceedings may
be made in a Moment of Time, and without any Perceivance in the Person. Thus by
Occasion of our Author's Dividing of Memory upon a novel and singular Fancy of
his own, there has been set forth a Model of the Microcosm, somewhat different
from what Men have formerly conceived of it. But we now return again to our
Author.

Page 750. He calls the Will the Vis Motrix, and the Spirits, Nerves, Muscles,
and Members, the Vis Prosequens, [or rather should be the Vires Prosequentes.]
He calls the Voluntary Faculty, the Queen in the Body: and we have given her
such Part in our Constitution of Government, as a Queen at Chess acts in the
Regulation and Effects in that Game.

Page 753, Says, The Humane Soul, at every Conception, is created, ex Nihilo:
that the Vegetative Soul extinguishes in the Sensitive when it comes, and the
Sensitive in the Rational when it comes; and thinks the two former may be
generated.

Page 757. Questions how Men differ from Brutes? Averroes answers, In the
Cogitative Faculty, which acts by Organs. The Author replies, This is a
Sensitive Power, and does not really differ from the Phantasy: for that which
is a more simple and dull Phantasy in the Brutes, is a more acute Phantasy in
Men, and is called Cogitation in them.

Page 759. The Doubt concerning the Original of Souls, is a difficult Question,
and always was so: And Three Prime Points in it. 1. The Efficient, or Causa ex
qua, whether they are ex nihilo, or ex Re praejacente. 2. When they were made,
whether in the Beginning, from the First Creation, and so do pre-exist, or in
Future Times. 3. Whether they are made before or after the Formation of the
Body, or at one same time with the Body.


Some thought Souls were communicated to Men from the Soul of the World, of
like Matter to Heaven and the Stars, and therefore Incorruptible and Immortal,
created at first to a certain vast Number, and remain in Repositories, till
called by the Formation of their destined Bodies. And this was the Opinion of
Pythagoras, Plato, and most of the Academick Philosophers: And this infers a
Transmigration of Souls into several Bodies. Origin thought that Souls were so
created, but in time, after the World created; and that they were by God sent
down, or did of their own accord descend into Bodies fit for them, in due time;
and some other Divines were of that Mind.

Some thought Souls were part of God himself, others that they were by Angels
made of Fire and Air: Others that God made only the Soul of Adam, and that all
future Souls, are derived by Propagation from him; and that as Men have their
Bodies from his Body, so their Souls from his Soul, radically; but yet
Immortal. Some who so believed, thought the Soul Corporeal, and therefore
generated. Others thought it a Spirit, and propagated from the Generators Soul,
as one Light kindles another. This last Opinion, Apollinaris and many other
Bishops did hold, and especially the Western Churches.

Others thought God created New Souls, as there was Occasion for them; so St.
Jerome, who says, the Church of his time did so believe. St. Austin would not
condemn either of these two last Opinions; he inclined rather to the Creation
of New Souls, but confessed he knew not how to prove it from Scripture. Those
who hold the New Creation of Souls, differ; some think it created in the Body,
and some without the Body, and some that Infundendo creatur.

Cites three sorts of Spirits, P. 761. viz. God, who always was, and shall be;
then Souls of Brutes, which neither were, nor shall be always: then Angels and
Souls of Men, which were not, but shall be always. Cites this out of Ficinus.
P. 762. The Author argues against Origins Opinion of Pre-existent Souls; says,
The Soul is Man's proper Form, who consists of a Soul and Body; and it is
natural to this Form to be united to its proper Matter or Body; and against
Nature to be separated from it: and it is Praeter Naturam, that a Humane Soul
separated from the Body, should so remain till the Refurrection: and therefore
it would be Praeter Naturam, that Souls should pre-exist, by a Creation of all
at once: Whence this is repugnant to the Wisdom of God and the Course of
Nature. It is natural, and per se, that the Soul should be with the Body, and
against Nature, that it should be out of it; seeing it is the Bodies proper
Form [so much as it cannot be said to be there in loco, as Arist observes] and
it is there, as in its proper Being. The Soul of Adam sinned not without the
Body, nor have other Souls done so; and therefore have not deserved to be
punished without it.

P. 763. says, That Opinion of the Souls being derived from Generation, as well
as the Body, held by Tertullian and the Western Church, is much followed and
strongly defended: for the more rational deriving the Guilt of Original Sin,
upon all Mankind: for that unless Men's Souls be propagated from Adam, as well
as their Bodies, by what means should Original Sin come to be attached to the
Souls of all Men. For if Souls be of new created, and out of nothing; they must
be either created sinful by God, or how else should sin come upon them in their
Mothers Bellies; where they cannot commit Sin, nor be contaminate by Lust of
the Parents, who do not generate the Soul: Nor can its Contiguity with a
Corrupt Body, defile it: Also that Conjunction is the Act of God. Those Fathers
therefore held it necessary to believe the Generation of the Soul as well as of
the Body, to the intent they might have a sufficient ground of Casting he Guilt
of Original Sin upon all People. And for this respect Austin and those of his
time, would not reject or condemn this Opinion held by Tertullian, Apollinaris,
and the Western Churches; Ausi non fuerint damnare: and cites to the same
purpose Eucherius and Gregory the First Bishop of Rome, P. 765. our Author
means to prove, That Humane Souls are New Creations, made by God out of Nothing.

1. Because Adam's Soul was so created, our Bodies are of the Earth, like his;
and likely our Souls like his, by Creation. I say to this, We do not find a
Creation of Adam's Soul, but that God breathed into him the breath of life;
gave him breath or respiration; this kindled in his Blood and Humors (then
ready) the Flame of Life: till that is again quite extinguished, the Man lives,
and nourishes that Flame by the like respirations; but that Flame extinguished,
the respiration ceases, and the Man dies beyond all Humane Power to help in
such Cases. The Soul parts, together with the Breath and Flame of Life, and
never was found but together with them in any Body, or other Place, or Manner
whatsoever. It seems this Flame and its Active Powers, is not only inseparable
from the Soul, but that most likely it self is that Soul, as well as it is in
the Beasts: With it, and by it, they live, move, and act: With its
Extinguishment they die and turn to immediate Corruption, and, Gradatim, to
their Original Earth and Dust: So was it with Adam and his Soul and Body, and
from his Time has so continued, without Exception, save in Enoch and Elijah,
by Divine Power, or Miracle, manifested in reviving Lazarus and some other dead
Bodies, by re-kindling in them the extinguished Flame of Life.

2. He doubts not but that Eve's Soul was like Adam's; and if his were created,
so was hers. And this we grant; as well the one as the other.

3. Adam did not speak of her Soul, but owned her Body of his: therefore he
knew not her Soul, or what, or whence it was. Whence it is not likely her Soul
was made out of his, but was a Creation from nothing. I grant her Soul was not
made out of his, but made like his. The Body, Blood and Humors, being prepared
and fit, the Flame of Life was kindled in her by the Divine Power: and after
her first Breath, she lived by Respiration as Adam did, so long as that Flame
of Life continued unextinguished, and she was made, and so long she continued a
Living Soul, or rather a Living Compositum both of Body and Soul.

4. If the Soul were generated, there would be a subject Matter, out of which
it grew: And then Solomon could not properly say, it returned to God that gave
it: but it should rather return into such Matter as it was raised from. He says
Austin applied this Saying of Solomon only to Adam's Soul, or the Orignal of
Souls: for that he would not oppose the Generation of Souls. But the Author
says, it must doubtless be understood of all Souls. Concerning this, I say, it
appears as clearly, that Solomon was not resolved concerning Humane Souls,
whether they went upward or downward, or what became of them, upon a Solemn
Consideration and Argument: Yet he does after, and without Argument, summarily
say, the Spirit returns to God who gave it. In both Places our Translators use
the Term of Spirit, and not of Soul. The Breath, Spirit, and Life, which is in
Man, goes not (perceivably to Sense) any whither. Likely it is, the common
Opinion of his Time was for a Separate Subsistence of Souls. For we read, Saul
applied himself to the Witch, for bringing up of Samuel, intending his
Separately Subsisting Soul: And the Devil favors this Opinion, in pretending
to be Samuel's disquieted Soul. In these few Words of Solomon, it may be
conceived, that, unresolved in himself, he thus expressed himself, in
Compliance with the Common Opinion of his Time and Country: Also what is
intended by Spirit, Whether Breath and Life, or Soul, seems not very clear?
David says, When God takes away Men's Breath, they die and are turned again to
their Dust; Psalm. 104. But if he let his Breath go forth, Men are made, and the
Face of the Earth renewed. This Informing Breath, first breathed into Adam,
leaves the Body at Death, returns (says Solomon) to God who gave it. But
elsewhere says, he knows not what to think of it, whether it go upward or be
extinguished with the Life, as those of the Beasts are.

5. and 6. Page 766. He cites Isa. 57. Zach. 12. Exodus 21. That God makes the
Souls: And what Austin answers thereunto: That it is by God, that they come
from the Parents. He cites Theodoret: That the Foetus in the Womb, is first an
unformed Embrion: then becomes formed into the Perfect Shape of a Body, and
after That it first obtains a Soul. Page 767. And if so, How can the Soul rise
out of the Seed, or from Generation? If (says he) you will say, that in the
Seed there is Vis Animae Parentis, out of which the Infant's Soul arises in due
Time. This he refuses by any means to admit of: but why, he does not say:
because it is against Reason or Nature. But because then it would follow, that
the Soul must be Corruptible and Mortal. And to this Conclusion (which he
maintains with diverse Arguments) we do easily agree. Page 771. See the same.

7. The Soul of Christ was not from Generation. Ergo* other Men's are not so. I
say, It seems Christ was born from the Seed of David, and was the Seed of the
Woman: and being by Operation of the Holy Spirit upon her, might be made and
born in all things like to us, except Sin: For what he took by Generation from
the Holy Spirit could not partake of Sin. And it seems Temerity to, affirm any
thing concerning Christ's Soul, which is not revealed (as this Point is not:)
for that neither the Manner nor the Matter, can be traced or found out by the
Powers of Humane Reason, or the Dependence of Natural Causes; to all which
Proceedings this Birth is an absolute Mystery.

P. 769. He says, both these Opinions, viz. that of a continual New Creation of
Souls, and that of Propagating them by Generation, have had great and many
Abettors and Defenders in the Church, For the New Creation of Souls, he
enumerates Greg. Nyssen, Theodoret. S. Jerome, Leo I. a Bishop of Rome, S.
Ambrose, Hilary: Says, Flesh generates the Flesh, but the Soul is the Work of
God. I say this is no absolute Denial of the Souls being generated, as Austin
has said, by God's Power and Providence: For the Souls being generated with
the Body, held Tertullian. Page 770. S. Augustine, Greg. I. a Bishop of Rome, he
omits here Apollinaris and most of the Fathers of the Western Church before
remembered.

The Opinions differed upon two Difficulties: some would have a New Creation,
for that Generation concluded Souls to be Mortal: others would have Souls
generated with the Bodies, because whole Man is involved in, and put under the
Guilt of Original Sin, which if his Soul were Newly created by God, can have no
sound and reasonable Derivation upon it. Our Author means to show how New
created Souls may be taken within the Guilt of Original Sin.

Page 772. He begins with Philsophers who have highly extolled the Soul, and
said it came from God.

Page 773. 1. Says, Souls and Angels are of the same Nature, Kind and
Substance, alike subsisting of themselves: and as one Angel does not generate
another, so it is for Souls, they generate not. I say this Parallel of Souls
and Angels is bold, but never granted.

2. Says, The Soul can understand and will without the Body or its Organs, and
therefore subsist without it. I grant both alike, and one as much as the other.

3. The Soul is an Immaterial Spirit, and cannot be propagated, no not from
another Soul: and if it rise from another Soul, it cannot be Immortal. All but
its Immateriality is granted.

4. The Opposers say the Body cannot infect a New created Soul with Original
Sin, much less (says he) can it generate such a Soul; nor can such a
Substantial Immaterial Spirit proceed from Flesh and Blood, a Spirit which
needs not any Bodily Organs, but can act alone, and by its own single Power:
and if one Soul could produce another, yet that cannot be done by Efficiency of
Seed or Corporeal Generation.

5 The Soul is Immortal and Self-subsistent, neither dies nor decays with the
Body, and therefore is not generated by it, or proceeds from it. I say, these
two Arguments proceed ex non concessis: the Inferences are reasonable, but the
Foundations fail, and are not granted, nor enough proved.

6. P. 775. If the Soul be propagated from the Seed, it is but as Trees and
Beasts are: and if the Seed be Corporeal, the Spirit thence arising must be
Material: for that which is of the Flesh is Flesh: whence the Soul must be
Corruptible and Mortal. I grant his Arguments, which (he says) cannot be easily
refuted, except by such as will reject his Principles of the Soul's
Immateriality and Self-subsistence, as we have done from the Beginning, and yet
continue to do.

Page 775. Now he comes to his Case of how his New created Souls may be justly
involved in the Guilt of Original Sin? and he begins (as commonly Men do in
such Undertakings) to prove Obscurum per Obscurius, viz. the Thing proceeds
from Gods Decree, that so it should be. I ask how does he know that? He does
not pretend particular Revelation for it. No, but (he Pays) God did Decree to
join these New created and pure Souls with Bodies conceived in Sin, although he
knew that thence it would follow, those Souls should thereby become infected
with Sin: But not one Word of Proof, neither of the Decree, nor how the New
Soul is infected, nor that it is so infected. And we dare not take his Word for
all this: but he goes on. First, (says he) God decreed to permit Sin: but he
proves not that, and yet it seems to stand in great Need of proving. Then he
decreed, the Guilt and woeful Effect of Adam's Sin should be derived upon all
his Posterity. Still he needs Proof of a Decree of God in this Point. Then God
(says he) decreed the Redemption of the Elect by Christ, and reprobating all
the Residue of People. Hence (says he) it comes, that many Things are by God
done, and permitted against our Rules of Justice and Goodness, which are in his
Power easily to hinder or alter: And because he does do or permit such Things,
we must conceive that Things so done or suffered to be done, are certainly
agreeable to Justice and Goodness, (he says) in respect to God's Order and
Decrees: I say, in respect to his Nature and Being. But we both agree, Men do
not know how to reconcile Things so done or permitted, with the Common Rules of
Morality amongst Men. And it seems it had been no ill Course for our Author in
this Case to have said, Souls must be thus infected with Sin, by God's Decree,
although it be above our present State to know, either the Manner how, or the
Reason why.

Page 776, and 777. Says, God made Man in his Image, just and upright, and so
might his posterity have continued. I say, If God had not (as our Author says)
otherwise decreed it. Well, but by Adam's sin, all was lost, both to him and
his posterity; for as Levy paid Tithes to Melchizedeck in Abraham, so all Men
sinned in Adam. I say this Comparison seems apt enough, deeming Levy's payment
in Abraham but Notional or Putative; and alleged Argumentative: (Says our
Author) Adam 's Sin was not more actual to him, then it was original to all his
posterity: There followed a propensity to sin in Adam, and thence a Corruption
in the Nature of all his Posterity, called, Original Sin, as a Penal
consequence of that Offense; Adam 's disobedience being imputed to all his
Offspring, to bring the New created Soul under the guilt of this Original. The
Author denies to say that properly, and really, the Body does work upon the
Soul, and so infect it; but he does say, That in the instant when God joins the
Soul (newly by him created) to the Body, conceived in Sin, the Compositum,
becomes Man, and then, and thenceforth, Adam 's Sin is imputed to this
Compositum existing in the Womb. He says, Some take Original Sin, only for a
Corruptness in Man's Nature, or a Propensity to Sin. This he avoids, as making
it harder to show, how this can come into a New created Soul, over which the
Body cannot have power; nor will God (it seems) indow, or infect it, with this
evil inclination; nor will there be any other likely means for this to arise in
the Soul, save only by Propagation.

Page 778. But yet he will find a means to do this; and (he says) It arises
from the just appointment of God, that all Adam 's Offspring shall have such a
Corrupted Nature in them, taken from Adam, as their Fountain end Original; and
this should reach to the Soul, as well as to the Body, under the Name of
Natural Corruption. So it grows not from the Bodies infecting the Soul, but by
the Will and Appointment of God. To this I say, The Words or Intent that Adam's
Offspring should be corrupted, can reach no farther than to what comes from
him by Generation; which Souls (our Author says) do not: And the Soul Principal
in Man, who upon breath given him, became a Living Soul: And therefore an
Appointment that Newly created Souls (as he says all are) should all be
necessaly corrupted, and inclined to sins continually; for one Offense of the
Old Adam; with whom they never had any relation or affinity, nor any derivation
from him; (Our Author intitles it just) but it seems to me very incongruous and
hetorogenial to Rules of Equity and Reason. He does not prove such Appointment
of God, nor offer to maintain by Reason, that the thing would be justifiable by
the ordinary Rules of Equity or Reason. We therefore take it all for his Fancy,
and that he is under a mistake in the main of this Argument; and that what is
true in, and concerning the guilt of Original Sin, is much more maintainable by
those who raise Souls, as well as Bodies, from Adam by Generation: then by
those who do believe that God creates new Souls for the supply of every
successful Humane Coition; not to speak of those betwixt Man and Beast, where
the product is of a Humane Shape.

Page 779. Now he comes to defend the Justice of God's Proceeding in this Case,
and says, Though God put the Infected Body and the Pure Soul together, God does
not instill or put the Evil Qualification into the Soul; nor cause it to be
infected by the Body; but the Corruptiin of the (Pure Newly created and much to
be pitied) Soul, grows upon it only by accident. If Adam had not sinned, God
would yet have been always making New Souls, as he is all the World over; and
he joins Souls and Bodies per se, but the Souls are infected per accidens. All
are Words and Fancy, without showing the difference betwixt per se and per
accidens, in this Case, or Answer to what he said before that the Original of
this Corruption in the Soul, is God's own Appointment: whence he makes New,
Clean, Pure Souls, and appoints them to be corrupted, and to be made wicked,
and fall (for exceedingly the greatest Part) into everlasting Burnings: those
who are persuaded may believe what he says. Page 780. Says again, Adam was the
Root and Foundation of Man and Sin; and this Natural Contagion descends from
him upon all his Posterity: as well upon their New created Souls as their
propagated Bodies, by the special Ordinance of God. But some (says he) will
except, How can Adam 's Sin be imputed to Men's Souls, if they be not generated?
for else they were not in the Loins of Adam when he sinned. He answers, The
Soul and Body make the Man, and you must not divide them in Examination of this
Matter. Souls or Bodies are not born apart, nor come from Adam singly: nor is
Sin imputed to the Soul before it be joined to the Body: It is Men, that come
from Adam, not their Souls or Bodies; and the whole Person is called Son of
Adam, and the Son of Man. We say so too: All are Sons of Adam, and of Man,
Souls and Bodies. And when he divides them, and brings one from Creation
singly, and the other from Propagation singly, he offends, Male dividendo. God
puts them together, they live together; so they are born, and it seems they are
generated together; and we may apply to them, 2 Samuel 1.23. Saul and Jonathan
were lovely in their Lives, and in their Death they were not divided, but fell
together.

Page 781. He says, Christ is called the Seed of David, and Son of Man; and yet
his Soul was not generated. This is neither proved nor granted: For he was like
to us in all things, (as Man) Sin only excepted; and that Manhood he took from
his Mother, a Daughter of David, and a very Woman: he took all that was Man
from her, and as much as other Men take from their Parents. Page 782. He says,
The Soul comes not from the Parents, but is created by God, but its Principle
of Existence comes from the Parents: for that it did not begin to be or
subsist, but in the Body disposed and prepared for it: [And this makes him
hold, that the Soul is created in the Body disposed to receive it.] Whence
(says he) the Soul may be said in a manner to be generated by the Parents. It
seems this Sort of Argumentation is mere Trifling: For, the truth is, either
the Soul is generated as well as the Body, or it is not. That Man is generated,
is according to Nature, and agrees with Scripture: But, That his Soul is a New
Creation at every fruitful Coition, is not revealed in Scripture, is against
the ordinary Course of Nature, and seems a mere and bare Humane Invention and
Fiction, introduced for the better maintaining the supposed Being of an
Immaterial Self-subsisting Soul in Man, and is of no other Use, nor has any
other Foundation or Ground, but an Intent and Desire to fortify and maintain
that Opinion; and thence, and for that only End it is, that our Author has
bestowed so much Labor about it, with what Success, must be left to Judgment.
He cites Contarenus and Ficinus, That the Production of Souls is in, and by a
Medium betwixt Creation and Generation, and that the Animal Spirits (which are
a Medium betwixt Soul and Body), do knit and unite the Soul and Body together:
He catches at any Saying that sounds toward a Solder for knitting and
strengthing of his Precarious Assertions; for these Sayings make as much
against as for his Opinion.

Page 782. He begins to put Objections against his own Opinion to the Number of
Nine, and gives Answers to them: the Main of which Answers is grounded in non
concessis, viz. That Christ was perfectly generated from Mary, and yet he took
not his Soul from her. Therefore (says he) Parents do generate others perfectly
like themselves, although their Souls be not generated. We have said, All that
was Man in Christ, viz. Soul and Body, came from the Virgin (for any thing
appearing.) And we do say, That if Souls be not generated as well as Bodies,
the Parents do not generate others perfectly like themselves, nor near like
themselves, but Carkases rather, or Bodies that have no Life in them, not a
Man: for that, Forma dat esse Rei.

Page 784. Respondendo, Repeats, The Soul is created pure; then of that and the
generated Body, Man is made: then God fastens Adam 's Sin upon the Soul and
Body, or the Man, by Imputation: and thence the Person yet in the Womb, becomes
involved in the Guilt of Original Sin. This he said before, and it is the main
Ground he stands upon, but not granted nor proved, no nor probable, that God
should use a Pure, Young, Innocent Soul in that manner, and make the Number of
such Souls, decreed and intended for eternal Torments, so exceeding great, in
Comparison of those intended to be saved. That God should do this to Pure,
Innocent Souls of his own immediate Creation; we cannot, dare not believe it,
without most undeniable Evidence: And yet he gives us none, but his own bare
Word for it, or his Opinion, possibly his Conceit, which we find no sufficient
Reason to follow.

P. 786. Says, Hilary thought that the Soul was first formed, and before the
Body generated: and this (says he) would serve our Turn well, to prove a
Separate Subsistence of Souls: but that thereupon would follow other absurd
Consequences: Others think the Soul is formed after the Body: of which some
think it first created and then infused, which also proves it Self-subsistent:
But (says he) the most received Opinion is that of the Schools, viz. That the
Soul is created in the Body now formed and ready for its Reception, Infundendo
creatur.

He says, The Generative Formation of the Body, is first from a Milky
Substance, then changed into a Bloody one, and then into Flesh, Bones, etc. and
lastly, to a perfect Formation: And so for the Soul: first, there is in the
Seed, not a Soul, but the Vigor of a Soul; whence rises in the Body a
Vegetative Soul; whence the Embrion lives: shortly after which, there is by a
like Vigor in the Seed, a Sensitive Soul produced, and the Vegetative is
extinguished: then Sensitive Soul extinguishes, and the Rational Soul succeeds
thereunto, but not by the Seminal Vigor, but by the sole Creation of God, out
of nothing. And thus his Tenet sets God at continual Employment to create a
Number of Souls every Day, all the World over, without Warrant of Scripture or
Reason, or the general Consent of Antiquity. And he says: Thus Man, by
Generation, prepares for God a Body into which God may introduce a Soul of his
own Creation.

Page 787. Here he places the chief Seat of the Soul, not in the Head, but in
the Heart, that it may be in the Middle of the Body; and calls the Soul a Part
of Humane Nature, not perfect without its Body, and therefore desiring a
Reunion; all contrary to his former Assertions.

Page 788. Says, The Body does nothing without the Soul, Nec fere Anima sine
Corpore. Page 793. Says, The Soul is not Tota in qualibet Part, nor in any
Part, nor affixed to any Organ, no nor Tota in toto, and yet the Essence of the
Soul is Tota in toto, and in qualibet Part, as Light is in the Air, both Light
and Heat appear in different Degrees, in diverse Places, and yet their Influence
reaches to the whole Horizon. Page 794. That which is Indivisible, Totum est,
Ubi est; and this holds in the Soul: And so God is in the World, and every Part
of it; and as Soul and Body united are yet distinct Soul and Body. So, Page
798. the End of Reason, and a Humane Soul, is to know and love God: but the
Intellect is like clean White Paper without any Character upon it, and cannot
perceive but by the Senses, nor work without Bodily Organs, and those must have
Life or else they could not have Sense, and Life must have Nourishment: whence
there is in the Soul a Nutritive Faculty for Support, Augmentation, and
Procreation; then a Sensitive Faculty, being a Power of Perceiving External
Objects, for Benefit and Safety of the Animal; next, a Power to retain and
preserve the Species or Idea's of what was perceived; and then a Power of
offering them to the Intellect, for obtaining a Judgment upon them.

Page 799. The Humane Soul, though it work in the Body, yet it does not work by
Organs of the Body, and therefore its Actions are not common with the Body,
applying this particularly to the Intellect: And That, (he says) is endowed
with certain Gifts or Impressions, by God, at the Creation of the Soul; that by
Help of them, Men may better comprehend all other Things: And that there are
such common Innate Notions, Experience does manifest. Calls these the Sparks
and Seeds of Knowledge in Man: But this, he confesses, is rejected by
Aristotle, which yet he would make some kind of Argument for Souls being
created; and therefore preferrs the Platonic and Stoical opinion before that
of Aristotle, and therefore will not admit of the Rule of nothingh being in the
Intellect, which came not thither throug the Senses, to be absolutely true; but
only, that for the most part it is so; though he have repeated and granted this
Rule, without Exception, several times before.

Page 800. Says, That for all these Impressions made by God upon Souls, yet the
Intellect is still as a White Paper without Writing or Character upon it; and
therefore must seek to obtain its Knowledge from without it self; and this it
seeks from the Senses, and from God, by his Word and Spirit. How the Intellect
should be as fair White Paper, and yet have Characters imprinted upon it, I do
not conceive, nor diverse other Things late before delivered by our Author.

Our Author seems to have pursued this Argument concerning the Soul, through
all the known Particulars that may be belonging to it, and yet has not
thoroughly satisfied himself thereupon, and therefore he begins again with it,
Page 802. and runs descant upon it all over again, unto Page 851. repeating and
confirming his former Arguments. First he quotes Texts of Scripture, to Page
809. and there quotes the Opinion and Consent of the World to his Opinion.

Page 810. He begins with Sayings of Philosophers, Pythagoras and Plato, who
held Pre-existence of Souls, and consequently their Separate Subsistence: then
Alcmaeon and Anaxagoras, who held their Spirituality: then the Stoics. Page
812. He comes to Aristotle, and says that he had no Will to declare his Opinion
concerning the Soul, but did on purpose speak obscurely about it. But yet,
(says he) Aristotle did not say it was Material or Mortal. And for Proof of
this he quotes 14 Places out of Aristotle's Writings, which was not needful on
our Behalf; for that this Assertion was before agreed by us: This reaches to
Page 820. and there cites Turks, Tartars, Persians, he might have said
Mahometans, agreeing to his Tenet; and so other Barbarous Nations. Page 821. He
comes to Reasons, first upon Moral Congruity, that there must be future Reward
and Punishment, which he thinks cannot be, without a Separately-subsisting
Soul, and goes on, to 12 Arguments, reaching to Page 827. Page 828. Says; If
the Soul come from Generation, it must be Elementary and Material. Page 829.
Brings Arguments from the Souls own Actions and Motions. Page 830. Adds a 13th
Argument to his former 12: and thence to Page 834. he makes up his Arguments to
20. And he cites Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 6. Cap. 36. where we do find, that in
Origin's Time there arose in Arabia, Authors of a Pernicious Doctrine, who
taught that Souls died here with their Bodies, and that at the Resurrection
they rose again together: and a great Synod was summoned upon that Account, and
Origin sent for unto it; and he so discoursed and disputed, that he purged
their seduced Minds from this foul Error cited by our Author, Page 804. It
seems the Opinion was condemned in that Synod by Origin's Assistance, but that
also the Thing is not such a Novelty, as (without his Testimony) it might seem
to be.

Page 835. Our Author comes to cite and confute Arguments made against his
Tenet. 1. We see nothing part at Death of a Body, but a vanishing Breath, nor
can perceive, and hardly conceive, what a Soul is, or should be, without a
Body. Hence (he says) Men must doubt of God and Spirits. Page 837. Arg. 4. The
Soul cannot operate without the Body, and therefore does not so subsist. He
says, The Soul Both Understand and Will without the Body, Page 838. and the
Intellective Memory remains in a Separated Soul, and so Love, Joy, and their
like, in an Intellectual Manner, Page 839. Arg. 5. In great Weakness of the
Body, the Souls Operations are alto feeble. The Sum of his Answer to this, is a
Denial of the Thing; and whether true or not, is left to Judgment and
Experience. Page 840. The Soul parts unwillingly from the Body: this argues,
she does not apprehend the going to a more perfect State, but rather to
Corruption or Extinguishment; and Christ would have avoided this Cup; and yet
he knew that was his Way to a Resurection and future Happiness. To this he
makes a long Answer, not to be summed in few Words. Page 841. Arg. 7. The Soul
is troubled with diverse Afflictions; but Spirits or Immaterial Substances are
not subject to Mortal Perturbations; therefore the Soul is not such a Spirit.
He answers: The Bodies Contrariety to the Soul is the Soul's great Affliction:
and if Angels were so knit to Bodies they would be as much troubled: and in Man
this Perturbation is one Effect of Sin. Page 843. He compares Dying to the
Child's Leaving the Womb, which he fancies the Child is very unwilling to do,
just as Men are to die. And he proposes 10 Similitudes in this Supposition,
which seem not well grounded nor weighty. Page 845. Quotes Texts of Scripture,
urged against his Tenet, and answers them; but Three in all. Then he comes to
the Opinion, that Souls departed do sleep till the Resurrection, void of all
Operation till the Resurrection: and then the Bodies rise from Death, and the
Souls from their Lethargy: This Sleep (says our Author) is plain Death, as that
of the Body is called Sleep. Page 846. He says, Sure it is, good Souls
separated, do go into Heaven and enjoy the Vision of God: and the evil do go
into Hell: but they are not completely Happy or Unhappy till the Resurrection.
But from whence he takes this Rule he shows not, nor offers Proof of it. It is
an absurd Thing, and against God's Wisdom, That the Form of any Body should
always subsist separately from that Body: I say, if this be absurd, it is very
near of Kin to Absurdity, That it should subsist at all without its Body. It
was objected to him, That if Souls went to Heaven at the Death, what need was
there then of a Resurrection? He answers, The Form or Soul could not always
subsist without the Body. Why not, say I, as well as do so for Hundreds or
Thousands of Years? Says he, It would be absurd and against God's Wisdom. I do
perceive this Consequence, and he does not offer to prove it; therefore I think
it no more absurd in the one Case than in the other. Page 847. Says, The
Separation of the Soul and Body is by Violence; and Nullum Violentum est
Perpetuum. I say, nor Diuturnum. Cites 1 Cor. 15.19. If there be not a
Resurrection, Christians are of all Men most miserable. How can that be, if
good Souls go to Heaven at the Death, and there behold the Face of God. He
answers; This Saying concerns only the Bodies of Christians, and not their
Souls. Their Bodies (says he) would be most miserable. Not more miserable, say
I, than the Bodies of other Men, and therefore not of all others the most
miserable. He cites Psalm 146.4. When the Breath of Man goes forth, he shall
turn again to his Earth, and that very day all his Thoughts perish. So Psalm.
78.39. Man's Spirit as a Wind, passes away, and comes not again. Page 848. He
will not allow Spirit in these Places to signify the Soul; but in Places
making for him, it must do so: as when Stephen says, Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit. Cites Psalm. 115 17. and in other Places: The Dead praise not thee, O
Lord, nor all they that go down into the Silence: But the Living do it. So,
Isa. 38. he answers, Souls after Death do praise God: proved, Rev. Chap. 5. and
Chap. 19. and opposes this Trance to the other Texts. Page 849. Cites. Job.
17.16. Also in the Grave the Weary are at rest and fear no Oppressor: Therefore
bad Souls not punished.

Page 850. He closes his Treatise of the Soul, with a long Definition of it,
according to his Mode, and, with all the particular Qualifications which he
has before designed for it. We may, now observe, in short, upon this Author,
that he was very much inclined and bent to maintain the Immateriality of the
Soul, as a thing without which there could not be a future Reward or
Punishment: a Mistake wherein all are involved (or pretend to be involved) who
maintaintain his Opinion. We see he has been very laborious about it, has
read all that he could find written of it, and studied; and delivered to us a
Multitude of Arguments about it; and has showed Learning, Judgment, and
Industry, to a high Degree, joined with Integrity, or a good Meaning and Belief
that he did well, and bestowed his Pains upon a Subject that deserved them; and
that it was a very Needful Truth which he supported: But with what Success he
has done it, must be referred to Judgment, after Perusal of the Answers which
have been offered to his Arguments, upon the Differences arising between the
Opinions of the Author and the Answerer, upon many Occasions or Particulars:
and because we have very much studied and affected Brevity, in both our
Observations and Answers, it need not be doubted, but that those who are
desirous of a more full Satisfaction upon this Point, will think our Author
worthy of their own Perusal concerning this Subject, and many others.

Franciscus de Oviedo, a Jesuit, wrote a Body of Philosophy, and in it, Of the
Soul, Printed in a large Folio, at Lions, Anno 1640. and therein, Fol. 6. N.
17. He joins with others in finding Fault with Aristotle's Definition of the
Soul, because he does not tell us, Quid sit Anima, but Cujus sit. Our Author
offers to mend that of Aristotle, by a Definition of his own, viz. The Soul is
the Constituent Act, or Moving Power of a Compositum, that is able to exert or
exercise Vital Actions. I say, this seems a Difference without a Diversity, or
but one pretended: and it may be collected, that a Soul has no proper Genus,
or such Specifical Difference of its own, whereby it can be defined or known;
nor that it can be conceived otherwise than as it is a Constituent Part of a
Compositum, by the Conjunction of a Soul and a Body. Whence we pretend to
infer, That the Soul, in its Nature, is not a Substance subsisting by it self,
or in Separation from its Body; nor can be otherwise defined or understood,
than by its Reference and Relation to a Body. Both our Definitions call it the
Actus Primus of the Compositum, or of an Organical Body: so as we have no
Conception of it at all, save by the Relation which it has to the Body, or to
the Man, and without that it is to us unintelligible: and thence, it seems, a
Separate Subsistence cannot be Natural to it, or at least to our Conception or
Knowledge of it.

Fol. 8. N. 2. He says, There is no Degree of Reason in Brutes, and but some
Degrees of Sense: and in Brutes we find no Degree of Intellect, or Sign of it,
but all they do, is by Instinct. To the contrary of this, we have said before,
that Beasts do know by single Intellect, and are taught to remember Duty, and
deny their Appetites, and obey their Teachers and other Men, in Things which
they have learned, and use both Obedience, and a Rational Subtilty in them. He
says every Soul is the Act of a Mortal Body; that an Angel is a Simple Complete
Substance, but the Soul is an Incomplete Substance, ordained to be totally
Compounded with the Body, with which it is united, that by Means of the
Material Organs, it may produce Sense and Intelligence in such Bodies as have
them. This I take well enough to agree with a Material Soul.

Fol. 10. N. 15. He says it is objected, The Humane Soul does so communicate it
self to Matter, as that still it keeps its own Subsistence. He answers, This
Soul is the very Form, and though it have its Proper Subsistence, yet it does
totally communicate it self to Matter, because its Nature is Essentially united
to Matter: and for the Form to communicate with the Matter, is totally to be
united to it. He says, Humane Souls are produced by Creation, other Souls by
Generation: but the very Being of a Form is its Union with the Subject. Yet,
not to depend upon it, Objectors say, the Humane Soul works without any
Dependence upon its Subject [or the Bodily Organs] and therefore is not a true
Form. He answers, by granting it works so in a State of Separation, but denies
it does so in a State of Union with the Body: and in this, he contradicts our
next preceding Author, who will have the Soul work without help of the Body or
its Organs, even whilst it is in a State of Union with the Body. And our
Author agrees with Aristotle in this, That the Souls not working in a State of
Union without the Bodily Organs, is an Evidence that a State of Separation is
not Natural to the Soul: For Aristotle puts the Matter upon this Trial, and our
Author agrees the Evidence demanded.

Fol. 11. Nu. 4. Diverse have thought the Soul to be Material: as Cleanthes, and
Chrysippus, and many of the Stoics: and so Apollinaris of Alexandria, and
Tertullian. Nu. 5. Many Old Heretics thought the Soul to be a Spark of the
Divinity, or a Particle of God: so Philojudaeus. Fol. 12. Nu. 6. Origin thought
the Soul not distinguishable from Angels. Nu. 7. The Luciferians said, It was
propagated from the Seed. Nu. 9. Origin taught that Souls were Angels, who
after having sinned, were for their Punishment put into Bodies, as into
Prisons. Nu. 10. Others said the Soul was in the Body, as Light is in the Air,
a Directive Qualification: and this, diverse do say, was Aristotle's Opinion.
Nu. 16. Cites the Lateran Council, under Leo X. saying, It is as certain that
the Soul is Immaterial, as that it is Immortal: and that it is Immortal, is de
Fide.

Fol. 13. Nu. 17. He argues, The Soul as a Natural Form, is not capable of
knowing Spiritual Beings, nor or of making Collections, or Universals, or
Reflex Discourses; concerning all which, we have before spoken. Nu. 19. Angels
know by Intuition; but a Soul only by Apprehension, Composition, Discourse,
Perceivance Internal, and the Outward Senses. Nu. 22. The Soul is Form to the
Body, therefore it must be produced in Union with it, and cannot naturally be
produced in time before the Body.

Fol. 14. N. 27. The Soul, as Rational, is united with the Body, because it
exercises all Acts of Reason in the Brain, upon the Disposition of which, it
does depend, for such Purposes: and if the Organs there do fail, or are
obstructed, the Soul cannot act Reasonably, as appears in Distracted Persons,
or Furious, or otherwise disordered. Nu. 29. and 30. Cites Cajetan and Ferrara,
who do not allow the Soul, as Rational, to be the Natural Form of the Body, or
united to it as such; but would have it placed in a Superior Degree to the
Body; which our Author does not allow.

Fol. 18. N. 7. He argues, a Material Phantasy offered to the Intellect,
produces therein a Species impressed upon it, or expressed in it, the Action
which is here productive of this Spiritual Species received in the Soul,
depends upon the Fancy, which is a Corporeal Thing: Whence a Thing that is
Spiritual may depend upon one that is Material.

Fol. 19. Nu. 11. He denies the Mode of the Union betwixt Soul and Body to be
Spiritual. And I say, it seems not Miraculous, but Natural. However, many of
our Authors conceive miraculous New Creations and Unions, upon Fruitful
Coitions, Lawful or Unlawful. Fol. 20. N. 16. Seems to believe, that in the
Union of Soul and Body, there is a Penetration and Mixture of both. Nu. 17. And
that a Spiritual Thing may consist of Parts. Nu. 18. Says, The Soul is not
compounded of Essential Parts, viz. Matter and Form, Nu. 21. nor of Integral
Parts; but is an Indivisible Entity. Fol. 21. Nu. 26. This Soul (is objected)
may inform, or be in diverse Parts of the Body; therefore it may be in many more
Parts; and, though Indivisible, may inform a very great Bulk of Matter. He
answers, The Soul is fitted for a Humane Body, and terminated in it, and is
neither too great or too little for it. I say this needs Proof, and yet has
none. Fol. 22. Nu. 28. The Soul can inform but one Heart and Head, and such
other Parts as are in Connection with them, or unseparated: but no Proof
offered. And what shall be said of one Joint-Body to the Navel, and thence to
both Bodies and Heads, of which diverse Examples have been. Fol. 24. Nu. 14.
Says, The Material Soul, as in Beasts, may be Indivisible into Integral Parts.

Fol. 25. Nu. 1. Says, Certain it is, that Souls in the Body do act diversely in
diverse Parts of that Body: it Sees in the Eyes, Hears in the Ears, etc. Fol.
27. N. 19. and they are acted by the Soul, in, and according to the Aptitude
and Power of the several Parts and Organs of the Body, and as God has
appointed them to be performed and done. And to this I agree.

Fol. 28. N. 1. Some hold, that all Souls of one Sort or Kind, are Unequal one
to another: Contra: Others say, there can be no Vnequality amongst them: In
this must be observed, That to be Equal, is one thing, and to be Alike, is
another thing: nor are they the same with Agreeable or Disagreeable. Fol. 35.
N. 33. One Man may have more perfect Accidents than another; and so for
Operations, by reason of Accidental Advantages or Disadvantages: and so one
same Person may be accidentally more or less Perfect at Times. But this proves
not an Inequality amongst Souls. N. 34. Not proving a Natural either Inequality
or Dissimilitude, he proposes a Prudential one: For, (says he) the Affirming
that Judas had a Soul equal to that of Christ or his Mother, would be harsh and
imprudent: and therefore we may say, Souls existing, may be both Unlike and
Unequal. And even from the Ground laid in Generation, Degrees of Qualification
may arise. Fol. 36. N. 1. Each Living Creature has a Soul, and but one. Fol.
37. N. 7. The Vegetative and Sensitive are formally included in the Rational
Soul, for that is the Formal Principle of Humane Life and Sense. And I do
agree, them and Reason, to come all from one Principle. Fol. 41. N. 1. Wit can
either be separated from Knowledge, or it cannot. [We have said it cannot.] N.
3. He cites an Opinion, from Ariaga, that Life or Living is Real or
Intentional; the Real Worldly, must have a Nourishment, as in Plants, Brutes,
and Men, the Life Intentional has Principles of Knowledge and Appetite,
comprehending God, Angels, and all that have Life. Whence, says he, Plants live
only on the Gross or Real Life: Animals that have Sense, viz. Brutes and Men,
live Really and Intentionally; God and Angels, Intentionally: this, says our
Author is a feigned Invention.

Fol. 50. N. 3. Says, The Soul does concur, both effectually and immediately,
in the Exercising of its own Operations. The Soul deserves well or ill,
according to the good or ill Will, and the Effects of it: whence it is, the
Soul that it free [and not the Will.] Merit and Demerit grows from a Liberty to
do, or suffer, or not; and therefore this Liberty belongs immediately and
principally not to the Will, but to the Soul: so the Soul in truly free, and
has Power to determine its own Efficiency and Operations; agreeing with what
we have before spoken concerning it. N. 5. The Will is Coeca Potentia, and
cannot work, but as it is determined by Knowledge; and the Knowing Principle is
that which is free formally.

Fol. 52. N. 7. Says, The Soul has no Parts, but the whole concurrs to every
Vital Action in Hand, Head, Feet, etc. This I say, is the inconvenient Result
of Framing the Soul to be an Immaterial Substance, and impartible. Hence
follows our Author's Assertion, That the whole Soul must be undividably acting
in all Parts at once, and wholly in every Part, which to unprejudiced Persons,
looks very like unintelligible. N. 11. The Soul is the formally intelligent
Principle. Fol. 53. N. 14. He says, The Senses in Man are subjected in Matter,
as the proper Subject where it is inherent. That the Soul is not a proper
Subject for its Inhesion: for Material Accidents cannot be produced out of a
Spiritual Subject. Matter united to a Sensitive Soul, is not therefore
Sensitive; nor for being united to a Rational Soul, is it Rational: but the
whole Compositum is by Force and Power of its Form, Sensible or Rational. N.
17. And the Material Sensations are united to the Soul, which is the Principium
Sentiens, and yet may not be a Recipient of the Sensations. N. 17. For the Soul
informs Matter in which it is not inherent, but united to it. N. 19. Though a
Form be united to a Subject without being inherent in it: yet no Form can be
inherent in a Subject to which it is not united; and therefore Sensation
received in Matter and united to the Form, must be likewise united to the
Matter.

Fol. 54. N. 21. Sensations of Brutes are both subjected and united in their
Souls: but Sensations of Men are only united to their Souls, [because that is
here taken for an Immaterial Spirit, whence Material Agencies cannot arise
Productive.]

Fol. 54. N. 1. It is (says he) a great Question amongst the Learned, Whether
the Faculties, such as Nutrition, Generation, Sense, Intellect, be really
distinct from the Soul or not? Some say that they are not; and some that they
are: Others, that the Vegetative, viz. Nutritive and Generative, are really the
same with that sort of Soul; but that the Sentient and Intelligent Faculties
are really distinguished from those Souls. N. 3. The Will, if divided from the
Soul or Intellect, cannot have Knowledge, and therefore not Freedom of Acting:
nor is any thing essentially Subsisting of it self: N. 4. but dependently upon
the Intellect or Judgment; and that is most knowng and free, and by that
Voluntary Faculty is determined.

Fol. 56. N. 11. Begins to cite Arguments for proving that the Faculties or
Powers are distinct from the Soul, and answers them.

Fol. 58. N. 1. He raises another Question, viz. granting such Faculties really
Identified, or to be really undistinguished from the Soul; Whether then they be
not formally distinguished from it? N. 2. He says they first are formally
distinguished from one another; and then that every one of them is so
distinguished from the Soul, at least inadequate. Fol. 59. N. 9. Questions if
there can be an Intellective Faculty without the Voluntary attending it.

Fol. 65. N. 1. Anatomists do find, that from the outward Organs of the Sense
there go Nerves which lead to the Brain, by which the Vital Spirits represent
the Images received, unto the common Sense, or inward Faculty, that can
discern. Dogs cannot bark without Sensation: thin (in their Sleep) cannot be
outward: therefore they do so by Force of their Sense Internal. N. 2. Says,
There is in Man a Sensual Appetite, besides his Will: And if so, (says he)
there must be also a Knowing Principle or Power to guide it. And this, he says,
is the Common or Inward Sense. But to this I do not agree: but say, The Contest
does not seem to be betwixt the Will and the Appetite, but betwixt Reason, and
the Affections, and Passions, each endeadeavouring to incline the Judicial
Faculty to pass Sentence on their behalf. And the Passions, as Wrath and Fear,
do even strive by their Violence, to overpower and compel the Judgment to pass
its Sentence on their Side, that the Compositum may obtain a present Quiet,
which without giving some Degrees of Satisfaction to those rebellious and
potent Contestors, it is not likely to do: But upon a Consent obtained, the
Voluntary Power (call it Will or Appetite) is readily subservient to such
Agreement of the Judgment, and has no Power in Nature to resist such a Decree,
its Dependence being upon the Judgment, as upon its Natural Guide and Director;
without whose Consent, she neither will, or naturally can act: so as there is
no need to make the Intellect Guide to the Will, and the Common Sense Guide to
the Appetite; but the one Guidance of Judgment will serve them both; or there
is, in truth, no real Difference between them. Fol. 65. N. 3. There are diverse
Acts of the Sense or Senses Internal. 1. It is Perceptive of the Objects
delivered by the Senses; and thence is called the Common Sense. 2. It conserves
the Species so delivered, Revolvendo, and is called the Imagination. 3. It can
know them and distinguish them one from another, and thence is called the
Affirmative Power. 4. It can compound and join these Species together, with
what Coherence or Incoherence it pleases, or as may happen; and this is called
the Phantasy. 5. It records and remembers such Objects, and conserves Things
apprehended for Future Times and Uses; and this is called the Memory.
Doubt may be, whether a Power or Faculty shall be constituted for Performance
of every one of these Offices, or that one Common Power shall be said to
perform them all? Our Author defends, There is but one Common Internal Sense
acting in all these Performances, (if in truth they be distinct or several)
they all may proceed from one Power, and it is not reasonable to multiply
Powers more than is needful, especially for Men of his Judgment; which was,
That there were no Powers in the Compositum, which were really distinct from
the Soul: And in all this I am at Agreement with him, viz. That there are no
Powers or Faculties so really distinct from the Soul, as that they can act to
Effect, without the Excitation and Assistance of the Soul. Hence the Soul moves
the Hand, Foot, Heart, and all Members; sees in the Eyes, hears in the Ears,
expresses in the Voice, perceives in the Common Sense, compares and compounds
in the Phantasy, records in the Memory, reasons in the Intellect, and judges in
his Supreme Seat or Power: it desires in the Affections, excites and acts in
the Passions; moving all to the intended Preservation, Propagation, Good, and
Advantage of each of those Faculties, to which they most properly belong;
intending withal to the Good of the whole Compositum. Hence the Affections and
Passions do derive from the Soul, as well as the Reason and Intellect, and one
of them is not naturally subjected unto the other: but each of them has its
Faculties and Powers, formally distinguished from one another, but all
identified in the Soul, so as they act freely and without Dependence of one
upon another. Thus the Affections and Passions (as Products of the same Soul,
with the Reason and Intellect) are naturally at like Freedom, and not the
Former under Cohersion of the Latter. The Seat of Judgment we place Supreme in
the Microcosm, endowing that Power with Knowledge, and Discretion, to the
Measure of that Compositum wherein it is. This, we say, sways in the
Government, which is Monarchical and Legal; and the Judgment cannot be
corrupted or beaded to act otherwise than appears to be for the most Safety,
Good, and Benefit of the Compositum, all things (then offered or appearing)
considered: without Consent of this, the Will or Voluntary Power cannot move,
or proceed to Execution; and yet the Judgment often does consent, with great
Measures of Reluctance, pressed thereunto by the Furies and Force of Passions,
viz. Wrath and Fear; or by the extreme troublesome and vexatious Importunities
of Affections, viz. Ambition, Covetousness, and Lust, divided into that of
Nutrition and Generation: and these do so far, oft-times, importune and press
the Judgment for its Consent to their Satisfaction, as that upon the overlong
Delay, or utter rejecting of their Suit by the Judgment, or their final
Opposition from outward Obstacles: they are able to drive the whole Compositum
along with them into Frenzy, Despair, Diseases, and other ruinous Calamities,
as we have before quoted in the Case of Judas; in which the Judgment consented
to a Violent Death, rather than bear the Stings and Torments of his Passions.
But this abates or takes away the Wonder, upon the Judgment's Consenting with
Reluctance, to Execution of those Actions which it self does not approve.
Thence we often do what we would not, and do not what both Reason and Judgment
desire to do. And though S. Paul call this Sin in us, I take leave to think it
is Nature in us, and that it was in Adam before Sin, and was the Original of
Sin in him and his Wife as well as in us. For when the Woman saw that the Fruit
was Good for Food, and Pleasant to the Eyes: here was her Lust tempted and
prevailed upon. And that it was to be desired, to make one Wise: here was her
Ambition tempted and prevailed upon. And these prevailed upon her Judgment,
which consenting, the Voluntary Power moved the Hands to take, and Chaps to
grind and devour, that which (from S. Paul's Authority) Christians have ever
sine believed to be the Root of Original Sin, and bad Inclinations in Men:
although by this they seem to grow from a higher Original, viz. Nature in Man;
in which we do not place the Affections or Passions under the Regiment of
Reason Naturally, but take them for Powers Coordinate, excited and acted by
the Soul, and set under Direction and Government of the Judgment, upon which
the Voluntary Power is Attendant. And we say (with this our former Author) That
the Souls Operations are assisted or hindered, by the Fitness of Matter and
Aptness of Organs in the Body: If the Matter be of good Temper, and the Organs
apt and fit, the Soul's Operations are more Vigorous and Effectual: If the
Matter or Organs be indisposed, the Soul's Operations are more infirm and
feeble; and if the Instruments be corrupted or spoiled, the Soul cannot operate
at all by them: as, if the Eyes be out, the Soul cannot see; if the Memory be
spoiled, it cannot remember; if the Intellect be crazed, the Soul cannot
reason; if the Seat of Judgment be corrupted, the Government fails, and all
goes out of Order. Also the Judgment may be more Able and Firm in some than in
others, according as the Materials are tempered, and the Organs apt and fit:
And Degrees of Perfection or Imperfection come upon it by good or ill
Education, Custom, Company, and other Accidents, to which that, and all other
Faculties, Powers, Members; and Organs of the Soul and Body are subject. And
they will be better and worse in the same Person at diverse Times, and upon
several Accidents and Occasions; all which, seem to evince a Mutual Dependence
of the Soul and Body, one upon another. The Body without the Soul is but a Dead
Body, void of Motion, Sense, and Life; and the Soul without a Body, has no
Place where it can lay its Head, or set down its Foot: the Body is its Natural
Receptacle, and there only it seems to be at Home, enlivening the whole Body,
inciting each Member, Organ and Faculty, to the Performance of those Duties and
Operations, for which (by God and Nature) they were intended and appointed; and
acting in them, and by them, all that has been before particularly mentioned.
All this (we say) is performed by that Flame of Life kindled from Heaven in the
Bodies, Blood, and Humors of Adam and his Wife, and by them propagated to all
Future Generations: this Flame passing in and with the Blood throughout, and
into every small Part and Member of the Body, may (it seems) be easily
conceived to act in all the Members and Organs of the Body, and the Vital,
Sensitive, and Intellectual Faculties thereunto joined, and in, and by its
Organs performed; working, per My, and per Tout, all that is acted in the Body,
and in every Part and Parcel of the same; because this Soul is spread and
diffused over all. But how things should in this Manner be performed by an
Immaterial and Indivisible Spirit or Spark of a Soul, that its whole should be,
and act, in every Member and Organ of the Body, and yet be but one for, and in,
the whole Body; this is so far from me conceivingly to believe, as that I
rather incline to think it an unintelligible Thing. As we have said, the Soul
acts in every Organ of the Body, and the Inward as well as the Outward. So (it
seems) it cannot act to its special Purposes, but in those Places and Organs,
to those Purposes specially appointed by Nature. It Sees in the Eyes, and Hears
in the Ears; but it cannot See or Hear without them, nor by any other Member or
Instrument: It cannot perceive but in the Common Sense, nor frame idea's but in
the Phantasy, nor remember but in and by the Organ of Memory, nor understand
but in the Intellect, nor determine but in the Judgment, viz. cannot act, but
in and by its proper Organs of the Body, and as they are by Nature and Primary
Creation appointed to be thereunto qualified, attendant and sufficient, each
for their proper Performances: so as, although the Soul do enliven and quicken
the whole Body, and act, in, and by every Part and Member of it, yet without
the Body (it seems) it cannot subsist, nor in the Body can act but by the
Bodily Organs, and according to their Aptitude and Powers, and the Strength or
Weakness which it finds in the Bodily Organs. And this seems to evince (with
some Clearness) the strict and necessary Union of the Body and Soul; and that
they cannot act, or even subsist, but in and by the Dependence which] they have
one upon the other.

Fol. 66. Nu. 8. Our Author says, The Seat of Common Sense is in the Brain, as
Galen has showed. Fol. 67. Nu. 3. He says, There is but one Internal Knowing
Power in Man, and therefore but one Appetite in him. N. 4. And this (he says)
resides in the Head: against the Opinions both of Aristotle and Galen, who
place it in the Heart. Fol. 72. N. 2. Says, The Distinction of the Intellect
into Active, and Passive, seems not real, but only formal; the same Faculty
appearing Active, in order to some things, and Passive, in order to other
things. Fol. 73. N. 3. Its Agency lies, 1. In taking a View the Idea's in the
Phantasy. 2. In putting them into an Intelligible Frame. 3. In collecting a
Result from them.
Fol. 75. N. 2. Those who do not distinguish betwixt the Soul and the
Intellect, do say [as they must needs] that the Intellect resides in the whole
Body: but (says he) the Intellective Faculty is not in the whole Body: for the
Soul has not Sense in the Bones, nor does it understand in the Foot: and it is
by Organs that the Soul acts the Intellect, and in it. And this (says he)
proves the Dependence which the Soul has upon Matter, for the Exercising of
its Operations; and therefore the Soul unites to it self the Intellect in that
Part of the Body in which it finds the proper Dispositions which are suitable
and expedient, for the Exercise of that Power or Faculty: and therefore that
Faculty is in the Brain, and not in the whole Body. Some Folio's raises and
answers Objections concerning the Intellect.

Fol. 82. N. 1. Diverse Philosophers (he says) and most Divines, do say, That
there is an Intellective Memory; Others say, Memory does properly belong to the
Common Sense only, and to the Intellect but improperly. Others say, It does
properly belong to the Intellect: for that the Act of Memory does more properly
belong to the Powers of the Intellect than to those of the Common Sense. N. 2.
But for himself (who does not realy distinguish betwixt the Faculties and the
Soul it self) he does likewise not distinguish between the Intellect and the
Memory, any otherwise than is distinguished amongst the Senses, Fancy, Will,
and like other Faculties, not really but formally. Fol. 85. N. 16. The Soul
whilst united to the Body, uses the Intellect in Perception of Objects
dependently upon the Phantasy and the External Senses, and perceiver more
clearly Things which have come from the Senses to the Phantasy, than those
which are framed by the Phantasy it self.

Fol. 86. N. 1. Many hold, That the Intellect does first apprehend Vniversals,
and then Singulars; and as many hold, That Singulars are first understood, and
then Vniversals. Fol. 92. N. 9. The Intellect and Will, in Creatures existing,
are radically but the same things, and differ only in Name and Opinion. And yet
some Things are understood, in order to be desired or avoided, and require
Execution to be followed by the Will accordingly: other Things may be also
understood, which neither excite nor incline the Will, one Way or another; so
pass in the Intellect, without Need or Use of a Voluntary Faculty.

Fol. 103. N. 1. Acts of the Intellect, are Apprehension, Judgment, and
Discourse: by Apprehension the Object is only perceived and known; Judgment is
a Sentence passed upon the Object, grounded upon such Knowledge. Fol. 142. N.
1. It is (says he) a certain Rule, That the Act of the Will depends upon the
Knowledge [or Judgment.] But it is doubted whether this Dependence be only for
its Illumination, or both for that, and its Efficacy or Operations. And he says
it is only directed by the Judgment, to which it has a Moral Application, not
determined by it. N. 2. The Will depends upon Knowledge as its Guide, for that
it self is but a Blind Power: but the Concurrence of the Knowing Powers, seems
not of Necessity for its Operations. N. 5. And yet the Will is specificated
from the Sorts of Knowledge whereby it is guided. N. 1. Nihil Volitum quin
Praecognitum; the Will follows not an Unknown Object, but is directed by
Knowledge; and grows from the same Intrinsic Principle with Knowledge: Whence
the Will cannot naturally be otherwise but dependent upon Knowledge [or
Judgment.] And this (he says) is an undoubted Rule. Fol. 144. N. 4. It is
morally impossible for a sober Person, and not surprised, willingly to fall
into Ways or Means of Execution, fir doing or obtaining any Thing, without a
Judgment preceding upon that Thing, both concerning the Beneficialness,
Fitness, and Feasibleness of the Thing, which is intended to be effected. Fol.
145. N. 5. There is no other Act of the Intellect required, for setting the
Will on work, besides the Apprehension or Judgment: N. 7. whose Empire he is
not willing to extend so far, as to take away all Freedom from the Will. And I
do not see how that Conclusion is, or can be avoided, viz. That the Freedom
often applied to the Will, is Originally and Really in the Judgment, upon whose
Guidance and Government the Will is Dependent. Fol. 146. N. 7. This is
apparently to take away all Freedom from the Will, and to put the Reins (say I)
into the right Hands and Power. N. 8. There is no Act of Empire in the
Intellect, other than the Judgment. Yet he will not grant to the Thomists, That
the Empire of the Judgment, is of such Nature as to take away all Liberty from
the Will; but says it is rather a Guide to the Will, than a Predeterminer of
it. And we do not pretend to a Violence of Power or Empire in the Judgment, but
to a Natural or Easy Power, where the Sway and Guidance is such, as it
determines according to Nature, without imposing upon the Will any Restraint or
Constraint, obeyed freely by the Will, to which it leaves all the Liberty and
Freedom which is Natural to it.

Fol. 155. N. 1. He says, Acts of Natural Power or Command, though they are
Efficacious in their Nature, yet they do not infringe the Liberty of the Powers
acted by them, or that act under them. This he quotes as a more late Opinion.
Fol. 156. N. 2. Cites those who do not agree to this. N. 3. He disputes this
Point. Fol. 174. N. 23. Says, The Will depends upon Knowledge, both in its
Executions and Omissions. Fol. 195. N. 4. The Will intending to Execute, cannot
compare the Mediums by which it shall work, make its own Choice of them: but
the Intellect must compare the Mediums, by which Execution may be made: And
then it seems doubted, whether still the Will may choose which Medium it will
use in the Execution: Although that chosen, seems to the Intellect less
accommodate to the Execution intended. Cites many Opinions, that it cannot so
choose; and many other Opinions, N. 5. that it can. Fol. 197. N. 14. Cites Tho.
Aquinas, saying, The whole Reason and Power of Election lies in the Intellect
or Judgment; because that can only distinguish the Reason of things, what is
fit and likely, and what not; also which is more or less fit and apt: and
therefore the Will is determined to the Mediums of Execution as well as to the
Acts of it. And to this I agree, intending that in both Cases it obeys the
Judgment, and is determined by it.

Fol. 200. N. 1. ad 6. Asserts a Liberty in Mankind to act freely, he passes it
under the Term of Free Will, which we continue to express by Name of a Liberty
of Judgment; intending both Judgment and Will to be Powers or Acts of the
Intellect: but the Will (of it self without Knowledge) depends for its
Direction upon the Resolution of the Intellect, which is the Judgment: All are
acted by the same Spirit, and therefore they cannot contest or disagree with
one another. And (it seems) the Links are thus knit and fastened; the Soul in
the Head incites or stirs, assists and acts in the Organs there placed, fitted
and intended by God and Nature, for the Exercise and Performance of Perceiving,
Reasoning, Judging, and Willing, and all other Acts, to a Humane Intellect
belonging. The Activity proceeds from the Soul; but the Degrees of Perfection
in Acting, depends much upon the Matter of the Animal Spirits, and fit Frame of
the Organs found in that Region: for if they be faulty, the Soul cannot amend
them, nor act otherwise than according to their Capacities, and to a greater or
less Perfection accordingly. We place the Judgment in the Supreme Degree of
Government, and may term it the Result of the Rational Faculty, upon which the
Inclinations and Will are dependent, and by which (it seems) they are naturally
led and guided. This Judgment is more or less perfect, as the Animal Spirits
are more or less pure and rectified, and the Materials fine and plentiful, and
the Organs sound and sit: and is capable of being advanced by outward or
accidental Additions, as by Education, Learning, Examples, Experience, and
Practice; and may be disadvantaged by the ill Temper of the Spirits, or Paucity
or Superfluity of them; by a Discomposure or Distemper in Matter, or by
Unsoundness or Unfitness of any of the Natural and Necessary Organs to such
Operations belonging: also from outward Distempers and Diseases, from ill
Accidents, as Education, Examples, Company, Practice, and like Unhappinesses.
If the Soul were an Immaterial Spark or Spirit, it would seem more strange that
it should be affected, helped, or hindered by outward Accidents, as Infancy,
Diseases, Old Age, Learning, Example, Company, and the like; or that it should
be opposed and overruled in Government by Affections and Passions, which are
believed to proceed from Flesh and Blood. If the Intellect and all its Offices
and Powers proceed from the Soul, acting in the Regions and Organs appointed
and proper for the Production of all its Performances; and the Affections and
Passions proceed from the same Soul, acting in the Animal Parts or Inferior
Regions, and in the Organs appointed for the Production of such Faculties: if
both Sorts, viz. Intellect and Affections, be actually proceeding from the same
Soul, and equally radicated in it, this Wonder must needs be the less, That the
continual Contest between them should be maintained in the Condition which we
find it is, sometimes one Sort prevailing, and sometimes the other, under the
Natural Actings of a Soul which is equally productive of them both, and does
not or cannot favor one of them more than the other: and they seem planted in
Man by Nature (which is the Appointment of God) as Opposite Powers, swayed by
the Judgment, after a Paternal Regiment, sometimes yielding to the Affections,
sometimes pacifying them, and sometimes crucifying them, and to such Degrees as
to sacrifice the Body, its Life and Members, to the rigorous Resolution of the
Judgment, which Men have used to call a Wilfulness; but it seems of a Will
guided and ruled by the Judgment: and yet at its full and natural Freedom,
naturally determined by the Result of the Judgment. Our Author says, Freedom is
a Power, which having ready all Requisites for Acting, may act, or not act, at
its Pleasure. Now, upon weighing this Definition, I do not find in Man such a
Freedom (by way of Regiment) as will be thereto agreeable: The Judgment is
indeed at a full natural Freedom, but it is not natural to the Judgment to act
in Matters of Moment without a Consult of Reason in such Cases; and then it
cannot go from that which appears best for the Compositum, all things (then
appearing) considered. It is true, that in Trivial Matters, which do not need
or deserve a Consideration, the Act may be so free as to be very uncertain, and
to pass rather under the Name of Chance than Choice.

Fol. 205. N. 2. Some say, the Liberum Arbitrium is a Moving Power distinct
both from the Intellect and the Will. Fol. 207. N. 12. He says, It is a Power
of Acting freely, and able to determine it self. This (we say) agrees fully to
the Judgment, and gives all Natural Liberty (by that Medium) to the Will.

Fol. 235. N. 8. The Brutes are capable of Habits and Actions that are not
Natural to them, and yet may be acquired and made easy to them by Exercise. N.
9. The Cogitative Power may be cogently set at work by the Empire of Reason [or
Judgment] and be determined by it. [The same which I have said for the Will.
Fol. 257. N. 1. Substances so Simple, as that they do not consist of Matter and
Form, as Heaven, Angels, a Humane Soul, and the Materia Prima, because they
cannot be produced by any Creature, they have no Rules for their Specification,
or Things of a Specifical Nature with them.

Fol. 262. N. 2. Says, The Soul must needs be Immortal, for that else there
could not be future Rewards and Punishments, the great Inducements to a Holy
and Civil Life; and granting the Soul to be Immortal, the Substance of it in a
Separate State is Consequential. This last I grant, but not the first. Fol.
259. N. 5. Cites the Lateran Council held by Leo X. where all are condemned who
say the Soul is Mortal: and it is commanded to all Masters in Philosophy, That
they answer and solve all Arguments which may be alleged against this Tenet of
the Immortality. N. 7. He says, Let the Learned search into the Reasons and
Grounds of this Immortality, which all confess to be taken principally from
God's Special Providence, for Rewarding the Good, and Punishing the Wicked, in
a Future State. N. 8. Goes on upon the same Ground. N. 9. Mentions only, that
some do reason for it, from Man's Capacity to apprehend Eternal Things, and to
desire and expect them; but does not insist upon such Arguments, or so much as
say that they are firm. N. 1. He discourses concerning Powers and Acts of Souls
Separated, with little Assurance, and says, They have an Innate Inclination and
Appetite, again to inform, and to be united to their proper Matter.

Upon this our Author, we may observe, a Love and Inclination to Truth,
somewhat constrained by the Duties of his Obedience and Profession, and the
Place of his Abode and Conversation: but in Things not forbidden him, he seems
congruous enough to the Natural Truth and Reason of Things.

I met with a Pamphlet printed 1645. in English, entitled, The Prerogative of
Man, or, The Souls Immortality: the Author not named, but learned; full of
Quotations concernining our present Point. Page 9. He says, The Old and Great
Philosophers have agreed a Separate Subsistence of Souls. And this I do not
deny. He cites Cicero, Permanere Animos arbitramur. But what they then are, and
whither they go, we are yet to learn. Page 13. Cites Marcus Aurelius Emperor:
As Bodies dying are turned to Earth and Dust by Degrees, so Souls carried into
the Air, are liquified, and conjoined to the great Soul of the World, which
(says the Author) is nothing but God. Cites Tacitus, In Vita Agric. If to Good
Spirits there may be any Place remaining, if Great Souls extinguish not with
their Bodies; may thou rest in Peace! Cites Macrobius, who after reciting
sundry Opinions touching the Nature of the Soul, concludes, That the Opinion,
that it was Incorporeal and Immortal, had prevailed over all the other
Opinions. And this we do easily grant. Page 10. He grants Aristotle did not
declare himself in this Point, but thinks he forbore so to do, because he knew
not how to dispose of such Souls after Death. Page 14. He says, It imports
little, that Dicoearchus, Aristoxenus, Pherecrates, Tertullian, Sextus
Empericus, and some other Learned Men, have thought the Soul to be Mortal: for
that some Philosophers have held very odd Opinions. (He says) The Term of Soul
is taken for an Exhalation of the Purer Blood; sometimes for a Ruling Spiritual
Intellect; and sometimes for the Immaterial Immortal Part of Man. Page 15. He
says, Increase or Diminution of Knowledge grow from the Difference, Advantage
or Alteration in the Organs: and thence a Man understands better than a Child,
a Learned than an Illiterate, and a Diligent better than a Negligent Person.
And this we agree to, with this Addition, That the Soul or Flame of Life has
its Vicissitudes as well as the Body and its Organs. Page 16. He says, Some
Acts of the Soul are Independent of the Body, and wholly Inorganical, as diverse
Learned Authors have showed. This shows like an open Blot in his Tables: for
this Thing is the most precise Point in Issue: Prove this, and carry the Cause.
And, that in this Point he should shuffle us off, without offer of one
Quotation, or one Reason, in Proof of his Assertion, inferrs, he could find
nothing to say in it that was satisfactory to his own Reason, or likely to
satisfy other Inquisitive People. P. 17. Says, An Immortal Soul cannot be
generated: And therefore it is not dependent upon Matter or the Being of a
Compositum: And this would be true, if the Thing were so, viz. that Man's Souls
were Immaterial: but that still wants Proof, and so the Argument proceeds, ex
non concessis. He cites an Argument against his Opinion, viz. The Anatomies of
Men and Beasts show their Bodies to be alike; and their Senses, Affections,
Memories, Fantasies, are found to be alike; and they have each an Intellect
and Common Sense, some more and some less Perfect: whence then can such
Difference arise between them in Nature, that the Souls of Beasts must be
Mortal, and those of Men Immortal? And this carries the Sense of our former and
main Objection; and being put by our Author upon himself, it seems he should
make a Substantial Answer to it: but all the Answer he gives is this, viz. We
do collect from the Operations of the Souls of Men and of Beasts, That there is
not only a Gradual, but an Essential Difference between them, and that their
being like does not prove them the same. The last we grant: and for what he
will collect, it may be what he pleases, but need be no Rule to others. But
here is no Reason shown why or wherefore he makes such a Collection, nor how
that must needs, or can be so done. P. 18. He offers, as some Proof the
Difference between the Faculties of Men's Sensual Affections and their Reasons.
Yet he does not say a Man has two Souls, and that Affections proceed from one
of them and Reason from the other; but pretends an Essential Difference between
the Faculties of the same Soul; which seems absurd in Nature: and he might with
as good Reason say, that Love and Hatred in Man should infer a Specifical
Difference in his Soul.

Page 25. He affirms, Generation cannot produce a Humane Soul: but argues ex
non concessis, supposing it Immaterial; and then what he says is true. But it
begs the Point in Question; and which will not be granted him. P. 26. Says
Reason cannot be generated, no more can Sense: But the Organs of both may be
so, and the Powers and Spirits that actuate them. I, but says he, Reason and
Judgment can, and do (at times) act Inorganically. This has been said before;
but neither then, nor now, was, nor is proved, or offered to be so, and
therefore is not believed.

Page 26. Says, Generation is not performed by Acts of Wit or Understanding,
but those of Vegetation and Sense; and a Soul does not generate a Soul: still
supposing a Non supponendum, that a Soul is Immaterial, and separately
subsisting: but taking it for a Material Spirit, the producing it by generation
is easy and natural, Page 27. It follows (says he) that because a Man does not
generate with his Mind, but his Body, therefore his Body is Corruptible, and
his Mind or Soul is Immortal. It seems this needs no Answer. Page 28. says, The
Learned Sennertus ( a famous Physician) was moved by certain Reasons which he
could not overcome, to think the Soul is generated, and that the Seed it self
is animated with a Humane Soul [as in the Case of the Beasts] but this
Physician and Justus Lipsius, called before the Divines, and told, the Consent
of Divines was to the contrary; they declared their Resolutions to obey the
Order of the Divines, as was the most safe for them to do. He names on this
Page 21 Authors who maintain the Separate State and Immortality of Souls; and I
confess, I never met yet with any Writer who did not profess and maintain that
Opinion; and therefore do easily grant that this Opinion is undoubtedly
Catholic, in the plain and full Sense of that Word; qualified as the Broad Way
and the Wide Gate, which is the general Passage appointed for the World; not
intending it to be of that dangerous consequence or effect: but to show that
the general acceptance of an Opinion, is not an undoubted Security against its
possibility of being an Error: and that is delivered 1 Esdras 4.38. is still
effectual, viz. That Truth endures, and is always strong; it lives and
conquereth for evermore. P. 3. He confesses, That at the Resurrection a
complete recompense may be made both to Soul and Body, though they both should
be extinguished for a time. P. 34. Cites Aureolus, The Souls Immortality is to
be held as a common conception of the Mind, evident in it self; though to give
a reason for it, is no easy thing [is it possible to give one that is
convincing or sufficient.] P. 35. says, Generation procreates the Man, or the
Compositum, but not all his parts: viz. not his Soul. I say then, neither the
Compositum, nor the Man, whose Chief Constituent Part, the Soul is. Well (says
he) but if all the parts must be generated, whether are these parts simple or
compound Entities? If simple, they cannot be generated, but must be created: If
compound, then if they must be generated, the parts also of which those parts
are made, must in like sort be generated; and so in infinitum, or till we come
to some parts which are simple, and so ingenerable: Whence (say he) it follows,
that no parts at all, Corporeal, nor Spiritual, neither in Man nor Beasts, do
receive their Being by Generation. To this (I say) the absurdity of this
Consequence, shows his Argument to be a Fallacy: And we do not demand more than
what he cannot deny, and therefore grants, That the Whole Man is generated, and
so for the Beasts: and they are a Compound of Parts, both Essential and
Integral; and if either of the Essential Parts be wanting, viz. Soul or Body,
the Man or Beast is not generated, nor can be; and the Charge given, Genesis 1.28.
Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth, should be utterly void, and
of no effect at all. P. 36. He insists, A Man (producing another like himself,
by only composing and uniting his two Essential parts, viz. Soul and Body)
makes that a Man which before was none; and does truly generate, though he no
more produce the Soul, then he does the Matter of which the Body is made. This
I grant, no more the one then the other; and he does not deny the one to be
generated as much as the other. Thus we are at Agreement, viz. Something is
generated, a Man is generated, that cannot be without a Soul; and the Soul as
much generated as the Matter of the Body: but that it is Radically in the Seed,
as both in Plants and Beasts, the Vegetative and Sensitive Soul, as well as
Body. He nor any other, do show when, nor how, nor even why, or whence the
Superior, or more Intense Degree of Rationality in a Soul, or a Compositum,
should so alter the Nature or Power of Generation, and the very Intent and
Design of it, as to make it Ineffectual for the Production of a Man, and the
Continuance of that Species of Creatures in the World, contrary to the Design
of Generation; which Aristotle has observed to be Ordained for Immortalising
the several Species of Creatures in the World; and which God took care to
continue by a Miraculous Provision for them in the Ark: The Species were
intended to be continued by a Natural Means, viz. that of Generation; and Men
have by that Means been continued from the Creation till this day naturally;
and without needless and even Frivolous Multiplication of Miracles; by the
Creation of new Souls every hour, and perhaps every moment, viz. upon every
Fruitful Coition, though never so unlawful, wicked, or bestial. Page 37. He
says, That which is not wholly Mortal, does not wholly Generate; and therefore
neither Man nor Beast does generate wholly, yet a Beast more wholly then a Man:
My Answer to this is, That I do not wholly understand him; and for as much as I
do understand, I am wholly of another opinion: But he insists, you say, whole
Man is generated by Man; therefore all his Parts both Soul and Body: And he
grants, Whole Man is generated by Man, and that both Soul and Body are made
Parts of Man by Generation, and so Man generates his like: But that Soul and
Body have their Entities or Beings given them by Procreation; he denies, not
only as false, but as absurd. Page 38. Well, but how does he prove this? Even
by an Example. He says, A Whole Horse is generated, both Matter and Form, and
yet his Matter did not receive any Being by Generation. I Answer, There was in
the Seed a Vigorous Principle of Vegetation, Impregnated with a Nutrative
Power, Effective of Augmentation, till the Creature arrive to its full
Perfection of Parts, and after of Degrees; the same which we evidently perceive
in Plants and Trees: whose vast Boles and Branches Rise, and Grow from a very
small Principle in their Seeds; and thus the Matter of the Horse did receive a
Commencement or Principle of Being from Generation, though not a present
Perfection of Being, which future Nutriment will bring it unto: The Form of the
Horse, He grants, is as truly, and as much generated as his Matter, and both go
on and Increase together, to their full Perfection of Age, and of Degrees: Now
says he, Why should the Form be more necessarily Generated then the Matter; I
say so too, and therefore that it is not more necessary, but both alike; and
that he says true, viz. that the Form is not more generated then the Matter,
the Soul then the Body; but that the Principles of them both are in the Seed.
Which David tells us day by day are Formed out of that, which at the first was
none of them: It seems they take Life together, and so Increase and Grow, they
rejoice and suffer together, are grieved with Pains, and Sickness, and are so
released and extinguished by Death, for any thing that our Writer has said to
the contrary. Page 39. He says, That Men do Receive their Souls by force of
Generation, although they be not generated; and so might the Soul of Christ be
the Seed of the Woman, although not Procreated from her: These are his
Affirmative Sayings, but has more wit then to offer at Proof of either of
them, and others more, then to believe him upon his bare word. He says, That
before Infusion of the Soul, there is Life in the Embrion by sole Virtue of the
Seed; and that it is a Vegetation holding upon the Part of the Matter only, and
has in it no Performance of the Office of a Soul; and yet it fashions an
Organical Body, to make it fit for the Reception of a Soul. To which I answer,
There is nothing of this either proved or granted. P. 40. He tells us what Dr.
Sennertus says in his Books, viz. he holds it probable, That the Soul proceeds
from Procreation, and that from the first Instant of the Conception the Seed is
animated with a Rational Soul. Also, That nothing created is Immortal by a
Principle of Nature, but only by the Free Will and Gift of God. Also, That by
Force of God's Direction, and the Words, Increase and Multiply, there was given
Power to every Soul to Multiply another. To the first of these Positions, our
Writer says, That, by the Doctor's Leave, it infers the Soul's Mortality: for
whatsoever is generated is Corruptible, and must go out as it came in. And this
is easily granted him. To the next, he says, It is neither true, likely, nor
Philosophical; for by this, a Fly may be as Immortal as a Soul. And this is
also granted him.

As to the Seeds having in it the Principle of producing a Reasonable Soul, the
Writer demands, P. 41. what becomes of all those Souls contained in misspent
Seed, or ineffectual Coitions. Innumerable Souls (says he) must so be lost and
perish. He might as well have said Bodies also; for there is no Soul till there
be a Body: they are both equally in the Seed, and but potentially: But they
rise and grow together out of the same Root and Power, and together; and if
their Principle, the Seed perish, nothing is lost but it self, any more than
Men can say, when a Swine eats Akrons, that he has eaten up so many Oaks. Then
he demands, Why does the Soul depart from the Body, but because it leaves to be
Organical? I may as well ask, Why the Body departs from the Soul? And we do not
find that either does depart from the other, until Death them depart, and that
they cannot help it; Durum Telum Necessitas: and that is the Common or only
Cause why the Soul and Body are parted, or rather do cease to be. And it seems
not likely, that when they are parted, there remains any more a Soul than a
Body. The Man is departed, the Body is turned to a Carcass, and what becomes of
the Soul, no Man naturally can tell, unless it extinguish with the Vital Flame,
and Spirits of the Body. Thus many Thousands Years are past in the Worlds Age,
and yet Men are but as wise as Solomon left us, in that Point; and as Men had
been from the Beginning to his Time. For if former Times had known it, he could
not have doubted as he did. Aristotle, who lived about 700 Years after Solomon,
and doubted, and searched in this Point, as that Wise King did; yet he could
not resolve, but has left Posterity under the same Doubts that Solomon did.
Who knows the Difference, or that there is a real Difference between the
Natures or Souls of Men and Beasts, in Point of their Separate Subsistences
after Death. Our Writer tells us, It is the Father's Office to provide a Body
for his Child's Soul; which he performs by his Deputy Seed. For my part, I
should rather have thought this to have been (more properly) the Office of the
Mother. But he goes on, and tells us how this is Naturally Performed. The Seed
(says he) has a Natural Strength and Cunning to frame a Body for the Child's
Soul, done by the Form of the Seed, without any Animation of it with a Soul:
and so does an Akron by Virtue derived from the Tree upon which it grew, and
the Forming Virtue is the Seeds own Form, excited and assisted by the breeding
and connatural Warmth of the Maternal Body, and works as the Seed of the Cock
impregnates the Egg with a Chicken: And yet (says he) is it probable, that in
so small a Seed as comes from the Cock, the Soul or Essence of a Cock should be
resident. Why not (say I) as well as the Vegetative Soul, and Essence of an
Oak, in an Akron? And to what he last before affirmed, That the Father provides
a Body for his Child's Soul, he offers no Proof: and (for ought appears) he may
as truly prepare a Soul for the Body, as a Body for the Soul. He says, The
Forming Virtue is the Seeds own Form. I say, the Quickening Virtue is as
properly in the Seed, as the Forming Virtue; and nothing can Naturally enliven
the Body but the Soul, and therefore both Soul and Body proceed Equally and
Naturally from the Generation and Efficiency of the Parents, without any need
of New Creation of Souls in such Cases. P. 42. Our Writer agrees the Effect of
Sennertus's Assertion, upon the Words Increase and Multiply; but not by
deriving the Younger Souls from the Elder; but by the doing of some Act, out of
which such Forms should connaturally flow. As Material Forms (he says) they
grow by Resultancy; but the Immaterial by Creation, from a higher Cause, which
Creation is to follow, and is due, by a Regular Ordination and Existence of
Nature; and so they may be truly generated, viz. given and communicated, though
not made, by the Force of Generation. (I say) This Act done, out of which the
Humane Form should connaturally flow, or follow, must be the Natural Coition of
the Man and the Woman: and the Form of the Child being (by this Tenet)
Immaterial, must be created as a Thing due by regular Ordination, and Exigence
of Nature, to such Fact of Coition. I demand from what Original he has copied
out the Regular Ordination here delivered? He quotes no Authority in the Point,
nor offers any Reason for the maintaining it. Therefore we take it for a bold
Romance, invented by himself for Supporting his Tenet of the Souls
Immateriality: the Dissenters from which, have no need of this Conceit,
agreeing, That the Essential Parts, Constituent of the Man, viz. his Body and
Soul, are generated, and take Growth together, till they attain to their
Perfection of Degrees, and then decline, decay, and perish accordingly,
maintaining a strict Union and Copartnership both in Weal and in Woe, till
Death dissolve and finish their Association. Men thus persuaded, have no need
of our Friend's invented Regular Ordination, or Exigence of Nature, but may
reasonably fix upon it the Terms of a bare and a needless Fiction.

P. 42. He tells us that Sennertus argues, If the Parents do not give the Form,
viz. the Soul, then they do not generate the Man: but they do generate the Man,
and therefore they do give the Soul also; and unless they do communicate the
Soul, it cannot be truly said, that Like does generate its Like.

Our Friend answers, The Parents do give and communicate both Form and Matter,
but without producing either of them: certain it is, they give the Matter, and
as certain that they do not produce it: and the same may be said for the Form,
viz. the Soul; the Parents give it, but they do not produce it. This Answer
seems clearly Concessive, that the Parents generate the Soul as much and as
effectually as they do the Body; and more than that is not required by
Sennertus or any other.

But our Friend insists, Learn (says he) the Effects of Generation from those
of our Dissolution: our Death does dissolve the Union of our Parts, but it does
not destroy those Parts, but only the Man: whence, as by Generation we become
Men, by Dying we cease to be so. This also grants, that all which perishes in
Death was generated by the Parents. The Body had a Time to get Life and grow;
and so it has to putrify and consume; and the Soul began with Life in the
Embrion, and in the Body, and it seems to extinguish in Death of the Body,
naturally; or we desire to be yet scientifically instructed, from Reason or
Nature, what it is, and where it is, or at least, that it is, and has a
Separate State and Subsistence of its own?

P. 43. He recites another Argument of Sennertus, viz. If the Seed be not
animated from the first Instant, and then the Progenitor happen to die before
the Time of Animation, it might be truly said, that a Dead Man did Genenerate.
He answers, This Case is like one who puts Sparks of Fire amongst Fuel, then
leaves it, and the Fire does not take hold and burn till a good while after:
yet this Man is said to have made the Fire. And we do agree the Similitude to
be apt enough in this Case; and that it seems to import, The Seed is as much
the Efficient of the whole Child, as the Sparks put into the Fuel are of the
Fire: more than which, has not been demanded. Our Friend says, he has chosen
to contest this Point against Sennertus, because that Doctor was a Man of great
Worth and Substance: (And says) he magnified his Wisdom greatly, in Submitting
his Opinion to the Divines; worthy to be imitated herein by all other Men: But
that before has been delivered, does sufficiently evince, that there is a
great Latitude and Difference of Opinions in the World.

Concerning this Writer of An. 1645. we may observe, he had the Advantage of
the Wren in the Fable, who sat upon the Back of the Eagle, and was carried by
her into the Clouds, and coming to the full Extent of the Eagles Height, she
put her self to the small Stretch of her own Wings, and mounted above the Eagle
by so much. He had perceived the great Incongruities of continually, newly
created Souls, and intended at mollifying them, by assigning them a Regular
Ordination, as a Duty upon the Exigence of Nature. This Course appears healing
and helpful, Posito, that the Soul be Immaterial; but it is no Manner of Proof
that the Soul is so. And if it be not so, but only a Material Spirit, then is
there no need of this Invention; and then it is (as has been said) not only an
Invention, but a needless one. And yet it testifies the Writer (amongst his
other Endeavors) to have been a Person of Wit, Learning, and Consideration.

All the Authors, presently in our Possession or Reach concerning the Soul,
have before been Cited and Considered, viz. Four Foreign, and Four of our own
Later, and Domestic Writers. And concerning the Materiality, or Immateriality
of Humane Souls, we may observe (from that they have spoken) that there are Two
particular Queries or Questions; the Determination of which, will advance much
toward the knowledge of the Souls Nature and Qualifications: If One of them be
proved or granted, thence the Immateriality of the Soul may be strongly
inferred; and if the other be proved or granted, thence may he as strongly
inferred the Souls Materiality. The First of these is held in the Affirmative
by diverse of our Authors, viz. More, Digby, Zanchius, and the Pamphlet of 1645,
who do all expressly, and often affirm, That the Soul, in Lifetime of the Man,
does at some times, and in some cases, act of, and by her self, without Aid or
Ministry of the Body, or its Organs, or any Members or Powers of it: If this
Assertion have been proved, or can, or shall be proved: We grant, from the
Conclusion, a very strong Inference may be drawn for the Souls Immateriality;
agreeing the Truth of Aristotle's Assertion, in his Treatise of the Soul, Chap.
1. That if the Soul have any Operation or Affection peculiar to her self, and
wherein she can effectually Act, without Use, or Aid of the Body, or the
Members, Organs, or Spirits of it; then it is very likely that she may also be
capable of a Subsistence, in a State of Separation from the Body. But (says he)
If the thing be not so, and Men fail in Proof of such a peculiar in the Soul,
certainly she cannot subsist in a State of Separation from the Body. Our
Authors, for Proof of such a Peculiar in the Soul, do allege, That the Soul
can conceive Spiritual Beings and Universals; Second, or Abstracted Notions,
Logical, Mathematical, and Metaphysical Beings, and Things; which Matter is not
very capable of, nor that it can be Assistant to the Formation, or
Contemplation of such Conceptions: In answer to which, may be opposed, the same
Authors Assertions, That whilst the Soul is in the Body, she cannot act without
the Animal or Vital Spirits of the Body; and before has been observed, That
the Soul cannot see but by the Eyes, nor remember but in the Memory. And these
Organs and Faculties may be lost by Accident, and yet the Soul remain perfect
still; but without Sight or Memory, for want of the Bodily Organs: and if the
Intellect be crazed, the Soul cannot understand but according to such
Capacities as remain in the Organ: and it seems the like may be said for all
other Faculties of the Soul, and Organs of the Body; which infers the Soul
cannot operate, without the Spirits and Organs of the Body. As to the
Conceiving Spiritual Beings and Things, it has been said such Knowledge has
been derived from Revelations made to the Senses of some Men, and their
Testimony of them to other Men: and for the Conceptions of Universals and
Abstracted Notions, it seems the Soul in the Intellect, working Comparate and
Abstractive, by using the Joint Powers of Intellect, Fantasy, and Memory; and
by composing and comparing what is found in them, may well enough be able (by
abstracting them from Conceptions of Matter and Sense;) and sorting them first,
then ranking and comparing them, the Soul (by Joint Use of these Organs) may
naturally be able to raise Generals out of Particulars, and from Generals
ascend to Universals; and so likewise raise abstracted Notions from the often
Repetition and comparing Things first made known to them by the Senses. We do
not then agree that any of our Authors have proved, that the Soul has any
Operation or Affection so peculiar to her self, as that the Body has no
Participation thereof with her; or that she does, or can act any thing, or
produce any Effect without the Spirits, Members and Organs of the Body; which
(it seems) cannot be excluded from participating with the Soul in all its
Affections, Operations, and Motions, no more than the Soul can be unconcerned
in the Health, Accidents, Rejoicings, or Sufferings of the Body.

We come now to the other Question or Query, which, if it be determined in the
Affirmative, will strongly infer the Souls Materiality, viz. Concerning the
Mode of the Generation of Mankind. If the Parents do generate a Child like unto
themselves, consisting of the same Matter and Form, or such a like Soul and
Body as themselves are: if the Child's Soul and Body be generated by the
Parents, as well the one as the other: if the Thing have been proved, or can,
and shall be proved effectually so to be done; a very strong Inference and
Argument may thence be drawn, That the Soul is of the same Nature and
Constitution with the Body, Materially and Naturally Extinguishable by
Dissolution of the Compositum, Man, whose Constituent Parts they were. For, it
seems, Generation and Corruption do mutuo se ponere and tollere. What grows
from Generation has a Natural Tendency to Growth, Strength, Decay, and
Dissolution. If therefore one Man does generate another like himself, and so
the Soul as well as the Body, it seems likely that what comes from Generation
is under a clear Capacity of Corruption, if it be not under a Necessity of
Terminating by that Means. We are in a great Measure convinced that the Parents
do procreate Children like themselves, both their Souls and Bodies, and that
therefore both those Parts have in Nature and Reason a Capacity, or a Tendency,
if not a sort of Necessity to terminate in Corruption. So as we do not perceive
that Arguments drawn from Reason or Nature, and hitherto produced, are strong
enough to evince, That the Humane Soul is Immaterial, or Self-subsistent, after
the Dissolution of the Person, and Corruption of that Body to which it was
knit, and which (whilst Life lasted) it did inform, direct and actuate. And
herewith shall be concluded the Disquisition intended, concerning the Soul of
Man, founded upon the Grounds of Nature and Reason, and tried by the Arguments
extracted from them.

We proceed from them to the Second Sort of Arguments offered for Proof of a
Soul's Separate Subsistence, drawn (by our Opposers) from the Ground of Moral
Congruity. There must be (say they) a Reward and Punishment future to this
Life; of this, the Corrupted Carcass is by no Possibility in Nature capable:
and therefore the Soul must needs have a Separate Subsistence, that thereby
Future Rewards and Punishments may have a proper Subject to work upon. And this
sort of Argument is propounded and handled by Baxter in his Quoted Book, at P.
34. reaching thence to 40. and by Dr. More, in his 18th Chap. of the quoted
Book, Page 314. to the End of that Chapter: and by Sir K. Digby, in the 10th
Paragraph of his 9th Chapter. And all our Authors have mainly insisted upon
this Argument in Places before quoted. And it is done by them upon very good
and unanswerable Reason; such as the Wit of Man (grounding it self only upon
Nature and Reason) is not able to make sufficient Reply unto or to overcome.
This we look upon as the Potent and Prevalent Argument whereby the whole World,
and in all the Ages of it hitherto, has been drawn, and even forced to consent
to the Opinion of a Separate Subsistence of a Humane Soul; and to invent
Elisiums, Fortunate Islands, and Paradises, for the Good; also Tartarums, and
Barathrums, and Gehenna's, for the Wicked Souls departed. The Silly Americans
have not wanted their more crude Conceits, viz. That in Places beyond their
Mountains, the Good Souls Sing and Dance amongst Groves and Fountains: and the
Wicked ones are relegated to Denns and Caves, and other Dark and Disconsolate
Places, suting with their Demerits. Thus, from the Necessity of Future
Recompenses, the Opinion of the Souls Separate Subsistence has been spread and
received over the Face of the whole Earth, far and wide, without stint in
place, or stay in time. All Nations and all Religions, have accepted of this
Opinion, and it has hitherto prevailed amongst them: and thus may their
Argument be framed,

It is Morally Congruous amongst all Men, That Good Men and Actions, should be
rewarded and recompensed; and that Bad Men and Actions, should be punished.

But Men find (and see it falls out very often) that Rewards and Punishments
are not so distributed in this World.

Ergo, Moral Congruity requires, and that proves, there must be a future State,
wherein Men and their Actions shall be Rewarded, and Recompensed according to
their Deserts.

This. Men cannot reasonably refuse to grant, and then, ex concessis, it may be
further argued,

Man is Constituted but of Two Essential Parts, viz. his Body and his Soul.

His Body dying, Corrupts and Turns to Dust, and so becomes incapable of Reward
or Punishment in a future State,

Ergo, If the Man and his Actions be Rewarded or Punished in a future State, he
must receive the Effects of such Reward or Punishment in that part of him,
which is reputed capable, and may by possibility have a separate Subsistence
after the Man's Death, viz. in his Soul; and that this may be done: The Soul
must have a separate Subsistence after Death of the Body.

And the same holds true Negative: There is nothing of Man to be Rewarded or
Punished in a future State, but his Body or his Soul: But the Body in a State
of Dissolution, is not, capable of Reward or Punishment; and if the Soul
extinguish in Death, then is there nothing of the Man lest capable of receiving
Reward or Punishment, in a State future to this Life.

Ergo, (That the Rules of Moral Congruity may stand, and be maintained in the
World) the Soul of Man must needs enjoy a separate Subsistence, capable of
Reward and Punishment after Death, and the Dissolution, and Corruption of his
Body.

This Argument appears irrefragable, not to be confuted, or effectually
answered by the uttermost strength of Man's Reason: And therefore it is nothing
strange, that it has prevailed with Jews, and Gentiles, Mahometans, and
Christians; inducing them generally to belive a Separate State of Humane Souls
after Death; and it is still used by all our Authors, for maintenance of the
same Opinion at this time.

We still agree that the force of this Argument, cannot (by the bare Wit or
Reason of Mankind) be Answered and Refuted, but yet we say, that the same may
be fully so Answered, by Deductions out of the Divine Revelations, and Oracles
of God; and that by Arguments thence to be taken, both Negative and Positive;
and though we do mainly rely upon our Positive Argument on this behalf, yet it
seems not requisite to pass over in Silence, the Negative Argument, which may
be drawn out of our Holy Oracles for that purpose; arguing therefore
Negatively, we say,

That God is not bound, has not bound Himself, nor can, or will be bound by
any other Rule or Power, to act according to the Rules or Axioms of Moral
Congruity amongst Men; but that he ever was, still is, and ever will be at full
Liberty, freely to act with Men, and upon them, according to the tenor of his
own good Will and Pleasure, and without giving Account of any of his Matters,
without being any way obliged to the Observance of the Rules of Moral
Congruity, which appear most consonant to the Reason and Sense of Mankind.

1. The whole Book of Job seems to be an Argument upon this Point of Moral
Congruity. The Friends maintain, That even in this World, God rewards and
punishes according to Men's Deserts; and thence infer that Job was guilty of
some great, though secret wickedness, and most likely of Hypocrisy; or else
God would not, could not, have punished him in so severe and signal a manner.
Job replies, Granting this to be the General Course of Gods Proceedings amongst
Men: But (says he) God is so far from being tied, or tying himself to such a
Constant Course of Proceeding; that the Exceptions out of that Rule are very
numerous, and so many; as that Man cannot perceive the Love or Hatred of God to
Men, by any Course of his Proceeding toward them in this World: For visible it
is, that Wicked Men do often prosper in this World, and leave their great
Substance for their Babes and Children: Also many Good People live and die in
mean and afflicted Condition. Therefore (says Job) you may say and think what
you please of me: but you do notably wrong both me and my Maker, if you will
needy condemn me of Wickedness, because I am a Sufferer, and confine him to act
no otherwise but by the Rules of Moral Congruity, which ought to be used
amongst Men. And God after tells the Friends, That they had not spoken of him
the thing that was right, as his Servant Job had done. They were mistaken in
their Opinion that God was any ways tied, or would tie himself to such Rules as
are Morally Congruous, and ought to be observed amongst Men. 2. Another Example
in this Kind we may find in S. John's Gospel, when our Lord came to cure the
Man that was born blind: his Disciples demanded of him, Whether did this Man
sin, or his Parents, that he was born blind? Imagining (like Job's Friends)
that there must needs be some notable Sin in the Case or else God would not
have sent so remarkable a Judgment amongst them: But our Lord tells them, That
neither had the Man sinned, nor his Parents, in an extraordinary Manner: Nor
was that Blindness chiefly sent for their Punishment, but that Christ might
obtain Glory by his Cure; a thing which they could never have found out, if it
had not been revealed to them by a Supernatural Means, no more than Job and his
Friends could have found out the Truth of his Case if the same had not been
revealed. 3. Another Example in the like Kind may be, The Householder who sent
Laborers into his Vineyard, some early in the Morning, and others still later,
even to the last Hour of the Day, and in the end gave then Wages all alike:
those who had labored all day grumbled at this sort of Distribution, whereby
those who came at the last Hour were made equal in Reward to those who had born
the Burden and Heat of the Day. What the Master replied was true, there was no
Wrong done to the First Comers, for that they had their stipulated Wages: But
yet there was a great Partiality and Favor shown to the Last Comers; and the
making them Equal to those who had born the Burden and Heat of the Day, was
not according to the Rules of Congruity amongst Men: for those would either
have abated something upon the Last Laborers, or have added something to the
Wages of them who had born the Burden and Heat of the Day; and the Master had,
or gave no other Reason of what he did, but his Will. 4. Alike Example we find
upon distribution of the Talents: Ten were given to one, Five to another, and
One to another: when that One was taken from him, it was not given to another
that had none, nor to him who had Five, but to him who had the Ten Talents,
that he might still have more Abundance. Our Proverb calls this Greasing a Fat
Sow in the Breech, and seems a Fact much removed from the Common Rules of
Congruity amongst Men. The Four Examples, or Instances before quoted, extend
only to the several Particular Cases whereunto they are applied: but a General
Case may thereunto be added and derived from Scripture, concerning all Mankind,
in our highest Concern, viz. the Salvation or Damnation of us all. 5. Then we
attempt, consider what S. Paul said to the Romans, Chap. 9.22. What if God,
willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power known, endured with much
Long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath fitted to Destruction? This What if God did
do so? seems to import, that (in Paul's Opinion) God did do so, and that thence
should be derived the Cause or the Occasion of some Vessels of Wrath amongst
Men, fitted to Destruction. We will not yet put it to the Question, how
Congruous this Course of Proceeding by God is to the Rules of Morality amongst
Men, but will first thereunto add a farther Degree of Difficulty, viz. that of
casting, not some Men, or a great Number of Men, into this deplorable
Condition, but the casting the greatest Part of Mankind by many Degrees, into
the miserable Estate of Eternal Punishment, remediless and endless. We
therefore propose it as our Question, How this Proceeding of God toward Men
can be reconciled and made to agree with the allowed Rules of Justice and
Goodness amongst Men? For they seem to direct, That if some Men must perish for
the Showing of God's Wrath, and making his Power to be known; that yet the
Number so perishing should have been but small, and that much the greater
Number should have been made Partakers of God's great Bounty and Goodness:
Whereas it is declared to us by our Lord and Master, That Wide is the Gate and
Broad is the Way that lead to Destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat: but Strait is the Gate, and Narrow is the Way that lead to Life, and
few there be that find it. And this Truth is confirmed to us by our own
Experience: For we read of the Epidemical Wickedness of the World in former
Times, before and since the Flood; and we see in our own Times the vast Number
of Gentiles, or Heathen-Idolaters, and the Mahometans, whom we condemn: also
they Popish Idolaters, Schismatics, and Dissenters: and amongst the most
Reformed or Refined, the very great Number of Evil Practicers and Evil Livers;
enough to convince all Men, that our Lord's Declaration concerning the same is
Veritable, and free from all Degrees of Exception. We take then the Case
concerning, the Salvation and Damnation of Mankind to be thus far clear: that
the greatest Part (by far) do go in the Broad Way, and pass through the Wide
Gate, and but a few in Comparison do find out and walk in the Narrow Way, and
so pass through the Strait Gate. And upon it we demand to have God's
Proceedings upon this Point reconciled and made coherent with the Justice, and
especially the Goodness of God? How is it coherent to Rules of Justice and
Goodness amongst Men, that God by his Providence should so act in, and dispose
of, Second Causes, as that the Eternal Destruction of vastly the greater Number
of Humane Souls should finally fall out and follow thereupon; and that
(according to his Will) the hugely greater Part of Men, Bodies and Souls,
should finally fall into Everlasting Torments, to make God's Proceedings in
this Point coherent to the Rules of Justice and Goodness amongst Men, is the
Thing in demand, and which would pass for a great Degree of Happiness to see
well, and solidly performed.
But this, some quick Men will soon say (and perhaps think) may be very easily
done, by saying, that this Course of Proceeding was not of God's making, but
came upon Mankind by Accident, viz. by the Disobedience and Voluntary Sin of
our First Parents. That was the Cause and Original of all these Sins and Evils
upon Man. But to this Answer may be replied, That by Revelation we know, God
was conversant with our First Parents in the Garden; and if that had not been
told us, we know from Nature, and Reason, and other Revelations, that God fills
Heaven and Earth, and is Omnipresent: he was therefore in Paradise at that
Time, and knew when the Devil went about to possess himself of the Serpent, a
Fact which he could have hindered by saying nay; he knew the Devil's Design in
it, and could have prevented its Execution, or could have supported our Parents
against the Force of Satan's Temptations: but it was not his Will to use any of
these or any other Preventions of that Calamitiy; but the Thing was done, the
Devils Design succeeded, and our Parents sinned, all according tot he Will,
Providence and Appointment of God, and according to our old and approved Rule
of Morality, Malum qui potest and non prohibet, jubet; He who can hinder,
especially easily hinder, Evil from being done, and will not, does not hinder
it, is guilty of the Crime, as well, if not as much, as he that acts it: and we
desire God may be fairly brought off from having acted incoherently to this our
Approved Rule in Morality. Evident it is, he knew of all that was done, and
knew what would follow: he could easily have prevented all, or any Part of
this, if he had pleased; but he did not, would not do it. Whence, it seems
clearly inferable, it was God's Will that all things should fall out as they
did, that our Parents should sin, and their Posterities should be infected, and
be Sinners, and be Sufferers, except some (in comparison) few whom it would
please God to call out from the vast Number of People intended to be cast into
Hell Fire. I demand how these Proceedings of God are coherent, or can be made
coherent to Rules of Justice and Goodness amongst Men; and if no Man, be able
sufficiently to perform this Postulatum? I see not what should hinder Men to
conclude, from this Proceeding, That God does not tie himself, nor will be tied
by others, to act according to the Rules of Moral Congruity passing amongst
Men. Whence there is not a Necessity of framing a Self-subsisting Soul in Man,
capable of future Rewards and Punishments; for that God may order Things in
what other manner he pleases, without being any ways tied to observe the Rules
of Morality accepted amongst Men, or to proceed in Satisfaction of their
Expectations. And this shall be the Conclusion of our Negative Argument, before
the total Departure from which, it seems fit to reflect upon a Sting left in
the Expression; That Men are not able to justify the Proceeding of God,
concerning the exceeding Multitude of the Damned, in comparison of the Saved;
nor to reconcile that sort of Acting, to the Common Rules of Justice and
Goodness. It appeals a Thing so difficult as we think Reason too weak an
Instrument for the Performance of it; and that no sufficient Revelation has
yet been made unto Men, upon which they may ground any clear Justification of
the same, in a fully intelligible Manner, but that this may be said thereupon
with very great Assurance; That God is essentially Justice and Goodness, and
certain it is, he cannot act against his own Essence; and therefore all that
God does, is agreeable to Justice and Goodness in respect to him and to his
Manner of Acting: And that Men are not able to demonstrate that Truth in this
Point, proceeds from our own Ignorance and Infirmity: but if by God's farther
Revelation concerning such things in this Life, or in a future State after this
Life, Men do come to understand the true State of Affairs concerning this
Question, they need have no Doubt but that God's Proceedings with Men will then
appear full of Goodness, Justice, and Mercy, since in Nature and Truth the
Thing cannot possibly be otherwise.

We now proceed to our Positive Proof, That for the due and proper Application
of Rewards and Punishments future to this Life, there is no Necessity, or any
Need at all, to introduce or constitute the Separate Subsistence of a Humane
Soul: For, that there is a Resurrection of the Dead openly declared, as
appointed by God to that very Purpose and Intent; that both Bodies and Souls
may be sure of receiving Future Rewards and Punishments, according to their
Works and Farms of Living in this World; a Thing which the Ancient Jews and
Gentiles could never imagine; nor could it enter into the Heart of Man to
conceive that such a thing might be, unless the same had been revealed from
Heaven, and so well and fully asserted and testified, as there is no Room left
for Doubt or Infidelity concerning the same.

But before we proceed to the full Proof of this Point, some Observations
concerning the Resurrection shall be propounded, fit for People to take into
their Considerations.

1. That it is a Thing as clearly asserted in Scripture as any other Article of
the Christian Religion whatsoever: and has as full and concurrent Evidence for
the Proof and Certainty of it, as that Christ Jesus came to save Sinners; and
we have the same Grounds to believe the one as well as the other: and in this
Assurance and Certainty the Resurrection does far transcend the Opinion of the
Separate Subsistence of a Humane Soul, which is not dogmatically asserted by
any one Text of Scripture, nor doctinally taught in it; but is supported only
by a Collection, upon Inferences, from some Texts which mention the Soul or
Spirit of Man, without Design to teach concerning it.

2. We may observe, that the Retribution expected to be made at the
Resurection, will be both more complete, and formal, than what Men conceive to
be in the Procedure concerning a Separately Subsisting Soul. We read, God would
not execute upon Sodom without a full Examination of the Matter; and so there
shall be in the Resurrection: All shall stand before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and the Books shall be opened, that of Conscience, and that of Life.
That of Conscience has enough Evidence to condemn the whole World, but those
whose Names are found written in the Book of Life; and those only shall escape
by special Privilege, or Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. And as the
Proceeding will be more Formal, so the Retribution will be more Complete, and
made to both the Essential Parts of Man, his Soul and his Body; which, as they
have Jointly and Inseparately acted in this Life, so shall they Rejoice or
Mourn at the Resurrection, after the Sentence of a Last Judgment passed upon
them.

3. We may observe, That Death in the New Testament, is frequently called and
compared to a Sleep, and that the most sound and profound; and in such a Sleep,
viz. a sound Sleep, whatsoever time passes over the Sleepers head, he has no
perceivance of, if it be two, ten, or twenty hours, the length or shortness of
the passing time, does not at all appear to the Sleeper, but at his waking he
rises, as if he had been but newly fallen asleep. Man's Death is such a
profound Sleep, and his Resurrection such a Waking. If during that Sleep, there
go over the Dead man's head, Months or Years, to an Hundred, or a Thousand,
this is no way perceivable by the Dead Person; but when he rises, it will be
but as if he had newly fallen asleep. We read that a Thousand Years with God
are but as one Day, nor are they in truth so much: And in our present Case, we
may say, that a Thousand Years going over such a Sleeper's head, are but as one
Day to him, or are rather less; viz, not so much to the Sleeper, as one Day to
a Man that is Active in the World: for that the Dead man is not at all affected
with the time which passes over him: but when the Last Trumpet shall sound,
the Dead World shall awake, as if they had then but newly fallen asleep; ready
to obey the Summons, of Rise ye Dead, and come to Judgment. Whence, although
the time betwixt Death and Judgment, appear upon a sudden Conception to be long
or overlong, yet upon a better Search it will be found of very small
importance, either in respect to God or Man.

And notice (it seems) may be taken, that it would look like a great
impropriety, to term Death a Sleep; if it were true, that after Death, the
better part of the Man, viz. his Soul, continued Waking and alive; and at a
greater Liberty and Freedom of Action, then ever it enjoyed during its
Conjunction with the Body.

4. We may observe, That the same which dies, rises; and as the Soul is
principal in Man, so Man shall be more the same at his rising in respect of his
Soul, then of his Body: for his Body shall be but of the same kind; as Wheat
comes of Wheat, and Barley of Barley: but when Providence has so formed the
Body, and kindled in it the Flame of Life, by breathing into him the Breath of
Life, to be derived only from Heaven, his Humane Powers and Faculties, viz. his
Senses and Common Sense, his Fantasy, Intellect, and Judgment; his Affections
and Passions, his Knowledge and Memory, shall be altogether the same that they
were when he died: and as much the same as they are at a Man's waking again
after a sound and long Sleep taken; and the person rising, shall be more the
same, then an Old Man is the same person that he was when he was Young. The
same Person, Soul and Body, that died, shall be revived, and rise again, as one
who falls asleep, wakens and returns to the former Powers, Affections, and
Actions of his Life: But if the Soul were in a Separate Being and State of
Activity, during all that time of the Separation, how could it be said to
obtain a Resurrection; or be conceived to desire a Reunion with that Body,
which before was but as a Cage or Prison to it: And it seems such a Soul should
rather fear and resist such a Reunion with its former Body, then rejoice at
it, or be contented with it.

5. We may observe, That betwixt the Death and Resurrection of Man, no
alteration of his Condition can be expected or hoped for; but as the Tree
falls, so it must lie: and as Death leaves us, so Judgment shall find us. The
Body is returned to the Dust from whence it was taken, and if the Flame of Life
and Activity, first derived from God, and sine propagated by Generation, be by
Death extinguished, there remains nothing for an altering Power naturally to
work upon. Solomon tells us, There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, in the Grave; but all is rest and peace there. And so says Job, There
the wicked cease from troubling, and there the we ary are at rest. So Chap.
3.11. Oh that I had died from the Womb! I should then have been as though I had
not been. Solomon, again, As a Man comes out of his Mothers Womb, so shall he
return, to go as he came, and shall take nothing with him. And so for the
Resurrection, Men shall rise as they lay down; without natural or appearing
Possibility of any Alteration.

We proceed now to the Proof of what we have before asserted, viz. That the
Resurrection is an Article or Point of the Christian Religion, as clearly
taught and asserted, as well evidenced and attested, and as fully and certainly
to be believed, as any other Point or Article of the Christian Religion
whatsoever. And for this, our Evidence shall begin from the Old Testament.
There, Exodus 3.6. God is styled, The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: and from
that Style the Resurrection is proved by our Lord: but we must agree, that the
Proof which it makes, rises more from the Authority of him who quoted it as a
Proof, than in the Evidence of the Words themselves: For God might reasonably
be so styled, from the great Favor which he had showed to those Persons, and
his Covenant and Promises made with them, and to them. But the Sadduces refused
to admit of any other Scriptures save Moses his Writings: And to prove the
Resurrection out of those Writings, our Lord made choice of this Text; and from
his Authority the same must be admitted amongst Christians to be a good Proof
of our Future Resurrection from the Dead: And as Ordinary Readers could hardly
have drawn a good Proof out of that Text, so another Proof of the Resurrection
appears not, till we come to the Book of Job, and there Chap. 19.25. he says, I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the later day upon the
earth; and that my person shall be destroyed: yet that after this I shall see
God in my flesh; and I shall see him with mine own eyes. Here is a clear
Testimony of the Resurrection, if this Book may be admitted for Historical, and
acquitted from the misprision of being only Parabolical: It seems to me rather
to be Historical, and one of Moses his Writings, in the Forty Years time of his
sojourning with Jethro, in the very part of Arabia where the Land of Vz is
described. The Fact might be famous in that Time and Place, and the Revelation
made of the Causes whence that Trial began, so as it might deserve to be
recorded by a worthy Pen to all Posterities: and we find Job ranked by the
Prophet with Noah and Daniel: and James 5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of
Job, and have seen what end his afflictions had. Whence is seems the more
likely that this Book is a true Relation and History, and not a bare Invention
or Parable. Our next Proof is Psalm. 16.11. Thou shall not leave my soul in
hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption. And this is quoted by St.
Peter, Acts 2.27. as an Evidence of Christ's Resurrection, and so visibly it is.
And from Christ's Resurrection, Paul infers a general Resurrection, so as
i^mediately this is taken for a Proof of the Resurrection of the Dead
generally. Eccles. 11. Solomon bids the young Man, Walk in the ways of his
heart, and says, though he live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet
remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many; and know that in the end
God will bring thee into Judgment. 12.14. For God will bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. It may be
paraphrased, Young Man, thou may at thy liking and peril, follow the ways
that please thee; but remember that there will come days of darkness, many such
days; after the end of which thou shall be brought into Judgment before God for
all things done in thy life time: for God has appointed to bring every work
into Judgment, whether the same be good or evil. Thus paraphrased, this Text
seems to be a likely Proof of the Resurrection of the Dead. So Isa. 26.19. Thy
dead men shall live, with my dead body shall they arise. This Text sounds in
the words of it, like a strong Proof of a Resurrection; but upon consideration
of the Context, both before and after, no intent of treating concerning that
Subject appearing, we shall only propound the Text as an Expression favoring
that Opinion. So Ezekiel. 37. his Vision of the Dry Bones rising into an exceeding
great Army, we pass for a Parable, and as an Illustration, rather then a Proof
of the Resurrection. Our last Text for Legal Proof is out of Daniel, Chap. 7.9.
He beheld till the Thrones were cast down, and the ancient of days did sit:
like a clear and plain Description of the Last Judgment: and yet by the Context
both before and after, it seems pertinent properly to the Times of our Lords
first coming. Chap. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth,
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and others to a like punishment. Here if
the word many might be changed for all, or be accounted to intend all; this
Text would be a full Proof of the Last Resurrection and Judgment: Upon which
Daniel is told, ver. 13. Go thou thy way, till the end be, for thou shall rest
[ viz. in death] and stand in the lot at the end of the days; viz. at the Last
Day, or the Day of the General Resurrection.

These are the Texts which we find in the Old Testament evincing the General
Resurrection of the Dead, somewhat dark and mystical; the only clear Text being
that of Job, and that put under the suspect or prejudice of being Parabolical;
and so no undoubted Proof of the thing for which it was alleged. Those of
Exodus and the Psalms, are more authorized by their being quoted in the New
Testament, then by their own proper Intrinsic Light: And those of Solomon and
Daniel, may have some reasonable Exceptions against them: Whence our Point of
the Resurrection may be concluded to have been not very conceivable, or with
any firmness believed, before the Work of our Redemption was perfected. The
Apostles questioned among themselves, What the Resurrection from the Dead
should mean? and 2 Timothy 1.19. Paul says, Christ brought life and immortality to
light, through the Gospel; intending not a Separate Subsistence of the Soul,
for that had been accepted and believed, by Jews and Gentiles, from a great
Antiquity: by Jews from Readiness time, and by the Greeks from the times of
Orpheus and Pythagoras: but Christ brought that life and immortality to light,
which springs from the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and the State thereunto
subsequent: and that we say is so clearly delivered in the New Testament, as
there seems to be no possibility left of Doubting concerning the same. And to
those Proofs out of the New Testament, are we now arrived.

Upon a Survey of those Proofs, we make choice to begin with St. Paul's, 1 Cor.
15. as that which most opens the whole State of the Case concerning the
Resurrection; there that Apostle says, It is as true that there shall be a
Resurrection of the Dead, as it is certain that Christ was raised; and if this
be not true, and the Resurrection consequent: then our Preaching is vain, and
your Faith is also vain: we are found false Witnesses, and ye are yet in your
sins: and they who are Dead in Christ are perished: [this cannot stand with a
Separate Subsistence of Souls] if we have hope in Christ only in this World, we
are the most miserable amongst Men [without notice taken of the Separate State
of a Soul] but now Christ is risen, and they that are Christ's, shall rise at
his coming: If the Dead rise not, why are others baptized for them; and why do
we put our selves in jeopardy every hour: [but in hope of such a Resurrection]
but the Trompet shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised incorruptible: and
those who are then alive, shall be changed in a moment of time: therefore
continue steadfast, unmovable; abounding in the work of the Lord; forasmuch as
you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord: but it shall be
recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just. We take this Text to prove the
Certainty of a Resurrection, and the Necessity of it; for that without it, the
whole Profession and Practice of Christian Religion is vain; and all our labor
in the Lord, would be lost: without mention or hint in all this, that there is
a Separate State of the Soul, wherein it is capable of Future Rewards or
Punishments: but the whole stress of Future Recompenses, is laid here, upon the
only Faith and Expectation of a Resurrection.

We shall now begin to cite our Proofs in order, as they rise in other Books of
the New Testament. Mat. 10.15. It shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom
and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment, then for that City. There must be a Day
of Judgment, and consequently a Resurrection, Chap. 12. Men shall give account
for every idle word at the Day of Judgment. Chap. 13.39. The harvest is the
end of the World, the Reapers are the Angels. Ver. 49. The Angels shall sever
the Wicked from among the Just, at the end of the World. Chap. 16.27. The Son
of Man shall come in glory, and then shall he reward every man according to his
Works. Chap. 19.28. Ye who have followed me, when the Son of Man shall sit on
the Throne of his glory, shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes
of Israel. Chap. 22.31. cites Exodus 3.6. for proof of the Resurrection, against
the Sadduces. Chap. 24.30. Christ's Coming with the Clouds of Heaven, and
gathering his Elect together. Chap. 25.31. Is a large Description of the Last
Judgment, and that all Nations shall be gathered before his Seat of Judgment.

Mark 8.13. Those who are ashamed of Christ, he will be ashamed of them when he
comes in glory with his holy Angels. Chap. 13.26. Then shall they see the Son
of Man coming in the clouds, with great power and glory; and he shall send his
angels, and gather his elect from all parts of heaven and earth.

Luke 21.27. Then shall men see Christ come in a cloud, with power and great
glory; and then their redemption draws nigh. Chap. 22.30. Ye shall eat and
drink at my table, in my Kingdom. Ver. 69. Christ shall sit on the right hand
of the power of God. Chap. 24.51. Christ was parted from them, and carried up
into a heaven. And Acts 1.11. This same Jesus shall so come, in like manner as
ye have seen him go into heaven.

John 5.25. The dead shall hear Christ's voice, and they that hear shall live.
Ver. 28. All that are in the graves, shall hear his voice. Chap. 6.44. He that
comer to me, I will raise him up at the last day [without mention of a Soul in
Separation.] Chap. 11.23. Jesus to Martha, Thy brother shall rise again; she
replies, I know he shall in the resurrection, at the last day: Jesus says, He
that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. Chap. 12.48. He
that receives me not, my words shall judge him at the last day [not mentioning,
or supposing any intermediate Judgment.]

Acts 3.21. Heaven must receive Christ until the time of the restitution of all
things foretold by the prophets; [and so it seems must earth and the grave,
receive all other people.] Chap. 4.2. The Jews were grieved that the Apostles
preached through Jesus the Resurrection of the dead. Chap. 17.18. Paul preached
to the Athenians Jesus and the Resurrection. Chap. 23.8. The Sadduces say there
is no Resurrection, Angel, nor Spirit, but the Pharisees confess both [seems
confess all these; but still no mention of a Separated Soul.] Chap. 24.14. Paul
believed as the Jews also allowed, that there should be a Resurrection of the
Dead, both of the Just and Unjust.

Romans 14.8. Whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live, therefore or
die, we are the Lords. So Ver. 9. For to this end Christ both died, and rose,
and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. Ver. 10. We
shall all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ.

2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, whether good or bad: thus
knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, from that Argument, to a holy
life.

Philip. 3.10. To know the power of Christ's Resurrection, and by any means to
attain to the Resurrection of the Dead. Ver. 20. and 21. We look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, from heaven; who shall change our vile body,
and make it like unto his glorious body.

Colos. 3.4. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in glory. [Seems not before then.]

1 Thessalonians. 3.13. Be found in holiness, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all his Saints. [If so we die, we shall so be found.] Chap. 4.14. If we
believe that Jesus died, and rose again; even so them also which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him. Ver. 15. And we [who live at the time] shall
not prevent them which are asleep. Ver. 16. But the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Chap. 5.10. Christ died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we should
live together with him: [ viz. at his Coming.]

2 Thessalonians. 1.7. God will give to you who are troubled, rest with us; when our
Lord shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire.
Chap. 2.8. The Man of Sin shall be destroyed by the brightness of Christ's
coming. Chap. 1.10. Wait for Christ's coming from heaven: [as for the time of
the Resurrection.] 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The Lord himself shall descend with a shout,
the voice of the Archangel, and the Tromp of God: [and these shall allarm the
dead,] and those dead in Christ, shall rise first.

1 Timothy 6.14. Keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; which in his times he shall show.

2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, with Christ, we shall also reign with him. Ver. 18.
Some said, the Resurrection was past already; which was an error, and had an
ill effect. Chap. 4.1. I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearing and his
Kingdom. Ver. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the Righteous Judge, shall give to me at that day: and not to me
only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

Heb. 4.3. We which have believed, in Christ, do enter into his rest. Ver. 9.
There remains therefore a rest to the people of God. Ver. 10. A ceasing from
our own works, as God did from his: And we must labor therefore to enter into
that rest. Chap. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
Judgenment: And Christ once offered for sin, shall appear the second time,
without sin unto salvation. Chap. 10.37. Yet a little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry. Ver. 35. and 36. We must wait with
patience and confidence, till the time promised do come. Chap. 11.35. Persons
were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain [not a happy
Separated Estate, but] a better Resurrection.

James 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for when he is tried,
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him. Chap. 5.8. Be ye also patient, stablish your hearts, for the coming
of the Lord draws nigh.

1 Pet. 1.4. and 5. Ver. We are begotten by the Resurrection of Christ, to an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for us; who are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation,
ready to be revealed in the last time: [not already participated by Souls in
separation]. Ver. 9. Receiving [seems in the last time] the end of your faith,
even the salvation of your souls: viz. their persons, or their selves. Chap.
4.5. The Wicked shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and
the dead. Ver. 7. The end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer. Ver. 13. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of
Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also
with exceeding joy: [seems not before that time.] Chap. 5.4. Those who do well,
when the chief Shepherd shall appear, shall receive a crown of glory, that
fades not away.

2 Pet. 3.8, 9, 10. A thousand years are with the Lord but as one day;
therefore he is not slack, but would have all come to him: yet the day of the
Lord will come in a terrible manner, and we must wait for and haste to the
coming of that day; and look for New Heavens and Earth, according to his
promise: and seeing you look for such things, keep your selves without spot or
blemish: without mention of a Soul, or its expectations.

1 John 2.28. Now little children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we
may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. Chap. 2.3. We
are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is:
and every one that has this hope, purifieth himself, even as Christ is pure:
Without mention of an intermediate State betwixt Death and the Second Coming of
our Lord.

Revel. 17. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him; and they
also which pierced him: and the kindreds of the earth shall wail, because of
him; even so, Amen: [The thing is certain.] Chap. 3.5. I will confess the name
of him who overcomes, before my Father and before his Angels. Chap. 20.4.
Judgment, importing a first Resurrection. Ver. 11. and 12. The Form of the
Last Judgment related, where the Dead, both small and great, were raised, and
stood before God, and had Doom and Judgment, according to their deserts.

1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden works of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts: and then shall every [deserving] man have praise of God.

Heb. 6.2. Says, Let us go on to Perfection, to Doctrines of the Resurrection
of the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment.

Our Lord directs, Search the Scriptures, and we have followed his direction
upon our present Point: Not for that it is doubted, that men do disbelieve, or
even question, the truth of our Article concerning the Resurrection of the
Dead; but to the intent that it might more clearly appear, how much better, and
more strong Evidence there is for this Point, and the Retribution to be
expected at the Resurrection: Then there is for the Separate Subsistence of a
Humane Soul, as a Subject for the Rewards and Punishments to be expected, in a
State future to this Life. We may perceive the Resurrection is Ordained and
Appointed, to the very intent, that future Recompenses for things done in this
Life, may be fitly Awarded, and fully Executed: Whereas we find not one Text in
Scripture, that says in express terms, Man has an Immaterial, or Separately
Subsisting, or an Immortal Soul; nor that tells us, Recompenses shall be made
to it in a future State, nor does Doctrinally so Teach, viz. does utter the
words from whence such Collections are made, with intent to teach that
Doctrine; but the words whence such Collections are made, are all spoken,
intending to Teach some other more main and principal Point, and the Point
concerning the Soul is but by Collection from the Expressions, principally
intended to teach some other Points of Doctrine: So as these different ways or
mediums of Rewards and Punishments future to this Life, being placed and
considered together, Magis illucescunt, that clearness and certainty of the one
seems more lucid and eminent, by being compared with the darkness and in
certainty of the other: Also the one being so clear and certain, it seems very
needless, and somewhat Incongruous to introduce another means or medium of
future Recompenses, neither clear in it self, nor plainly asserted, or
precisely Taught in the Scripture, as a Christian Doctrine; nor yet received as
an Article into any of our most Ancient and approved Creeds: Whereas the
Reception of our Article of the Resurrection into every one of them, fixes the
same in the Christian Religion like a Rock immovable. And we Read that he who
builds his house upon a Rock is wise, but he who chooses to build upon the Sand
is otherwise; and what can Men otherwise think of one not able to support
himself, and in want of Direction and Relief, being in reach or compass of a
firm and strong Pillar, will choose to lean himself against a Post, which if it
be not rotten, yet may be reasonably reputed, both feeble and suspicious. The
censure due upon such a choice, shall be left to the Consideration of every
Man: And thus (it seems) we have showed and proved the Resurrection sufficient
to answer the Worlds Expectations concerning Rewards and Punishments in a State
future to this Life; and that therefore there is no need of introducing a
Separate Subsisting Soul to that intent. And we proceed to our Authors Third
Topic, or Ground of Argument, for proving the Separate Subsistence, and
Immateriality of a Humane Soul, viz. to examine the tenor and intent of such
Texts of the Scripture, as are, or may be found out, and alleged to that
purpose; intending to offer such Answers to them severally after each quotation
as shall readily occurr; not presuming a likelihood to make them such, as may
satisfy, and convince minds pre-possessed all the times of their lives, that
the thing is so, and may be, or muft be so proved; it shall be enough to
suppose they possibly be made such, as that People who are desirous, or willing
to put off (as much as they can) the prejudices of their former Opinions in
this Point, drawn from their earliest Education, and sucked in with their first
Milk: If such Persons do not perceive the Answers made to be unreasonable,
fictitious, or very trivial, there will enough be obtained to satisfy an
Expectation limited within narrow bounds; and that hardly can rise to the hopes
of so easy a passage under the Censures of any, who shall happen to peruse the
same; it seems less hazard then a hard censure cannot be hoped for, upon an
undertaking to row against the Stream and general Opinion, as well of past
Ages, as the present time. 1 Samuel 30.6. When David was in very evil case, he
encouraged himself in the Lord his God; he it is who has required that Men
should be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth. And Esdras 4.35. Great is the
Truth, and stronger then all things: those who know that their aim and design
is no other but the bringing the Truth in this Point to Light, to the end that
Gods Truth, viz. the very Truth thereby may be exhibited and discovered; may
(it seems) go on in it without being terrified, or bearing an astonishing
regard to the censures of Men. We shall proceed therefore to Execution of what
has been declared to be intended: Also where two or more Texts are cited, unto
which one same Answer may well be applied, such Texts are designed to be quoted
together, or at once, that the same Answers may not be often repeated: And
whereas heretofore those Texts intended to prove Recompenses in a State future
to this Life, have been often applied to prove the Self-subsistence of a
Separated Soul. Here will be care taken to detect and avoid that Point of
Misapplication.

We begin then from the Beginning of the Creation, and the History of it, viz.
Genesis 1.26. God said, let us make Man in our image, after our likeness. Ver. 27.
So God Created Man in his own Image. Chap. 2.7. God breathed into Man's Nostrils
the Breath of Life, and Man became a living Soul. We have before proved it, the
ordinary Use of Scripture, to express the Person by Name or Term of the Soul,
and here, Man became a living Soul; intends a living Person, both Soul and
Body. Zanchius puts a very great Stress and weight, upon Gods breathing into
Man's Nostrils the Breath of Life, for the Proof of a Separately Subsisting Soul
in Man: To this we say, there is not that clear Sense in the Text, which seems
to import no more, but that God gave to Man his Breath and Life; and so he did
to the Beasts of the Earth, and kindled in their Bodies their first flames of
Life, Propagated from those Originals to all future Generations; each
Generating its like, both amongst Men and Beasts: And as concerning the Image
of God in Man, what, and where it is, we leave to be disputed, as it has been
from those Ancient times, till this time, without being able to attain a clear
Determination. That Text, Genesis 7.22. All Terrestial Creatures in whose Nostrils
was the Breath of the Spirit of Life died in the Flood, seems to Paraphrase the
Breath of Life, breathed into Man's Nostrils, and to expound it in the sense
before given of it.

1 Kings, 17.21. The Prophet Elijah Prays, My God, I pray thee, let this Child's
Soul come into him again: Thus it may be Paraphrased. Lord kindle again in this
Child the Flame of Life, which is now extinguishable, restore him to Life
again; but the mode of speaking here used by the Prophet, was agreeable to the
common Opinion of his time, which was long after that of Saul. A like thing we
Read, 1 Samuel 30.12. concerning the Egyptian found at Ziklag; When he had eaten,
his Spirit came again to him, viz. the Flame of Life almost extinguished for
want of Fuel, was again revived and enabled for action by fresh Food, and
Nourishment; and as the Child's Soul came into him again and he revived, so this
Aegyptian's Spirit came again to him when he had eaten, and he revived. And 2
Kings 13.21. a Dead Man let down into Elisha's Grave, at the touch of Elisha's
Bones, the Dead Man revived; whether his Soul returned, or his Flame of Life
was rekindled, there is no Ground here to dispute, or need to do it: Job.
12.10. In God's hand is the Soul of every living thing, and the breath of all
Mankind. Here man is ranked with every living thing, as to his Soul, and Soul
and Breath are taken for the same things, and of a like Subsistence. Chap.
34.14. If God gather to himself Man's Spirit and his Breath, he shall turn to
his Dust; here Spirit and Breath pass for the same thing. Chap. 33.30. Bring
back his Soul from the pit, to the light of the living, viz. save his Life or
revive him.

Psalm. 49.8. It cost more to redeem their Souls, viz. their Lives or Persons,
their Riches could not do it, Ver. 15. but God has delivered my Soul from the
place of Hell, for he shall receive me, viz. he shall deliver me yet from
Death, and the Grave, and hide me as in the secret place of his Dwelling,
receive me under his Protection. Psalm. 56.13. Thou have delivered my Soul from
Death: viz. have saved my Life, so my Soul trusts in thee, and my Soul is
among Lions, and my Soul thirsts for thee, and my Soul follows hard after
thee, he holds my Soul in Life, and my Soul which thou have redeemed; and
72.14. He shall redeem their Soul from deceit and violence. 73.19. Deliver not
the Soul of thy Turtle Dove to the Enemy. 86.2. Preserve my Soul, for I am
holy: ver. 13. Thou have delivered my Soul from the lowest Hell, and my Soul is
full of troubles, and Lord, why casts thou out my Soul. 89.48. What Man is he
that lives and shall not see Death? shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of
the Grave? and bless the Lord, O my Soul. And he satisfies the empty Soul, and
fills the hungry Soul with goodness, and their Soul abhorred all manner of
Meat, and those who speak evil against my Soul. All these, and abundance more
places of the Psalms, do under the Word or Term Soul, intend and signify, the
Person, the Life, the Affection of the Party. Praise the Lord, O my Soul: These
and many other Texts sound (to common Readers) as Proofs of a Separately
Subsisting Soul of Man; but that Opinion may be past for a clear mistake, and
an apparent mis-conception.

Prove. 11.25. The liberal Soul shall be made fat, viz. the liberal Person.
Chap. 13.4. The Soul of the sluggard desires and has nothing; but the Soul of
the diligent shall be made fat; viz. the diligent Person. 14.25. A true Witness
delivers Souls; People, Men. Chap. 16.24. Pleasant words are sweet to the
Soul. 19.2. That the Soul he without knowledge, it is not good: viz. the
Person. Chasten thy Son, and let not thy Soul spare for his crying: Do not thou
spare. The full Soul loathes the Honeycomb. Thus far we have added to our
former proofs, that Soul is very often put for Person; and we now expect that
shall pass for a granted Truth; and it may still be confirmed by more
Testimonies than all that have yet been Cited. Eccles. 8.8. There is no man
that has Power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit, neither has he power in
the day of Death: Here Spirit seems to intend Breath or Life. Chap. 10.4. If
the Spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, viz. his wrath. Chap. 12.7. The
dust shall return to the Earth as it was: and the Spirit shall return unto God
who gave it. We say, this may be expounded, by Genesis 7.22. and 1 Samuel 30.12. and
Job 12.10. all before Cited. Then Chap. 34.14. If God set his heart upon man,
if he gather unto himself his Spirit and his Breath; All flesh shall perish
together, and man shall turn again unto Dust. Psalm. 31. Prays, Let me not be
put to confusion, but deliver me, be thou my Rock and Defense; Into thy hand I
commit my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me: And Psalm. 104.29. When thou take
away their breath, they die, and are turned again to their dust: When thou
let thy breath go forth, they shall be made, and thou shall renew the face
of the earth. Zech. 6.5. These are the four spirits of the heavens, noted on
the Margent, or Winds. These places make Breath and the Spirit, mentioned by
Solomon, to be much, if not altogether the same thing: And it seems remarkable,
that when David prays for Deliverance from Dangers that were temporal, as in
Psalm. 31. he uses this Expression: Into thine Hand I commit my Spirit: this
makes it seem, to intend his whole Person, himself, both Soul and Body, as has
been shown to be usual and common, in the Usage of the Word Soul. Isa. 29.24.
They who erred in Spirit shall come to Understanding. Here Spirit seems to
signify a Faculty of the Man, viz. his Mind or Intellect: Upon the Whole, it
seems the Spirit's Return to God, in Solomon's Sense, might be a willing
Submission of the Mind or Understanding to that Dissolution by Death, which he
has appointed to be the Natural End of all Mankind. This makes Death appear a
willing Return of a meek and quiet Spirit to God, by an easy Surrender of its
Fort and Hold, the Body, when others and they (if they did not so meekly
surrender) would be Stormed, and forced against their Wills to let go their
Holds, and be driven out of Forts which they have not Power to defend and
maintain against the violent and prevalent Assaults and Storms of Death.

We meet in Isaiah, Chapter 53.10. such an Addition concerning the Term of Soul, as
we judge not fit to omit, viz. When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for
Sin: This intended his whole Person: And he shall see of the Travail of his
Soul: Chap. 57.16. I will not contend for ever, for so should the Spirit fail
before me, and the Souls which I have made, viz. the People which I have made.
So, Is it such a Day for Man to afflict his Soul, viz. himself? And, If thou
draw out thy Soul to the Hungry, if thou minister unto him. Ezekiel. 37.14. I will
put my Spirit in you [Bodies rising from dry Bones] and ye shall live. And this
was executed by the Four Winds, blowing upon them: Whence it seems Spirit,
Wind, and Breath have a great Congruity one with another, and are put one for
another diverse times: And this helps to declare what Solomon meant by Spirit.
Dan. 2.3. The King's Spirit was troubled to know the Dream, viz. his
Understanding. Chap. 5.20. An excellent Spirit, Knowledge, and Understanding
was found in Daniel. One of these Words expound another. Micah 6.7. Shall I
give my Firstborn, the Fruits of my Body for the Sin of my Soul, seems to
import, Shall I give or Sacrifice my Child for my own Sin. Soul being here put
for Person, as we have shown was very usual. Zech. 6.5. These are the Four
Spirits (or Winds) of the Heavens. Chap. 12.1. The Lord that forms the Spirit
of Man within him, viz. who has given him Faculties of Sense, Memory,
Understanding, etc. Thus the Texts of the Old Testament, which make most for
the Proof of a Separate and Self-subsisting Soul of Man, have been quoted, and
such Expositions made of them, and Answers thereby made to them, as appear to
us sufficient to abate and take away the Violence or proving Force of them, by
showing that they do not necessarily or strongly compel to the Belief of such a
Separated Subsistence of Humane Souls. But that they only be solved and
answered by Senses or Constructions more Natural and likely, and more
consentaneous to the Natural Conceptions of a Humane Reason unbiassed or
distorted by the Prejudices of formerly received and radicated Opinions.

We proceed to Texts of the New Testament, which have been, or may be quoted to
the same Intent and Purpose. Mat. 16.25. He that will save his Life shall lose
it; and he that (for Christ's sake) loses it, shall find it: For what is a Man
profited if he gain the whole World and lose his own Soul; or what shall a Man
give in Exchange for his Soul? For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of
his Father, with his Angels, and then he shall reward every Man according to
his Works. Here, it seems, the Word Soul intends the Life or Person of the Man:
and what shall a Man get by grasping or gaping after the whole World, if he
lose his own Life: for without Life to enjoy it, what Profit or Benefit can one
make of the whole World, if it could be gotten: and no Man (in his Wits) will
take the whole World in Exchange for his Life: for he can have no Profit, but
plain Damage and Loss by that Exchange. And yet, says our Lord, He that loses
his Life for my sake, shall find it, viz. shall find Profit by that Exchange:
For he shall be recompensed at the Resurrection. For the Son of Man shall come
in his Father's Glory, and then he shall reward every Man according to his
Works. The Man shall then receive an Eternal Recompense, and be made a great
Gainer by that Exchange. Chap. 13.42. For then the Wicked shall be cast into a
Furnace of Fire: and the Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom
of their Father.

Next is quoted, Matthew. 17. the Relation of our Lord's Transfiguration
repeated. Mark 9. and Luke 9. There appeared to them ( viz. the three
Disciples) Moses and Elias, talking with him. They all saw the Appearances: It
must be true then, that these Prophets have a Subsistence after their Departure
out of this our World. And for Elias, his creates no great Difficulty in the
Case, upon Supposal that his Body went to Heaven, and was changed (as S. Paul
says) in a Moment into a Spiritual Body, and there may well enough be still
continuing. And for Moses his Body, it could never be found, what became of it
seems not very certain; but not being to forth-come, it was conjectured and
concluded to be buried, no Man ever knew where, nor that there was, or is, a
Certainty in that Fact: It seems he went up the Hill alone and never returned,
nor was his Body found: what therefore became of him (we may think) remains a
Mystery, and that he died, may be taken for a Conjecture from common
Probability: He never returned, nor was after to be found; therefore most
likely he died in the Mount, and was buried, but so unknownly, as they counted
it (by Conjecture also) to be God's own doing: But there was then no Witness of
that Fact, nor any Revelation since concerning it, till this Appearance of that
Prophet at our Present Transfiguration; and that seems to favor rather Moses
his Translation more than his Death and Burial: Although the Letter of the Text
stand for the Later, we leave the Truth as a Mystery, and accept the Proof as
Mystical, and therefore not to be confided in, or relied upon, for the
Establishment of a Doctrine whose Verity and Certainty is now controverted, and
expected to be better proved than by mystical and untrialable Arguments.

Matthew. 22.32. God declares himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And
our Lord says, He is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living: Ergo, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob are Living, and do Subsist in their Separated Souls; for their
Bodies are long since turned to Dust, and are not. To this we answer, That all
Persons who have lived, do live, or shall live, may be well enough said to live
unto God, with whom Things past and to come, may be well enough said to be
present; for that Time cannot work, or have any Effect upon Him, his Being, or
his Knowledge. And therefore Luke 20.28. (relating the same Fact) says, God is
not God of the Dead, but of the Living: Adds the Reason, For that all live unto
him. All who have lived, and shall live, as well as those who do live; those
who have lived and shall live, do live unto God, although they do not live unto
Men, nor have any present Subsistence either in Soul or Body. If our Lord had
intended their living to God in a State of Separated Souls, the Intent might
easily, and would likely have been declared by him: But the Matter then argued
did no way concern the Point of a Soul's Separate Subsistence. But the Answer
was only intended to the Query put to our Lord by the Sadduces, who denied the
Resurrection. They propounded a Case of Seven Brothers, having all one same
Wife; upon which our Lord cites the Words of God concerning these three Old
Patriarchs. Luke says that they are the Children of God, being the Children of
the Resurrection; and our Lord applies his Answer to their Question. They
demand whose Wife their Woman shall be in the Resurrection? He replies, as
touching the Resurrection, Have ye not read this Saying of God touching the
Patriarchs? and then applies that Saying to prove the Resurrection accordingly:
So as Question, the Answer, and the Application was all, and (for ought
appears) only intended concerning the Resurrection, without Intent to speak
here, concerning any State or Condition of Souls, betwixt the State of Death
and that of the Resurrection: and the Resurrection was the only thing intended
to be proved by that Quotation.

Mat. 10.28. Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell.
Luke 12.4. relates the same Doctrine thus; Fear not them that kill the Body,
and after that have no more that they can do; but fear him who after he has
killed, has Power to cast into Hell. We may perceive that the Substance and
Intent of Christ's Doctrine is the Same in both these Evangelists; but the
Words or Expression in which the same is delivered do differ very much, yet not
to alter the Doctrine principally intended to be taught, viz. not to fear the
Violence of Men, whose Power is confined to this World, and can extend no
farther: but that Men ought rather to fear God, who has Power to reward and
punish after Men's Departure out of this World, and in a Future State: This we
take for the Doctrine mainly intended by them both, and therein they do fully
agree: but in the Collateral Doctrine endeavored to be collected from S.
Matthew's Expressions and wording of the same; so separating and dividing
betwixt the Soul and the Body, as that one may be killed and the other not, or
the one be cast into Hell, and the other not: In this Point (which I take for
Collateral to the main Point intended) the Words of these two Evangelists
differ very much: for in the Expressions of S. Luke there is no mention at all
of the Soul, and therefore no Division made or intended betwixt Soul and Body.
It seems then that it may be collected, that both having a right Notion of the
Doctrine mainly intended to be delivered, of not fearing Men, whose Power was
limited to this World, and fearing God, who could recompense both here and
hereafter. S. Matthew may have worded this Matter according to his own
Conception of the Thing: for his Words prove, at least, his Opinion to have
been, that a Man's Soul and Body were dividable, and that the Body might be
killed without killing the Soul: And yet he does not say the Soul can be in
Hell without the Body, but God can cast them both into Hell. Plain it seems, S.
Matthew was of Opinion that Souls were capable of Separate State: but the
Expressions of S. Luke give us some Warrant to think that Christ did not
deliver than Doctrine in the Words used by S. Matthew, but that he has worded
it according to his own Conception and Opinion, and that the Doctrine of
Christ, taken as delivered by S. Luke, is no more, but that Men can only
afflict and punish in this World, but God can do it both here and hereafter:
And this all Men must agree and assent unto.

Luke 16.19. Begins that which Men usually call the Parable of Dives and
Lazarus. The foregoing Chap. 15. consists all of Parables; and this Chapter
begins with the Parable of the Unjust Steward, and ends with this of Dives and
Lazarus, whose very Names seem to be some Proof that the Story is a Parable. If
it were a History and true Relation of a Fact, it might pass for a very strong
Proof of the Soul's Subsistence in a State of Separation from the Body; but
passing for a Parable, it seems not a Foundation firm enough to bear the Weight
of an otherwise unproved Structure. And the like may be said for Rev. 6.10. the
Souls under the Altar, of those slain for the Word of God, and the Testimony
which they held, crying with a loud Voice, How long, Lord, do thou not judge
and avenge our Blood. This was but in a Trance, and no more real or true, than
the Appearances of the great Dragon with Seven Heads, and Ten Horns, and Seven
Crowns, whose Tail drew the Third Part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast
them to the Earth; or that there was a great City descending out of Heaven from
God: After S. John was rapt up into Heaven by the open Door, all was but a
Trance, and may pass for a Rapture, not a Ground strong enough to fix a proving
Foundation upon: And it seems this Crying by the Souls was in the same manner
as the Blood of Abel's Cying from the Ground against his Murderer; and as all
Notable Actions, good or bad, do depend for Recompense upon the Effects of
God's Divine Providence, Justice and Power, and so we leave it.

Luke 23.43. Christ says to one of the Crucified Thieves, Verily I say unto
thee, to day shall thorn be with we in Paradise. This could not be performed in
their Bodies, for that our Lord's lay in the Grave till the Third Day;
therefore it must be fulfilled in their Souls separated from their Bodies. To
this Objection the Answer may have Two Parts. First, We quote Matthew. 27.24. The
Thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his Teeth. And,
Mark 15.32. They that were crucified with him reviled him. Both these
Evangelists agree, that they, both the Thieves, that were crucified with him,
reviled him. S. Luke is commonly taken for the Penman of S. Paul, by whom this
Gospel is believed to have been dictated: But neither of these are taken to
have been Eyewitnesses, or that they were by and present at this Fact. S. Mark
is taken to write from the Mouth of S. Peter, although it might possibly be
from the Apostle S. Barnabas, either of which Apostles were likely to be
Eyewitnesses of the Fact then done. And S. Matthew was himself both Apostle
and Evangelist, and likely an Eyewitness of the Fact; and there is an Old
Rule, That one Eyewitness is better than two Ear-Witnesses of any Fact. We
conclude then, that here are Two Witnesses against One, and that One but an
Ear-Witness of that Fact: And therefore there is a Ground to question the very
Truth of S. Luke's Relation, seeing he wrote but by Relation, and what he says,
stands not of it self, and can with great Difficulty be made to stand in
Agreement with what the other two Evangelists have delivered. Secondly, We say,
to the Words, To day thou shall be with me, they may be expounded from other
like Expressions. Heb. 3.7. cites Psalm. 95.7. To day if ye will hear his
Voice. Ver. 13. Exhort one another daily whilst it is called to day. Here it
seems the Word Day is not limited to an Artificial or a Natural Day, but
signifies a present, but yet a competent Time. Luke 19.42. Christ wept over
Jerusalem, saying, If thou had known, even thou at least, in this thy Day,
viz. had known that Time of my present Call unto thee; here expressed by the
Word Day. So The Son of Man must be Three Days and Three Nights in the Heart of
the Earth. And yet we know Christ lay in the Grave but Two Nights, viz. Friday
and Saturday Nights; and for Days, only one whole one, viz. Saturday; for he
was buried on Friday at Even, and rose very early upon Sunday Morning. Whence
it seems the Words, To day shall thou be with me, need not be limited to a
precise Day, Artificial or Natural, but may be reasonably intended to signify
within some short Time after that Promise. And that we may the better account
for the same, there shall be cited Jo. 20.17. Our Lord (lately risen) says to
Mary, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father.
And the same Day at Evening, Ver. 19. came Jesus and stood in the midst among
his Discipler. And Luke 24.39. he says, Handle me, and by Feeling, perceive and
see that I have Flesh and Bones, which a Spirit has not. Hence may be
collected, that betwixt his appearing to Mary that Morning, and to his
Disciples in the Evening, he had ascended to his Father, and returned. Matthew.
27.52. When Christ died, The Graves were opened, and many Bodies of Saints
which slept arose, and came out of the Graves after our Lord's Resurrection,
and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many. Amongst these, we have
reason to suppose, was the Body of this Thief, as well as his Soul, the Flame
of Life re-kindled in him as well as in those other Saints, and of our Lord
himself, and that he, the Thief, and the other Saints then rising did make this
Ascent, with our Lord, upon Sunday, next after the Friday Night of his
Suffering: And this (I conceive) was enough to satisfy our Lord's Expression
of, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise, in so short a Time, as it may be
counted present, or to day. And this Resurrection might occasion some to think,
as, 2 Timothy 2.18. that the Resurrection was past already, and was not (in
Future) to be expected. Luke 23.46. Jesus cried with a loud Voice, and said,
Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit; and having said thus he gave up the
Ghost. And to this we join Acts 7.59. They stoned Stephen calling, and saying,
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. This Objection from recommending the Spirit of a
Dying Person to God and Christ, Men say, imports a Spiritual Being or a Soul in
Man, which is capable of a Subsistence, and has such a Subsistence, in a State
separated from the Body. The Objection is of the same Nature with that from
Solomon, The Spirit returns to God that gave it: and requires some Repetition
of what was thereunto answered. And for findding out the Sense and Intent of
the Word Spirit, Places of Scripture shall be quoted. 1 Samuel 30.12. When the
starved Egyptian had eaten some Figs and Raisins, his Spirit came again to him,
seems his Spirit of Life, his Vital Spirits. Ezra 1.5. They stood up, whose
Spirit God had raised to go and build the Temple, seems to intend their
Inclination and Affection. Job 20.3. The Spirit of my Understanding causes me
to answer, seems the Eagerness of his Desire. Chap. 21.4. Why should not my
Spirit be troubled? viz. why should not I be troubled? Psalm. 51.17. The
Sacrifice of God it a broken Spirit: there is paraphrased by a contrite Heart.
-- 143.4. My Spirit is vexed within me, and my Heart within me is desolate.
Prove. 18.14. The Spirit of a Man will sustain his Infirmity, but a wounded
Spirit who can bear; viz. a good or bad Conscience. Chap. 25.28. He that has
no Rule over his own Spirit, it like a City broken down and without Walls. Here
Spirit must signify Affections. Eccles. 8.8. No Man has Power over the Spirit
to retain the Spirit, seems Men's Passions. Prove. 20.27. The Spirit of Man is
the Candle of the Lord, searching the inward Parts of the Belly, viz. Man's
Reason and Knowledge, is the Candle. Psalm 31.6. Thou art my strength, into thy
hand I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me. God had saved him in his
Troubles, and therefore he again commends himself to God, under the Term of his
Spirit. Dan. 5.12. An excellent Spirit, Knowledge, and Vnderdeastanding, was
found in Daniel; The latter Words expound Spirit. Acts 17.16. Paul's Spirit was
stirred in him at Athens: he was moved and provoked. Chap. 18.25. Apollos was
fervent in Spirit: or was Zealous. 1 Cor. 5.5. Deliver the Man to Satan, that
the Spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord, viz. that at the Resurrection
the Whole may be saved: Spirit put for the Whole Man. Chap. 7.34. The unmarried
Woman is holy in Body and Spirit, viz. Soul and Body together, holy in the
whole Compositum. Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give them one Heart, and put a new
Spirit, and a Heart of Flesh within you. Chap. 13.3. Woe to the Prophets that
follow their own Spirit, and have seen nothing. Ver. 17. They prophecy out of
their own Heart: And thus we see Spirit put for the Person, the Heart, the
Affections, the Passions, for Mind, Understanding, Knowledge, Reason,
Conscience, viz. for Man, and every of his Sublime and Spiritual Parts or
Faculties, but most properly and especially for his Breath. As Job 12.10. In
the Hand of God is the Soul of every living thing, and the Breath of all
Mankind. Chapter 34.14. If God set his Heart upon Man, if he gather unto himself
his Spirit and his Breath, all Flesh shall perish together, and Man shall turn
again to his Dust. Psalm. 104.29. When thou take away their Breath they die
and are turned again to their Dust: when thou let thy Breath go forth, they
shall be made, and thou shall renew the Face of the Earth. Genesis 2.7. By God's
breathing into Man's Nostrils the Breath of Life, Man became a Living Soul. Romans
14.7. None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself; but we live to
the Lord, and die to the Lord; whether therefore we live or die, we are the
Lords. Hence it need not seem strange, that a Dying Man should recommend his
Person to the Lord by the Term of his Spirit; for the Body as well as the Soul
is under the Knowledge and Provision of Providence. When good Men lie down to
sleep, they customarily recommend themselves to God; and going to sleep in
Death makes such a Recommendation both the more earnest and the more solemn,
and cannot reasonably be intended of the Spirit only, but of the whole
Compositum by that Term: and God will raise them both up again at the Last Day,
both Soul and Body. John 6.44. The Man that comes to me, I will raise him up at
the last Day; the whole Man, both Soul and Body. Psalm. 31.6. Into thine Hands I
commend my Spirit, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. David spoke this
when he was in a way of Living, and had both a Body and a Soul, and apparently
sought God's Protection for them both, viz. for his Person, under this Term of
Spirit. Jo. 11.25. He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live, viz. the Compositum of Soul and Body. Our Lord knew he should have a
speedy Resurrection, and foretold it to be within Three Days Time, both of Soul
and Body: And it seems that by this Term of Spirit he recommended them both to
the Protection of his Father, and that S. Stephen did the like to our Lord:
Whence here appears no Necessity of Inferring a Separate Subsistence of a
Humane Soul from these Texts, which plainly did not intend to teach the
Doctrine; and it seeems may be very well satisfied by another very different
Construction of them. Joh. 6.40. It is God's Will, that he who believes should
have everlasting Life; and I will raise him up at the last Day, Soul and Body,
without mention of an intermediate Estate. And we do not accept our two quoted
Texts as a sufficient Proof of that Point. Acts 2.27. Thou shall not leave my
Soul in Hell, [or Death] is construed to comprehend the Body also; and both
were raised accordingly. Romans 2.9. Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of
Man that does Evil: this comprehends the Body also. So Chap. 13.1. Let every
Soul be subject to the higher Powers. Whence we conclude, that by recommending
the Dying Spirits, intended the Dying Bodies also, and was intended of the
Whole Man, or the Person then departing out of this World. 2 Cor. 5.1. If our
earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, a
House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. And desires to be clothed
upon with that House, Groans to be clothed upon, that Mortality might be
swallowed up of Life: yet would not be unclothed: whilst we are at home in the
Body, we are absent from the Lord; walking by Faith, not by Sight, we desire to
be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord; for we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his Body, according to that he has done, whether good or bad. We read, Rev.
22.12. I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give every Man according as
his work shall be. Ver. 20. Surely I come quickly, Amen, even so come Lord
Jesus. Heb. 10.37. Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry. Ver. 35. and 36. We must wait with Patience and Confidence,
till the Time promised do come. James 5.8. Be ye also patient, stablish your
Hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by
the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last
Time [as if the last Time was near.] Chap. 4.5. Men shall give an Account to
him that is ready to judge the Quick and the Dead, [ viz. in a short Time
coming.] 2 Pet. 3.12. Looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the Day of
God to Judgment. 1 John 2.28. Abide in Christ, that when he shall appear, ye
may have Confidence, and not be ashamed at his coming, [as if he were expected
to come in their Time.] So, 1 Timothy 6.14. Keep this Commandment without spot,
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, [as if Timothy might live to that
Time.] And elsewhere, The coming of our Lord draws nigh. 1 John 2.18. Little
Children it is the last Time. And, The Time is short; he that is holy let him
be holy. Rev. 22.11. And he which is filthy let him be filthy still, [as if
Christ's coming to Judgment were even then at hand.] 2 Pet. 3.9. Men then said
that Day was slack in its coming, and Ver. 4. that the Promise of his coming
was overlong delayed. From all these Evidences it appears that the Church at
that Time, did believe the coming of our Lord to Judgment, to be nigh at hand,
and that when he should appear, we should be like him, and that then, as
Philip. 3.21. Our vile Bodies should be changed, and fashioned like his
Glorious Body. 1 Cor. 15.51. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed. And to this Change (it seems) S. Paul's Words in our Proving Text are
to be applied: He would not be unclothed, but clothed upon with the House which
is from Heaven, that so he might not be found naked; but that Mortality might
be swallowed up in Life: Whilst we are at home, in the Body, viz. our Natural
Body, we are absent from the Lord; and therefore we are willing rather to be
absent from this Body, to have it changed into a Spiritual Body, and therein to
be present with the Lord: And however, in the one Body, or in the other, we
labor, present or absent, to be accepted of God: for we must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ, [sooner or later] that every Man [Body and Soul]
may receive the Things done in his Body, [ viz. when he was alive] according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad: And this seems to apply all that
he had before spoken, as designed a Relation to the Resurrection and the Last
Judgment, and not to make or afford any Proof of the Separate Subsistence of a
Soul, after Death of the Body. Philip. 1.21. For me, to live is Christ, and to
die is Gain, what I shall choose I wot not; for I am in a strait between two,
having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better:
Nevertheless, to abide in the Flesh, is more needful for you. This sounds as
if, upon Death of the Body, something were still left in such a State and
Being, as should immediately thereupon go to be with Christ; and this can be no
other but the Man's Soul subsisting in a State of Separation. We read, Rev.
14.13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their
Labors, and their Works do follow them. 2 Timothy 1.10. Christ abolished Death,
and brought Life and Immortality to Light, through the Gospel. [Whence Death
now to the Godly, is but a Sleep, or Resting in Christ.] Acts 7.60. Stephen
cried, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge: and when he said this, he fell
asleep. 1 Cor. 15.6. Christ risen was seen of five hundred Brethren, of whom
then some were fallen asleep. Ver. 18. If there be no Resurrection, then they
who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. Ver. 51. We shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed. 1 Thessalonians. 4.15. We who are alive at our Lord's
coming, shall not prevent them who are asleep. Ver. 14. But those who sleep in
Jesus shall God bring with him. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. It is righteous with God to
recompense Tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled,
Rest with us; when Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels;
[seems this Rest with us must be future to this World, and most likely in
Death.] Heb. 4.3. We who have believed, do enter into Rest. Ver. 9. There
remains a Rest to the People of God. Ver. 10. A ceasing from our own Works, as
God did from his; and we must labor to enter into this Rest: seems properly a
Dying in the Lord. And Job testifies, There the weary are at Rest. Upon the
Evidences thus quoted by us, it seems our Proving Text may be construed in this
manner; I know that to die is Gain, and for me to depart out of this world and
to be at rest in Christ, and in expectation of a joyful Resurrection, is far
better; but for me to abide in the Flesh is more needful for you: And this
Consideration puts me into a Strait between two Things, so as what I shall
choose I wot not; and doubtless it is better, and far more easy and desirable
for a godly Man to sleep and be at rest in Christ, than to be in the Troubles,
Temptations and Persecutions of this World, as S. Paul was when he was in it.
Daniel 12.13. the Angel says to him, Go thy way till the End be, for thou shall
rest and stand in the Lot at the End of the Days. And this has been the Lot of
the Godly in all Ages: and the Wisdom of the World has been able to teach,
that the Day of a Man's Death is better than that of his Birth; and if
generally, how much better then must it needs be for a good Christian to depart
and be at rest in Christ: Lying down in a sure Faith and steadfast Hope of a
joyful Resurrection; when the Lord himself shall defend from Hevean with a
shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of God: for then the Dead
in Christ shall rise first, and be caught up into the Clouds to meet the Lord,
in the Air; and so shall they ever be with the Lord. What Earthly Thing can be
compared with such a State, so much Joy, and so great an Assuranee: No wonder
then that our Apostle calls his Death a Gain, being then in a Condition so to
die, and so he continued, (as he says) 2 Timothy 4.7. I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that Day: and not to me only, but unto them
also that love his Appearing. But it seems he did not expect it before that
Day, the Day of Christ's Second Coming, to reward every Man according to his
Works. And we conclude, the Apostle, in our Proving Text, intended rather a
going to rest in Christ, than a going into Heaven to him in the State of a
Separated Soul.

Heb. 12.22. Ye are come to an innumerable Company of Angels, and to the
Spirits of just Men made Perfect; to God the Judge, and to Jesus the Mediator,
and to the heavenly Jerusalem. Some have raised an Argument of the Souls
Separate Subsistence, from this Text. The Words, Ye are come, in the present
Tense, spoken unto living People, cannot be literally intended; unless the
Words be intended of the Doctrine. viz. You are come to a Gospel or Doctrine,
which teaches to believe and expect such Things in future Times; or, you are
come to such Things in Faith which is the Evidence of Things not seen, better
things than appeared at Mount Sinay. So, 2 Pet. 3.12. Look for and haste unto
the Coming of the Day of God, wherein all shall be burnt up, as in Noah 's Time
it was drowned: But we look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness: And seeing ye look for such Things, what manner of Persons ought
ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness, without spot, and blameless.
This expounds how we come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, viz. to that Doctrine,
Faith and Expectation, to be fulfilled and enjoyed at the Coming of the Day of
God, without any mention at all of a Soul in the State of a Separate
Subsistence, or discoverable Intention concerning it.

1 Pet. 3.19. Christ was quickened in the Spirit, by which also he went and
preached unto the Spirits in Prison, when Noah prepared the Ark. To this we
say, the Text is very mystical and obscure, and so every Part and Sentence of
it: And what is here meant by the Spirits in Prison; or the Preaching to them,
we humbly confess Ignorance, and that we do not know: Therefore the Text and
Consequences of it shall be left to Consideration of the more Learned, better
versed in the Writings of Fathers and Commentators; but till the Meaning of it
be better known, it seems, it can have but little Force of Proof in this
Argument.

Joh. 12 26. If any Man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am there shall
also my servant be. Chap. 14.3. If I go and prepare a Place for you, I will
come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.
This later Text expounds the former, viz. Christ's Servants shall be where he
is, intending after he has first prepared a Place for them, and then comes
again to receive them.

These particular Texts of Scripture are all that we meet with that are quoted
by others, or are observed by us, and tending materially to Proof of the
Separate State, or Subsistence of Humane Souls after this Life ended.

And yet there remains one Persuasive, which inclines common Readers as much or
more than any other Argument, to believe that there is a Separate State of
Souls Subsisting after they are parted from the Bodies; a Persuasive rising
from Induction of many Scriptural Expressions concerning the Soul and the Body,
as different, and even opposite Things and Principles. Romans 7. describes the
Contest betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit, as if they were naturally different
Principles in Man, whereas they are but different Faculties in Man, viz. the
Affections, Passions and Appetites, Vital, combating the Faculties
Intellectual, the Knowledge, and Reason of the same Party, with various
Success. But these being expressed by the Terms of Flesh and Spirit of the Man,
seem to represent them as two Principles different and contrary one to the
other. Such Faculties we agree they are, different and contrary; but such
Principles we say they are not: but all proceed from the same Principles, the
Constituent Parts of Man, viz. his Soul, and his Body. The Natural Powers of
such a Compositum all these Faculties equally are, and seem the one of them
independent upon the other, and seldom free from a Contest amongst them, in
which the Judgment or highest Prudence of the Party bears the Sway, and has
the Determinative Power naturally residing in it: So as what is here signified
by the Terms of Flesh and Spirit, are so far from a Possibility of a real
Separation one Sort from the other, as neither of them can subsist but in eodem
subjecto with the other, and the Compositum which has not all of them, is
Imperfect. Chap. 8.1. They who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit.
This taken for a Humane Spirit or Soul, must intend the Reason or Intellect:
And the Chapter goes in Terms of Flesh and Spirit, inducing Readers to accept
them as different Principles, and thence Separable. Whereas we are ready to put
the Stress of our Argument upon their being Joint-Principles of one Compositum,
Man, which cannot consist without both. And, it seems, as he, Man, cannot
subsist without them, so they not without one another: And so in a Compositum
they are generated, grow, stand and fall together, one and all, the Soul, the
Body, and the Compositum; and so they shall rise and be recompensed together.
And what God has so joined together in Bands of Nature, and absolute Coherence
one of them to another. the Power of Men's Wits and Persuasions will never be
able finally to separate, or to evince their Subsistence in a State of
Separation, one of them from the other, Matthew. 26.41. Our Lord says to his
sleeping Disciples, The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: intending the
Body is often unable to act according to the Reason and Desire of the Mind,
Judgment and Intent of the Man; and that Infirmity of Weakness and Weariness,
is peculiar to the Flesh, thereby made unable to act with that Vigor and
Continuance which the Soul acting in the Phantasy and Reason of the Man,
requires; and shows such Connection of the Matter and Form, as (in the Man) one
of them cannot act without the other. Romans 8.10. The Body is dead because of
Sin, but the Spirit is Life because of Righteousness. 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us
cleanse our selves from all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit. Galat. 3.3.
Having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect in the Flesh. Chapter 5.16.
Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the Lust of the Flesh. Ver. 19.
Works of the Flesh. Ver. 22. Fruits of the Spirit. Coloss. 2.11. Putting off
the Body of the Sins of the Flesh. 1 Cor. 7.34. The unmarried Woman cares that
she may be holy both in Body and in Spirit. Ephesians. 4.4. There is one Body and one
Spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. I pray your whole Spirit and Soul and Body, be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord. James 4.5. The Spirit that dwells in
us lusts to envy. 1 Pet. 2.11. Beloved, I beseech you abstain from fleshly
Lusts, which war against the Soul. Chapter 3.18. Christ was put to death in the
Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. Chapter 4.1. He that suffers in the Flesh has
ceased from Sin, and must live the rest of his time in the Flesh, not to the
Lusts of Men, but to the Will of God. 2 Pet. 2.10. Wicked Men walk after the
Flesh, in Sins here named. Romans 13.14. Make no Provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof. 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a Price, therefore
glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's. These Texts,
and their like, have a Sound or Semblance of Supposing a Separating Difference
betwixt the Soul and the Body; whereas their true Signification seems to be, a
Distinction between the Powers or Faculties of the Compositum, viz. those
Vital, or the Vegetative and Sensual, from those Intellectual and Rational,
viz. Man's Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, Wrath, and Fear, and their
Descendents, from his Knowledge of Common Sense, his Phantasy, Opinion, Reason,
and Prudence. The first Sort of these Faculties and their Inclinations and
Desires, are signified and intended under the Name and Term of Flesh: in S.
John's Epistle, called the World. And the second Sort of these Humane Faculties
are signified and intended under the Name and Term of the Spirit, or the Soul.
But both Sorts are Fundamentally and even Inseparately united in the Nature of
Man, or that which is the Compositum both of Soul and Body: Both Sorts are
derived from the Conjunction of these two Principles or Constituent Parts of
the Man, it seems, not singly, but each from the Whole, or the Compositum. Not
the first Sort from the Flesh, and the second Sort from the Spirit, or Soul,
really; for the Flesh by it self cannot live or act. And that a Soul by it
self, either ever did, or that it can act, was questioned by Aristotle, and not
found or believed by him. It has been affirmed by some of our Authors quoted;
but their Proofs offered are so weak as they appear very unlikely to persuade
Considering People, who can put off their former Prejudices: Nor have they
prevailed yet to induce a Belief, that the Soul cannot act those Faculties of
the Second Sort but only in the Body, and by the Organs of it; so as the Soul
cannot act them in any other Part of the Body, but only in those very Organs
ordained by God and Nature for those Purposes, viz. not see, but in the Eyes;
remember, but in the Memory; not understand, but in the Intellect: Any such
Parts or Organs harmed or lost, the Soul can only work with what is left, or
cannot work at all to those Purposes. Hence it seems these second Sort of
Powers in Man, do not more proceed from the Soul than those of the first Sort
do. The Soul in the Head, and Intellectual Organs there, produces and acts the
Intellectual Powers and Faculties of the Man; and the same Soul in the Vital
Parts and Organs of the Body, produces and acts Affections, and Passions, and
Sensual Appetites, which solicit the Judgment, that the Whole may be employed
so far as may be needful for the Procuring their Satisfaction. And all these
Repetitions tend to prove, that the terming these first sort of Faculties the
Flesh, and the second sort of Faculties the Spirit, cannot reasonably be made
an Argument inducing to believe an easy, natural, or feasible Separation of
the Flesh and Spirit, and that one of them can have a Subsistence without the
other. And thus we conclude the Examination of such Texts of Scripture as are
alleged for Proofs of the Subsistence of a Humane Soul in a State of
Separation from the Body.

And we proceed to produce Arguments which work in Debilitation of such a
Separate Subsistence of Souls. First, We say it seems a great Weakening of that
Opinion, That there is not in the whole Bible to be found one Text which does
expressly affirm that the Soul of Man has a Separate Subsistence after Death of
the Man, nor that it is Immaterial or Immortal. Secondly, None of the Texts
before quoted, nor any other, from which the Separate Subsistence is
endeavored to be proved, did principally intend the Teaching or Proving of the
Doctrine: but all such Texts do principally aim at some other End or Design;
and what is drawn from those Texts in Proof of this Point, is but Collateral to
the Intent of such Texts, and rises only upon a Collection drawn from
Inferences.
The Parable of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16. looks most like a Design to that
Purpose: And yet, Ver. 15. our Lord teaches, That what is highly esteemed
amongst Men, is Abomination in the sight of God: And then speaks of the Power
of the Law. And in Ver. 19. begins this Parable, intending thereby to
dilucidate his Assertion of Ver. 15. that Men may be, and often are, greatly
deceived in their Opinions concerning Things, and particularly in Judging of
the Happiness of Men's Conditions: for Illustration of which Doctrine, he places
Dives in as high a Degree of Happiness as Men ordinarily do desire: He was
richly arrayed, and fared sumptuously every day, and had Health withal. And
Lazarus he puts down as low in Comparison: He was a Beggar, a Lazar, and full
of Sores, who was brought and laid at Dives his Gate, and fed with the Crumbs
that fell from his Table. Here was Dives his Condition highly esteemed and
desired amongst Men: but he showed by the Sequel of the Parable, that it was
abominated in the Sight of God; for the Poor Man was comforted, and Dives
tormented. So as the Illustration of this Doctrine, seems to have been the main
Intent of the Parable: and what is spoken of Discourse betwixt Abraham and
Dives, and the seeing Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom afar off, seems like the Pomp
of Dives and the Misery of Lazarus, not real, but parabolical, or Invention:
Like the falling of the Seed, some amongst Thorns, some on a Rock, some upon
one sort of Ground, and some upon another. A third Disability upon the Tenet of
Separate Subsistence is, that in all our Evidences concerning the Resurrection,
very copious and full, there is no mention of an Intermediate State betwixt the
Man's Death and his Resurrection; nor concerning the Separate State of Humane
Souls, or their being in that Estate, or Capacity of being in it. We may (to
this purpose) look back upon 1 Cor. 15. If there be not a Resurrection, all
Christian Religion is vain, our Preaching, and your Faith; Christians are of
all Men most miserable; and you are yet in your Sins. Here appears no Help from
the Separate Estate or Subsistence of a Soul, nor Mention of such a thing. And
Ver. 18. All that are fallen asleep in Christ are perished, if there be no
Resurrection. What then becomes of Souls subsisting in a State of Separation?
It seems S. Paul knew nothing of such an Estate, or made small Account of it;
or else (very likely) he would have made some mention of it. Phil. 3.20. Our
Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Body, and make it like his glorious
Body, according as he is able to subdue all things to himself. Here is no
mention of Soul, but as in Conjunction with the Body; and Flesh is not a Body
without a Soul: therefore the Soul in Conjunction is here intended; but no Room
seems to be left here for a Separate Subsistence of Souls. 1 Pet. 1.4. We are
begotten by the Resurrection of Christ, to an Inheritance in Heaven, ready to
be revealed in the last Time. Ver. 9. Receiving the End of your Faith, even the
Salvation of your Souls. Here Soul is mentioned, intended in Conjunction with
the Body; Soul for Person. As Genesis 46.26. All the Souls which came with Jacob
into Egypt; all the Souls were threescore and six: and the two Sons of Joseph
were two Souls; as before has been largely quoted. And the Apostle refers here
to the Resurrection to be revealed in the last Time: Whence Body must be
conjoined; and no mention of an intermediate State, or a Soul in that State.
Chap. 5.4. Those who do well, when the chief Shepherd shall appear, shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away. 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord shall give me at that
Day; and not to me only, but to them also that love his Appearing. Here is no
Notice taken of intermediate Time, or Estate, but when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, and at that Day. Coloss. 3.4. When Christ who is our Life shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in Glory. 1 John 3.2. It does not yet appear
what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him.
It seems he knew not of a Separate Subsistence of Souls, but expected to learn
at the Appearance of Christ, what himself should be. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed
unto Men once to die, and after this the Judgment. Nothing here betwixt Death
and Judgment; and expounds his Meaning to be of the general Judgment. Ver. 28.
Christ once offered for sin, shall appear the second time without sin unto
salvation: viz. to execute the last Judgment. Jam. 1.12. Blessed is he that is
tried, for he shall receive a Crown of Life. Chap. 9.8. Be patient, stablish
your Hearts, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh; viz. repose your selves
upon that: without telling them that in the mean Time their Souls shall be
happy in a State of Separation. We may say that in none of these Places, nor in
any other Texts of Scripture, do we find mention of an Intermediate State
betwixt that of Death, and that of the Resurrection, nor a State of Separation,
or Self-subsistency of a Soul departed from the Body. We leave therefore that
Apprehension or Opinion much enfeebled, through the Defect and Failure of such
Testimonies as might reasonably have been expected to have been found on that
behalf; and in a Case which may concern the Church to be rightly informed
about. We believe that if such an Intermediate Estate there were, or such a
Separate Subsistence of a Humane Soul, the Scriptures in all these and other
Places, would not be altogether silent concerning the same, as we have found
them to be: And hence we conclude, the Opinions thus far impugned, are infirm,
feeble, and not thoroughly maintainable by Arguments drawn from Nature and
Reason, nor from Prudence and Moral Congruity, nor from Scripture and
particular Texts of the same; but that all Proofs of it hitherto, drawn ex
Causis, and from the Foundations thereof, do fail, and appear very insufficient
for the Support of it. And hence we go on to propound some Arguments which may
be drawn ab Effectu, or from the Consequences which arise upon this Doctrine of
the Soul's Separate Subsistence after Death of the Man. And we say, That it is
a Natural and Common Consequence of Error, to raise Dfficulties, lead to
Absurdities, and create Inconveniences amongst Men: And for Truth and the
Discoveries thereof, to dissolve Difficulties, and promote the Conveniences of
Man and Nature. Now that the Doctrine of a Humane Soul's Immateriality and
Separate Subsistence does raise diverse Difficulties which otherwise are
needless, we propound as Evidence the Questions made by S. Austin, viz. Whether
the Soul were One, and not Many; or Many, and not One? Or, That it be at once
both One and Many? And he thought the Last most probable, though seemingly
ridiculous. 2. There are Difficulties concerning the Soul, a Part ante, viz.
Whence it comes, or how it is derived? Whether it pre-exist, or be newly
created by God upon every successful Copulation, or be generated? 3. If by New
Creation; then When and How such New Souls are joined and incorporated with the
generated Bodies? 4. How these fresh and newly made Souls come to be
contaminated and infected with Original Sin, derived by Procreation from Adam?
Next, there is Question, after Conjunction with the Body, Where such an
Immaterial Soul resides in the Body? and then, How it acts there? Whether all
in all, or all in every Part; or Part in one Place, and Part in another? And
then, concerning such a Soul, a Part post, viz. What becomes of it when the
Man dies? Does it slide into Dr. More's Receptacles in the Air, or into some
appointed Limbus or Dormitory; or to some Places of Pleasure or Punishment,
Paradise, Elisium, or Tartarum? or whether directly either to Heaven or Hell?
or that there be a most frequented Purgatorium appointed for the Reception of
them? These are some of the Difficulties raised from the Doctrine of an
Immaterial and Self-subsisting Soul.

We come next to some Absurdities whereunto Men are led by this Doctrine.
First, It induces to assert and maintain, That God does create a New Soul upon
every Fruitful Coition of Man and Woman, be the same Lawful or not; and the
same for all Humane Copulations with Beasts, where the Product is of a Humane
Form: This Conceit, invented merely to shore up the Immateriality of the Soul,
and to provide it a different Original from Generation, is neither agreeable to
Reason, nor supported by any manner of Proof from Scripture; is disagreeable to
the Common Sense of Mankind, incongruous to the Excellent Majesty of God, and
to his Detestation of wicked Actions in Venery; contrary to that Text which
says, God rested from his Works of the Creation: He gave over that sort of
Work, and his own Son was generated. If God should be continually still
employed in creating New Souls every Day all the World over, what Ceasing were
this from his Works of Creation? This would not be true, that after the six
Days he ceased from such Works. We say therefore, that this Indignous
Employment of daily Creating Souls in such manner, and to make Wicked Coitions
Effectual, is most unworthy of so Glorious and Pure an Agent, and therefore is
a mere Fiction invented to support this Opinion only, and of no other Use in
the World: grounded neither upon Scripture nor Reason, but opposed by both. So
as it may be pronounced not only false and feigned, but grossly incongruous and
absurd, in respect of the Agent, the Operation, and the Effect.

Another Absurdity Men are apt to be led into by this Doctrine, is this; They
do pretend, That after God has thus newly created a Soul, which they say comes
from his Hand, fresh, pure, and undefiled; she (poor Soul) is put or cast into
the newly generated Body for which she was made. The Body infected and defiled
with Original Sin derived from Adam, she is there presently infected with this
contagious Disease, and soon becomes immersed in it; a Thing which this Young
Soul can neither resist nor help; and there the much to be pitied Soul (say
they) is kept as in a Cage or Prison, or like a Man fallen into a deep Pit, out
of which he can by no means get: and then this Soul can know no more than what
it learns from the Senses, and other Bodily Assistances; as one in a Pit sees
no more of Light than that which comes in at the top of it. And thus this
young, pure, and innocent Soul should be used by a merciful Creator, with an
overgreat, and very deplorable, and unreasonable, and most unlikely Measure of
Cruelty and Rigor, that God should so use an innocent Soul, by himself newly
created, there is neither Sense nor Reason for Men to believe; nor is there a
Word or Text in Scripture from whence it can be derived: And the whole Progress
seems so incongruous and absurd, as (being rightly and impartially surveyed)
may reasonably create Wonder in those who shall peruse the Maintainers of
Immateriality upon this Point or Subject, that they could believe what they
have written, or could write such gross Things and put them into Men's Hands to
read, if themselves had not believed them. It seems the Writers, rather did
believe them, led thereto by the Prejudices and Common Reception of this
Opinion of the Immateriality of Souls, which they believed might best be
defended by such Inventions as these.

And, to add yet another Instance in this Kind, it may be remembered, That upon
this Dispute it has been said, A Material Soul in Man, could not so act in his
Senses, Affections, Phantasy, and Memory, as we find to be done; and therefore
this Soul must needs be Immaterial. To this it was replied, That all these
Faculties were acted by a Material Soul in some Beasts, and to as great Degrees
of Perfection as they are in some Men. Pressed with this Replication, four of
our Authors (who handle this Point) divide themselves; and two of them go one
way, and two another, directly contrary each Party to the other: For Dr. More
and Mr. Baxter do agree the Force of the Replication, and confess, that the
Beasts are acted in all these Faculties by their Souls; but that those Souls
are such as have Degrees of Rationality in them, and do subsist after the
Beasts Death, and do not die together with the Beasts, as Solomon, and the
World sine him, have imagined. The other two, viz. Des Carts and Sir K. Digby.
fly to another Extreme, and say, That Beasts are so far from having such Souls,
or any Degrees of Rationality, as that themselves do not know why, or what they
do, nor that they do any thing, nor that they are Voluntary Agents, or have any
Design in, or Knowledge of, what they do; but they act like Machines, or
Motions framed by Art; and are acted by Heat and Cold, Rarity or Density; a
Turgency of their Blood and Humors, and a Pricking and Promptitude in their
Bodies and Members to Actions: but that they have neither Affections,
Knowledge, Fantasies, Memories, or the like; nor Knowledge, nor Will, in any
thing that they do. Of these two Pretenses, it seems the Former may pass better
than the Latter; but both of them appear so incongruous and unsuitable to
Nature, to Reason, and to Expressions of Scripture, as they justly fall under a
Suspicion of Absurdity; and how well they deserve to come under that
Denomination, shall be left to the Judgment of indifferent Persons: But clear
it is that these Proposals or Pretenses were devised, and are maintained, in
Subserviency to the Immateriality of Souls, and the Support of that Opinion
only; and serve to no other Use, Intent or Purpose whatsoever.

The Inconveniences arising from the Opinion of the Soul's Immateriality, may
be diverse; as from the Allowance of one mistaken Principle for a Truth, many
Fallacies do thence grow, both quickly and strongly: From the Opinion of this
Separate Subsistence, in Saul, sprang his going to a Witch, that so he might
come to speak with, and enquire of Samuel: And the Devil appearing, fortifies
Saul in this Opinion, by his circumventing Question, viz. Why have thou
disquieted me, to bring me up? intimating thereby himself to be the true Soul
of Samuel subsisting in a Separated Estate. And this Opinion is the only
Foundation and Support of Souls in Purgatory, of Prayers for Souls, and Prayers
to Saints; which can have no Common Sense in them, if Souls do not subsist in a
State of Separation. And yet it is wonderful to consider, what a Force and
Strength there is in a long-fostered Opinion and Custom: so that even though
Men were convinced of a Souls Materiality and Extinguishing with the Death of
the Man, yet it may not be certain, that all would be drawn from those
long-believed and practiced Vanities: And yet those obstinate Retainers of
their Old Customs must naturally and surely be convinced of all, and be judged
of all others who do apparently perceive the Error of that Practice. From the
Original of Self-subsisting Souls arises the Opinion of Souls Walking (as it is
called) and Infesting Houses and Places in an extraordinary Manner; which in
the more dark Popish Times, are reported to have been very usual and even
common; but of later Times have lost their Credit very much, and are now rarely
spoken of, and little believed. And whatever was true concerning them, may be
reasonably imputed to the grand Impostor and his subservient Spirits, seeking
to deceive, subvert and devour: These may have acted the Parts of Souls, as the
Witches Samuel did that of the Prophet; or as the late ones did of the Robin
Goodfellows, or the Fairies, in darker Times: And so the Heathens (holding a
Separately Subsisting Soul) had their Penates, their Genii, and Lemures, and
their Separated Souls appearing upon Occasions, and sometimes helping in
Distresses. Also some Dreams to such Purposes are recorded in Histories of
Primitive Christian Times, but they were only Dreams; and for such we pass all
Appearances or Actings of Souls departed, viz. either for Dreams, or the Acts
and Agencies of Spirits, more often of the bad, but many times of the good
Spirits also; of the one sort to deceive and oppress, of the other sort to
instruct and protect, as was done to the Apostles imprisoned, and to Peter in
paricular. Another Inconvenience may be added, viz. A Practice of diverse
Protestant Preachers, who persuade their Trading Auditors to drive a Christian
Trade, as the most gainful Mart and Bargain, and to follow Christ for the
Loaves and Profit that may be expected by his Faith and Service. For, Beloved,
(say they) what shall he profit who gains the whole World, and loses his own
Soul, viz. himself, Soul and Body. True. Well then (say they) follow our
Directions, and though Twenty per Cent. be fair Profit, and to have Cent. per
Cent. Men will venture themselves and what they have to the Indies: You shall
have (by our Directions) a far greater Profit, and a more gainful Bargain: your
Precious Souls, shall from your Bed of Death, be transported by Angels into
Abraham 's Bofom, to a State of Happiness and Eternity: and for this you have
the Warrant of God's Word, which cannot deceive any who confide and rely upon
it. This Mode of Direction may have a Twofold Inconvenience. First, It may not
be true, that Men's Souls go to Heaven at the Time of the Man's Death, nor at
all, without the Body. Secondly, It seems to make Men's Service to God,
mercenary; principally induced by a Desire of Gain and Reward, even built upon
that Foundation, quickened and supported by that Consideration; an Inducement
sordid and mechanical, and of Force primely, if not only, with such People. It
seems an Alloy of base Metal put to the Gold of a pure Christian Profession,
That God is a Rewarder of all who serve him, is a Scriptural, Rational, and
Natural Truth: but, that Services levelled at the Reward, and done only, or
chiefly, for the Rewards sake, are acceptable to him, there may be good Reason
to deny, from the Authority of Job's Case, largely reported to us. The Devil
accuses him of this Enormity: (Says he) Does Job serve God for naught? Nay,
thou have bribed him to it by thy Blessings. Intending, He would serve me, if I
would, and were able so to reward him. It cost Job a most severe Trial to wipe
off this Aspersion; and God was pleased he should undergo it to that Intent,
and gave him the Victory in it. He will not have his Servants work like
Hirelings, the Eyes of whose Minds are levelled at, and fixed upon their Wages;
nor will suffer that Accusation to be believed, or stand fixed as a Calumny
upon them: They shall have Rewards becoming the Nobleness and Grandeur of their
Master. But, for Men to be moved and directed to serve God for Rewards of any
Sort or Value whatsoever, seems Debasement to the Profession and Practice of
Christianity. And we leave it as an Inconveniency drawn from, or very much
improved by the Conceit, That Men's precious Souls have a Subsistence in a
Separate State from their Bodies; and that upon their Separation they pass to
Heaven immediately. Hence we pass,

And come to show, how the Opinion of a Soul's Materiality does serve to the
Solving of such Difficulties as are raised by the Belief of a Soul's Separated
Subsistence. And First, If the Soul be Material, it takes away all Ground of
Questioning its being One, or Many; since being generated and extinguished with
the Body, as the Constituent Form of the Man, it can be no more Many than the
Body or the Person is so. 2. The Tenet of the Soul's being generated or
propagated, answers or silences all the Difficulties raised, a Part ante,
concerning the Soul, touching its Original or Derivation: And there can be
neither Need of, nor Truth in the Pre-existence, or continual New Creation of
Souls. 3. It removes the Query, How Souls and Bodies come to be United. 4. It
gives a clear Account of the Souls being contaminated with Original Sin, as
well, and as much, as the Body is so.
Next for the Soul's Residing in the Body, and Acting in it: The Soul, being
Material, possesses the Whole, and resides sparsim in every Member and small
Parcel of it: The glowing and inflamed Blood carries the Vigor and Virtue of
the Flame of Life to every least Parcel of the Body, and thereby is every such
Part enlivened and acted according to its Capacity and the Intent for which it
was made: whence it is neither All in Every Place, nor All in Any Place; but
possesses the whole Body, and supplies and acts every Member and Parcel, as
has been before described. And thence the Opinion of the Soul's Materiality
removes all Difficulties concerning the Soul, a Part post, viz. the Questions,
Whither it goes, and What becomes of it? and What it does, or can do, or
suffer, after its Separation from the Body?

The Opinion of the Soul's Materiality does also deliver from all the
Absurdities before-named: for then there can be no Need for, or a Pretense of,
a New Creation of Souls, which grow out of Nature and Generation: nor will
there be any need of using Young Innocent Souls with so great and unreasonable
Rigor, or making their Bodies the Cages or Prisons of them: nor will there be
any need of Ascribing to Beasts Pre-existent and Separately Subsisting Souls:
Nor for the depriving them of Senses, Memory, Affections, and Knowledge, which
naturally and evidently they have, and so knownly, as it seems absurd to aver
the contrary. But then it may be said, This will make the Souls of Men and
Beasts to be of the same Nature, and equal Expectations. The first of these we
grant, but the second we deny: Of the same Nature we grant, as well as they are
in their Bodies, the same sort of Flesh, Bones, Blood, Breath, Spirits, Urine,
Humors, and Life; and the same sort of Soul, or Living Flame, supporting and
acting in every Part and Member of their Bodies, but not of equal Expectations:
And yet the Difference arises not from Nature, but from the declared Disposal
and Appointment of God, who has appointed a Day in which he will Judge the
World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained; Whereof be has
given Assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the Dead. This
Appointment of God, that Men shall be raised from the Dead, and judged, and
rewarded according to their Works, and their Lives led here upon Earth, is the
Cause and Original of that Difference which shall be between the Future State
of Men and Beasts. This Resurrection is evidently declared to be designed for
Men, without mention of Beasts; and therefore we may say, and not for Beasts,
One Sort shall rise to give Account and receive Recompense for their Works, and
the other not. And this is the Ground for different Expectations of Men and
Beasts, as well as it answers the Arguments for a Separate State of Souls,
drawn from the accepted Rules of Moral Congruity amongst Men. Hence are the
Rewards of a true Christian Profession derived; and hence may all Arguments for
a Separate Subsistence of Souls be better answered, upon the Principles of
Christian Religon, than they can be from Reason, Nature, or the Principles of
any other Religion whatsoever.

We go on to consider, How the Inconveniences derived from the Opinion of a
Separated Subsistence of Souls, may be removed, or helped by the Acceptance of
the Soul's Materiality. And if so it be, and therefore extinguished by Death of
the Man, Men will not attempt upon utter Impossibilities, viz. to Raise or
Consult the Spirits of Dead Men, when they know that in Nature there is no such
Spirit. And for Purgatory, and Prayers to the Dead, and for the Dead, remove
but the Opinion of a Separate Subsistence of Souls, and change it for the
Materiality and Extinguishment of them, and this Change will presently remove
Purgatory, as useless, and to no Purpose: because there will be nothing in the
World for it to work upon. All its Pretense is for the Purging of Separated
Souls; and if really there are no such in the World, then can there be no Use,
no more than there is a real Being of Purgatory; then for Prayers to the Dead,
who in Life were Holy Persons or Saints, if their Souls were Material, and in
Death extinguished, what can there be lest for Addressing of Prayers unto, but
only Men's own Fantasies and Imaginations, and Ancient Practices and Customs,
which have a very strong Operation upon Men's Opinions, and yet hardly so
potent, as to justify to Men's ordinary Reason the Addressing of Prayers to
Persons who they are convinced have utterly no Subsistence at all. And Prayers
for the Dead, would upon the same Account become as needless and unsuccessful
as the former: For if there be no Souls to pray out of Purgatory, nor any
thing, in Rerum Natura, for which Prayers can be applied, it must appear
utterly against Common Sense and Reason for Men to pray for Things that are
not, or for nothing. And, it seems, if Men were once so persuaded, they would
never practice or use such unreasonable Ceremonies in any time to come. As for
the Conceit of Souls appearing or Walking after Death of the Persons, if Men
could bring themselves to believe that there are no Separately Subsisting Souls
in the World, they would need no more for their Cure, and putting them out of
Conceit with that Vain Apprehension.

Finally, It seems that if our Preachers in Cities, Burghs, and such as we call
Good Towns, and Trading Places, did apprehend there were no Separate
Subsistence of Souls, said to be departed, they would much abate of their
Pressures usually made upon the Score and Title of Men's precious Souls; and
they would not so clearly neglect and forget, if not despise the Body, as they
commonly appear to do. We see them fully joined together in Life, and that they
arise, grow, stand, decay, and fall together: And we read, much and often, that
they shall rise, be judged, and be rewarded together, without any one express
Averment, that either of them does, ever did, or can subsist without the other.
Hence it appears not very sound in them to build their Persuasions to Christian
Piety upon Ground so Sandy as the Separate Subsistence of Souls seems to be;
especially considering they have a Rock so near to them as that of the
Resurrection has been proved. Next we say, That if they did believe the
Rewards of Piety were so far off, as to the time of the Resurrection, and not
to be expected till the Soul and Body should be reunited: likely it is, they
would run a little less hotly upon the serving God mainly, at least, and
primely, if not only for the Rewards expected, and the Gain and Advantage Men
hope to make of a Bargain so prudently driven for their Benefit. Men who in
their Service look only or principally at their Rewards or Wages, are apt to
choose, not the best so soon as the most liberal Master; a bounteous, though
wicked, rather than a frugal, though honest Master. And if a Master of Servants
find some who serve only, or principally for the Wages; and others who though
they need and expect the Wages, yet serve heartily, and not as Men-pleasers,
but out of Love to their Master, and a Desire to please him, and render
themselves acceptable to him: We say a Master to whom this Proceeding is
undoubtedly known, cannot fail to make a great Difference in Account and Esteem
of such Servants, and their Rewards may be expected enough to give a clear
Testimony of the same. Baxter, in his Quoted Book, Page 34. and 35. says, It is
certain and proved, that God made it every Man's chief Duty and Care, and Work,
in this Life, to obtain Happiness hereafter. And yet I cannot grant him this
confident Assertion; but do say, That the Chief End of Man's Creation was not
to obtain Happiness of any sort. That was not the End or Scope of the Creation
of Man or any other Creature: Not made chiefly to obtain or seek their own
Good, Joy, Content, or Ease; but for the Glory and Service of God, and the
fulfilling of his Will, Things of much greater Importance than the Happiness or
Sufferings of Creatures, Beasts or Men. And so as they serve God's Will, and
effect his Glory, the Design of their Creation is therein more fully and
perfectly accomplished, than if they should otherwise have obtained all the
Happiness which their Natures are capable of: And they have the Advantage of
doing and bearing freely the Things and Duties appointed for them, which
otherwise must however be accomplished by them and upon them. Our Lord teaches,
That when Men have done their uttermost, they are but unprofitable Servants;
and therefore their Rewards must come ex Gratia, not ex Debito, or by way of
Stipulation, in the Mode of a gainful Bargain. And it seems, the Conceit, that
the Happiness of the Creatures is the great or main Design of their being or
acting, is a clear Mistake, in a main Point, and of very great Importance in
the Economy of the World, and Disposal of the Creatures in it, whose
Sufferings shall never be undeserved, nor can be very considerable in
comparison of their Design, viz. the Service of God, the fulfilling of his
Will, and the Advancement of his Glory: And the Serving to these Ends or
Designs, is every Man's chief Duty, and ought to be the Care and Work of his
Life; much to be preferred before his own obtaining of Happiness hereafter;
although that is no way excluded or weakened: for it is a certain Concomitant or
Consequent of such Performances, though not the main Design or Intent of them.
For God is not unrighteous, to forget Men's Works and Labor of Love which they
show to his Name: And certainly they thought so, who sold all they had, and
delivered the Money to be divided and distributed to others, every one as his
Need required. Our Lord directs, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and leave the
Care of your Rewards to him. They are no Debts from God, whatsoever Preachers
may call them, who sometimes say, God has obliged his Word and his Truth to
make them good, and to pay them accordingly: And he who labors in the Vineyard
shall be sure of the Wages. They ought to remember the Ground of that
Expression was but a Parable or Similitude, a Sandy Ground for Doctrines to be
built upon. And whatsoever other Expressions are found in Scripture to that
Purpose, may pass for Condescentions to the Weakness of Men. Paul tells us, God
that made the World, and all things in it, derives not Worship from Men's Hands
or Actions, as if he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all, Life, and
Breath, and all things. Whence, he who gives all things to all Men, cannot be
made a Debtor to any: since no Man has any thing which he has not received
from God, who cannot be made a Debtor for his own. When the Servants who had
employed their Talents, came to Account, they delivered up both the Principal
and the Product, without Pretense to Wages or Hire; and yet they were not the
less, but very highly rewarded. Romans 4.4. To him that works is the Reward not
reckoned of Grace, but of Debt: And therefore Christian Righteousness consists
in Faith, always productive of suitable Works. So our Service to God, in
fulfilling his Will, is always productive of Rewards suitable to the Greatness
and Goodness of our Lord and Benefactor, as the Proceed of his own Bounty and
Goodness; not paid as Wages, nor suting with Men's Work, nor in discharge of a
Debt, nor upon a Compensatory Account, but ex certa Scientia, and mero Motu. He
knows the Person loved and feared him, and had a perfect Heart toward him, and
therefore labored to keep his Commandments and all that he has appointed, and
to glorify his Name, and fulfill his Will: Great Rewards are as sure the
Consequences of such Performances, as good Works are of a true and lively
Faith; one can by no means be without the other; and where the one is not, the
other cannot grow, nor is reasonably to be expected. Performances of Duty for
Hire, or in Expectation chiefly of the desired Wages, is Servile and Mercenary;
without Cheerfulness in the Servant, or Regardfulness in the Master; and we
will not pretend to determine what may be the Effect of such an Expectation:
But whatsoever that may be, we are sure that whosoever serves God for Love, and
thence principally fears to offend; that serves God for Duty, and with Desire,
casting Rewards into the lowest Degrees of his Consideration, is in the most
certain Way to attain them. We read of generous Persons who have preferred the
Good of other Men before their own Happiness. Moses prays to be blotted out of
God's Book, or Catalogue of the Blessed, for Preservation of his Nation. And,
Romans 9. St. Paul could wish that himself were accursed from Christ, for his
Brethren and Kinsmen according to the Flesh. Our Men seem to be of other Minds,
they prefer the Reward, their own Happiness, above all other things. They
profess indeed to love God as Men ought to do, but yet they make it every Man's
chief Duty, and the Care and Work of his Life, to obtain Happiness hereafter;
terminating their Duties in their own Happiness, or the Rewards expected for
their Service of God; and are taught to count God their Debtor upon Promises
made in his Word, as for Wages due and stipulated between two Parties. What can
Men imagine of Men so set upon Gain, or the Gain of Godliness, but that if
there were a Being which' could give greater Wages, and would offer larger
Hire, such Chapmen would go over to the fairest Bidder; and as they hoped to
obtain the most gainful Bargain, Consideratis considerandis. But Rules of
Nature, or Grace, teach not this Practice, viz. to love for Hire, or serve God
for Rewards; but to love God for his Excellency and Beneficence; to serve him
well, because that is the most Perfect Freedom, and the best Employment that
the World affords; to seek his Glory as our own Happiness, and greatest
Exaltation; to prize his Acceptance more than his Rewards, and to esteem his
Rewards more highly, for being Effects and Assurances of his Favor, than for
the other Benefits which we may reap from them: This manner of Proceeding
creates a Freedom in Service, and makes that our Choice which is our Duty, and
cannot fail of obtaining one of those Crowns which are laid up, and to be
distributed at the Last Day, not as a Debt, Wages, or Hire, but as an Effect of
God's Bounty, Liberality, and Love. But perhaps Men of Trade, brought up to
seek Advantages in Bargains, may better relish to have God made Debtor upon his
Word and Book, than to rely upon the Excellent Goodness of his Nature or being.
It may be they are not capable of so high a Principle; to their own therefore,
of Wages, Hire, and a Book-debt, we leave them, with Advice not to be
overhasty in their Expectations, for fear of being put off by their
mis-understood, or mis-called Debtor to a farther Day, viz. that of the
Resurrection: And however that may seem some Disappointment to them, yet it
will be without Cause or Power to complain of his so doing. And the very
Opinion that it will so fall out, may go in Abatement of such Men's
Expectations, and take them something off that Eagerness which they have, or
make Show to have, in Matters of Religion; and whereby they are too often
troublesome to Government, and the quiet State of their Neighbors, and such as
otherwise have Occasion to converse with them: If they can believe that their
Hire, Wages, or Debt, shall not be paid till the Resurrection, and that all
then shall be called and paid off together, as it is in the Parable; it seems,
they will more easily be persuaded to put off all Hatred, Variance, Emulations,
Wrath, Strife, Seditions, etc. concerning which, heavy Charges have been laid
upon them, and Accusations have been brought against them, which we wish may be
found Mistakes, and not so well grounded as has been by their Accusers
pretended. This Inconvenience of eagerly expecting a sudden Transportation to
Heaven in State of a Separated Soul, was the last in our Examination
propounded; and we have so gone through it, as to bring it to an End, though
likely not to a Determination: but however it fall our, we do mean to take, and
use it, as an End and Termination of our present Argument and Enquiry
concerning the Soul; and here fix our Pillars, with the Inscription upon them,
of a Ne plus ultra.

As to the Conclusions inferrible from, or upon this Argument, or any
particulars of it, we leave them to be drawn up and inferred by the unbiassed
Perusers of the same: And because we doubt whether any such there are, all Men,
and the Arguer himself amongst them, having been nursed, taught, and educated
in the Opinion and Belief of the Immortality and Separate Subsistence of a
Humane Soul, we desire this Treatise may fall into, or under the Examination of
the Prudent, who can consider the Force of Prejudice, and will make it Part of
their Endeavor to lay aside or weaken (in what they can) the Power of such
Prejudice, which will otherwise take from them the true Denomination of Just
and Equal Judges, and make them Partial ones, a Quality condemnable in any who
shall be made, or shall make themselves Judges. We wish those Desires which
induced the Search and the Communicating this Product, may accompany the
Perusers of it, viz. a Desire to find out the Truth in this Point, and a
Willingness to weigh and consider patiently the proposed Arguments, and to
endure the Contradiction they will certainly offer to the Bent or Assurance of
their Opinions in this Point, long since accepted, and hitherto fostered
without any former Doubt or Hesitation concerning the same. Judges thus
qualified are such as we desire; and to such we offer the Perusal of this
Argument intended for their Examination, and willingly to be put under their
Censures; and for that of other People, we shall rest indifferent, and under
Expectation of a great and general Contradiction, such as many Truths have met
with in the World, upon the first Proposals made of them, and seems naturally
incident to all like Undertakings: Whence Men must either stifle or smother
their Idea's of Truth, putting such Lights under a Bushel, or covering them
with some other Vessel, or putting them under a Bed, or into some other secret
Place, without daring to set them upon a Candlestick, and expose them to the
View of the World, that their Light may be examined; or else they must be
exposed, or even expose themselves to the Violences of inveterate Prejudices,
and indiscreet Surmises of mistaking, and impotent, and Passionate Judges, made
by the publishing and making themselves so by their sudden Censuring and
Condemning the Tenet and Design, before they have half perused, or in any
measure weighed, the Grounds or Reasons offered or alleged in the Behalf of
it. It is truly told us, that though Light be offered to the World, yet Men may
love an Old and Accustomed Darkness better than a New and Unaccustomed Light.
And yet Men seem encouraged, or even pressed to undergo the Trial, by what
follows, viz. He who does the Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be
made manifest that they are wrought in God. Hence, he whosoever fears to bring his
Works to the Light, as to put them rather in a secret Place and smother them,
seems convinced, or under a strong Suspicion that they are not wrought in God.
For he who does Truth, comes willingly to the Light for the Manifestation of
his Deeds: And we would have it taken, and accepted, as the true and only
Design of making this Argument public; believing it a Discovery of Truth,
wrought in God, without any crooked Biass or Design; and not unfit or improper
to be set upon a Candlestick, that Men may have Opportunity to see and
discover, and to examine its Light, viz. the Truth of it, and may use it
accordingly.

Having made such Search after Souls as we are able, we go on to enquire
concerning other Spiritual Operations in Man. And do say, that we have taken
the Occasion of this Enquiry from the Book before-cited, called Richard
Baxter's Dying Thoughts: Perusing what he said there concerning the Soul, I met
with Doctrines about the Operations of God's Spirit acting in Man, such as were
very different from my own Apprehensions; and thereupon entered into a Design of
enquiring farther into the Truth of what there is asserted; and to approve, or
endeavor to confute, what we there met with, concerning this Subject, as it
shall appear agreeable to Truth, or otherwise deviating from, or opposite unto
the same. Page 47. He says, This Spirit works in all Believers, and either in
them only, or eminently above all others. Page 48. But this is not discoverable
to those who have had a pious Education, and have pursued that Course from,
their Youth: They cannot discover the Spirit's Renovation in themselves, but
are left to make such Discovery of Renovation in others, who have been changed
from Evil to Good. Without Christ's Spirit we can do nothing, and better have
no Souls than be void of that Spirit. Hereupon I observe, That those who cannot
discern this sort of Spirit working in themselves, seem to be very incompetent
Judges of its working in other People, or of knowing that such Change was
wrought by that Spirit. They may guess, and mistake: but we deny that they can
know it. We agree that no Man can act any thing without God's Assistance: for
in him we live, move, and have our Being. We cannot do a good Work, nor any
Work without him; and our Dependence is upon him, both for Life and Action. And
this Divine Energy Men may call the Spirit of God, within us: But we deny that
this is peculiar to Believers more than to other People, although it seem often
confounded, with the Holy Spirit of God, and of Christ.

Page 49 He says, Heaven is the Sum and End of all the Spirit's Operations,
viz. Man's Salvation purchased by Christ, and given by Covenant: Take up the
Cross, forsake all, and follow me, and thou shall have Reward in Heaven. For
this he quotes Luke 14. Ver. 26. and 33. The Words are, Those who do not
forsake all cannot be Christ's Disciples. And he quotes Luke 18.22. where the
Words are, Sell all and distribute, and thou shall have Treasure in Heaven. How
far these Words prove his Assertion, we leave to Judgment. It follows, God
sends his Spirit to good Purposes, and to illuminate and make Holy: And we
grant, where it comes, it does so. But to know where, or in whom this Holy
Spirit resides, will be the Difficulty between us. Page 50. He quotes 16 Texts
of Scripture to prove God has promised this Spirit to Believers in a Special
Manner. I have perused them all, and do not find one of them come home to his
Assertion, viz. That God will give to all Believers his Spirit in a Special
Manner. And yet, that they are all under the Conduct of that Spirit, and are
moved and led thereby, we do grant; but do say, that it works generally by
Natural Ways and Means of Illuminating the Understandings of Men, and their
Faculties of Perception, inclining their Judgments, and thereby their Wills,
regulating their Affections, quieting their Passions, subduing all to the
Obedience of Christ, by Natural, and therefore Imperceptible Working in them,
upon them, and by them; so as the Working may not be perceptible to themselves,
or others who converse them: But the prime or sole Appearance of this ordinary
Conduct of Gods Spirit must be sought for and found, in the Fruits, not in the
Leaves, the Bustling Noise, or Rattling Professions, or Contendings about, or
for Religion. Galat. 5.22. Gives us a Catalogue of these Fruits. The Fruit of
the Spirit, is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance. Where these Fruits grow and flourish, and the Works of
the Flesh here mentioned wither and die, Men have great Reason to conclude the
Person so walking, is under the Conduct of God's Holy Spirit; because it is
beyond Humane Power to produce these Effects, without the Divine Assistance, or
Aids from Heaven; and thus we join with our Author at the Journeys End,
although we travel in different Roads toward it. We both say, God's Spirit
conducts and leads Believers in a particular Manner; but we do not agree about
the Manner. I say, The ordinary Working of God's Spirit, is by Natural Means,
perfecting and regulating the Man's Powers and Actions, till they arrive to a
Conformity with their highest Intention, and the Will and Appointment of God,
unperceivably in the Operation or Conduct, both to other People, or even to the
Party upon whom this Grace is bestowed; for that it is Naturally effected, and
so without any violent or perceptible Motion, or Action; and therefore cannot
be known but by the Evidence of Fruits. Our Author, By God's Spirit gives to
Believers in a Special Manner (agreeing in general with those of his Practices)
does intend such a perceivable and vigorous Working of God's Spirit in Men, as
excites their Zeal and Concernment for the Gospel-Interest, and what they
believe tendent and conducing to the Glory of God; although in their
Proceedings to such Purposes, there appear neither Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, nor Meekness; and although there do appear Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, and such like. This Tenet I
pretend to oppose, as an Erroneous and Dangerous Doctrine, opposing our Lord's
Direction; By their Fruits ye shall know them. The Pharisees and Jewish Nation
of Christ's Time, were as zealous for God and his Law, as the most Devoted of
our Time can show themselves for the Gospel: Their Hatred to him grew the most
apparently, from his not strictly observing the Sabbath Day, and not Washing
before Meat, and other Religious Practices then used; and his Pretending to
introduce a New Mode of Religion different from that given by God at Mount
Sinai. But they proceeded in Opposition by Unjust and Faulty Methods, viz.
Violent Oppression, not agreeing with their Law, False Accusations and
Witnesses, Barbarous Exclamations of, Crucify him, Crucify him; though they
had not proved, nor the Judge found any Evil in him. By these Fruits the Jewish
Zealots might safely and certainly be Judged. Of whom St. Paul bears witness,
That they had a Zeal to God, [seems true and unfeigned,] but not according to
Knowledge: They held the Truth in Unrighteousness, and practiced the doing of
Evil that Good might come. And by like Fruits any Persons may be known, and
that they have not the Spirit of God, how eager Pretenders soever to the same
they be.

We do also agree with our Author, and those of his Mode, That the Spirit of
God has in many or all Ages, moved and acted People in a very perceivable
Manner; and most eminently, during the Infant Times, or Beginning of the
Christian Doctrines and Church. Acts 20. The Holy Ghost witnesses in every
City, saying, that Bonds and Afflictions abide me. As if the Spirit of Prophecy
were very frequent among them. Galat. 3.5. He that ministers to you the
Spirit, and works Miracles amongst you, does he it by the Law? And by Laying
on of the Apostles Hands (in Nature of a Confirmation) the Holy Ghost was
frequently given. And at the Conversion of Cornelius, The Holy Ghost fell on
all them which heard the Word. And at their first Pentecost, The Holy Ghost
appeared in a visible Sign, and sat upon every one of the Disciples, and they
spoke with Tongues, as the Spirit gave them Utterance: not able to use another
Tongue at that Time. So Cornelius his Guests spoke with Tongues, and magnified
God. At Ephesus, upon Laying on of Paul's Hands, the Holy Ghost fell upon his
Converts, and they spoke with Tongues and Prophesied. These Texts are
Evidences, that these eminent and visible Actings of the Holy Ghost, upon the
Disciples of those Times, were very frequent and usual, attended with the
miraculous Effects of Prophesying, Speaking with Tongues, and Healing Diseases,
Casting out of Devils, etc 1 Cor. 12.4. There are Diversities of Gifts, but the
same Spirit; Healing, Miracles, Prophecy, Tongue: also Wisdom, Knowledge, and
Faith. The three later, Men cannot with any Clearness and Certainty discern;
but the sour former give Testimony to Men's Senses that they are wrought by the
Spirit and Power of God; for that none of them are Effects of Natural Powers.
And when Men behold them done in their Presence, they are ready to fall down
and worship God, and report, That God is truly in such Actors, and that these
are the Effects of God's Spirit in them. This sort of eminent and perceivable
Endowment with God's Spirit, was very frequent and general in the Apostolic
Times; but in Future Times it diminished, decayed, ceased, and finished, by
Degrees: And for many Hundreds of Years, we have seen, or believed no Evidences
that have been given us, whereby the same should be perceived. We have heard
indeed, and read diverse Relations and Pretenses to that Purpose, but never saw
or believed any to be Real and Convincing Evidences, that any Men since the
Primitive Ages of the Christian Church, have been endowed with God's Spirit, in
this Eminent and Perceivable or Extraordinary Manner: The Evidences of which,
are the Miraculous Effects and Operations expected plainly to be manifested for
Confirmation of that Opinion or Pretense. Whence we require these two Sorts of
Proofs, from Men pretending to have God's Spirit in a Special or Peculiar
Manner; viz. If they pretend to the Ordinary Imperceptible Operations of that
Spirit upon them; we demand Evidence by the Fruits before specified: If they
reply, You shall hear us Pray and Preach Ex tempore with great Vehemence, and
without Hacking or Extravagancy; and this we propose to all that hear us, as a
Supernatural Power, and an Evident Effect and Operation of God's Spirit. We
agree this to be somewhat Extraordinary, when Really and Truly Performed; but
withal do say, Such Power is attainable by the Industry and Practice of Man.
And of that we give Instance, out of Socrates his History, Lib. 7. Cap. 2.
where Atticus was made Patriarch of Constantinople, about An. Christi 410. He
was a Man of mean Learning, but of Godly Life, and great Wisdom, and became a
painful Student, and spent the greater Part of his Night in Reading, and became
so learned, as no Sophistry could puzzle him. First, viz. As soon as he was
made Priest, he framed Sermons, and with great Labor learned to repeat them
without Book, and by Diligence and Exercise, became so expert, that he came to
Preach ex tempore, and his Manner of Teaching was very plain. See here an
Ancient Father of the Church, obtaining this Faculty of Preaching ex tempore by
Diligence and Exercise (without Pretense or Mention that it was a particular
Operation of God's Spirit.) We see this Gift may be obtained therefore by
Nature; assisted with God's ordinary Concurrence requisite to the perfecting of
all Man's Designs; and therefore it may not pass with us for an undoubted sort
of Proof, that Persons, so able, and so doing, are therefore endowed with the
Spirit of God in a Special and Particular Manner. And we say farther, That this
Faculty of Praying and Preaching, is none of those mentioned in S. Paul's
Catalogue for Fruits of the Spirit; nay, and that it is consistent with, and
often serviceable to, the Works of the Flesh. We refuse then to admit this
Faculty for a Proof that the Actors are Specially endowed with God's Spirit;
and call for such Fruits as St. Paul has specified to us, as Evidences that
God's Spirit resides Specially in Particular Persons, working in them in his
ordinary Imperceptible and Natural Way, proceeding by the Enlightening their
Perceptive Faculties, inclining their Judgments, and so their Wills, regulating
their Affections, quieting their Passions, and subduing all to the Rules of
Christ's Gospel, and Observance of all that is there declared and enjoined. And
as to the eminent or extraordinary, or perceptible Endowment with God's Spirit,
like those in the Apostles Times, and some next Ages to them, we expect that
all who pretend to be so end owed, shall prove and manifest the same by their
Miraculous Operations. Let us see or hear them Prophecy, speak with Tongues
unlearnt, heal the Sick, cast out Devils, cleanse Lepers, raise the Dead, or do
some Things that may be like these, and clearly above the Power of Nature to
perform; and less or other Evidence, will not be admitted as Proof that any
Person is endowed with Gods Holy Spirit, in such an extraordinary and
perceptible Manner, as People used frequently to be in the Apostolical Times,
and the Ages next unto them: And an Instance shall be cited of those Ages next
after the Apostles, viz. Eusebius. Hist. Lib. 6. Cap. 8. Narcissus became Bishop
of Jerusalem, about Anno Christi 190. in the Vigils of Easter, the Christians
then used to be in Nocturnal Celebrations in the great Church, Oil was not
provided enough to nourish the Lamps, at which Defect the Multitude complained
and grieved, the Bishop also troubled, commands the Officers, to fetch Water
out of the next Well, and when it was brought, he prayed over it, then bad them
pour it out into the Lamps, and the Water changed into Oil, and served the
Lamps as Liquor of that Nature: and a small Quantity was (for the Miracles
sake) reserved by many of the Brethren a long while after. This, says our
Author (who wrote about Anno 340.) is come to us by Tradition from one to
another: And being a Tradition so Ancient, and of a Time reputed more Innocent
than the Present, is here repeated as an Evidence, that the Power and Spirit of
God did work, did then work miraculously amongst them in the Church: And except
we see such Signs and Wonders, we shall not be able to believe that any amongst
us have the Spirit of God in such extraordinary Manner as the Apostolic Times
and Men had it, in a Manner perceptible to the Parties themselves, or to any
others who shall converse with them. And this settles the Case betwixt the
Author and me; and shows where the Difference of Opinions sticks. He intends
the Church now has that Power of the Spirit which is perceptible to the
Party's own self, and to others, such as was in the Apostolic Times, and which
I call Extraordinary. This I deny; and the Proof lying upon his Hand, it seems
he ought to make the same Proof of it in these Times that was wont to be made
in those Times, viz. Miraculous Operations, such as are above the Power of
Man's Nature of it self to perform: Instead of which, he endeavors to conclude
upon us with Quotations of some Expressions taken out of St. Paul's Epistles,
sounding to his Purpose; against which Records collected out of Scripture, he
says, we may not aver. To this I reply, That those Epistles have in them some
Things hard to be understood, and which may be wrested to the Maintenance of
Errors; and it seems that diverse such Places are wrested, by applying to Future
Times, and our Times, what was by that Apostle spoken of those Times in which
he lived, and so applied, were pertinent and true; and yet, if applied to
Future Times, for which they were not intended, they may (very likely) have
another Appearance. We have also before spoken of God's Ordinary Conduct given
to Believers, whose Natural Faculties his Spirit polishes, leads, orders and
perfects; moving and intercepting their Faculties and Actions, and meliorating
their Natures and Inclinations with so much Gentleness and Easiness, as the
Parties cannot themselves perceive any Violence of Motion, no nor any Motion at
all; nor do they certainly know how far, or how much, the Spirit of God acts in
their own Reformation or Amendment; and how then should other People know the
Spirit of God to act in them? Why, the Party, and those who consider his
Condition, have all the same Means to know the Spirit is there; and where it
is, it works; they must derive their Knowledge from the Fruits: These are are
good and known Fruits of the Spirit, and they cannot spring nor grow without
Cultivation of God's Spirit; and where those Effects are visible and known,
there the Cause and Presence of that Spirit may as certainly be concluded. Now
we say, that by rightly applying the Expressions of St. Paul in his Epistles,
unto these two Grounds and Positions, or to one of them, as the Expression
shall require, all that Apostle's Expressions are solvable without any Need of
Reason thence to infer, that there must be in the Christian Church of all
Times, such a special perceptible Impulse of God's Spirit, as there was in the
Times when St. Paul wrote; and which I have termed Extraordinary, as given to,
and in that Time, and not to be continually communicated to Future Ages: And
where God's continual Assistance, and that of his Spirit is mentioned, it may
the most likely be intended the Ordinary Communications of God's Spirit, which
we doubt not are frequently and ordinarily to be perceived in our own Times,
and by the Means before prescribed. So as the applying of these Texts out of
St. Paul's Epistles, to the one, or the other, of our proposed Positions, will
be able to answer and satisfy all those Texts, and put a Reasonable and True
Construction upon them, without any need of Inferring from them a Necessity of
having amongst Christians in all Future Ages, such Endowments and Operations of
God's Spirit, as were in the Persons living in Apostolic Times, or near unto
them.

And that an Instance may be given of our propounded Manner for the expounding
such of St. Paul's Texts; we make Choice of a Place, often urged upon Debates,
concerning the Necessity of being eminently endowed with God's Spirit, in all
Times, and Places Christian, viz. 1 Cor. 2.14 The Natural Man receives not the
Things of the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he
know them, because they are Spiritually discerned. This Text or Verse, as it
stands alone, or by it self, sounds as if Man's Nature and Reason were utterly
useless in understanding the Tenets and Duties pertaining to the Christian
Faith and Profession; but that all such Things must be left to Guidance of the
Spirit, and Direction of those who are thereunto inspired, or that are reputed
so to be. In answer to this, we say, that for expounding this Text, and all
others, the Context is very necessary to be well considered: And to that
Purpose, we go upward to the sixth Verse of this Chapter: There the Apostle
says, We speak Wisdom, but not of this World. Ver. 7. We speak the Wisdom of
God in a Mystery. Ver. 8. Which, if the Princes of the World had known, they
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. Ver. 9. But neither Man's Senses,
nor his Understanding, can find out the Things which God has prepared for
those that love him. Ver. 10. But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit,
which searches the deep Things of God. We ask, What is intended by us? and take
us to signify the Apostles, and other inspired, Disciples and Teachers of
those Times; and not extending to the later and suspected Pretenders of future,
or our Time, since the Miraculous Manifestations of the Spirit ceased in the
Church. Ver. 11. and 12. We received the Spirit which is of God, viz. those
Teachers received. Ver. 13. And we speak this Mystery in Words not taught by
Man's Wisdom, but which the Holy Ghost teaches; comparing Spiritual Things
with Spiritual. Then comes our Text. Then, Ver. 15. He that is Spiritual,
judges all things, viz. He to whom God has so communicated his Spirit, as
that thereby they were enabled to know the Thoughts and Intents of Men's Hearts;
as that impotent People had Faith to be healed. And in the Conspiracy of
Ananias and Saphira, 1 Cor. 14.24. and Acts 20.23. before cited. They knew not
only Things present, but Things to come, and therefore might judge all things.
But we cannot allow the present Pretenders amongst us to apply this to
themselves, or to any of theirs. Ver. 16. Says, We have known the Mind of
Christ. viz. by Revelation of the Spirit; not only by the Letter: Nay, from the
Spirit in them, by whom the Letter of what we call Gods Word, was dedicated and
framed. Ephesians. 3.3. Ye have heard of the Grace of God given me, and that by
Revelation, God made known unto me the Mystery. viz. that Mystery intended in
our present Chapter. Col. 1.26. Even the Mystery which has been hid from all
Ages and Generations: But was then made manifest to the Saints of that Time.
Ephesians. 1.17. I pray that God will give you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation,
the Eyes of your Understanding being enlightened, that ye may know the Hope of
his Calling, and the Riches of his Glory. Galat. 1.16. It pleased God to call
me by his Grace, and to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him. Ver. 12.
I neither received the Doctrine of the Gospel from Man, nor was I taught it,
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Nor did he then consult with other
Apostles, or his own Flesh and Blood, about it, but went into Arabia, far from
other Teachers. Acts 8.26. The Angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, arise
and go toward the South, with other Directions. Ver. 29. The Spirit said to
Philip, go near, and join thy self to this Chariot. Ver. 39. When they were
come up out of the Water, the Spirit of God caught away Philip, and the Eunuch
saw him no more. Act. 10.19. While Peter thought on the Vision, the Spirit said
to him, behold three Men seek thee; arise and go with them, for I have sent
them. So, Chap. 11.12. The Spirit bad me go with them, nothing doubting. Act.
13 2. As at Antioch they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost said,
separate me Barnabas and Saul for the Work whereunto I have appointed them.
Acts 16.6. Paul was forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the Word in Asia.
Ver. 7. And they essayed to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not.
These Texts have been quoted to evince and declare the Manner and Efficacy of
God's Communicating his Spirit in those Times: Of which sort our present
Pretenders to Endowments of the Spirit, have not a Face to challenge any thing.
We return now to Examination of our quoted Text and Chapter, and say, That the
Wisdom of which St. Paul here speaks, is the Wisdom of God in a Mystery,
ordained before the World unto our Glory, called, Ephesians. 1. The Mystery which had
been hid from Ages and Generations: but was made manifest to the Saints of that
Time. Mentioned, Matthew. 16.17. Peter says to his Master, thou art Christ, the
Son of the living God: And Jesus answered, Flesh and Blood has not revealed
this unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. The Redemption of the World,
by Christ, and that Jesus preached to the People was Christ, was the Mystery of
St. Paul, intended in this Text. The Princes of this World had no Knowledge of
this Mystery; for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory. This was not a Thing that could enter into the Senses, or the Heart of
Man to conceive: But God had then revealed it by his Spirit to the Holy
Apostles, and Disciples of that Time, who had received the Spirit of God, that
they might know this Mystery as a Thing freely given to them of God; of which
they spoke in Words taught by the Spirit. But the Natural Man [or the Reason of
Man] could not find out, or were not capable of receiving this Mystery by any
Helps of Nature or Reason; for this Mystery would be Foolishness to a Natural
Man, and could not be known by Natural Means, or Grounds of Reason, but must be
Spiritually discerned, by Revelation of God's Spirit: For the Things of God
knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. As our Lord, to Peter, Flesh and Blood
has not revealed this to thee, but my Father has done it. A Thing which no
other Means had Power to do. Not Man's Nature or his Reason: Nothing could
discover this to Man, but the Revelation of Gods Spirit. Every Parcel of this
Mystery is above the Natural Man's Capacity and Comprehension. What Eye had
ever seen, or Ear heard, or what Heart had ever conceived, That a Woman should
bear a Child without the Assistance of a Man. The Virgin demands, How can this
Thing be, seeing I know not a Man? The Natural Man could not receive this
small, or least Part of the Mystery of Man's Redemption; but it would appear
Foolishness to him: Not to speak of the Trinity, and Second Person in it,
united to the Nature of Man, and choosing to appear in the Form of a Servant, to
undergo Contempt, Want, Pain, and Death, and rise again by his own Power; and
that his so doing, should be Expiatory for the Sins of Men, and be so accepted
in the Sight of God, the Natural Man receives not; cannot naturally receive the
Things of this Mystery; for they are Foolishness to him; nor can his Reason
know or conceive them, because they are, and must be Spiritually discerned,
viz. must come to be first known by the Revelation of God's Spirit only. Our
Apostle's Text thus applied, is not only firm and true, but also plain and
clear, intelligible and rational; which Men take upon them to confound, by
taking a dictum secundum quid, for a dictum simpliciter; and applying what the
Apostle speaks concerning this great Mystery, and concerning the first and
eminent Revelations of it, to all Occasions, Persons, and Times, without
observing the Measures of Difference which ought to be made between them;
concerning which, we say,

That although at the first Times of making this great Mystery known to the
World, there was no Way of Producing that Effect, save the only Revelation of
God by his Spirit; and the same was performed accordingly. Yet in a short
Process of Time, it came to pass, that this Mystery was Taught, Accepted, and
Believed, by Natural Men, upon Reasonable Grounds, and without being counted
Foolishness amongst them, viz. when God by his Spirit had revealed this Mystery
to Peter, Paul, and the rest of the rest of the Disciples of our Lord, and
other Christians: Then they preached the same to other Men, and declared this
Mystery to them. Mark 16.23. They went forth and preached every where, the Lord
working with them, and confirming the Word with Signs following. Their Auditors
(Natural Men) had Reason to consider the Teachers, the Doctrine, and the Signs
following. The Teachers were Men, Sober and Pious, not seeking Worldly
Interests, ready to suffer for Justifying the Truth of their Doctrines, and
without Exceptions in the Course of their Lives: The Doctrine was Sublime, said
to be revealed by God, the Facts delivered, of our Lord's Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and Descent of the Holy Ghost, were examinable, and
being examined, would firmly abide that Test: all of it tended to Humility,
Piety, Charity, and Works esteemed good amongst Men; and though the Mystery of
it soared above Humane Reason and Comprehension, yet they were not inconsistent
with, or contrary to the same. For the Signs following, they were very great
and undoubted, and very many, not here to be recounted. The Auditors convinced
by all these Considerations, might, and did believe the Mysteries, and accept
and practice the Doctrines of Christian Religion, upon good and convincing
Grounds, Natural and Rational; and without any good or plain Reason to account
them Foolishness. The Men who then primely taught these Doctrines to Natural
Men of their Times, wrote them after, for the Use of future Times and Ages; and
they being dead, now speak to us by those Writings, and still teach and
convince the Natural and Rational Persons of our Times (as they did those of
their own) to believe this great Mystery of the Redemption, and other Mysteries
of of our Religion; and they did then, and do still prevail over their
Proselites to these Purposes, even as they are Reasonable and Natural Men, and
without requiring or perceiving any eminent Motions, or evident Operations of
the Spirit in such Cases, more than such as we have before specified, and
termed ordinary amongst Christians; not to be evidently perceived by Motions
and Operations, but are as certainly to be known by the Fruits, Effects and
Products of it, in the Course and Tenor of the Professors Lives. And by this
Application, as to a dictum secundum quid, we pretend to have avoided the
extravagant Inferences deducible from this Text of St. Paul, if it should pass
for a dictum simpliciter, we have fixed it to the most early Times of the
Gospel, as intended for them only, and not reasonably to be generally, or any
farther extended; and thus shall be ended our Exposition of this Text.

And we proceed to other Texts fit and needful to be solved, by applying them
to the ordinary Effects of God's Spirit amongst Christians of our own and all
former Ages. Romans 8.9. If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. This we apply to the ordinary Operation of God's Spirit in Believers,
appearing in the Fruits of a holy Life. Ver. 14. As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. Ver. 26. The Spirit helps our
Infirmities; viz. this ordinary, tacit Operation of the Spirit; but that
Spirit which makes Intercession for us with Groanings, seems not within us, but
external to us. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwells in you, viz. in the ordinary Manner. Chap.
12.13. We are all baptized, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.
This Spirit intends a Spirit external to us and our own Baptism and Communion.
Galat. 4.6. God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying
Abba, Father. viz. God's Spirit in ordinary Manner. Chap. 5.25. If we live in
the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. This is clear in it self to intend
ordinary Operation. Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with Wine, but be filled with the
Spirit. viz. live according to the ordinary Directions of God's Spirit,
soberly, as well as righteously and godly in this present World. These Texts,
and their like, we expound, by applying them to the ordinary Operation of God's
Spirit in Believers, not easily or likely to be discovered by the Parties
themselves or by any other, except only by the Fruits of a holy Life, and godly
Conversation: Where these really are, and appear plainly, there is the Spirit
of God, the true Root and Original of them: And where these do not appear, and
really are not, there certainly the Spirit of God is not, be the Leaves of
Profession never so large, fair, or flourishing, and though they make never so
much Noise and Clatter, when they are moved with such Winds of Doctrine, and
Trial, as happen to blow upon them. There is no doubt but that the ordinary
Operations of God's Spirit are dispensed in diverse Degrees of more or less
Strength and Perfection. Nor but that God can and will, when he pleases, in
any present or future Times, (as well as the Primitive) give and distribute to
whom he pleases, such eminent and perceptible Endowments of his Holy Spirit, as
he did to the Apostles, and Disciples of their Times: But we do not, or will,
or cannot yet believe, that so he has done, does, or will do, without
accompanying the same with such Signs following, as shall plainly distinguish
the Persons, and give them an Esteem superior to that of other Men. 2 Cor.
12.12. Truly the Signs of an Apostle were wrought amongst yon, in Signs and
Wonders and mighty Deeds. And whosoever shall lay Claim to the eminent,
powerful, and perceptible Endowments of God's Spirit, without those or the like
Signs, which did in Primitive Times accompany the same, will, it seems, deserve
and find very little Credit or Acceptance amongst Considerate Persons at this
Day. And we have thus done with our Considerations of the ordinary Operation of
God's Spirit upon Believers. As an Appendix to which, we may observe, that God
is pleased to communicate the Assistances of his Spirit operating in Men, upon
Worldly Occasions and Accounts, as well, if not as much as in Occurence
concerning Matters of Religion, and in the Ordinary and Natural Manner before
declared, illuminating Men's Understandings, and their Faculties of Perception,
inclining their Judgments and their Wills, regulating their Affections and
Passions, elevating and perfecting their Natures. Exodus 31.3. I have called by
Name Bezaluel, and have filled him with the Spirit of God, in Wisdom, and
Understanding, Knowledge, and all manner of Workmanship. Ver. 6. So for
Aholiab, and other Men of Art, I have put Wisdom in them, that they may make
all that I have commanded thee. These Men had learnt their Arts and Trades in
Egypt, but the Spirit of God gave them further Degrees of Illumination, and
farther Perception concerning them, than they had before attained; directing to
a more perfect and ready Practice than had been usual to them before: like as,
in Matters of Religion, the ordinary Operations of God's Spirit appear, Things
which People have read or heard before without a right Understanding, or a true
Feeling, are by such Operation of the Spirit cleared up to them, and fixed in
their Hearts, so as to intend the Observance of them, introducing into them an
Aversion from Evil, and an earnest Desire to do Good, and a Joy of Heart in the
Performance; also they may perceive Practices of Piety grow more easy to them,
both in Points of Learning and Performance. These are evident Signs of God's
Spirit present, and working, although no perceptible Motion be felt, nor any
other Evidence of the Presence of God's Spirit: And no Testimony is given, that
these Artists did perceive or find any Motion of God's Spirit working in them;
but it perfected and enabled their Natural Faculties, producing its Effects in
an Easy, Imperceptible and Natural Manner. Judge. 14.6. A young Lion roared
against Samson; and the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon him, and he rent
the Lion like a Kid. So Ver. 19. So Chap. 15.14. and Chap. 13.25. The Spirit of
the Lord began to move him at times. In the Camp of Dan, 1 Kings 3.9. Solomon
says, Give thy Servant an Understanding Heart to judge thy People. Ver. 12. God
says, I have given thee a Wise and an Understanding Heart, above all before or
after thee. Seems by enlightening and perfecting of Natural Faculties; if
Samson's Strength were not so effected. Isa. 28.6. The Lord shall be for a
Spirit of Judgment to him that sits in Judgment; and for Strength to them
that turn the Battle to the Gate. Ver. 26. God does instruct the Husbandman
concerning his Corn, and does teach him how to order it. Chapter 50.4. The Lord
has given me the Tongue of the Learned, and wakeneth mine Ear to hear as the
Learned: viz. makes me Learned. Deuteronomy. 34.9. Joshuah was full of the Spirit of
Wisdom, for Moses had laid his Hands upon him. Act 6.10. Stephen 's Opposers
were not able to resist the Wisdom of the Spirit by which he spoke. James 1.5.
If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, and it shall be given him
liberally. And whereas some going to a Sermon, or reading a Book, will take
hold and be converted thereby, and others not; and this is said to be an Effect
of God's Spirit in the Converted: We do not deny it; but do also say, That if
Twenty Scholars read and study Euclide, a few are likely to attain the Effect
easily, and the greater Part never. So, in Practice of Music, some will attain
a Perfection, but the Major Part never. And so in many other Faculties,
especially such wherein Phantasy and Apprehension are the most concerned.
Sometimes also the Works and Gifts of God's Spirit are so lively imitated by
the Father of Lies, as the World has thereby been generally and greatly
deceived, and induced to take the one for the other. Moses Opposers acted his
Miracles till they came to the Lice; and the Devil acted so against Job, as it
looked like the Hand of God's Justice against him, and made him pass for an
Hypocrite in the World, and with his best Friends. The Lying Spirit seen by
Michaiah, gave such great and strong Impressions to Ahab's Prophets, and so
like a Divine Revelation, as they had no ordinary Means of Distinguishing the
one from the other. Hence St. John. 1 Ep. 4.1. wisely directs; Believe not
every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God; for there are many
false ones in the World. And our Lord taught us to try every Tree by its own
Fruit: if it bear Grapes it is undoubtedly a Vine, and otherwise not. And to
this Trial we commit the most confident Pretenders to the Spiritual Endowments,
not to be derived from any but the Giver of every good and and perfect Gift.

Our Author, Page 52. says, The Spirit is given by Christ to all sound
Believers. If he mean as a Guide, whose Instinct they ought to follow: I deny
it. But if as Assistant, and a Helper in their Endeavors, working in them to
will and to do, as by Reason and Scripture they are directed; I grant it. Page
54. Says, Have thou not found the Motions, the Effectual Operations, the
Renewing Changes of this Spirit in thee long ago? and is he not still the Agent
and Witness in thee of Christ's Residing and Operating in thee? Whence else are
thy Groanings after God, thy Desires to be nearer to his Glory, and to know him
better, to love him more, the Pleasure which thou have had in his Truth, Ways,
and Service, etc. We pass by his Christ's Residing in thee, and thy Groanings
after God, and Desires to be nearer his Glory, as a New, and Cloudy Language:
And to his plain Expressions of desiring and endeavoring to Know and Love God,
and to delight in his Truth, Ways, and Service, we say, That they who do not
pretend to a Special Spiritual Conduct, but walk by the Lights of Scripture and
Reason, under the ordinary Conduct of God's Spirit, do as much observe^ and as
well perform, all known Religious Duties and Services required by God in his
Word, as Pretenders to a Spiritual Guidance do, without yielding to them in any
true Practice of Piety or Charity whatsoever. He pretends, That the Spirit
raises Devotion, or gives a greater Height of Rapture, in Men's Religious
Performances. And we agree, That so it can do, and may do so, when God pleases,
and that with some extraordinary Testimony of Illumination: But, that this is a
Common or Ordinary Effect of God's Spirit amongst Believers, we do deny: And do
impute such Effects (ordinarily happening) not to the Spirit of God, but to the
Fantasies of Men, who putting themselves into a Godly Chafe, and thereby
feeling a great Heat, Mettle, and Emotion within them, it seems, they imagine
this is given them from above, and that it is God's Spirit working within them;
and that it would be Sin in them not to follow the Dictates and Motions of it,
although upon due Trial they fall out to be very Irregular; and the common
Effect thereof is, That Men dethrone their Reason and Judgment, which God has
placed in them for Natural Guides and Rulers, on Pretense of the Text, 1 Cor.
2.14. before expounded, saying, The natural Man receives not the Things of the
Spirit of God, nor can know them, but they must be spiritually discerned.
Concerning which, enough has been spoken. Our Men led by Erroneous
Construction of this Text principally, and what other like they happen to meet
with, do often take upon them to dethrone their Reason from the Regiment where
God has placed it, and to set up in its Room a Fervor of Spirit which (it
seems) they think is of God; and is so necessary for them, as that they cannot
be good Christians without it: And thus truly and effectually they displace and
put down their Reason, and set up their Phantasy to govern instead of it. And
whereas Reason is one, and uniform in Mankind generally, and would induce Men
to Think and Speak the same Things; Phantasy in Men is as Various as our Faces,
no one perfectly like another. Whence it comes, that Christians, of whom Paul
says, We being many are one Bread, are so infinitely divided, as that scarcely,
a whole Loaf can be found amongst us; but we are broken into Pieces, and even
murled into Crumbs, without any Fastness or Cohesion of one Sort of us to
another; and we pray God to direct our Church to other, and more reasonable
Practices for the Time to come.

Page 59. Our Author complains grievously of his own Infidelity concerning
Rewards after Death, in Maintenance of which, he had both preached and written
to other People. Page 129. Says, Satan's principal Labor is to keep Men from
Heaven. I say nay to this: But that his prime Labor is to draw or drive Men
from the Love, Service, and Worship of God; of which the Obtaining God's Favor
and Acceptance is the End or Design, and Heaven but the Consequent, or a Reward
suitable to the Bounty and Magnificence of the Giver, but not to the Merit of
the Receiver. Page 276. Says, It is notorious that all who are Christians out
of their own Choice, and are serious in their Profession, are holy, sober, and
just. Here he mentions not his wonted Dependencies upon the Spirit. And we
believe and know that such as do not depend upon Motions of the Spirit, but do
follow Directions of the Scripture, understood and expounded according to sound
and true Reason, are as holy, sober, and just Persons, as any Pretenders to
Spiritual Motions, that can be found amongst their Tribes; but that God's
Spirit by Means of its usual and ordinary Conduct, does effect in them such
holy Practices, and produces in them Degrees of Melioration from Time to Time,
and thereby also People are sometimes changed from the Love of Worldly
Vanities, to the true Love and Service of God; and this we ascribe to the
easy, ordinary and commonly imperceptible Operations of God's Spirit;
believing the perceptible and heaving Motions of that Holy Spirit, to be very
extraordinary, miraculous, not to be expected or depended upon, and an apt
Instrument for Impostors. Whence the Prophet exhorts to look to the Law and to
the Testimony, and not to pretending Seducers on the Score of Spiritual
Revelations: And Men cannot rationally judge of the Thing, and therefore if
they follow, it must be in the Dark, where the Deceit is easily feasible, and
the Consequence dangerous. We say then, That Reason exercising its Power in,
and over the Person, directed by the Rules of the Gospel, and guided by the
easy and ordinary Conduct of God's Spirit, is a sufficient Means to convince
Believers of their Duties, and constrain them to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present World; to rejoice and delight in their so doing, and to
be greatly grieved for their Failures therein: And these are known Fruits of
the Spirit, and prove, that of a Truth it is and rules in such People, although
themselves, or those that see them, have otherwise no Perceptions, or other
Evidences of the Spirit's Acting or Moving in them. It seems such Men fulfill
St. Paul's Rule, 1. Cor. 14 15. I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray with
the Understanding also: and so ought Men also to rejoice and sing. Thus should
Men act in their Duties of Religion specially, and in their Actions generally.
Ver. 14. So to use Direction of the Spirit, as the Understanding may not be
unfruitful. Page 277. He falls in again with the Necessary Operation or God's
Spirit, for the Rectification of Humane Nature, and drawing Men's Inclinations
from the World to God: And this I grant to be done ordinarily, by directing Men
to the Scriptures as their Rule, and convincing them of the Authority, Truth,
and Sufficiency of them: Then by illuminating their Understandings and
Perceptive Faculties; helping also their other Capacities, as their
Apprehensions, Memories, Elocutions. Exodus 4.11. God says to Moses, Who has
made Man's Mouth, or his other Senses? have not I the Lord? He makes the Blind,
the Dumb, and the Deaf, to see, speak and hear; and then they exercise these
Faculties as other Men do, who have them sound by Birth, without continuing
Supernatural Supplies to them for ever. And so we say, when God by manfest
Revelations of his Spirit, accompanied with Signs and mighty Deeds, had fully
discovered his Supernatural Truths to Men, and had sufficiently convinced and
instructed the Teachers of them; and then those Teachers had instructed others
in the Faith of such revealed Mysteries, and holy Trade of Living, the
Supernatural Supplies were no more needful. 2 Timothy 2.2. The Things which thou
have heard of me amongst many Witnesses [hast heard me preach] do thou commit
to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also. So 2 Timothy 3.14
Continue thou in the Things which thou have learned, and have been assured of,
knowing of whom thou have learnt them; and that from a Child thou have known
the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through
Faith which is in Christ Jesus. We may consider the Time of writing this
Epistle, the last Days of St. Paul, when he was now ready to be offered, and
the Time of his Departure was at hand. Thus he writes to his Son in the Gospel,
one of his Scholars, and an eminent Teacher of that Time, directing him to the
Rules and Doctrines delivered us in the Scriptures, and to the Comments,
Expositions and Discourses of such as teach from them (intended) in a rational
Manner, and by good, sufficient Deductions, and Consequences, without mention
of Perceptible or Peculiar Motions of the Spirit; or that Timothy or other
Christians are put under Obligations to attend thereunto, or to ground their
Hopes or Practices upon Operations of a perceptible and eminently moving Spirit
in them. Yes, says our Author, Page 277. But yet apparent it is, that no other
Power can prevail over the Corrupted Nature of Man, and for converting Men unto
holy Practices, but only that of the Spirit of God, and the irresistible
Operations of the same. I answer, That in diverse Schools of the Ancient
Philosophers, and by their Doctrines, many were induced to take up the Practice
and Habit of living soberly and virtuously in this present World. I but,
replies he, we see Children will grow up in Wickedness, against all the
Counsel, Love, and Correction of their Parents; and no Means will prevail with
them, till God, by the Operation of his own Spirit, cure them. And we grant
this may come to pass, by the Assistance of God's Grace in the Ordinary Course,
and without any Perceptible, Peculiar Impulse or Emotion of God's Spirit, viz.
by his Illumination, his easy Inclination, and the Rectifying and Perfecting
their Natural Powers and Qualifications, by insensible and unperceived Degrees.
All things Divine and Humane are under God's Special Economy, and nothing can
be done without a Divine Assistance: Nullum magnum ingenium, sine Afflatu
Divini Numinis, was known to Heathens; without God, we cannot think a good
Thought, nor think any Thought, cannot do a good Action, nor any Action at all:
For (as our Author tells us) we depend more upon God's Acting us, then upon our
own Natural Parts or Forms; and in him we live, move, and have our Being. But
his Ordinary Actings in Men, are by their Natural and Proper Faculties and
Powers, and not by Perceptible Impulses of his Spirit, which we take for a
Miraculous Operation, and not Natural. God has given us the Law and the
Prophets, the New Testament, and Primitive Church Practices, for our Ordinary
Spiritual Conduct, assisted with his Grace and Spirit working in us to will and
to do, by those Ordinary Operations before described; improving our Reason to a
right Apprehension and Understanding of them, and our Discretion to a right
Choice and Practice. St. Paul tells his Corinthians, I speak as unto wise Men,
judge ye what I say. He does not refuse the Judgment arising from the Reason or
Wise Men. Let Men now tell a Quaker what the Words of Scripture are, and what
Consequence from thence must reasonably and necessarily follow; his Answer is
ready, He cares not what either of them says; for he has a Light within him;
the very Holy Spirit of God: which tells him, and witnesses with his Spirit,
That all which he believes and professes is true, and the only salutary Way for
his Soul; and so for all other Men's, if God will please to communicate to them
the like Perceptible Illuminations and Special Impulses of his Holy Spirit,
which the World does not, cannot receive, nor can the Natural Man do it; but
such Things are to him direct Foolishness, and he cannot know them, because
they are Spiritually discerned; and cannot be so by Reason, or any Humane Power
or Means whatsoever. Now whilst this Man is thus certainly persuaded in his
own Mind, and that he who is Spiritual ( viz. endowed with such Light within
him) judges all things, and yet himself is judged of no Man, nor will submit
himself to be so: He seems to be past all Conviction, or Cure, by reasonable
Remedies or Applications; having thus passed beyond the Bounds of Humane Reason
and Scripture, he is become excentrick to all Humane Persuasion and Government,
and (as incurable Phreneticks) must be born withal, so far as their Fantasies
are only detrimental to themselves. And it we may place all other Dependers
upon Perceptible, Extraordinary Motions of God's Spirit, in a Form or Classis
next below them, differing in the Degrees of a like Infirmity; all holding the
same Original Ground, and growing from the same Root, and defending themselves
in the same Fortresses, and by like Weapons; only the first Sort have passed to
a farther Degree in the Distemper than the rest have hitherto done. We must
leave them, upon this Account, to the great Power of God, who only can, and in
his Time may, and perhaps will, give them Convictions in a miraculous and
powerful Manner, and really such, as they do now but pretend unto. The
Distemper, it seems, has grown from the ill Digestion of some of St. Paul's
Expressions, wrested by Men, both unlearned and unstable (as other Scriptures
may be) to the Perverting, if not the Destruction of themselves and their
Proselites, and to the great Disturbance of the Protestant Churches.

Page 278. Says, God's Cures by his Spirit are wrought with great Pangs of
Repentance. I say, That upon every notorious Sin committed, these are rational
and necessary Consequences, as well at last as at first; and no more to be
enquired after in Youth than in Age; nor in one Part of a Man's Life than in
another. But such Carriage ought to be both expected and performed., whenever
there is a just and reasonable Cause for the so doing. Page 280. Says, God is
all in all things. It may pass for a Cloudy Expression: And we agree, That God
and Christ are what Christians acknowledge and adore: Also that we are
generally under the ordinary Guidance of God's Spirit, and are thereby led into
all Truth, directed therein by the Scriptures, confirmed by Sacraments,
instructed and excited by sound, Teaching, and the Acts of God's Providence
amongst us, for us, toward us, the Convictions of Humane Reason and our sound
Senses, and the like usual and common Manuductions, for establishing of our
Faith and perfecting the Practice and due Performances of a holy Life. That God
can do this by eminent and perceptible Emotions of his Spirit, in a
Supernatural and Miraculous Manner, is granted, and certain: And this was
common in the Church during all the Time of St. Paul's Life. But that God does
still continue those Supernatural Actings in his Church ordinarily and at this
Day, has been, and will be continually denied; and that none can be saved who
do not feelingly perceive in themselves such Impulsions or Emotions of God's
Spirit working in them to such Purposes, we not only deny, but do condemn and
explode, as a great Instrument of Deceit, and a most pernicious Error. Page
291. Says, The Christian Church needs no Testimony of Miracles, of new: Upon
this I demand, What these Eminent and Perceptible Emotions of the Spirit are to
be counted? Natural they are not, as their Defenders assert, and we agree;
therefore they are Preternatural or Supernatural; and they pass for Acts of the
later Sort, whenever they do happen: And our Opposers maintain they are very
frequent, and ought not only to be Common, but Universal amongst Christians;
amongst whom every one should have a Taste and Feeling of them, and
consequently a daily Exhibition of New Miracles. Page 308. Says, Many of his
Friends, Holy Persons, are gone to Heaven, and that is spangled with these
Spiritual Stars, the Place is honored with them, and they with it. We think
our dead Friends are almost lost to us, till the Heavenly Spirit tell us where
they are, and prepare us to desire our being there. Observe from hence, we may,
what our Author means by his Term of Heavenly Spirit, viz. his own and his
Followers eager and hot Phantasy or Conceit. For if he had obtained any
Perceptible Spiritual Revelation concerning his dead Friends, or any one of
them, we do very much assure our selves he would have made us acquainted with
it: For his Expression, That Heaven is honored with the Presence of the holy
Persons, his dead Friends, it tastes of an arrogant Conceit, not warranted by
Scripture or Reason, but suitable to his Spiritual Vehemencies and Impulses.
Page 348. Says, It is the Will of God, that the Ministry and Testimony of Man,
shall be a Means of our Believing; and he will use Man for the Instruction and
Salvation of Man, and not send Angels with every Message. To this we agree, and
say, the Perceptible Actings of God's Spirit may be as rare as the Ministry of
Angels, in our Times. Page 353. Says, Grace is not a Brutish Principle, but
works by Reason, having also its natural inclining Force. We account this
Expression as one of our own, extracted from him by inadverted Power of Truth.
Page 359. All true Believers are justified, that consent to the Baptismal
Covenant, choosing God for their God, Christ for their Savior, and the Holy
Ghost for their Sanctifier, though this be done with so great Weakness as
neither ends Men's Doubts, nor quiets their Minds. It seems the Perceptible
Actings of the Spirit are wanting in such Cases; and he seems either to have
forgot, or to distrust the Necessity of that Assistance. Page 368. Says, The
Soul has no distinct Idea of its Future State out of the Body, and we see not
whither it is that we must go; but a Trust in God supports all. It seems he
knew of no Revelation, Primitive or Modern, that could give Satisfaction in
that Point. Page 372. Says, God does his own Works in a Causal Order, one Work
prepares for another, and he makes Varieties of Capacities, which occasion
Varieties of Gifts, and of Receptions; and he uses to give every one, that,
unto which he has brought him into a next Capacity for the Reception of. And
granted it is, That all is Acted by Energy from God and his Spirit: But, say I,
(as he also) by giving Capacities, and advancing them to Degrees of Perfection,
in an Ordinary and Natural Course; producing Effects from their Natural and
Proper Causes: And that when he goes beyond this Course, or out of this Way,
the Proceeding is Extraordinary, Supernatural, Miraculous, such as we have no
Warrant to expect, or depend upon, in the ordinary Course of our Conduct. True
it is, God's Arm is not shortened, and therefore in all Cases of great Exigency,
we know he can work by Natural Causes beyond Men's Expectations; or by Miracles
at his own Pleasure. We read of such Procedure in the Primitive Times; since
which, the Signs and Wonders are ceased, and so the Perceptible Actings of
God's Spirit ordinarily: And it seems we are not any more reasonably or
warrantably to expect them, or to depend upon them; but to wait upon God's
ordinary Dispensations in his Ordinances, Hearing, Reading, Praying,
Practicing, Living and Dying in him, to him, (and if need be) for him: so as
Living we may repose upon him, and Dying we may rest in him. 1 John 2.28. So as
in all Conditions are abide in him; that when he shall appear, we may have
Confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his Coming: And this is the Fruit
of our Labor and Conflicts in this World, that we may have the Hope and
Courage (at our Awaking) to come before him with Confidence, and without being
ashamed in his Presence. Page 374. Says, We must not have slight Thoughts of
the Office and Work of the Holy Ghost on Souls, and our Necessity of it, but
must beg and wait for the Spirit's Special Help. That Spirit is not impotent or
inexorable; he has appointed us Means for so high a State, and he appoints no
Means in vain. Page 375. Says, Let thy Dependence on the Holy Ghost, as given
from Christ, be as serious and constant to thee, as the dependence of the Eye
is upon the Light. Beg hard for the Holy Spirit, and gladly entertain it. All
these, Expressions of our Author seem to intend some eminent and perceptible
Motions or Actings of God's Spirit; if so he do, there are diverse Testimonies
in this Book which show he did not attain unto them. We have shown the Thing to
be a Miracle, common in Primitive Times of the Church, but ceasing by degrees
until no Signs of it were left. But the Fruits, the extraordinary Appearances
are failed long since; and the like Effects do not now show themselves: Where
the Spirit is, it works; and if it be present in an extraordinary and
miraculous Manner, it will produce suitable Effects, as it did in those
Primitive Times; and where such do not appear, such Pretenses are not to be
believed. If our Author intend the Ordinary Gifts and Graces of God's Spirit
working in us to will and to do what God has appointed us in his Holy Word, by
Illumination, Rectification, Melioration, and Direction of our Natural
Faculties, Powers, and Capacities, all his Exhortations may pass for good; and
Men may pray in Faith for such Assistances and Graces, and may likely find a
good Return upon them. Our Author says no more upon this Point, and we shall
therefore follow it no farther, but return with him to our first Design.

Page 380. He says, The Sensible Souls of Brutes are Substances, and therefore
not animated at their Deaths: God tells us not what he does with them after
Death, and it is likely they are (after Death) in a State still of Service unto
Man, but how we know not. It seems the same Scruple which troubled him at the
Beginning of his Book, has stuck to him all along, and unto the End of it;
viz. how to make a real and clear Difference between the Souls of Men and
Beasts. He does constantly acknowledge a great Assimilation of the one of them
to the other; and shows a great Inclination to raise the Nature of the Souls of
Brutes above that which ordinary Opinions have allowed them; to the Intent that
a Separately Subsisting Soul of Man might the more easily pass, and be assented
unto, or with fewer Difficulties and Exceptions: And to this, I say, that he
labors in vain, to persuade, that Souls of Beasts are Self-subsistent. It
seems a Fancy, either derived from Dr. More, or out of his own Brain: He does
not allege a Revelation of the Spirit for it; and if he had, such Allegation
could not support that Opinion. We say, That Souls of Brutes are Material
Spirits, living and acting in their Blood and Humors, and preying upon them as
their Natural Support and Nourishment; inflamed by the continual Fanning of
their Breath; and when, for want of Breath, or other Nourishment, the Flame of
those Natural Spirits is totally extinguished; or that by other Violence such
total Extinguishment happens, the Beast dies, and these Natural or Vital
Spirits, cease to work and be, and can no more revive than a Fire clean gone
out, or put out, can rekindle it self without fresh Fire applied to that
Purpose. And for the Beasts, we have no notice or Proof, that ever such a
Reviver or Rekindling shall be given them. But concerning Men, we have very
clear, undoubted and undeniable Revelations, that there shall be a
Resurrection, or a Reviver of them. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto Men once to
die, but after this the Judgment. And Chap. 11.35. Torments were endured, not
accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection: For there
will be a better and a worse, both of the Just and of the Unjust: And then
shall Christ sit upon the Throne of his Glory, distributing Crowns to his brave
Soldiers the Martyrs, laid up for them against that Day; and awarding other
Rewards and Glories to his faithful Servants, and passing a dreadful Sentence
upon his Enemies, and specially Deserters, Takers and Breakers of Holy Vows and
Covenants of Fidelity in his Service; for that they crucify the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open Shame. From such a Resurrection Good Lord
deliver us; and rather may the Mountains fall upon us, and the Hills cover us,
that we may never see the Frowns of Goodness, and Love, rejecting all Future
Addresses, and putting us over to the Masters and Company, which living we
chose and preferred before his Greatness and Glory, his Goodness and Love,
testified by his Sufferings for us. But living People have yet Time to prevent
such heavy Consequences of the Resurrection: And God give us all Grace heartily
to endeavor the same.

FINIS.
A SECOND PART OF A TREATISE ENTITLED A SEARCH after SOULS.
THE Foregoing Treatise being finished, and coming under the Perusal of
several Persons, amongst them a Minister, an Eminent both Scholar and Teacher,
made some Reflections thereupon; and transmitted them to the Author of this
Treatise, willing to receive his Reply thereunto: And because the Dispute
arising thereupon, occasioned the opening diverse Apprehensions concerning the
Main Intent of the Treatise, it seemed useful to publish the same therewithal.
The First Opposal came in one Sheet of Paper, which received a Division into
Fifteen Paragraphs:

1. Paragraph Was a Civil Complement. To which was returned a Thankfulness.

2. Parag. Was a Discourse that some particular Fathers Opinions touching the
Soul, as Origin, Tertullian, and even St. Austin, was not fit to counterpoise
the General Stream of the Fathers of their Time. And this was granted.

3. and 4. Speak to the Novelty of the Opinion of a Humane Material Soul; and
it is granted new to the Generality.

5. States the Question, viz. that it is, Whether the Soul of Man be Material
or Immaterial?

6. Parag. The Opponent says; Men cannot conceive how a Material Agent can act
as the Intellect and Memory of Man can do: Nor that it can do so: Therefore the
Soul of Man cannot be Material, but must be Immaterial. To this it was replied,

That the Works of God exceed the Capacities of Men to conceive; and that Men
cannot find out Reasons for, or of, the Contextures, so much as of a Leaf: What
it is that frames it into a Stem, then puts forth the Ramuli, then the Fibers,
of a diverse Fashion, as is proper to each Tree: then unites them by a thin
Covering of Green, in some more glossy and glittering, and in some less. Men
cannot perceive how or by what means this is done, but are satisfied with
knowing that there is a Material Spirit or Sap in the Plant; and that thereby,
and by the Vegetative Power in Plants, all such acts are wrought in them; and
that they are acted according to the appointment of God: without Men's being
able to find out the immediate or next Causes of the particulars. And so for
the Animalia, they have Nutritive and Generative Powers; the Loco-motive and
Affective, as Lust, Wrath, Fear; they have Sensitive Powers, and all these in
as high and perfect a Degree as Men have them: and the Intellectual Faculties,
but in a very low Degree. Men know these Powers or Acts are wrought in or by
the Beasts, but not in a particular manner, applicando to the next Causes of
them; but we know there is a Flame of Life in them, which acts in them, and
acts them; and is the Cause and Original of all their Motions and Actions,
without knowing how that produces in them Anger or Fear, or a Lust to
Generation; or power to see, remember, etc. The very next Causes or Manner of
their Production, cannot be known: but Men may be satisfied in knowing the
Aptitude of the Organs, and that generally there is a Flame of Life, or a Flamy
Spirit, in Animals, by which God can and does effect all such Motions and
Actions as are fit and proper for each sort of Animals to perform. And if all
this can be done in Beasts by such a Spirit, I desire to be shown some reason
why the like may not be acted in Man by a like Spirit, and in a much higher
Degree, assisted by Organs (especially in the Head) much fitlier framed for the
effecting of such purposes: and so judging we shall be freed from the Common
and Vulgar Error, of thinking all we see done extraordinary, and of which we
are not able to collect or find out the Cause, that it is done by assistance or
agency of Spirits; as was the Case of Regiomontanus his Eagle and Fly: and the
Artist was therefore taken for a Conjurer. And so, when Watches first appeared
in China, those People thought they were moved by Spirits. Our present Argument
seems of that Nature, we know not how such Effects are or can be produced from
Matter and Motion, and therefore they must be acted by an Immaterial and
Self-subsisting Spirit, not generated, but coming into the Body ab extra; no
Body certainly knowing from whence, nor how, nor what it is, nor that it is.

Doctor Willis in his Book De Anima Brutorum, Latin, Printed at Amsterdam, page
4. names Periera and Des Carts and Sir Ken. Dighy, who to avoid the allowance
of such Souls unto the Beasts, will have the Beast esteemed but a sort of
Machines, which only can move; but that they have no knowledge or feeling of
any thing that they do or suffer, acted by Matter and Motion, which they say
can have no Sense. P. 5. These Men (says the Dr.) think that God cannot make
Things or Creatures beyond the Powers of Man's Capacity to conceive and rightly
to understand. P. 6. But (says he) Nemesius and Gassendus do allow to Beasts
Senses Outward and Inward, Perception, Appetite, Spontaneous Motion, a sort of
Deliberation, Judgment, and a lower sort of Ratiocination; for that is no more
but knowingly to distinguish one Thing from another, to compare them, and choose
one of them before the other. And the Brutes do Ex uno colligere aliud; and
therefore they have a sort of Reasoning, although in a very low Degree: and he
cites the words of Gassendus, Animam esse quandam flammulam, ignisve tenuissimi
speciem, quae quamdiu viget, seu manet accensa, tam diu vivit animal, cum
amplius non viget, seu extinguitur, animal moritur. P. 8. the Doctor says, The
Sensitive Souls of Men are of the same nature with this description; and this
sort of Soul is extended over the whole Body, and is dividable: and the Members
and Parts of the Body, are the proper Organs of this Soul; aad this Soul is of
a fiery nature, and the act or substance of it is either a Flame, aut habitum
flammae proximum and affinem: and that so it is, says he, not only Gassendus
has determined, but 13 great Learned Men, here named, have concurred in that
Opinion. P. 9. he asserts, Animam in sanguine, aut liquore vitali gliscentem,
aut ignem, aut flammam quandam esse. And this Soul which acts, and keeps Life
in the Body, must have a continual Nourishment, both from Air and Viands. And
he takes this Soul to consist of the same Matter with the Body, but of the most
select, subtle, and active Particles of such Matter: he says Dr. Ent has
clearly demonstrated, Sanguinem pariter ac ignem duo desiderare; viz. alimentum
and ventilationem. This Soul is fitted and proportioned to the Body, and the
Body contains it, as the Scabbard does the Sword: and it is so fine as to be
imperceptible to Humane Senses; and so as that it can be known only ab effectis
and operationibus. P. 11. So as when the Life fails, there is no sign or
footsteps left of this Soul: the Existence of it debends upon the act, like a
common flame of Fire, or the flash of it, as soon as it ceases, illico non est;
and cannot be numerically the same again [without miracle:] and this Materiae
vitalis incendium, has so many Evidences, that whosoever shall well consider them,
will be very apt to believe, Sanguinem revera efflagrare, vitamque non tam
flammae similem quam ipsammet eandem esse. P. 30. He ranks this Sensitive Soul
of Man in the same Classis with the Souls of the Quadrupedes, quoniam in
utrisque, praecordiorum, necnon cerebri ejusque appendicis nervosi, eadem est
conformatio. P. 40. He does not take care to answer those who assert that
Sensitive Creatures have not power to use their Senses and Powers of
Perception, without the assistance and government of an Immaterial, Intelligent
Spirit. For the Contexture of the Body, and wonderful aptitude of its Organs,
may serve to confute this Opinion. P. 42. in Mechanicis, Fire, Air, and Light,
are the Principal (...), by which Humane Industry can effect Things that are
Wonderful, Useful, and Necessary, and likely it is that the Wise Creator did
form and frame the Souls of Living Creatures out of those Principles or
Materials, adding to them an Eminent Virtue or Efficacy; and fitting for them
the most proper and apt Organs, exquisitely framed and put together, as he
proceeds to show: Concluding that they are Subjects of Wonder and Admiration,
rather than of a Rational Disquisition: yet proceeds to a Rational Account of
them, in Pages 46, and 47. and concludes that the Sensitive Soul of Man, both
in the Head, and Systemate Nervoso (as to all its Powers, and the Exercise of
them) is merely Organical; proindeque extensam, and quodammodo corpoream esse.
P. 52. But this Artifice cannot be a Work of Chance, but of a Divine Architect.
P. 59. As to the Objection That Matter is not only Insensible, but Iners, and
merely, Passive, Incapable of Sense or Animal Activity, He answers, That
between Corpus sensibile and insensibile, there is not much more difference
than betwixt accensum and inaccensum; and of inaccensum we can soon make
accensum: and why not then Sensibile be made ex insensibili; Materia quaelibet
uti non comburitur ita non animator: but if an Active Element be communicated
and disposed amongst fit Matter, there usually proceeds from, that Mixture a
Wonderful Activity; the inkindled Parts, Rapidissime commotae, and quasi
animatae exiliunt, and lumen cum calore and luce producunt. P. 60. He cannot
find in the Soul or the Body, any distinct Material Part or Subject, to which
the Rational Power or Faculties may be justly attributed; but when he considers
the Corpus animatum together, as a Divine Fabric, built and intended for
proper and special Uses, he will say confidently, That God by the Intent and
Law of his Creation, has so ordained, that in the composition of Soul and
Body, there should be such a confluence of Faculties, and result of them, as
should be needful for every Animal, and the proper ends and uses of it; and
that in them Materiam superavit Opus. P. 61. Consider an Organ, made out of
stupid and hard Matter, of it self utterly unactive, yet let it be inspired by
a convenient breath, and a acted by a directing hand, it can vary sounds and
agree them to a Miracle, in all ordinary computation of such as are not
acquainted with the nature and composure of them.

Philip Melanchton de Anima, P. 5. The Vital Spirits of Man are bred in the
Heart, and vere sunt Flammae; and from thence rise Men's Affections, cum omnibus
Voluntatis motibus. P. 7. It is agreed that the souls of Brutes are Material
Spirits, or a Temperament; such an Anima as is in Sanguine; and therefore
amongst the Hebrews Anima significat Vitam: for that Sanguis est Vehiculum
Vitae; and Spiritus Vitales illam rem esse, quae ciet Corpora, quam nominamus
Animam. P. 8. As in a Torch, Flamma rapit Alimentum; so the Vital Spirit of
Animals, which is tenuissima Flamma, genita ex Sanguine, Virtute Cordis,
volitans per totam Corporis Machinam and largiens Corpori vivificum calorem. P.
12. The Philosophers and Divines do agree, That the Vegetative and Sensitive
Souls are Material, or Temperamenta, propagatus ex Natura Corporea, from the
Seed: and as in the Beasts, sic Anima Vegetativa and Sensitiva in Homine, dici
potest: Homo enim non generat imperfectius quam plantae, aut Boves; gignit ergo
Homo hominem saltem secundum Vitam sentientem; si non secundum Animam
Rationalem: and the two former must be confessed to be ex traduce. P. 14. If it
be demanded concerning the how and the why, of the Animal Actions, he answers,
Cernimus Motus, quod, cur [and quomodo] ita hoc factum sit, Sapientiae est
Artificis, non nostrae. P. 112. Cerebrum est Officina Cogitationum, Judicii
Ratiocinationis, and Memoriae. Men cannot find out its manner of working, nor
what the very true Substance of it is. P. 116. In hac caligine non perspicimus
quomodo haec Miranda Opera, Cognitio, Ratiocinatio, Memoria, Recordatio,
Judicium fiant: sed fieri ea Cerebri Open certissimum est. P. 203. Brutes have
Apprehension and Memory, and potentiam, ad Cogitationem factam. P. 205. The
Actings of Common Sense, and Reason, and Memory, are known to us, viz. That
such Acts there are, quomodo fiant non cernimus, in hac caligine. P. 286. The
Degrees of Acting in the Mind of Man, and the Manner of them, describi non
satis possunt; non enim cernuntur oculis, sed similitudine quadam existimantur.
P. 297. He descants upon Immortality, and derives the Certainty of it from the
Resurrection; and says, That the Old Patriarchs rose with our Savior.

Sandii Tractatus de Origin Animae, P. 1. The Opinion related by Eusebius
Hist. lib. 6. cap. 34. was, That the Soul did rise and grow ex traduce; and
that it extinguished with the Life of the Creature; and that before the Last
Judgment the Whole Man should rise again. He cites Augustine de Anima, cap. 48.
saying, That Cyril and the Luciferians, and maxima pars Occidentalium, did
think so, Test Hieronymo, Tom. 2. Epist. 82. and Greg. Nyssen, lib. de Anima.
This Opinion was condemned in a Council of that time, wherein Origin bare a
great sway. This Opinion, viz. of the Generation of Souls, Per Populos
Barbaros, Arrii Religionem sectantes, videtur explosa, Creatione animae
introducta. This Author is an Origenist, a Maintainer of Prae-existence, and
therefore opposes both the Generation and new Creation of Souls.

These Quotations have been made to show the Agreement of other Men, with what
is said in the Search after Souls: And that Willis and Melanchton are contented
to confess their ignorance of the particular Workings of God in Man, and do not
make use of their ignorance, for the extracting from thence an Unintelligible,
Extraneous Spirit, for the Government of a Humane Body, Memory or
Understanding. The case of the Watch shows the thing moved, and made a noise,
and the Indians did not, and could not discover the cause thereof; and
therefore they concluded it was moved by a Spirit, which contains the very
Ground of your Argument, viz. We understand not how a Material Agent can
perform such a sort of acting: Therefore there must be an Intelligent Spirit in
the case, or else such things could not be done; yet if you will but make this
Grant, That a Man does generate a Man as truly and perfectly as one Horse
generates another, it will prove like Archimedes his Postulatum of a Ground
whereupon to fix his Instrument; for thence will apparently follow all that in
my Treatise has been asserted. For what is begotten and born of Flesh, is
Flesh; and I would not advise you to venture upon the task of proving any other
way of proceeding, or framing of Humane Souls.

7. Paragraph, You pretend to prove an Intelligent Spirit in Man, from the
Power and Effects of Conscience in him. You say no Beasts have it, and yet it
is very potent and prevalent in Man: And I agree, that Man has a Conscience,
and that it has a great Power in him, and over him: But I do not grant the
Beasts are without it, in a degree suitable to their Capacities and
Understandings. You say, That Conscience in Man is natural to him, or slows
from his pure Natural Faculties, unassisted by Education, or Rules: But this I
deny, and assert, that Conscience in Man is not derived barely from Nature, in
such manner as his Vital Powers, viz. Digestion, Nutrition and Generation are;
nor as his Passionate Powers, viz. his Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, Wrath and
Fear are; nor as his Sensitive Powers, or the use of this Senses are, nor as
his Rational Powers, viz. his Understanding, Fancy, Memory, Judgment are: For
all these Faculties are so natural to every Man, that he can, and does act
them, and by them, without either Rule, Tutor, or Example: But Speech is not so
natural, nor is Conscience so natural, but they must both be Learned and
Directed by Rules, Doctrine, or Examples; and then they may be varied and
changed according as things shall fall out, or it shall come into the Phancies
of Men: But without some sort of Education, Rule, Direction, or Opinion, there
is no more Conscience in Man than in Beasts. For take a Salvage Person bred up
amongst Beasts, he will not know that Killing in a Sin, nor spare a Man in his
Hunger or his Wrath, any more than a Beast. And for Adultery, he is not capable
of knowing it, because he knows not what Marriage is. And for Incest, it is
naturally so much unknown, as that the first People practiced it with Sisters
lawfully; and it seems Abraham thought it no Crime, nor the Princes, to whom he
avowed it; for that it passed without Punishment or Reproof from them. And for
Theft and Robbery, it passed for a Glory amongst Barbarous People; and so it
does amongst Conquerours at this day: and it is counted a sufficient Crime for
the Vaniquished, to defend his Goods or Women from the Conqueror; and he will
yet be killed for so doing, without any remorse or sense of Conscience in the
Conqueror: Nor is the Fact against Nature, however Rules may perhaps determine
otherwise. I say then, that Conscience is not an absolutely Natural Faculty in
Man, but rather is Faculty Complicated of Nature and other Adjuncts and
Ingredients; the Natural Powers that act in it, are the Understanding, the
Memory, and the Judgment, and the Effects of it, viz. Joy and Grief, are also
Natural: but to complete the Faculty of Conscience in Man, there must be also
some Rule for Direction of the Judgment; whose proper Office is to compare the
Fact and the Rule together: and if they be found to agree, the Effect is Joyous
and Pleasing: if they differ, the Effect is Sorrow and Fear; and the widelier
they differ, the stronger Effects are produced. But say you, these Effects are
sometimes so potent and violent, as they could not be, if they did not proceed
from an Intelligent Spirit. Concerning which, I will again quote to you
Melanct. dicto lib. page 148. There he says, Let our Students learn to admire
the Wonderful Works of God in Man, our Principal Powers and Faculties, Vital,
Sensitive, Affectionate, Cogitative; efficiuntur Spiritu Vitali and Animali;
ideo, aliqui dixerunt, Animam esse hos Spiritus seu Flammulas Vitales and
Animales; and sua Luce superant Solis and omnium Stellarum Lucem: and quod
Mirabilius est; his ipsis Spiritibus in Homibus piis, miscetur ipse Divinus
Spiritus: and makes this Light in Man more Refulgent, Active, and Inclinable to
apprehend Divine Truths, and to practice accordingly. And on the contrary, When
the Devil gets a Possession, or but an Entrance amongst them, he disturbs and
tortures both Heart and Brain; and drives them into Cruel Motions and manifest
Furies. And thus this Excellent Divine instructs us, what are the proper Causes
of the great and violent Stings of Conscience, which you have chosen for a
strong Proof of an Intelligent, Immaterial Spirit in Man.

And that Conscience is not barely from Nature, but is a Complex of Nature and
Rules, there are diverse Texts of Scripture which may be cited to prove. Romans 2.
St. Paul says, Men do by Nature the things contained in the Law [of Moses;]
this intends a Cultivated Nature, ordered and directed by other Rules, although
they were ignorant of Moses's Law; and those other Rules became to them a Law
written in their hearts, which if they followed, their Conscience was
satisfied: and if they acted contrary to those Rules, their Consciences accused
them for it. St. Paul's Nature in this place therefore intends, not Nature in
puris naturalibus, utterly unpolished and barbarous, or salvage, and naked of
Rules, Education, and Examples; but such a Nature as has submitted it self to
some Rules, Education, or Example, though they be utterly ignorant of Moses's
Laws. Romans 5.13. Though sin [those acts which are sinful] were in the world
until [or before] the Law, yet sin is not imputed where there is no Law [or
Rule, to direct the Judgment:] and therefore without some sort of Rule rising
from Institution, Example, or Opinion, as there can no Sin be imputed; so no
Consciousness of Sin, nor Sting of Conscience for it. So Romans 7.7. I had not
known sin, but by the Law [some Rule, Education, or Example, which taught me
that this is Sin;] bare or salvage Nature, would not have taught me what was a
Sin, and what was not. John 9.41. Our Lord says to the Pharisees, If you were
blind, [purely ignorant] ye should have no sin. Chap. 15.22. If I had not
spoken to them, [instructed them] they had not had sin. 1 John 3.4. Sin is the
Transgression of the Law, [not known to bare Nature.] And finally, Romans 4.15.
Where no Law is, there is not transgression; so no Conscience accusing, or
approving. And all this proves, That Conscience in Man, is not an Act purely
Natural, but a Complex Act, of and Educated Nature, under the Direction of some
sort of Rules.

You say, That Man has a kind of Natural Expectation of receiving Rewards or
Punishments, as soon as he departs this Life. I grant only, Such a kind of
Natural, as Education and Custom can make Men expect to receive what they are
taught, and therefore do believe will be given them; if taught to believe
receiving as soon as they are dead, their Expectation will be suitable; if
taught to defer their Expectations till the Resurrection and Christ's Second
Coming to Judgment, it will be as easy and natural to expect the Rewards and
Punishments at that time, as to do it at the time of our Deaths. Either of them
is enough effective in us, to create an Endeavor of Obtaining the Future
Rewards, and Avoiding such Punishments, by the greatest Endeavors that in this
Life can be used: Knowing that there is no Work nor Device in the Grave,
whither we go. But as the Tree falls, so it is like to lie: and as Death leaves
Men, so Judgment shall find them. And we are therefore as much concerned to
provide for a good departure out of this World, in respect to the time of our
Resurrection, as if we expected an immediate Reward or Punishment, from the
time of our Death. For that once dead (in my Sense) we are not, are no more
concerned in time, nor the passing of it, but shall rise again, as if we had
lain down but the hour before.

You say, You cannot believe that the Primitive Martyrs would have died so
cheerfully, had they not thought that they exchanged this life for a better
immediately. But I believe they might do it in expectation of a Crown to be
given them at that day, the Great Day of General Doom, or Judgment: and so
says Peter Martyr in his Common Places, This is the consolation of the godly
afflicted in this world, they have an eye to the Resurrection, and thereupon
quiet themselves. And again, Martyrs in death were comforted by belief of the
Resurrection. And Heb. 11.35. Martyrs were tortured, not accepting Deliverance,
that they might obtain a better Resurrection. So 1 Thessalonians. 4.15. Paul comforts
them is sorrow for their dead Friends, not by giving them assurance of their
being gone to Heaven, but by assurance of the Resurrection; the manner of which
he there describes to them. You say, You have known some die with great
cheerfulness, and in full expectation of an immediate transportation to Heaven
by the ministry of Angels. And I doubt not but your Assertion may be true; for
Men learn to believe and practice as they are taught. And I doubt not but the
Jews, Turks, Heretics, and the Old Women, beforementioned, may be found dying
(some of all sorts) with great Constancy, and a good Assurance, and
Expectation, of Future Felicity, each of them in their own Way; but my Opinion
is, that God has appointed a day, in which he will judge the World by the Man
whom he has ordained: and that it is appointed for Men once to die, and after
that the Judgment, at which all must appear and give account for their own
Works. The happiness which I desire before that day, is, that it may be said to
me as to Daniel, Go thy way [Leave this life] and wait till the end be; for
thou shall rest and stand in the Lot at the end of the days, the assured hope
of a joyful Resurrection.

Paragraph 8. You grant that there do not occur in the Scriptures the Terms or
Words, of a Separately subsisting, or Immaterial Soul. I had said also, not
that of Immortal Soul, and you might as well have granted that too; for that
neither you nor I can find it there. You say, I take the word Soul in Scripture
very often to signify Life, or Person; and you grant that in Hebrew it does
so. But say I, we find the like in Greek also; for in St. Paul's Shipwreck,
there were in the Ship two hundred seventy six Souls, alias, Persons. You say,
That in my Opinion I follow my friend Mr. Hobbs. I say, I follow nothing but
Common Sense and Reason in it; and that if Mr. Hobbs have said the same things,
I see no reason to think that strange: but proceeding in both from one Common
Principle: which makes our Construction obvious to the Reason of Mankind. If I
had ever had the knowledge of Mr. Hobbs his Opinion, or Writings, I know no
cause to reject or refuse the owning of it: but for Truth's sake, I tell you,
that I never saw the Man but once, and that without changing one word; nor did
I ever peruse any of his Writings (to my remembrance) nor have I received any
light proceeding from him; and you are the first Discoverer to me, and the
only, that his Sense and mine agree in it.

Paragraph 9. You examine Solomon's Expression, The dust shall return to the
earth as it was, and the spirit to God who gave it. Concerning this Expression,
my Treatise shows, That Spirit and Breath are often used in the same
signification, and may pass for Synonyma's. Genesis 2.7. God made Man of the dust,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and Man became a living
soul: viz. a living person. Ante. Roccius in his Book De Anima, page 20. says,
The Souls of Animals [or Brutes] had a like beginning to those of Men; quamvis
per Emphasin, ob majorem Animae Humanae dignitatem, de ipsa id exactius
exprimitur. Very probable it seems that God gave to Brutes the Breath of Life,
as well as to Men: Although (as he says) Moses has not expressed it; that by
Spirit here may be intended the Breath and Life, or the Breath of Life seems to
me not unlikely. And whatsoever the Sense may be, or whether spoken by Solomon,
according to common conception; or that he spoke it as you take it, for the
last result of his Judgment, I mean thereupon to follow Sir Walter Raleigh's
Direction, viz. In all dark, and hard Questions, the most easy and best end of
them, is to say, I will not dispute that. So I will not farther dispute the
intent of Solomon in this place, but willingly leave you and all men at liberty
to think thereof as their Reason or Fancy shall direct, and I hope for a like
permission from other Men.

Paragraph 10. You quote St. Matthew: Fear not them who can only kill the Body,
but not the Soul: Also St. Luke's Text in the same point, which names not the
Soul at all. And you say, We may perceive that the substance and intent of
Christ's Doctrine was the same in both places; viz. That the Body being mortal,
may be killed, but the Soul not so. Whether this your Assertion be true or not,
let the World be judge. For our Lord's main scope and intent in this Text
appears clearly to be, The Warning of his Disciples, not to fear Men, for that
they could only punish with Death and no farther: Not to fear them so much as
God, who can punish beyond Death, by casting into Hell. The Contents in both
Evangelists express. That our Lord exhorted his Disciples to preach to others
what they had heard of him, he bids them not be afraid so to do; for that Men
can only kill the Body, and do you no more harm: but God can punish after
Death, and cast you into Hell; and this we ought to fear more than any thing
that Man can do to us. That St. Matthew. has worded our Lord's Expressions
otherwise, is true; but that our Lord's intent here, was to teach a Separate
Subsistence of Souls after Death, appears not in St. Luke's words, nor in the
Contexts of either of the Evangelists. And the wording of it in St. Matthew's
Text, seems to me but the result of that Apostle's Judgment; perhaps according
to the Common Opinion of that Time. And however, here being two Relations of
the same Thing, and of equal Authority, it seems Men may accept which of them
they think most likely, or most true, without much apprehending the abuses
which Atheists or Profane Persons may make of it.

Parag. 11. You say, I make Matthew and Luke to disagree again. Yet the Case is
no more but this, Matthew says, Two Thieves were crucified with our Savior,
and those Thieves also which were crucified with him reviled him. And Mark says
the same thing, viz. They Crucified Two Thieves with him, and they who were
Crucified with him reviled him. Luke only relates the matter of the Thiefs
Conversion, which he had by hearsay. Thus the difference which there is
amongst them, is not made by me, who only relate the Case as it is, leaving it
to others to adjust such difference as there appears amongst them. I do not
deny the truth of St. Luke's Relation, only say it may be questionable upon
these differences. But for Answer to the Objection from the Thiefs being that
day in Paradise: I say, That the Crucifixion and Death was on Friday Evening,
and the Resurrection upon Sunday Morning; and this Thief might, and likely did
rise, at the time of our Lord's Resurrection, Matthew. 27.52. The Graves were
opened, and many Bodies of Saints which slept, arose, and went, and appeared
unto many. And there is a great Concurrence of Opinion, That the Old Patriarchs
had part in that Resurrection. This being granted, I hope, showing the Sense of
the Word this day, is to very good purpose: for this Promise to the Thief might
be literally fulfilled, if he rose at our Lord's Resurrection. I wonder how you
mist of this effect of my Answer, fully expressed in my Treatise; and yet it
seems you did miss of it: for else you would not have proceeded as you do in
this Paragraph.

Paragraph 12. You say, You wonder how I can conceive, that the Parable of
Dives was delivered to dilucidate our Lord's Doctrine in the 15th. verse of
that Chapter: viz. That what was highly esteemed in the sight of Men, may be an
abomination in the sight of God. I will tell you how I come to conceive so.
This Doctrine our Lord delivers, ver. 15. and ver. the 19th. begins the
Parable, distanced only by three intermediate verses: and the Parable is very
proper and significant for that purpose. For what (in Man's sight) is more
glorious and happy, than the State of Dives, and what more miserable than that
of Lazarus? and yet in God's sight and knowledge, their State was directly the
contrary. But, say you, Christ delivered this Doctrine to the Pharisees. I
grant it, and so (for ought that I can perceive) he did that Parable; nor do I
find any cause for you to doubt of it. You are willing to suppose (which I
think is to grant) that it is a Parable, and you wonder that I should say,
Parables are a sandy Foundation for the building of Doctrines upon: For say
you, Our Lord spoke to the multitude in Parables, and without a Parable spoke
he not unto them. To this I answer, His Disciples wondered at it, and enquired
why he did so, and he told them the reason, viz. That seeing they might not
perceive, and hearing they might not understand and be converted: for God's
appointments were to be fulfilled by means of their ignorance. Acts 3.17. Peter
tells the Jews (concerning our Lord's sufferings) I wot that through Ignorance
you did it, as did also your rulers; but God so brought about, what he had
foretold by the mouth of all his Prophets. So Paul, Had they known him, they
would not have crucified the Lord of glory. But when our Lord and his Disciples
were by themselves together, he expounded all things unto them, and did
manifest himself unto them, and not to the world: but all was delivered in
Parables to them who were without. John 15.15. Ye are my friends, for all
things which I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you; and I
heartily wish our Lord had expounded this Parable unto them.

Parag. 13. You demand, What could move Paul to desire death rather than life?
I answer, He was at Rome when he wrote to the Philippians; such an one as Paul
the aged, and a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, in continual expectation of
Martyrdom. Chap. 2.17. If I be offered up as a sacrifice, I will joy and
rejoice with you; and I would have you do so with me. Your self may, if you
please, contemplando, put your soul into his souls stead, as Job says, or
imagine your self to be in his Case; I judge you would have no cause to desire
a long or a longer continuance in that condition, If it were not (as he says)
for the opportunity and power to profit other men: he says, For him to die, and
be with Christ, would be far better. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. As Jesus died and rose
again, even so them also who sleep in Jesus, shall God bring with him: but
howsoever (in such a Case) you might judge, I think for my self, that if I were
in that Case, or a far more easy state of Life, yet infirm and aged, as I am,
and had withal so great assurance of a blessed, joyful Resurrection, as that
Apostle had; viz. That a Crown of Righteousness was laid up for him, and to be
given him at that day: I think that I should make little doubt in the choice,
but fully desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, in the sense of
resting or Sleeping in Christ, to be of that number, who being asleep in Jesus,
God will bring with him: for that blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, for
they rest from their labors. And so Job says, There the weary are at rest,
freed from oppressions, pains, and sufferings. You mention a man's becoming a
prey to worms, as a terror of Death; but I esteem that terriculamentum only,
and of no force at all upon the Understanding of a Man. It seems Solomon had
another sort of apprehension concerning Death, Eccles. 7.1. he says, The day of
a man's death is better than that of his birth, speaking generally; and Chap. 4.
when he considers worldly oppressions and miseries, he says, I praised the
dead, which are already dead, more than the living, which are yet alive. He
liked the dead state better: Yea, better is he than both of them, who has not
yet been, and so has not seen [nor felt, or been partaker of] the evils that
are done [or suffered] under the Sun. Chap. 6.3. he prefers the state of an
untimely birth before the long life of a man in a miserable or suffering
condition. Our Lord says of the man who should betray him, It had been better
for that man not to have been born. It seems a vain Scholastic Invention, That
a state of being, or living (though in very great Misery) is better, or more
eligible than a State of Death, or not being. A true and full sense of
Suffering will fully convince Men concerning the error of that Apprehension: We
find Job frequently desiring Death, as a period to his Afflictions, and wishing
to have died from the Womb; and so earnest for Death, as that he would dig for
it, more than other Men would do for hid Treasures. Death is the Universal Port
and remedy for the Afflicted: And upon this Argument it seems reasonable to
think, that one in St. Paul's condition might very wisely desire to depart this
life, and to be with Christ; is much the better state for him, though taken in
the sense of a resting or sleeping in Jesus, till the times of refreshing and
Resurrection shall come.

It seems an Appendix to this Paragraph, That you have given me your pains upon
this Treatise, but you will not go on in that course any farther. I do
acknowledge my self very much obliged to you for what you have done; and that
it is more than any Peruser has done before you; And I take it as a real
effect of your Zeal and Kindness. St. James tells us, That he who converts a
Sinner from the error of his way, shall save a Soul from Death, and hide a
multitude of Sins. And I am ready to believe that you had that Prospect in the
eye of your mind, when you bestowed the pains for the Conviction of me, and
others who might happen to have the Perusal of what you have Written; why you
should refuse to go forwards, and to the Accomplishment of so worthy a Design,
I do not enough apprehend. You have indeed many other good Works and needful
Employments upon your hands; but perhaps you ought so to do them, as not to
leave this undone, if really, and in your own Conscience, you are convinced and
fully persuaded that you are able to do the thing substantially, or by rational
and somewhat evident Deductions, from Nature, Reason, or Scripture, I declare
my self willing to hearken to all and any of these Evidences, and to your
Proposal of them, as soon as to any man's. You have entered the Lists, and how
you can now forsake them without trying the uttermost of the Combat, I leave
to you to consider.

In the last place of this Paragraph, you reflect upon what I said concerning
Preaching in Trading Towns; you say you are such a Preacher, and I grant it;
and that you are reached, and within the bounds of the Expression; but yet you
are not within the intent of it: for those words are amongst my Observations
upon Mr. Baxter's Book, and the intent went primely, if not only, to those who
preached according to the Direction and Rules of that Book. You have discovered
to me the indiscretion of that general Expression, for which I crave pardon,
and do acknowledge there may be error in the general sense of the words there
used; and that they may and do exceed the intent of the Writer.

But your Conclusion, That you will more insist upon the Separate Subsistence
of Souls, and their Immortality, in your Sermons than formerly you used to do,
I do not fully approve; the word more is capable of diverse applications, viz.
more frequently, or more positively, or more provingly: If your more be applied
to the third sense, I grant you have reason in it; but if to either of the
other two senses, I think you have not sufficient reason for that intent or
practice, Rules of Self-denial teach men to correct the inveterate inclination
of Nature, Qua nitimur invetitum. I will not multiply words upon this Subject,
knowing I speak sapienti.

Paragraph 14. You observe the inconvenient Consequences of my Opinion, i. e.
It offers indignity to Man's Nature, in debasing it to that of the Beasts. To
the Term of equalling it with the Beasts, I do not agree, for thorowout my
Treatise there are ascribed to Man many higher Degrees of Reason, Memory,
Judgment, and Will, than Beasts are allowed to be capable of. A like Nature is
supposed in all, but an apparently great difference in the Degrees, as we may
plainly see is betwixt Elephants and Mice, Camels and Moles; a like or greater
difference is agreed to be betwixt Men and Brutes, both in their Bodies and
Minds. The Elephant and Mouse have great differences, and clear likenesses, yet
greater differences are allowed betwixt Men and Brutes; but there are still
great likenesses amongst them: and this I hold to be no disparagement to Man's
Nature. And in Judgment Men are not permitted to decline to the right hand or
to the left, but ought to follow Truth to the best of their Knowledge, and give
honor to whom honor is due; not give it where it is not due, nor more than is
due.

Secondly, You say, The Opinion contradicts the common apprehension of Mankind
hitherto accepted. You say, It contradicts the Universal Tradition of the
Christian Church. But this I do not agree, having cited some Fathers and
Divines to the contrary. You say, The Opinion is bold, singular, and heretical.
That there is a degree of boldness and singularity in it, I do not deny; but I
say it is not so great a degree of either, as I took it to be when I writ my
Treatise, witness the many Quotations reported in this Writing. It fared with
me as it did with Elijah, who thought he was the only true Servant which God
had in Israel, but it was revealed to him that there were Seven thousand such
left in Israel, although he knew nothing of them, To the word heretical, I read
in King James the First his Apology, Fol. 302. of his Works, That he thought
himself acquitted from that Charge, by his professing to believe the Scripture,
and the three most Ancient Creeds; his submission to the Four First Great or
General Councils, and to what the Fathers of the First Five hundred years did
agree upon as necessary to salvation. Here are your Rules for Examination of
Heresy, and none of these Trials do I refuse, but till Proofs rise from some
of these Grounds, my Answer to this Expression, shall be the words of Moses,
Numb. 16. and the close of the 7th. verse.

Thirdly, You say, The Opinion opens a gap to Atheism and Disobedience; and
incourages Men to prefer their private Phancies before the Wisdom and Authority
of the Church. To this I say, Our Primitive Reformers, have (in Answer to their
Popish Superiors) fully answered this Objection; and to them I refer you for
an Answer, with this Addition, That if your Proposition were irrefragable,
Errors grown general, would prove irremediable.

Fourthly, You say, The Opinion tends to promote Vice, and that the Souls
Separate Subsistence is the strongest Foundation of Piety and Religion. But I
cannot grant any of these Consequences to be necessary or probable; but do say,
That our Lord's Direction, To fear God, who can both kill and cast into hell;
stands firm and unshaken: and the passing of an intermediate time betwixt Death
and Judgment (which time to the dead is nothing) does no way infeeble the
Certainty of Future Rewards and Punishments; but places the Expectation of them
upon a right and a firm Foot or Foundation, maintained by a Concurrent
Testimony thorowout the Scripture, and fortified by the Articles of our several
Creeds: A Truth, of which since Christ's time, there never was any doubt; nor
can be, by any who do acknowledge the Authority of the Scripture. You say, Men
may except against the Resurrection also; and I grant it: for some do it daily
against the Being or Government of a Deity. But this does not strengthen your
Inference, That because Men question and explode an Opinion which appears to be
not well grounded, therefore they will do the same by another Opinion that is
well grounded, and founded upon a Rock. True it is, That our Churches for about
the last 1200 years, have been so possessed with the Conceit of a Separately
Subsisting Soul, that they have made little use of the Resurrection in their
Exhortations. And in truth, if the Soul parting from the Body, go presently to
Heaven or Hell, our Article of the Resurrection can be but of small use in the
Church. If Souls get amongst Blessed Angels in Heaven, what need can there be
to them of a Resurrection? It seems rather a loss and harm to them to enter
again into Bodies, and come out of Heaven to inhabit on Earth again, although
it be a New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. There have been Testimonies
all along in the Church against the Separate Subsistence of Souls, except in
the 600 years wherein the thick darkness of Popish Ignorance overspread the
Christian World: viz. from An. 600 till An. 1200. You say again, Mr. Hobbs has
propagated this, or such Opinions; but I must clear him still from the having
done me any harm: nor in this Opinion has any Man done it. The Truth warrants
me to use St. Paul's words, I neither received it of man, nor was I taught it:
so little acquainted with what other men have thought of it, that I did not
know or believe that any other man had been of this Opinion, according to what
I affirm in my Treatise. In the late Auction of Books held in the Towu, you
purchass'd for me Dr. Willis his Book De Anima Brutorum, in which I found all
the particulars of my Opinion, fully delivered in terminis; far better framed,
and learnedly maintained, then I know how to do it. And it has been my
admiration, that two so utterly unconversant, should jump so evenly and fully
into the same impressions. Also Antonius Roccius a German Philosopher,
maintains the very same Opinions of the Souls being generated, and naturally
Mortal. And yet both of them allow and maintain an Immortal Soul in Man; yet
but in words: for all their Reasons and Deductions make against it, Roccius was
a Professed Papist, and his Church have sharp Censures in such Cases; and Willis
appears wary: but in me the Old Proverb is verified, Who so bold as blind
Bayard? I neither knew nor meant any harm in the promulgating of this Opinion:
and perhaps I may not yet have enough considered the thing: and my Prayer to
God is, That he will give us understanding in all things; and particularly in
the thing now disputed: Other Interest in this Opinion I have none, but as it
yet seems to me the very Truth; and if so it be not, I pray God deliver me from
it: and I will very much thank any man who will take pains with me to that
purpose, as you have begun to do; and I count it a Proof of Good Nature and
Charity in you.

Paragraph 15. You favor me with your advice in pursuance of Dr. Ashington's
Opinion, and I doubt not of your good meaning in it. But my thoughts concerning
Treatises of Practical Divinity are, That they are already so many, and perhaps
so ineffectual, as that a Talent laid out upon them, may be accounted next to
one wrapped up in a Napkin and buried in the Earth. So unprofitable a Traffic,
and the Markets already so clogged with that Commodity, as hardly can any man
expect to double his Principal; no not to make One of One, by such an
Undertaking: Operam and Oleum perdere, is the most likely effect of such an
Undertaking. Learned Men would not need it, the more Ignorant would not read
it; and they who did so, would not heed it: and in fine all would come to the
Sense of the Old Latin Expression before recited. I do not much doubt, but that
the design of your Advice intends thus, Sir, It seems you have itching Fingers,
apt to fall into some Employment; little good can be expected from them:
therefore pray use them in such things, wherein if they can do no good, they
may do no harm. And your design in it is not to be condemned. But I thus answer
to it, That it is a Rule in Education of Children, to employ them in such
Studies or Arts toward which they have a most Propensity and Inclination, as
the most likely Course for them to succeed in: And so I conceive it is with
Writers, their own Genius is a more proper Director, than others men's
Appointments. And yet my Fingers have not been slack in handling Points of
Practical Divinity, for I have by me Five Treatises upon those Points, finished
before I had any thoughts concerning that which you have lately perused; and
they are of ten times the bulk of that. I doubt I must entreat you, and much
more other Strangers, to read them; nay, perhaps you or they would not be hired
to it for a small matter, although my Books follow not the beaten Load upon
that Subject. That Archbishop Laud, quoted by you, differs in his Opinion from
me upon this Point, I do not wonder, nor that you do so; but I should wonder to
find men who will agree with me in it: I did wonder when I found Willis doing
so, and citing: Gassendus in the words which express my Opinion; when I found
Roccius saying the same things and words; and Melanchton apparently to the same
Sense: and Peter Martyr approaching thereunto, and nearer than I do expect
other men shall come in any short time. Your Quotation out of Dr. Cave was
drawn by him out of Eusebius. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 36 and is quoted in my Treatise.
This Particular finishes your Opposition to my Treatise, and shall put an End
also to my Defense.

Yet because I have (as you may see) some room left upon this Sheet of Paper, I
am thereby invited to remember what you said in your Second Paragraph; viz.
That it is not unlikely that my Treatise might be the result of some years
Study. To set your Imagination right upon that Point, I give you this Account
of it, That in Summer 1690, I practiced my Monastic Discipline, reading within
Doors, and laboring the Ground abroad, Mutans quadrata rotundis. What I read
within, I ruminated without. I considered the close Connection of Soul and
Body, and even the Contexture of them; that Humane Constitutions and Faculties
are often altered by Diet, Air, Sickness, Accidents; that the best Reasons,
Memories, or Judgments, may be altered or spoiled, by diverse like Means; and
recovered sometimes by Medicines applied to the disaffected Parts or Organs of
the Body. How this might competere with the Acts and Powers of a Substantial
Angelical Spirit as the Soul or Form of Man, I found my self unable to
comprehend; but that rather it seemed there was a Dependency of the Soul upon
the Body, as well as of the Body upon the Soul. Hence I concluded there was a
Close and Natural Contexture between them, and that likely they were both of
one same Nature, Connatural to Man; viz. his Natural and Constituent Parts.
Then I considered the Brutes, and that they had the same Senses and Affections
with Men, and some sort of Understanding, Fancy, and Memory, and all liable to
like Accidents: Also both Sorts lived by Blood, Breath, and Fuel or Food, and
if any of these failed, the Man must die as well as the Beast: so as the Man's
Soul could help in such, or any other Vital or Natural Necessities, no more
than the Soul of a Beast can do in like Cases. And thus I went on considering
all the Summer, and coming tube inclined, I fell upon a very Natural Course of
Proceeding in such Cases, followed by St. Paul, Acts 17.17. He disputed his
Tenets in all Places, and with all Persons of his Conversation, proper for that
purpose; and so did I, and read Books, such as I had or could buy or borrow.
Lastly, One lent me a Book, called Richard Baxter's Dying Thoughts; and the
Weak Defense which he and Sir Kenelm Digby, and Doctor More, made on behalf of
that Immortal Opinion, fortified my Conceptions to the contrary. In Christmas
I discoursed with many about it, and soon after Candlemass I began to write and
finished my Treatise about a Week after Midsummer, in An. 1691, since which
time diverse have perused it, and I refuse it to none who are like to use it
cleanly, and are capable of it. I know you observe that I begin with Baxter's
Book, and end with it, quoting and examining of it all along; nor did I find it
difficult to refute all that he says in maintenance of the Immortality, except
the Texts of Scripture which he quotes. And those Texts in him and in you, seem
to me the only Defenses of the Immortality. Batteries you perceive, are and may
be raised against the intention and effects of those Texts which are quoted to
that purpose; and of what force they will prove, Men are not like speedily to
determine. But my Judgment is not convinced or persuaded, that by forbearing
the Argument drawn from the Immortality, and pressing in its stead that from
the Resurrection, and the Last Judgment, there can any detriment arise to the
Progress and Maintenance of the Christian, and specially of the Protestant
Religion. If I had a desire to argue upon this Point, and toward the Clearing
of it (as St. Paul did) both in Synagogues, Markets, and Schools, I do it much
more desirously with you; as professing my self,

Your much obliged and very humble Servant.
8 March 1692.
After, this Answer to the Opponents Objections, he was p1eased to reply
thereunto in June following; and his Replication was divided into Seven
Paragraphs.

His 1. Parag, Insists, That I had not made that Proof which he demanded of the
Quomodo, How a Material Spirit was able to act, or did act, the Humane
Faculties and Powers, known to be in Mankind, and carried to an excellent
Perfection in some Men? As this was a repeated Demand, so I say, that I answer
to it as before; viz. That there are many other Things and Actings in the
World, the Reasons and Causes of which Men neither do nor can enough comprehend
or perceive. Our Lord tells us, That if one should watch the Corn Night and
Day, yet he could not perceive, so as to know, the Immediate and Proper Causes
of its Growth; but it will bring forth, first the Stalk, next the Blade, then
the Ear* and lastly, the Full Corn in it: Men not perceiving the How, or the
Why of it: and the Case is like for all other Plants. How it was, or whence it
proceeds, that they bring forth Fruits and Leaves of wondrous Variety and
Diversity, in Color, Figure, Taste, Smell, Bulk, and Operations. We see that
each of them have Root, Bole, Skin, or Bark; and we perceive and know that each
of them has an active and lively Juice or Spirit ascending from the Root into
the Boles, Branches, and Tops of them: and this Composition of Matter and Form
in Plants we do reasonably believe to be sufficient and effectual, for the
production of all that does ordinarily grow out of them. But that Solomon, or
any other man, ever did, or can declare to us the manner of their proceedings,
or the next Reasons of them, and of that great Variety in their Natures and
Productions. I do not know, nor believe, nor do I think it a Work of Humane
Power to do.

Next Plants, we may consider the Insects; Solomon points us to the Spiders,
the Locusts, the Ants, and the Bees, what are the Causes of their Motions and
Actions? Solomon tells us they do what is proper and best for their Beings, but
as Wonders to him and us, who know neither the How, nor the Why, of them. And
so for the Fishes and the Birds, we cannot know by what secret Engines and
Motors diverse particulars are done amongst them.

Concerning the Quadrupedes, we see and know they have the same Flesh, Blood,
Bones, and Breath, that Men have, and in their Kinds suitable Bodily Members, as
Head, Heart, Liver, Lungs, Arteries, Veins, Fibers, Muscles, etc. that Men
have: also a Generation and Production all alike. I may demand what makes them
live and grow in the Wombs of their Dams? What forms their Members, and how are
they made, in those Dark Receptacles? How can mere Matter and Motion hit upon
forming every Species amongst them, like those of their own Kind? How comes it
that upon their first Production they seek their Dams Paps for Nourishment?
What teaches them the proper uses of their several Armatures, not mere Matter
and Motion? What teaches them Art Natural or Acquired; Also their Senses both
Inward and Outward, their Phancies and Memories? How come they by these and the
use of them, not by mere Matter and Motion; but even as Men do, though in a
much Lower Degree?

Genesis 1.25. God made the Beast of the Earth after his Kind. ver. 26. He said,
Let us make Man in our Image. Here appears a plain Intention of God to make
both Man and Beast, and that they were made by him accordingly, and that he
endued each sort of them with a Generative Faculty or Power, whereby they were
enabled, and even naturally and generally provoked to generate their like,
according to their several Species. Chap. 5.3. Adam begat a Son in his own
likeness, after his Image; whence Men are generated in the same Image and
Likeness that they were created.

The Maintainers of the Immateriality pretend to expound the Texts of Genesis
last quoted, and they do it thus; where it is said, That God made Man after his
own Image, this Image of God, say they, was the Soul of Man, but not his Body;
for that cannot be the Image of a Spirit: and God is a Spirit. Then upon Adam's
begetting a Son in his own Likeness, after his Image: They say, This begetting
after his Image, must be intended of the Body only, and not of the Soul; for
that the Parents cannot generate Souls of their Sort, viz. Intelligent and
Angelical: but that must be newly created by God, upon every new Procreation of
Bodies by the Parents. I answer, That both these Expositions are merely
precarious and arbitrary, not agreeable to Reason, or grounded upon Scripture:
Not upon Scripture, for they are contrary to the Letter and Words of the Texts.
The first says, God made Man after his own Image. Here Man, say I, must intend
the Compositum of the Soul and Body; for we never heard or read of a Man
without a Body. And as this Contexture of Soul and Body, is the Image of God,
so Death, by Dissolving of that Contexture, destroys that Image of God, which
was the Man, whilst that Contexture continued. So for the other Text, Adam
begat a Son in his own Likeness, after his Image. This, say I, intends a
begetting of the Soul as well as the Body; for we never heard of a Son of Man
without a Soul: and think that in Nature there cannot be that thing, viz. a Son
of Man without a Soul. But they reply, Flesh and Blood cannot generate Soul of
our Sort, not an Angelical Spirit; for, that which it born of flesh is fleshly;
and not such a Spirit. This I grant to be true, and infer thence, That a Humane
Soul generated, is not an Intelligent Spirit, but a Material, though very much
Refined Spirit; and of a Flamy Aerie Nature: as Heraclitus and my Lord Bacon
have described it, and as Hippocrates, Galen, Sennertus, Willis, and Ent, have
spoken of it.

I say then, That God created Man, endowing Matter with Motion; and the
Contexture of such a Spirit or Soul, as did enable him to perform all those
Actions, and was able to actuate all those Powers which God intended for him,
and bestowed upon him. That God can so do at his pleasure, I believe there are
few that doubt. Willis page 5. bot. says, Dum ita Creatoris opera quisque ad
ingenii sui modulum exponit, sentire utique videtur quod Deus nihil amplius
fabricare valeat quam quod homo possit concipere, aut effingere: To this he
adds, page 40. That the Vital and Animal Spirits are prime parts of the
Sensitive Soul in Men and Beasts. And says, Vt nihil referam illis qui hosce
Spiritus prorsus negant, quorum existentia (fere palpabilis) ab effect is
probari potest; neque de illis redarguendis solicitus sim, qui viventium sensus
and facultates quascunque perceptivas, non nisi a substantia immateriali
immortalique obiri posse contendunt. And to the like Sense, Melanchton, De
Anima, p. 5. Spiritus vitales in homine nascuntur in cord, and vere sunt
flammae. P. 7. Moses teaches, Animam carnis in sanguine esse; significat autem
anima (Hebraeis) vitam. And when Moses says, The Life or Soul is in the Blood,
vult sanguinem vehiculum esse vitae, and spiritus vitales illam ipsam rem esse
quae ciet corpora, quam nominamus animam. P. 21. The Powers of a Sensitive
Soul, Monstrant aliquid quod cogitari potest in materia, fons esse actionum;
non tamen haec prorsus perspicimus, sed naturam fons intuemur, experimur and
cernimus motus, quod, cur it a factum est, sapientia est artificis, non nostra.
P. 112. Nulla pars in universa natura ita introspici potest ut penitus and tot
a agnoscatur. Admirandum est cerebrum quod est domicilium sapientiae ac
officina cognitionum, judicii, ratiocinationis, and memoriae; actiones cerebri
quantum differunt a physicis qualitatibus quae est substantia cerebri, ubi, and
quomodo fiunt hae mirandae actiones in hac squalida massa, haec fateamur non
penitus sciri, and agnoscamus Deum esse Naturae nostrae conditorem; and
actiones cerebri proprias maxim testari hunc mundum non extitisse casu, and
Deum conditorem esse mentem sapientem, beneficam, justam, and veracem, quia
impossible est, discrimen honestorum and turpium casu aut a natura bruta ortum
esse. Upon which I thus descant. That as God has given to Brutes, quasdam
notitias proper to their Natures, of which Men cannot perceive the Origins or
Causes, as in the Arts of Bees, Ants, Spiders, Birds Building, Procreation,
Government, and Feeding: Brutes Knowledge of their Natural Enemies, and the
strength and use of their own Armatures; and the Proprieties of their Food and
Medicines. These and their like, come from particular Notices planted by God in
the Natures of Creatures; and it seems Congruous enough to such Proceedings,
That God may have given to Mankind the easy apprehension, honestorum and
turpium, and the Notion of Expectation of a Ruling and Protecting Divinity, as
proper Notices and Instincts, very suitable to the Nature of Man and his
Commodious Living in this World. The same Author, P. 205. says, Many things we
know are acted in us and by us, Ita condita est hominum natura divinitus, ut
fieri cogitationes in nobis, and formari and ordinari imagines sciamus; quomodo
fiant, non cernimus, sed ita Deus voluit. And this to me seems a sufficient
Account of Men's using their Faculties of Understanding and Reason, ita Deus
voluit; and that it is to be preferred before the Expedient or Proposal of
Prescribing an Immaterial Spirit to be newly created by God upon every fruitful
Coition of Man and Woman.

These and the like Sayings of Learned Men, and the Grounds and Reasons of
them, are offered as a sufficient Cause and Occasion for me to wave, and even
to deny and refuse the entering into a Fruitless Enquiry after the Means how Men
are enabled to used their Senses, Phancies, Understandings, Memories,
Judgments; of which yet I think I can give as good an account, as you can do
how Infants grow in the Womb, and live there without Breathing, in nature of a
Grub: Or the How or Why Teeth grow out of their Jaws. David could say, I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, but he could not tell how that Knowledge was
too wonderful and excellent for him: and he could not, and much less are you
like to attain unto it; and pari ratione, let me require of you to show,
Whence, and How, Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, Wrath, and Fear, grow in all
Men? and in the most, to such a Power and Strength, as to baffle and bear down
the Powers of Reason, and that Angelical Soul or Spirit, which you say resides
and governs in every man, and is specially created for him by God to that
purpose. You may please to account to me, for the How, and by what means, such
things are acted or come to pass: or lastly, do for the Immaterial Soul what
you require of me for my Material one; declare and prove to me how and by what
means the Immaterial Soul works or acts in each of the Senses, in the
Understanding, Fancy, Memory, Judgment, Local Motion, Appetite, Digestion,
Nutrition, Generation, and Outward and Inward Faculties and Power belonging to
Mankind: and by the time that you have so done, I hope to be able and willing
to account to you how such things may all be done as well, and more probably,
by a Material Spirit; the thing which you require of me, I am not yet able to
perform, but by that time that you have acted and done, what pari passu I have
now required of you, I doubt not but that I shall be enabled to give you a more
satisfactory. Answer to the appointments which you have been pleased to press
upon me, as most necessary in our present Disputation. You found these things
in my Treatise, which yet I think fit to repeat here, because it seems you do
not remember what you read there concerning them.

As to the Material Soul, if you did not grant that in Nature the Things is,
and that it acts in Plants, Insects, Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts, I could
describe to you much of its Nature and Efficiency, and make good Proof of it ab
effectis. and from Sensible Discoveries, quod sit in Natura Rerum. And for the
quid sit in Men and Beasts, it has been said, and is now repeated, that is the
Spirits and Particles of Blood inflamed and glowing, such as needs a continual
Nourishment, both from well disgested and rarefied Humors, and the fresh
fanning of the ambient Air; and according to the goodness or badness of these,
both Men and Beasts are very much affected. For the unde oritur, I say it grows
from the Energy of the Seed, fomented in loco idoneo. To the quando ingreditur,
I say it comes not aliunde (as you say the Immaterial does) Melanch in his
quoted Book, p. 12 says, It is, Propagata ex Natura corporea; viz. Natura
seminum: and as in Plants and Brutes, Anima oritur ex vi seminis, sic de Anima
vegetativa and sensitativa in homini dici potest; homo enim non generat
imperfectius quam Plantae and Boves; manifestum est animae sentientis nullas
esse actiones nisi Organicas, quare consentaneum est oriri eam ex semine, and
esse vel temperamentum vel potentiam in corpore; gignit igitur homo hominem
saltem secundum vitam sentientem, si non secumdum animam rationalem: and has
animas, vegetativam and sentientem esse ex traduce, id est ex natura seminis
fatendum est. For the Vbi residet Anima Materialis in Homine, I say it is
dispersed over the whole Body. Our last quoted Author, p. 24. says, This
Spiritu Vitalis sentiens, aut Anima Bovis, est quiddam divisibile juxta parts
corporis: nam Spiritus Vitalis similis est flammae, quae parts habet, and
alibi sunt aliae. For the Tota in toto and qualibet part, he says, Vnde
sumptum sit ignoro, nam in Aristotele nusquam extat, and commen^i^ium est,
etiamsi quis tantum de hominis anima intelligot, and sentiet eam esse spiritum
separabilem: quia spiritus finiti sunt in unico loco, ex quo agunt ad certam
distantiam, alii magis, alii minus procul, ut suum quisque robur est. P. 146.
Spiritus est subtilis vapor ex sanguine, coctis virtute cordis ac incensus ut
sit velut flammula quae in diversis membris dissimiles habet actiones; quanquam
enim unus est fons spirituum, tamen locis mutantur, and mutati, dissimiles
habent actiones. Dr. Willis, in the Preface to his Anima Brutorum, p. 2
Nequaquam diffiteor, animae corporeitatem a rationibus minime contemnendis and
ampliissimis ubique, tum veterum, tum recentiorum suffragiis evinci, haec anima
sensitiva est toti corpori coextensa, habens parts non modo plures and
distinctas, sed and quadantenus dissimilares. P. 3. Quis sponsorem se fecerit
Deum non potuisse vires and facultates materiae imprimere vitae sensitivae
muniis accommodas, sed si quis substantiam illam subtilissimam and prorsus
aetheream quae vitali oeconomiae inservit immaterialem statuat; meminerit mihi
indulgeri, si forte ego materialem apellem. Libri P. 8. Bruti, uti inferior
hominis anima, materialis ac divisibilis est, and toti corpori coextensa; quia
plures ac diversos actus animales, simul a diversis corporis membris, ac
partibus obiri cernimus, eodem instanti oculus videt, auris audit, nares
olfaciunt, lingua gustat, and membra quaevis exteriora tactus sensum, and motum
exercent; ac interea, viscera quaeque and praecordia munia sua exequuntur;
quandoquidem igitur, inter corpus and animam non datur medium, sed corporis
membra and parts animae sunt organa, quid aliud arbitrari aut statuere
passumus quam ejusdem animae extensae plures and distinctas portiones singula
isthaec corporis membra and parts actuare.

As to the Quomodo operatur Anima haec nostra Materialis, our Author, p. 10.
says, Haec anima consistit iisdem particulis, aut ejusdem materie^ ex quibus
corpus formatur, iis vero selectis, subtilissimis, and maxim activis, quae
tanquam flos and crassiori massa emergentes mutuo coeunt, atque ductus idoneos
(quos per totam corporis compagem ipsae procudunt) nactae hypostasin unam
continuam, scilicet praetenuem and quasi spirituosam toti adaequatam and
coextensam consti^^unt, ex creationis lege. Here he shows how these Active
Particles first work in semine, and form a Consistence and Body suitable to its
own activities; as a Case may be exactly fitted to a Jewel: and haec anima ex
se statim dissolvi, tenuesque in auras evanescere apta, a corpore continenti in
subsistentia sua and actu conservatur; ita anima (tenuissima licet) est
corporea. P. 11. Corpori intime unitur ejusque velut subtegmen existit, attamen
textura subtilissima, sensibus nostris percipi nequit, sed solum modo ab
effectis and operationibus suis dignoscitur. And when the Creature dies, Statim
ejus particulae a concretione sive mutua adhaesione sua abruptae (absque
vestigio quovis relicto) prorsus dissipantur. P. 30. After treating of Brutal
Souls, he says, Ac in eadem class etiam hominis animam corpoream ponimus,
idque jure: quoniam in utrisque praecordiorum, nec non cerebri, ejusque
appendicis nervosi eadem est confirmatio. P. 38. Anima corporea, brutis
perfectionibus and homini communis, cum toti corpori organico extenditur, and
singula tum parts ejus, tum humores vivificat, actuat, and irradiat, ita in
duobus illorum eminentius subsistere atque seeds velut imperiales habere
videtur. Here our Doctor declares the manner how this Material Soul acts and
works in the Head and Heart principally. P. 39. The Modes and Manner of its
Operation by such inflamed Particles of the Blood, and specially in the Head,
whence they are dispersed over all the Body, effecting therein Perception by
the Senses and all other Faculties; their Order, Causes, and Manner of Working,
very much deserving the perusal of those who really desire satisfaction in the
Enquiry which you have propounded: viz. Quomodo operatur Anima Materialis in
Homine. There you may find a better account to this purpose and a larger, than
I dare pretend to give you of my own.

My Answer to your Question, How Men's Faculties and Powers can be acted by a
Material Spirit, given in my former Treatise, is, That although I were not able
to give Evidence of the Manner how, but should plead Ignoramus in Answer
thereunto, this could be no great Detriment to the Tenet of a Material Soul in
Man. For that Men do not know, nor can find out how the Material Soul in Plants
produces Wood, Bark, Leaves, Blossoms, Fruits, of great Diversities in Nature,
Shape, Firmness, Taste, Color, Smell, Natural Qualities, both for Meat,
Medicine, and diverse other uses. Nor do Men know how the Material Soul in
Insects does or can produce the admirable Order, Economy and Regiment which is
plainly visible amongst the Bees; the Orderly Proceedings and Industry amongst
the Ants, and the fine and regular Textures of Spiders; the wonderful Faculties
of Birds, in choosing commodious Places for their Nests; their Building,
Sitting, Hatching, Feeding, Guarding, and Training of their Young. Their
Musical Notes and Modulations: their Exercises of Power, the Stronger over the
Weaker, and which the Weaker apprehend at the very first sight. Neither do men
know, nor can find out, how or by what means the Beasts discern and know their
proper Nouritures and Medicines, the Means and Causes of their Disgestion,
Nutrition, Generation, Appetites, Passions, Spontaneous Motions, Ejections of
Excrements, the putting out their Hair, Horns, Hooffs, Claws, etc. Or the Means
or Causes of using their Senses and perceiving by them. Their Common Sense,
Fancy, Memory, and the low Degree of Understanding which they have. I say, the
next Means and Causes of these Effects, and their like, men cannot discover or
find out. And yet there appears no doubt but that such Effects flow from the
Material Souls, or Spirits, with which every one of them in their Kinds or
Species are endowed. Ergo, Though I may not be able to declare how a Material
Spirit does or can act in Man his Superior Faculties of his Reason and Mind,
yet that may not prove an Argument sufficient to overthrow the Materiality of a
Humane Soul: For such a Soul may (and probably does) actuate all these
Superior Powers and Faculties in Man, although we cannot perceive or
understand the manner and next Causes of such Productions in any plain or
declarable manner. It seems enough that we find there are apt Matter, Members,
and Organs, to serve those Effects; and there is an Active Principle or Spirit,
though Material, yet sufficient for enlivening and acting those Organs or
Instruments for the serving such turns, to as great Perfection as is ordinarily
found in Humane Nature; although we do not, and rationally are not able to
discover the adaequate, or perhaps, the true Reasons or Means; the How, and the
Why, of such Performances.

Sir Kenelm Digby in his Maintenance of the Soul's Immortality, Fol. 394. says,
Gross Earthly Bodies create Idea's in the Minds of Men, and by that means does
Spiritualize such Bodies; and that which can so do, must needs be Immaterial.
Now if you ask me how this comes to pass, and by what Artifice Bodies are thus
spiritualized? I confess I shall not be able to satisfy you: but must answer,
That it is done I know not how, by the power of the Soul. Show me a Soul, and I
will tell you how it works. But as we are sure there is a Soul (that is to say,
a Principle from which these Operations spring) though we cannot see it: so we
may and do certainly know that this Mystery is (says he) as I say, though we
cannot know, nor express the manner of it. And I may say the like for the
Material Soul, that it is also Invisible, too fine to be perceived but by its
Effects; and therefore its Operations, or the Manner of them, are not
Perceptible by Men's Senses: and thereunto the old Theorem may reasonably be
applied, Nihil venit in Intellectu, quod non prius fuit in Sensu. And it seems
not reasonable to expect a clear Description or Declaration of such Things or
Productions as are not perceptible to Sense; or that does not at some time
come, or in some measure come, under the Test and Trial of those Informers.

To comply with your Demands, I have thus repeated to you that I have before
expressed in my First Treatise, although it seem more than the Exigence of the
Case requires: For that although nothing had been said in the Defense, Proof,
or Discovery, of what concerns the Souls Materiality, yet it seems not to me a
good or clear Consequence, That therefore it must be Immaterial. But that the
Proof of that will still be necessary, and lie upon your hand; to show, De
Anima Immateriali, quod sit in Rerum Natura; quid sit unde oritur, quando
ingreditur, and quomodo; ubi residet in Corpore, quomodo actuat Corpus cum
Membris, and omnia ejus Organa, as well in the Vital, Nutritive, Generative
Faculties, as in the Loco-motive, Affective and Passionate Powers, and those of
Sensation. And Lastly in the Rational and Superior Powers of Understanding,
Fancy, Memory, Judgment, and Will. You have required of me Proofs how such
things are, or can be acted in Man by a Material Spirit; to show the hardship
of such an Imposition. I now demand the like of you, on behalf of an Immaterial
Spirit; not believing that you will undertake the Employment, or that you, or
any other man, can make a good performance of it; or discover so much on that
behalf, as I have but now done on behalf of the Material One. It seems my
Demand upon you, may pass lege talionis, it is thereby done to you, as you.
thought fit to do: viz. Bind an heavy Burden, and lay it upon others
Shoulders, which it may be you will avoid touching with one of your fingers,
believing the whole to be much too heavy for you: and this shall finish the
Answer to your Demand of the Quomodo operatur Anima Materialis in Homine.

2 Paragraph, Here you raise an Argument for the Immateriality, from the Acts
and Powers of Conscience in Man; which you think cannot grow, or be derived
from Matter and Motion. I grant it is no more derived from mere Matter and
Motion, than the other Faculties of Man are. God who created both Matter and
Motion, and acts them in Plants, Insects, Fowls, and Beasts, to the Production
of all that is done amongst them, acts them also in Mankind, to the
Instruction, and for the Guidance of their Natures and Actions, the Conscient
Powers in Man, viz. his Understanding, Memory, and Judgment, I have said are
Natural, and the Effects of Conscience; viz. Content and Joy, or Sorrow and
Fear, are also Natural: but to the Constitution and Completing of Conscience,
there must also be allowed some Rules, Examples, or Conceptions, to which Men
have submitted their Minds; in such manner as to believe what is done according
to those Directions, is well done; and what is contrary to them, is a Fault or
Offense. And this Conscience, I say, is common to Beasts as well as Men, though
not so much, or in so high a Degree, but according to the proportion of
Understanding amongst them. A Child young, has no perceivance of Conscience,
but as it grows to the Cognizance of Rules, it becomes subjected to the Strokes
and Stings of Conscience. How are Beasts taught Duty, but by Rewards and
Punishments, the Remembrances of which act upon them so as to make them correct
a Failure in Duty, by a quick correcting of themselves in Action, and Amendment
thereupon. And what is Conscience in Man more, than a Perceiving, or an
Apprehension, that he has acted against his Rule, which has gotten the
Ascendent over him; and for which he has an Expectation of Punishment or
Suffering, such, so great; so lasting, and intolerable, as those who have
delivered the Rules to him, have taught him to conceive and apprehend: but that
amongst Men that are Savage, and utterly uncultivated by any sort of Education,
without Rules or Laws of any sort: amongst such Persons, there is no
Transgression nor Conscience of Sin; viz. no Conscience at all. And we may
compare the Faculty of Conscience to that of Speech amongst Men, they are
things to which Humane Nature has a great Aptitude and Inclination; but yet
they are not so Natural, as to grow out of bare Nature, without any sort of
Instruction or Teaching whatsoever. Mothers and Nurses commonly give the first
Rudiments of them both: and they receive Alterations according as future
Informers and Practices get Power over them. High Expectations of Eternal
Rewards or Punishments, are able to transport Men, and have transported some,
with ardent Desires, others with Afflictions and terrible Fears; so as they are
thoroughly persuaded and convinced of such Future States as we are taught to
believe, if upon Examinatien of the Conscient Powers, the Man find his Actions
contrary to his Rules; and that therefore he is in a State of unmeasurable ill
expectations. It seems natural and likely, that this man shall be apt to fall
under the tyranical dominion of his Fear, and that he needs no Immaterial Power
to induce such Conceptions in him, or inflict such Rigors upon him; his own
Connatural Conscient Powers, and the Cruelty and Tyranny of his Fear thence
arising, are enough: and if any farther addition be needful, I have before
quoted Melanchton, That a Diabolical assistance is often ready to act in such
cases, for making the Effects more atrocious and remarkable, without needing
the Opinion of a Soul's being Immaterial, for Solution of the Quaery of the
Quomodo such things are possible to be done. And though the Acts of Conscience
be Natural, yet the Rules which govern it, are chiefly (if not only) the
Apprehensions or Opinions of the Persons under Trial, growing from Education,
Institution, Example, Observation, Opinion, or Conceit, however Superstitious
or Fallacious the same may be.

To what you say, That you had given Instances concerning Acts of Conscience
(and Terror upon them) in Persons who were above all Prejudice or Fear. I
answer, That no Man can be above these Adjuncts or Qualifications: but all
Educated Persons have always been taught to believe and fear a Divine Being and
Vengeance, even when Jupiter and Apollo, Woden and Frea past in the World for
their Prime Deities. And it seems observable, that however highly a supposed
Immaterial Spirit may impress Terror upon the Conscience, yet let any man come
and demonstrate convincingly, that there is a mistake, in that the Fact is not
against the Rule, or that the Rule it self is an Error; and so the Wrath and
Vengeance of God not due, or reasonably to be expected to follow upon such
Failures. Such an Opinion and Belief, must and will naturally appease and cure
the greatest Horrors of a Troubled Conscience; and do it as substantially as a
Physician can cure any other Disease whatsoever, viz. by removing and curing
the Efficient Causes of it. You demand of me, How Rules for Direction for
Conscience came to Men at the first, when there were but few Persons in the
World, and Customs or Conceits were not so various or common as of later times
they are grown? To this I answer, That the only Persons in the World free from
Prejudices and Rules imposed upon them by Education, were our first Parents,
Adam and his Wife; and to them we read God gave an Express Rule; viz. Of the
Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the
day thou eatest thereof, thou shall, surely die. Next, we read of Men's
sacrificing to God, for which I do not perceive any ground in Reason or Nature;
viz. That Man should or could, from Reason, invent or conceive, that the
killing or shedding the Blood of Bulls, Rams, or Goats, should be pleasing or
acceptable to the Omnipotent God: Whence I collect, that this early Practice
amongst Men sprung from the Positive Direction of God; and soon after this
Practice began, Cain shed the Blood of Abel his Brother: Whether he knew this
Fact to be a Sin, or not, does not appear in the Text. You observe in his
Answer to God, after his Condemnation for it; he says, My punishment is greater
than I can bear: Say you, The Margent of some Bibles render the words, Mine
iniquity is greater then I can bear; and in this you say truly. It seems, the
same Hebrew Expression may bear either Sense; but seeing it follows next after
the Sentence, our Translators (in my mind) have done right, to put Punishment
into the Text, and set the diversity of Reading only in the Margent. But
whether Cain knew his Killing at that time, to be a Sin, or not, it afterward
was made known to be a Crying Crime amongst Men. God blessed Noah and his Sons,
and said to them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth; the flesh
with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat; and surely
the blood of your lives will I require: at the hand of every beast will I
require it; and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man's brother will I
require the life of man. Accordingly, the First Command of Moses his Second
Table, is in express Terms, Thou shall not Kill, a man, thy brother,
presumptuously, innocent, or not deserving such punishment: soon after which
Promulgation, viz. Exodus 32.25. Moses commands a promiscuous killing of his
brethren, by which there fell about Three thousand men; and this summarily,
without hearing or judgment. So Numb. 25.5. Moses said to the Judges of Israel,
Slay ye every one his men, that were joined unto Baal-peor. Also Phineas warmed
by Zeal, and without any other Warrant, but that Heat, slew two Persons, by one
through thrust of a Javelin, without regard to their future state, or giving
them time to call upon God for mercy; and yet this Fact was both approved and
rewarded by God. David shed blood abundantly upon the earth, and yet not
reproved for his so doing. So Soldiers at this day, in pursuit of a flying
Army, kill with commendations as many as they can, without imputing Crimes to
them, or particular provocation from them. And this continues an avowed
Practice and a daily Trade amongst Christians, hired to it for money. Amongst
our Ancestors and other German Nations, the Killing of any Man might be legally
compensated by Money at a stated Rate or Price, suitable to the Degrees or
Qualities of Men amongst them; even though the Person killed were a King of the
Nation, or a holy Bishop amongst them. There was a certain Price set upon every
Quality of Persons, called Weargelt, and the Payment of that Price in Money or
Goods to that Value, was a lawful Satisfaction for such Killing, and a
Discharge from any farther Punishment, appertaining to the same. We read that
at Rome it was accounted brave for People to kill themselves: And in Greece it
was counted glorious to kill Tyrants; and so in all places to kill Enemies.
These Facts and Fashions incline me to believe that Killing is not a Sin so
much discoverable by Nature as by Polity, or Positive Law. God directed Noah
and his Sons concerning it, and from them it past to their Posterities, all
Nations of the World as a great Offense, but rather against Law than Nature:
unless we shall take Nature in the Sense of General Custom, which is a Second
Nature, and able to correct or supplant and overcome the Inclinations of
Mankind, which we know to be Natural: Whence it seems, the Knowledge that
Killing is an high Crime, is rather acquired, than Natural: And we see daily
that Legislators set a Rate of Killing upon what Facts they think fit; and Men
who are after executed for such Facts, are counted to be lawfully killed: and
it seems from a like Original, that Killing is counted Criminal, and not from
Nature alone uncultivated and savage, as the same may reasonably be conceived,
and sometimes actually found. I say then, this Second Nature meliorated by
Rules, directed by the Wisdom of God, and the Practice and Experience of Men,
has a Power and Effect of Conscience universally thereunto annexed; not proper
to an Humane Nature in its naked State, or the absolute simplicity of it: But
if in that low condition there be at all a Conscience, any more than what some
Beasts can attain unto, I suppose it can extend no farther than to the practice
of our Lords two general Rules, of doing to others what Men think Just and
Good, if done to themselves; and Loving and Honoring that God, which Nature
has a great Propensity to fear and invoke, in times of Men's Distress or
Terror. I am not confident that Men in their lowest estate, can (without a
long practice, and some sort of communication with others) be able to attain a
Power and Practice of Conscience, extending to these two Universal Principles:
but I confide, the Power of Nature in its Simplicity, cannot reach beyond a
Sense of these Principles, if it can attain unto them: For other Sins, as
Adultery, those who know not what Marriage is, cannot know what Adultery is.
And for Theft and Robbery, it has past for a Glory in Ancient Barbarism; and
at this day we find it in the continual Practice of the Turks and French, and
used without any manner of Sense of Conscience for the same, without any
alteration but of the Name, from Robbery to Conquest; as the Pirate very well
observed to Alexander in his time. And the like may be said for all Moses's
Laws. Paul says, I should not have known Covetousness to be a Sin, if the Law
had not said, Thou shall not covet: and so for Incest, if the Law had not
forbidden it. At the first it was necessary and lawful, Abraham was late in the
practice of it; and Amram Son of Kohath, Son of Levi, married Jocabed his
Fathers Sister: and it became usual for the Ptolemy's and Persian Kings, to
marry their Sisters: and so it is at this day, for the Moguls, and Kings of
Siam, China, and other parts of India, to use their Sisters, and even their
Daughters, without any Reclamation of their Natural Consciences in those Cases.

Hence it seems your Argument for the Immateriality, derived from a Natural
Conscience directing the Actions of Men, can have but a small strength of
Coercion in it; and because you say you will hold me to this Argument from
Conscience, as the most Noble, Natural Proof of the Immateriality, I have been
as long as I though need required, in my Answer of it.

3. Parag. You say, Your sort of Soul has a power able to control the actions
of Men naturally. I grant Men have a Rational Faculty, that does often resist
and sometimes prevail against their Sensual Appetites, but not without some
kind of Cultivation by Rules, Custom, or Example. Nay, say you, but bare Nature
has in it self that Power and Practice; and in Proof you allege Sr. Paul's
Words, The Gentiles do by Nature the Things contained in the Law, and have a
Law written in their Hearts, and are a Law to themselves. In Answer to this, I
quote, as a parallel Text, 1 Cor. 11.14. Does not even Nature it self teach
you, that if a Man have long Hair it is a Shame to him. I say, this Text seems
to expound what he meant by Nature in the former Text, viz. that second Nature
arising from Education and the general Customs practiced and observed amongst
Men. In all the Countries of St. Paul's Progress and Travels, Men used to wear
their Hair short, and thence it looked to him like an unnatural thing to do
otherwise. and yet at that Time, both in Germany, France, and England, those
Nations had a general Custom for Men to wear their Hair at as full a Length as
the Women, especially those who were of a Superior Quality amongst them. Hence
I would infer, St. Paul's Nature by which Men do the Things contained in the
Law, intends a Nature cultivated by Education, acting, though not by the Rules
of Moses's Law, (not known to them) yet by other Rules parallel and equivalent,
and according to the Direction of their several Educations, and such Rules as
happened to be taught them, and they believed themselves obliged to obey. Men
so educated and informed, acted by Force of such their second Nature, according
to their accepted Rules and Customs, the Moral Duties positively expressed in,
and commanded by the Laws delivered by Angels unto Moses: Capacities of Humane
Nature could and did attain to such Perfections by Rules, Education, and
Custom, as led them to the Performance of those Actions which Moses commanded.
As Men by Custom and Education are taught to manage Armies, and Treaties, to
Argue and Infer, to Dance, Sing, etc. All which, and infinite other Thoughts
and Things, do very fat exceed the Powers and Practice of an Humane Nature in
its naked Simplicity; as of one Born or exposed in a Wilderness or Desert
without Education or Company of any but the Beasts. The best amongst the
Heathens did, as you say, conquer Vices, assisted and directed by good Rules,
Education, Imitation and Practice; but never by Powers of Nature uncultivated,
naked, and simple, as in some Men it may have been found. You say, Such
Heathens governed their Inclinations by the Prevalency of their Reason above,
or over their Sensual Desires. And I grant, That assisted by Rules, Education
and Examples of others who instructed them; their Reason did prevail to
rectify or control the common, inordinate and irregular Desires of their
Appetites and Passions. You told me before, One Swallow makes not a Summer. And
I say now of these Heathens, Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto: an
exceeding small Number of them, if compared with the vast Multitudes of those
who acted otherwise. They were Men composed ex meliori luto: fact^ ex ligno quo
sit Mercurius: assisted and elevated by an happy Education, good Rules,
commendable Examples, which themselves improved by Consideration and Study, and
made them habitual to themselves by Practice: I say that such a Conduct is no
more natural to Humanity than it is to Speak, Read, Write, build Forts, play
upon the Lute, or any such like Practices. There are Capacities in Humane
Nature able to attain to all these, and very many other Acts and Practices; but
not without the Assistance of Education, Rules, Examples, Labor, Exercise and
Practice. So by Nature thus cultivated, these high Heathens acted to great
Degrees of Goodness, and became a Law to themselves: not from simply natural
Inclinations, or the Notices of a Humane Soul in its naked Naturals, or any
Power growing out of it as from a Proper Internal Original, like to those of
the Senses, Appetites, Affections, Passions, the Understanding, Invention,
Memory, Judgment, Will, for these proceed from Internal and Natural Originals,
viz. the Contexture of the Body and Soul in Man, and act of themselves in that
Compositum without needing to be taught or learnt; and they form the Capacities
of Man's Learning, ready and fit for all Men's Performances apt to be advanced,
directed and perfected by Education, Rules and Examples, and made so easy as
to appear in some measure Natural, by the Custom and Practice of them, as we
may perceive in a Practiced Lutinist, who plays with such apparent Ease and
Readiness, as if that Faculty were Natural to him, and had come of it self upon
him: And thus the good Deportment of Heathens became, and might be esteemed and
spoken of as Natural to them; not simpliciter, sed secundum quid, mediantibus,
the Education, Rules, Imitation, Practice, and, Custom; and from this acquired
Nature in Man, it seems, his Conscience discerning the Sinfulness of Homicide,
Adultery, Theft, and Covetousness, are derived, and not from an Internal or
mere Natural Principle, or as an Effluvium emanant from his Immortal or
Immaterial Soul.

Paragraph 4. You tell me, That in considering the great and generally
prevalent Power of Sensuality in Man, I ought to take in the Struggles of
Reason against it: And I agree that I ought to do so, and say, that I have done
so in all my Disquisitions concerning that Matter. I have said, That in
Contests between Sensuality and Reason, they both plead before the Judgment,
arguing each according to their several Conceptions, the one Side for a present
and certain Pleasure or Satisfaction, the other for a Future or more remote,
and less certain Good to be obtained, or Suffering to be avoided, according as
Men have been taught by their Education, the Rules and Examples of others,
their own Experience, or such Conceptions as they have submitted themselves
unto. I had said that an Intelligent Soul in Man, whereby he lives and is
goern'd, should probably be able to compel the Obedience of the Sensual
Faculty. You boggle at the Word compel, and change it into effectually
persuade; and I am content to agree to your wording of it. But evident it is,
that the Rational Soul, or Faculty, is not able effectually to persuade the
Sensitive Faculties to submit themselves to the Directions of Reason or Piety;
but in more than a hundred for one, or more likely a thousand for one, it comes
to pass that this Rational Soul or Faculty, instead of prevailing over Sensual
Inclinations and Forces, it is by them overborn and baffled to that Degree, as
to be hurried with them into a greedy Accomplishment of such Desires as are
contrary to the Dictates of such Soul, or Rational Faculty, even when
strengthened with all its Assistances of Education, Rules, good Examples,
Exhortations, and Conscience. To this you answer, That the Prevalency of Sense
against the Rational Soul grows not from Humane Nature, but from the
Depravation of it, occasioned by the Sin of Man, and the Curse thereupon
ensuing. This Depravation, (you say) does very much incline Men to follow the
Violent Bent of their Sensitive Appetites and Passions against the Struggles of
Reason, the Effects of Grace, which though sufficient, may (for want of being
attended unto) become ineffectual. To this I reply, That I do believe, you, or
I, or any Man whatsoever, can judge of Humane Nature no otherwise than we now
find it to be. What it was before the Fall, we do not, and perhaps cannot know.
The Words of the Curse in Genesis neither express, nor import such a
Depravation of Man's Reason, Soul, or Power of Government; but the Particulars
of it apply altogether to the Body, and to Temporal Concernments. How far, in
what Parts, and to what Degrees Humane Nature was corrupted by the Fall of our
First Parents, is an Ignotum to us: And I should be glad to receive your
Instruction thereupon; toward which, you offer me a Sentence of St. Paul, The
good that I would I do not, etc. You tell me that the Design of this Text was
to represent the State or Condition of those People who had no other Help
against their Lust but the Laws of Nature, and of Moses; and that it is
altogether applicable to the depraved and unregenerate State of Mankind: Sed
non ego credulus. For I think it rather spoken of that Condition in which St.
Paul was at the Time of the Speaking of it. This Epistle is dated from Corinth,
and we do not read Sr. Paul was there any oftener than once, and that was diverse
Years after his Conversion and State of Regeneration. He uses the Present
Tense, viz. I do, and I do not, and it is not I that do it. Thus the Words make
for my Opinion; and the Sense is not disagreeable. For where is the Man so
fully regenerate, as that this Saying of St. Paul may not be fully and truly
applied to him. Of my own State I have a good Hope, and yet I confess, the good
that I would, I do not; and the evil that I would not, that I do, sometimes,
too often, very often: And I pray you communicate to me how you find it with
your self in that Point; or if you know any other Man of whom this Expression
may not be truly predicated, remembering that in many Things we sin all: And the
righteous Man falls seven times a day: which good Men would not do if they
could help it; viz. if the Rational Soul were intelligent and regnant within
them and over them. I agree with you, That there is need of the Special Grace
of God enabling Men to do the Good which Reason and Rules direct them unto, and
so to avoid Evil; and that thence good Effects and Products may be called the
Fruits of the Spirit. And you say, That if Men do resist rational Motions and
Persuasions* then the Grace of God strikes in, and co-operates with the
Reasonable Faculty; and if Men resist all these Inducements to Goodness, they
are left without Excuse. I demand if the Soul of Man be an Intelligent Spirit
governing in the Man as his proper Form, what is it in Man that does, or in
likelihood can resist the Natural Power which such a Soul should have over it?
You will not say that Man has any thing in him besides his Soul, but Matter
and Motion: And I would have you tell me whence it should come that mere Matter
and Motion should so far overpower such an intelligent Soul, as not only to
resist its Government, but even to captivate, overruled and enslave it, not
only to a Content in evil and bad Practices of Sensuality, but even bring it to
an Immersion, and a Delight in them? Thus it seems your supposed Intelligent
Spirit or Soul is not able to make a sufficient effectual Resistance to the
Force and Violence of other Powers or Principles to the Humane Nature properly
belonging: But that other Power or Principle is able, not only to resist the
Rational Power of the Soul, but even the ordinary Operations of the Spirit of
God also. For you say, That Men resisting these are left without Excuse. Now
seeing that in Man's Nature there is some Inward Principle able to combat the
Rational Soul so assisted, I demand of you, What sort of Power you think this
to be, and from whence it proceeds? We know of no other Principle of Life,
Motion, or Activity in the Body, that is Natural, but the Soul. Hence I
conclude, that this Power so able to resist and conquer the Rational Power,
proceeds from the same Soul that the Rational Power does. The Rational Power is
the Soul acting in the Head; and the Sensitive or Affectionate Power is the
Soul acting in the Praecordia, and pressing on to the Desire of such Objects as
are near hand, presently beneficial, and pleasant, howsoever Things may fall
out for the future. But if the Humane Soul be Intelligent, why does it actuate
the Sensual or Affectionate Faculty so strongly as to enable it to combat and
resist, nay (for much the greater part) to overcome and conquer the Rational
Powers, and to draw the Soul it self into the Practices of Sensuality, which
she her self does disapprove and condemn? I cannot perceive that this sort of
Economy in the Microcosm is comportant with the Act of Intelligence in an
Humane Soul; for that thus it would become divided against it self, whence its
Government should not be able to stand. But if this Soul fall out to be
Material, and not Intelligent, the declared Economy stands well together: For
such a Soul can act every Part, Member, and Organ according as was intended by
the great Artificer of them; but not to any other Intent, ad libitum, of the
Soul: It acts therefore the Organs of Sensuality and Affections, and it acts
also the Rational Powers, each according to the Proprieties and Powers of their
Natures, without any Favor or Inclination to the one or the other: So as the
Soul is the Actor, but not the Governor in the Microcosm; For sometimes one of
these Powers prevail, and sometime the other; so as Aristotle compares their
Contest to a Game at Ball, as it were, whether for a Penny; and there is no
Certainty at all of the Success, from the Cradle to the Grave, for Time; and
the Thing is from Nature; and is acted in all Mankind. So it is with Wind in
the Organ; it acts the Fabric and every Pipe in it, one as well and as much as
the other, but sutably to their several Constitutions, without Inclination or
Intelligence. I say, if the Sensitive Powers resisting and overcoming Reason
and the Ordinary Effects of God's Spirit in Man be not acted by the Humane
Soul, by what then are they acted? And if by it they be acted, it seems very
probable, that Soul is Material and not Intelligent.

5 Paragraph. You say, We find many Texts of Scripture, importing that Man
perishes by his voluntary Choice of Evil, and neglecting the Means of Grace,
and resisting the Motions and Assistances of God's Spirit. And I have a great
Inclination to believe your Assertion, notwithstanding St. Paul, Romans 9. tells
us, God has Mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens: And his
Purpose according to Election must stand: So as the willing or running of Man,
viz. Humane Industry, should be of no great Avail to such Purposes. I am apt to
conceive that our Apostle might have learned and accepted this Doctrine, de
Faro, from the School of Gamaliel. Acts 22.3. He was taught according to the
perfect Manner of the Law of the Fathers: which I take for the Rabbinical
Traditions: And this I the rather conceive, because I meet with no other
Scriptures concurring with this Opinion, but his Writings only. And whether in
the delivering this Doctrine he speak and not the Lord, or not he but the Lord,
I will not take upon me to determine: But I am ready to proceed with you upon
your own Ground, viz. that Men fall not into Vice and Sin, contrary to their
Consciences, without a Failure in the Management of their own Powers. In my
First Treatise I declare, That in all Contests betwixt Sensuality and Reason,
the Matter is examined at the Bar of the Judgment, and there determined, before
the Will proceed to Execution one way or other; and that the Will has no
Choice in it self, or of its own, but is directed and determined by Result of
the Judgment, and is thereunto naturally, and therefore easily obedient; as
freely and aptly executing the Judicial Directions, as the Judgment it self is
naturally obliged and ready to approve and choose that which it is persuaded is
most for the Good of the Person acting, all things then appearing considered.
Hence, whenever a worse Choice is made, upon a full and true Information, the
Failure is imputable to the Judgment, and not to the Will. And the Judgment of
(by far) the greater Part of Men is very apt to choose and prefer a near and
certain Pleasure, before a future and less certain Consequence of obtaining
Rewards, or avoiding of Punishments; although in Estimation or Value, they very
far exceed the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. Thus appears a Capacity in Man
naturally to govern his Actions, viz. by the Power of his Judgment, whose
Decrees are executed by the Will; for that it is directed by the Judgment,
naturally aiming at the Good of the Person: and in the highest Degree that it
can reasonably expect to attain unto. Hence all Vices and Sins spring either
from Ignorance or Error of the Judgment, the Supreme and Ruling Power in Man,
naturally. And when the Judgment chooses or consents to Sensuality or the
Pleasures thereof, it is because it conceives them more conducing to the good
of the Person, all things then appearing considered, then what Reason or Future
Casualties, can allege to the contrary. The Causes of Differences in Humane
Judgments, are, First, Soundness or Weakness of the Organ, or Materials in
their Constitutions. Secondly, The great Diversities of Rules, Customs, and
Parties, and even of Conceits or Opinions amongst Men. Thirdly, The Natural
Violences of Affections and Passions, more Extreme in some Persons than in
others; and more so, in the same Person, at one time than at another: Violent
Passions surprise and blind the Judgment so as not to have a right Estimation,
but as led to think that a most good to the Person, which gratifies a present
Desire, in asswagement of such Disturbances as are then upon him, come of it
what will in the future.
Upon all this it seems consequent, that Men are not vicious, but in defect or
default of their Judgments, either by Natural Infirmity or Ignorance, wanting
Instruction, or by adhering to wrong Rules and false Teaching, or by extreme
Violence of Passions and Appetites, or by bad Example, Practice, or Custom.
Some of these Faults or Failings Men may help, and some they cannot help; and
for what Man cannot help, it seems he shall not account: And thence grows a
sufficient Reason for Men to forbear the judging of others, whose Capacities,
Temptations, Prejudices, Misinformations, and Educations, other Men cannot know
or consider. But if we shall conceive a Man to be of a Naturally Sound
Judgment, a good Education; under the Guidance of true and good Rules,
naturally Temperate Affections: having his abode amongst People commending and
practicing Virtue. If one thus qualified and assisted, choose a Vicious Course,
his Guilt will be apparent to Men as well as to God; and he will find no Excuse
sufficient: his own Heart will condemn him, and the Judgment of his own
Conscience will torment him, and drive him either to a Sorrowful Repentance, or
into a State that will be miserable, likely in this World, and certainly at the
day of Man's Last Audit, or Account. And all this may be well maintained from
the Power of Reason and Judgment adherent to Man's Nature; acted by the same
Soul that the Affections and Passions are: even as the same breath in an Organ
acts the Pipes to a great Variety of Sounds, but every one to that peculiar for
which the Artist made it. And I take it no way Dishonorable to Man, that he
should be counted a Machine of Gods making, since the World is so, and all that
therein is.

You say, I pretend to make Man an Involuntary Agent, whereas you cannot but
know, that I both assert and prove, the Brutes to be knowing of what they do;
and voluntarily choosing one thing before another: And this Truth is a full
Answer to all your mistaken Surmises in the rest of this Paragraph.

6 Paragr. You say, You are verily persuaded, That the Opinion of the Souls
Materiality is an Error: And I do easily believe that you are so persuaded:
But that this Opinion is destructive of True Faith, or of Christian and Good
Practice, I take leave to deny; or that it tends to supplant Morality, or gives
Men leave to indulge their Passions, or imboldens them in that Practice; If (as
you say) Men would not trouble themselves about thoughts of Eternity, etc. it
will be the Ministers part to press upon them the Resurrection, the horror of
an unhappy one; the terror and danger of a last and final Judgment, and the
Execution thereupon consequent. And I suspect, that where these Arguments
cannot prevail, people will not be persuaded, though others preach up the
Immortality never so much. Those who will not hearken to Moses and the
Prophets, viz. to Arguments true and clearly provable; neither will they be
drawn by the Doctrine of the Immortality of Souls, although one of them came
from the dead, to give them assurance of it.

7 Paragr. You put the Case, That if the Opinion of the Immortality should
prove a mistake, or be granted an error, yet it would be an innocent error,
and could do no harm to Religion. I answer, That the teaching this Error for a
Truth, makes the Auditors trust in a Lie, and would prove a Deceit to their
Expectation; and that I think to be a great Offense. 2. It will have the same
Inconvenience with all other Errors: viz. Dato uno errore, sequuntur mill. It
may serve to ground other Erroneous Opinions upon, and to maintain them; and
has served to such purposes: 1. Making the Soul, Tota in qualibet part. 2.
Setting on foot a New Creation of Souls by God every day, and for Adulterous,
Incestuous, and Buggered Procreations, where the Shape is Humane, by a Creando
infunditur. 3. It immerses pure young innocent Souls, newly created, in the
filth of Original Sin, without any Cause given, or Offense committed by them.
4. St. Austin had thereby his Imagination confounded, not knowing if such Soul
was One and not Two, or Two and not One; or were at once both one and Two: and
made him think the last, though a Paradox, to be the most likely. 5. Upon this
Error is grounded the Prae-existence of such Souls, and the Consequences
thereof: viz. their hovering in the Air, their attending New Procreations of
Bodies, that thence they may glide down into them: and forsaking Dying Bodies,
return again into those Aerie Habitations. 6. The Transmigration of such Souls,
from one Humane Body to another: and some made the Transmigration Common
between Men and Beasts, as the Pythagorean Schools; maintained at this day by
the Eastern Indians and the Chinese. 7. Hence have grown the Inventions of
Mahomet's Paradises, his Purgatories, and his Gehenna's, as formerly the
Heathens had their Eliziums and Barathrums; supposed Receptacles in the Bowels
of the Globe of our Earth. Such a Case we find argued in Salust betwixt Caesar
and Cato, Caesar calls Mortem aerumnarum requiem, jam cuncta mortalium mala
dissolvere, ultra neque curae neque gaudio locum esse. Cato answers, that by
this Speech it appears what Caesar thought of Death; Credo falsa existimans ea
quae de inferis memorantur, diverso itinere malos a bonis, loca tetra, inculta,
foeda, atque formidolosa habere. 8. Hence has arisen the Popish Purgatorium,
where his Holiness is allowed to have an absolute Command; and by which he
makes Profit accordingly. 9. Hence has grown the Error of Praying for the
Dead in the Romish Churches. 10. Those Churches have upon this Error followed
the Heathen Practices of Adoring Dead Persons, the one as Gods, and the other
as Saints.
Pliny in his Natural History, lib. 7. cap. 55. says, That the Body or Soul of
Man has no more Sense after Death, than they had before their Nativity; and
yet the folly and vanity of Men (says he) is so great, as that they imagine the
Humane Soul extends even to future Ages, and that they have Sense: whereupon
Men render them honor and worship, making a God of him who is not so much as a
Man; as if the manner of Men's breathing differed from that of other Creatures.
And thus has the Popish World practiced, to make them Images, and to believe
their Personal Appearances, as Saul believed the Soul of Samuel appearing in
the Witches Specter; and to it Saul stooped with his face to the ground, and
bowed himself: so worshipping the Devil instead of the Prophet, as the Papists
do instead of their Saints; who likely have no manner of being, nor shall have,
until the Resurrection at the Last Day. You say, That a Separate Subsistence of
Souls does not infer Purgatory. And I grant it, but it is the causa sine qua
non of that Opinion; for if no Separate Subsistence, then no Purgatory, nor no
Prayers for, or to, Persons departed this life, and returned to the dust from
whence they were taken. Farther to evince a Sparate State of the Soul, you
offer to raise Evidence out of a Collect in the Office of our Burial, Praying,
That we and those departed, may have a perfect consummation of Bliss in Eternal
Glory. I say this Consummation of Bliss, is to be intended after the
Resurrection, without necessarily supposing any Intermediate State; unless it
be to such as are beforehand persuaded that there is such a State.

In the close of your 6th Paragraph, you say, That your Zeal against the
Opinion of the Materiality, is grounded upon your own apprehensions, that this
conceit would introduce an inundation of Atheism and Profaneness, Looseness,
and Sensuality. To me, these Consequences do not appear at all likely; Not of
Atheism, for that it asserts God, the Creation, Generation, and Resurrection,
all acted by Divine Power, Nor of any the other three, for that it approves and
maintains the extremest Recompenses dispensable in a Future State, after the
Resurrection. And my Apprehension is, That although in your Future
Ministration, you should never insist more upon the Souls Immortality, but
enforce your Exhortations pertaining to Future Recompenses, from the Certainty
and Concernment of the Resurrection, the Last Judgment, and Execution of the
same, your Auditors would not thereby become any whit more Atheists than they
were before, or more Sensual, Loose, or Profane, upon that Occasion; but
probably would continue to act and live as formerly they have done; without
that any alteration would thereupon be visible, or consequent. And for the
Intermediate State, you say, The Fathers owned a Middle State, which was
neither Heaven nor Hell; and because they either could not tell what that State
was, or not agree about it, we seem left at liberty by them to think as we may
concerning it. We have not found any Text of Scripture positively asserting the
Separate Subsistence, nor such a Doctrine concerning it, as that the principal
aim and intent of it was to teach this Assertion for a Truth. The Fathers
Opinions about it are disagreeable to one another, and unknowing of what was
the clear Truth in this Poin. You say, They thought Souls were neither in
Heaven, nor Hell. I have quoted to you Mr. Baxter's Book, p. 398. where he
tells us, That many of his friends, holy persons, were gone to Heaven, and that
is spangled with their spiritual stars; the place is honored with them, and
they with it. This his Opinion of going to Heaven or Hell, upon Death, I take
to be the most commonly embraced amongst us, and I shall be glad to receive
your particular Opinion thereupon; but these Uncertainties concerning the
Separate State, the Manner, and Places, thereto belonging, make me more to
question the Verity of it; and to conclude upon it rather in the Negative.

You quote to me a Saying of Cicero, That if the Opinion of the Immortality be
an Error, libenter erro, this you translate, the Opinion pleases me well; it
is an innocent Disception: as if the liking of an Opinion, and the innocence of
it, were the same thing; whereas it is evident Men like and choose sometimes
false and harmful Opinions, before those which are tried, innocent, and
beneficial; as I doubt not but you think I do in this Point; not sub, nomine
erroris, but by a deceived heart, carried and drawn away by pride,
conceitedness, contumacy, and disobedience, to the Ordinance of God (as you
word it;) and yet you do not cite one Ordinance of God to which the Opinion of
the Materiality is contrary: but I desire you will do it in your next Return.
You say, You do not require an implicit Faith to Church Ordinances; and do you
show me Ordinances of God convincingly such, in this point: and then I promise
you to be obedient to them, and there will need no more words in the Case now
disputed. But if you cannot, or (which will come to one) do not do it, you may
have some Title to the Term of a False Accuser of your Brethren, whose conceits
or errors, perhaps of weakness, you cannot infect or sully, by the sour and
tainted Originals from whence you are pleased ignorantly to derive them. And
for your Conclusion, That the Opinion of the Materiality, tends to subvert the
Fundamentals als Religion; it is neither proved nor granted: but asserted, to
strengthen the Foundation of Future Rewards and Punishments, by fixing them
upon very many and very plain Texts of Scripture, and the Articles of our
several Creeds: clearly proving the Resurrection of the Dead and the Last
Judgment. Whereas Proofs of the Immortality, are neither plainly asserting, nor
with any manner of clearness proving the same; nor is it made an Article in any
of our Creeds, nor is any thing of it in the 39. Articles of our Church. But
there I find, Artic. 6. That whatsoever is not read in Scripture, nor may be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, that it should be believed as
an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite to salvation.

We all perceive, that during Life there is a Contexture of Soul and Body, and
such an Union, as they jointly participate of all that befalls the Person, and
act undividedly and inseparably from the Person, and from one another. That
Death is a Separation of them, is clear also, and, What then becomes of the
Soul, is our Question: and that we trace from its Nature, as near as we can
investigate: If it be a small intelligent Spiritual Substance, created by God
upon every Procreation of Man, likely it is to have a Separate Subsistence
after Death of the Person; but then it cannot be properly said, The Man, or the
Person dies, but the Body dies. And if the Humane Soul be a Flame of Life
kindled by God in Adam, when he made him a Living Person, and from that time
has passed by generation from one Man to another, then more likely it is that
this sort of Soul is extinguished in Death; or that the Extinguishment of this
Flame totally, or in every part of the Body, is the Death of the Person.

Originally it seems, Men were of kin to Beasts in their Manner and Way of
Living and Acting: Of the Thracians in Orpheus's time we read, Silvestres
homines, sacer interpresque deorum,
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus;
Dictus ob id lenire tygres, rabidosque leones.


Our own Ancestors, in Caesar's time and many years after, were naked as their
Beasts, and had no other Covering, but their Skins; their Food Acorns and Wild
Fruits, and their Manners were much suitable: and of late we have heard like
things of Wild Irish People, Americans, Libyans, and in diverse other parts of
Africa, who go naked as the Beasts, and feed upon Raw Flesh and Snakes, and the
very Guts and Garbage of the Creatures, and are as wild, says Lithgow, as their
four-footed companions in the Libyan deserts. In a State of so great
Simplicity, it seems Mankind may be well enough compared by us, as it was by
David, to the Beasts that perish.

Since my ending the very last Period, came to my hands a little Book written
by Naudaeus, printed Land. in 12o. 1637, in page 248, he cites Lactantius,
asserting that Democritus Epicurus and Dicaearchus, would not have so
confidently denied the Immortality of the Soul, Mago aliquo praesente, qui
sciret certis carminibus cieri ab inferis animas, and adesse and praebere se
humanis oculis videndas, and loqui, and futura praedicere. I do so little
approve of the Fathers Opinion in this, that if his Magus should show me such
Souls, like the Witch of Endor, I should take them for his Conjurati, and to be
no proof at all of the Separate Subsistence of a Humane Soul. P. 38. He
mentions Archimedes his Mundane Globe, the Moving Tripods of Vulcan made by
Daedalus, Architas his Pigeon, Regiomontanus his Eagle and his Fly. Men could
not believe these Engines could move as they did without a Spirit, which they
thought could not be Material, because that cannot act upon Hard Bodies, as
Wood, Iron, etc. therefore they concluded those Motions were acted and guided
by an Immaterial Spirit, viz. a Demon; and that therefore these Artificers
were Magi in the worst Sense, very Conjurers. But from this Crime our Author
defends them, and says, The things were all feasible by Art Natural, although
Men do not now know, nor did then understand, the Rules, or the Artifice of
making such things, or other things like or equal to them. And this gives us a
good semblance of Reason why Men have been apt to maintain their Souls to be
Immaterial, because they cannot perceive or learn the means and manner by which
a Material Soul can act and govern Common Sense, Apprehension, Fancy, Memory,
Judgment, Conscience, and the Affections and Passions incident to Humane
Nature. P. 299. In conclusion, he says, Men must take good heed not to be
carried away with the current of common Opinions; that when we are swayed by
example and custom, and go with the throng in the way, we slip and fall one
over another: and alienis perimus exemplis.

Besides this Book, I have since this writing, perused another; viz. Mr. Robert
Boil his Experiments, printed London 1662, 2d. Edition, there p. 190, he says,
He inclines to think the Air necessary to ventilate and cherish the Vital Flame
continually burning in the Heart. And he found a new kind of resemblance
betwixt Fire and Life, the one lasting no longer than the other. P. 190. The
Flame of Spirit of Wine will burn long upon fine white linen or paper, without
consuming either. Eminent Naturalists do esteem the Heat which resides in the
Heart, to be a true Flame; and this, says he, I do not oppose, provided they
add, that it is such a temperate and almost insensible Fire as that
beforementioned: and yet he thinks that to be hardly fine enough. [I have
mentioned before, a Tenuity to an Invisibility.] P. 197. He takes Animals for a
kind of Curious Engines set on work, and kept in Motion by Heat and Air. Dr.
Willis in his often quoted Book, p. 4. tells us, That Epicurus taught the Soul to
be compounded, ex atomis levissimis and rotundissimis, non multum diversis ab
eis ex quibus est ignis, compactum ex quodam calido, flatuoso and aerio. P. 38.
He says, He has given Reasons, Quare haee flamma vitalis, non uti flamma
vulgaris visibilis and destructiva fuerit. P. 53. As soon as this flame is
extinguished, the compages of Soul and Body is dissolved; and as long as this
Soul is in the Body, semper nascitur usque ad mortem, by fresh nourishment and
ventilation, without which this animating flame cannot subsist, any more than
common fire or flame can do. P. 102. This Soul perceives not the external
Objects, or internal Operations, but like [the Sap in Plants, or] the Blood in
Animals, though such Blood be animated, it has neither knowledge, nor sense;
for those parts which must be in continual flame and motion, give thereby that
to other parts, which they themselves have not. And thus, say I, Animal Fire,
whilst it keeps glowing, irradiates and acts the Bodily Parts and Organs, to
and for those effects and purposes for which they were intended and made by the
great Artificer of the Universe.

In your first Paragraph, you are pleased to say, That my Answer to your
Question, How a Material Soul does or can act the Senses, Understandings,
Memories, and Consciences of Men, is not so distinct as you expected; but that
I shift off with general Remarks and Quotations of Authors. My general Remark
is, That in Plants and Beasts we cannot discern the Quomodo, viz. How the
Material Soul works in them, and yet we are sure of the thing; viz. That it
does work all in them: and that so it is very probable to be in the State and
Case of Mankind: And I think this Answer is no shifting one, but very plain and
full to your Question. And for my Quotations, they are taken out of good and
allowed Authors of late times; viz. Boil, Roccius, Willis, Peter Martyr,
Philip Melanchton, pertinent and somewhat full in the Point, of any of which
you take no particular notice, nor give them any manner of Answer, but pass
them all by as nothing were, and without accepting or answering any one of
them; whence my labor and intent of quoting good Authors to you, is made
altogether fruitless and ineffectual. I am not knowing in my self, that ever I
did, or do, say any thing for a shift or a blind; for my meaning and intent
seeks Truth: and what I say, I think, without going one step out of the way of
right, to the best of my knowledge; and I am altogether as willing your side in
this Dispute be proved true, as my own present Opinion: and that Truth may
finally appear and be prevalent, is the only desire, intent, and endeavor of
Sir,

Your Obliged humble Servant.
Dat. 18 July 1693.
To the abovesaid Answer, our Friend returned a Third Opposition, Oct. 18.
1693. and this was divided into Eight Paragraphs.

1. Paragraph, Is a Profession to end this Dispute with this his present Paper,
and to proceed no farther in it.

2. Paragraph, You say, The main Question between us is, the Quid sit Anima
Immortalis, aut Immaterialis? And to this you answer, It is an Immaterial,
Immortal Siprit^, and this you should prove: intending what you say, it is
impossible it should be otherwise; For that Matter and Motion cannot act Humane
Faculties as they are acted amongst Men; as if you intend that God cannot make
Cogitative Matter, or not make Matter Cogitative: but I think God can make
Matter Cogitative; and if so, then you do not deny, That a Material Spirit, in
Conjunction with the Body, may possibly act all Humane Powers and Faculties
whatsoever. You offer to me, That Men think it good proof that there is a God,
by showing an impossibility that it should be otherwise. In Answer to which, I
say, I hold this sort of Proof of that or any Truth, to be very obscure and
infirm; for that it makes Men the competent Judges of what is possible to be,
or be done; which I do not grant them to be, For that Men have seen many things
done, which without such Ocular Testimony they could not have been persuaded to
believe never possible to be done: viz. that a Remora, no bigger than a Snail,
should stop and hold fast a great Ship going before the Wind with all her
Sails: that a Fish hooked at the end of an Angling Line, should stupefie the
Hand, and thence the Body, of the Fisher, and put him into a Deadly Swound:
that a vast Heap of Water, fishes and all, should in a Calm Day rise up into
the Air, and move there in a heap to a far distant Place, and there fall down
again in Spouts and Hurricanes. I think therefore the Arguments ex impossibili
concerning Souls, are fit only for such as dare take upon them to judge and
determine what God can do, and what he cannot do. Men have Reason to judge it
impossible for a Living Person to live still and be safe, in the midst of
Nebuchadnezzar's Fiery Furnace; and yet that and many like things, are possible
with God, and far beyond Humane Knowledge: for our Lord tells us, That with God
all things are possible. In my Paper I cited to you Dr. Willis, saying, That
Men who think that God can do nothing above or beyond what they can conceive,
do not deserve to be answered, no more than they, qui viventium Sensus and
Facultates quascunque, non nisi a substantia Immateriali Immortalique obiri
posse contendunt. You say, Man's Soul must be Immaterial, because God cannot act
Man without such a Spirit. Prove that and take the Victory; and if you do not
prove that, it seems you have said little in the Case. Your Paper says only,
The thing is impossible, for that Matter and Motion cannot do it. The truth of
which you neither do nor (I believe) can prove. But whatsoever Matter and
Motion can of it self do or not do, I assure my self God can make Matter
Cogitative; and can by a Material Spirit and apt Organs, effect in Man all that
which we see daily performed amongst us: and so it still seems to me most
likely that he has done.

3. Paragraph. The Description of Conscience in my Paper, you think too long to
examine, and therefore to confute or answer it. You say, There is really a
Dominion and Authority of Conscience, and I have before granted it, and
described the Nature of it: agreeing that all who have submitted themselves to
Rules, be they Jewish, Christian, Gentile, Mohammedan, Romish, Quakery, or
whatsoever other Rules, Customs, or Conceits, Men have submitted their Minds
unto, they are under a Coercion of Conscience from the Dictates and Power of
such Rules, Customs, or Conceits; viz. All Cultivated Humane Natures receive
more from Education, Rules, Example, and Practices, than their Souls of any
sort can furnish them with, toward the Establishment of a Conscience in them;
which has no Power, or very little, in a State of Simple and Bare Nature,
without any manner of Cultivation whatsover. So for Children, as they come to
understand and submit to Rules, so Conscience grows and increases upon them:
Also Beasts at their full Liberty, show no signs of Conscience, but put them
under an Education, and they will show plain Signs of Regret and Fear, for
having acted against their Rules, by their Crouching and Slinking Behaviors.
Hence appears, that the Actings of Conscience are founded upon Rules, and
whether those Rules are right or wrong really, their being accepted for right,
makes them obligatory to the Party accepting them; so as Offenses against
Erroneous Rules, reputed true, are equally burdensome to the Conscience, as if
they were the most true and rectified that can be delivered to Men: and yet
they are capable of a more easy Cure, viz. by discovery of the Falsity and
Error of them. Hence may be inferred, that without some sort of Rules and
Submission to them, the Acts and Power of Conscience are not perceivable; which
shows, they do not flow from the Soul, Material or Immaterial, but from
Education, Custom, Opinion, and Rules, to which Actions must be compared; for
without such a Comparison Judgment cannot be made, whether they are right or
wrong. That Conscience grows as aforesaid, appears also from diversity in the
acts of it: for some Men make a great scruple of Conscience to do things which
others think they are bound in duty to do; and cannot omit them without check
of their Conscience: whereas Immaterial Souls pass for all alike. And if
Conscience were a Natural Efflux from them, there could not be such difference
and contrariety in the Acts of it. I have observed how it grows in Children and
Beasts, from the effects of their Education, made powerful in them by the
terror of a Humane Vengeance, expected to follow upon their swerving from the
Rules of their Discipline; and which the apprehension of Legal Punishments has
often inflicted upon Offenders, before Temporal Execution overtook them. The
Conscience of Sins against God is of a like nature, and the Terror of it grows
from Fear, that he being offended for the Breach of what Men are persuaded he
has commanded to be done, or not done, will inflict terrible punishments for
the same, of unimaginable torment and endless duration, as Men are taught to
believe and expects, by such Rules and Doctrines as are daily represented to
them and pressed upon their apprehensions and belief. And thus have I summed
and shortened my formerly longer Expressions concerning Conscience, to which I
shall be glad to receive a reasonable Answer either long or short.

4. Paragraph. You quote the words, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and you
say, Faith here signifies Conscience. My sense of those Words, is, Whatsoever
Men do, believing it to be a Sin, that is a Sin in them, though the Action in
it self be good: but if it be contrary to those Rules to which a Man has
submitted himself, this is a Sin against the Man's Conscience: though if there
were no accepted Rule against it, there would be no transgression in it. You
express also to think that Beasts cannot be brought by any Education to resist
and conquer their Appetites, forgetting what formerly I said of a Setting Dog
whose Mouth will water, and his Chaps move, and all his Members and Motions
show a great Desire to be in with his Game, and yet he will sit for a long
time, constrained by the remembrance of punishment to be expected and executed
upon his doing otherwise. And many instances may be produced of other Bestial
Actions in this kind.

You make it my wonder, That Sensual Powers do for much the greater part,
overruled the Rational, and prevail against it. You say, I may (likely) find it
often so in my self, and I grant it; and therefore is that none of my wonder.
And you demand, From whence comer Men's uneasiness of Mind upon such occasions?
I answer, It comes from finding their Actions do not agree with their Rules,
and therefore not with their Duties; for the Failure in which, they expect
punishment, less or more, according as their Delicts may seem to deserve; not
from Powers of Nature in its Simplicity, but its Cultivated Capacity, under the
Conduct of Rules, Examples, or Opinions, to which Men have submitted their
Minds; and this makes men nocent, as the contrary makes men innocent, in the
judgment of their own Underftanding, which is their Conscience.

5 Paragr. Upon your maintaining, That Man's Soul is an Immaterial, Intelligent
Spirit, created each for the Government of each Person. I demand, Whence it
comes, that this Soul does not, or cannot, so prevail with, or over the Person
whom it should Govern, as to keep it in Rational and Virtuous Ways of Living
and Practice, but that the far greater number of people follow Vicious
Practices, contrary to Right Reason, and the Desire and Design of such an
Intelligent Spirit? And the true Cause of my wonder is, What that can be in
Man, which has Power to oppose and overthrow the Government and Command of
this Kind of Soul in him? To this you answer (You say) with St. James, This
comes from men's lusts which war in their members. To you I reply, and ask, From
what Original in Man do such Lusts grow; viz. Affections, Passions,
Sensualities? Either they grow from the same Originals with Reason and his
other Faculties, viz. from the Contexture of his Soul and Body, or from some
other Cause. You say, I should not wonder at the thing, for that universal
Experience teaches that so it is. This I grant, and therefore do not wonder at
the being so of the thing; but at the Cause and Manner how this comes to pass:
viz. from what Original in Man this Effect can grow? Apparent it seems, that
Affections and Passions in Man, grow from the Contexture of his Soul and Body,
as all his other Powers and Faculties do, and are Natural to him: for one that
has them not, is not a complete Man. But if their Energy proceed from Man's
Soul, a Spirit governing, this Soul in acting the Affections and Passions so
vigorously, seems to act blindly and unintelligently, or else that it is
divided against it self, and therefore its Kingdom cannot stand; but such Lusts
as it self produces and acts, prevail to overthrow its Government, and bring
the poor indiscreet Soul under the Pestilent Power of Sin and Satan: If thus it
be not, I desire you will Answer what I Object in this Point; which is, that
Man's Soul acts against reason, and its own Interest, in so highly actuating of
these Lusts, or (which is far more likely) that the Humane Soul is not
Intelligent.

For what you say concerning St. Paul's Text, Romans 9. I hold with you; that
many places of Scripture do testify a Power in Man, to act for his own
Advancement in Piety, and toward future Happiness: And I assent to that
Opinion the rather, for that the same is consonant to the reason of Mankind;
but to agree this Opinion with St. Paul's Text, is beyond my Capacity, and I
should be glad to know your manner of doing it.

You mention ill effects from the Opinion of the Materiality, Omnia tuta
timens, consonant to the Nature of Zeal and Affection: That in your
Exhortations you have a great respect to the Resurrection, and last Judgment, I
think to be well done, and upon very firm Grounds; but for the Immateriality it
seems no high Building should be erected upon it, as judging that Ground not to
be Rocky.

6. Paragraph, You except against my Expression of making Men trust in a lie:
You say it is uncivil to tell a Man that he lies, or that he Teaches others to
trust in lies: To this I say, it seems you perused my Paper in haste, and with
a greater desire to Answer, than to consider it; for I find none of these
sayings or things there, either in letter or sense.

As to the Consequences of the Materiality we differ in Judgment, and they
appear worse to your fears that to me. Experience was never yet made of them;
and I see not cause to apprehend them as you do. Upon your Discourse of
Purgatory, you say, Men must not renounce the truth, because some draw ill
Consequences from it: and I grant it, but find no cause or need for asserting
it.

7. Paragraph, You say, The Fathers generally thought that Souls departed, do
not go strait-way to Heaven, the same which you said in your last Paper; and
thereupon I demanded, why Men do no^ think otherwise, viz, that Souls at this
day go immediately to Heaven or Hell; and I desired to know your Opinion upon
this difference, and which of them you think to be the truer, but to neither of
these Queries do you here return me any Answer: But you think it strange that
if the Opinion of the Separate Subsistence be an error, it should be so early,
and so generally accepted in the Christian Church. To this I Answer, That those
most early Professors found this the prevailing Opinion in the World at that
time; yet so as there were many disbelievers of it. That St. Matthew Apostle
and Evangelist did believe it, seems something clear, by his Relation, Chap.
10.28. but that neither St. Paul, St. Peter, nor St. John believed it: I hold
the more probable, of St. Paul from I Cor. 15. and 1 These. 4.13. of Peter, from
2 Peter 3.10. of John, from 1 John 3.2. and Chap 2.28. Our Lord also lays the
Expectation of future Recompenses upon the time of the last day. John 6. in
four places, or expressions in that Chapter: Another evident Cause of accepting
the Opinion of a Separate Subsistence, likely was the Expression in St.
Matthew's Gospel before Quoted. This Gospel was the most early Written, and in
the proper Language of the Jews, the Hebrew Tongue, and they were the first
Preachers and Planters of the Christian Religion. The other three Gospels are
of a later date; whence this Text of St. Matthew might likely have Planted this
Opinion, and confirmed the old Belief of the World: But after St. Luke had
(from St. Paul's Mouth) Published his Gospel, there was reason to examine St.
Matthew's Relation of that Fact or History, by comparing his, Chap. 12.4. with
Matthew's 10.28. They agree exactly in the main Point of Doctrine, viz. That we
ought to fear God more than Men; but when they give the reason why Men should
do so, they Word that reason in a different manner. St. Matthew Worded it
according to his Opinion, in Expressions importing a Separate Subsistence of
the Soul; but St. Paul's Words or Expressions are not of that import. What the
very Words were wherein Our Lord delivered this Doctrine, we have no means to
discover, without a future Revelation; and therefore I conceive we may accept
which of these we shall judge most agreeable to the reason and nature of
things. Those who judge immateriality most agreeable to Nature, and the most
reasonable, are likely to adhere to the Words of St. Matthew: And those who
judge the Materiality most agreeable to the Nature and State of Man, are likely
to adhere to the Words of St. Luke, as the very Expressions delivered by Our
Lord and Savior.

I believe that God has given to Men for their Instruction ordinarily, the two
great Codes of Nature and Scripture; and that where these two do with cleerness
agree, the difference of Opinions among Learned Men cannot be very great: But
the common cause of their differing is the differences appearing between Nature
and Scripture: Not that I believe either of them are, or can be false, or
deceitful, nor really contrary the one unto the other; and therefore, where
there appears a difference between them, the same ought to be accommodated by
favorable and fair Constructions, according to the Nature of the Subject then
under Consideration, viz. If the Subject be Supernatural, or beyond the
Capacities of Humane Senses and Reason to judge lightly of, as are the Persons
in the Holy Trinity: The Incarnation, or Uniting the Manhood with the Godhead:
The Proceeding of the Holy Ghost, and the actings of it: The Production of a
Child by a Virgin: The Power of Sacraments; a Spiritual Regeneration by the
Water of Baptism: That Bread and Wine become the real Body and Blood of Christ,
after a Spiritual manner: In all these and the like Cases, if Men's Reason takes
boggle, and cannot understand them, nor freely or readily consent unto them, it
seems Duty for Men to be overruled therein, by Words or Expressions which the
Scripture uses concerning them; and to endeavor by all means to think of such
things as the sense of Scripture Expressions do direct us.

On the other hand, If the Subject doubted be a Natural thing, falling clearly
under the Notice and Power of the Humane Senses, or Reason and Understanding to
judge of: If in such Cases some Scripture Expressions seem to thwart the true
Nature of the thing, or the Sense and reason of Mankind Working thereupon. As
for instance: Moses says, God made Two great Lights, viz. the Sun and Moon.
This seems to intend that these Two were the biggest Luminaries; yet when
Astronomers teach, the Moon to be the least, or one of the least amongst those
Luminaries; Men do rather choose to believe them, and Collect that Moses did not
intend to Teach in that Matter, but spoke at large, according to common
Apprehension: And so upon the Question whether our day and night be made by a
Circuit of the Sun about the Earth in every 24 hours, or by the Circunvolution
of the Earth it self in that space of time. The Expressions of Scripture, viz.
Jos. 10.12. and Psalm. 19. and 2 Kin. 19. which do all favor the going of the
Sun about the Earth, and yet Humane Art and Reason have lately so far
prevailed, as to persuade amongst Learned Men, that the Circumvolution of the
Earth is the true cause of day and night amongst us: And for Scripture in the
Point, they say, as before; it spoke ad captum Humanum of that time: grown
since to be ad capturd vulgi, without intention to Teach the truth of Science
concerning such things. The long disputed Words, viz. hoc est Corpus meum, are
a like Proof, or Church, and many other Churches refuse to accept them in their
plain and usual import, and fay, they must be Figuratively taken, because in
their plain sense they thwart and oppose the common Sense, Reason, and
Experience of Mankind: So when Our Lord Commands, take no care for to morrow.
These Words pass under a reasonable Construction; so the Words, Swear not at
all: so for turning the other Cheek, and lending to all Borrowers. These
Directions never were observed in the full Latitude of the Gospel Expressions,
but according to fair and reasonable Constructions made of them, and whereby
they were made agreeable to the Sense, Reason, and Experience of Mankind: and
if particular Expressions of Scripture may be Accommodated to the Sense,
Reason, and Experience of Men for the avoiding the Clashes of one against the
other. A fortiori, when Two Texts relate the same Doctrine of Our Lord in
different Expressions; it seems Men may accept which of these Relations they
please, as the very Words wherein that Doctrine was delivered: And every Man is
likely to choose and adhere to such Expressions as he thinks best to agree with
Nature and Reason in this, or any other Case that shall happen to be disputed.

8. Paragraph, Your Argument upon a delegated Power, left by Christ to his
Church, urged on the behalf of the Universal or Catholic, by the Romanists
against our Divines, Fortified with the Decrees of Councils, Styled
ecumenical, has been often and fully Answered: and as in my First Paper, I
referred you to Numb. 16. so now I must refer you to Acts 4 19.

You say, The Immortality is plainly implied in the Creeds, or some of them,
but you do not mention the Words implying, nor how the Inference is to be
drawn, which would have been the most Material Argument that you could have
used for the convincing of my Judgment; unless you conceive that what is plain
to you, would not be so to me: For a thing plain to one already persuaded, does
often seem otherwise, to Men of another Judgment; but if it be plain to you, it
seems you should at least have pointed me to the place where I might have
expected to find it.

Your reason why nothing about the Soul is inserted into the 39th. Art. is very
likely to be true; yet grants my Assertion of not being there: And what you
have showed out of Scripture concerning the Immortallity, I have Answered unto,
and am contented to refer the reason and truth of what has been said on both
sides, to the Censure of Perusers. Out of the 39 Articles I quoted to you the
sixth, viz. That what is not asserted in Scripture is not needful to be
believed; and I prosess'd my Obedience to any clear Direction of Scripture in
our Point: To this you reply, the Soul's Separate Subsistence is asserted in
Scripture: and to prove that, you quote Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the dust
return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God, who gave it.
This Text, I agree, does sound in favor of Souls Separate Subsistence, after
they are parted from their Bodies; and because you quote it singly, it seems,
the strongest Text which you could find for Proof of the Separate Subsistence
of Humane Souls: You had quoted it before, and I gave it some Answer; but
considering you do now use it as a Pillar of your asserted Opinion, I shall
undertake a more narrow, or strict, and yet a more large Examination of it.

First I inquire what is here intended by the term of Spirit. Comenius
Translated into English, Printed, London 1651, in 12o. Page 218. cites Zach.
12.1. where God says, he forms the Spirit of Man in the midst of him. The word
Jatzar in the Hebrew, says he, is here used for forming, which shows the
Formation was out of Prae-existent Matter, and was not a Creation, ex nihilo,
it being the same Word that was used at the forming of Man's Body.

Page 22. He says, The Spirit of God stirring upon the Waters, produced the
Spirit or Soul of the World, which puts Life into all living things. The Hebrew
term Offiz, says he, signifies both Spirit and Breath: [So the know in the
Greek does (...).] Luke 23.46. It seems, if in this verse, (...), had been
Translated; Father, into thy hands I commend my Breath. It would have been as
true, and warrantable a Translation, as ours, which renders (...) by the word
Spirit; and so for Acts 7.59. St. Stephen's (...), receive my Breath: whence I
suppose, that if in Solomon's Text the Hebrew word Offiz be used, it may as
well intend Breath as Spirit, and thence the force of this Text will remain
enervated and broken: And this appears the more likely, from Moses's Text, Genesis
2.7. God formed Man, and breathed into his Nostrils the breath of Life: An
Animating Breath, upon which he does not say, that Breath became a living Soul
(as many would have it intended) but that Man became a living Soul, intending
Person, viz. the Compositum of Soul and Body became a living Person; and that
Spirit and Breath intend much the same Thing, and pass in a like sense; appears
from diverse other parallel places of Scripture. Genesis 7.22. All in whose
Nostrils was the Breath of Life, died in the Flood. Job 12.10. In Gods hand is
the Soul of every living thing, and the Breath of all Mankind. Chap. 34.14. If
God gather to himself Man's Spirit and his Breath, he shall turn to his dust.
Psalm. 104. All things wait upon God, when he takes away their Breath they die,
when thou let thy Breath go forth, they shall be made, and the face of the
Earth renewed. Here Breath seems to intend Spirit, and that they are much of
the same Signification. Psalm. 146.3. When the Breath of Man goes forth, he
shall turn again to his Earth, and then all his thoughts Perish. Here David
says the same thing with Solomon, only in Solonmo's Text, that which is called
or Translated Spirit, is in David, called or Translated Breath. Acts 12.25. God
gives to all, Life and Breath, and all Things [Life and Breath as closely
United] or as an Animating Breath. Zach. 5. These are the Four Spirits of the
Heavens, Noted upon the Margent, or Winds. Ezekiel. 37. He describes the
Resurrection of dry Bones, there was a shaking, and the Bones came together,
and the Senews and Flesh came up upon them, and the Skin covered them above,
and yet they lived not: Then the Prophet commanded [not to call for Souls to
enliven those Bodies] but to say, Come from the Four Winds, O Breath, and
breath upon these slain, that they may live, and the Breath came into them, and
they lived, and stood up upon their Feet. From these Texts, it seems probable
to me, That the Word in Solomon's Text, rendered by Spirit, does intend such an
Animating Breath, as God Breathed into Adam's Nostrils; and of which it was
said, all in whole Nostrils was the Breath of Life died in the Flood. This
Animating Breath, God breathe first into Adam, and from him it has been
Propagated ever since: By this is the Flame of Life kindled, and kept glowing
in Man and Beast; none of which can continue living without it. Some have lived
a long time without Food in great Distempers or Maladies; but Breath failing,
or being stopped for some sew moments, the Flame of Life is thereby Suffocated
and Extinguished, and that Extinguishment is Death, and nothing can then
restore this Flame once totally extinguished in all parts of the Body; but such
an Animating Breath to enkindle it, not to be imparted by any Power lets than
Divine; which first breathed it into Adam's Nostrils. This Breath or Spirit,
Eccles. 3. Solomon argues upon, and says, Who knows the Spirit of a Man that
goes upward, and the Spirit of a Beast that goes downward to the Earth; who
knows that there is that difference between them: And if the one go no more
upward, then the other goes downward to the Earth, it seems there should be
neither one nor other in the Case: for plain, and agreed it is, that the Spirit
of Beasts extinguisheth in Death, and therefore goes no whither, not downward
to the Earth; and so for the Man, to me it seems his Spirit also extinguisheth
and goes no whither, therefore not upward: so as Solomon's Expressions, both in
this Text, and that of Chap. 12. seem delivered by him according to common
Opinion. Like Moses, Genesis 1.16. concerning God's making two great Lights.
Solomon Chap. 12. is describing the Degrees and Ceremonies of Peoples Departure
in Death, and concludes, The Body returns to the Earth whence it was; and the
Spirit shall return unto God who gave it. Moses had taught, That God breathed
into Adam the breath of Life; and when the Man died, it was the common Opinion,
and perhaps might seem true to him, that such animating Breath or Spirit,
returned to God who gave it to Man at the first: but there seems not Reason
enough to conceive, that Solomon intended, by this short Sentence, to teach a
Separate Subsistence of the Soul of Man, after Death of the Body. And it seems
to me spoken transciently, and according to common Opinion, rather than with an
intent to teach, or establish that Doctrine.

2. A Second Argument to prove that this Text was not intended for a Teaching
Direction, may be taken from the generality of' its Expression; viz. The Spirit
shall return to God who gave it. It seems, the Spirit of man, is an Indefinite
Expression, and aequipollent to an Universal; as if be had said, All Humane
Souls return to God who gave them: for all have a like dependence upon him, the
bad as well as the good. Numb. 16.22. Moses calls God, the God of the spirits
of all flesh; and Dan. 5.23. he tells Belshazzar, The God in whose hand thy
breath is, haft thou not glorified. I suppose you will not deny, that all
Spirits have a like dependence upon him, and that he is the Giver of them all
alike, to the bad as well as to the good. Whence, by the words and sense of
Solomon's Text, they should all go alike to God, the one as well as the other.
But this is disagreeable both to Heathen, Christian, Mohammedan, and other
Religions. The Heathen sent their better Souls into Elisium, and their bad ones
before Minos, and other severe Judges of Hell, to receive their Sentences; and
so Cato, Diverso itinere malos a bonis: they had several ways to go, and places
for Souls to go to; commonly three: viz. Heaven, Hell, and a Purgatorium. So
had many of the Heathen, as the Platonists: so have at present the Mahometans
and the Papists. The Reformed Churches acknowledge but two places for Souls
after Death, viz. Heaven and Hell. And the General Opinion amongst them is,
That all Departed Souls go immediately either to one of these places or to the
other: but that the number of bad Souls going to places of Torment, do very
much exceed those who go to God and Heaven. Our Lord shows plainly, when he
says, The way is narrow, and the gate strait, that leads to life, and few there
be that find it; but the other way and gate are broad and wide, and many go in,
and into them: viz. all who do not hit the narrow way and strait gate: So as
those who go to the Devil, do very much exceed in number those who go to God;
according to their own Opinions. Hence Solomon's Text, The Spirit returns to
God, or all Humane Spirits return to God, who gave them, cannot hold true in
your own Sense or Separately Subsisting Souls; but seems to be a great mistake,
and very far out of the way. A part of the Academick School held an Opinion
punctually agreeing with this Text of Solomon; viz. That all Souls, and
particularly the Humane, were Sparks and Particles of God, emaning from him,
for the animation of his Creatures; upon whose Death those Souls returned again
to God, and became united to him, as before: and thus the Spirit returns
precisely to God who gave it: but thereby the Individuation of such Souls must
needs be destroyed, as Rivers after their falling into the Sea, or Drops into a
quantity of Water; though they are still Water, yet they are no more Drops nor
Rivers: So Humane Spirits, thus returning to God who gave them, should be still
Spiritual in their being, but are not Souls Separately subsisting. That the
greater number of Mankind, by far, go into Perdition, I have no doubt; and how
then all Souls or Spirits given by God, do return to him, I am not yet able to
understand, but desire to receive your Instructions thereupon.

3. A Third Argument in Opposition to your Proof by this Text, may be drawn
from other Texts of Scripture, importing to the contrary of it. Solomon
himself, Eccles. 11.8. just before your Proving Text, says, Remember the days
of darkness, for they shall be many. This thwarts the Separate Souls going
presently to Heaven, for then the Man would have no dark days at all. Job
14.12. Man lies down, and rises not till the heavens be no more. This, say I,
cannot be intended of the Body only, for that is not the Man; but if there be a
State in Separation, the Soul must be the Man: Nam forma dat esse rei. Whence
it seems, That if the State of a Separate good Soul were such as is generally
supposed, the Man cannot properly be said to die at all.

Solomon's Father, Psalm 49. Observes, That even such amongst Men, as attain to
Honor, have not so much Understanding, as to exempt them from being compared
unto, or being like the Beasts that perish; viz. in their Natural state: But
God has given to Men a full assurance of a Resurrection, which he has not
given to the Beasts. Solomon, Eccles. 3. compares them in like manner. Jud.
15.19. Sampson ready to die for thirst; God clave an hollow place that was in
the Jaw Bone, out of which Water proceeded, and when he had drunk, his Spirit
came again, and he revived: So 1 Samuel 30.11, 12. The Servants of David found an
Egyptian in the Field, and gave him Bread, and he did eat, and they made him,
drink Water: and when he had eaten his Spirit came again to him; for he had not
eaten no Bread, nor drank any Water, three days and three nights. I demand what
sort of Spirit was that, which in these Two Persons came again to them, and
revived them? It seems the same sort of Spirit, which for want of Food and
Moisture, was almost extinguished; the Spirit by which they lived, and which by
Nourishment became strengthened, refreshed and revived, as a Fire wanting
supply; and therefore ready to go out, may be again revived and restored by
Ministration of fresh Fuel to that purpose. I pass this for a somewhat clear
evidence, that these Spirits were Material, and seems the same sort of Spirit
which Solomon says returns to God who gave it. A Spirit giving Life, Sense,
Understanding, and Memory to the Person revived, by the coming again unto him,
or the being restored and re-inkindled in him. In both Texts, the Words are,
The Spirit came again into those Persons; expressed according to common or vulgar
Conception: And so when a Man died, those who thought he had a Separately
Subsisting Soul, and could not imagine what became of it, were very apt to
think that it returned to God who gave it: At the first to Adam, and from him
by Propagation unto all Mankind. And if you demand, Why they thought Men had
Souls Separately Subsisting? I say, it was because they could net otherwise
imagine how there could be a Distribution of Recompenses future to this Life:
for that then the Doctrine of the Resurrection was not mentioned amongst Men,
and much less was fully revealed or made known unto them.

You recite what I had said, viz. That if you should forbear to press the
Immortality, and instead thereof insist upon the Resurrection, and the last
Judgment, your Auditors would be no more Atheists or wicked Livers than they
were before; and you seem to grant this by your saying nothing against it: And
so do I grant what you say, viz. That if you should tell them that you do not
believe the Immortality, it would appear scandalous to them, and would make
them distrust your other Doctrines, how true soever the same might be: And if
you should not press the Immortality, believing you therein stifle a Truth of
which you are fully persuaded. I grant this would be Sin in you, because your
so doing would not be of Faith, but in Dissimulation, or Compliance: but if I
were in your place, and should omit to press Arguments from the Immortality,
and insist upon those of the Resurrection and the last Judgment, I should act
in Faith, or a Belief of well doing, and yet make my Auditors no worse
Christians: Nay if I should say to them, whatsoever you have heard of the Souls
Separate Subsistence, and howsoever things may fall out thereupon, yet certain
it is from the whole Current of Scripture, and the Articles of our Creed, that
there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, dreadful to those left at the
Separation expected to be made by the Angels between the Elected and the
Reprobates, and joyful to those who shall be elevated and admitted to meet the
Lord in the Air, and so ever to be with the Lord. It seems Expressions like
these would not make Men more Atheists in Opinion, or more vicious in their
Lives, than they formerly used to be: And this I did, and do say, with intent
to show, that by the Opinion of the Materiality, those grievous Consequences
which you are pleased to expect, are not likely really to ensue, but that
rather you are over suspicious on that behalf.

You say, You cannot foresee what good the Publishing of my Opinion can do to
the Word: To this I say, What good does the Publishing of the Opinion of the
Rotation of the Earth do to the World, any more than as it is a discovery of
Truth, or a thing very like it? But I have formerly told you, that the
Materiality does Fundamentally overthrow Purgatory, Prayers for the Dead,
Prayers to the Saints, and gives a great blow to the Worship of their Images.
Whereby (as Pliny says) they make a god, or a saint of one, who is not so much
as a Man. Secondly, It will put to Silence all disputations concerning the
Originals, Actings, and Residences of intelligent Souls in Men; and those
concerning their Powers, Places of being, and manner of acting, after their
departures from the Body; which perhaps never troubled you, and very few of
your Auditors: Whence you may repute them as things of small concernment, and
yet to many others they have been, and may be very troublesome. Thirdly, It
would (like many other Emanations of Truth) Fortify the Foundations of the
Christian Faith, and make it apparent, that the Professors of it do not submit
themselves to be guided by questionable or doubtful Opinions, followed by many
or few; but that willingly we adhere to Truth according to its strength of
evidence drawn from Scripture, or Reason, and no farther.
Also we Read of some Greeks so Transported with the Surmises of what
privileges Souls Departed enjoyed, that they killed themselves the sooner to
obtain the Possession of them: And very likely it is, some present Proselytes
promise themselves an immediate Transportation to Heaven, as soon as their
Souls are parted from their Bodies. Which you say, the Primitive Fathers of the
Church did not believe: And I find Peter Martyr in his common places Citing
Irenaeus, That Souls go not to Heaven before the Resurrection, and that it is
Heresy to think, that Souls go to Heaven, or are carried to God, without
attending the time of the Resurrection: And this seems to amount somewhat near
the Soul and Bodies going to God together then; and that seems much agreeable
to my Proposal: For I think there is no considerable or desirable Difference or
Preference between the Souls Temporary Extinguishment, and its sleeping in a
Limbus, or Dormitory, and other place of bare rest and quiet, according to the
Opinion of most of the Fathers. You say again, That though the Knowledge of my
Opinion can do no good in the World, that likely it may do much mischief: I
will not refer you for Answer to 2 Kings 18.20. but do say in Answer, that if
my Opinion, thoroughly discussed, prove not the Truth, it shall not be my
Opinion; and if it prove really, or most probably true, I believe it ought also
to be your Opinion: Truth is more valuable than Rubies, and a little of it hewn
out of the Rock, is of great Price; not to be sold: Prove. 23.23. but to be
bought: nor are any evil effects of it greatly to be feared: The effects of
error are very dangerous, nam, dato uno, sequuntur mill; but no Lie is of the
Truth, nor can grow out of it. Deuteronomy. 32. God is a God of Truth; and Psalm. 15.
accepts those who speak in Truth, and do the thing which is right; viz.
propound, and maintain the Truth.

But say you, I cannot be sure that the Materiality is a Truth: I grant that I
am not sure; but I would be sure if I knew how to be so; and therefore I
applied to you, for obtaining your chief Arguments against it: And I am ready
to do so, to any other likely Person, capable to assist me in searching the
Truth concerning it: And therefore in my Observations upon Dr. Bentley's
Sermon, Entitled, Matter and Motion cannot think; I have requested, and even
provoked him to perform his promise made in that Sermon, viz. that he will make
good Proof of the Souls Immateriality, from some positive Grounds Rational, or
Scriptural: For that his telling us, that God cannot make Men, and act them by
a Material Spirit, nor by any other means, but by an Immaterial Intelligent
Spirit, seems to me precarious, erroneus, and arbitrary in him: And I think I
may as well say, God can make Man, and act him by a Material Spirit, as well as
he has done with his inferior Creatures; and for ought that hitherto appears
to me, I think it most likely that he has so done.

This finishes my Reply to my Friends Third Opposition, after which I received
a Fourth Paper of the like Nature, Dated 6. Nov. 93, divided into 8, Paragraphs.
1. Paragraph, Concerned only the intent or meaning of Paul in his term of
Nature, whether intended absolutely in puris Naturalibus, or cultivated by
Education, Rule or Example.

2. Paragraph, Was concerning my Expression of making Men trust in a Lie.

3. Paragraph, I Reply to it: You seem to think that God can make Matter
Cogitative, and will not deny that to be in his Power, and we are agreed in
that; but you think God has not done so: I think he has done so; and this it
seems need not be determined, but remain a Dissension without making it a
Difference, the Proof on either side appearing a very great difficulty.

4. Paragraph, Desiring to show, that there is a Knowledge of what is Morally
good or bad, Grounded in Nature, Unassisted by Rules, Education, or
Institution. You Cite an Instance in Cain, who (you think) knew he had sinned
in killing his Brother; and that before his Nature was assisted by Rules, or
positive Institution. Here I say, are Two Assertions: First that he knew the
Fact to be wicked; next he knew this by simple Nature, unassisted by any Rule
or Institution whatsoever. To the First I Answer, It does not appear in the
Text, that he knew that his Fact to be a Crime. You say, it appears upon the
Margent: The Text says, My Punishment is greater than I can bear: The Margent
says, Mine Iniquity is greater than can be forgiven. Evident it is, that the
Complaint succeeds immediately to the Sentence pronounced after that Fact;
which induces me to believe it applicable to the Punishment, rather than to the
Sin; and that therefore the Reading put into the Text by our Translators, is
more likely to be the true and proper Reading, than that upon the Margent: But
if that which you pretend should be admitted, and the Marginal Reading should
be accepted. Yet it seems the State of Cain at that time, was not a State of
bare and simple Nature, unassisted by Institution or Rules: For Adam was
Divinely Instructed, and probably brought up his Children under Discipline, or
a directive Education: They were Taught the use of Sacrificing; and verse. 7.
God himself gave Cain Directions for his Instruction in Morality and Piety.
Hence, to me it seems your instance of Cain does not enough prove, that
Conscience (without Rules or Instruction) is a Natural Guide to direct Men in
their Actions; able to make a true Distinction betwixt evil and good. Romans
5.13. For until the Law, Sin was in the World: but Sin is not imputed when
there is no Law. And Chap. 7.7. I had not known Sin, but by the Law: Verse. 13.
Sin by the Commandment became exceeding sinful, viz. until, or before the Law,
bad Actions were Sins, but not imputed, because not known to be Sins; but when
Institution, and Laws have detected, or discovered to Mankind the Sin of such
Actions, viz. that they are Sins against God and his Laws: This knowledge makes
that which before was a Sin, though not imputed, to become by such Revelation
exceeding sinful: First a Sin in it self, and next as made known to the acter
by the Law, or some other Institution that it is a Sin. You give no farther, or
other Answer to what I had largely spoken, concerning the Nature and Operation
of Conscience in Man: I desired to know your Apprehensions concerning the same,
and your silence therein seems to admit of my Conceptions thereupon as firm, or
probable.

5. Paragraph, You say, I desire to know of you, whence Humane Affections and
their Powers grow? You Answer, They grow from the Corruption of Man's Nature, by
the Fall of Adam, and the Curse attending it; to evince which, it seems you
should show what Man's Nature was before the fall, and wherein, and how far the
same became Corrupted upon that Occasion: But that is a thing which I think you
neither know, nor have means to discover, and that therefore we are driven to
consider Humane Nature, as we now find it so considered: It is found, and you
grant, that Affections and Passions have a very great Power in disposing of
Humane Actions, and the Applications, and Practices of the same; that they do
very often and most commonly overpower and mislead the National Faculty, and
its Dependencies, and drive, or draw the Person, Soul and Body, into very
impure and wicked Practices, even reclamante Ratione, and maugre all the
Spiritual Powers which ordinarily they meet with in Mankind: And these
Affections, Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, and the Passions, Wrath and Fear, are
as natural to Man, as his Vital and Rational Faculties are: All Men have them,
and one who has them not, is not perfect in his Nature: The Beasts have them,
viz. Lust, Wrath and Fear, and they act with as much Violence and Power in the
Beasts as in the Men: And our First Parents had them before the Fall: The Woman
saw the Tree was good for Food, and pleasant to the Taste; hereby was her Lust
tempted: And a Fruit desirable to make one Wise; here was her Ambition tempted,
and by these Affections Satan prevailed (as amongst Men of our times he daily
does) to draw our First Parents into the ruinous Accomplishments of Sin and
Wickedness. I say then, The Affections and Passions appear to grow, not as an
effect of Adam's Fall, but as a Fruit of Natural Production; and from the same
Principles and Originals that his Nutritive, Generative, and other Vital Powers
do grow; that his other Sensitive, and his Rational Faculties do also grow:
They seem to have one same Original, and that they are as Natural to Man; as
any of the other are; and that they have received no more Detriment or Vitiated
Quality from the Fall, than the other Humane Powers and Faculties have done: I
say, they are all acted alike, viz. by the Natural Contexture of Soul and Body:
And I thence infer, that if the Humane Soul were Intelligent, she would not act
these Affections and Passions with the Force and Violence, with which,
oft-times we find them to be acted; but would rather choose to act them
moderately, and no farther than might stand with Terms of Discretion; and so as
to restrain and keep them ever under Power of her own Government and Regality:
And because she does not, and I think cannot do this, I conclude, she seems to
me not Intelligent, but Material.

6. Paragraph, In the Matter of the Fathers Opinions concerning the going of
Souls to Heaven, upon Death of their Bodies, I undertake not to speak upon my
own perusal of the Fathers; but as I find them Cited by other Writers. I have
from Peter Martyr, quoted to you Irenaeus, denying Souls passing to God or
Heaven before the Resurrection; and there Tertullian is quoted to the same
purpose, viz. that Heaven shall not be opened till the Resurrection. Dr. Willet
in his Synopsis Papismi, Fol. 402. He says, We confess most part of the
Fathers, especially the later sort of them, to have been in this error. Fol.
403. He says, Bellarmine Cites 14 Fathers to this purpose: Nay, and Our Lord,
Joh. 14.2, 3. says, I go to prepare a place for you; and I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also: Seeming to
infer a Rest till Christ's Second Coming: As Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead
which die in the Lord, that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works
do follow them. 1 Pet. 4.13. Rejoice, as being Partakers of Christ's
Sufferings, that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may be also glad with
exceeding joy: So 2 Pet. 3.11. Seeing all the Earth, and the Heaven about it
shall be Burnt up, what Holy Persons ought ye to be; looking for, and hasting
to the day of God. 1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord
come, who both will bring to Light the hidden things of Darkness, and then
shall every [deserving] Man have Praise of God. 1 Cor. 1. Verse. 7, 8. Waiting
for the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that ye may be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 John 2.28. Abide in him, that when he appears
you may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his Coming. Chap.
3.2. We know not yet what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him. Joh. 6. Our Lord promises four times over to raise his
Servants up at the last Day: And he tells Martha, her Brother shall rise again.
She Answers: I know he shall rise again at the Resurrection of the last day.
All these places refer to, and rest upon the Judgment of the last day, or
Christ's Second Coming, without taking notice of any Intermediate State: Nor do
I meet with any Scripture asserting any Intermediate State, Place, or Judgment,
between Death and the Resurrection of the last day: True it is, That those who
believed the Subsistence of Souls in a State of Separation from their Bodies,
were forced to invent some places and modes of that Subsistence: Whence Heathen
Divines, or Poets, framed their Elisiums, and Fortunate Islands; their
Habitations of Dis, and Tartarums: And so have the Mahometans done, and so a
great part of Christians maintain their Limbus's patrum and puerorum,
Purgatory, and sinum Abrahae, from the Parable of Lazarus, and places of other
Tortures for wicked Souls; but without being able to make out, or prove such
places, or such things, either from Reason, Scripture, or other solid, and
credible, or faithful Ocular Testimony, or Relations whatsoever: And if you
know of any such Proofs of those, or the like places, I shall be very glad to
receive the Communication thereof from you.

You say, The Fathers did not think that Souls go not to Heaven before the
Resurrection: You avoid saying, They did think Souls went to Heaven before that
time. I have named to you Irenaeus and Tertullian, who thought they went not to
Heaven before the Resurrection. And your own Second Paper, Parag. 7. say, The
Fathers owned a middle State, which was neither Heaven nor Hell, and that good
Souls were in a State of Rest and Happiness, but not in Heaven, or the full
Fruition of it: The Fathers owned an Intermediate State for good Souls, between
Death and Heaven. Our Church, or the greatest part of it, say, They go
presently upon Death to Heaven: I desire to know a Reason of this Difference in
Opinion, viz. why we differ from the Fathers in it: To this you Answer, These
Opinions agree well enough: This gives me little Satisfaction in the Point,
viz. your telling me they agree well enough, because I see plainly there is a
wide Difference between them, and still I want a Reason of that Difference.

7. Paragraph, You had quoted to me Solomon's Saying, The Spirit returns to
God, who gave it, as the strongest Text you could find for the Soul's Separate
Subsistence. To that Text, as proving this Point, I sent you Three Objections,
never propounded to you nor Answered by you before: They appear to me very
Material, and such as you will, with great difficulty be able to make a
reasonable and substantial Answer unto; and therefore I desired you to bestow
an Answer upon them: instead of which you tell me, you have said enough upon
that Text before, approved by the Learned of your Town, as a true and
Unanswerable Explication of that Text. To this I reply, Those Learned were Men
agreeing in Judgment with your self in our disputed Point, and apt to approve
what was said by you in the Confirmation of it: But now if you please to
Communicate these Objections to those Persons, and make such Answer to them as
they shall approve, it will oblige me much, and add great strength to the force
of your Argument from that Text, which I think my Objections do overthrow, so
long as they stand in force and remain unanswered: And I allow you to think as
the Jebusites expressed, 2 Samuel 5.6. They challenged David, conceiving as in
the last clause of that Verse.

8. Paragraph, You say, You have lately had occasion to consider a Text of
Scripture, which you think directly contradicts and overthrows my Opinion, viz.
2 Cor. 5. Verse. 6. and 8. Knowing that whilst we are at home in the Body, we
are absent from the Lord, and are willing therefore to be absent from the Body,
and present with the Lord: And I grant, That these Words absent from the Body,
and present with the Lord, taken singly as recited in these Two Verses, seem
strongly to import, that a Man has something, which being absent from the
Body, may be present with the Lord: But it is a granted, and well tried, and
approved Rule; that for the Understanding and sound Exposition of Scripture,
the Context is always well, and thoroughly to be considered, and all the parts
so be understood and construed, as may make the several Parts and Expressions
of it stand and agree together, and with the true and sober Rules of common
Sense and Reason: To make such an Exposition of these two Verses, and the
Words, and import of them, it seems to me, the Expounders of them should begin
from the next preceding Chapter, viz. Chap. 4.8. there Paul begins to recount
his Sufferings: Verse. 14. But after all, He who raised the Lord Jesus, shall
raise us up also by Jesus, and shall present us with you: And therefore we must
look a^ things not seen and Eternal; in comparison of which, the present
Affliction is but short and light: Chap. 5.1, etc. For we know, we have a
Building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens; desiring
to be clothed upon with our house: if so be that being clothed, we shall not
be found naked: For we do groan, not for that we would be uncloathed but
clothed upon, that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life: Therefore we
knowing, that whilst we are at hone in the Body, we are absent from the Lord,
and are willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present with the
Lord: therefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted
of him. For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his Body, according to what be has done,
whether it be good or bad. To accord the Words absent from the Body, and
present with the Lord, to the rest of the Context, it seems we must take Body
in this place for the Natural Body, as it is distinguished from the Spiritual
Body, expected at the time of Christ's Second Coming: Those who are raised to
Happiness, shall be raised Spiritual Bodies, as 1 Cor. 15.44. and those who are
alive at that time shall be changed, viz. their Natural Bodies into Spiritual
Bodies; For Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: Whilst therefore
we are at home in the Natural Body, we are, and must be absent from the Lord;
and do wish rather to be absent from this Body, viz. have it changed into a
Spiritual Body; that this Mortal might put on Immortality, and Death may not
have Power over us, but be swallowed up in that Victory: Our Text is parallel
hereunto, we know we have an house eternal in the Heavens, desiring to be
clothed upon with this house, viz. the Spiritual Body, that Mortality might be
swallowed up of Life: Therefore he desires not to be Uncloathed, not to Die, or
put off this Tabernacle, but to be Clothed upon; to pass to Life without
passing the Gates of Death, be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye;
for till a Resurrection, or such a change, we are like to be absent from the
Lord: Therefore he desires to be Clothed upon with this house from Heaven,
that he may not continue in the Natural Body, and thereby absent from the Lord:
He speaks as if he might live to that time, says, We shall not all sleep, but
we shall all be changed: And of absence from the Body by this change, it seems
St. Paul speaks in my Text which you have quoted, and not of any thing to be
done, or expected, after Death, or betwixt that and the Resurrection. The whole
Tract recited, seems to me, intended for Comfort in times of Worldly
Afflictions, founded upon the Resurrection, Chap. 4.14. and terminated in it,
Chap. 5.10. desiring whether absent in the Natural Body, or present in the
Spiritual, to be accepted by Christ, that we may come to that great Audit with
Confidence, as 1 John 2.28. and not be ashamed before him at his coming, but
may rejoice at it, with joy unspeakable and full of Glory; that the wicked
rising, or found alive at Christ's Coming, shall be so changed, or have
Spiritual Bodies, I do not find Written, and it seems as likely that they may
still remain in their former state of Nature, sensible of what they suffer, as
in their first Life: The difficulty thereupon will be, how they should be able
to dwell in Everlasting Burnings, without being consumed: But I pretend not to
solve all Difficulties, but shall leave this to farther Consideration, and
conclude my self,

Your obliged humble Servant.
10. Nov. 93.
In a Postscript to a Letter from my Opponent: He says, I can by no means
consent to the making any thing of mine Public; but if they will serve you in
Private, you may keep them by you, Dated Nov. 6.93.

And to my Reply, Dated 10. Nov. 93. His Answer was, That he sent back my
Papers, without rejoyning to them; foreseeing that the effect of his Rejoinder,
would be but another Answer from me, and a fruitless trouble to us both: He
warned me to forbear Publishing my Opinion, as new, singular, dangerous and
false, and likely to produce great inconveniences to my self, from the ill
treatment I might find from others (who) if they thought me considerable enough
to be Answered, were likely to give me Answer in Terms less civil, than he had
used toward me. Dated Nov. 21. Anno 93.

And thus finished the Intercourse betwixt me and my Learned Neighbor, upon
the Point before disputed, Whilst I was employed upon this Argument with my
said Neighbor, there came to my hand a Sermon of Dr. Bentley's, treating upon
the same Subject; and Entitled, Matter and Motion cannot think: Wherein he
Undertakes, or promises to prove, That the Humane Soul is an Immaterial,
Intelligent Spirit; and because I thought he fell short in his performance of
that promise, I made Observations in Nature of a Refutation upon that Sermon,
as far only as concerned that Point: These Observations I sent to London (as my
Opposer says he had notice) with intent to have them Printed; but hitherto an
Imprimatur has not been obtained for them. In them I press Dr. Bentley to a
better performance of that his promise, than I think he has made in that
Sermon; and do desire him to take that promise to heart, and perform it to the
uttermost of his Power, as a Work worthy of his Endeavors, and requisite and
very needful for the times we live in; but when that my demand may arrive to
him in the way which I intend, I do not yet perceive; but as I was musing, a
Friend Minister brought me a Book, which he said had given him great
Satisfaction in the Point thus far disputed, and he thought it might probably
do the same to me: I found it Printed, Land. 1685. in 4o. Entitled: A Treatise
of the Soul of Man, by John Flavel, Minister late of Dartmouth; upon perusal I
found his Design the very same with that which I had pressed Dr. Bentley to
Undertake, viz. to prove that the Humane Soul is an Immaterial, Immortal,
Intelligent Spirit; and that the Author was Learned, Judicious, and
Industrious, and Considerable in the Degrees of them: for that he had Collected
together all that I had met with in my former Authors for the Maintenance of
his Tenet, and had placed and used them Dexterously, and as they appeared to
serve the most Advantageously for his Deign: So as it seemed I had not much
more to expect from Dr. Bentley, or any other Writer, who should, or might
Undertake the maintenance of that Opinion: I thought it deserved my serious
Consideration; yet found it not convictive of my Judgment in the Point, nor
able to give any considerable stagger to it: And therefore for my own
Satisfaction in the first place, and Assistance of others in the next place, I
undertook to make a stricture upon all the Arguments delivered in this Book,
for Proof of the Point Controverted; and this by Pages, according to his Order
used in the delivery of them: And as he brings no new Arguments, but only uses
those which in my former Writings have been mentioned, so are my returns
thereunto; but a Repetition of things before delivered, applied to the
Particulars as they are urged by him: And because the Answers are Repetitions,
my intent is to abbreviate them as much as I can, without rebating the edge, or
taking from the vigor of them.

Page 5. He comes to the Soul of Man, and says, God's Breath infused it, and
our Breath continues its Union with the Body: Here though I conceive not that
God has Breath or does breath, yet I grant, that God did by an Animating
Breath, give Life to the Body of Man, first fitted and prepared to receive and
act by the same: He remarks the Ability of Speech is conferred on no other Soul
but Man's: This I should Word, It was conferred on no other Body but Man's, for
that Man's Soul cannot speak without his Tongue; and if there be a defect in
that Organ, the Soul can neither help it, nor act to Speak without it Page 6.
Says, That by calling Man's a living Soul, it is distinguished from all other
Souls: This I deny, and say, That Beasts Souls are living, as well, and as
Naturally as Men's. Page 7. Amongst his many Expressions not granted, I grant
this, That Adam's Soul came by Inspiration from the Lord. He says, It it a most
astonishing Mystery, to see the dust of the Ground, and an Immortal Spirit
clasping each other with such dear Embraces: I confess this Mystery is so
astonishing, as quite discourages my belief of the thing. He quotes Austin for
the infundendo creatur, but not any part or place of that Author, where the
Words quoted may be found, and I doubt he is wrong in it; and that this
Expression is of latter date than Austin's time. Page 8. The Breath of our
Nostrils, he says, and nothing else links and holds these Two Natures, viz. the
Mortal and Immortal together; for the Soul comes and goes with the Breath, and
cannot stay one minute after the Breath is gone: I grant, That as Fire for want
of Air is suffocated, so both the Humane and Bestial Soul for want of Breath;
but that is not the only want which can extinguish, or dislodge such Souls; the
want of Blood will do it, and so will the want of Food, or Nourishment: For
Breath, Blood and Food are all of necessity for the Life and Support of an
Humane, as well as of a Brutal Soul; they cannot subsist, if any of these be
wanting to them: And it passes with me for a strong evidence, that the thing
which cannot subsist without all these Material Supports, is it self also
Material, viz. both the Brutal and the Humane Souls, which therefore I take for
Material Spirits. Our Author, here says, No Elixir, or Worldly Power, can make
the Soul stay one minute after the Breath is gone: And I say so for the Blood;
and so when all the Nouriture is spent, the Soul can stay no longer (says he)
live no longer in the Body (say I.) Here he says, The Humane Soul is of Divine
Original, Created and Inspired by God: I refuse the Word Created, for that it
is not in Moses's Text here expounded, neither in Letter nor Sense, that I can
perceive: And for the Divine Original, and Inspiration, it seems, the Brutal
Soul and first Breath, may lay a good claim to them both; although Moses have
not so fully declared the manner of God's acting with, or upon them. Page 9.
Says, The Nature of the Soul cannot be perfectly known. Page 11. To prove the
Humane Soul is in strict and proper sense, created by God: he cites, Zech.
12.1. The Lord who stretches out the Heavens, and lays the Foundation of the
Earth, and forms the Spirit of Man within him. Comenius tells us, That the
Word here Translated, forms, is in the Hebrew Jatzar, used for the forming of
Man's Body out of the Ground, viz. a Formation from some Prae-exsistent Matter:
I say, from these Words the Formation of a Material Soul, Vital, Animal,
Rational, may very well be intended; and that this seems most likely to be the
sense and intent of it: To prove the Soul created, he Cites farther 1 Pet.
4.19. Let them that suffer, commit the keeping of their Souls to God, as unto a
faithful Creator. I demand, of what God was the Creator, not of Souls singly,
but of Bodies also; and here, commit the keeping of their Souls, intends
themselves, or their Persons: An usual Scripture Expression in the like Cases;
thus his Proofs for the single Creation of Souls out of nothing, are answered,
which renders his Design vain; viz. of proving that the Soul is a Substance,
because created out of nothing. I grant, the Material Soul to be a Substance;
but, says he, Not a substance created out of nothing: Yours say he, Flows from
the Matter, and depends upon it: And say I, so does the Humane Soul do, as
appears before; and he has yet made no good Proof of a single Creation of it
out of nothing: Well, but he has another Argument, to prove, that the Soul is
such a Substance, viz. the Soul does exist and subsist by it self alone, when
separated from the Body by Death: And I grant, if he proves this, it will do
his Work; and he Cites in Proof, Luke 23.43. the Case of the Thief upon the
Cross, and Christ's promise to him: And Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them that kill
the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul. To each of these Texts I have
answered before as fully as I can; and hold it not fit to repeat those Answers
here: St. Matthew's Text I grant is a clear Proof, that he was of our Authors
Opinion, viz. That the Soul might have a Subsistence separate from the Body;
but St. Paul in St. Lukes Gospel, 12.^4. has otherwise worded Our Lord's
Doctrine upon that occasion; and it seems by 1 Cor. 15.18. and 2 These. 4.15.
and 1 Cor. 4.5. Chap 1. verse. 7. and 8. that Paul did not hold or know the
Separate Subsistence of Souls, and so an intermediate State, betwixt Death and
the Resurrection; and therefore Luke's Words in relating of that Fact, do not
import a Separate Subsistence of Souls: And so it seems for Peter, 1 Pet. 4.13.
and 2 Pet. 3.11. and 12.13, etc. So 1 John 2.28. and 3.2. all importing they
knew of no State between Death and the Resurrection, and consequently of no
Separate Subsistence of Souls. Page 12. he quotes, 2 Cor. 5.8. If absent from
the Body, and present with the Lord; which I have in a few Leaves before
largely expounded, to a sense far different from the Authors intent. He cites 2
Cor. 4.16. of the Outward and Inward Man, which I say intends the two
Faculties, viz. Sensitive or Passionate, and the Rational. Page 13. Says, The
Soul is a substance: I grant it so, though Material; for so is Heart, Brain,
etc. He says, Affections, and Passions, Habits, and Arts, and Sciences, are
lodged and seated, and rooted in the Soul, and spring from it: All this I deny,
and say, they are all lodged, seated, and rooted in the Man, and spring from,
and are perfected by the Contexture of his Soul and Body: He says, The Soul in
Moses 's Text, was a living active being of it self, as opposed to Matter and
Body: This I deny, and say, That as the Body cannot move it self without the
Soul, so neither the Soul without the Body. The Soul is in the Body as its
proper Form, or active Principle, that it has no proper place but the Body;
nor has it any quickening Power without the Body: It cannot quicken any thing
else but the Body, nor does it act, nor is it any thing but in the Body: He
says, Moses in the Text calls it a living Soul: This say I is an apparent
mistake, for the Text says not that the Breath became a living Soul, but the
Man did so; the Man became a living Soul, alias Person: He says, Take mere
Matter, and do what you will with it, you can never make it see, feel, etc.
Mark his Consequence, ergo, God cannot effect it; he might as well say, you
cannot make a Dog, or a Mouse, ergo, etc. Page 14. In Proof of the Soul's being
a Separable Spirit, he Cites Luke 23.46. and Acts 7.29. I say, That in these
places, by the term of Spirit the Persons recommended themselves to God, as
David in his full life used the very same Words, Into thy hands I commend my
Spirit, intending his whole Person: Also Christ made his Soul an Offering for
Sin, intending his whole Person. Here he also cites Solomon's Text, viz. The
Spirit returns to God who gave it; concerning which Expression, I refer to what
has before been spoken of it: Cites Heb. 12.9. You have been subject to the
Fathers in the Flesh, be now rather so to the Father of Spirits, viz. say I of
Angels, and all other Creatures. Cites again Zech. 12.1. yet cannot, does not
deny: Acts 17.25. That God gives to all Life, and Breath, and all things,
ergo, to Plants, Insects, and Brutes, as well as to Men. He says, Other Souls
flow not from God by Creation, but Man's did: I have denied such Creation, and I
think he has not proved it: I have granted Man's Soul in-kindled by God's
Inspiration, and so I think for the Brutes, they had their first Breath from
him; and from that time, Men and Brutes have been generated perfectly according
to their first Patterns. Page 9. He had told us, That the Soul's Nature is so
spiritual and sublime, that it cannot be perfectly known by the most acute and
penetrating Understanding: But being come to page 15. He tells us, It is a
substance as Incorporeal as other Spirits are, that it is Invisible, and has
no Extension of Parts; it has no Dimensions or Figure: But I grant none of all
these, nor does he offer to prove any of them: He makes it a vast wonder that
such a Spirit as his sort of Soul, should be so tied and linked to a clod of
Clay, the Body, that it can by no Art or Power free it self: And I confess his
sort of Soul is very Productive of strange and unlikely Consequences; but to my
sort of Soul all is in great Congruity: I say, there is no wonder at all, but
very Congruous, that the Soul and Body should be so affected and affixed one to
another, for they are both of a piece; are generated, grow, stand, decay, and
fall together, and they rejoice and suffer, share and share alike, and that
there is no more difference between Humane Souls and Bodies than Material
Spirits differ from their Bodies; and as they do and suffer together in this
World, so may it be expected for the World to come, they will Rise, be Judged,
and Recompensed together, according to their joint behaviors, used in the time
of their Earthly Life. Page 17. He produces Des Carts Principle, and Dr.
Bentley's, viz. I know that I think, and that Matter and Motion cannot think,
ergo, There must be a Spirit to act thought in me: This I grant, but says he,
This must be a Spirit Immaterial, Intelligent, for God cannot act all Man's
Faculties by a Material Spirit, nor make Matter Cogitative I think he can do
all this, and thereupon I am at issue with Dr. Bentley, and I believe that he
has so done: And if God can act Man's Senses and Reason by a Material Spirit,
and has so done, all our Author's Allegations here, are thereby answered and
made ineffectual, which otherwise do not seem very material. He says, No Man
can think, that combining Fire, Air, Water and Earth, should make the Lump of
it to know or consider: And I grant, this cannot be done by Man, but by what
consequence can it be said, ergo, God cannot do it: I say such an ergo will
have no Force or Coercion in it: And I farther say, Souls cannot think or
understand without their Bodies. He says, We see manifestly, that upon division
of the Body, viz. a Leg or an Arm cut off, the Soul remains entire, viz. the
Understanding, Affections, etc. I grant, That the Vital and Rational Faculties
do in such case still remain entire; but by Blows or Wounds in the Head, the
Understanding and Memory may be spoiled, and yet the Vital and Generative Parts
remain firm: So as his instance proves no more, but that the loss of a Member
and the Spirit which enlivened it, affects not other Members, or the Spirit in
them so much, but that they can still exercise their proper Faculties as
before; and this is very well Comportant with a Material Spirit: For his tota
in to to and qualibet part, I have quoted Melanchton, who says, The Expression
is commonly Fathered upon Arist. but it is not found in any of his Writings,
nor is the thing true: For says he, If we shall take the Humane Soul for an
Immaterial Spirit; we know such a Spirit can be but in unico loco at a time,
and not in tota in qualibet part at the same time: And therefore this
Expression shall be past here but for a Quibble, fit to serve the turn of this
indiscerptible or undividable Soul, as our Author here calls it: And the same
may be said for the Creando infunditur, and Infundendo creatur, it may pass for
a Riddle, and both of them for Mystical Expressions concerning a Mysterious
Imaginary Soul; and both intended rather to amuse, than to instruct the
Auditors: Here again he recites Solomon's Text, The Spirit returns to God who
gave it: I have showed before, that by far, the greatest part of Humane Souls
go to the Devil, and this he does not deny. Page 17. But says, That before
going to the Devil, it goes first to God, to give an account of it self to him,
and receive its Judgment from him: This Assertion say I, is merely arbitrary
and precarious, but very necessary for the maintenance of that sense which he
would put upon Solomon's Text: He adds, The Soul must appear before the God of
the Spirits of all Flesh, as Arbiter and final Judge, intended, before it go to
the Devil or Hell. It seems strange to me, that our Author should be so
positive and certain in this Assertion as he is, without offering any sort of
Proof concerning the truth of it. If this were true, it would put a period to
all farther dispute upon the Difference now in Discourse amongst us: That this
may be done, there must be a Separate Subsistence of Souls first granted or
supposed; and this methinks should have minded him of the great need there was
of making the best and strongest Proof that was possible, for the maintenance
of it; but of that sort there is not a word here, neither from Scripture,
Reason, nor Experience, but a bare supposal of our Author, drawn (for ought
appears) out of his own Imagination: and let him prove such a going of the Soul
to God, as he has here asserted, or that there is any Intermediate Judgment
given upon Souls between Death and the day of General Doom or Judgment; or let
any other Man make Proof of either of these Points convincing, or somewhat
clear, and I am ready to submit, and confess my present Opinion to be an Error:
Whence it seems our Author did not enough consider the Importation of what he
pretends here to impose upon the mere Credit and Power of his ipse dixit. Page
18. Says, The Ingress of the Soul is obscure, and so the Egress: And I grant it
so much, as the one and other are hardly credible. He says, That the Radical
Moisture or Balsam, is the Oil that maintains the Natural Heat, or the Bridle
which restrains the Flame of Life from departing, and such departure is the
Cause of Natural Death. And this I grant, having before said the same thing,
and very near the Words, viz. That the Radical Moisture maintains the Flame of
Life; this Moisture must be maintained by Food, and the Flame in the Blood
fanned by Breath, and the Extinguishment of this Flame is Death. What he says
more of the Soul here, is suppositis non supponendis. Page 17. He had said, The
Soul is a Created Rational Spirit, conscious to it self of Moral Good and Evil:
I say, it is not the Soul alone, but the Man together; that is so conscious to
himself, and that not from bare and uncultivated Nature, but assisted by Rules
derived from God, Education, Precepts, or Opinions. Page 19. He calls,
Understanding a Faculty of the Reasonable Soul: I call it a Faculty of the Man,
who is a Contexture of Soul and Body. The Soul cannot understand without the
Brain, and if that be crazed or spoiled, the Soul cannot understand: And hence
all here said is answerable, by applying what he says of the Soul, to the
Rational Faculty in Man. Page 20. He allows that Humane Discretion or Judgment,
is the Guide of the Soul, and of the Will; and that the Will follows the
Dictates of the Judgment, as I have before said; and attributes all to the
Soul, which belongs to the Rational Faculty in Man, and cannot be acted without
the Brain, and but according to the condition and temper of that Organ. Page
21. Says, The Power of Cogitation is in the Soul: I say in the Brain, acted by
the Soul. He sets out the great Power of Conscience, which he says, Is the
Judgment of a Man upon himself: And I agree it, and that it belongs to the
Understanding Part, or Faculty: He says, It is potent and terrible: And I grant
it, and say, that terror is Grounded in fear of Suffering, and the Erroneus
Conscience, as potent and terrible, as the best Grounded; when the Memory,
Judgment and Passions fail, as in Death they all do, perishing with their
proper Organs: Conscience fails with them when all Man's thoughts, and his very
Faculty of thinking perishes, none of them ever to return, till the time of our
Resurrection; and then they shall all return, and be revived as formerly. He
Page 20. called the Discretion the Guide of the Soul and Will but here. Page
23. He makes it but a Counceller to the Will: I hold with the former, and say,
The Will follows the Guidance of the Judgment in all Deliberate Acts, yet acts
freely, viz. with such a freedom as is natural to it: a Promptitude and
Inclination to that compliance is led, and yet runs freely, as he says, who
words it, is drawn and runs freely; I say guided or directed, and runs freely.
Page 25. He says, The Will can Command the Body absolutely: I say no otherwise
than as the Judgment guides the Will, viz. by a Natural and Easy Compliance.
Page 27. He magnifies the Power of the Will, which I say, cannot act
deliberately but by Direction of the Judgment, and that must naturally act by
choosing bonum apparens and magis bonum, and cannot naturally choose or direct
the Will to act that which is malum apparens, to the state or benefit of the
Party acting. Page 28. That which he calls here a Struggle of the Soul, is a
Struggle of the Rational Faculty against the Sensual desires. Page 29. His
Pondus or Inclination of his sort of Soul to the Body, is but Invention, and
has neither Ground nor Proof. Page 30. Says, Angels have Assumed Bodies: I
say, not of Flesh and Blood, which shows not any Affection in them to be
im-bodied, as he seems to pretend. He says, He has proved the Soul Immortal,
and has, as such, an Inclination to the Body: I say such Inclination of an
Immaterial Spirit to a Body: himself, Page 7. calls an Astonishing Mystery, and
I think it very incongruous to Reason and common Sense; yet he says he has
proved the Soul to be Immortal, and that as such, it has an Inclination to the
Body; I say, proved both alike, viz. neither the one nor the other, except his
saying may pass for proving. Page 31. He calls God's breathing into Man the
Breath of Life, the Infusion of a Newly Created Soul into him: This I have
denied, and do deny, and he proves it not: For other Brute Creatures, I say, it
is very probable God gave them their first Breath, though Moses have not
expressed it. He says, The Opinion of the Souls Propagation from the Parents by
Generation, is very Ancient, and Tertullian, and diverse of the Western Fathers
closed with it: And so do I. He says, Antiquity is no pasport for errors, and
so say I: He cites an Objection against the daily Creation of Souls, and in
Proof of their Generation, out of Dr. Brown's Religio Medici. Page 32. He
pretends to Answer this Objection, but uses to that purpose, only Scholastical
Distinctions and Niceties, and brings no material or solid Reason from Nature;
so as I think the Objection is not enough Answered, but holds still good
against the Creation, and for the Generation of the whole, both Body and Soul.
Page 33. Cites Genesis 22. God rested on the seventh day from all his Work which
he had made. Page 34. This, says he, Intends, he ceased from making any new
Species, or Kinds of Creatures, but he still creates Individual Souls of the
same kind and nature with Adam 's Soul: and he means all Humane Souls. So as
upon Fruitful Coition of Man and Woman, or of Man and Beast, where the product
is of Humane shape, God creates a new, young Soul, to enliven and inform every
such Body; whence every day, hour and moment, he is creating such Souls for all
the Earth over. I would know where he found his Distinction, of God's ceasing
from Creation of New Species, but not of New Individuals; he quotes no Author,
or Original for it, and till he so do, it will pass with Readers, for his own
Fiction, and do him no service at all. And his Proof of his New Creation is a
kin to this Distinction; he cites for Proof of it, Our Lord's Words, My Father
works hitherto, and I work: How this proves Gods Continual New Creation of
Souls, I do not perceive, and I suppose sew others will be drawn to believe
such New Creations, upon this Proof. He says, To me it is clear that the Soul
is not generated; for that which is generable is corruptible. This I agree, and
thence infer, The Humane Soul both generable, material, and extinguishable. He
Reasons against this, but by Arguments before Answered. Page 35. Farther to
prove a New Creation of Souls, he quotes again, Heb. 12.9. Men must be in
subjection to the Father of Spirits, intending it to signify, the Father of
their Spirits or Souls. This I do not grant, but say, This Sense restraining to
Humane Spirits only, is against the express Words of the Text, as well as the
intent of it. He quotes again, Zech. 12.1. before examined he quotes, Isa.
42.5. God that gives Breath unto the people upon the Earth, and Spirit to them
that walk therein: I take Breath and Spirit here for the same thing. Here he
cites Chap. and Verse. of four places more; I have searched them, and find no
mention of Spirit or Soul in any of them. Page 36. He says, These Texts speak
of Creating Heaven and Earth, yea and their Souls also. Of Heaven and Earth
they all speak, but of Souls not a word; whence it is not safe to take even a
good Man's word in Matter of Controversy. Page 36. Cites Solomon's Text again,
Dust returns to the Earth, and the Spirit to God who gave it. The Soul and
Body, says he, Are the two Constitutive Parts of Man, and have two distinct
Originals; the Body is of the Earth, the Soul a Spirit given by God, who gave
it Being by Creation. I say God gave the Body a Being by Creation, as well as
the Soul, and as the Elements of the Body are Earth and Moisture, so that of
his Soul are likely Air and Fire; and at Death the Body goes to the Earth, the
Fire extinguisheth, and Air vanishes. What Solomon's Expression intended, and
the manner of that Expression, has been before disputed. Page 37. Says, The
Soul has no Principle, out of which by Order of Nature it did arise: I say the
Body had no such Principle, neither God created it of the Earth, and breathed
into Adam 's Nostrils the Breath of Life, and he became a living Soul, whence
the Man was created Body as well as Soul. He agrees, the Souls of Brutes are
generated, but says he, There is a Specific Difference betwixt the Brutal and
Rational Soul. This I deny, and say, The Soul is not Rational, but is so in the
Head only, where there are Organs created proper for that Faculty; and in no
part of the Body can the Soul act rationally, but in the Head. Page 38. He
demands, Why are not Brutes capable of performing Rational and Religious Acts?
I Answer, because God has not given them Rational Powers and Organs in so high
a degree, as he has done to Men; nor can one Man perform like another in such
occasions: But (whatsoever their Souls are) the People can act but according to
the Capacity of their Organs, and the Temperament of their Bodies and
Complexions and Humors. Men have a different Posture of Body from other
Creatures, more Capacious Heads in Proportion, and store of Brains, and finer
Matter; and they have Heads and Tongues, whereby they can better learn, direct
and act, than any Brutes: These Differences set Humane Bodies far above the
Brutes, and yet it seems they may be acted as the Brutes are, by a Material
Spirit; for the Flesh and Blood are Materials of both sorts, and that which
nourishes, is alike in both: without Breath, Blood, and Food, both sorts
perish, and their Souls depart or vanish; and yet as Men's Bodily Organs exceed
the Brutes for Use and Aptitude, so may their Spirits for fineness of Matter
and plenty of it, and purity and brightness of that flame of Life in them. Page
39. Says, Seed of the Soul is not to be found in Man, because the Soul is a
Spiritual Essence. I say, this begs the Question, but if this Spirit be
Material, he will not deny that the Seed of it may be found in Man. Page 40.
Upon this I say, Remove the Opinion; or later Invention of the new Creation of
Souls, for all Adulterous, Incestuous, Buggerly Humane Procreations, and then
all his Questions here argued, are needless, and useless. He confesses he
cannot tell how a Newly Created Spirit should come to be defiled with Original
Sin. I say; he need not trouble himself about it, for that the thing is not at
all so. Page 41. He asks, How so many Souls become foolish, forgetful,
injudicious? It seems he means Men. He supposes it to come from the Bodily
Temper and Organs, and I grant that very often it does so: But yet I say, that
my sort of Soul, viz. the Flame of Life, or the Material Spirit, is subject to
Defects, Infirmities, and Obstructions; as well as the Body. Page 42. His
Deduction of Original Sin upon Man, draws it only from his being a Child of
Adam; whence it seems his Soul cannot be defiled, but by its coming from Adam.
Page 43. Says, His sort of Soul is a true Being, and not only a Conceit, or
Fancy. It seems he suspects it looks somewhat like a Fancy, and I am very apt
to pass it for one, notwithstanding his word to the contrary. He says, My Soul
can, and will subsist and remain what it is, when separated from the Body; but
yet I do not believe him. He says, It is not my Body, but my Soul, which makes
me a Man. I say, neither of them makes a Man, but they must be both together
for that purpose. Page 44. Says, Let an Apoplexy hinder the Operation of the
Soul in my Brain, and all my Organs become useless. I agree this, and say, The
Soul therefore does not act or understand, but by the Organs, cannot do so
without them. What Man by his Rational Faculty can perform, he says, Is done by
his Soul; and I grant it, but not without the Organs of the Head, and
especially the Brain: and so for the Sensitive and Vital Faculties and their
Organs. Page 45. Grants here the Understanding to be the Guide of the Will,
which chooses or refuses as the other directs. He says, My Affections are the
strong and sensible Motions of my Soul. I grant it so in the Praecordia, as the
Rational is in the Head; but in no other part, save the Praecordia, are there
any Affections: and there they are as properly the effect of the Organs, as of
the Soul; they must both Operate to the Production of such Effects: He says, He
finds his Soul could never rise out of Matter, nor come into his Body, by
Natural Generation. I will not take upon me to know what he may find of
himself, or say of himself; but I find no such things of my self, nor has he
yet enough directed other Men to find, what he says he finds, unless they will
first accept of his fancy, viz. That a Man has within him a small Spark of a
Spirit, coming he knows not how, nor from whence; residing and governing, he
knows not how, nor where; and departing from him, he knows not how; nor
whither: And how to know that such a thing there is in a Man, neither has he
shown, nor can Man's reason find out; so as most likely all this is but a
fancy. He says, Brutes are destitute of Understanding, Reason and Conscience,
etc. I say they have these Faculties in a very low degree, as we may know and
love God in a very much lower degree than the Angels. Page 46. Says, He is made
for nobler ends and uses, than to eat, drink, sleep, talk, and die. And I grant
it, and that ex hoc momento pendet eternitas, at the Resurrection an account
must be given, and then Recompenses shall be distributed: 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing. All Men shall then receive acccording to
their Works and Behavior used here upon Earth; and this is as true, and
provable, as that Christ Jesus came to save Sinners, or that he is the Son of
God; so as one who professes to believe the Gospel, can have no doubt of the
truth or certainty of it: And yet our Author in all this proving Discourse,
makes no mention at all of it; and the likely reason of that, is the
Contrariety which appears betwixt the Two Doctrines, of the Soul's going
immediately to Heaven or Hell, and that of the Resurrection. We both agree that
Sense and Perception are acted by the Soul: He says, By its own Efficacy: I
say, by Assistance of Bodily Organs, and not without them; whence his Soul in
Hell, needs no Addition of Body, or Organs, to make it more sensible than of it
self it is; but mine must have a Body and Organs, or it can neither do, nor
suffer any thing: Thus a Resurrection for mine is necessary, in respect to
future Recompenses, not so for his. Consider we his sort of Soul in Heaven,
What advantage can it expect from a Resurrection? It has already the Roal
Mansions of Heaven, the Society of the Holy Angels, and the Beatifical Vision
of God; and what can any Creature or Being desire more? Well, but if things go
on to a Resurrection, the Case must be altered, and for the worse, as it seems;
for these Souls must go down again from those Glorious Mansions, and enter of
new into its old Body, and return no more to Heaven, but live upon Earth again:
It Is true it shall be a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness in a more happy
and blessed state than now it is, or than we at present enjoy; but far short of
God's Royal Mansions in Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens; of which he has said,
Heaven is my Throne, in comparison of which, the Earth is but a Footstool: 2
Pet. 3.13, 14. We, according to his promise, look for new Heavens [or Skies]
and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness: and seeing that ye look for
such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot,
and blameless; do so that ye may be Partakers of these Rewards. Revel. 21.1, 2.
I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and a new Jerusalem, coming down from God
out of Heaven [Upon that new Earth.] Verse. 11. He begins to describe this
Glorious City by Metaphors of Gold, precious Stones, Pearls, etc. intending the
happy State and resplendent Virtues, which the new raised People shall enjoy,
after our expected Resurrection: There, there shall be no more Death, Sorrow,
Pain, or Crying, God shall be with them [as with our First Parents in Paradise]
and dry up all their Tears: But when all this is done and considered, What
Comparison can we make betwixt this new Earth, and that Heaven, which is the
Royal Throne of God, and where he is superlatively present, sic parvis
componere magna solemus? We must say, the one state and place is extraordinary
happy, but the other transcends Man's conceit, and is super-excellent to all
Imagination: I say then, A Soul once received into the highest Heavens [if it
can be capable of a Mansion there] coming at the Resurrection to be put into
its Body again, and made an Inhabitant of a new Earth, must be apparently a
Loser by that Change; and Naturally, or Rationally, such a Resurrection cannot
be grateful to it, or desired by it; but must be compelled, and go on, invita
minerva, which is not the State or Case of the Resurrection; for that is given
to Man as the greatest Benefit and Blessing which his Servants receive of God,
and for the most grievous Punishment of Offenders, it was purchased by Christ
for his Servants. 1 Cor. 15.13, 14. If there be no Resurrection of the Dead,
then is Christ not risen: and if Christ be not risen, then is our Preaching
vain, and your Faith is also vain. [Notwithstanding the Souls Separate
Subsistence.] Verse. 15. We have testified of God, that he raised up Christ:
whom he raised not up, if so be that the Dead rise not. Verse. 18. Then they
also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. [But if at Death they
went to Heaven, they should not be perished, though there were no
Resurrection.] Thus by the Doctrine of the Immediate Avolation to Heaven, that
of the Resurrection (the Main Comfort and Support of Christian Believers) is
not only undermined, but is made a kind of Insipid and Useless Doctrine, not
worthy to be remembered by our Author, or other Zealous Proselites and Defenders
of the Immateriality. Let them alone, as Persons hood-winked by an Old mistaken
Opinion, to lead those who follow them, into lesser Falls, or more dangerous
Precipices; but our endeavor is to detect the Fallacies of that Opinion, which
I pray God prosper no otherwise, than as it is Grounded upon Truth, and Verity.
To this, Page 46. Our Author goes on in a proving manner, and I have traced him
accordingly Page by Page; but in his Progress, he now begins to make Inferences
and raise Doctrines, of which I do not pretend to take Notice, but intend to
pass over them, without omitting any thing which I think to be Material and
Proving.

Page 48. He says, Happy had it been for bad Men, if their Souls had been like
the Beasts, extinguishable in Death: for then all their Miseries had ended
there. I say, Mark what little or no account he makes here of the Resurrection,
so solemnly, plainly, and fully Published and Promised in the Gospel; he does
not so much as name, or remember such a thing, which would fully avoid his
Positive Determination. Page 49. Says, It Is a great mistake, that the Soul is
only capable of Social Glory, in Partnership with the Body, and cannot exert
its own Power, nor enjoy Happiness in the absence of the Body: The Opinion of
the Sleeping Interval, says he, took its rise from this Error. Say I, from this
Truth only, the Holders of this Opinion did not Penetrate to the bottom of the
Truth, viz. the Temporal Extinguishment of the Soul: They thought it had a
Separate Subsistence, but in a Limbus, or Dormitory, where it neither did, nor
suffered any thing, wanting a Capacity to do so without the Body: I say, The
Temporary Extinguishment, is to be preferred before this Dormitory, and is far
more agreeable to Nature and Reason. He says, The Soul does not necessarily
depend upon the Body in its Operations, but that it can live and act out of a
Body as well as in it. I say, What is Petitio Principii if this be not? And so
is all the rest which follows here. He quotes Luke 23.43. and Phil. 1.23. both
before fully answered. Page 50. He says, All Souls by Nature are as excellent,
one as another. I say there are great differences amongst them, and we see it
plainly in the different Performances and Perfections of Men, to be referred
partly to Body and Organs, and partly to the Vigor, Purity and Brightness of
the Material Soul in them. He cites Ezekiel. 48.4. All Souls are mine: This I say
intends Persons, the Soul that sins, shall surely die, viz. the Person: Verse.
5. If a Man be just, etc. shows, Soul here intends Person. Page 51. and is but
a fancy; but I say Redemption was not of Souls only, but of Persons. Page 52.
cites, 3 John 2. I wish that thou may prosper and be in health, even as thy
Soul prospers. I say, this intends thy Person and Temporal Affairs, as thy
Practices of Piety. Then he says, There are great differences betwixt Soul and
Soul, in respect of Natural Gifts and Abilities of Mind; and the Soul is more
vigorous, when the Body and its Organs are more sound and apt: And says the
same that I said before, against what himself said before. Page 54. Says, Those
who perish, will find themselves as capable of Blessedness, as those that
obtain it. I say, perhaps their Bodily Temper and Capacities could not be
equally assistant to their Souls. Page 59. Says, The Food of every Creature is
agreeable to its Nature, and that the Soul does not live upon Material Things,
as the Body does: I say, The Soul cannot live in the Body without Food, and if
not in the Body, then no where: For I think, there is no place where it can
live but in the Body, and each in its own Body, and not out of that Body, to
which it is Con-natural. He cites Luke 12.19 Soul take thine ease, Eat, Drink
and be Merry; and says, The Soul cannot do so: I say Soul here (as in very many
places) intends Person, or the Man; and yet the Soul of Man is refreshed, and
renewed by Meat and Drink, and cannot subsist without them. Page 61. Cites Romans
1.9. Paul says, God whom I serve with my Spirit, adding, Paul durst appeal to
God, who searched his Heart, as if he took Heart and Spirit for the same thing
here; and to that I agree. Page 63. To what he says here, I answer, Humane
Apprehensions of a World to come, may fully be answered by the Resurrection and
the Last Judgment: And yet I do not grant that such Apprehensions do grow from
Man's Nature purely, or nakedly considered; but Nature cultivated by Education
or Doctrine. He cites Romans 2.14. The Gentiles do by Nature the things contained
in the Law. I say this intends Cultivated Nature, or an Universal Education: We
find all People have Speech, and yet Men cannot speak without being Taught; and
those who Teach them to speak, give them Impressions of Morality and Religion,
viz. Nurses and Mothers. Page 65. I say to this, He who ingages against Man,
does so against his Soul and Body, for they are inseparable by any thing but
Death. Page 68. This Discourse by the Word Soul, intends Heart, or Affections,
and the Mind of Man. Page 70. He says, The Soul and Body are knit together by
the feeble hand of the Breath in their Nostrils; but his Quotation speaks more
truly: And I say, That Union is a Work of God, and his Handmaid Nature; that
it Springs ab ovo, and both grow out of the same Root or Principle: viz. the
Seed in Generation, and are separable only by Death: He says, The Life of the
Body results from its Union with the Soul; as James 2.26. and I grant it. Page
74. Cites Psalm. 104.29. When thou take away their Breath, they die, and
return to their dust: This say I, makes Soul and Breath Equivalent. He cites
Psalm 66.8. God holds our Soul in Life: This I say, intends keeps us alive;
viz. our Persons. Page 89. Cites Revel. 6.9. and calls the Text a firm
Foundation for the Souls Immortality: Whereas this Cry of Souls under the Altar
is apparently Parabolical, and no more real, than the Voice of Abel's Blood
Crying from the Ground to God: no more than the great Red Dragons drawing the
third part of the Stars with his Tail, and casting them to the Earth; or
Jerusalems coming down out of Heaven: and therefore this is no firm Foundation
for the Souls Immortality.

Page 92. He says, John saw those Souls, those Spiritual, Immortal [he should
have added Invisible] Substances, separated from their Bodies: And these Souls,
says he, All that had died for Christ, from Abel till that time, John saw in
the Spirit, in a rapture not under a Material Altar; but Christ was represented
by this Altar, and the Souls were at the foot or basis of it: Whereas the Text
says under it: The Truth is, he says what he will concerning it. The Souls
which John saw, he will have to be the very Immortal Substances separated from
their Bodies; but the Altar was a Parable, and the Souls not under it [as they
might under the Mosaical, or Solomon's Altars, which were hollow, and covered
with Boards] but at the Foot of it; this seems a mere Invention of his own: I
say, all this was but a Figure, and Teaches no more, but that they who were
Martyred for Christ, still lived to God under his Care and Knowledge, and
should be Rewarded; as 2 Timothy 4.8. And in the mean time they sleep in Christ,
and rest as in Daniel the last verse, and shall stand first in the Lot at the
end of the days. He makes the Things which were Visible in Nature, to be
Figure: For, he says, There was neither real Altar, nor White Robes: but the
Souls which are in Nature invisible, he will have to be real, it seems, without
Success. Page 95. To prove the Soul is Immortal, he says, it is Immaterial: I
say, the one as much as the other; and he might as well say, it is Immaterial,
because it is Immortal. Page 96. Says, The Appetite of the Mind is unlimited,
and never says it is enough: I say, the Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor
the Ear with hearing; so the Fire and the Barren Womb never say it is enough,
and yet, these are all Material. Page 97. Says, Age makes no decay in the Soul:
I say it does, and both must refer our selves to the common Experiences of
those who live to very great Ages, and such as Converse with them. Page 98. He
propounds a Simile of a Musician and his Instrument: But these, I say, are
different Subjects, and not Indentified in the same Subject, as the Soul and
the Body are; and therefore goes not in Proof of his Point. He says, from
Hypocrates, The Soul's Essence cannot be changed: I say, this intends, it will
be still the Soul, notwithstanding the Alterations by Meat, Drink, etc. He here
cites diverse Texts, promising Blessedness Future to this Life, never taking
notice of the Resurrection, which answers them all; but as if without the
Separate Subsistence there could be no means of Future Rewards and Punishments;
which Error I take for the Original of the Immaterial Opinion: Citing (in
Confirmation of Recompencing at the last Day) Our Lords own Words, four times
repeated by him, John 6.40. I will raise him up at the last Day: without
mention of any thing Intermediate, or before that Day. Page 99. The Promises
here cited by him shall not fail, but be fullfilled at the Resurrection. He
says, Though our Bodies die, yet they shall live again; and I say the same of
our Souls: And his Quotation, Romans 8.11. agrees with me, and Verse. 10. which
mentions a Difference, intends between the Sensual Powers and the Rational
Mind: He cites Matthew. 22.32. and says, If the Patriarchs perished in Soul, as
well as in Body, How can God be their God; for he is not so of those who are
utterly perished? To this I say, Neither their Bodies nor Souls are utterly
perished, for they shall both rise again; the Brutes are termed the Beasts that
perish, viz. utterly, for that no Resurrection is granted to them. Page 100.
Says, How shall the Wicked be Eternally punished, if their Souls have not an
Eternal Duration? I say as before, by the Resurrection and Last Judgment, and
then their Bodies shall be as durable as their Souls.

He began this Section, Page 94. by citing a third time Matthew. 10.28. and I
grant it to be his best Weapon, viz. the strongest Text, if not the only strong
One, for Proof of the Souls Separate Subsistence. Now Page 100. He produces the
strongest of his Rational Arguments for the same purpose, and which also I
grant to be of great Weight. Page 101. He says, The Souls Immortality has been
generally held by all Nations and Ages, and thence seems likely to be a Natural
Notion to all Mankind. The first Assertion, viz. Its Universal Prevalency
amongst Men, I grant not so: the Second, it may be demanded, Whence could it so
come to pass, if not from Nature? I say from an Humane Frailty, and Ignorance
of Gods Appointment: People saw many times good Men Afflicted, and the Wicked
Prosperous in this World, so living and so dying. Hence arose a Rational
Inference, ergo, There are Rewards and Punishments Future to this Life; and
those must be applied to the Body, or to the Soul, but not to the Body soon
Corrupted and turned to Dust, ergo, to the Soul only: And that so it might
possibly be, the Soul must have a Separate Subsistence after Death of the Man.
This Argument might reasonably induce Mankind to entertain the Belief of this
Opinion: But since the Christian Doctrine has been received, and the Belief of
the Resurrection and Last Judgment accepted, that Doctrine consented unto,
gives a Satisfactory Answer to that Argument drawn from the Congruity, that
reasonably there must be Recompenses Future to this Life. Still it may be
insisted, That Christians since the Resurrection revealed, have as generally
received and believed that Old Opinion of the Immortality: And I grant that
too, and say, they might have these Inducements so to do. First, They found
this Opinion already rooted in the Minds of Men. Secondly, They Read in St.
Matthew's Gospel his Text, Chap. 10.28. whose Allowance of the Separate
Subsistence of Souls might likely enough pass that Opinion amongst the First
Christians which were of the Jewish Nation, and Read principally, if not only
that Gospel; for that it was Written first, or before the other Three, and was
Written in Hebrew, their own Language; whereas the Others are Written in Greek,
which the Jews generally did not understand: As, Acts 21.37. The Chief Captain
says to Paul a Jew, Can thou speak Greek?
And apparent it is, That the First Christians and Teachers of Christianity
were Jews; and such as Taught but what they had Learned, were likely enough to
Teach this Doctrine: but St. Paul and the other Apostles were not such
Teachers. He says, Galat. 1.12. For I neither received the Gospel of Man,
neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: And by such
Revelation he Dedicated to St. Luke that Gospel, passing under Luke's Name,
Published diverse Years after that of St. Matthew, and in the Grecian Language:
And that Doctrine which St. Matthew delivers, Chap. 10.28. Luke delivers, Chap.
12.4. in Words which do not import a Separate Subsistence of Souls: In the main
Doctrine of fearing God more than Men, because Men can punish but in this Life,
but God can cast into Hell in a Future State: they both fully agree, and
therein it seems Our Lord might have respect to the Words of Isa. Chap. 51.
Verse. 12. and 13. Who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a Man that
shall die, and forgetest the Lord thy Maker, and who has made Heaven and
Earth, and have feared continually every day, because of the fury of the
Oppressor? And where is the fury of the Oppressor? Viz. It is but for a short
time, in comparison, the Death of either Party will determine it. These Things
were Inducements to Christians to accept and follow the Old Opinions Rooted in
the World, concerning the Subsistence of Souls in a State of Separation from
their Bodies.

Having thus traced the Original of the Opinion of the Immateriality amongst
Christians, I come to consider our Authors Argument. Says he, The Notion or
Opinion of the Souls Separate Subsistence, has been thus Universal and
Continuing; therefore it is agreeable to Nature and Truth, and ought to be
accepted and acknowledged by all Men, upon that Account. I answer, This I hold
to be a Matter of great incertainty; for the Proof of which I intend to produce
Two Instances, wherein Old and Universal Opinions have been changed, upon
Grounds of Truth, and with Commendations of those who have acted in those
Alterations; One of them lies in the Theory, and the other in the Practick:
That in the Theory concerns Nature, and that in the Practick Religion: The
Theory concerning Nature, lies in the Scheme or Nature of the World: The Old
Universal Opinion continuing diverse Thousands of Years, was, is, That our Earth
was the real and true Center of the whole World, that all the Heavenly Bodies
or Bright Globes moved about it; and particularly, that the Sun, as big as it
is, and at as great distance as it is from the Earth, yet that every 24 hours
this Vast Body, at that Vast Distance, made a Journey about the Earth; and that
his so doing was the true and only cause and occasion of Day and Night amongst
us: But later, even late Times and Persons, have found good and sufficient
Reasons to alter this Theory or Scheme of the World, and to place the Sun in
the Center of it, and to assign a Planetary Motion to the Earth, as moving
about the Sun, like Mars and Venus; and that it shines to those Planets, and to
the Stars, and whatsoever Inhabitants may be in them, as those enlightened, or
Inlightning Globes do to us; and particularly, that the Sun does not compass
the Earth in the foresaid 24 hours, so to become the cause of our Day and
Night; but that the Earth it self suffers a Rotation every 24 hours, being
toward the Sun for one part of that time, and from it for another part of that
time: and where one part of the Earth obstructs the Sun's Light from falling
upon another part of it, that Obstruction makes Night in the place from which
the Sun's Light is so obstructed. This Theory, I say, has been quite altered;
what was formerly conceived concerning the World by the Universal Opinion of
Mankind, held for diverse Thousands of Years together: Held in Joshua's time, in
David's Psalms, in Hezekiah's time; asserted to by the Words, or Expressions of
Scripture, continuing down to our own Time, and in it; so that it is still the
Vulgar Opinion which passes amongst common People, who for want of Leisure,
Capacity, or Curiosity, make no deep Inquiry into such Things. It is true,
There have been some Men of the more Learned in diverse Ages, who did oppose the
Old Theory in their times; and so there have been a like or a greater Number of
Learned Men in most Ages, who have denied the Souls Separate Subsistence; but
the Universality of Opinion has stood for the Old Theory of the World, and for
the Immaterialty of Souls: But we see the New Theory now prevailing amongst the
Learned of our Age, and I believe the Change has been made upon sufficient and
convincing Reasons; and that there are such for changing the Old Opinion of the
Immateriality, for that of the Materiality of Souls: and that we are not
therefore obliged to hold still the Opinion of the Immateriality, because the
same is very Ancient, and in a manner Universally accepted; but that rather we
may, and ought (upon sufficient Reasons appearing) change the Belief of the
Immateriality of Souls, for that of the Materiality.

My Second Instance intended to prove the Weak Coercion of our Authors
Argument, I take from one of the most Ancient and Universal Practices of
Religion that have been used amongst Men, viz. the pacifying God's Wrath, and
obtaining his Favor and Blessing, by shedding the Blood of Bulls and Goats,
and his other Creatures, offered in Sacrifice to him; sprinkling their Blood
and burning their Flesh and Bones upon Altars, Erected for such Purposes;
though this Fact was not Grounded upon any Consonancy of Reason: To which it
does not agree, That such shedding the Blood of God's Creatures should be
pleasing to him, nor that the Fumes of such Offerings should be as Moses calls
them, A sweet Savor of an Offering made by Fire. This Practice, seems not to
have grown from Rules of Reason, nor has, as I have said, any great Consonancy
thereunto; and yet the Practice of it, seems as early as any thing, pertaining
to Religion, in the World. For Abel brought an Offering to the Lord, the
Firstlings of his Flock, and of the Fat thereof: And this Practice, it seems,
continued to the Flood; after which, Noah made a great Sacrifice, of every
clean Beast and Foul, and the Lord smelled a sweet Savor, and the Lord said
in his Heart, I will no more Curse the Ground: And this Practice was used by
Abraham, and Jacob, and came thence to Moses, who Established a great Number of
Laws concerning Sacrifices: And these were observed by the Jews, and practiced
in all Ages, even till the utter Destruction of their Temple by Titus, about
Anno Christi 74 And for the Gentiles, all Countries had their Sacrifices in
very abundant manner: Noah's Sacrifice was a Lecture to them all, both to his
Sons, and their Posterities. We find the Assirians, Egyptians, Cananites, the
Chaldeans, Persians, Graecians, Romans, Celts, Cimbers, Gauls, Britain, Saxons,
and all other known Nations, offering Sacrifices, and Blood to God; some of
Beasts and Fowls, and some of Men and Children, according as the Devil
directed, or persuaded them: Nor know we of any Nation, or even Person, that
refused or condemned the shedding of Blood, in Sacrificing, and Offerings made
to their several sorts of gods: And this Practice held Universal in the World,
till about the 20th. Year of Constantine, the Great Emperor, about Anno Christi
330. He first discouraged Sacrificing, and then condemned it: His Son
Constantius forbad it, in places where he was, or had full Power; whence in
that Empire this Practice fell to decay, and in time became quite abolished.
The Christian Religion has opposed and overcome it, in all places of its
Plantation; and finally, it is now come to be rooted out of all the known
World: And we know of no Nation in Europe, Asia, or Africa, where shedding of
Blood is used in Sacrifice to their gods. Here is a great and evident Change of
the most Ancient, and Universal Practice that ever was in the World, concerning
Religion; and no Man will pretend to say, that this Change was for the worse,
but for the better, although it had God's Approbation by Moses, and is not
positively forbidden in any part of the New Testament. The Apostles after Our
Lords Death used it, Acts 21.20. Thousands of Believing Jews were yet Zealous
of the Law, verse 26. Paul went to the Temple with the Four Men that had a Vow,
and attended till an Offering should be offered for every one of them: And, yet
we see this Practice now utterly abolished, and we give God thanks for the
performance of it, as I think there is great reason; and by the change of this
most Ancient, Universal Practice in Religion, I pretend to have raised an
eminent Impeachment to the force of our Authors Argument, from the Antiquity
and the Universality of the Immaterial Opinion. We know the Papists Plead in
like manner against the Reformation, intended to be put upon their Errors,
though Ancient, and very generally received heretofore into the Christian
Churches of the Dark Ages, passing from Anno 600, even down to the Times of
Luther, and other Reformers then arising; but we do not accept their Plea of
Antiquity and Universality, as sufficient for the Justification of their
Errors. I will but nominate Dr. Comber's Plea for a Divine Right of Titles, by
force of the same Argument, because I have answered it in a particular
Treatise, not yet Published: But upon the whole Matter, I think it reasonable
to conclude, that an Argument drawn from the Antiquity and Universality of an
Opinion, is but an Argument to that Favor, viz. that it ought to be well
Weighed, and thoroughly Considered, before it be changed; and not at all to be
changed, except there appear sufficient and convincing Proofs, that the same
ought to be done; but not to be reputed of such Force or Power, as to silence
all Arguments which may be made against it, or to stop all manner of
Proceedings toward a Conviction thereupon: To stop the Press from Publishing
such Arguments, I do not allow, but the way fully to stop and silence them, is
to make Rational and Substantial Answers to them; which I profess my self now
and ever willing to receive and embrace with all Sincerity according to the
Merit, which (to my Understanding) shall appear in them.

Thus far I have gone out of my ordinary Way of making Strictures upon our
Authors Pages, that I might make the more full Answer to this grand Argument of
Antiquity and Universality, offered on behalf of the Souls Immateriality. Page
105. Says, One Man is of more worth than all the Inferior Creatures. This I do
not grant. Page 106. His Discourse here imports, That there is no means of a
Future State, but by the Souls Immortality, an Error, which has generally
misled the World before him. Page 107. I say to this, The Resurrection will
satisfy Men's Desires of Immortality, if they be rightly Grounded. Page 108. To
it I say, The return of Souls into Bodies once Dead, seems, the re-kindling of
the Flame of Life by an Act of Divine Power. He confesses, That when Bodies
have been restored to Life in this World (as he here cites diverse) that there
was no Sense or Apprehension in such Souls returned, of the place, or state
they were in, during their Separation; but that there is a perfect
forgetfulness of all that they saw and felt in a State of Separation. He gives
a Reason for this, both Foreign to the purpose and weak: but to me this seems a
very likely Proof, that in such their Separation they neither saw, nor felt,
any thing at all; but that rather they were in Death Extinguishable, and in
Life again re-kindled: From hence, to Page 117. is all answered by the
Resurrection. Page 117. He says, He cannot. (But I suppose) he will not
imagine, how there can be a Resurrection without a Soul once Separated,
entering into the same Body that died: I say, one shall be as much the same as
the other shall be: 1 Cor. 15.37. As Wheat growing out of Wheat sown, so shall
the Body be, with a Flame of Life kindled in it, suitable to its Powers, and to
that Flame, which before was born with it. He says, If it be so, the Sins of
the Old Man cannot be put to the New Man's Account. I say, they may justly be
so; and the rising Person is so much the same with the dying Person, as to be
accountable for his Actions, viz. effectually the same Body, Members, Flame of
Life, Senses, Affections, Fancy, Understanding, Memory, and Judgment, and
shall so awake, and rise, as if he had fallen asleep but a few hours before:
And his Supposition is but the proper Effect of his own mistaken Doctrine,
concerning the Creation of Souls; for if that were true, and the Old Soul did
not subsist Separately, there must be another, viz. a New One be Created; but
my sort of Soul requires no such thing. Page 119. Says, There are Acts
performed by the Soul, whilst it is in the Body, in which it makes no use at
all of the Body: He instances in Self-Intuition, and Self-Reflection. I say,
These Acts cannot be done without the Brain, Fancy, and Memory; and for
Raptures, they are but Impressions upon, and Revelations unto, the common
Sense, Understanding, or Fancy, recorded upon the Memory: Also that Fancy may
be Transported to things without the Body, and the limits of Reason; yet act by
the assistance of proper Organs, without which the Soul cannot act any thing:
Life it self cannot be acted, but by the Vital Organs, and yet without Life
there can be no Apprehension, Self-Intuition, or Reflection, but all Men's
Thoughts perish. Page 189. Cites Heb. 12.29. We are come to Angels, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the
Mediator. He bids us note these Words, They are not, says he, shall come after
the Resurrection or General Judgment. I say, not after our Deaths, but intends
we are come to them in Faith and Expectation, to a Doctrine which declares such
things to us, and which we may believe and expect, as surely as if we were now
in the Possession of them; but not a word of coming to them presently after our
Deaths, as he not only endeavors to Insinuate, but expressly affirms. And, Page
192. He says, These Enjoyments will not be deferred, till the Resurrection, but
be obtained presently upon the Death of the Body. I say, The Words mention
neither the one time, nor the other, nor it seems do intend the one any more
than the other; for they import a present Being come to those Advantages, and
not a future. He confesses here, That Humane Wisdom cannot Penetrate into the
Future State of Souls, and that Men know but little of them: I say, can know
just nothing of his sort of Souls. Page 192. He cites, 1 John 3.2. It does not
yet appear what we shall be: I ask whence that will appear, the Text says, it
will appear at Christ's Second Coming, that when he shall appear, we know we
shall be like him: which intimates Men must stay till that time for such
Knowledge. Page 196. He says, When Death comes, the Soul disputes its
Possession of the Body with him, from Member to Member, like Soldiers in a
Stormed Garrison, and at last loses the Royal Fort: Intimating that his Soul's
Being, is like that of Death's Being, viz. no Real Subsistence, but an
Imagination. Page 197. Says, The falling asleep in Death, or sleeping in Jesus,
must not be stretched to a length, in respect of the Soul: but offers no Proof
of this. I say, That it concerns the whole Person, Soul as well as Body, and
likely will strech it self, to the very time of the Resurrection. Page 202.
Says, Angels carry our Souls to God: And for Proof cites the Parable of Dives,
his only Ground for that Opinion; which I say, is too sandy to support it, for
that here was no real Fact related, but only a Similitude fitted to the common
Jewish Opinion of that time. Page 203. Grants, there is no necessity of such
Conveyance of the Soul, but it is used for State or Decorum. All this seems but
his Fancy, and he gives no other Proof, either of the one, viz. that there was
such a Fact, or of the other, viz. that it is for State and Decorum. Page 204.
Says, The presence of Angels or Spirits affright the Spirits, not only of Men,
but of Beasts, and thence the Soul of Man by consent: But of such a Consent, he
offers no Proof, nor that there is a Soul different from the Material: which I
say, is of the same Nature both in Man and Beast; which by the Production of
like fears, both in Man and Beast, at the appearance of Spirits, seems to me
somewhat confirmed. Page 205. Delivers but his own Fancy thereupon. Page 206.
He asks, What Form, Shape, or Figure, can the Fancy of Man cast his own Soul
into, as an help to understand its Nature? I answer, into none at all, mine
has no certain Form of it self; and of his may be said, ex nihilo nihil fit:
But if such a Soul there be, one may Form an Idea of it, as well as of any
other Spirit: And for Raptures, I have said, the Understanding, Fancy, and
Memory, may be effectually Wrought upon, and affected. Page 214. Says, The
Souls of the Just go immediately to Glory, from the time of the Persons Death:
And offers Proof, Luke 23.43. of the Thief, also Luke 16.22. of Lazarus being
carried; and Phil. 2.23. a desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: all
cited and answered before. Page 215. Speaks but his own Fancy, and without
Proof. Page 225. Says, Good Souls departed, have a satisfying Apprehension,
though no perfect Comprehension of the Divine Essence: and mentions the seeing
God Face to Face: Whereas St. John teaches, We know that when he shall appear
[at his Second Coming] we shall see him as he is. Christ does not say, see God.
But the Author produces no Proof of any sort of seeing after Death. Page 234.
Says, Those who went to Heaven before Christ's Ascension, were fully at rest in
God, and yet upon Christ's Coming to Heaven, their Happiness was advanced:
Cites to prove this, Heb. 11.40. God having provided some better thing for us,
that they without us should not be made perfect. To this, I say, it rather
seems to prove a stay of Perfection, till the whole Number be accomplished at
the Resurrection, as the Answer to the Souls, in the Revelation also does. Page
243. Says, It is too great a dificulty to trace the Soul beyond the limits of
this World. I say, it is so, to trace his sort of Soul in this World; and I
deny that his Text proves, that Death perfects the Spirits of the Just, which
shall not be done till the Number be completed at the Resurrection. Page 244.
Says, We have more Acquaintance with Souls than with Angels: He means with his
sort of Souls, and then I deny it; for Angels and Spirits have appeared, and
been otherwise sensibly perceived to act, but we know not that ever an Humane
Soul by it self, was known or perceived so to do. Page 252. He says, The
Radical Moisture, which is daily consuming by the Flame of Life, must needs be
spent ere long: Here we agree. Page 266. Says, Separated Souls are capable af
performing God's Commands, as well as Angels are. This I deny, and he offers no
Proof. He says, Some departed Souls have returned and appeared in this World:
Instances in Moses and Elias, and the Bodies of Saints which appeared at
Christ's Resurrection. To this I say, All these Appearances were of Bodies,
except Moses, and of him it may be doubted what appeared. Page 267. Says,
Apparitions, as of Dead Persons, are not indeed so, but are acts of other sorts
of Spirits: To this I agree. Page 273. Men often meet a Mortal Enemy's Spirit in
the disguise of a dead Friend. Page 274. Says, That after the Resurrection, the
Raised shall know one another and talk, and converse; but till that time, Souls
departed, do converse only with God. How proves he this, not at all; ergo it is
a bare Invention: Yes, says he, it must needs be so: for if Souls could act
thus before, the Resurrection would be needless, and to no purpose. I say,
Souls going to Heaven, and seeing, and enjoying God and Heaven before that
time, makes the Resurrection of small value, and little signification. Page
284. Says, It Is confessed that the Soul, concerning it self, singly is made
perfect, and enjoys Blessedness in the absence of the Body. He tells us not who
has made this Confession: He quotes Words of Alstedius here, but they do not
import such a Confession; but whosoever did confess it, I am sure that I deny
it, mente and manu, and he should prove it, but does not. Page 285. Cites 2
These. 4.15. It says, Those which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. This
says he, must properly respect the Body, for the Soul sleeps not: I say, as
much as the Body does. Page 304. He says, I should rather choose to live meanly,
then to die easily; and if both Parts were to perish, no Man would die, or
desire it. And the Opinion of the Immortality, say I, prevails not with those
who live at ease to desire Death. He says, It would be a madness for a Soul to
desire to be dissolved, if it thought it self should be extinguished. I say, No
madness at all, but a very reasonable and wise Choice, viz. a desire to part
with a troublesome and suffering Life, for the rest of Death, or sleeping in
Christ, in an assured Hope of a joyful Resurrection, and of then receiving a
Crown of Glory, as Paul's Case was: And if our Author were of another Mind,
it is a sign he loved Life better than ordinary. He has also before said, That
the Grave was a good hiding place from the Storms of the World: Which I there
agreed, and so do most People. Page 310. Cites 2 Timothy 4.8. A Crown of Life will
be given to all who love Christ's appearing. I ask, When shall this be done?
The Text says, At that day. The Author says, This intends the Day of Men's
Deaths No, say I; for that Day intends one time appointed, whereas Days of
Deaths are diverse and various; therefore the Day here, intends the
Resurrection. P. 313. Says, In Death the Soul attains its Rest. I say, the Man
attains his Rest in hopes of a future happiness, or fears of what may follow,
at that Day. Page 314. Says, Death, finally and certainly cures seven several
very great Humane Maladies. And therefore, say I, is much more desirable, than
a troublesome or afflicted Life. Page 326. Says, Little do Believers think what
Visions of God, and ravishing Sights of Christ, the Souls of their Friends
have, when they are closing their eyes with Tears. I say, Little does our
Author know for their Information in such Cases, or for their Comfort. 1 These.
4.13. Paul comforts People in such cases, by the hopes only of a Resurrection,
which gives me a great Assurance, that he either knew not of our Author's
Opinion, or did not believe it. He adds, Evil Days should make God's People
willing to accept of a hiding place in the Grave, as a special Favor from God:
And I grant it, and believe it often does so. Page 322. Cites, Blessed are the
Dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from their Labors: [And that might
make Paul desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. viz. To rest, or sleep
in Him.] Page 329. Cites Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all Men once to die,
and after that the Judgment. I say, this intends one Judgment, viz. the Last,
and that no intermediate Judgment can be proved. Page 334. Cites 1 Pet. 3 19.
He went and Preached to the Spirits in Prison: And he says, There are
Difficulties in this Text; and that Aestius reckons no less than Ten
Expositions of it: And says, It is a very difficult Scripture in the Judgment
of almost all Interpreters. Page 335. Says What is called a Soul, whilst in the
Body, after Separation, is properly called a Spirit. I deny then, that ever it
can be properly called a Spirit. Page 339. He says, Conscience is the Judge and
prime Guide of the Soul. I say, of the Man: He says, The Will, as potent as it
is, moves not until the Judgment comes to a Conclusion: And this I Agree. Page
340. He says, Every Soul comes to its particular Judgment immediately after
Death. To Prove this, he Cites Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all Men once to
die, and after that the Judgment. How this proves every Man's particular
Judgment at Death, I do not perceive: It seems rather all Men must die, before
this Judgment; and when all are dead, then this Judgment: But there is no
Application of it to a particular Judgment. Then he Cites Proverbs 11.7. When a
wicked Man dies his Expectation shall perish, and the Hope of unjust Men
perishes. I demand, How this proves a particular Judgment after each Man's
Death? Then he Cites Matthew. 7.22. Many will say to me in that Day, Have not we
done great Works in thy Name? Then will I profess to them, I never knew you;
depart from me. Thus he proves a particular Judgment, Many will say in that Day
[the Great Day;] and then I will say to them, [to those Many.] Such Scriptures
as these he is forced to use for Proof of his particular Judgment: Not that
likely he, or any Man can think them good Proofs of the thing; but because this
sort of Judgment is indispensably necessary to a Separate Soul's going to
Heaven, or Hell: Without this sort of Judgment, there can be no Truth in their
Tenet, and therefore they must Prove, or Yield. They cannot do it; and I think
he were as good not have offered at it, as to have done it in this manner. But
neither I, nor it seems, He, could tell how to do it better. Page 350. Cites
Heb. 4.3. We which have Believed, do enter into Rest. I say, this intends Rest
from their Labors, as the Revelation expresses it; and I do not find Heaven
in it. Page 359. Says, Nothing more sure or awful than the Day of the Last
Judgment. I Agree it. Page 361. Cites Matthew. 16.26. What is a Man profited, if
he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or, What shall a Man give
in Exchange for his Soul? Our great Difference upon this Text will be, what is
here intended by the Word or Term of Soul. I say, That (as in a vast number of
other Places) so in this Place, the Word Soul intends the Man's Self, or his
Person, or Life; Ver. 25. He that will save his Life shall lose it, but he that
loses it for Christ's sake shall find it. Then follows our Text, with
Connection: For what is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and
lose his own Soul, or Life? And what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul,
or Life? Once lost, it cannot be redeemed, or recovered, nor recompensed by any
thing of this World; yet He that loses his Life for Christ's sake shall find
it; for he shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just; and as Heb.
11. 35. People were Tortured, not accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain
a better Resurrection. Page 362. He Quotes a Saying, To win Venice, and he
hanged at the Gates of it, What good would it do any Man? So says he, of
getting a vast Treasure, with the Loss of ones Life: And I Agree, and say, when
a Man is dead, What good can all the World do him? And this I take for the true
Meaning of this Text: And our Lord shows, how one that loses Life for his sake,
shall find it. Ver. 26. For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his
Father, with his Angels, and then he shall reward every Man according to his
Works: and this seems to sound strongly in Exclusion of the particular Judgment
before spoken of. Page 363. He magnifies the Expression, or the Term, Soul, in
this Text, and says, That Rocks of Diamonds are not worth it. I say, they are
not worth any Man's Life, to him; and this the Devil knew, when he said, All
that a Man has, will he give for his Life: And so is the ordinary Practice of
Mankind. He says, He who bought Souls, knew the Value of them. I say, Souls
were never bought alone, but the Redemption was of Persons, commonly expressed
in Scripture by the Term of, Souls; and so is David's Expression to be
understood, when he says, It cost me more to redeem their Souls, viz. to redeem
them, or their Persons. Page 364. Says, God created the Soul as his rare
Masterpiece, and the Three Persons laid their Heads together to Project it. I
have denied a Separate Creation of the Soul, and I do so still, and do look
upon his present Oratory to be very inconsiderate. Page 365. He confounds the
Soul and the Rational Faculty together, or makes them both one thing, or
mistakes the one for the other. Page 367. All that he here says of the Soul, is
properly applicable to the Rational Faculty: He says, No Soul, but Man's, is
Marriageable unto Christ. If he do not mean the Church, or at least the Person,
I can not understand him; for we never heard of a Soul's being Married, or
doing any other thing by its self, singly. Page 369. What he says here, was
done for Souls, is to be applied to Persons. Page 370. Says, Words shall come
into Judgment at the last Day. I say, Why not at the particular Judgment, if
such an one there be? Page 371. He again here applies to the Soul, what belongs
to the Person: And I say, the Devil seeks to devour not the Soul only, but the
Person. Page 374. Still applies all to Souls, instead of Persons. Page 375. He
Quotes three Texts, but they all apply to Persons; and Solomon's winning Souls,
intends Persons. Page 379. Says, He has proved that one Soul is of more Value
than the whole World. I say, no otherwise than a Man's Life is, viz. to himself
it is so, but not in it self, or with any respect to other People. Page 379.
Says, The Soul was not made for the Body, but the Body for it. I say, they were
made for one another, and are daily made, viz. Procreated together. Page 387.
Cites a Saying, as concerning Souls, but it proves only of Persons; and goes on
in the like applying to Souls, what is intended of Persons. Page 390. Says,
Souls cannot live upon Food, or Earthly things. I say, They do live upon Food
and Earthly things, and cannot live without them. Page 439. and so to 441. He
pretends Holy Duties are not enough for Christians, viz. Nature improved by
Virtues, and common Graces of the Spirit of God, a Holy Unreproveable Life,
relying on Christ for Pardon of Sins, and Support under Sorrow, and Dangers;
Practicing the Commandments, Believing the Creeds, Receiving the Sacraments,
Doing as they would be Done to, Sorrowing for their Failures, striving to rise
again, and Praying to God every day to Assist them by his Grace, and Save them
by his Goodness, and Christ's Sufferings: He insinuates that such ordinary
Practices, are not sufficient for Regeneration, without Heavenly Tempers, and
Tendencies of Soul, viz. a singular Claim and Profession to Grace and
Sanctification above ordinary. I profess my self content with the former State,
and will give his Proselites leave to affect the later, without condemning
them, so being that they act not the Pharisee, in justifying themselves and
despising others. Page 449. Directs Men to ask, Am I born again? Am I a New
Creature? I say, Baptism is the Laver of Regeneration, and Mark 16.16. He that
believes, and it baptized, shall be saved; and thus practiced the Jailer at
Philippi, Cornelius the Captain, and the Ethiopian Eunuch; but he requires a
regenerating of the Spirit. I allow, so appearing as to make the Fruits good;
but for his extraordinary Elevations and Motions of Spirit, I leave them to
himself, as a Fervor of Fancy. Page 464. Says, Your Election is only secured
by your Effectual Calling, intending, as seems, that every one must have, and
find, a particular time of God's calling him to a State of Regeneration and
Sanctification. This looks to me, like an intended distinguishing Character
betwixt them, who follow Rational Deductions from Scripture, and those who
pretend to be led by the Spirit, in an extraordinary manner, and they must show
us Signs, and Wonders, and mighty Deeds, or else we shall not be able to
believe them, that they are so led: For if other Men work, and live as well as
they, and show as good Fruits of the Spirit, as they, How can they be
distinguished, but by Wonders and mighty Deeds? Say they, by our Special
Calling, Regeneration and Sanctification: But, How shall others know these to
be good, or better than ordinary, but by their Fruits, or mighty Deeds? If
those Deeds, or Fruits extraordinary, do not appear, we have no means to know
them, nor reason to approve them. In Page 461. He said, Let none be so fond to
expect Comfort in Death, until his Soul have first complied with, and obeyed
the Call of God, in the time thereof. Page 463. Says, Souls of Men are as it
were embarked in the Calls of God, and if they be lost, your Souls are lost. I
Collect, he intends, Let your Faith and Practice be what they will, if you have
not a Call to the singular Mode of our Profession, and obey that Call, your
precious Souls, after all this, will be lost. He said before, That when the
Enfranchised Soul was upon its departure, and sat upon the quivering Lips of
the dying Person, neither able to stay in the Body, nor abiding to forsake it,
the State of it was deplorable. This shows, That he imagined the Soul to be an
Intelligent Little Thing, Parcel, or Spark: He does not say, that she is
snatched, or forced away from the Body, nor what should move her to forsake it,
or leave the being in it, or near it, against her Will; and yet I doubt not but
he could have told us that, as well as the foregoing, viz. Imaginando, if he
had pleased. And this calls to mind a Relation made to us by Dr. Collins, in
his Treatise concerning Russia: There, says he, when a Person draws on toward
Death, they set a Basin of fair Water in the Window, and set the Casement also
open, that the parting Soul may have the Opportunity of bathing and refreshing
it self in the Water, and find an open Passage out at the Casement, and not be
enforced to the Contrast of passing through Crannies of the Window, or other
Places. And thus I part with our Author, and finish my intended Observations
upon him.

I read in a Noble Author of our own Nation, That in all Contests, he who
stands only upon his Defense, stands upon no Defense. Seems, Wants one main
part of Defense: viz. The Disarming or Weakening his Opposer; whereby his
intended Defense should be made both more easy and effectual. Thus far in
defending a Tenet opposite to that of our Author, I have used only the Buckler,
in shelter from the dints of his Arguments: but that I may not forsake the
benefit which may accrue in defense, by overthrowing or weakening of the
Opposite Tenet, I shall here begin to sharpen the point and turn the edge of
Argument against the Opposite, not so much Party, as Opinion.

I begin this Argument, Arguendo and Negativis, and I say,

First, That Humane Souls Immateriality, is not taught in the Catechism
publicly used and authorized by our Church. Secondly, It is not imposed by any
of our Thirty nine Articles. Thirdly, It is not expressly required to be
delivered by any of our Three most ancient Creeds. Fourthly, We meet not with
any Canons of the Four First General Councils that recommend it. Fifthly, In
the whole Bible there is not one plain positive Affirmation, That a Humane Soul
does separately subsist after Death of the Body: Nor, That it is Immaterial or
Immortal, nor so much, That it is Intelligent. Sixthly, There are no Sentences
in the Bible, no nor Words, which Doctrinally do teach the Immateriality; viz.
Whose Principal Intent at their Delivery, was to teach the matter of the
Immateriality.
For Proof of this last Assertion, there seems requisite an Examination of the
most Important Particulars alleged for Proof of this Tenet.

Matthew. 10.28. Fear not them who kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul. I take the Doctrine principally intended in this Text to be, A teaching
of the Apostles (then newly instituted) to be bold in their Promulgation of the
Gospel; and in their so doing, to fear more the Power and Wrath of God than of
Men: and with this concurs Luke 12.4. both Evangelists testify this, and agree
fully in it. If Matthew's Text had intended to teach the Immateriality, this
short Expression seems a very transient or even a superficial manner of doing
it: had that therefore been the intent of this Text, it seems some farther
Declaration would here have been made of it. In Verses 32. and 33. pursuing the
same Discourse or Doctrine, our Lord says, Those who confess him, he will
confess before his Father which is in Heaven; and those who deny him, he will
so deny: which (to my apprehension) intimates and intends the Judgment of the
Last Day, where Christ shall be the Judge, and own and disown, as he pleases.
We find, Luke's words in the delivery of this Doctrine, do not mention a
Separate Subsistence, or Killing the Body without Killing the Soul. In the main
intent of the Doctrine, viz. Fearing God more than Men, they agree and say the
same thing; but in words importing the Separate State they differ: ergo, The
main intent of this Text was to teach the fearing of God more than man, and the
words importing a Separate State of the Soul, are but collateral: and St. Luke
deliversng the main Doctrine without these words, or others of like import, it
seems St. Matthew's words which are of that import, may pass for a way of
wording this Doctrine, in Expressions suitable to his Opinion of the thing.

Another Text alleged for Proof of Immateriality, is Luke 23.43. Our Lord to
the Thief, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Such Proof of the
Immateriality as arises from hence, seems clearly no more, but a Collection
upon Inferences; for there appears no Intent in this Text to teach that
Doctrine, viz. of the Immateriality.

Verse. 46. of the same Chap. Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and St.
Stephen's Lord Jesus receive my Spirit; it seems, were not spoken with intent
to teach the Souls Immateriality, or Separate Subsistence; but as a
recommending of themselves to God, and Christ, in the uttermost Extremities of
their Conditions.

The Parable of Dives, Luke 16.19. seems to me, spoken principally upon this
Occasion, Ver. 14. Our Lord's Discourse was derided by the Pharisees: He
answers them, God knows your hearts, for that which is highly esteemed amongst
men, is abomination in the sight of God. This Verse. 15. and Ver. 19. begins the
Parable of Dives, perfectly proper for the Illustration of this Assertion; for
what more highly esteemed amongst Men, than the Condition of Dives? And what
more miserable, than that of Lazarus? And yet, in the sight of God, the Case
was quite contrary. I say, the main Design and Intent of this Parable, seems to
have been, the Illustration of this Doctrine, and not to teach any thing
concerning the Separate Subsistence of Souls, of which it speaks according to
the common conception of that time.

Phil. 1.21. To me, to live is Christ; and to die, is gain. I have a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better, but to abide in the Flesh,
is more needful for you. Here does not appear (to my understanding) any Intent
to teach the Souls Immateriality; but that the state of the Dead in CHRIST, is
more to be desired, and more happy, than a state of Life in this World,
'specially one like that of St. PAVL then; being Paul the Aged, and a Prisoner,
Chap. 2.17. ready to be offered upon the Service and Sacrifice of Faith, Who
would not choose a Death in Christ, rather than such a Life; and would not
abide in the Flesh, but for the Good of other People, and Service of the
Gospel? Here appears no Intent of St. Paul's to teach the Soul's Immateriality.
Mat. 16.26. Of gaining the World, and losing Men's Souls, I hold evidently
unproving.

So 2 Cor. 5.8. Of being absent from the Body, and present with the Lord, has
very little appearance of Proof, and no semblance of Intent to teach the
Immateriality.

These Eight Texts, I take for the most alleged, and the most proving the
Immateriality of a Humane Soul; in which I have pretended to show, That they
intend not (as their prime Design) to Prove, or Maintain, the Immateriality of
an Humane Soul: And I think this goes far in the Proof of my Assertion, viz.
That there are no Sentences, or Words in the Bible, whose principal Intent at
their Delivery, was to assert or teach the Soul's Immateriality. And here I
finish my Proof, ex Negativis: The Belief of the Immateriality is not required
at our hands, nor to be exacted of any Man.

I now proceed to Positive Proofs, importing a greater Probability of the
Humane Soul's being Material and Extinguishable, then Immaterial, and
Separately Subsisting: Intending which, I say, if after Death a Man's Soul
obtain a Separate Subsistence, and be at greater Liberty than it was (living in
the Man) and in a full State and Capacity of Acting, Enjoying, and Suffering:
Then, the calling Man's Death, a Sleep, and a Rest, appears a very improper,
and even a misleading sort of Expression; but the Scripture in very many
places, calls Death a Sleep, and a Rest: Ergo, If the Soul so subsist after
Death, as before is said, the Scripture, in its Terming Death a Sleep, and a
Rest, speaks very improperly, and somewhat misleading in very many Places.

In Proof of the Major Proposition, I say, Those who do sensibly perceive, and
actually understand, remember, believe, and will, cannot properly be said to be
in a dead sleep; nor can those, who act freely, and fully, and enjoy, or
suffer, in a high degree, be properly said to be at Rest: Ergo, If the Soul do
subsist in this manner after Death of the Man, the calling of Death, a Sleep,
and a Rest, appears (at least) a very improper sort of Expression.

To Prove the Minor, viz. That the Scripture calls Death a Sleep, and a Rest,
in very many Places, seems to my self a needless Trouble, or Undertaking; for
that all who are conversant in Scripture, know this thing to be true: But
deploringly, I again consider, that a great part, or a greatest part of People,
are not so well verss'd in this Book, as to be without need of Proof in this
Matter: And for their sakes I take upon my self the Labor of somewhat a
troublesome Induction of Particulars.

In Proof of this Truth therefore, I quote Job 3.13. Why died I not from the
Womb? For if so, I had now been still and quiet. I should have slept, then had
I been at rest.

Ecclesiast. 11.8. If a Man lives many years, and rejoice in them all, yet let
him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. Add to this, Those
who sleep, sleep in the Night; and then this Text seems to Prove a long Sleep,
Job 14.12. Man lies down, and rises not till the Heavens be no more; they
shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep.

Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the Dust of the Earth, shall awake; some
to Life, and some to Contempt.

Mat. 27.52. Many Bodies of Saints which slept, arose, and came out of the
Graves, after his Resurrection. Amongst which (say I, supponendo) was the
Crucified Thief.

Joh. 5.28. The hour is coming, in which, all that are in the Graves, shall
hear his Voice, and shall come forth. Chap. 11.11. He says unto them, Our
Friend Lazarus sleeps, but I go that I may awake him out of sleep. Ver. 13.
Jesus spoke of his Death, and then told them plainly, Lazarus is dead.

Act. 13.36. David, after he had served his Generation by the will of God, fell
on sleep, and saw Corruption. 1 King. 2.10. So David slept with his Fathers,
and was buried in the City of David. So Chap. 11.43. The same for Solomon.

1 Cor. 11.30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep. Chap. 15.6 Christ was seen of above 500 Brethren at once, of whom some
are fallen asleep.

1 These. 4.14. Those also who sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him. Ver. 15.
And we which are alive, shall not prevent them that are asleep. Ver. 16. And
the dead in Christ shall rise first.

These are a Proof, That Death, and Dying, are in Scripture very often termed a
Sleep, and Sleeping.

As to Deaths being there called and counted a Rest, I quote Job 3.17. There
the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest.

Dan. 12.13. Thou shall rest, and stand in the Lot, at the end of the days.

2 These. 1.7. God will recompense Tribulation to them who trouble you, and to
you who are troubled, Rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with his Mighty Angels.

Heb. 4.1. There is a Promise of entering into his Rest. Ver. 3. We who have
believed, do enter into his Rest, as he said. Ver. 6. And some must enter
therein. Ver. 9. There remains therefore a Rest for the People of God. Ver.
10. And those that enter into Rest, cease from their Works.

Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, that they may rest
from their Labors, and their Works do follow them. And thus appears, That
Death, in Scripture, is often called a Rest, and accounted so.

The Scripture speaks thus of Death in very many Places, and even of ordinary
Custom, and Course; and either the thing so delivered, is proper and true, or
the Speeches are improper and misleading. If the Soul subsist, act, and suffer,
after Death, as before is said, the Scripture speaks improperly of Death: But
if there be no Separate Subsistence of the Soul, after Death of the Man, then
these Scriptural Expressions concerning Death, are proper, and true. I have a
great Inclination to believe, that the Scripture speaks properly and truly,
than otherwise: And therefore do conclude, these Expressions are proper, and
true; and that the Soul has not such a Separate Subsistence, as above is
described; but rather that it is Material, and Extinguishes with Death of the
Man.

My Second Argument for positive Proof of this Tenet, rises from many
particular Places of Scripture, to be alleged, and produced, in nature of a
Sorites, each proving by its self, and all fortifying the Tenet intended to be
Defended.

In which, I begin, from a Scripture which discourses most copiously upon the
State of Man after Death, above any other Text whatsoever, Part of the Works
and Doctrine of the Apostle St. Paul, viz. his 1 Cor. 15. he begins there Ver.
13. and says, If there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is Christ not
risen; and then, [viz. consequently] if no Resurrection, our Preaching is vain,
and your Faith is also vain, and we are false Witnesses, and you are yet in
your sins; and they who are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. Upon this I
Argue, If the Soul enjoy a Separate State, and go to Heaven at the Man's Death,
then, How could these dreadful Consequences follow upon the Failure of Truth in
the Doctrine of the Resurrection! For if the Soul go to Heaven at the Death,
that would enjoy Bliss and Happiness in an high degree, though there were no
Resurrection at all: But our Apostle here concludes all Christianity to be in
vain, without a Resurrection. And the next Verse, viz. 19th. he says, If in
this Life only, we have Hope in Christ, we are of all Men the most miserable;
but Christ is risen, and by him came also the Resurrection of the Dead: Which
seems plainly inferring, That if there be no Resurrection, then our Hope in
Christ can extend only to this World, and the things of it; and then we should
be more miserable than other Men, who give themselves more liberty in the
Enjoyment of them: He goes on through this long Chapter, to Treat of the
Resurrection, and the Manner, and Benefits of it. Ver. 58. He concludes, Abound
in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know [by this my Discourse of the
Resurrection] that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord. Thus he discourses
fully and largely upon the Resurrection, without a Word speaking, or a Hint
giving, concerning a Separate Subsistence of Souls, or a particular Judgment,
or any Appertenant to a State intermediate between Death and Judgment final.

I proceed in the Works of this Apostle, and quote him again, 1 These. 4.13. He
would not have them sorrow for their dead Friends, as others who had no Hope,
did: For, says he, We believe that Jesus died, and rose again; and even so
also, those who sleep in Jesus, shall God bring with him, and the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of the Archangel, and
with the Tromp of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then the Elect
living Persons shall be Translated, and caught up to the Clouds, and both sorts
together shall meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall they ever be with the
Lord. Here we may perceive, or collect, That St. Paul directs, to look after
the Resurrection, for Comfort, at, or immediately after, the Death of the
Party. Had he known, or believed a Separate Subsistence of Souls, and a going
to Heaven of the good, immediately after Death of the Party: Our Author gives
it us in these Words, Page 326. Little (says he) do Believers think, what
Visions of God, and Ravishing Sights of Christ, the Souls of their Friends
have, when they are closing their eyes with tears. It seems strange St. Paul
did not know any thing of this delightful Scene; and pity it is, doubtless,
that he was ignorant of such Ravishing Enjoyments, and the quick attainment of
them. Acts 20.20. He kept nothing back that was profitable to his Auditors.
Ver. 27. But declared to them all the Council of God. Had he known, or
believed, the Separate Subsistence, or the particular Judgment, or the
immediate going to Heaven by Angels, or the Ravishing Sights, and Joys so soon
accruing, he would not have kept back all or any of them, from his Proselites
the Thessalonians: But we have Reason to think he would fully and freely have
communicated the same to them, and have raised Edifying and Comfortable
Exhortations, if he had found, or known of sound ground, to erect them upon.
Our Ministers and People, fetch not their Comforts so far as the Resurrection;
but fetch them from Heaven immediately, and hope (with as much likelihood) that
all their Friends Souls go thither, by the Conveyance of Angels: But because
St. Paul here gives us no Encouragement to believe them, for my Part, I cannot
do it; but fix my self for Comfort, in such Cases, upon the Rocky Ground, which
our Apostle here gives us, the Certainty and Assurance of a General
Resurrection, and Judgment.

Our Apostle's former Text, 1 Cor. 15.32. says thus, What shall all the
Afflictions that I have undergone, profit me, if the dead rise not? [But if
the-Case be so,] Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die; [and there is an
end,] casting the whole Expectation of Recompenses future to this Life, upon
the Resurrection, without mention, or regard, of any Intermediate State. Romans
2.5. Thou treasurest up unto thy self, Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God. Ver. 6. Who will render to every
Man according to his Deeds, Honor and Immortality to some, but Indignation and
Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, to all who work evil, etc. to Ver. 16. In the
day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. Plainly, the Day
of the Last Judgment, so as Recompenses shall then be distributed, according to
what Men have done here; and only then, for any thing that appears in this
Text, without mention, or regard to, an Intermediate State.

1 Cor. 1.7, 8. Ye come behind in no Gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord
Jesus, who also shall confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Plainly intending his Second Coming to Judgment,
as the only known Time, for the Expectation of future Recompenses.

1 Cor. 4.5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden Works of Darkness, and manifest the Counsels of
Hearts, and then shall every [deserving] Man have Praise of God: Plainly
denoting the Resurrection, as the Time of Judgment, and Recompenses.

2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his Body, whether good or bad: Still without
hinting any other Time or Place, for future Recompenses.

Philip. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior, the Lord of Glory, who shall change our vile Body, and make it like
his Glorious Body, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all
things unto himself. Still no mention of any Expectation future to this Life,
till our Lord's Second Coming.

2 These. 1.7. It is right for God to recompense harm to them which trouble you,
and to you who are troubled, Rest with us, when the Lord shall appear from
Heaven with his mighty Angels. Chap. 3.5. The Lord airect your hearts into the
Love of God, and unto the patient waiting for Christ. [His Coming again.]

1 Timothy 6.14. Keep this Commandment until the appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ, which in his times he shall show as the only time for Recompenses.

2 Timothy 4.8 Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only,
but unto them also that love his appearing, [ viz. his Second Coming.] And this
applies Chap. 1.12. I suffer without being ashamed; for I know whom I have
believed, and that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him,
against that day. And so, Ver. 18. The Lord grant to Onisephorus, that he may
find Mercy of the Lord in that day. Chap. 4.1. I Charge thee before God and
Christ, who shall Judge the Quick and Dead at his Appearing, and his Kingdom.
All harping upon the same string, viz. the Resurrection, and General Judgment,
without one word mentioning a Particular Judgment, or an Intermediate State.

Tit. 2.13. Teach to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present
world; looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the Great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. No mention of the Hope of a Blessed
Intermediate State.

Heb. 6.2. He will go on to the Doctrines of the main Duties to be performed in
this world, and to the Resurrection of the dead, and that of eternal Judgment,
for the world to come, as the only considerable things. Chap. 9.27. It is
appointed unto Men, once to die, and after that the Judgment. The Last Day, or
Judgment: Not Two, one Particular, and the other General. No mention of more
than One. Chap. 11.35. Others were tortured, not accepting deliverance that
they might obtain, What? Not an immediate going to Heaven of their Souls, but a
better Resurrection. Chap. 12.22. Ye are come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, to
God, and Angels, to the General Assembly, and Church, and just Spirits made
perfect. And see that ye refuse not him that speaks [in the Gospel,] whose
Voice then shook the Earth; yet once more, I shake not the Earth only, but also
Heaven; which signifies the removing of them, [at the Last Day,] aad then we
shall receive a Kingdom, which cannot he moved: And then enjoy the Heavenly
Jerusalem, God, Christ, Angels, the Assembly of the Church perfected, unto
which things we are now come in Faith, Hope, and Expectation; having received a
full and true Declaration of them.

We have thus traversed the large Fields of St. Paul's Epistles, collecting
Evidences concerning his Doctrine and Opinion touching the Future State of
Mankind, after a Death in this World. The Texts of his which have been quoted,
treat particularly of such Future State, and intend to teach concerning the
same, delivering thereupon, according as in the said Quotations has been
expressed.

Before have been quoted (on the other hand) Four Texts of his said Writings,
alleged, in Proof of the Immateriality, viz. 2 Cor. 5. Ver. 6. and 8. and
Phil. 1.23. and Heb. 12.9. and Heb. 12.22. To these I say, none of those Places
treat particularly of the Future State of Mankind, or intend to Teach, or
Examine, what the same shall be. Next, I say, that of these four Places, none
speak Provingly: But Phil. 1.23. viz. His desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ. I say, the Question made thereupon, is concerning the Meaning or
Sense of the Expression, of being with Christ: It intends a State more
desirable, than that which at that time he enjoyed. I take a sleeping in Jesus
to be so, viz. a more desirable State than that, which at that time, he
enjoyed: That this is a Blessed State, we read, Revel. 14.13. after mentioning
the Patience and Faith of the Saints under Persecutions, the Text says, Blessed
are the dead, which die in the Lord, that they may rest from their Labors, and
their Works do follow them. And that it is a State cared for by God, and under
his Protection, appears Romans 14.7. None of us lives to himself, and no man
dies to himself. Ver. 8. For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and
whether we die, we die unto the Lord: Whether we live therefore, or die, we are
the Lord's. Verse 9. For Christ died, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord
both of the dead and living. Ver. 10. We shall all stand before the Judgment
Seat of Christ. So Chap. 4.17. God who quickneth the dead, and calls those
things that be not, as though they were; and so he is the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, for all live unto him; though the Body turn to dust, and the
Soul expire, yet neither of then are lost. Joh. 11.23. Our Lord says to Martha,
Thy Brother shall rise again. She Answers, I know that he shall rise again at
the Resurrection of the Last Day. He Replies, I am the Resurrection, and the
Life; he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and
whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die. Viz. So as to fall out of
my Care, or Protection, or Knowledge; thy Brother shall rise again speedily;
and for others, Joh. 6.39. Of that which my Father has given me, I will lose
nothing, but will raise it up at the Last Day. Ver. 40. All who believe in me,
shall have Everlasting Life, and I will raise them up at the Last Day: (Which
Paul to Tim. calls That Day.) So Ver. 44. and 54. All speak of raising
Believers up at the Last Day, to receive Blessings and Rewards, whereas the
rising of the Wicked shall be attended with a Second Death. This intends an
Answer, additional, to Paul's Desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

And touching the whole Course of this Apostle's Writings, concerning a State
of Mankind after Death, my Quotations make it appear, That either he knew of no
Intermediate State betwixt Death and the Resurrection, or else he did not
Acknowledge, or Believe it: For his Knowledge, that there was an Opinion in the
World, of Souls Subsisting in a Separate State from their Bodies, there are
great Probabilities, as that Solomon's Text, The Spirit returns to God. And St.
Matthew's Text of, Cannot kill the Soul: And both Heathen and Jewish Opinions
to that purpose, it seems, could hardly escape his Knowledge: But most likely
it is, that he did not acknowledge, or believe the Truth of that Opinion; for
that in any of his Writings upon that Subject, he does neither relate to it,
nor mention it, much less does he confirm, or approve it; but puts all
Expectation of Rewards or Punishments Future to this World, upon the Score and
Account of the Resurrection: And upon the foot of that Account I leave it, with
this Apostle, intending to Examine what other Apostles have written to the same
Purpose.

I proceed to the Epistle of St. James, and quote out of it, Chap. 1.12.
Blessed is the Man that endures Temptation, for when he is tried, he shall
receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.
In Words very like 2 Timothy 4.8. and of the same Import, and that applies the
receiving of the Crown to that Day, or the Last Day. So Chap. 5.7. Be patient,
Brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Ver. 8. Again, Be patient, for the
coming of the Lord draws nigh: Gives no Expectatation of Recompenses, till
the coming of the Lord.

I go on to St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.4. You are begotten to an Inheritance
incorruptible, reserved in Heaven for you. Ver. 5. Who are kept by the power of
God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time: Does
not say to be revealed at the times of your Death. So Chap. 5.4. When the chief
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory, that fades not away:
Agreeing with Paul, and James, just before. Chap. 4.5. Those who speak evil of
you, shall give account to him, who is ready to judge the quick and the dead.
This must intend the Resurrection; for that no Judgment shall pass of the quick
and the dead together, till that time. Ver. 13. Rejoice, in as much as ye are
Partakers of Christ's Sufferings; that when his Glory shall be revealed, you
may be glad also with exceeding Joy. This proves (to my understanding) that the
Ravishing Joys of a newly departed Soul, were unknown to this Prime Apostle.

2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows to deliver the Godly, and to reserve the Unjust
unto the day of Judgment, to be punished. So Ver. 4. Evil Angels are delivered
into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment. Jude, Ver. 6. Those
Angels are reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of
the Great Day. This shows what sort of Judgment was before intended. Chap.
3.12. What manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness, looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein
all shall be burnt up; but we look for new Heavens and Earth; and seeing ye
look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in Peace,
without spot, and blameless. Thus he exhorts to a Holy Life, from the
expectation of the Great Day of Judgment, and Dissolution of the Earth, Sky,
and Elements about it, without a word of Separated Souls, or a particular
Judgment, or an Intermediate State between Death and Judgment final. And hence,
it seems, St. Peter believed them not, nor liked to build any thing upon them.

Some have Alleged 1 Pet. 3.19. to Prove the Separate Subsistence of Souls,
viz. That Christ was quickened by the Spirit; by which also he went, and
preached to the Spirits in Prison, etc. Concerning this Text, I have said
before, that I do not understand it: If I should offer to prove by this Text,
it would be to prove what I know not; by what I do not understand, and what I
would not offer, I cannot agree to accept. My desire is to have the
Immateriality, or Separate Subsistence of Souls, proved by some Texts that I do
understand; and because I do not understand this Text, I refuse to accept it,
as a Proof of the Separate Subsistence of Souls:

And proceed to observe in the Writings of St. John, 1 John 2.28. Little
Children, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and
not he ashamed before him at his coming. And Chap. 3.2. Beloved, now we are the
Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. Both
these Texts put all our Expectations after Death, to the future Appearing or
Coming of Christ, and still without notice of any State or Thing Intermediate
between Death and the Resurrection.

Jude, Ver. 14. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to
execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds, and speeches spoken against him. Referring all
Judgment future to Life, unto that of the Great, or Last Day, as we have found
it done before, by all the Apostles, whose Writings are come to our hands, with
a Consent and Agreement amongst them, much above ordinary; and which Testifies
they were le^ by the same Spirit, promised to lead them into all Truth. We see
this Promise, actually and completely fulfilled in the Texts alleged out of
all their Writings, and wherein they all say the same things.

We now go on to the Search of the Four Evangelists, according to our Lord's
Direction, Search the Scriptures, Mat. 13.36. Christ Expounds his Parable of
the Tares, he will not have them weeded, or rooted up in this World, but
suffered to grow here: But Ver. 40. At the end of the world, the Angels shall
gather them, and cast them into a Furnace of Fire. Ver. 43. and then shall the
Righteous shine forth, as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Without
Mention, or Notice, of an Intermediate Judgment, or State.

Chap. 19.28. Ye who have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of Man
shall fit in the Throne of his Glory; ye shall sit on Twelve Thrones, judging
the Twelve Tribes of Israel; and every one who has suffered for my sake, shall
receive an Hundred Fold, and shall inherit Everlasting Life. Observe, Peter
Ver. 27. had asked our Lord, what Rewards, they who had forsaken all for his
Sake, should have therefore? Christ gives the abovesaid Answer: But if he had
intended, or known of an Immediate going to Heaven of Souls, upon Death of
Parties; it seems, that in this place, he could not reasonably have omitted the
Mention of it: Whence likely, he neither intended it, nor knew of it.

Chap. 16.27. The Son of shall come in the Glory of his Father, with his
Angels; and then, he shall reward every Man according to his Works. The Words,
[And then he shall reward,] [seem to import, That this Second Coming of our
Lord, is the only known Time appointed for the distribution of Recompenses
future to this Life.

Mark 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and my Words, of him shall the
Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy
Angels. Without notice taking of any Intermediate Time or State.

Luke 12.8. He that confesses me before men, I will confess him before the
Angels of God; and he that denies me before men, shall be denied before the
Angels of God. Chap. 13.25. When the Master of the House has shut the door,
those knocking without cannot come in; but the workers of Iniquity shall go to
the place of weeping and gnashing of teeth. This seems the Effect of a General
Judgment. Chap. 10.14. It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the Day
of Judgment, than for you. Ver. 12. More tolerable in that day, for Sodom, than
for that City. Chap. 14.14. Call to thy Feast, the Poor, Lame, and Blind, and
thou shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee, for thou shall be
recompensed at the Resurrecteon of the Just. This seems plainly proving the
Resurrection to be the Time, and even the only Time for Expectation of
Recompenses; and that delivered by our Lord's own Mouth, the highest Authority
that Christians can expect, or desire.

Job. 5.28. All that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shad come
forth; they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and they that
have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation. Who shall hear his Voice in
the Graves? Not the Bodies, or Souls, but the dead Persons; and they shall come
forth, at that Time only, and be doomed, and judged, to Life, or Damnation.
Chap. 6.39. My Father's Will is, that of all which he has given me, I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the Last Day. Ver. 40. He that
believes on the Son, shall have Everlasting Life, and I will raise him up at
the Last Day. Ver. 44. He that comes to me, I will raise him up at the Last
Day. Ver. 54. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, I will raise him up
at the Last Day. In the 2d. and 3d. of the Revelations, there are a great
Variety of Rewards promised to him that overcomes; but here the only Reward in
our four Places, is to be raised up at the Last Day, to Life Everlasting, as an
abundant Recompense for all Faith, Performances, and Sufferings; and shows that
to be the only Time, future to this World, when they are to be warrantably, and
upon good grounds, expected, and hoped for by all true Believers. Chap. 12.48.
The Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge a Man at the Last Day. As
Mat. 12.36. Of every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give account at
the day of Judgment. If they had given such an Account of a Particular Judgment
soon after Death, What need can there be of bringing idle Words to Account over
again, at the General Judgment? There seems no Probability in it. Chap. 14.1.
Let not your Hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in Me; in my
Fathers House are many Mansions, and I go to prepare a Place for you; and if I
go, and prepare a Place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my
self, that where I am, there ye may be also. This shows when Recompencs are
warrantable to be expected, viz. at Christ's Second Coming; and to look for
them sooner, is against his own Direction in this Text: Well fortified and
confirmed by, Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins
may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence
of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ, whom the Heaven must receive,
until the times of the restitution of all things: The time, when amongst other
things, Men shall be restored to their former Beings, and become the same
Persons that they were before; and so shall account at the Last Judgment, and
in all probability not before. Well but what becomes of people in the mean
time? I take it for most likely, that the Body verges to Dust Gradatim, and the
Flame of Life (which I take for the Soul) extinguishes in Death; as Dr. Willis
says, Illico nihil est, it vanishes, as the Flame of Spirit of Wine, when the
Spirit is consumed: And thus (I conceive) Men die; thus they rest, and
Believers sleep in Jesus, till time of the Restitution of all things: Job
14.12. Even as the Flood decays and dries up, so Man lies down and rises
not at all, till the Heavens be no more: they shall not awake, nor be raised
out of their sleep. Thus Job and I agree punctually in our State of Death, and
so we do in that of the Resurrection. Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the later day upon the Earth; and though,
after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God. And as
1 John 3.2. We know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we
shall see him as he is. At his Second Coming, and not till then; not by going
to Heaven in Effigy: But till then, Believers in Death enjoy such a Rest, as
the Revel. calls Blessed: They sleep in Jesus, and rest from their Labors. So
Heb. 4.1. There is a Promise left us of entering into his Rest. Ver. 6. Some
must enter therein. Ver. 9. There remains a Rest to the People of God. Ver. 10.
He that is entered into his Rest, has ceased from his own Works, as God did
from his. And such a Rest, is a pious Death, and in assured hope of a joyful
Resurrection. Dan. 12.13. The Angel says to him, Go thy way, till the end be;
for thou shall rest, and stand in the Lot at the end of the days. And here I
cease, and rest my Second positive Argument against the Immateriality and
Separate Subsistence of Souls, and their going to Heaven or Hell before the
Resurrection.

And upon this Argument, I intend to make Three short Observations. The First
of which, grows from our Author's Expressions, Page 49. of his said Book. There
he says, It Is a great Mistake, that the Soul is capable only of Social Glory,
[or Suffering] or a Blessedness in Partnership with the Body; and that it can
neither exert its own powers, nor enjoy its own happiness, in the absence of
the Body. The Opinion of a sleeping Interval of the Soul, he says, took its
rise from this Error; They conceived the Soul to be so dependant upon the Body
(at least in all its Operations) that when Death rends it from the Body, it
must needs be left as in a swoon or sleep, unable to exert its proper Powers,
or enjoy that felicity which we ascribe to it, in its state of Separation. Thus
our Author: To which I Reply, They who so conceived, were Fathers very Ancient,
and of great Authority in the Church; and (in my Opinion) the Ground they stood
upon was firm, and good, viz. they, and we, and all Men, who consider, may, and
do perceive by hourly Experiences, that the Soul does no more act, or suffer
without the Body, than the Body without the Soul; nor either of them without
the other. This, constant Experience teaches: To this also, Reason very well
agrees; and Men have never yet met with good Reason, plain Experience, or clear
Scripture, to the contrary. Nor does our Author, or any other, show any
convincing, or strong, or likely Evidence that ever any Soul did, or that it
can act or suffer without Partnership with the Body, and in Conjunction with
it: It may be asked, How then can it subsist in a State of Separation from the
Body, if it can neither act nor suffer without it? I Answer, That I am not to
Account for such a Subsistence, because I deny the thing, and say the Soul
extinguishes in Death: But those who held both Opinions, viz. The Separate
State, and the Non-Activity, did imaginarily, cast the Soul into such a Swoon
or Sleep, as the Author mentions, in a Limbus or Dormitory, created by
Invention to that purpose; and those who so believe both Opinions, are
necessitated to invent such Places. That the Soul neither acts nor suffers,
without the Body, being true, and the Separate Subsistence, being granted,
Places for Dormitories, were a reasonable, and necessary Invention: But if the
Truth stand with me, and the Soul extinguish in Death, it neither acts nor
suffers without the Body; nor yet is there need to invent Dormitories or
Purgatories for reception of such Souls, as have no real Subsistence. He has
truly related a Cause, why the Ancients did believe Souls rested in Dormitories
till the Resurrection, not going to Heaven or Hell, till that time, and a
Reunion with their Bodies; viz. Because they believed Souls could not act, or
suffer without their Bodies, according to the common Course of Nature and
Experience. This I agree to be true, and a reasonable Ground for them to stand
upon in this Point, and that they erred only in believing a Separate
Subsistence; whence they were forced to invent Dormitories. But I say, though
the Author have given us a true and good Cause, why the Ancients thought Souls
went not to Heaven or Hell before the Resurrection, grounded upon the Nature
and Constitution of Mankind; there is another Cause and Reason for their so
believing, as true, well grounded, and evident, as the former, which will weigh
with many Believers, more than that can do, viz. The Tenor and Consent of all
the Texts before quoted by me in this Argument. There is another Mavelous
Agreement amongst them; for all say the same things, viz. That all Men must
after Death appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, at his Second Coming, at
that Day, at the Last Day, when he shall appear: Without mention of any other
Time, or any other Judgment, or any going to Heaven or Hell in the mean time.
This sort of Declaration of the state of things after Death, was a good and
sufficient Ground for those Ancients, to believe that Souls went not to Heaven
or Hell before the Resurrection; and I hold this Declaration to be a good,
true, and sufficient Ground for People so to believe at this day. And with this
I finish my first Observation upon this Argument.

2. My Second Observation concerns an Objection which has been and may be made
against my pretense of the Souls Extinguishment at the Death of the Party. It
is demanded, If the Old Flame of Life be extinguished in Death, and anew
kindled at the Resurrection, how can that which rises, be the same with that
which died? And if not so, the new must be rather taken for a Creation than a
Resurrection? To this I answer by another Question concerning the Body, How can
that Body whose Flesh and Bones are eaten by Wolves or Dogs (as Jezabel's was)
or burnt to Ashes, and those scattered in the Wind, or upon the Water, rise the
same again at the Last Day? To this Query, St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. gives an
Answer, which it seems will serve both Cases alike; ver. 35. How are the dead
raised, and with what Body do they come? He answers, That which thou sowest is
not quickened except it die, and thou sowest not that which shall be: For
Example, Wheat the Grain sown first corrupts, then fructifies, and God makes
the New grow out of the Old; and God gives it a Body, viz. to every seed its
own Body: and thence Wheat rises from Wheat, and Barley from Barley; plainly
declaring that in the Resurrection, the New Body shall be the same with the Old
in Substance, Flesh and Blood, Skin and Bone, Head and Heart, Brain and Breath,
Limbs, Members, Muscles, and all Organs proportionable to the Old, as one Grain
of Wheat, or like as one Egg to another. This I take for the Sameness of Body,
which the Apostle here describes to us; and such a Sameness will the Soul
easily obtain, viz. a Flame of Life, as much the same with the former: As a
Flame in one part of a Fire kindles, and produces a Flame in another part of
the Fire; singly there are so many Flames, and yet all are but the Flame of the
same Fire, and may well enough be called the same Flame, full as well as the
Ear of Wheat, and all the Corns of it, may be called Wheat, and the same Wheat
with that which was sown. And this Solution, it seems, may serve for the Souls,
as well as St. Paul's Wheat for the Body; and one of them shall be as much the
same, as the other: But (to my Apprehension) the Sameness intended in the
Resurrection, is not so much, or properly applicable to the Soul or the Body,
as to the Person: The Body suitable to the former, and like it, as one Grain of
Wheat like and proportionable to that from which it springs: So a Flame of
Life, of suitable force, brightness and activity, to the former, and fit for
that Body where it is kindled, these will in the Person, produce the same
Faculties that were in the former Person, viz. The same Vital Powers, Sensitive
Powers; same Inclinations, Affections, Desires Natural; the same Rational
Powers, Perception, Understanding, Fancy, Judgment, Memory, Will, Conscience:
And these will make the rising Person altogether the very self and same Person
with that which died; more the same than an Old Man is the same with what he
was when Young, or a Child: Compare a Child of four years, to a Man of
fourscore, they are known really to be the same Person, by Collateral
Evidences; but none, by having known the Child, can expect by his Senses to
discover the Old Man to be the same Person; nor can the Old Man himself
evidently know, or make Proof by any thing in himself, that he is the same
Person; so great Differences grow in time, between the one Age and the other.
But the Person rising at the Last Day, may likely be as much the same with him
that died, as the Man waking after a long Sleep, is the same with him that lay
down to take his Rest: There will be Body, Soul, and Person, without
difference, and the same Powers, Vital, Sensitive, Rational, Inclinations,
Affections, Cogitations and Knowledge; all which, make effectually, and really
the same Person, and more the same than the Old Man is with the Young, and yet
those are really the same Person also.

3. My Third Observation shall be, concerning such Texts, as those who maintain
the Immateriality and Separate Subsistence of Souls do Allege, both out of the
Evangelists, and the Apostolic Writings, for the Proof and Support of that
Opinion: Viz.

Mat. 10.28. Are not able to kill the Soul, Chap. 16.26. Gain the whole World,
and lose his own Soul.

Luke 16.19. The Parable of Dives. Chap. 23.43. To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Ver. 46. Jesus cried, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. And
Acts 7.59. Stephen's Saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

2 Cor. 5. Ver. 6. and 8. Absent from the Body, and present with the Lord.
Phil. 1.23. To depart and be with Christ is better, but to abide in the Flesh
is more needful for you. Heb. 12.9. Ye have been obedient to your fleshly
Fathers, and shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits? Ver. 22. Ye are come to Mount Sion, God, Christ, and the Spirits of
Just Men made Perfect.

1 Pet. 3.19. He went and preached to the Spirits in Prison. Rev. 6.9. The
Souls under the Altar.

Here are 11 Quotations Alleged to Prove the Separate Subsistence of Souls,
and their Immateriality: And some add to these, Mat. 17. Moses and Elias
appearing at the Transfiguration, which makes them up a Dozen.

I have made, and do make one General Observation upon them all, viz. That they
are all spoken, or delivered, in a transient manner, not principally intending
to teach the Immateriality, or Separate Subsistence of Souls; not in Places
where the Contexts before lead to a Discourse concerning the Nature or State of
Souls, or what becomes of them after Death, or between that and the
Resurrection; so as there is not a Design in any of these Texts, principally to
teach that Doctrine: Nor any clear Intention apparent, to teach at all this
Belief. For Instance,

The Absent from the Body, and present with the Lord; or the, To day shall thou
be with me in Paradise: Or the, Receive my Spirit: Or the, Be Obedient to the
Father of Spirits: Or the, We are come to God, Christ, and his Church: Or the,
Preaching to the Spirits in Prison: Or the, Souls under the Altar: Or the,
Appearing of Moses and Elias at Tabor. I demand, what do these Texts, of
themselves, teach concerning a Separate State or Subsistence of Souls? There is
no previous Discourse in their Contexts, leading to speak of the State of
Souls, or inducing to teach concerning them; nor apparent Intent in any of
these Texts, so to do: But Men possessed with an Opinion of the Separate
Subsistence, do draw, and beat out of these Texts, that which does not
naturally flow from them; nor that they ever intended to teach; so as the
Doctrine squeezed out of these Texts for the Nourishment and Support of their
Opinion, tastes strongly of the Husk and Skins of them; and are rather
violently forced, than freely and fairly flowing, from the Words and Intent of
these Scriptures. Well, but still there are Four Texts not instanced in, and
which seem to make appear an Intent to teach this Doctrine; concerning them, I
say, that Mat. 10. and Phil. 1. show not a principal Intent so to teach: That
of Mat. teaches principally, to fear God more than men; the Philip. intends
principally to show, That Paul would have Christ magnified by his Life, or by
his Death; and that it was indifferent to him, by whether of these means that
end should be attained: By Death, would be easier, and a more Gain to him; but
by Life, he thought might be more profitable and beneficial to them and the
Church. This seems the principal Intent and Scope of this Text, and not to
teach a Separate Subsistence, or Immateriality of Soul.

Mat. 16. About Gaining the World, and losing the Soul, seems to show an Intent
of teaching concerning Souls; and the Hinge of its Meaning, turns upon the
Signification of the Word Soul in this Place: Our Lord previously Exhorts his
Disciples to take up the Cross, and follow him. Expect Tribulation in his
Doctrine, For whosoever will save his Life, shall lose it; and whosoever will
lose his Life for my sake, shall find it: For, What is a Man profited, if he
shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or, What shall a Man give in
Exchange for his Soul? My Sense of this Text, is, That the Words, Soul and
Life, are consignificant; as if it had been said, He that saves his Life, shall
lose it; and he that loses it, shall find it: For, What is a Man profited, if
he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Life? Or, What can a Man give
in Exchange for his Life? If one lose his Life, the gain of the whole World can
do him no good, nor make him a Recompense for it: And the Devil could say, All
that a Man has would he give for his Life. Nor would any Man of Sense, take
the World in Exchange for his Life; for that the World is of no Use or Value to
the Dead: So as there is nothing in this Text of the Soul, but the Word, or
Term, which I have before plentifully proved to signify and intend, very
often, the Person, the Affection, the Intellect, and the Life: And I take it
here to intend the Life of the Person, and not the Soul, which is the Forma
Informans of the Man.

To the Parable of Dives, Luke 16. I have fully spoken, and observed, That it
is but a Parable, not Explained or Expounded by our Lord, that we know of: I
take it spoken in Illustration of our Lord's Doctrine delivered but three
Verses before, viz. That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination
in the sight of God, as being very proper for that purpose; and that the
Discourse held in it between Dives and Lazarus, is suited to the common Opinion
of the People to whom he spoke, and does not intend a true Relation of the
State of Souls after Death.

I conceive, the Text 10. Mat. and this Parable, to be like the Two Pillars of
Dagon's House, the main Props of the Immaterial Opinion; upon which the whole
Weight of it leans, propped also by the other Texts before rehearsed, but
weakly: And I leave the Consideration, to such as shall happen to peruse what
has here been Collected, and put together, intending, singly, the Search and
Manifestation of the Truth in this Point.

Our Author Flavel, lays the Foundation for Proof of the Separate Subsistence
of Souls, upon Moses his Text quoted Page 1. of his Book, viz. Genesis 2.7. God
formed Man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath
of Life, and Man became a Living Soul. And the Words of this Text he takes upon
him to Interpret, and by his so doing, verefies the Old Saying, Mala
Interpretatio corrumpit Textum; for thus he Interprets: This Text, says he,
proves and intends, that God did then Create a Spirit or Soul out of nothing;
for Man, viz. an Immaterial, Intelligent Substance, or Spirit; and that was
either, first Created, and then Infused, or Infundendo, was Created, in the
very Act of Infusion. I will raise no Dispute with him about the Mode, or
Manner of his intended Creation; be it Created and Infused, or Infundendo
Created: But I say, that either way taken, it is not warranted by the Letter,
or Words of the Text; for therein is no Mention, of Spirit, or Creation out of
nothing, or any sort of Creation whatsoever: So his Interpretation is not
warranted by the Words or Letter of the Text; and that it is more opposed by
the Sense and Meaning of the Text, than it is by the Letter of it: For if the
Text, or Moses, had intended or meant, that the Breath of Life breathed into
Adam, should be taken for such a Spirit, it would have been more plainly
expressed in the Text; or at least, the propriety of speaking would have
required to have had it expressed after another manner, viz. God breathed into
Adam the Breath of Life; and it, or that, viz. that Breath, became a Living
Soul: But the Text is otherwise Worded, it neither says, nor intends, that the
Breath became a Living Soul, but that the Man did so. And I say farther, that
by the Man's becoming a Living Soul, is not intended, that he became a Soul
merely, or singly, called by Aristotle, (...), and Expounded by, Actus primus
Corporis Organici: Not such a bare Soul without a Body, (a thing never yet
known in Rerum Natura,) but a Living Soul in Composito, viz. a Living Person,
Man became a Living Person, Heb. 10.39. We are of them that believe to the
Salvation of the Soul. viz. of the Person: For all Agree the Body shall have a
Salvation, as well as he Soul. I perceive that the Term of Soul, very often in
Scripture, intended to signify the Person, is a great occasion of misleading
the Apprehension of the Readers, inducing them to apply to the single and bare
Soul, those Sayings which are intended of, or for, the Person: So is the Case
now Cited, Heb. 10. and so in our Text now Examined; and because the Correcting
and Emendation of this Mistake, seems to be of very great Importance, I have
before given many Instances of the Usage, in Scripture Expressions, in a
multitude of Places, and yet not in half of those that I might have done. And
because this Truth cannot be made too apparent, and with great difficulty plain
enough, I will touch a few Instances of it again in this Place. Gen, 46.26. All
the Souls that came out of Jacob's Loins into Egypt, were 66, and Joseph's
Sons were two Souls; so all the Souls of Jacob's House were 70, counting Jacob
and Joseph. Here Souls can intend nothing but Persons. Acts 27.37. In Paul's
Voyage toward Rome, and Shipwreck at Malta, there were in all, in the Ship,
276 Souls, viz. Persons. Isa. 53.10. Thou shall make his Soul an Offering for
Sin, viz. his Person: For none will deny his Body to have been made a visible
Offering for Sin, one as well, and as much as the other; his whole Person was
so. Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hand I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me.
David was then alive, and in Condition to write this Psalm, and had a Body as
well as a Spirit, and under the Term of Spirit, commended his Person, or
himself to God. Luke 23.56. Our Lord did the very same; he knew his Body was to
rise early upon the Third Day, yet Cried, Father into thy hands I commend my
Spirit: Recommending by that Term, himself, or his Person, Soul and Body. So
David, My Soul is among Lions, deliver my Soul from the Sword; the Lord is with
them that uphold my Soul, viz. Deliver me, uphold me. So Jonathan loved David
as his own Soul, viz. as he did himself, his own Person. And this Form of
Expression seems agreeable enough to Reason, and common Practice in other
Cases, Pars pro Toto: As we use to say, Sweet Soul, and dear Heart; Forma dat
esse rei. And so Men frequently use, by the most noble Part, to express or
denote the whole: And hence I conclude, that the last Part of Moses's Text
here, is well Paraphrased; And Man became a Living Person, without intent to
speak of a Soul by its self, or otherwise, then as in conjunction with the
Body, it helped to make up the Person: And because this is a Material Point,
and beats hard upon our Opponents Foundation, another Parallel Text shall be
cited, for Illustration and Confirmation of the same; viz. Ezech. 37. The
Prophecy over dry Bones, which thereupon came together, and the Sinews, and
Flesh came up upon them, and the Skin covered them above, but there was no
Breath in them: Then he was commanded to Prophecy over these Bones, yet not to
call for Souls or Spirits for their Animation, but to say to the Wind, Thus
says the Lord God, Come from the four Winds, O Breath, and breathe upon these
slain, that they may live: And thereupon, the Breath came into them, and they
lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great Army. Here, it seems,
we have a Specimen of the First Man's Creation, viz. His Body was first made
ready for that Animating Breath, which should first tine and kindle the Flame
of Life in his Body, then made ready for it: And this Flame, constantly fanned
by Respiration, and un-put out, or extinguished by any violent, or other means,
seems to be the Actus primus Corporis Organici. Whilst that continues flaming
and glowing, the Person lives; when that is extinguished, the Person dies
beyond Remedy; and being once extinguished in all Parts of the Body, it cannot
be again re-kindled, but by fresh Fire from Heaven, or a Divine Power. Our
Author, Page 252. He says, The Radical Moisture, which is daily consuming by
the Flame of Life, must needs be spent e're long. And I say, that if this Flame
be not fed and nourished by Food, and Viands competent, and of suitable Nature,
this Flame must first diminish, then decay, and lastly be extinguished, as
daily Experience teaches in Times of Scarcity and Famine, and the like
distressing Accidents: So as this Vision gives us some Traces, whereby the
manner of Adam's Creation, and the Infusion of the Breath of Life into him, may
guessingly be collected: And as it directs backwards to the Creation, so it
does it forwards, open some Prospect toward the manner of our expected
Resurrection; in which, after the Body shall have been made ready, and
complete, for the Reception and Nourishment of it, the Animating Breath shall
again kindle in it the Flame of Life, as by God shall be appointed, for the
Actuating such Raised Bodies, and as it did before their former Dissolution:
And this Flame will be of the same Kind and Nature with the former, and as much
the same, as the Bodies then Rising, will be the same Bodies with the former:
before it was a body with such Organs, acted by a Natural Flame of Life; and
the same shall it be after the Resurrection, with this Change to the Blessed,
that their Natural Body shall be made a Spiritual Body. By this Counter
Exposition of Moses's Text before recited, I pretend to have battered and
shaken, or even to have overthrown the First, and one of the Main Foundations
of our Author's Opinion, upon which he principally insists, and grounds himself
in the first 46 Pages of his Book.

And I now proceed to propound an Argument in direct Opposition to his Opinion
and all that he has said in maintenance of the same. Thus then I argue, That
which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, but the Soul as well as the Body is
generated and comes of Flesh: Ergo, The Soul is a Material and not an
Immaterial Intelligent Spirit. The Major of these Propositions is apparently
agreeable to the Course of Nature; and John 3* 6. sufficiently supported by our
Lords own Assertion. The Minor I prove by Genesis 5.3. Adam begat a Son in his own
likeness, after his Image. Hence I argue, Adam after the breathing into him of
the Breath of Life, became a Living Person, and continued to be so, at the
Procreation and Birth of his Son; therefore the Procreation of a Son in his own
likeness, intends, That the Son was generated a Living Person: but so he could
not be, without a Soul or Spirit. James 2.26. The Body without the Spirit is
dead: and Nature agrees, viz. That one cannot be a Living Person, unless he
have the two Essential Parts, which constitute the same; viz. Body and Soul. It
seems clear, That when Adam begat a Son, he begat a Living Person: and that so
he could not be without a Soul: Ergo, Adam begetting a Son in his own likeness
(a Living Person) begat his Soul as well as his Body. And for a farther Proof
of my Minor Proposition, I argue again, from Genesis 1.28. and 9.2. God says to
our First Parents, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth, and bring
forth abundantly in the Earth. Hereupon I say, That if Man do not beget a Son
in his own likeness, after his Image, viz. a Living Person, as Adam is said to
do, it could not be in the Power or Nature of Man to replenish the Earth with
other Men or Persons like himself: or of his own Kind and Nature. And to
believe or maintain otherwise, crosses not only the import of these Texts, but
the common experience of Mankind also: and the Evidences app^aring every day,
for Children are born (all the World over) with their perfection of parts,
little indeed, but magnum in parvo and potentia, and perfectly Living Persons,
in the likeness of their Parents; and the very Abbreviations and Epitomes of
them. Some say (but they are but vain words) That the Parents procreate the
Body only, but the Soul (a Praeexistent Spirit, lies hovering in the Air,
watching every New Procreation of a Body, and thence if glides down into the
Impregnated Womb, and insinuates it self into the Seed or the Embrion, they
cannot well tell whether. Others say, God creates New Souls, pure innocent
Spirits, for each new Procreation, be it by Adultery, Incest. Buggery, so as
the Shape be Humane: So often as people commit these Crimes with success, God
is ready to make a New Soul for every Procreated Body, and that then he puts or
casts these new, innocent, pure Souls, or Intelligent Spirits, into Bodies so
procreated in Sins of the deepest Dye. And what can this poor intelligent
Spirit do to prevent its going into a Body procreated in and by wickedness, and
where she is sure to be polluted with Original Sin, before she knows where she
is. If this were a true Story, the Case of such Souls were much to be lamented;
and what Augustus said of being Herod's Son, might reasonably enough be applied
to it. The making and using of Souls after such a fashion, are alike contrary
to the Goodness and Honor of God: and the Invention is such, as wants the
ordinary grace of Romance: viz. to be made probable or something like the
Truth. It is not so much as offered, or attempted to be proved, by any Sentence
or Thing recorded or appearing in either of God's Two Great Books of Nature or
Scripture: and therefore it shall here be forsaken and left to the Maintainers,
as a rotten Prop for the Immateriality: for which only intent it was first
invented and set on foot, and is still continued for that very Design: and
neither does, nor can serve, for any other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever.
Now rejecting both these Opinions, viz. Of the Praeexistence and the New
Creation of Souls upon every Procreation of Bodies. I stick to and maintain the
Third Opinion; viz. That Souls are generated together with their Bodies, by
Virtue and Power of Gods benediction, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish
the Earth: Procreate Children like your selves, from one end of the World to
another, according to the Course appointed for all other Animals. Shall we say
or think, That a Man generates more imperfectly than an Horse or a Bull: our
Experience does not so prove to us: nor does our Reason persuade us to believe
it: and Scripture affords no Proof of it: How comes it then to be so generally
professed to be believed, only from an ardent Mistaking Zeal, to maintain a
Separate Subsistence of Souls; without which the Old World could not, and the
later and present do not, or will not conceive and believe Recompenses future
to this life, can be, and will be fully and sufficiently distributed to
Mankind, according to their Behaviors in this Life: they will continue to
believe, That if Men's Souls have not a Subsistence in Separation from their
Bodies, the expectation of sufficient future Recompenses is destroyed: and this
grows from the Pulpit, where the Doctrine of the Resurrection has been utterly
put to silence, by the Opinion of Souls going presently to Heaven upon Death.
And if in truth the Case were so, the Doctrine of the Resurrection might well
enough be laid aside, as it is, and fall into disesteem, as little useful for
the advancement of future Recompenses. The desire, I say, of maintaining a
Separate State of the Soul for such purposes, drives some to invent, and most
Men to believe such very unlikely and unreasonable Proposals and Assertions, as
I have late before, and do here relate and endeavor to detect and confute. Our
Author has the Ingenuity to confess, That the Opinion of the Generation of
Souls as well as Bodies, is very ancient, and was generally maintained by the
Western Churches. But, say I, the Opinion of the Separate Subsistence of Souls
has even quite rooted it out, and that of necessity; for what comes of the
Flesh, cannot naturally be Immaterial, and to maintain Immateriality, we find
Men proneto deny visible, experienced Truths, and accept of gross, unreasonable
Fictions, Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum, when it falls under a
confident Mistake; as Christ foretells his Disciples, When they persecute you,
they will think that (in so doing) they do God good Service: And what if the
present Writer meet with a like Usage? He may say with St. Paul, Galat. 26. Am
I therefore become your Enemy, [or will you count me your Enemy?] because I
tell you the Truth? Or that which I believe to be so. It seems such Proceeding
would be both Unkind, and Unchristian. Joh. 8 40. Our Lord says, You s^ek to
kill me, a Man that tells you the Truth; [and even for telling them the Truth]
this did not Abraham. The best sort of People will not do so, but they are ever
the fiercest; and therefore, Persecution and Reproach, are natural and common
Consequences, of those Endeavors which intend to stemm the Tide of a commonly
received Opinion, and ro^e against the stream of it. Acts 21 Paul was foretold
of a heavy Persecution, but he would not be persuaded to go out of the Right
Way for avoiding it, and as his Friends ceased, so I rest my self, Ver. 14.
saying, The Will of the Lord be done. Our Present Text now under Examination,
Proves, The Ancient Western Churches, and amongst them, St. Austin, were in the
Right, in thinking the Soul Generated, as well as the Body; and that God's
Direction is still observed by Nature: For Men now, as Adam did, get Children
after their own likeness: viz. Living and Animated Persons: and which ever
since have replenished and do still replenish, the Earth, as the Effects of
their Parents Fruitfulness. And thus from the Creation and Generation of
Mankind, I pretend to have proved, That the Soul or Spirit of Man is generated
and born of the Flesh of the Parents, and with the Flesh of the Children,
Connatural to the Body, and no Stranger to it.

I take another Argument for Proof of the Materiality, from Natural Supports of
the Soul, whilst it remains in Conjunction with the Body; and thereupon I
argue thus, That which can neither act or subsist in the Body, without the
Supplies and Supports of Material Provisions, is it Self Material; but the Soul
cannot act or subsist in the Body without the Supplies and Supports of Material
Provisions, Ergo, The Soul is most likely to be of a Material Nature. The Major
I prove by the Rational and Received Rule of Simile simili gaudet. For proof of
the Minor, I instance in Three Material Things or Provisions, all so necessary
for the Soul of Man, as that if any One of them fail, or be wanting, the Soul
cannot act or subsist in the Body, but must needs part from it, either by
Extinguishment or Avolation. And these Three so necessary Provisions are Blood,
Breath, and Food, or Nourishment. For the Blood, if it be totally exhausted or
corrupted, a Man can live no longer; but the Soul will be forced to dislodge
out of its present Tenement. For Breath, we know by every days Experience, when
Executions are done by Hanging: that if it be stopped but for some few Moments,
the Man dies without remedy: as any Flame or Fire is soon extinguished for want
of Air. For Food or Nourishment, it seems that as a Flame, Torch, or other
Fire, cannot continue or endure, without a competency of Fuel proper for its
Nature; so the Soul of Man cannot continue or subsist in the Body, without
fitting supplement of Food or Nourishment in a fitting compass of time: and the
truth of this is so clear, and the Experiences of it so frequent and so
certain, as there need no more be said in the proof of it. And yet for the more
full Explication how things pass in the Man upon that occasion, I will quote
Judge. 15.18. There Sampson had slain the Philistims, and fell into such want of
Drink, that he was ready to die for thirst; but God provided Water, and when he
had drank, his Spirit came again and he revived. So 1 Samuel 30.11. David found
an Egyptian in the Field, who had neither eat nor drink in three days and three
nights, so that his spirit was quite spent, and he was in a departing
condition: but they gave him some Food, and when he had eaten, his spirit came
again to him, and therewithal his Understanding, Memory, and Judgment; so much
as to demand of David an Oath for his security: upon which he directed David as
he was desired, and gave him the opportunity of obtaining a notable Victory.
And these instances seem to prove, First, That the Soul cannot subsist in the
Body without Food: Secondly, That the Failure of the Spirit in such Cases is by
Degrees, and not all at once or together; but as a Flame or Fire draws toward
an end, Gradatim, upon Consumption and Decay of the Fuel, till they both fail
together. Thirdly, It shows, That with the Decay and Consumption of this Spirit
or Flame of Life, the Senses, Intellect, Memory, Fancy, Judgment, do also
decay and fail; and do return to the Man again, together with the recovery and
reviver of this Spirit or Flame of Life, by the applying of fresh Nourishment
or Fuel to it. And the whole Argument seems to evince that the continuance of
such a Spirit in the Body, depends upon Matter, as the Support of it; and
therefore that most probably it is a Material Spirit, extracted from Corporeal
Humors: and inflamed, heating, inlivening, and acting the Body, and all the
Members and Organs of it; for the effecting in them such Faculties and Powers,
and by them such Motions and Actions as he intended them for, who has framed
and fitted them accordingly. With this Argument shall be closed and finished
our positive Proofs upon this Subject: to which notwithstanding there shall be
annexed Argumentum a simile, for Illustration and Persuasion; that the Fact
asserted, is neither a stranger to Nature, nor improbable to be the very Truth
according to Reason, but that it is very agreeable unto them both. To this
intent I enter upon a Course which has been followed and practiced in all
Ages, upon Occasions and Disputes of the like Nature; viz. When the Subject is
such as no Experience can clear it, nor the Senses be made Judges concerning
it, then Men have used to excogitate Similitudes or Emblems, taken from things
more known, and of which our Senses may be more proper Judges; and by applying
them to the more abstruse and unknown, to add Light to the more dark, and for
the discovery of the more hidden, so as they may be better understood than
otherwise they are likely to be. We find that by Collecting the Suns Beams upon
a Glass, and turning from thence the Ray into a Dark Room, the Room will
thereby be so enlightened, beyond what it was before, or what the Natural Light
did afford it; that diverse things in it may be thereby made visible, which
without that help could not have been discovered.

The Similitude which I have chosen for Illustration of the Nature of our
present Subject the Soul, shall be grounded upon Harmony, and the diverse sorts
of Instruments employed in the Wind Music: such as derive their Sound from the
Motion of Breath, or Bellows: and to make them serviceable for the present
Design, they shall be ranked into Twelve several sorts, viz. 1. The Single Call
or Whistle. 2. The Horn. 3. The Penny Pipe. 4. The Bag-pipe. 5. The Flute. 6.
The Rebeck. 7. The Hautboys. 8. The Sackbut. 9. The Cornet. 10. Pan's Oaten
Pipe. 11. The Trompet. 12. The Organ.
And in correspondence to these, I rank the Animantia, or Self-moving
Creatures, into as many and like Sorts or Divisions: viz. In rank with the
Whistle I place all the small Insects, as Worms, Flies, Bees, Wasps, Ants,
Spiders, Beetles, etc. Who all work according to the Rules of Science, but not
knowingly: They have no Variety in their Working, but go always to work after
the same manner, and even as the Whistle sounds. 2dly. To the Horn, whose only
Changes are shorter and longer, lower and louder Sounds, I compare the greater
Insects, viz. Frogs, Askers, Snakes, Adders, Serpents, and the very great ones
in Africa and India, the Salamander, Scorpion, Lizard, and Camelion, etc. And
to the Penny Pipe I compare the lowest of the Animalia, viz. Mice, Rats, Moles,
Bats, etc. To the Bagpipe I compare the small but nimble Creatures, as Weasels,
Foumards, Ferrets, Squirrels, etc. To the Flute I compare Cats, Currs, Otters,
Badgers, Conies, Hares, etc. -- To the Rebeck, all sorts of Deer, the Rein, the
Red, the Fallow, and the Row, the Ass, the Musk Creatures, etc. To the
Hautboys, compare the Volatilia, of all Sorts and Sizes. To the Sackbut compare
the heavier sorts of Voracious Brutes, as Bears, Wolves, greater Dogs,
Crocodiles, River-Horses, etc. To the Cornet, compare the more active and noble
sort of them, as Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Panthers, Ounces, Linxes, etc. To
Pan's Pipe compare the Jumenta, or Cattle, such as Sheep, and Goats, Swine, the
Bubuli, etc. To the Trumpet compare the Principal or most Intelligent sort of
Brute Animals, the Elephant, Horse, Camel, Tame-Dog, Fox, Ape, Monkey,
Creatures the most observing and docible, who can apprehend and obey a Voice, a
Motion of the Body, or even a turning of the Eye, and come nearest to the
Pretenses of some sort of Understanding.

I should not have put Pan's Pipe so high in my Catalogue but that I find it
likely was very musical; so as the Instrument might admit of diverse Tones, viz.
Treble, Mean, Tenor, and Base; on which Account Pan took upon him to contest in
Melody with Apollo's Harp, and they chose Midas King of Lydia for their Judge;
and upon full Hearing of both parties, Midas passed Judgment against Apollo,
pronouncing that Pan's Pipe excelled the Music of Apollo's Harp: And though
Apollo in Revenge planted Asses Ears upon the Head of his impartial Judge, yet
the History proves Pan's Pipe to have been then counted a very melodious
Instrument: Pan primus Calamos cera conjungere plures instituit. Lastly, I have
chosen the Organ as that Instrument whereunto Mankind may most sutably be
compared; and from hence shall begin to make general Observations upon these
Instruments and Creatures, comparando.

As the Whistle and Horn have no great Variety in their Sounds, so have the
Insects but something analogous in them to them to Flame and Blood, and
therefore may rather be counted Animata than Animalie, and we shall but little
insist upon them, but choose to observe rather upon our Third Instrument, the
Penny Pipe, which can make a Variety of Sounds, by several Stops upon it:
First, it appears that this (as all our other Instruments) this and they all
are acted and made sounding by one same Actor or Principle, viz. Breath, or
Wind, inspiring them. And I say the like of the small Animals compared to it,
viz. Mice, Moles, etc. we say that they (as all other Animals) are framed and
acted after a similar Manner, and as the rest of the greater Animals are, and
as Man their Supreme also is; for each of these small Animals have Skin, Bone,
Flesh, Blood, Sinews, Nerves, Muscles, Joints, Heart, Brain, and Breath, as
well as the Horse, or the Elephant, or even as Man himself, and act their Five
Senses, and Vital Faculties, as other Animals do, and have a Flame of Life or
Glowing in their Flood, which makes it Circulate, Active, and Moving; as is
done in other more large and potent Animals, in a Proportion and Nature suitable
to their beings. The thing is all of a hind in them all, as the Wind and Breath
in the Musical Instruments: the Wind in them does not make a like Sound or
Music in them all, but according to the structure and capacity of every one of
them. Now give a Penny Pipe into the best Artists hand, and who has a very
good Breath, yet he shall be able to make but very mean Music with it, suitable
to the mean capacity of the Instrument: and this is the Case of the Mouse or
the Mole amongst Animals, though they in their Structure, Parts, and Spirits,
are of the same Nature with the greater Animals, yet such Spirit and Flame can
do no more in those small and weak Bodies, than the Capacities and Organs of
them will extend unto; and those Degrees of Power proportionate to its own
Strength, Nature, and Constitution. And so it is in every Degree of Animals,
one above another, the Flame or Material Spirit of Life, works in each of them,
proportionably to act and perform such things, and in such manner as the
Structure of their Bodies and the Figure, Power, and Order of their Members,
make them able and inclinable to act; and gives them a Power to execute. And
just as in the Wind Instruments, one sort of Spirit acts them all, and one sort
of Materials; viz, Hard Materials, Wood or Met^al, make the Body, or gross and
palpable parts of them; and yet there is that vast Variety in the Music and
Sounds of them, as if they were not at all of kin, one of them to the other;
but rather as if they were quite different things in their Nature, which
plainly they are not; for the Matter and Spirit in them all are alike: It is
true they are different Instruments, and make very different Sounds and Sort of
Music. And it seems, the Case is the same amongst Animals, Matter and Spirit
are of like Nature in them all: Man himself, though Sanctius his Animal,
Mentisque capacius altae, his Genus is the same with theirs; he is Animal, let
the differentia be what it will, Rationale or Religiosum. Man is of the same
Kind with the other Animals, and is compared by David to the Beasts that perish
utterly: and so should Man have done, unless God had promised and appointed a
Resurrection for him, and a Judgment upon him. But all our Maintainers of the
Immateriality exclaim and declaim upon the transcendent advantages which Men
have over and beyond the Beasts, in the Power and Activity of their Rational
Faculty; which mistakingly, and yet generally, they call the Soul of Man, and
seem so to esteem and think of it; but to me it seems there is not a greater
difference in Nature or Power betwixt Men and Beasts, then in Music there is
between the Organ and the inferior Instruments, from the Trompet to the Penny
Pipe, or Whistle. There is as great a transcendency in the Organ over or and
above each of the other Instruments in the Musical Use of them, as there is in
Men over and above Beasts, in the several Kinds of them. These Machines, viz.
the Organ and the Man, the one amongst Wind Instruments, and the other amongst
Animals, must evidently be accounted for Superlative and Supreme; with whom
none of the Inferior Animals or Instruments can hold a reasonable Comparison:
but Ocularly visible it is, that the Organ has no other Spirit or Cause of its
Sound, Music, and Harmony; but the same that acts in all the Inferior
Instruments. And semblably, it seems, that although Man be a Superlative and
Supreme Animal, yet he may be, and is acted by a like Flame or Spirit, as we
agree does actuate and enliven the other Animals of an Inferior Nature or
Degree; inabling for Acts of Life and Vegetation, Nourishment, Digestion, and
Generation, stirring their Affections of Lust, Wrath, and Fear: Moving and
acting their Five Senses to perceive their several Objects. And all these and
their Local Motions, are as vigorous, and perfectly acted in Beasts as in Men:
and this sort of Soul acts also in Brutes an Understanding, Fancy, Judgment,
and Memory, true in their Kind, but to a very low Degree, in comparison, with
Faculties of those Kinds found amongst Men: for that the Humane Head and Organs
there placed, are far more advantageously framed and fitted for such purposes.
And thus it seems there is set forth and showed an apparent and pregnant
likeness or similitude between the Correspondence which the Organ has with the
Inferior Wind Instruments, and that which Man has with the Inferior Animals:
And that this Comparison or Similitude may be helpfully used toward the
Discovery of the Nature and Operations of an Humane Soul, and some farther
Assimilations may be made of Man to an Organ, viz. First, That as in an Organ,
the Wind cannot command or alter the Sound of any of the Pipes, so as to make
the Treble, Mean, Tenor, or Bases, sound otherwise than that Artist who made
them, intended them for. So it is in Man, his Spirit or Soul, cannot act any of
his Senses or Faculties to other then those very purposes for which the Divine
Artificer made and intended them: it cannot make the Hand see, nor the Foot
hear, the Shoulders understand; nor the Buttocks digest: but it can only act
every Part, Member, and Organ, to those purposes intended by him that made
them. Secondly, As when any of the Pipes in an Organ are ill made, cracked, or
otherwise harmed, the Wind cannot cure or help such a misadventure, but can
only make it sound according to its present capacity: so it is with a Man's
Spirit and his Bodily Members and Organs; if there be a Lisping or Stammering
Tongue, or a Sanded or Squinting Eye, a Lame Hand, or a Foot out of joint, the
Soul cannot cure or help, in any such Cases; but can only act the Members and
Organs as it finds them capable: and the like, if harm come to the Members or
Organs by Diseases, Wounds, or any like Accidents, the Soul has no more power
to help in such Cases; then Wind can help Deficiencies in the Organ. Thirdly,
If there be any Pipes quite spoiled, broken, or wanting, in the Organ, the Wind
can make no Music or Sound at all in those places: and in like manner, for
Man, if the Eyes be out, the Soul cannot make the Man see; nor speak without a
Tongue, etc. As for the Understanding and the Memory, which seem to be the most
spiritualized, the Soul cannot act them without their proper Bodily Organs; and
by Blows, Wounds, or Diseases in the Head, spoiling those Organs, such
Faculties may he lost: the Soul still able and continuing still to act the
Vital, Nutritive, and Generative Powers, and to keep the Man well enough alive.
Fourthly, As upon ceasing of Wind in the Organ, the Instrument loses all its
Activity and Harmonical Sounds, and becomes only a Dead Fabric; so when the
Flame of Life in Man is extinguished, the Body and all its Organs and Members,
become Dead and Cold, even as the very Organ and his Pipes, which without Wind
are useless to those purposes for which they were contrived and intended. And
thus the real Matter of our present Simile shall be determined.

And yet is it not so finished, but that still there may be some farther use
made upon the Circumstantials of it; viz. Those Ornamental Accoutrements
wherewith we see the Organs in Cathedrals and other very Eminent Places,
embellished, and curiously engraved, painted, varnished, and gilded, to such
Degrees, that (with the Lillies) they may be compared to Solomon in all his
glory: but if these Splendid Circumstances be taken off them, they must be
found in their own proper likeness, or Bodies; viz. Wood or some coarse or
ordinary Metal, without Luster or Gloss, or any other Delight, in the
beholding. The Shining Ornaments of our Organ we compare not only to the Robes
of Solomon's Glory, and those of other Princes, Magistrates, and Prelates, which
are intended to produce an awe and reverence in the Beholders and Common
People, and are often times productive of their designed Effect; but I also
compare them to diverse other Ornaments and Glories of the Humane Nature,
acquired and accumulated by the Labor and Industry of many Generations in
Succession, one after the other; viz. Many Manual and other Arts and Sciences,
derived from one Man to another; and by various Experiments and Degrees,
brought to that Perfection which hitherto they have attained. Now those who
behold the State of Man's Nature, and contemplate it in the Glories of all
these fresh Colors, Varnishing and Gilding (as the most Men do) cannot easily
forbear to wonder at those who do or can apprehend, that the Brutal Nature
should be so near related as to be next of kin to the Humane: I will therefore
use this Nature as before I have used the Fabric of the Organ; viz. Remove its
Acquired Ornaments, which have so dazzled most Men's Eyes, as to make the Great
Princes and Persons, or some of them thought and think themselves above or
beyond the Common Condition and Nature of other Men, and to despise the
Ordinary Sort of People to so high a Degree, as not to count them made of the
same Stuff or Kind with themselves. And not Princes and Conquerours only, but
diverse amongst the Learned and Knowing, and Men of Skill in Arts and Sciences,
are too often apt to contemn their ignorant and illiterate Brethren, as fit
rather to be ranked inter Oves and Boves and caetera Pecora Campi, than to be
placed in equal Degree and Honor with themselves. Let us then, imaginando
remove these Ornaments, which become the Occasions of such great Mistakes; and
consider Man and his Nature in their own Natural Robes and Colors: And this
may be done without the taking from our Grandees any of their Ornaments or
Preheminences, for the true State of this Nature may best be surveyed in the
Lowest and Plainest Ranks that can be found amongst Men: which sort of People,
if we shall consider from the Cradle to the Grave, we shall easily perceive to
be wholly employed and taken up with the Care and Endeavor to acquire
Nourishment, Warmth, and the Means of Propagation: and these are the very
Things which the more Sagacious Brutes do universally attend. The Diet of such
Lowest Sort of People and their Fare is Gross and Coarse; so as the Rich men's
Horses, Dogs, and Monkeys, are often better provided: their Houses far meaner
than the Stables, Beast Houses, and even Swine-cotes of the Rich: Nothing so
well clad or covered as a well kept Horse. If the Polity of the Places they
live in has taught them some good Rules and Precepts, they make ordinarily a
shift (in a competent time) to forget or change them, and are to be governed
and kept in order, as Brutal Creatures are, by the only Expectation or Fear of
Rewards and Punishments: and these things are applicable to Men whom we know by
a Continual and Daily Conversation. But if we direct our Prospect, toward the
more Desert Countries, North or South, we may find in India and Arabia, but
most especially in Africa and America, Nations and People, who have only their
bare Skins for a Covering; they rob and prey upon others for a maintenance:
they live upon Raw Flesh, and the very Guts and Entrails of such Creatures as
they can get; Flesh of Men, Dogs, Horses, Serpents; all goes down with them.
Now what do Beasts differ from such Men, or they from Beasts? Even Wild Beasts
of the Forest, for our Tame Cattle will not do so, nor hardly any Beasts
amongst us, but hungry Dogs. They discover no Effect of Rules or Civility
amongst them, save to forbear hurting one another, as the Beasts do; Saevis
inter se convenit Vrsis: but their Lusts are at as full Liberty as those of
other Cattle. Thus in general, but to set forth Humanity in its most Simple,
Natural, and Plain Colors, Sir Kenelm Digby's Treatise of the Soul shall be
cited, fol. 247. where he relates and testifies this fact, An Army coming to
attack Liege, the people of the next Villages fled into the Forest of Ardennes;
amongst whom a Woman and her Son of about five years old: the Soldiers beat up
into the Woods for Booty, and frighted the People, so as the Woman lost her
Son, and never found him; after the Army departed, and the People returned: and
about ten years after an extraordinary hard Winter happened, and the Wild Beasts
haunted toward Houses for relief: amongst them was observed one who ran
sometimes on two feet, and otherwhiles on four; the Spectators took him for a
Satyr, they set the Haunt to take him, and took him: he was found a perfect
Man, of wonderful quick Senses, especially in Smelling; he learned again to
speak, and was known for the poor Woman's Son, and then related his manner of
living amongst the Beasts; accepted as one of their kind, and so herded with
them, living as they did; and the People named him John of Liege, And this Fact
discovers a near degree of Affinity between Man and Beast, and so does the
Nourishment of Humane Bodies by the Milk of Beasts; and the Support of Humane
Bodies by the Transfusion of the Blood of Beasts into their Veins and Bodies:
which shows even a Consanguinity amongst us. Our Predecessors in this Island,
in Julius Caesar's time, and a good while after, lived as naked as their
Cattle, and fed amongst other things, upon Wildings, Acrons, Bollis, Sloes,
Heps, Haws, etc. as both Beasts and poor People diverse times feed at this day.
And to prove, That Beasts and Men, in puris naturalibus, do not greatly differ,
in the last place shall be cited the Case of Nebuchadnezzar, who had for many
years as high a place in the Throne of Glory as any other Man whatsoever; and
we may presume, had indulged himself, as Men in such Cases and Places use to
do, till by the Operation (it seems) of his Fancy, his Heart or Inclinations,
became like those of the Beasts; he hearded with the Oxen, fed with them, and
lived amongst them: his Skin was his only Covering, and was wet with the
Showers of Heaven, his Hair grew to cover him, like the Birds Feathers; and his
Nails like their Claws: and this be was well enough able to endure, and it
stood with his choice and liking, during such distemper of his Fancy, the
space of Seven years, as an Apprenticeship, under Discipline. And it may serve
for an Example and Proof, that as Men and Beasts are under the same Genus, or
Kind of Creatures, similar in their Bodies, as to the Materials and Parts of
them, so they shall not be so exceedingly different in the Nature of their
Souls, as the received Opinion has made them; but more likely it seems, That a
Soul of such Nature as acts in the Brutes, First, Their Vital Faculties,
Digestion, Nutrition, Generation; Secondly, Their Passions of Lust, Wrath, and
Fear; Thirdly, Their Sensitive Faculties, Seeing, Hearing, etc. Fourthly, Such
low Degrees as they have of Perception, Understanding, Fancy, Judgment, Will
and Memory; such a Soul as acts these last Faculties in a low Degree, and all
the former in as high a Degree as is done in Man: such a like Soul should be
enough able to act in Man all that his Body and Organs can perform, and for
which such Organs were first intended and made.

But against this Conclusion diverse have objected and said, That Man has one
singular Ornamental Quality, peculiar to his Nature, and so well fixed to it,
as the same cannot be separated from it, nor be communicated to any Brutal
Nature whatsoever; and that is, a Natural Power of Discerning Honestum from
Turpe, and distinguishing between them, so as to approve the one and condemn
the other. To this I reply, It seems Reason does not drive Men to consent to
this Assertion, or to approve the Import of it. But they re-joyn, The Truth of
it is proved Romans 2.14. Those who have not the Law, do by Nature the things
contained in the Law; having the Law written in their hearts. For an help to
expound this Text, I quote another, 1 Cor. 11.14. Does not even Nature it self
teach you, that if a Man have long hair, it is a shame to him. Here by Nature
is intended an universal Custom of those Countries which St. Paul had seen; for
in them all, Men used to wear their hair short, and that became amongst them a
second Nature, as our Proverb terms it. Hence I collect for probable, that in
the quoted Text to the Romans, Paul by the word Nature intended a Civilized and
Cultivated Nature, meliorated by some kind of Education or Institution, as all
the Nations that he knew were; for his words, having not the Law, points at
that of Moses: and he seems to account, that all who were not under that Law,
were under Nature, and the Guidance of it: but such a Nature as had the
Cultivation of other Laws or Rules, and which generally were much agreeaable to
the Letter or Sense of Moses his Moral Laws; and made like Impressions upon the
hearts of the Gentiles, as that of Moses did upon the Jews: but that here by
Nature he did not intend Humane Nature, in puris naturalibus, naked and bare of
all manner of Institution or Education whatsoever; not such a Nature as that of
John of Liege, the Lybian Jamnites, and Sabunks, where Men are so few, as their
converse amongst the more numerous Beasts, makes them like one another: not
like the Caribbee Islanders, or the most Northernly Americans, or some
miserable, poor, wild Irish, have been reported. It seems he does not intend
Nature thus naked, but under the Cultivation of some Civil Education. Now for
Man's Natural Faculty of discerning Honestum from Turpe, I say, First, That it
is not in his Nature, after the manner of his Natural Faculties; his Vital,
Passionate, Sensitive, or Rational Powers: for all these (of which the Beasts
are also partakers) rise out of bare Nature, or the Natural Contexture of Soul
and Body; and exert themselves upon emergent Occasions, without any Teaching or
Instruction whatsoever: this Power of discerning Honestum from Turpe does not
so. Adam did not by Nature discern that Nakedness was an undecent Thing, or
Turpe. Who told thee that thou wast naked? Discovered to thee that Nakedness
was an Indecency in thee? Or that thou have need of any Covering but thy Skin?
Romans 7.7. I had not known sin (or what actions were sins) but by the Law. Ver.
8. Without the Law sin was dead (seems unperceived.) Chap. 5.13. Sin is not
imputed when there is no Law. These prove that there is need of Rules to
discern Honestum from Turpe, even in the most gross actions: for Romans 4.15.
Where no Law is, there is no transgression. Let us try this by a Case of
Shedding Man's Blood: viz. Two Men in Pure State of Nature, or Savages, happen
to meet at large, and to have view of an Object which they both desire; they
cannot dispute, for want of Language, but both seize the Object, and fall to
the Brutal Way of Contending, viz. Violence and Force; and in the Contest one
kills the other: It seems, the Killer (instead of remorse) should glory in this
Achievement, and be more encouraged, and ready to follow the same Course
another time. And what otherwise do our practiced Duellists, but glory in their
Shame, with apparent disadvantage; acting against the Laws both of God and Man:
Whereas the Fact of our Savage (who has not, nor knows any Law) may pass well
enough, without discerning (by any Light of Nature) that his Fact was Turpe.
And so may the Case be for Adultery, or Incest, amongst Persons who neither
live under Laws, nor have any knowledge of them; they cannot naturally discern
the Turpe in such Actions: and for Theft and Robbery, it would be the delight
and glory of such Savages, and was the common practice of the Savage World, and
is the common Arabian Profession at this day. And we may add to them the petit
Pirates, and even the great Conquerours and Spoilers of Nations, who (because
they live without Laws, or above them) do not, or will not, discover any
Natural Turpe in those Ravages which they make upon the (to them) innocent and
harmless people. All these Cases or Instances, seem to evince, that the
Discovery of Honestum and Turpe grows not from Nature barely, or in its
extremest Simplicity; nor without some assistance from Education or
Institution.

Next, our opposing Immateriallists, do allege, That upon the committing of
any known and great Turpe, there arises amongst Men a great and tormenting
Sense of such Evil, flowing from Nature in Man, and which is never found in
Beasts of any Kind. But I do not assent to either of these Assertions. First,
For Conscience in Man, I have said the Conscient Powers, viz. Understanding,
Memory, and Judgment, are Natural, and so are the Effects: viz. Pleasure and
Joy, Sorrow and Fear: But to complete a Conscience in Man, there must be more
than Nature; viz. Some sort of Rules or Directions, growing from Education or
Institution; and such may derive themselves from Three Originals: First, By
Revelation from God or Spirits. Secondly, From Precepts or Examples of other
Men. Thirdly, From the Person himself concerned in the Inquiry, his own
Observations, Opinions, Fantasies. Now take any of these Sorts of Rules which
any Man has accepted for his Guides, and submitted himself unto; if he find
his Actions agree with his Rules, that Agreement produces Comfort and Joy: and
the contrary produces Sorrow and Fear: the wide^^er they differ, the greater
the Fear; and proportionable to the degrees and duration of Rewards
an1Punishments taught and believed to be expected, and the reputed certainty of
them. And it seems, the Rule accepted and submitted to, be it right or wrong,
true or false, obliges the Conscience of the Believer, and strikes him with
remorse upon any his irregular Actions; as strong the false as the true: and
this shows the Faculty not to be wholly from Nature, for that she is more
constant in her Directions and Notices, then to be ordinarily liable to such
great aberrations. We say then, a Savage can have no Conscience, for want of
Rules, whence that Power cannot be derived from bare Nature in Man.

The other Assertion, viz. That Conscience is not to be found in Beasts of any
kind; I do not assent unto: yet granting that naturally none of them have it.
But I conceive, that by an Education amongst Men, and a Conversation with them.
some Beasts may attain, and have obtained to such Conscient Faculties, as are
agreeable to the low degrees of their Understanding; and I give instance in a
Mastiff Dog, if he go at liberty without Education, and meet with a Sheep
hungry, he falls on and kills and eats till he have enough, and departs without
any sign or sense of remorse for his so doing: But take one of that kind, and
give him an Education amongst Men, and (being taught his Duty in that Case) if
after, this Dog happen to worry a Sheep, he becomes so sensible, ashamed, and
afraid togteher, that his guilt and fear appear in his whole carriage, and the
Temper and posture of his Body: so as his looks and carriage give evident proof
that he is a Sheep-biter. So for a Setting-Dog, if his over-eager desire carry
him into his Game, and that he spring it, his Conscient Power smites him upon
that Fact, so that he dare not, will not, approach his Master or Teacher, but
will a void and fly from them, by all means, and for a competent time, till
their anger may be allwaged: and some of them have been thereby so scared, as
to run quite from their Masters, and forsake them for ever. We know also that
some Horses which have been corrected for tripping upon the Highway, it by
accident they make a trip, they suddenly dart themselves forwards, remembering
the former Corrections, and sometimes, do by that means, escape the punishment
which otherwhiles would have fallen upon them. And in like manner, the most
Docible Creatures. Dogs, Horses, Apes, Elephants, are made tractable and t^ught
by Rewards and Punishments, and the Desire, Fear, and Expectations of them; the
same which are the Grounds and Effects of Conscience in Man.

And thus Arguend^, and with hard rubbing, it seems there is taken off from the
Nature of Man this last Piece of Varnish or Ornament, which by diverse has been
so hard laid on and fastened, as it seemed like a Fixation inseparable, and
quarto modo peculiar to it: in consequence of which I say, That we have now
laid the Nature of Man as naked and bared of its Ornaments; as before we did
that of our Organ. And as then that Instrument so bared, had for its Materials
no other then what the Inferior Instruments were made of: viz. Wood, or
Common-Metal; so is it like to fall out with the Body of Man: there will appear
in it nothing but Skin, Bone, Flesh, Blood, Joints, Muscles, Nerves, Arteries,
Sinews, Veins, Heart, Head, Brain, and Breath, etc. all of the same kind with
those of the Inferior Animals. And for the Active Principle in them both, as
Wind and Breath, of the same Nature, but stronger or weaker, moves and acts, as
well the Organ as all the other Inferior Instruments. So it seems, a Spirit
inflamed, and of a like Nature, is the Active Principle in the whole Animal
Kind and Nature; viz. both of Man and Beast* The Flame may be purer and
grosser, brighter and dimmer, but in all of a Similar Kind and Nature, one of
them with he other; as the Wind and Breath was to the forenamed Instruments.
And this Conclusion shall close and finish my present Simile, and that put end
to my intended Argument against the Immateriality and Separate Subsistence of
Soul.

For the publishing of which I offer this Reason, That having an Inclination
and Desire to find out or learn the Truth in the Point before disputed, and
having in my Answer to Doctor Bentley's Sermon, summoned him to perform his
promise of proving the Separate Subsistence of an Humane Soul, I thought it
requisite to lay before him or any other, who (being qualified for it) shall
undertake the Employment, all or the most important of those Grounds and
Reasons which moved me, in a Mature and Decaying Age, to persuade my self, that
the Opinion of the Immateriality and Separate Subsistence of Humane Souls after
Death of their Bodies, is an Error; to the intent, that having before them the
true State of the Malady, and the Causes of it, they may be the better inabred
to direct their Applications for the Cure, and take the whole State of the Case
together; and shall say no more, save by way of Caution; viz. That hitherto the
Fabric of the Argument is held together, as by Nails driven through Boards,
yet remaining with straight points, so as they may be pinched out again with
more ease, and little damage to the Materials, it proper Endeavors shall be
used to that purpose; viz. By a full, strong, reasonable, and well grounded
Answer to the Objections which have been in this Tract or Treatise produced:
but if pregnant Persons shall enter upon the Undertaking, without Direction or
Advice, and make infirm, choleric, or any way insufficient Answers thereunto,
that will prove like a clenching or rivetting the points of the Nails on the
farther side, and make them so hard to be drawn out again, as there may be
great difficulty and some inconvenience in the performance of it.

My Desire and Prayer to God is, That he will by his good Providence and
Spirit, direct such, as out of a Pious Inclination, and for Love to Truth,
shall in Peaceable and Christian Manner, undertake the Rectification of those
Errors which shall be with clearness detected in this Treatise: And that he
will finally discover to us what is the very Truth in the Point here disputed.
And to an Answerer I shall conclude with St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2.7. Consider what I
say, and the Lord give thee understanding [in this] and in all things;
especially enable thee for the Discovery, declaring and proving of the Truth in
this Point.

FINIS.

