APTISALOGIA OR A TREATISE CONCERNING Baptisms: Whereto is added a DISCOURSE
CONCERNING THE Supper, Bread and Wine, Called also COMMUNION.

By Thomas Lawson.

Printed in the Year 167^

READER,
IN this following Treatise is presented to thy ^ye: 1. The Temporary Baptism
of John with Water. 2. The Permanent or Continuing Baptism of Christ with the
Spirit. 3. The irrepititious Custom of Rantism, that is, Sprinkling of Infants.


Herein also thou may see, that after the Primitive Times, the Fall of the
Star from Heaven was manifested, Sun and Air (through the Smoke of the
Bottomless Pit, Maman Wisdom, Heathenish Learning, Spoiling Philosophy, School
Divinity) was darkened, through the steaming in of which Christ's Baptism in and
with the Spirit came to be lost, then Water Baptism and Rantism came to be
reassumed.

1. One while baptizing or sprinkling Old People on their Deathbeds. 2.
Another while baptizing of People sooner, as when they were capable of being
catechized. 3. After this Baptizing or Sprinkling of Infants. 4. Some Baptized
People after they were Dead, and put the Sacramental Bread (as it is called) in
their Mouths. 5. Hence sprung in the Custom of Baptizing the Living for the
Dead. 6. Hence arose the Custom of Baptizing Children in the Womb, before they
were born. 7. Some have had the Character of a Cross made in their Foreheads
with a Burning Iron, which was called Christ's Baptism with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire. 8. Many, yea, almost all, for Ages, were Baptized Naked. 9. Many
Baptized Themselves every Year.
And these various Unscriptural Proceedings were and are cried up by the
Observers thereof to be of Divine Institution.

Here also thou may read, how that in this Night of Apostasy, which has come
upon the Churches professing Christianity, sprung up the use of Godfathers,
Godmothers, Gossips, Fonts, Exorcisms, Sign of the Cross, Albs, Salt; all which
things, with others, are more or less touched in this following Treatise.

APTISALOGIA Or a TREATISE concerning BAPTISM
I Confess, I have often been very serious concerning the Doctrine of Baptisms,
and have not let any thing slip from me, written or spoken in Vindication of
Baptism and Rantism, that is, Dipping and Sprinkling, without serious
Consideration, so to answer the Desires of some sober Persons, but primarily
Divine Requirings, I was induced to sharpen the Neb of my Pen, and to commit to
writing my Belief in reference thereto; and to the end I may the better be
understood of such as read me, I have reduced the Contents of the ensuing
Discourse into four Heads or Assertions, which be as follow.

I. The Baptism of John with Water, and the Baptism of Christ with the Spirit,
were not one, and the same, but two, that is to say, Distinct Baptisms. II.
John's Baptism, in or with Water, was a Figure, or a Shadow of Christ's
Baptism, in or with the Spirit, so thereby fulfilled and ended. III. Christ's,
Baptism in or with the Spirit, is the Baptism only to continue in the Church of
Christ to the End of the World. IV. Rantism, that is to say, Sprinkling of
Infants, is a Case unpresidented in the Primitive Times, an irrepetitious
Custom sprung up in the Night of Apostasy, after the Revolt from Christ, the
Captain of the true Israelites, the Fall from the primitive Order.
The First ASSERTION. The Baptism of John with Water, and the Baptism of Christ
with the Spirit, were not one, but two, that is to say, Distinct Baptisms.
THE Truth of this is clear and evident to every one, whose Eyes are opened by
the Influence of the Almighty, and I may produce a Cloud of Witnesses for the
Confirmation thereof, though indeed many late Writers and Teachers have and do
affirm, That John's Baptism and Christ's Baptism make but up one Baptism; that
the Spirit goes along with the Water, making up one Baptism; or that the Water
thorough the Word of Institution, has a supernatural Virtue, effectual to the
Sanctification, Ablution, that is, Washing and Regeneration of Man: this is an
Antichristian-Doctrine, to ascribe such things to visible elementary Water,
which are the Effects and Products of the Blood of Christ, the Water of Life,
John, Christ and Peter make them distinct.

Now for the determining of this Controversy, observe the Record of John the
Baptist, that is, John the Dipper; so called because he was authorized to
Baptize in Water, as also to distinguish him from John the Apostle, Mat. 3.11.
I indeed baptize you with Water, etc. (says John) but he that comes after me,
(to wit, Christ) he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.
Consider this, John makes them distinct Baptisms, as if he should have said, I
am to baptize with Water only, that is my Work, my Office, thereto I am
commissioned from Heaven, even to wash the Body, the Filth of the outward man;
but when Christ is come, he shall have another Work, of a more Heavenly Nature;
what is that? he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with Fire: he does
not say, he will baptize you with Water, neither does he say, he will baptize
you with Water and with the Spirit, but he will baptize you with the Holy
Spirit only; so that John absolutely concludes them to be distinct Baptisms, he
with Water, Christ with the Spirit.

See also Mark 1.8. where the very same Record is born of John's Baptism, and
Christ's Baptism, I indeed have baptized you with Water, but he shall baptize
you with the Holy Spirit. Mark this, [I have] but [he shall] this denotes the
two Baptisms.

See also Luke the third, there was a great musing about John, as whether he
was the Christ or no; people entertained high Thoughts of him, as being born in
an extraordinary manner, and living in the Wilderness, his Apparel and Diet
being unusual, as a Raiment of Camels Hair, Locusts and Wild Honey being his
Food, his Baptism was new and strange; these things being considered,
occasioned much Reasoning among the people, as, whether he was the Messiah or
no: now for a removal and scouring away of such Reasonings, John tells them
plainly and evidently, he was not the Christ, Luke 3.15, 16. saying, I indeed
baptize you with Water; my Work is to wash your Bodies with the visible Element
of Water, that is my Ministration: but (says he) Amightier then I comes after
me, and he shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit. Here John holds out his
Ministration of Water Baptism, and the Ministration of Christ's Spiritual
Baptism to be distinct.

See also Joh. 1.33. where the very same Record is born, I with Water, which
reaches to the Ablution of the outward Man; Christ with the Spirit, which is
effectual to the Ablution or Washing of the inward Man.

The four Evangelists, who were (...), that is, divinely inspired, are
unanimous in the distinction of the Baptism of John, and of the Baptism of
Christ.

Further, In Heb. 6.2. the Apostle speaking of some of the initial Points of
the true Religion, makes meniton of the Doctrine of Baptisms, not Baptism, but
Baptisms, in the plural number, and that these are John's with Water, and
Christ's with the Spirit, may be proved by a fruitful and plentiful Harvest of
Testimonies.

So they err greatly who affirm that the Baptism of John and the Baptism of
Christ made up but One Baptism, it being so evident in Scripture, that they
were distinct, which may further thus appear: First, They were distinct in
Name; for John's Baptism still kept its Name, yea, when the Apostles used it,
it was still called the Baptism of John; why so? because it was required of
him, his Office and Work by divine Institution, Joh. 1.33. yea, after Christ's
Baptism with the Spirit came in, John's Baptism with Water still retained its
Name, as being distinct from it, Acts 18.24, 25. Secondly, They were distinct
in Manifestation; that is, Christ's Baptism was to follow John's, and did not
go along with it, at the same time, as men now would jumble them together,
saying, The Spirit goes along with the Water, and both make up but One Baptism,
after the Resurrection of Christ, before his ascending; though John's Baptism
had been used several years, yet Christ told them, that what John spoke
concerning him, of his baptizing with the Holy Spirit, was not fulfilled, but
shortly to be fulfilled, Acts 1.4, 5. Christ being assembled with the Apostles,
commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the Promise of the
Father, which (says he) you have heard of me; for John truly baptized with
Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Spirie not many days hence,
which was fulfilled at the day of Pentecost: So that Christ's Baptism did not
accompany John's Baptism, to make up one entire Baptism; for it followed it
several years after it: so that the Effusion of the Holy Spirit is Christ's
Baptism, the great Blessing of Gospel-dayes, of the Evangelical Dispensation,
which qualified and does qualify to be the Lord's True and Living Witnesses.
Thirdly, John's Baptism and Christ's were distinct; forasmuch as those that
John baptized had need of the Baptism of Christ: Now, if John's Baptism had
been one and the same with Christ's, that only had been sufficient; but John's
baptizing of them with Water left them in need of the Baptism of Christ: John
said unto Christ (who came from Galilet to Jordan to be baptized of him) I have
need to be baptized of thee, and come thou unto me? Mat. 3.13, 14. So that
John the Baptist knew his Baptism to be inferior to Christ's Baptism, so
desired more fully to partake of it. See also Acts 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Paul found
certain Disciples Partakers of John's Baptism, but they had not received the
Spirit, as they themselves confessed; so that the Spirit, and Water outward go
not along to make up One Baptism; Paul laid his hands on them, and they
received the Spirit, so knew its Baptism; these had John's Baptism before they
received the Spirit and its Baptism, which proves them distinct Baptisms.
Fourthly, They are distinct, inasmuch as the Figure and the Substance are
distinct, as Circumcision Outward and Circumcision Inward were not One, but
Two, that is, distinct Circumcisions: so the Baptism of John with Water, and
the Baptism of Christ with the Spiria, were distinct Baptisms, whereby the
unfound Judgments of such appear, who affirm, teach and preach That the Spirit
goes along with the Water, and both make up One Baptism; and that the Water is
so influenced with a supernatural Virtue by the Word of Institution, that
Children (damnati priusquam nati, damned before they be born) are thereby made
Members of Christ, Children of God and Inheriters of the Kingdom of Heaven: And
though since the Primitive Times, to fulfill Divine Praedictions, Darkness, yea,
gross Darkness has benighted the Professors of Christianity, and the peccant
Humor of Error, Heresy, Schism and Misapprehensions of Divine Truths has
been predominant in the infirm and crazy Body of nominal Christianity, yet the
Lord has so far opened the Eyes of some, as that they have dropped forth
Testimonies in Vindication of that Truth here asserted, that is, that the
Baptism of John with Water, and the Baptism of Christ with the Spirit, without
Water, were distinct Baptisms, and that none may have occasion to render this a
groundless Flourish, I shall here subjoyn a few Testimonies.


Augustine said in a certain place, Illud manifestum est, alium fuisse
baptismum Johannes alium Christi; that is, It is clear and evident, that there
was One Baptism of John, and another Baptism of Christ, Contr. Lit. Petil. 2.

Pasor paraphrasing on Heb. 6.2. of the Doctrine of Baptisms, said, Here the
Plural Number shows forth the Outward and Inward Baptism.

Chrysostom says, That in the Apostles time the Baptism of Water, and the
Baptism of the Spirit were different Baptisms, and done at different Times,
Magd. 5. Cent. 363.

Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, who lived about the year 230. said, The Baptism of
John washed the outward Body, but the Baptism of Christ cleanses the inward
Man from the Defilements of Sin, Polydor. lib. 4. cap. 4.

The Baptism of John gives not spiritual Grace nor Remission of Sins; but
Christ forgives Sins, and gives the Spirit plentifully, Theophylact on Mat.
3.11.

John was sent to baptize with Water, but the Baptism of the Spirit was
committed to Christ: John baptized with Water, inviting to Repentance; Christ
by his Spirit, wherewith he baptizeth, renews the Heart, and sanctifies by his
Grace, Aug. Marlolat on Acts 1.5.

John the Baptist makes Christ the Author of spiritual Baptism, but himself the
Minister of outward Baptism only, not the putting away of the filth of the
Flesh, the Work of John's Baptism, but the Answer of a good Conscience, which
is an Effect of Christ's Baptism, says Aug. Marlolat on Matthew. 3.11. A clear
Distinction of the two Baptisms is here employed.

Spark, the King's Chaplain, speaking of the pouring forth of the Spirit upon
the Apostles, says, They had before baptismum fluminis, the Watery Baptism of
John; but now baptismum flaminis, the Baptism of the Holy Spirit; their Tongues
were touched with a Coal from the Heavenly Altar. A full Distinction of the two
Baptisms.

The Baptism of John (says the same Spark) does not take away Sin, but puts
them in mind thereof; but Christ's Baptism takes away Sin, his Spirit (says
he) is our Jordan.

Forgiveness of Sins was not in nor by John's Baptism, but in our Baptism all
sins are blotted out, says Ven. Bed. Histor. Eccles.

Piscator on Matthew. 3. speaking of 1 Pet. 3.21. says, Lest any should think
that Outward Baptism saves us, Peter makes a Distinction, and ascribes
Salvation to Inward Baptism, saying, Not Outward Baptism, whereby the Filth of
the Flesh is put off, save us, but Inward Baptism, etc.

There is a two fold Baptism (says Trapp on Matthew. 3.11.) viz. fluminis et
flaminis, that is, of Water, and of the Spirit; by John's, with Water, the
Polution of the Flesh is put away; by Christ's, with the Spirit, the Answer of
a Good Conscience, purged from Dead Works, to Godward is known.

Trapp on Heb. 6.2. concerning the Doctrine of Baptisms, makes a clear
Distinction betwixt the outward Baptism of John with Water, and the inward
Baptism of Christ with the Spirit.

Piscator on Mat. 3.11. says, There is a twofold Baptism, the one Outward,
whereby the Body is cleansed, the other Inward by the Spirit, whereby men are
regenerated and renewed, washed and purged from the Filth of Sin.

People were to be taught (says Wilson in his Comple at Christian-Dictonary)
'to put a Difference betwixt Outward Baptism by the Minister, and the Inward
Baptism by the Spirit, wherewith Christ baptizeth.

The Minister (says the same Wilson) baptizeth by Sprinkling with water,
Christ baptizes by bestowing the Gifts of his spirit.

Prudentius holds out a clear Distinction betwixt John's Baptism with Water,
and Christ's Baptism with the Spirit; saying in his Euchirid, 'Perfundit fluvio
pastus Baptista locustus
'Sylvarumque savis, et amistus vest Cameli
'Tinxerat et Christum, sed spirit us aethere missus
'Testatur tinctum, qui tinctis crimina donot.
John fed with Locusts, and with Honey wild,
Clothed with Camel's Hair, the Baptist styled,
He dipped Christ, Christ by the Spirit's Grace
Baptizeth his, and does their Sins deface.


The Second Assertion. John's Baptism in or with Water, was a Figure or a
Shadow of Christ's Baptism, in or with the Spirit, so thereby fulfilled and
ended.
THE Living God made Man perfect and upright at the beginning, as a Garden
watered with Heavenly Drops, beautified with Fruits of Righteousness, according
to the Nature of the noble Seed in him, yet he kept not his original Station,
but was entangled in the Net of the Hellish Spider, whereby Fruits of
Unrighteousness sprung up in him, the Foundation of another Kingdom was laid,
so that a world of Wickedness was ushered in, the comfortable Sunshine of the
Lord's Presence was lost; yet in this State there issued out from the Court of
Heaven a Hu-and-Cry (as I may say) after fallen and forlorn man, and it was
proclaimed, yea, evangelized to and in his Ears, that The Seed of the Woman
should bruise the Serpent's Head, Genesis 3.15. Now, after this, in Ages and
Generations, this Seed was figured out by Types and Shadows, whereby the
Faithful were led as by the hand, to look after and wait for the Promised Seed.

Abel in his day offered a Firstling of the Flock, shadowing out the Seed of
the Woman, Christ Jesus, the First and the Last, Lord of and in his Flock, who
was to destroy the Works of the Devil, Genesis 4.

Noah, after the Flood, builded an Altar unto the Lord, and offered clean
Beasts and clean Fowl thereon, unto the Lord which the Apostle witnessed
fulfilled, when he said, We have an Altar, whereof they have no Right to eat,
who serve the Tabernacle, Hebr. 13.10. in which Altar only is offered up a
Clean Heart and Holy Hands.

In the days of Abraham Circumcision outward was instituted, Genesis 17.10. a
Shadow of a Circumcision without hands in and through Christ.

Isaac burded an Altar, and called on the Name of the Lord, Genesis 26.25.

Jacob erected an Altar, and called it, El Elohe Israel; which is, being
interpreted, God, the God of Israel, Genesis 33.20.

And among the other Figures of the first Priesthood, which time fails me to
speak of particularly, Moses was commanded to make a Laver of Bra^^, and to put
Water therein, and Aaron and his Sons were to wash their Hands and their Feet
therein, lest they dye, Exodus 30.18. etc. Who are of God, they read these
things, and see what was pointed out thereby. Now when John was come, who was
not the Christ, but (...), the Forerunner of Christ, it pleased the Lord, that
he should not be without something in his Dispensation, which might point out
that which should shortly be revealed, as others before him in their respective
Ages and Generations had; and what was that? even to baptize with Water such as
repented and believed, to cleanse away the filth of the flesh outwardly;
figuring thereby Christ Jesus, who by the Power of his Spirit should purify,
wash and cleanse inwardly all that received him; so that Christ being come, who
was before Abel, yea, before the Hills and Mountains were; he put an End, not
only to Abel's Firstlings* to Noah's Altar, to Abraham's Circumcision, to
Jacob's Altar, to Moses's Laver-washing, but also to John's Jordan-washing* yet
I say, though these things were but outward, and availed nothing to the
purifying of the Conscience, yet inasmuch as they were divine Commands, and
Shadows of a future Glory, they were not to be disputed, but practiced, owned
and honored in their time and season: To this purpose well said Bernard, Non
attend it verus obediens, quale sit quod praecipitur, hoc solo contentus quia
praecipitur: that is, One truly obedient minds not what like the thing is,
which is commanded, in this only contenting himself, or acquiescing, because it
is commanded.

Now, if John's Water Baptism was a Figure, a Shadow, a Type of Christ, the
Life, the Glory, the Treasury of the Evangelical Dispensation, the Head of his
Body, the Church, his Kingdom, which stands not in Words, but in Power; not in
Shadows, Types and Figures, but in Substance, in Righteousness, Peace and Joy
in the holy Spirit: and that it was a shadow, Writers have born evidence, and
plentifully, then by Christ ended and fulfilled, so bears no Evangelical
Perpetuity.

Hugo Grotius on Mat. 3. calls Water Baptism a Ceremony.

Piscator on John 1. says, When John had instituted a new ceremony, those that
were sent enquired of him, By that Authority he did those things, if he was
neither Christ nor E^as.

Repentance and Faith (says one) were the Qualifications of John 's Typical
Baptism, which was in slain Water, without Oil, Salt, Spittle, Cream, which are
Antichristian Additaments.

Danvers, in his Treatise of Baptism, calls it, a Sign or a Figure of the
Mystery of the Gospel.

Baxter calls Water Baptism a Sign of Regeneration, page 117.

Dr. Tailor calls Water Baptism a Shadow.

The Sacraments of Baptism, and of the Supper of the Lord (says Juel in his
Apologet) we with Tertullian, Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, Chrisostom,
Basil, Dionisius, and oath ancient Fathers, do call them Figures, Ceremonies,
Signs, Types, Shadows, Similitudes, Remembrances, etc. And every Type has its
Antitype, by the which it is ended and fulfilled.

Water Baptism (says one) was not instituted to have Grace inseparably tied to
it, but to figure out the Power of divine Grace; giving these Reasons, 1st,
That John made a Distinction, I with Water, Christ with the Spirit. 2dly,
Otherwise all the Baptized should be regenerated, which appears otherwise in
Simon Magus, Ananias, Saphira, etc.

Calvin, in his Institutes, calls Water Baptism a Sign, a Figure; saying, If
men be Partakers of the thing signified, that is, of the Substance, why shall
they be withheld from the Sign? If they obtain the Truth, why shall they be
driven from the Figure? Lib. 4. Cap. 16. In calling it a Sign, a Figure, he
says, Well, but his Conclusion is Carnal and Antichristian, in saying, if men
have the Substance, why should they not have the Figure, by this crooked Rule
of Reasoning, might all the ritual Observances of Moses be imposed upon
Gospel-Believers.

Hammond, in his Paraphrase and Annotations on Mat. 3.11. calls John's Baptism
a Ceremony, saying, John initiated Disciples with Water, but Christ with Fire;
yea, and on Mark 1.5, 8. he paraphraseth, saying, Water is the only Signal that
John used, after the Jewish manner; but Christ was to send down the holy Spirit
from Heaven; and is not Christ the End of Ceremonies, Types, Figures and
Shadows? John 's Water Baptism, as all the Shadows of Moses, were but to endure
for a time; for as all the Prophets were until John, so John was until Christ,
and Christ by his internal Washing, the Laver of Regeneration, not only
fulfilled and ended Moses's Laver, but John's Jordan-washing, by fulfilling
inwardly that which they represented outwardly.

Obj. Christ himself was Baptized with Water, does not that perpetuate
Water Baptism in the Church?

Answ. Christ was Circumcised, not that from thence Outward Circumcision should
be continued; he went into the Temple, and taught there, and cast out the
Prophaners thereof; he said to the cleansed Leper, Go and show thy felf to the
Priest, and offer a Gift according to the Law, Mat. 8. so he was baptized, not
that he intended thereby to perpetuate or continue these things, Christ being
the Substance and Antitype, owned the Shadows, Types and Figures in their
place, and this tended to the Conviction of such who questioned the Authority
of those Typical Ministrations. Baptizatus est Christus a Johanne, ut Johannis
ministerium approbaret, says Martinius: that is, Christ was baptized by John,
that he might approve of the Ministration of John, to justify it in its Time,
Place and Season, against such as questioned the Authority of it. So 'twas
said, The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves,
being not baptized of John, Luke 7.30. And Christ put a Query to the Pharisees,
saying, The Baptism of John is it from Heaven, or of men? Luke 20.4. Christ
owning the Figures in their time and place, proved thereby their Institution to
be divine, but all this was before he was offered up; for when he was offered
up, then he blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances, took it out of the way,
nailed it to his Cross, Col. 2.14. When Christ, (says Piscator on this place)
was nailed to the Cross, even then the Ritual Observances of Moses were sore
wounded, yea, abolished. The first Covenant (says the Apostle) stood only in
Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings or Baptisms, and carnet Ordinances,
imposed until the time of Reformation, the Figures, which could not perfect the
Observers, as pertaining to the conscience, were to give way to the Evangelical
and Spiritual Worship brought in by the Substance, Hebr. 9. The Gospel-Time is
a Time of Reformation; so such as stick to the Figure, and will not have the
black Lines of their Corruptions washed away by the Blood of the Lamb, such
remain unreformed. Though Christ owned the Shadows before he was offered up,
yet when he was offered up, risen and ascended, and the Promise of the Father
fulfilled, the Spirit, wherewith Christ baptizes, revealed, then these things
were not preached up, but against; then Paul preached against circumcision
outward, Gal. 5.2. saying, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall prosit you
nothing; yea, he tell them, they bewitched them, who entangled them in the
droughty Desert of Ritual Observances; and he preached circumcision inward:
Stephen bare record, saying, The Most High dwells not in Temples made with
hands, Acts 7. Yea, and Paul said, The Priesthood was changed, Hebr. 7.12. Yea,
and Paul said, Christ sent me not to baptize, 1 Cor. 1.17. saying further,
There is one Lord, one Faith, one baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. There had been two
Baptisms, John's with Water, Christ's with the Spirit without Water; but now
the Shadow had given way to the Substance, one Baptism, says he; and he tells
what it was, by one Spirit into one Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. by one Spirit, not by
Water: So that the Spirit's Baptism, which is Christ's Baptism, is the One
Baptism which he preached up in the Churches: Who are of God, may read here the
Temporary Baptism of John laid aside, and the Spirit's Baptism preached up;
Shadows have no footing in Christ's Kingdom. When Jesus was baptized, he went
straightway out of the Water, and the Spirit descended like a Dove upon him,
the Spirit wherewith Christ baptizeth; and a Voice from Heaven said, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. and in another place, Hear ye
him: Not Moses with his Laver-Washing, not John with his Jordan-Washing, hear
the Son, who baptizes with the holy Spirit and with Fire, not with visible
Water: thus the Legal Rites, which Christ allowed of before he was offered up,
the Apostles, after his return in Spirit, they testified against the same, yet
in so doing were not Transgressors of Christ's Doctrine, but had his Mind:
These things being truly considered, and weighed in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, it cannot but appear, that it shows no soundness of Judgment to
plead, that Christ's being baptized by John, perpetuates Water Baptism or
Rantism in the Evangelical Dispensation. Paul said to the Collossions, If ye be
dead with Christ, from the Rudiments of the world, why as though living in the
world are ye subject to Ordinances? touch not, taste not, handle not, Col.
2.20, 21. Things that had been of Divine Institution, when continued beyond the
Bounds of their season and time, became worldly Rudiments and Doctrines of Men.

Obj. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; does not this Institution enjoin
all Ministers to Baptize?

Answ This Scripture has been much abused by Translators and Interpreters, and
alleged to patronize the Formal Inventions of men, as may appear by what
follows, being truly interpreted it is thus rendered, Go ye therefore, disciple
all Nations, baptizing or dipping them into the Name of the Father; and of the
Son, and of the holy Spirit: and it makes nothing for Water Baptism, nor for
Rantism; for Christ having qualified his Apostles to be his Witnesses to the
uttermost parts of the Earth, sent them not to preach up John, and his
VVater-baptism, but to preach the Everlasting Gospel, Christ, and his Baptism,
which is spiritual: John said and bare record, that he baptized with Water;
but he that was to come, Christ Jesus, should baptize with the holy spirit.
Now, to say, Christ baptized with Water, or sent his Apostles to baptize
therewith, is to question the Testimony and Record of John, who said, he should
baptize with the holy spirit. After Christ was risen from the Dead, he met his
Disciples on a Montain in Galilee, first telling them, that all Power was given
unto him in Heaven and in Earth, then he informed them what their Work should
be.

First, To Disciple the Nations; that is, by the Power of their Ministry to
bring them to be Disciples of Christ, to learn of him to know his Teaching, to
take up his Yoke, to bear the same, to learn Obedience, to come into the
self-denying state of Discipleship, so the word ^riginally imports, says
Bullenger, Zwinglius, Leigh, Fisher, etc. Trapp.

Secondly, He told his Disciples, that they should baptize or dip the Nations,
not in the Name, but into the Name of the Father, etc. Dell, Fisher, Hammon,
Trapp. And what is it to baptize or dip into the Name of the Father? Even the
same that Paul spoke of, when he said, By one spirit we are all bapt^zed into
one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. So that it is the Spirit that baptizeth into one Body,
as also into the Name of the Father, to be a living Member of that Body,
whereof Christ is the Head; it is the Spirit that effects this, not visible
Water.

Furthermore, Christ in these words commanded not his Disciple to turn back to
John's Ministration, to dip them in Jordan, or in any other River, or in a
Bowl, Basin or Font, but into the Name of the Father, etc. which is no other
thing then by the Power of the Spirit, whereof they were Ministers, to bring
them into the Power of God, to have fellowship with him through the Spirit.
Now, the Name of God is his Virtue or Power, as, In my Name they shall cast out
Devils; that is, in my Power; this Zwinglius on this place observes.

Teachers in Sprinkling of Infants, which they call Baptism, use this Scripture
as a Form of words, saying, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; which thing the Apostles did not, which
undoubtedly they would have done, if Christ had commanded it, as an absolute
Form.

Further, Zwinglius said of this place, Christus Jesus baptismi, formulam qua
uteremur, his verbis, non instituit, quemadmodum Theologi hactenus falso
tradiderunt: that is, Christ Jesus did not in these words institute a form of
Baptism, which we should use, as Divines have hitherto falsely taught. This was
the Testimony of Zwinglius, who in his Day was a great Opposer of Anabaptists,
Lib de bap. page 66. Tom. 2. oper. Piscator on the same place peaks fully to
the same purpose.

Again, This place cannot be meant of Water Baptism, because Paul thanked God
he had baptized none but such and such; for (says he) Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15, 16, 17. yet he fulfilled
that, Mat. 28. he preached the Gospel in a circuit from Jerusalem to Illyricum,
and many by his Ministry were discipled, brought into the state of Disciples,
to learn of Christ, yea, and into the Name of God, that is, into his Power;
many were baptized into the Name of the Father, as his Sons; into the Name of
his Son, as his Jewels and Ransomed Ones; into the Name of the Holy Spirit, as
his Sanctified Ones; these knew the One Baptism, by One Spirit, into One Body.

Why does Paul thank God, that he baptized none but such and such? 1st, Because
he saw them idolizing and jangling about it, which he knew to be a thing not of
absolute Necessity, not a Command of Christ, but used or born with for a
season, for the sake of the Weak, and others, in reference to John's Ministry,
if he had commonly practiced it before, from his Practice, they might have been
strengthened in their Thoughts about it, he being a great Apostle. Secondly, He
thanks God, that he baptized none but such and such; And why? Because he was
not sent of Christ so to do. Thirdly, Lest some should say, that he baptized in
his own Name, rather into his own Name, as the Greek Copies and diverse English
Translations render it; seeing from Christ, in whose Name he came, he had no
Command so to do. What Ambassador of an earthly Prince, commissioned to treat
with a foreign Prince, about especial Matters if he fail, in reference to the
Contents of his Commission, and treat about Matters whereto he was not
commissioned; can he expect that his Prince's Favor should be unto him as Dew
upon the Grass, or rather that his Wrath should be as the Roaring of a Lion? So
if that in Matthew. 28. had been a Command obligatory to all Gospel Ministers, to
Baptize with outward Water, could Paul have Cause of Rejoicing in that he
fulfilled ^ot the Command? Consider this, and judge.

Cbj. That in Mat. 28. must needs relate to outward Water; for the Apostles
could not Baptize with the Spirit.

Answ. Who as thus reason, are ignorant of the Ministry of Christ, which is a
Ministry of the Spirit; for all that are sent of Christ, through their Ministry
people are turned from Darkness to Light, and translated from Death to Life,
where Christ's Baptism is known; and this they do as endued with Power from
above, John 17.18. As thou have sent me into the World (says Christ) even so
send I them. And must not Christ and his Ministers be found in one Work? even
to turn people from Satan's power to the Power of God, where the spiritual
Baptism is. While Peter preached to Cornelius, and his Kinsmen and near
Friends, the holy Spirit fell on them, Acts 10. wherein Christ's Baptism is.
Moreover Paul laid his Hands on certain, and the holy Spirit fell upon them,
Acts 19. even that Spirit wherewith Christ baptizeth. Yea, and in Acts 26. Paul
gave a Relation of his Call, as also of his Work; I (says the Lord) have
appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a Minister: And what was his
Work? In preaching to the Gentiles, to open their Eyes, to turn them from
Darkness to Light, from the power of Satan usto God, that they may receive
Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith
in Christ Jesus. Paul declared his Commission to preach, and the Effects of it
was glorious, Conversion, Faith, Remission of Sins, Sanctification, Salvation;
he took not Flesh and Blood into counsel, evil Counselors for the Soul; but
silencing Flesh, entertaining a noble Resolution, he put himself into the hand
of God, saying in effect, Te duce, vera sequor; To duce, falsa nego. Consider,
Paul in and through the Virtue of him that sent him, opened peoples Eyes, and
turned them from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power unto God: Were not
these Witnesses of the Spirit's Baptism? Yes; for without the Spirit, and its
Baptism, none come to God, nor out of Satan's power: Thus Paul discipled the
Gentiles, that received his Testimony, and baptized them in and through the
Spirit, into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit;
and this was and is done, not by Water Baptism without, but by the Spirit's
Baptism within.

Again, 2 Cor. 3.6. Paul testifies, That they were made of God able Ministers
of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, even of the Spirit
in which Christ's Baptism is revealed: And Paul demanded of the Galatians,
saying, Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the Law, or by the hearing of
Faith? Gal. 3.2. As if he should have said, True it is, you have received the
Spirit, but not by the Works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith; so that
the Apostles preaching the Word of Faith unto them, they received the Spirit,
even that Spirit which baptizeth into one Body.

So that it is clear unto me, that such as allege this Scripture, Go and teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, etc. to patronize
Water Baptism or Rantism, that is, dipping or sprinkling, in Gospel-dayes, they
are Wresters and Perverters of the Scripture; and that this Scripture, as many
others, has in the dark Night of Apostasy been wrested, perverted, abused and
mis-interpreted, beside what has been spoken, may be more fully made apparent.

Zuinglius and Piscator say expressly, that Christ Jesus did not in those words
institute a Form of Baptism, and that Divines had taught falsely, who held it
out as a Form.

One Gulielmus, who was a Roman Catholic, taught, That the Form of Baptism
should be thus, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, of the Son, of the
holy Ghost, and of the blessed Virgin Mary, Cent. 13. Mag. 419.

There was a certain Priest, who being a Lack Latin, said in baptizing, Baptizo
te in nomine patria, et filia, et spiritu sancta; which is false Latin, as
Latinists know; about this there was no small contention, as, whether the
Baptism was lawful, yea or nay, where False Latin was broached; Bonifacius
Bishop under Car^lus Magnus, was of Opinion, that the Party thus baptized ought
to be Rebaptized; upon which Pope Zacharias wrote to Donifacius, That he
should not be Rebaptized, for that notwithstanding the False Latin, it was
True Baptism; he also put him in mind of the Custom of the Church, that if any
were baptized by Heretics, such should not be rebaptized, but only purged by
Imposition of Hands: Thus False Latin got the Day.

A Bishop of Paris in a Synod expressed himself thus, Let Baptism be celebrated
with Reverence, and let the Priest be very cautious in the Distinction and
Pronuntiation of Words, in which all the Virtue of the Sacrament and the
Salvation of Children consists, Statut. Synodal. Odonis Parisiensis Episcopi.
This is a strange, yea, an unchristian Doctrine, denying the Virgin's Birth,
Jesus, by interpretation a Savior, in whom alone Salvation is, and ascribing
the same to Water without, Formal Words, Distinctions and Pronuntiation without.

Obj. The Apostles practiced Water Baptism, not only before the coming in of
Christ's Baptism, but after, as it is evident in the Acts of the Apostles; does
not this infer the continuance of it in Gospoltimes?

Answ. As it was said in a certain Case, so may I say in this, Judicis officium
est, ut res; it a tempora rerum; Quarere -- that is, A Judge must not only
enquire after things, but also after their Times and Seasons: True it is, the
Apostles for a season practiced Water Baptism, not Rantism, that is, Dipping,
not Sprinkling; but whether they did it by Command, or by Permission, has been
a point of controversy: As for me and Thousands more, we believe, that they
did it not by Command from Christ, but took it up, and continued it for a
season, in relation to John's Water Baptism, as Paul said in a certain case, 1
Cor. 7.6. But I speak this by Permission, and not by Commandment. After the
Ascension of Christ some of the Apostles used outward circumcision, not as by
Christ's Command, but in relation to Moses, for their sakes (for a season) who
were weak, or otherwise affected, certainly knowing that soon after the Virtue
and Purity of Circumcision made without Hands, would put an End to Circumcision
outward; for the Mosaical Shadows and Figures were the most truly put off when
they felt the Substance, Christ, the Life, the End of such things risen in
their mortal Bodies; for, as the Sun-light swallows up the Moonlight, and as
Darkness is chased away when the Sun appears, and mounts up in its luster, so
all outward Shadows, Types and Figures, from the days of Righteous Abel to
John, were to vanish as the Life of Christ came to be exalted in his Church;
John intimated thus much when he said, I must decrease, he must increase: So
John's Water Baptism was to decrease, John being a Forerunner, and his
Servant, was to resign up his Baptism to Christ, yea, and as a Servant to
deliver all things into his hands, as Heir and Lord: John's Baptism reached
unto Christ's Kingdom, but has no place therein; yea, and to bring Shadows and
Figures into his Kingdom, is (if rightly understood) antichristian; for his
Kingdom is wholely spiritual, and in his Church he is a Bundle of Myrh, yes,
that very thing which from Abel to John was represented by outward Shadows.

So that those the Apostles baptized, as internally, I am persuaded, they did
it for a season in relation to John's Ministration, for the sake of the Weak,
and of others, the Day being but even dawning, which was to put an End unto and
fulfill the Laver-Washing, yea, and the Jordan-washing, as all other Shadows
from Abel to that very season.

And that they baptized on this Account, and not by a Command of Christ,
several Grounds induce me to believe:

First, Paul a chosen Vessel, who planted many Churches, yet altogether ceased
from John's Ministration of Water Baptism, after that he had used it twice or
thrice, as probably all the Apostles did, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15, 16, 17. he thanks
God that he baptized none but such and such, saying expressly, Christ sent him
not to baptize, dip or plung their Bodies in Outward Water, though he did is to
a few, yet he had no command for it: Hence it necessarily follows, that he did
it by Permission, in reference to John's Ministration, for the sake of the
Weak, or of others, and the present time, till the Lord Christ, the End of all
Figures, was more revealed in them: What was he sent to do? To preach the
Gospel, Christ, and his Baptism, which washes inwardly, fulfilling outward
Washings.

Secondly, This Paul, who had the Mind of Christ, held out but one continuing
Baptism in the Kingdom of Christ, writing to the Saints at Ephesus, he said,
There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. There had been two
Baptisms, John's with Water, Christ's with the Spirit; yet the one is repealed,
and not preached up among them. So to the wise in heart I appeal, whether this
one Baptism he preached up, was John's with Water, or Christ's with the Spirit;
and whatever thou be that says that the one Baptism which the Apostle preached
up, was John's Water Baptism, I tell thee thou denies Christ, and his Baptism
with the Spirit, and sets John and his Water Baptism in his Throne, thou
stumblest at the Rock, the Day Star thou know not, nor the Sun of
Righteousness risen, and the Shadows flown away. Now if any scruple this
Scripture, and simply desires to be resolved, whether Baptism he preaches up,
the Mouth of Paul in another place may inform thee, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit
we are all baptized into one Body. Here thou may be satisfied, he tells
thee, there is One Baptism; he also informs thee, what that one Baptism is, not
into Jordan, not into a Bowl, Basin or Font, but by the one Spirit into one
Body. So to every seeing Eye John's Water Baptism is here laid aside, his
Ordinance thereto repealed. Now it being that Paul was not sent to baptize with
Water, and that he preached up one baptism, and that of the Spirit, it
necessarily follows, that whom he baptized with Water, he did it by Permission
in reference to John's Ministration; Using and Instituting are two things; the
Apostles Condiscended where they never Commanded.

And whereas some allege, The Eunuch said unto Philip, Here is Water, what
does hinder me to be baptized? Philip said, If thou believe with all thy heart,
thou may, Acts 8.36, 37. He says not thou must; he held it not to be of
absolute Necessity, so condescended, as before: The holy Spirit, which seals up
to God, was received without Water Baptism, or Rantism; where then is the
Necessity of Dipping or Sprinkling?

Now, in reference to what was last objected, several Testimonies consonant to
what I here assert, might be produced, and that of such, who were not of mean
Account in their Day, their Works by many yet had in esteem.

The use of the Ceremonial Law (says Wollebius in his common places) was
profitab^e before the Death of Christ; after his Death unto the Promulgation or
spreading abroad of the Gospel, it (...) as indifferent, but after the
Promulgation or clear publishing of the Gospel, the observation of Ceremonies
is not only unwholesome, and unprofitable, but also deadly. Hence Paul at the
beginning, would have Timothy Circumcised, because of the weakness of the Jews,
Acts 16.3. but after that the Gospel was more fully Preached; he would not
yield that Titus should be Circumcised, Gal. 2. And says he, 'The Observation
of Jewish Ceremonies would now be nothing but a denying of the Coming and Death
of Christ. So there was a time (say I) when Iordan-washing was profitable;
there was a time, when it was indifferent, in which time the Apostles made some
use of it; and there is a time, when it may be said to be Antichristian, in
pleading for the outward Washing, when the Laver of Regeneration, filled with
the Water of Life, for the clensing of the inward Man, is set open, and when
performed in that Spirit which is at Enmity unto Christ.

Wilfred, a Presbyter, reasoning with Bishop Coleman, about the time of the
celebration of Easter, said, God forbid we should accuse the Apostle of Folly,
when he observed the Precepts of Moses, the Church as yet Iudaizing in many
things; neither were the Apostles on a sudden able to abolish all Legal
Observances, which had been of Divine Institution: On this account Paul
circumcised Timothy, offered in the Temple; purified himself, allowed of
Head-shaving, had his Head shorn at Cencrea, profitable to no other end, but to
avoid ministering of Offense to the Jews, who being weak saw not the End of
these things; in the year 664.

Piscator on Acts 16.3. says, After the Example of Paul and Timothy, that the
Weak may be gained, let us not refuse to submit unto troublesome things, which
otherwise we might with a good Conscience forbear.

Paul (says Trapp on 1 Cor. 9.) became all things to all men that he might
save some; and how? not in conforming to their Impieties, but in the Use of
things indifferent, in Bowels of Compassion to them. Paul (says he) harp'd
much of this String, out of a fervent and ardent Desire to gain Souls to the
Lord.

Though many Legal Types (says Gell) continued some considerable time after
Christ's Death, yet they lost their positive and obligatory Power, and were
used only as Adiaphora, things indifferent, in Compliance with the inveterate
Prejudices of new Converts, lately brought over from Judaism, who could not
quickly lay aside that great Veneration, which they had for the Rites of Mosaik
Institutions.

Obj. Peter baptized some Gentiles after that the Spirit was fain upon them;
does not this perpetuate Water Baptism?

Answ. True it is, while Peter preached the Everlasting Gospel unto the
Gentiles, the Gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out upon them; then said
Peter, Can any man forbid Water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Spirit as well as we? Acts 10.44, etc. The Grounds and
Reasons why Water Baptism, John's Ministration, was some time used for a season
in the primitive times by the Apostles, are before mentioned: I do not believe,
that Peter had any more Command for Water Baptism then Paul had, who said
expressly, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: Yea, and
this Paul said, Acts 20.27. I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole
Counsel of God. It seems John's Ministration of Water-Baptism's Continuance was
not of his Counsel: Where did he exhort Timothy, Titus, Philemon, or any of the
Churches he wrote Epistles to, to continue Water Baptism? on the contrary he
shows it was fulfilled, ended, repealed, as has before been spoken to, though
in Relation to John's Ministration, and in Compliance with the present State,
he baptized some few, as others upon the same grounds did. Paul circumcised
Timothy; yet in 1 Cor. 7.19. he says, Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of the commandments of God: The same
may be said of Water Baptism, 'Ti^ not Dipping, or Not Dipping, but the keeping
of the Commandments of God; this is the bonum hominis, the totum hominis, the
one thing necessary, 'twas not easy to bring them from what had been
commanded, but as Truth discovered it self to be the Substance thereof: Paul
writing to the Galatians said, How turn ye again to the weak and beggarly
Elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in Bondage? Gal. 4.9. What is earthly
and beggarly is not of power to enrich with spiritual Blessings: Water is an
Element, and appertains to the elemen^ary Part in man, which is to pass away,
in the Revelation of the Substance, which turns out the earthly within, and
earthly Rudiments without, establishing a Kingdom in Righteousness and
Substance, out of Figures and Shadows. Peter never ascribed Regeneration to
outward Water; neither did he preach, That Children ( damnati priusquam nati;
that is, damned before they be born, as the Doctrine is now) by sprinkling
Water upon them, are made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of
the Kingdom of Heaven; but he ascribed Regeneration to the Eternal Word,
saying, Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the
Word of God, which lives and abides forever, 1 Pet. 1.23.

Peter, a Fisher of Men, having caught a Draught of Gentiles, was right-glad
thereof; so in Compliance with the present Season, as others did, condescended
to Outward Water, which washes the Outward Man, and might take Occasion
therefrom to exhort them to wait for an Increase of the Spirit's Virtue and
Power, the Heavenly Baptism, which washes the Inward Man, for inward
cleansing; the Effect of the Spirit's Baptism is a gradual Work.

The Third Assertion. Christ's Baptism in or with the Spirit only, is the
Baptism that is to continue in the Church to the End of the World.
JOhn being the Forerunner of Christ, according to the Father's Appointment,
was to baptize with Outward Water, John 1.33. to wash away the Filth of the
Outward Man, shadowing out Christ ready to be revealed, and by his spiritual
Baptism to cleanse the Inward Man, to make it a Habitation of God; and this
Water Baptism was to be of less Continuance then the Shadows of Moses, as the
Morning Star, though brighter then the other Stars, shines less while then
they, because the sudden Appearance of the Sun swallows it up: So John's
Water Baptism, though its Beginning was long after Circumcision, commanded in
Abraham's days, and the Shadows of the First Priesthood, commanded in the
days of Moses, yet was it to have an End with them: for when as after Christ's
Ascension, Christ's Baptism began, cleansing inwardly, then John's Baptism, a
Figure thereof was ended and fulfilled, the Shadow was to give way to the
Substance, the Sign to the Truth, the Letter to the Spirit, the Servant to the
Son; for, as the Prophets were until John, so John was until Christ; and John
must no more exceed his Bounds, then Moses and the Prophets theirs: as the
Prophets gave up to John, so John was to give up to Christ: John, a Creature,
had a Temporary Baptism; but Christ, who is the same to day, yesterday and
forever, has an Everlasting Baptism, by the Spirit into one Body: and Christ's
Kingdom stands not in Signs, Figures and Shadows, but in Righteousness, Peace
and Joy in that Spirit wherewith he baptizeth.

Now, after John's Water Baptism had continued some 4 Years, then Christ's
Baptism with the Spirit, without Water, began to be manifested, as you may see
Acts 1.5. Christ told his Disciples, saying, John truly baptized with Water,
but ye shall be baptized with the holy Spirit not many days hence. Confider,
they were not to stick in John's Baptism, much les. in Rantism, a Tradition
then unheard of, nor build their Tarbernacles there, nor judge it sufficient,
but were to wait for the Promise of the Father, even the Spirit, wherewith
Christ baptizeth; the plentiful effusion of the Spirit was reserved as the
great Blessing of Gospel-days, of the Evangelical State and Dispensation, which
is to run parallel with the Age and Duration of the World; herein the
Everlasting Gospel is preached to Kindreds Tongues and Nations.

T^is precious Promise of the Father was accomplished and fulfilled at the Day
of Pentecost, when the Disciples were waiting together in one Place, Cloven
Tongues, like, as of Fire, sat upon each of them, and they were all filled
with the Holy Spirit, and spoke with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
Utterance, Acts 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Thus it was evident and manifest, that John the
Baptist was a true Prophet, who said, I baptize with Water, but Christ shall
baptize with the Holy Spirit and with Fire. Christ, Acts Chap. 1. bad them wait
for the promise of the Father; he told them what the Promise was, even the
Baptism with the holy Spirit; and they received what they waited for at the Day
of Pentecost, Acts 20. they were filled with the holy Spirit, which was
Christ's Baptism without Water; mark this, without Water, more excellent then
John's Baptism with Water. Now Baptists and Rantists, Dippers and Sprinklers,
for the most part are fallen into that Diminution, Deprivation, or utter
Abolution of divine Understanding, as that it seems ridiculous, or al^ogether
erroneous, to tell them of a Baptism without Waters This of Pentecost was the
beginning of Christ's Baptism, after he was ascended; to this John witnessed,
saying, Joh. 7.39. He that believes on me (said Christ) out of his Belly shall
flow Rivers of living Water: but this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that
believe on him should receive; for the holy Spirit was not yet given, because
that Jesus was not yet glorified; but as soon as he was glorified, then he
began to let out the Power of his Spirit, even his Baptism, the Progress of
Christ's Spiritual Baptism was further manifested, as Acts 8.17. Peter and John
laid their hands on the Believing. Samaritans, and they received the holy
Spirit; after this the Apostle Peter preached Christ to Correlius, his family
and Friends, the holy Spirit fell upon them, Acts 10.44. Moreover, all the
Saints at Pome, at Corinth, in Galatia, in Ephesus, in Philippi, in Coloss, in
Pontus, in Capadocia, in Asu^, in Bithyniae, yea, and all the true Churches
were in their respective Measures Partakers of the Spirit of the Lord, and of
its Baptism, which was and is the One Baptism to continue in the Church of
Christ to the End of the World; for, in the Church, the Kingdom of Christ, the
Apostles preached not up Circumcision nor Baptisms, but one Circumcision made
without Hands, one Baptism by the Spirit into one Body, and of the Necessity of
the Continuance of the Spirit's Baptism in the Church of Christ, let the Wise
in Heart, who read these things, consider: First, Without the Spirit's Baptism,
none come to fee the Volumn of Corruptions in his Heart to be cancelled, none
escape the Bondage, Slavery, Darkness, Defilements and Reprobate State of
corrupt Nature, but who walk in the Light, wherewith Christ has enlightened
them, and submit to its Guidance, they increase in heavenly Increases, they
grow in the Spirit, and seel its Baptism, so receive a New Nature, and their
Thoughts, Words and Works are savoury, Effects and Fruits of this new and
heavenly Nature: Peter wrote to the Saints who were Partakers of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Here the Image of God is renewed, the Life of God known,
Fellowship with him in his Holiness and Purity, yea, in his Blessednes^, in the
beatifical Presence and Brightness of his Glory, this Outward Washing, though a
Thousand times over, can never bring unto, but leaves the old Nature, the
cursed Nature, alive and vigorous in the Creature. Secondly, Christ's Baptism
gives a New Name, who hearken to Wisdom's Teaching, and in the Cross of Christ
see Sin crucified in their Mortal Bodies, and with the Sword of the Spirit, in
which the Evangelical Baptism is, see the Enmity slain, such receive a New
Name; To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Manna; I will
give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a New Name written, which no man knows
saving he that receives it, Rev. 2.17. The Lord's Worthies are fed with
Heavenly Manna, hidden from the Wise, from the Prudent, from the Princes of
this World; they have a White Stone, in which they are comforted,
notwithstanding all the black Coals, wherewith the world seeks to besmear them;
this Stone may spiritually be called Ebenezer, by interpretation, the Stone of
Help; these have a New Name, better then that of Son; and Daughters, Isa. 56.5.
Here, not thorough Willing, Runeing and carnal Conformity, but through Faith,
the Spirit of Adoption is received, wherein Christ's Bapt^sm is witnessed; and
because you are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son, crying, Abba
Father, Gal. 4.6. God has no Still-born Children; the Spirit of Grace is a
Spirit of Supplication, to this New Name, Adoption, Cry of Abba Father, Outward
Washing cannot bring; it is a rich, yea, an enriching Gi^t, neceived by the Hand
of Faith, Romans 8.15. Thirdly, The Spirit's Baptism must continue in the Church,
otherwise no true Worship, without it the true Worship is not known; the Woman
of Samaria acknowledging Christ to be a Prophet, forthwith she sought to be
satisfied in a Case of Conscience, concerning Worshipping in that Mountain, or
in Jerusalem, Christ said unto her, The hour comes, when ye shall neither in
this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father; for God is a Spirit,
and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.24.
How? In Spirit, in Opposition to the carnal and idolatrous Worship of the
Samaritans, who worshipped God under the Representation of a Dove: How must God
be worshipped? In Truth, in Opposition to the Typical and Figurative Worship of
the Jews, which was but a Shadow of the Gospel Worship. Paul bare record unto
this Worship, saying, We are the Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit;
as truly it may be said, They are of Christ's Baptism, who worship God in the
Spirit; such as have their Luxuriances lopped of, unruly Passions mortified,
and cast away as a superfluou. Foreskin; such are inwardly circumcised,
inwardly baptized by the One Spirit into One Body, in which the true Worship
is. Fourthly, The Spirit's Baptism must continue in the Church, else no
Translation into the Kingdom of Light; it is through the Spirit that Entrance is
known thereinto: so that the Doctrine of Men, who preach, reach and affirm,
that sprinkling of Infants, which they call Baptism, makes a M^mber of Christ,
a Child of God, an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, is an antichristian
Doctrine, setting outward Water in the place of the Spirit of Christ, whose
Work only translates into the Kingdom of God; so that the Apostle Paul gave
thanks to God, who had delivered them from the power of Darkness, and had
translated them into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.13. So it is the Power
of God, who is a Spirit, that translates into the Kingdom of Christ; not
extrinsecal, that is, outward water, as many erroneously teach; such as truly
have a Lot herein, though through the Malice of the old Serpent, they be cast
into a dark Dungeon, yet may say in Faithfulness and Verity, as Oscolampadius
upon his Deathbed said, Hic sat lucis, Here within is plenty of Divine Light.
Fifthly, The Baptism of the Spirit makes the Heart the Lord's Temple, outward
Water tends not to the cleansing of the inside; but in the Faith the Spirit is
received, which baptizes into one Body: Paul wrote to the Corinthians, saying,
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? and if any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the
Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. And this Temple is
not washed by John's Ministration of out ward Water, but by Christ's
Ministration of the Water of Life, it is swept by the Lord's Power, it is
beautified with Holiness, perfumed and sweetened with Heavenly Graces, like
Incease and Myrrh; the Lord will dwell in a poor, provided it be a pure Heart,
1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Sixthly, The Spirit's Baptism enables to the Work of the
Gospel Ministry; not Arts nor Sciences, nor Humane Endowments; not Aristotle's
Ethics, nor his Physics, nor his Metaphysics, makes a Minister of Christ,
but the Virtue of the Spirit, wherewith Christ baptizeth; The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me (faith Christ) he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
Poor; see Luke 4 18. even the Gospel, a Word of Excellency, Authority,
Certainty and Sufficiency: yea, and Christ said to his Disciples, John truly
baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Spirit not many
days hence; and ye shall receive Power, after that the holy Spirit is come
upon you; and ye shall be Witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth, Acts 1.5, 8
Consider this, Christ himself here calls Baptism of the Spirit, the Power
qualifying and enabling them to be his Witnesses. Yea, and 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy
Men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit; they were acted,
carried out of the Dungeon of Self, whence issue Dreams and Uncertainties, to
say and do what God would have them. Yea and on the Day of Pentecost, Cloven
Tongues like as of Fire, sat upon each of the Disciples, and they were all
filled with the holy Spirit, and spoke as the Spirit gave them Utterance, Acts
2. Thus were they baptized with the Spirit, Christ's Baptism, without Water,
John's Baptism; and they were taught, both (...), to divide the Word aright, as
also (...), to feot it aright, to teach well, and live well; so that in the
sense of God's Innocence wrought in them, they commended themselves as Examples
for others to follow. Yea, and 1 Pet. 4.10. As every man has received the
Gift, even so minister the same one to another, at good Stewards of the
manifold Grace of God. Cloups when full pour down, Presses overflow,
Aromatical Trees sweat out their precious and sovereign Oils; so the divinely
qualified Witnesses bring out rich Treasures, even lively and life-giving
Oracles; this is through the Spirit's Baptism, not through Acquired Seize
and Accomplishments. Seventhly, The Spirit's Baptism brings into the true
Service of God; for no Kindred, Tongue, Language, Nation, Family, Man or Woman
has an entrance into the pure Service of God; but inasmuch as they feel the
Spirit of the Lord in them, moving Heaven ward; for, as the Apostle said, But
now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were held, that
we should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldness of the Letter,
Romans 7.6. The true service of God is in the newness of that Spirit wherewith
Christ baptizeth, in which man being kept, he holds constantly a Countermotion
to the course of the World, to the torrent of its reigning corruptions, in
this, Bodies are presented a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which
is their reasonable service, Romans 12.1. a living Sacrifice instead of a Ram;
sinful Passions are here slain instead of a Goat; unclean affections, instead
of flying Fowls; vain Thoughts, foaring Purposes, wandering Imaginations are
slain; this is read in those Bodies that are this living Sacrifice. Eighthly,
The Spirits Baptism makes all that partake of it one in and with Christ, the
Head: Christ prayed to his Father, saying, John 17.11. Holy Father, keep
through thy own Name those whom thou have given me, that they may be one, as we
are; he prayed for their Oneness, who was heard of his Father: and Verse 20,
21. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word; that they all may be one, as thou, Father art in me, and I
in thee, that they all may be one in us. No true Unity is out of the Lords
Name; it is a strong Tower, a Munition of Rocks; here security and safeguard is
known, a sure and sweet Haven to have recourse unto. After Christ's Ascension,
when the Spirit was received with which Christ baptizeth, the Churches were
Witnesses of this Oneness; so Paul told the Galatians, Chap. 3.27, 28. As many
of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; there is neither
Jew nor Greek, there is neither Bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor
Female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. These were clothed with the Sun;
these were beautiful through divine Ornaments: Consider this, it was not
through Water Baptism, but through the Spirits baptism, that Christ was put on,
that Oneness was witnessed. And 1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all baptized
into one Body: So who become living Members of that Body whereof Christ is the
Head, and feel themselves to be of the Corporation and Company of Believers,
it is through the Spirits Baptism, not through outward Water. And 1 Cor. 6.17.
He that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit. Further, Paul to the Ephesians
said, Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, Ep^es
4.3. So the Unity and Unanimity is in the Spirit, in which Christ's Baptism is.
Ninthly, The Spirits Baptism cleanses from sin and iniquity, so fulfils
inwardly what. John's Water Baptism shadowed forth outwardly; 1 Cor. 6.9, 10,
11. Paul wrote to the Corinthians, saying, Know ye not that the Unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: it is an undefiled Inheritance, the
Unclean must not tread on that golden Pavement. And this Apostle having
branched out such and such Workers of Iniquity, he concludes thus, And such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Consider
this, when they came to be Partakers of the Spirit, to know its Baptisin, then
they came to be washed, sanctified, yea, and justified also. The same Apostle
wrote to the Saints at Ephesus, saying, Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it, that he might sanctisie and cleanse it with the washing of
Water, by the Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church,
without Blemish, Spot or Wrinkle. Now it is not Water without, though man were
washed a thousand times therewith, but the Spirit of the Lord, wherewith Christ
baptizeth, where a Well of Water is known springing up unto eternal Life, that
effects these things in the Church. Tenthly, The Spirits Baptism makes true
Christians; so deny it, and sweep true Christianity from off the Earth. Paul
writing to the Romans said, He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is
that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the
Lettir, whose Praise is not of man, but of God: and as truly it may be said, He
is not a Christian that is one outwardly, neither is that Baptism which is
outward in the Flesh; but he is a Christian which is one inwardly, and Baptism
is that of the Heart, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of men, but of
God: Gods Eye and Regard is to the inward Jew; and the inward Circumcision, to
the inside Christian, to the inward Baptism; but man's Eye and Regard who knows
not the Laver of Regeneration, is to the outside Christian, to outward
Baptism; for of the many Eplscopalians, Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists,
and others, who have written of Baptism and Rantism, that is, dipping and
sprinkling, few if any have written of the Baptism of Christ, with the Spirit,
which John the Baptist, Christ, Peter, Paul, etc. bare witness to* the Virgins
Birth was by the Angel unto Joseph named Jesus, by interpretation a Savior;
for says he, He shall save his People from their Sins, Matthew. 1.21. After he
was baptized of John in Jordan, and the holy Spirit descended like a Dove upon
him, from the divine Anointing, which came upon him, he came to be called
Messiah and Christ, which both signify anointed; Christ in Greek, as Mes^^^ in
Hebrew, signifies anointed, because he was anointed of the Father: Peter bare
record of Christ, saying, God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Spirit
and with Power* who were about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed
of the Devil; for God was with him, Acts 10.38. Thus Jesus was the Anointed, of
the Father, the Christ, the Messiah, and him the High Priests, Prophets and
some Kings under the Law, anointed with material Oil, represented: so
Christians signifies Anointed Ones; and none are truly Christians, but as they
partake of the Anointing, whereby they become Members of Christ, spiritually
influenced by Christ their Head, so become Kings and Priest unto God. The
Disciples (as Acts 11.26.) were called Christians first in Antioch, called so
by divine Direction, as the word signifies, says Trapp on this place; the same
Anointing which came upon Jesus, which God gave not by measure unto him, Joh. 3
34. the same Anointing is given in measure to the Members of Christ, of his
Fullness they receive Grace for Grace; these are true Christians, truly Anointed
Ones, Hebr. 1.9. Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, therefore
God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of Gladness above thy
Fellows. Thus real Christians partake of the Anointing in their respective
Measures; Christians are Christ's, and they that are Christ's, have crucified
the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5 24. Now such as take not up
the Cross, but live in the Flesh, in the carnalizing Principle, and in this
profess the Scriptures, God, Christ, and his Ordinances, so become swelled with
historical Knowledge and Notions, and hence conclude themselves Christians; I
say, they are not really so, Non re, sed nomine Christiani; Not real, but
nominal Christians, in Name only; even as such, who said, they were Jews, but
were not, but were the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2.9. The Tucks at this day
style themselves Musulmans, that is, The only true believers: The Angel of the
Church of Sardis was thus reproved, Thou have a Name that thou live, but art
dead, Rev. 3.1. so could neither praise nor serve the living God: A Ship may be
called Safeguard or Goodspeed, yet may fall into the Hand of Pirates: So
specious Names of Christians, Believers, Church Members, advantage nothing,
except the Cross of Christ be borne, the Anointed received, which truly makes
such. Eleventhly, The Spirits Baptism saves, is present Salvation: Now who
contend for John's Ministry, Water Baptism, be it Dippers or Sprinklers, their
discourse is of what the Saints enjoyed in the primitive times, and of what
Salvation shall be in another World, not waiting for Salvation and Redemption
in this Life; but they that live not the Life of the Righteous, shall not dye
the Death of the Righteous, nor shall have the Reward of the Righteous: but the
Apostle Paul preached present Salvation, not by John's Baptism, or
Water-washing, but by the Baptism of Christ, through the renewing of the
Spirit, Titus 3.5. According to his Mercy he saved us, by the Laver or Washing
of Regeneration and renewing of the holy Spirit: so that, so far as a man is
regenerated, renewed by the holy Spirit, which is Christ's Baptism, so far he is
saved from sin, and from the Reward thereof: this Laver of Regeneration fulfils
inwardly what Moses's Laver and John's Jordan-washing shadowed forth outwardly:
this Laver of Regeneration removes the old Nature, and brings in a new Nature,
whence issues new Thoughts, new Desires, new Words and new Works; he lives,
thinks, speaks, works, loves and acts otherwise then he was wont; the Old Man
and his Deeds are put off, the New Man and his Deeds are put on; Outward Water
is not of that virtue to effect this in man, it is a Water of a more Heavenly
Nature; Paul writing to the Saints at Ephesus, said, By Grace ye are saved,
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.
These were Witnesses of present salvation; they had known stirrings in the Womb
of Grace, precious unto God, had persevered therein, so became God's
Workmanship, to know the glorious Fabric of the New Man erected in them; these
were truly made alive unto God, who had lain rotting and stinking in the
sepulcher of Corruption; these knew Christ's spiritual Baptism; to this purpose
Peter ^are record, saying, The like Figure whereunto even Baptism does also now
save, not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Peter here speaks
of the Ark of Noah, which by Command of the Lord was made of Gopher wood, Genesis
6.14. a kind of Cedar, says the old Naturalist Pliny, which is not subject to
Rottenness nor Worm-eatenness, but endures forever; a shadow of Christ Jesus,
who is the same to day, yesterday and forever: so the Ark was a Figure of
Christ, as it saved by Water outwardly: so Christ by his Baptism, the Water of
Regeneration saves inwardly from the Deluge of sin, from the drowning Waves of
iniquity and transgression. Baptism saves now, says Peter: But what Baptism
does he speak of? of John's with Water, or of Christ's with the Spirit? the
Apostle answers this, lest any should misapprehend his sense and intent, he
explains himself evidently and fully, saying, Not the putting away the Filth of
the Flesh, the cleansing of the outward man, the effect of John's Baptism, but
the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, the effect of Christ's Baptism in
and with the Spirit, which inwardly saves, and brings to know and witness the
Answer of a good Conscience, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.9,
20, 21.


Piscator on Matthew. 3. gives his Testimony altogether answerable to what is
here written, saying, That the Apostle Peter here ascribes Salvation to inward
Baptism, not to the outward, which extends no further the^ the outward man.

Hammond, in his Paraphrase and Annotations on the New Testament, says on the
aforesaid place* As the Ark in the Water kept men safe from drowning, even so
Baptism does save; not that of John, which cleansed but the Body, but that
which is signified by it, even the Baptism of Christ with the Spirit, who saves
from sin, and from the wages thereof.

Obj. The Baptism here spoken of by Peter, must needs be Water Baptism, because
he calls it a Figure; for it were not proper to call the Spirits Baptism a
Figure.

Answ. I confess, while I had recourse only to our English Translations, this
before was my own Objection; but consulting the Greek Copies, the thing was
cleared unto me, and our English Translations appeared not so sound and clear
as might be desired; Peter speaking of the Preservation of 8 Souls in the Ark
by Water, says, if truly translated, Whose Antitype Baptism does also now save
us; And what is this Antitype? even Christ, who baptizes with a spiritual and
saving Baptism, even Christ, the Truth, the Sum, the Substance, the Thing
signified by Types and Figures; Circumcision outward was a Type, Circumcision
inward the Antitype; Moses's Laver a Type, the Evangelical Laver of
Regeneration the Antitype; Anointing without a Type, Anointing within the
Antitype; the Ark saving by Water without, a Type, Christ by his spiritual
Baptism saving from the proud Billows of Wickedness and Uncleanness is the
Antitype; so that the Antitype comes in lieu, stead, place or room of the Type:
(...) is the Greek word, and (...) signifies pro as well as contra; (...)
Consul, (...) Proconsul, the Consuls Deputy, one that officiates for him; these
things Linguists understand: so that though our English Translation renders it,
The like Figure whereunte even Baptism does also now save us; yet it is
properly, truly and answerable to the nature of Truth rendered, Whose Antitype
Baptism does also now save us, even as the Ark saved them of old. And if any
say, This is but a Conceit or Whimsie of my own Head, let such read Gerh. on
this word, who says, (...) in hoc loco ipsam veritatem significat, typo ac
figurae respondentem; that is, Antitype in this place of Peter, signifies the
Truth it self, answering to the Type and Figure: Truth, that is Christ, the Way
the Truth and the Life, who baptizeth with the Spirit, and saves from sin, as
the Ark saved outwardly. Vatabalus, Grotius, Frafmus, Cap^dus, Beza, Hammond,
gave their Testimonies to the same purpose.

If chi^ Scripture of Peter held out a Figure or Type, then one Type would
answer another, which were improper; for every shadow, type or fu^ure, rew^^^
to the substance as its Fulfiller. Again, it were to conclude the
Gospel Dispensation, to be a state of figures and shadows, which is the sum and
substance of all; the Kingdom of God stand not in Meat and Drink, but in
Righteous^^^^, Peace and Joy in the holy Spirit, wherein the Redeemed cry Abba
Father, Romans 14. Visibles are temporal, as Moses's Laver-washing, John's
Jordan-washing, imposed only until the Time of Reformation; but Invisibles are
eternal, as the Spirit of the Lord is eternal, in which Christ's Baptism is;
such as center in temporals, that Eye being shut which sees into the beginning,
before the temporals, these are but as an House without Pillars, tottering with
every Blast, as a Ship without Anchor, tossed with every Wave; for the
Establishment is in that which is Eternal.

-- Whose Antitype Baptism does also now save us. By this Scripture (as all the
wise in heart understand) Peter puts an End to Baptism of the Flesh, as Paul
did to Circumcision of the Flesh; for says Paul, Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a
Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in
the Flesh; but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of
the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of men,
but of God: which in effect is this, In Gospel-dayes, where all shadows are
fulfilled, Circumcision in the Spirit puts an end to Circumcision in the Flesh,
in effect Peter says as much of Baptism; Baptism (says he) saves, but not
that Baptism which puts but away the Filth of the Flesh, but that Baptism of
Christ in the Spirit, where the Answer of a good Conscience is known: Yea, by
this Peter intimates, that Baptism in the Spirit puts an to Baptism in the
Flesh; for of a Truth it may be said, He is not a Christian who is one
outwardly, neither is that Baptism which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a
Christian which is one inwardly, and Baptism is that of the Heart, in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praife is not of men, but of God: For
neither Moses's Laver-shawing, nor John's Jordan-washing, could bring inward
Cleanness and Purity of Conscience; therefore Christ put an end to all outward
shadows, figures and Types, by the Power of his Spirit inwardly effecting and
fulfilling that which they in an outward manner shadowed out. Many bear record
in Truth to the Apostles Testimony, who said, The Law make nothing perfect, but
the bringing in of a better hope, by the which we draw nigh unto God, Hebr.
7.19. Here is the perfecting of the Children of Light; here they are truly
joynted whom Satan had dislocated. Paul, who was not sent to baptize, but to
preach the Everlasting Gospel, a more weighty and ponderous Concern, he had his
Call from Heaven; in writing to the Church at Rome, he speaks of Gifts
differing, and exhorts every one to be faithful; but of baptizing with Water,
he speaks not; but in other places sets up the Spirit's Baptism, as conducing
to the Salvation of the Soul.

So who are serious in the things of God, cannot but conclude from what is
spoken, that the Spirit's Baptism is the only Baptism, peculiar to
Gospel-dayes, and that the continuance thereof is of absolute necessity,
whatever you be that deny it, to and in the Church, you shut out of the Church
the divine Nature, the new Name, the true Worship, Translation into the Kingdom
of God, the Lords Temple, the Gospel Ministry, the true Service of God, true
Unity, inward cleansing, true Christianity, present Salvation: and what is that
Church, and what are the respective Members thereof, that are destitute hereof?
Outsides, Formalists, tossed to and fro, as a Feather or Froth upon the Waves,
hurried about with every Wind of Doctrine, like Glasses blown into this or that
shape at the pleasure of man's breath; what are Professors that are destitute of
the Spirit and its Baptism? as hollow Trees in an old Wood, tall, but pithless,
sapless and unsound. What are these lifeless Formalists? as a Bulrush, whose
Color is fresh, Skin smooth, Body knotless, yet nothing is within but a kind
of spongeous unsubstantial substance. The Swan in the Law was rejected for
sacrifice, as some affirm, because of her Black Skin under White Feathers: thus
it is with Unscripturalized Outside Formalists; their Performances, how
specious soever, black Death reigning within, brings them not unto divine
Acceptance, their most Religious Duties and Performances issue from Art and
Acquired Parts, not from divine In-dwellings, who then touched with the sense
and possession of the Lord's Presence, and with the Virtue of his spiritual
Baptism, can be silent? And not, as the Lord's Worthies contend for it* of the
which such excellent things are spoken; if Christ must have pre-eminence in all
things, if he be All in his Church, beautified out of his Wardrobe, why is
Outward Water so much magnified in Gospel days? Christ is sufficient to and in
his Church, without John, though John was of use in his season, to point out
Christ to come; so the Baptism of Christ, without visible Water, is sufficient
in his Church, without the Baptism of John with Water, though the Baptism of
John with Water was useful in its season, being a shadow of a better thing to
come, even of Christ's Baptism with the Spirit, who said, He that believes on
me, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water: but this spoke he of
the Spirit, which Believers in him should receive, John 7.38, 39. So that
Believers receive the Spirit; so Christ's Baptism, living Water is to flow out
of the Womb of their Souls; they know the precious Virtue thereof, its Cooling,
Cleansing, Thirst-quenching and Fructifying Virtue; they know the fulfilling of
Moses's Laver and John's Jordan-Washing in their Mortal Bodies.

The Fourth Assertion. Rantism, that is, Sprinkling of Infants, is a Case
unpresidented in the Primitive times, an Irreptitious Custom, sprung up in the
Night of Apostasy, after the Falling Away from the Primitive Order.
I Have already showed the Temporary Baptism of John, and have likewise spoken
of the Baptism of Christ with the Spirit, and that this Baptism put an end to
John's Water Baptism, as to the other shadows; so that to and in the gathered
Churches one Baptism was preached, and that by one Spirit into one Body, the
shadow being left off: now it remains that I inform you, how Dipping, which was
John's Ministration came to be reassumed, and likewise how Sprinkling of
Infants got entrance among the Professers of Christianity.

Christ being upon the Mount of Olives with his Disciples, told them, that
False Christ's and False Prophets should come, Mat. 24. which John seeing
fulfilling and fulfilled, said expressly, they were come, saying, Little
Children, it is the last time; and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time,
^ John 2.18

Paul in the Spirit of Discerning sore-saw and foretold of an Apostasy, a
Departure from the Faith, that seducing spirits should be heeded, and Doctrines
of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1.

John in the Spirit foresaw all the world wondering after the Beast, Revel.
13.3. yea, and he saw and foretold of a great Whore, that should sit upon many
Waters, even upon Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, Revel. 17.1, 15.
yea, and he saw and foretold, that all Nations, yea, Kings themselves, should
be drunk with the Cup of Fornication, Revel. 18.3. Now as these things were in
fulfilling, Darkness entered the Professors of Christianity, yea, and losing the
Virtue and Influence of the Heavenly Pearl, Christ in them, the End,
Fulfilling, and Substance of all shadows from Abel to himself, then they began
to reassume shadows and figures without them, then losing the pure Gra^n, they
began to magnify the Husk, losing Christ's spiritual Baptism, the bubling
Spring of living Water, purifying inwardly; then they began to reassume John's
Ministration of Water Baptism outwardly, yea, and to call it Christ Ordinance,
then Divisions abounded; some baptized or sprinkled Old People on their
Deathbeds; some-baptized people in their more early Age, as when they were on
pable of being catechized; some began to baptize or sprinkle Young Children;
some baptized or sprinkled people after they were Dead; some baptized the
living for the Dead; some baptized Children in their Mothers Womb, before they
were born; some made the Character of a Cross in their Foreheads with a Burning
Iron, which they called Christ's Baptism; some baptized themselves every year,
still pretending and crying, Christ's Ordinance. Zuinglius in his Ago taking
notice of the Confusion of men in reference to Baptism, bore record in this
manner, saying, In the beginning of my Book (says he) I must ingeniously
profess, that almost all those that have undertaken to write of Baptism, even
from the very times of the Apostles, have (which I desire may be spoken with
the favor of all) not in a few things erred from the Truth: Yea, and this
Zuinglius, as well as they, erred also, the truly illuminated, Branches of the
true Vine, turns from such as turn from the Life of the Scriptures, the End of
Shadows, into Shadows and Inventions, it is more honorable to join to the Word
without Men, then to join to Men without the Word.

Now of the forementioned Confusion and Inventions concerning Baptism and
Rantism, Dipping and Sprinkling, more follows.

I profess, I have traced the steps of Antiquity, and have been diligent to
search out the Original of sprinkling, that if possible I might find him out to
whom this Tradition, Rantism, that is, sprinkling, may cry Abba Father; and
what I have found thereto to relating, I freely commend to him that reads me.

I find it recorded, that about the year 230. lived one Cyprian, who was Bishop
of Carthage, in which time the foggy Exhalations of Darkness much ascended the
Hearts of the Professors of Christianity, yea, so much as that Christ's Baptism
in and with the saving Spirit, the Water of Life being much lost within, they
began exceedingly to magnify Water without, the visible Element, thinking
Water Baptism saved, ascribing Washing of Souls, Regeneration, taking away of
Original Sin, freeing from Perdition, and eternal Salvation to it; yea, and in
effect the Belief of this Doctrine remains, and in such as would be accounted
high Sharers in Reformation, that the thing is so, multitudes of Testimonies
might be produced.

Whence (says Augustine) has Water so much Virtue, as that it touches the
Body, and washes the Heart, August. in Hom. 8.

Through baptismal Water men pass from Earth to Heaven, says Ambrose de
sacramentis.

As Water extinguisheth, cleanses, and whiteneth above other Liquors, so in
baptismal Water fleshly Lusts are quenched, Sin both original and actual washed
away, Innocence begotten, says Algerus.

Not particular men only, but even Councils were involved in this erroneous
Conceit and Misapprehension.

The Council of Florence taught, That by Baptism we are spiritually born again;
and that it imprints in the Soul a Character, that is, some spiritual sign;
indeleble, that is, which cannot be blotted out: and further, That we are
thereby made Members of Christ, of the Body of the Church, Summa Council et
Pontif.

The Trent Council taught, That by Baptism we put on Christ, and are thoroughly
made New Creatures.

Children dying without it, are by the Roman Catholics accounted Heathen, and
must not be buried in Hollowed Mould, Church, or Churchyard. Protestants
dancing after the same Pipe, accoun^ such Heathen, and wanting their
Christendom, so bury them behind the Church, so called.

This ancient Error of magnifying outward Water, when the the purifying Virtue
of the Water of Life was lost, yet remains; it is read in the beginning of the
old Catechism of present allowance, My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism,
wherein I was made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the
Kingdom of God. Is not here unspeakable Virtue ascribed to baptismal Water.

Mayer, in his Explanation of the English Catechism, paraphrasing on the
before-cited words, says, Outward Water makes none Partakers of such
Privileges, and that the Externals of the New are of no more Virtue then the
Externals of the Old Testament; alleging, that in Christ Jesus neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a New Creature, and the
keeping of the Commandments of God. Baptism (says he) confers not Grace, ex
opere operato, as the Church of Rome teaches; and if not Grace, neither those
precious Effects of Grace, neither is external baptismal Water any more
effectual then the Blood of Bulls and Goats to take away sins, Hebr. 10.4.

But to return from this digression, in Cyprian's Age, though the Degeneration
was not so great and general, as afterward it became, yet they greatly
magnified Water, and ascribed Salvation to it; so that converted Persons
deferred their Baptism to as near their Latter-end as they could guess, so that
they might have an Evidence of the Remission of their sins all at once; they
were not willing to have it before, lest by after-sinning they should lose
their Evidence: now in propounding this End to themselves, sometimes they
deferred their Baptism so long, as that through Extremity of Sickness and
Weakness, or the like, they could not be baptized, that is, dipped; then one
Magnus enquired of Cyprian, What they should do in such a case? Cyprian
answered, Seeing it could not be done as it ought, without the hazard of the
sick Persons Life, they must do it as well as they could, so that they might
have the Element of Water applied to them on their Beds, sprinkled upon them,
alleging Ez. 36. I will sprinkle clean Water upon them, yet if they were
restored again, they should be dipped in a River. Now Cyprian allowing of
sprinkling in this case, people would make use of it in other cases; see
Cyprian's Epistle to Magnus. Here you see the Author of Rantism, that is,
Sprinkling, not Christ, nor the Apostles, but Cyprian; not in the days of
Christ, but some Two Hundred and Thirty Years after; yet not Infants, but Old
People were sprinkled. Also he pleads for the sprinkling of new converted
Prisoners in the Prisonhouse; by degrees they let in the Custom of Sick
Children, afterward of All Children, Cypr. Lib. 4. Epist. 7. Magdib. page 126.

For further confirmation hereof, Musculus says in his Common-Places, page
741. Anciently very many did defer their Baptism to the very utmost term of
their Life, to the end that they might depart pure and blameless out of this
Life, and so they did not suffer themselves to be baptized, except in their
Bed, and that by sprinkling only, in the very point of Death, that they might
dye with an Evidence; for this cause these were called Clinicks, that is,
Bedridden, and Clinick Baptism: in this manner Constantine the great, the Son of
Helena, a zealous Professor, was baptized when about Sixty Five years old,
being sick, and dyed a few days after, Socrat. Scholast. lib. 1. cap. 26. Mark
this, that in the coming in of Rantism, that is, sprinkling; Old Men were
sprinkled, not Infants.

In early Ages of the Church, Baptism (says Cave) was deferred till old Age.

Basil Bishop of Gesaria, though born of believing Parents, as his Father being
Bishop of Nisen, was not baptized till aged, Osiander, Cent. 4. lib. 3.

Theodosius the Emperor, though born of Christian Parents, and instructed in
the Faith, yet was not baptized till aged, Historia tripartita, lib. 1.

Further, The Bohemiaen Confession holds out, that Baptism for the most part
was administered to Men of riper years.

In Alexandria the holy Scriptures were read and interpreted by the Unbaptized,
as well as by them that were Baptized: Which thing plainly evidences, that they
ascribed not that virtue to Sprinkling or Infants, as afterward men did, and
now do.

It was a Custom among the Ancients, that they that were baptized, were
baptized Naked, supposing that as they were stripped of their Garment, so by
baptismal Water the old man, that is, in-dwelling sin and corruption was put
off, Wolfgangus Musculus Dusanus in his Comment on the Psalms. This Custom
continued very long, as Authors say.

They had a Custom in the Primitive Church (says Trapp on Col. 2.12.) that the
Party to be baptized clod himself with old clothes, Which he put off when he
entered into the baptismal Water, and at his coming out he put on new Clothes:
What did they signify hereby? That they conceived, that by the Virtue of
baptismal Water, they put off the rotten Rags of Unrighteousness, and put on
the Garment of Righteousness and Salvation. Thus the Water of Life being much
lost within, which cleanses, washes, purifieth, sanctifies and takes away
Spots, Blemishes and spiritual Deformity, they ascribed this Work to Water
without.

One said, Ardua sacrati baptismatis aula coruscat
Quo delicta Adae Christus in amne lavat.


After this it came to be considered, that many dyed before they became old,
therefore it was decreed, That Children, when growing to years of Discretion,
should be instructed in Christian-Principles, and then baptized. Zuinglius
says in his Book of Articles, That Children were always openly instructed,
and when their Faith had made an impression in their Hearts, and they confessed
the same with their Mouths, then were they admitted to Baptism. Here was
Teaching before Baptism; but now they Sprinkle Infants, and many years after
teach them.

The one Baptism, by one Spirit into one Body, being much lost, then they
reassumed John's Ministration of Water Baptism, or an Imitation thereof.
Johannes Bohemius says, In time part it was the Custom to administer Baptism
alone to those that were instructed in the Faith, and were before Easter (so
called) and Pentecost catechized, and then upon their Confession they were
baptized; this was done twice a year, at Easter (so called) and Pentecost; such
as were baptized put on a White Garment when they came out of the Water, for
the aforesaid Reason, or in token of that innocent course of Life they had
engaged to walk in; this White Raiment, being exorcized and exsuffed with
sundry Ceremonies, they wore till the Sunday after Easter (so called) and on
that day put it off; which Day, from those White Rayments, was called Dominica
in Albis, that is, The Lord's Day in White. Concerning this Lactantius said,
Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candida signat
Et grege de niveo gaudia pastor habet.
White Rayments Represent Souls chaste and pure;
The Shepherd for his Flock takes Gladness sure.


The same Ceremony was observed by those that were baptized at Pentecost; so
from their White Rayments Pentecost came to be called Whit sunday, that is,
White-Sonday, in Memorial or Imitation thereof: When Infants are now baptized,
they have on their Heads a White Cloth, called a Chrisome, Johan. Bohemius de
gentium moribus, lib. 2. Cambdens Bret. page 768. Cave in his Primitive
Christianity.

Pope Siricius, in the year of the Lord 389. decreed, That Baptism should not
be celebrated but at the aforesaid two seasons, Easter and Pentecost, Summa
Council. et Pontif.

Baptizing at these two seasons became almost Universal, says Cassander de
Baptismo.

Thou have received after Baptism (says Ambrose de sacramentis) a White
Raiment, a Token that thou have put off the Pleasure of Sin, and have put on
the chaste or pure Raiment of Innocence.

Luther, Bullenger, Eras^us, Ludovicus Vives, Melancton, Beza, Bucer,
Augustine, Marlolat, Chamier, Hammond, Field, Hugo Grotius, Zuinglius, Tailor,
Parens, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Eusebius, Heracles, Dyonysius, Athanasius,
Hillary, Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Ambrose, Arnobius, Jerome, fourth Council of
Carthage, the Council of Laodicea, the Council of Neocesaria, Balsamon,
Zo^^r^^, Walafridus Strabo, Monsieur Daille, Beatus Rhenanus, and Augustine in
his Book De Fide, gave in their respective Testimonies, that in the more early
Ages of the Church, Repentance, Confession of Faith, and Instruction in
Christian-Principles, was commended to people as the only Qualifications for
Baptism; those thus instructed in Christian Principles were called Catechumens,
so were admitted to Baptism, which Custom (says Zuinglius) I wish it were in
use in our Age: Augustine and others charged their Opinions, if their Writings
be not corrupted by the Index expurgatorius,

Augustine, the Son of the virtuous Monica, being instructed in the Faith, was
not baptized till about the thirtieth year of his Age, as says Nauclerus, in
the year 301. His Mother would not have him baptized young, lest through
youthful Propensity he should fall into sin, which after Baptism would be
greater and more perilous, as she conceived, White's Apology for Kushworth's
Dialogues.

Gregory Nazianzen, born of Christian Parents, his Father being a Bishop, was
baptized about the twentieth year of his Age, Osiander, Cent. 4. Lib. 3.

Ambro^e, born of Christian Parents, remained instructed in Christian
Principles, and was unbaptized till he was chosen Bishop of Millain, Paulinus
in vita Ambrosij.

Jerome, born of Christian Parents, was baptized when about thirty years old,
Eras^^us in vita Hieron.

Chrysostom, born of Christian Parents, was not baptized till the one and
twentieth year of his Age, Hugo Grotius on Matthew. 19.

Nectarius was made Bishop of Constantinople before he was baptized, Vossius de
baptismo, page 100.

In Northumberland is a River called Glen, in which Paulinus (coming into those
parts with the King and Queen, and staying there some thirty six days)
baptized many, all which time he spent in catechizing and baptizing, being
instructed, he baptized them in the River Glen; these were not Infants, neither
were they sprinkled at a Basin, Bowl or Font, but they were returned to the
Shadow, Camb. Brit.

Basil said, None were to be baptized, but the Catechumens, that is, such as
were duly instructed in Christian Principles, Lib. 3. contra Eunomium.

Dr. Tailor, mentioning the Canon, page 238. says, It intimates a Practice
absolutely universal in the Church of interrogating the Catechumens, concerning
the Articles of their Creed, which is one Argument, that either they allowed
not of Infants Baptism, or that they did prevaricate egregiously in asking
Questions of them, who, as themselves well knew, were not capable of answering.

Now, what high Thoughts they had of Baptism, what Virtue they ascribed to it,
how they magnified it, further appears by the Canon of a Council under Pope
Honorius the first, who put forth, that No commemoration of an holy Oblation,
nor the Office of Singing should be bestowed on those Catechumens, that dyed
without the Redemption of Baptism, Council. Bacarense sub Honorio primo, vide
Summa Council. et Pontif.

In the days of the Apostles, when the Woman was clothed with the Sun, the
Church was beautified with the Garments of Christ's Righteousness and
Innocence, Satan operated to entangle them in the Net of Shadows, Elements and
beggarly Rudiments, as appears by Paul's Epistles to the Galatians*
Collessians, etc. Now after the Apostles days, as Satan, the old Adversary,
was more and more prevalent, so the purifying Faith, and the blessed,
primitive, apostolical Order was more and more departed from, the one Baptism,
which is spiritual, was in a high measure lost, then they began to reassume
John's Ministration of Water Baptism without, or an Imitation of it, as dipping
or sprinkling Aged People, baptizing Middle Age, Youth after they were
catechized; and as Darkness increased, Inventions were multiplied, and entered
the Throne of the Hearts of Christianity, as sprinkling of Infants, Godfathers
and Godmothers, Chrism, Chrisoms, Fonts, etc. in this Apostasy they ascribed
the virtue of Saving, Sanctifying, Regenerating, inward Washing to Baptismal
Water without, as now, of making Members of Christ, Children of God, etc. John
ascribed no such Virtue to his Baptismal Water, but only used it as a Figure of
that inward Washing which should be witnessed in the Church, by the Baptism of
Christ in the Spirit, without Outward Water.

Of the Original and Progress of Paedo-baptism, rather Paedorantism now, that
is, Sprinkling of Infants.
AFter this it was considered, that many Infants and Children dyed before they
were capable of catechizing and instructing in the Principles of Christian
Religion, and being doubtful concerning the Salvation of such, they wrote to
Augustine the Father, to have his Thoughts concerning the State and Case of
such as dyed unbaptized: To whom Augustine returned this Answer, Infants, who
whether they begin to live in the Mothers Womb, and there dye, or being born of
their Mothers, depart out of the World without the Sacrament of holy Baptism,
they are damned, being guilty of Original Sin.

Consider the Fury of this Uncharitable man, how he plants his great Gun
against innocent Children. Christ told certain, that they must become as Little
Children; which implies Children to be harmless and innocent, else they could
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: But this Augustine taught, that Infants
born or unborn are damned if they dye without Baptism. Truly he was styled,
Durus pater infantum, a hard Father to Infants. Again, He ascribes to Outward
Water the washing away o^ original Sin and actual also; so sets corruptible
Water in the place of the Blood of Christ, which indeed cleanses from all Sin.

Cassiodor on Psalm. 5. thus wrote, That in Baptism Original Sins and Offenses
are so cleansed, that it restores us to that Purity in which Adam was created.

Consider into what a Gulf of Error this Doctrine leads such as receive it,
ascribing the cleansing away of Sin to outward Water, yea, and that it restore
to that Purity in which Adam was created: When such poisonous Pills as these
were swallowed, such pernicious Doctrines credited, that Children quickened in
the Womb, or brought forth, dying without Water Baptism, were damned; and that
by Water Baptism they were cleansed, and made as pure and innocent as Adam was
before his Fall, from such accounts as these the Necessity of Infants Baptism
was concluded, and the Danger without it, and the unspeakable Benefits of it;
thus were Monsters conceived and brought forth out of the Womb of Ignorance,
and further to beget people into a Veneration and Esteem of it, it must have no
lower Title and Denomination then of being Christ's Ordinance; and those
Scriptures which were spoken of Christ's Baptism in the Spirit, of the Water of
Regeneration, must be wrested and perverted to defend Water Baptism and
Rantism; yea, and the Doctrine of Augustine, and such like, being rooted in
men's Belief, Sprinkling of Infants must be accounted Christ's Ordinance, and
all that deny the same must be branded as Heretics and Schismatics.

And that Augustine, Fulgentius, Leonardus Coquaeus, Cassander, and many of the
Ancients were of Opinion, That Children, born or unborn, if they dyed without
Baptism, were damned, Ecclesiastical History plentifully shows; August. ad
vicentium victorem, Fulgentius, Leonardus Coquaeus in August. de Civit. Dei
August. de fide ad Patrum Diaconum, Cassander de baptism, Epitome operum
Augustini, page 75.

Again, Some will have Poedo-baptism or Poedo-rantism, that is, dipping or
sprinkling of Children, to be of more Antiquity then Augustine; for it is
recorded, that about the year 248. lived a Priest called Fidus, who willed
people to baptize young Children according to the manner of Circumcision; about
which thing Cyprian with sixty six Bishops and Elders gathered together,
ordained, That Children should timely be baptized, as well before as after the
eighth day. It seems the Doctrine of Fidus concerning Dipping or Sprinkling of
Children was new, and seemed strange to Cyprian, seeing he would not ratify
nor confirm the same without the Sentence and Advice of s^^^y six Bishops; had
it been commanded by Christ, practiced by the Apostles, and continued in Matter
and Manner to Cyprian (...) days, there had not been a Necessity for the
conco^^^e of so many Bishops concerning the same: and though Cyprian here
enjoined Baptizing of Children, yet a few years before, he was for the Dipping
or Sprinkling of Aged People. See his Epistle to Magnus.

Now Cyprian and his fellow Bishops allowing of Childrens Baptism, hence it got
great entrance among the Church, professing Christianity; so that Cassander,
in his Book de Infantium baptismo, says, that Baptism of Infants came to be
much used by the Fathers, who lived some three hundred years after the
Apostles. He excludes it from being Christ's Command, or practiced by the
Apostles.

As the Apostasy was more and more manifested, Sun and Air, the Purity of the
primitive Church, through the Smoke of the Bottomless Pit, darkened, then
Traditions and Inventions of men were multiplied, then the Necessity of Infants
Baptism by Augustine, Cyprian, and such like, was introduced, and by the
Ratification and Enjoynment of Popes, Councils, General, National or Provincial
Synods, Kings, as absolutely necessary, was strengthened.

Johannes Bohemius says, That Baptism of old was administered to none (unless
upon urgent Necessity) but to such as were before instructed in the Faith, and
catechized; but when it came to be judged Necessary to Everlasting L^fe, it was
ordained that Infants should be baptized, and that they should have Godfathers
and Godmothers, who should be Sureties for Infants, and should renounce the
Devil in their behalfs, it grew to this in the Roman-Catholick-Church, that at
the baptizing of a Child, the Priest 1. blows three times in the Infants Face;
2. he anoints his Eyes, Ears and Nostrils with Earth moistened with his Spittle;
3. he names him, and marks him with the sign of the Cross upon his Breast and
Back with Hallowed Oil; 4. he dips him into the Water, or pours Water upon him
three times in form of a Cross; 5. dipping his Thumb in the Holy Chrism (as
they call it) he signs the Child's Forehead with the sign of the Cross; 6. he
covers him with a White Garment; 7. he puts into his Hand a Burning Candle,
Lib. 2. de Gentium moribus.

When the primitive Purity was turned from, the one Baptism by the one Spirit
into one Body lost, then steamed such like things out of the Bottomless Pit
into the Church; and to gain Estimation, they must be styled Christ's Commands,
or at least Apostolical Traditions.

Augustine (as it is said) was the first that preached the Necessity of Infants
Baptism; and as Nations became drunk with the Cup of Abomination and
Fornication, idolatrous and strange Erroneous Doctrines streamed out of
Apostatized Christendom.

About the year 402. the Milevitan Council, celebrated by ninety two Bishops,
put out this Canon, All that affirm that young Children receive Everlasting
Life without the Sacrament of Baptism, and will not that young Children newly
born be baptized, to the taking away of original Sin, that they be
anathematized, Magdiburg. Cent. 5. This Canon then sent to Rome, had the
Ratification of Pope Innocent the third.

In the 5th General Council at Carthage, held in the year 416. 'twas decreed,
That whosoever denies, that little Children by Baptism are freed from
Perdition, and eternally saved, let them be accursed. Tuis was confirmed and
ratified by the said Pope Innocent the third, after by Pope Zosimus, after by
Pope Boniface.

Isidore says, If Children were not baptized, so thereby renewed, and original
Sin washed away, they were in a state of Damnation, Madg. cent. 7.

Pope Hormisda ordained, That Children, if they be weak, should be baptized the
same day in which they are born, Summa Council. et Pontis And what care is taken
in this Nation for weak Children, to make sure their Christendom (as they say)
I may be silent.

About the year 692. In a King of the West Saxons, ordained, That every Infant
should be baptized within thirty days after its Birth on the Penalty of his
Parents forfeiting thirty shillings; and if the Child dyed unbaptized, the
whole Estate. These Saxons received the Faith of the Church of Rome, from the
mouth of Austine the Monk, and others.

About the year 816. the Council under Wolfred ordained, That they should not
pour Water upon the Heads of Infants, but immerge, that is, dip them in the
Font, Full. page 109. It seems they were for Dipping, not for Sprinkling.

In the 9th Century it crept in, 'That in Exorcism, the Head, Ears and Nose
should be salted, and anointed before Baptism, Magd. Cent. 9.

Augustine's Doctrine, That Children born or unborn, were damned, if they dyed
within Baptism, being received at a Heavenly Oracle, hence Infants Baptism was
enjoined by Popes, Councils and Kings, and great Virtue was ascribed to it, as
the taking away of Original Sin, and of regenerating Infants, and renewing of
them, and freeing them from Perdition, and eternally saving them, and of making
them Members of Christ, Children of God, and tha^ it made the Receivers as pure
and innocent as Adam was before his Fall; these things being believed,
Churchmen became Defenders and Propogators of it, common people received it
with Greediness: Who would refuse an Eternal Inheritance tendered upon such
terms? Thus Ignorance and Blindness entering Christendom, the Custom and
idolatrous Tradition of Infants Baptism became so epidemical and general, as
that in the eleventh Century it was scarce questioned; in this Age it crept in,
That Salt should be put into the Mouth of the Baptized, Magd. Cent. 11.

In the Discourse between Dr. Harpsfield Archdeacon, and John Bradford Martyr,
this Bradford said, I dare not exclude from Christ all that dye without
Baptism. He placed not Salvation in visible elementary Water; but the
Roman Catholics are otherwise minded, and thrust the Souls of Infants that dye
without it into a Limbus infantum, a place very nigh Hell, and their Bodies out
of Christian-burial, into an Unhallowed Place; and in this Nation, who pretend
to Reformation, behind the Church (so called) if granted for burial to the
Unbaptized, must be received as a Favor.

And to the Decrees of Popes, Councils and Kings, there are several wrested
Scriptures and Objections alleged for the defense and confirmation of Infants
Baptism.

I. Obj. Whole Families were baptized, so Children.

Answ. It Is written, that whole Families believed, John 4.53. Must it be
inferred hence, that Children, not grown up to years of Discretion, believed;
Families may be without Children, they may be grown up, or they might be newly
married Families, or their Children might be dead: so it is a wild Inference to
ground Infants Baptism on this, says Optatus.

II. Obj. The Spirit accompanies Water in Baptism, and Water so accompanied is
Christ's Baptism, the Spirits Baptism.

Answ. The Scripture bears record against that; the holy Spirit sell on the
Apostles on the day of Pentecost; this was Christ's Baptism, the Spirits
Baptism, and here was no Water made use of, Acts 1, and 2. yea, and in Acts
11.15. he call, the holy Spirit falling on them, the Spirits Baptism, without
the Element of Water; as for Water, that he calls John's Baptism.

III. Obj. Those that have right to the Promise, they have right to the Seal
thereof; but the Children of Believers have right to the Promise; ergo, they
have right to the Seal, that is baptism.

Answ. In Christ, the Promise of the Father, all the Kindreds of the Earth
obtain the Blessing; he is also the Covenant of Light, given for Salvation to
the Ends of the Earth, Isaiah 43.6. and that such as have right to the Promise,
have right to the Seal thereof, that is a real Truth; but that Dipping or
Sprinkling of Infants should be the Seal of the Covenant, that I deny, as
Antichristian: consider, the first Covenant stood in Meats and Drinks, and
diverse Baptisms, that is, Washings; it had a temporary Seal, to wit,
Circumcision, Romans 4.11. but the New Covenant, Christ Jesus, the great Promise
of the Father, has a spiritual, yea, an eternal Seal: this is my positive
Affirmation in this case, that the Old Covenant standing in outward things, had
an outward Seal; but the new Covenant, the Promise of the Father, has a
spiritual Seal: Paul a Witness of Christ, the new covenant, the great Promise
of the Father, in writing to the Saints at Ephesus, he testified on their
behalf, saying, After that ye believed, ye were scaled with the holy Spirit of
Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. He calls the Spirit the Seal of the New Covenant, Christ,
the Promise of the Father, not Baptism not Rantism, dipping or sprinkling.
Further, he exhorted them in these words, Grieve not the holy Spirit, whereby
ye are sealed to the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. He preaches up the Spirit
to be the Evangelical Seal of the New Covenant, the Promise of the Father; so
who preach up Water Baptism to be the Seal, they oppose the Apostles Testimony,
deny the Lord's Privy and Royal Seal, and introduce another of man's making; the
sealed are the Lord's Excellent Ones, his Worthies. And as for that Scripture,
Acts 2.39. The Promise is unto you, and to your Children, unto all that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord shall call. This makes nothing for
Water Baptism or Rantism to be the Evangelicall Seal: Peter told the House of
Israel, that the Promise was to them, to their Children, yea, to all the called
of the Lord. Outward Water was not the Promise which they were to wait for, but
a thing of a more Heavenly Nature. Christ told the Jews, John 8.39. If ye were
Abraham 's Children, ye would do the works of Abraham: so that such were the
Children of Abraham, and had right to the Promise, who were found doing the
Works of Abraham: yea, and the Apostle told the Galatians, that they which were
of Faith, were the Children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. such Children as these have
right to the Promise, and know the Seal thereof.

IV. Obj. Infants Baptism is an ancient Custom, so to be continued in the
Church.

Answ. The antiquity of a humane Tradition proves it not to be of divine
Institution; the spreading or over-spreading of Leprosy, proves it not to be
Soundness; the Entrance of true Reformation thrusts out humane Inventions, old
as well as new: what Christ received of his Father, that he taught his
Disciples, Apostles; what the Apostles received from Christ, the treasury of
Wisdom and Knowledge, that they taught to and in the Churches, and the same was
to be committed and commended to faithful men in the Faith; the Tongue of the
Learned was their All to them, and in them; and in this Faith that Tongue was
kept silent, which afterward brought the Darkness into the Church: in the Eye
of divine Illumination we see to before August in was, or Cyprian was, or Pope
Innocent the third was, who (as it is said) first established Infants Baptism,
by ratifying the Canon of the Milevitan Council; by this Eye we see and feel to
the Primitive Order, before the Apostasy was, Christ, the Apostles and
primitive Church, in the Beauty of Heavenly Virginity, taught no such thing, as
dipping or spriekling of Infants, and in the Faith the primitive Order is to be
pressed after and contended for, and the Smoke of the Pit, Inventions,
Traditions and Idolatious Customs, inconsistent with the living and Life-giving
Truth are to be warred against: Id verum quod prius, prius quod ab initio, ab
initio quod ab Apostolis, Tertul. contra Marcion, lib. 4. That is Truth, that
was first; that was first, which was from the beginning; which was from the
beginning, which was from the Apostles; what the Apostles preached, that they
received from Christ, who is Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, the
Beginning and the End, glorified with the Father before the Foundation of the
World. Augustine Bishop of Hippo testified, saying, Custom is not to be
preferred before Truth, but ought to give place to the Truth: but who plead for
Infants Baptism or Rantism, they would keep Custom in the Throne, and exclude
Truth. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage bare Testimony, saying, Custom crept in among
some people, ought not to hinder Truths prevailing and overcoming; for Custom
without Truth is nothing but ancient Error, wherefore forsaking Error, let us
pursue the Truth. These two said well, though true it is, as their Writings
evidently demonstrate, they were guilty of mingling their traditions,
inventions and imaginations with the Doctrine of Christ and of the Apostles.

V. Obj. It Is said, Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.5. death not this perpetuate
Infants Baptism?

Answ. Christ gave no command for Infants Baptism, neither did the Apostles
practice any such thing; whoever allege this, or any other Scripture for it,
they use the Scriptures as Torturers, who putting innocent men upon the Rack,
so force them to speak that which they never thought; such are these, who wrest
the Scriptures, to draw a sense out of them which the holy Spirit never
intended, so tortures and perverts them as to make them speak for maintaining
those things which were not commanded nor spoken of in those days wherein the
Scriptures were given forth. After the Apostles days Satan made an
Encroachment upon the Garden of the Lord, Earthly Exaltations of Darkness fumed
into the Professors of Christianity, then their Judgment became carnal, and
being not able to savor divine things, they wrested those Scriptures which
spoke of the Water of Life, and applied them to outward Water, ascribing inward
Washing and Regeneration thereto, whenas indeed external Water can contribute
nothing thereunto in this place. Christ preached unto Nicodemus the Necessity
of Regeneration, and informed him how it was brought forth, not by outward
Water, which can reach no further then outward things, but by a Water able to
renew a man, to make him a New, Holy and Heavenly Creature, to dissolve the
rotten and loathsome Fabric of unrenewed, untransformed man, where Belial is
King, and to erect a Building in Righteousness and true Holiness, where Christ
is Monarch, sole Lord. Other Scriptures give witness to this, as John 4.10.
Christ said to the Woman of Samaria, If thou knew the Gift of God, etc. thou
would have asked of him, and he would have given this living Water. Mark,
here is a Living Water, a Life-giving Water, effecting a living Work; and this
all the Re-born know. Further, says Christ, Verse. 14. The Water that I shall
give him, shall be in him a Well of Water, springing up unto Everlasting Life.
And John 7.38, 39. He that believes on we, out of his belly shall flow Revers
of living Water, which Believers in him should receive; there is a living Water
producing a Work of Wonder in the Bodies of men, making all things new; this
fulfils inwardly what Water elementary shadowed out outwardly, which cools,
cleanses quenches the Thirst, makes fruitful outwardly.

Piscator on this John 3.5. says very evidently, Seeing that without this
Water, whereof Christ spoke to Nicodemus, no man can attain unto eternal Life,
it follows, that Christ spoke not of Baptismal Water. Lombard, Vossius, yea, a
Cloud of Witnesses have showred down Testimonies to the same purpose; but if
notwithstanding all this, thou will have John 3, 5. to speak of material Water,
then Mat. 3.11. He shall baptize you with the holy Spirit and with fire, must
be understood of material Fire, then outward Fire must be used in Baptism,
which would be judged an Absurdity, and a strange Doctrine; Water and Fire are
in these places added, to show the effectual Operation of the Spirit, working
that inwardly which Fire and Water represent outwardly, as many have observed;
born of Water and of the Spirit, or of Water which is the Spirit, John 7.38, 9.
as Piscator observes: so baptized with the holy Spirit and with Fire, baptized
with the holy Spirit, which is Fire, a Coal from the Lord's Altar, giving light
to the inward man, spiritualizing him, changing him into the divine Image, from
Glory to Glory, elevates and carries the Renewed Heavenward, purifying from
the dross of Sin, Polutious and Defilements, uniting to the Called, Faithful
and Chosen, separating from the World, in a word, who dwell in the Light of
Grace, these more and more receive the Spirit, in which Christ's Baptism is a
Coal from the Lord's Altar, operating inwardly as elementary Fire outwardly.

Of Children in the Womb Baptized.

Satan, the grand Adversary, by Hellish Suggestions, Wicked Temptations,
Unclean Injections, by little and little after the primitive Times disjoynted,
and as I may fay, dis-spirited many, so that the pure serious Worship in Spirit
and in Truth came by little and little to be departed from, and a Will Worship
clouded with Ceremonies, Shadows, Traditions, Inventions of men came to be
established, so that Augustine in his day taught, That Children born or unborn,
if quickened in the Womb, were Damned, if they dyed without baptism: hence the
Necessity of baptizing Infants was concluded, as before I have touched. Now it
being observed, that many Children dyed in the Womb, and according to Father
Augustin's Doctrine such were damned, if unbaptized; the consideration of this
set them to seek a Remedy for that Disease, and none could be found, except the
Child in the Womb could be baptized; but if it might, then all was well: in
order to this concern, a great Question was propounded, An pueri in utero
possint baptizari, it a salvari; that is, Whether Children in the Womb could be
baptized, so saved, yea or nay? This was looked upon as a Mysterious Question,
and necessary to be considered, and it set the most curious Wits on work, and
out of the Magazine of carnal Reasoning came this Conclusion:

If a Quickened Child in the Mothers Womb shall be in danger to dye, thorough
the Weakness of the Mother or of the Child, or thorough hard Labor, let them
bless or pray for the Child, and let them strengthen the Mothers Womb, let them
commend the Child to God, with Desires to baptize it, and can protest, saying,
The Fault is not in them why that Child is not baptized; the Observation of
these Ceremonies upon the Child's account, was judged equivalent to Baptism,
and the Child concluded to be saved thorough its Parents Belief, Cassander de
baptismo. Thus after the ingress of Apostasy, multitudes of Inventions were
brought into the Church, and to the end they might have favorable
Entertainment, they were styled Decent, and Doctrines of Christ, or Apostolical
Traditions.

Concerning Baptizing of the Dead.

Thorough the Smoke of the Apostasy after the Apostles days, such was the
Depravation of men's Understandings, as that they ascribed the virtue of
Renovation, Regeneration and Eternal Salvation to Baptismal Water; yea, and not
a few concluded it effectual not only for the Living, but also for the Dead, so
that the Cataphygians and Montanists baptized the Dead Bodies of men, as says
Philastrius, and Georgius Ederus in his Mataeologia haereticorum.

There were some (says Spark) that baptized the Dead, and put the
Sacramental-Bread in their Mouths, as their Viaticum, udging it better to have
such a necessary Ordinance by Proxy then altogether to go without it.

A Child that dyed unbaptized was taken up and Christened (as it is said) and
had his Fathers Name given him, Magd. Cent. 7.

Concerning Baptizing the Living for the Dead.

Thorough the Apostasy many fell into a dead Lethargy (as I may say) into a
spiritual Sleepiness, Drowsiness and Forgetfulness, as Israel of old, who
forgot the Lord days without number, a Custom crept in among the Marcionites
and Cerinthians, that when any Catechumenist dyed without Baptism, that is,
such a one as had been instructed in the Principles of Christianity, some
living Person was placed under the Bed of the Deceased, then the Priest came
unto the Deceased Party, saying, Desire thou to be baptized? the Dead Man
replying nothing, the Party under the Bed answered for it, saying, I would be
baptized: thus they baptized him for the Dead, as if they acted a Play upon a
Stage, Tertull. Epiphan. de Cerinth. haeres. Goodwins Roman and Jewish
Antiquities.

Paul to the Corinthians said, If the Dead rise not at all, why are they then
baptized for the Dead? 1 Cor. 15.29. a Custom (says Piscator on this place)
not universal, nor taken up in all Churches, nor among the Corinthians, is here
noted. A Custom (says this Piscator) sprung up among the ancient Christians,
of being baptized at or over the Graves of the Dead of the Martyrs, to testify
(says he) that with Christ they were dead to sin, and ready to dye for him,
etc. But the Churches who bare about in their mortal Bodies the Dying of the
Lord Jesus, so came to witness his Life manifest in them, they knew the Ground
of Rudiments and beggarly Elements cast out, the End of Shadows and Figures
manifested, in which they left off John's typical Baptism without, and all
other irrePtitious Customs and Confusions about the same.

Of an Annual Baptism, that is, of such as Baptize themselves every Year.

The Habbasines, a kind of mongrel Christians in Africa, baptize themselves
every year on the day of Epiphany, so called, in Lakes or Ponds, thereby to
keep a Memorial of Christ's Baptism in Jordan, which was performed on the
aforesaid day, as many of the Ancients conjectured, Trapp on Matthew. 3.

Of Outward Fire used in Baptism.

The Apostasy prevailed with and in the Church as a Consumption upon a Mortal
Body, which weakens the Body by little and little, causes Leanness, and turns
the Body to the Dust; so the Apostasy crept in by little and little, the Cross
of Christ being turned from, Weakness followed, spiritual Leanness; that was
lost which opens Scriptures, and fulfils them in men; so conceits, conceivings,
mis-apprehensions, mis-interpretations got place, as from that Scripture,
Matthew. 3.11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire; a People
called Jacobites, from one Jacobus Syrus their Leader, a kind of mongrel
Christians in Asia, sign their Children many in the Face, some in the Arm, with
the sign of the Cross, imprinted with an hot burning Iron, at or before
Baptism, alleging the aforesaid Scripture, Council. Cackareuse 2. Can. 34, 35.
Trapp on Acts 8.

Of Fonts, and their Rise.

Some Authors mention, that when first they began to confer upon Infants the
Tradition of Baptism, they dipped them in Rivers or Fountains quarterly; but in
Winter the season being cold, and Children tender, Fonts were invented, and
Children dipped or sprinkled thereat.

There is a Book, called, A View of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, written
by one Sr. Thomas Ridley, wherein is written, that The Rites of Baptism in the
primitive Times were performed in Rivers and Fountains, and this manner of
baptizing (says he) 'the ancient Church entertained from the Example of
Christ, who was baptized of John in Jordan; in those Ages (says he) there were
no Fonts.

Further (says he) in the days we now live in, we have no other remainder of
the Rite of baptizing in Rivers and Fountains then the very Name; hence it is
(says he) that the Vessels containing Baptismal Water are called Fonts, from
the Latin word Fontes, which signifies Fountains. Consider, he acknowledges a
great Degeneration from the Primitive Order.

Further (says he) The Custom of Dipping in Rivers and Fountains being left
off, Fonts were erected in private Houses. Thus Invention followed Invention,
as Wave after Wave.

Further (says he) Because of the violent Persecution of those days, they
were debarred of that Convenience, and had recourse to Woods, and such like
places, where they had such Baptisterials as Fonts, with them, as they could.
Mede says the same.

But in more peaceable Times (says he) they drew nearer, and set their Fonts a
little distant from their Churches, so called; after they obtained to set them
in Church-Porches, and at last got them into the Church. As a Cloud by the
Winds, so 'twas tossed from place to place.

Further (he says) that at the first they were not placed in every Church, but
in Cities, and that in the Mother Church, so called; and why in the Mother
Church? because (says he) as people in their Mothers Wombs are born men, so in
the Fonts of Baptism, as in the Churches Womb, men are born Christians. Here
Regeneration is ascribed to Font-Water, an Antichristian Doctrine.

But in succeeding times (says he) it being considered, that the Mother
Church, so called, was far off Towns and Villages, and that in Winter season
people could not well repair thither, the Bishop took occasion to transfer the
Rite of Baptism and Burial to the Rural Churches, so called, together with the
Rite of Tithe, so made Parochial Churches.

Further (he says) That in Parishes, some living remote from the Church, it
was permitted them, to build in or nigh their Houses a Private Oratory,
reserving for the most part the Rite of Sepulture and Baptism to the Parish
Church; yea, and on high days (so called) they were to repare to the Parish
Church.

In after Times these Oratories were called Chapels, and such as exercised the
Ministerial Function in them, were called Chaplains, Tho. Ridley.

Fonts of old were adorned with Pictures of Holy Men, to the end that such as
were baptized might have before their Eyes whose Deeds they were to imitates,
as says Pontius Paulinus in an Epistle to Severus.

Of Godfathers and Godmothers, and Gossips, so called; and the word Gossip
interpreted and explained.

Faith and Repentance were the Qualifications of such who were admitted to
John's Baptism, the outward Cleansing, a shadow of Christ's Baptism, the Laver
of Regeneration, Washing inwardly, where the pure and undefiled Religion is
known; John baptized not Infants, Sureties to engage for Infants Faith and
Repentance when at years of Discretion had not allowance in his Ministration;
when thorough the ingress of Apostasy the saving spiritual Baptism was lost,
the shadow got entertainment in the Church; as the corruptible earthly part
prevailed within, then men grew irreligious; then credens being given to
Augustins Doctrine and others, That Children born or unborn were Damned, of
they dyed unbaptized, hence the Necessity of Infants Baptism was concluded, and
Churchmen became Defenders and Propogators of it: now they being conscious,
that Children knew nothing of Faith and Repentance, Qualifications for John's
Water Baptism, through the Door of this consideration crept in Godfathers and
Godmothers to be Sureties for Infants, and to renounce the Devil in their
behalfs, and to Promise and Vow, that when those Infants are grown up to years
of Discretion, they shall both believe and repent, a thing not heeded by one of
many, though formerly promised. See more of this in the old Catechi^m.

Pope Higinus ordained, That at the least one Godfather or one Godmother should
be concerned at Baptism, Platina de vitis Pontif. but for every male Child (as
it is now enjoined) two Godfathers and one Godmother, and for every female Child
two Godmothers and one Godfather are in this Nation required. About the year
680. Godfathers and Godmothers, so called, began to be used to Men of mature
age; Wolphere the Mercian King was Godfather unto Edelwalch King of the
South Saxons, and this (says my Author) was fashionable in that Age, that such
being baptized, should walk worthy of their Profession, were it but to save
their Friends Reputation, who had undertaken for their Sincerity therein,
Fuller page 89. Great Virtue in idolatrous Times was ascribed to Water Baptism,
as is more fully handled before, to which the Testimony of venerable Bede, so
called, hold out in his Ecclesiastical History may be added, who said, An
ignorant Infant is saved in Baptism, thorough the Faith of its Parents and
Godfather: a Testimony savouring of a carnal mind.

As for Gossips, I have observed, that our Ancestors understanding a spiritual
affinity or aliance (as they supposed) to grow between them and such as
undertook for their Children in Baptism, called each other by the Name of
Gossip, which is as much as akin through God; and the Child called such his
Godfather or Godmother; the word Gossip is derived from the Saxon word Godsib,
which signifies affinity or alliance in God; Sibbe in the Saxon Tongue
signifies affinity, alliance: as for a she Gossip the Belga called such a one
Ghemoeder, which is compounded of Ghe with, and moeder Mother: such a one in
the northern parts is usually called a Commother: for further confirmation of
this thing, it was ordained in the seventh Century, That no Gossips might Marry
together, because of the spiritual Affinity and Relation they had contratcted
at the Font, Madg. page 147.

In the tenth Century it crept in, That Gossips were to put on white Garments
as well as the Priests and the Baptized, Madg. Cent. 10. That is, at or about
the baptizing of any one, both Priest, Gossips, and the Party baptized put on
White Garments.

Of the Chrisom.

Of old the Custom was (when the Earthly Mind turned to Earthly Rudiments and
Elements) to baptize none till at years of Discretion, and the Baptized for
certain days put on a white Garment; in Imitation hereof, when Infants are now
baptized, they have on their Heads a White Cloth, called a Chrisom; why called
a Chrisom? because a white Cloth, at the first Institution of it, was put upon
a Child's Head, newly anointed with Chrisom, a hallowed Ointment among Papists,
after Baptism; so from this Ointment, this Chrisom, the White Cloth, as it is
said, was called Chrisom; now it is taken for the White Cloth put upon a Child
newly christened (as it is called) in token of its Baptism; and its usually
brought to the Church, so called, at the day of Churching the Woman, and pinned
behind her Head; and in many places it is bestowed upon the Priest; and in some
places Money instead thereof.

Thus the In-dwellings of Truth being lost, and turned from, after the
primitive times, ceremonies, inventions, customs, human traditions, as
Sprinkling of Infants, Godfathers, Godmothers, Goss^ps, Gommothers, Chrisom,
Chrisoms, Sign of the Cross, etc. sprung up among the Professors of
Christianity, as Weeds in untilled Grounds, yet to gain acceptance they are
styled by many Commands of Christ, or at the least Apostolical Traditions.

Now after Rantism, that is, sprinkling of Infants, was received into the
Churches as a Doctrine meet to be observed, and also Supreme Authorities and
Church-Liturgies in diverse Countries commending and commanding it, hence the
Clergy, so called, judged themselves concerned to propogate and defend the
same, it being that Nonconformity is not the Way to Preferment; yet in diverse
Ages, several who had Glimpses of Heavenly Light in them, questioned
Infants Baptism, yea, and esteemed it as Counterfeit Coin, as such may see who
trace the steps of Ecclesiastical Writers, some of whose Testimonies I shall
mention.

Tertullian (as it is said) opposed some Introducers of Infantsbaptism, saying,
That Confession of Sins, Faith, Repentance and Renouncing of the Devil, was
required of the Baptized, which Infants are not capable of, Tertull. de
baptismo.

Walafridus Strab^, who lived about the year 840. in his Book of Church
Affairs, chap. 26. said to this purpose, That in the early Ages of the Church,
Baptism was administered on the Adul^ only. When the Substance, say I, was
turned from, then they reassumed the Shadows. But afterward (says he)
Christians understanding Original Sin, and left their Children should perish,
without any Means of Grace, they began to baptize them by the Decree of the
Council of Africa, and then Godfathers and Godmothers were invented. This, I
say, is carnal Reasoning, and charging the Apostles of Christ, as not
understanding Original Sin, or as denying Means of Grace to Children; but I
say, such as reason thus, they reject the Lord's means of Increase in Grace,
and entertain Inventions of men in place thereof.

Zuing lius, speaking of Infants Baptism, says, There is no plain words of
Scripture where the same is commanded.

The Magdiburgenses in their learned History tell us, That as to the baptizing
of Infants, they read of no Example in the Scriptures, Cent. 1. Lib. 2. They
also therein declare against consecrating of Water before Baptism, as also
against Fonts, Baptisterions, and against baptizing at two times in the year,
Easter and Whitsontide, so called, against Gossips or Sureties for the Adult
and Infant, giving of Names in Baptism, Exorcisms* Chrisms or Anointing,
Consignations, that is, Sign of the Cross, Albs, Salt, Spittle, giving or
receiving of Gifts, Confirmation of Bishoping; these things were not in
primitive Times, but steamed in as the Smoke arose out of the Bottomless Pit,
Magdib-Cent. 1. Lib. 2.

Bellarmine, de baptismo, says, That in Scripture there is neither Command nor
Example for Infants Baptism; but he refers it to the immaginary Catalogue of
Apostolical Traditions.

Beringarius with the Bishop Bruno in France, gave public Testimony against
Infants Baptism, which Doctrine spread through France and Germany, Bar. Ann.
1050. Hence they were called Beringarians and Waldenses; they testified also
against the Real Presence, Magd. cent. 11.

Peter de Brusius taught against Infants Baptism, Transubstantiation, praying
for the Dead, for which Testimony he was burned to Death, Bar. Ann. 1116.

Arnaldus taught against Infants Baptism, Transubstantiation, Bar. Ann. 1116.

Peter Abailardus opposed Infants Baptism, so did many of the Clergy; this
Abailardus was burned to Ashes at Rome for his Testimony.

In the year 1176. a People was raised up in the Province of Albi, in France,
who preached, That Infants Baptism was not necessary to Salvation, Bar. ^ 310.

Calvin says expressly, That Infants Baptism is not mentioned by any of the
Evangelists, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 16.

They that baptize Children (says Tailor) make Baptism to be wholely an
outward Duty, a carnal Ordinance, it makes us be satisfied with Shadows, and to
relinquish the Substance and Spirituality of the Gospel, page 242.

Dr. Jerome Tailor says, That the Parents of Augustine, Jerome and Ambrose,
though Christians, did not baptize their Children till aged; which thing (says
he) is very effectual for destroying the supposed Necessity of derivation of
Infants Baptism from the Apostles, Lib. proph. page 239.

Luther in Postill. says, Young Children hear not, so if the Command be
followed, they are not to be baptized.

Erasmus, in his Book of the Union of the Church, says, It is no where
expressed in the Apostolical Writings, that they baptized Children.

Bucer upon Matthew says, That Christ no where commanded to baptize Infants.

Staphil^^ in his Epitome, says, That it is not expressed in holy Scriptures,
that Young Children should be baptized.

Chocleus says, That Jesus took a Child, etc. but he thinks he did not baptize
it.

Melancton, in his Treatise concerning Anabaptists, says, That there is no
plain Commandment in the Scriptures, that Children should be baptized.

Daniel Rogers says, That he is Vnconvinced by Demonstration of Scripture,
that Infants should be baptized, De bapt. part. 29.

Baxter, though much for Infants Baptism, yet in page 3. he confesses, That
Infants Baptism is not plainly determined in the Scriptures.

Dr. Tailor says, It is against the perpetual Analogy of Christ's Doctrine to
baptize Infants. Saying further, 'That Christ gave no Command for the same,
neither did he or his Apostles baptize any of them, lib.. proph. page 239.

Further, he says in page 237. of the same Book, As there was no Command for
Infants Baptism, so the Necessity of it was not determined in the Church, till
the Canon made by the Milevitan Council, a Provincial in Africa. Some I grant
(says he) used it before this time in Africa, having good Thoughts of it, yet
none of them pretended it to be necessary, nor a Gospel Precept, and for every
Ordinance the Institution is to be eyed, and neither to be stretched under, nor
drawn narrower then the Lord has made it.

I have read of a great Papist in London, who going to a Dispute about
Infants Baptism, told his Friend, He was going to hear a Miracle, viz.
Infants Baptism to be proved by Scriptures.

Oxford Divines, in a Convocation held in the year 1647. said, That without the
consentaneous Judgment and Practice of the Universal Church, they should be at
a loss when they are called upon for Proof in the Point of Infants Baptism.

Eccius acknowledges, That Infants Baptism is not clear from the Scripture, see
his Enchiridion.

Monsieur Daille, a learned Frenchman, a great Searcher into Antiquities, said,
That in ancient times they often deferred the Baptism of Infants, and produces
many Examples: but whence is it (says he) that the very mentioning hereof is
scarce to be endured at this day? Lib. 2. page 149.

Claudius Espontius, Bishop, ordained at a Council at Pysoy in France, about
the year 1500. That Infants Baptism should be received by Tradition, because it
could not be proved a Command of Christ.

The Long Parliament, which sat in the year 1647. in their Declaration in
Answer to the Scots Commissioners, declared thus, The Opinion touching the
Baptizing of Infants is such, wherein former Ages as well as this, learned and
godly Men have differed both in Opinion and Practice; and (said they) herein we
hold it fit, that men should be convinced by the Word of God, with Gentleness
and Reason, and not be beaten out by Force and Violence.

It is no small Evidence (says Hugo Grotius on Matthew. 19.) tho Baptism of
Infants for many Hundred Years was not ordinary in the Church, because
Constantine the Great, the Son of Helena a zealous Christian, was not baptized
till aged.

By what has been spoken, the Sober mind may understand, that such as dip
people are relapsed into the Shadow, John's temporary Baptism, and not
confirmed in the one Baptism, the inward cleansing, the Spirits Baptism into
one Body, and that such as rantize or sprinkle Infants have no Command from
Christ, nor Example among the Apostles, nor the first primitive Christians for
^o doing, but only the Commands of Popes, Councils, Kings, Earthly Powers, and
the Examples of men deviated from the primitive Order and Ministers of Christ,
should not be hurried away with the heady Torrent of Times, Customs,
Traditions, Unscriptural Non-apostolical Doctrines, but should have an Eye to
Christ's Command and the Apostles Practice for what they do, I cannot but
subscribe to the Testimony of Tertullian, who said, Id verum quod prius, prius
quod ab initio, ab initio quod ab Apostolis; that is, That is Truth, which was
first; that is first, which was from the beginning; that is from the Beginning,
which was from the Apostles, Tertul. contr. Marcion. lib. 4. for what the
Apostles preached, the same they received from Christ, who is Alpha and Omega,
the First and the Last, the Beginning and Ending, glorified with the Father
before the Foundation of the World.

Now if any question in their Minds; why I call Sprinkling of Infants Rantism,
let them consider what follows for their satisfaction.

The Ceremony of John's Ministration according to Divine Institution, was by
Dipping, Plunging or Overwhelming their Bodies in Water, as Scapula and
Stephens, two great Masters of the Greek Tongue testify; as also, Grotius,
Pasor, Vossius, Mi^ceus, Leigh, Casanbon, Bucan, Bullenger, Zanchy, Spanhemius,
Rogers, Tailor, Hammond, Calvin, Piscator, Aquinas, Scotus: Now this Dipping or
Plunging of the Bodies of such as repented and believed, in Rivers or
Fountains, the Greeks called it baptismos, the Latius call it baptismus, in
imitation of whom in our Orthography we call it baptism; the before-cited fully
agree hereunto. Now as for Sprinkling, the Greeks call it rantismos, which I
render rantism; for it is as proper to call Sprinkling Rantism, as to call
Dipping Baptism, this Linguists cannot be ignorant of, that dipping and
sprinkling are expressed by several words, both in Latin, Greek and Hebrew;
it is very evident, if Sprinkling had been of divine institution, the Greeks had
their rantismos; but as Dipping was the Institution, they used baptismos, so
maintained the purity and property of the Language. Meds in his Diatribe on
Titus says, That there was no such thing as Sprinkling, or Rantism, used in
Baptism in the Apostles days, nor many Ages after them; to sprinkle Young or
Old, and call it Baptism, is very incongruous, yea, as improper as to call a
Horse a Cow; for Baptism signifies Dipping, etc. Zepperus is as clear as the
Sun in this thing, saying, Ex ipsa vocis notatione, et etymo apparet quae
baptismi administrandi consuitudo fuerit initio; cu^ not pro baptismo Rantismon
potius, hoc est, aspersionem ^unc habeamus; that is, It appears by the genuine
signification of the word, what their Custom in administering Baptism was at
the first, forasmuch as for Baptism we now rather use Rantism, that is,
sprinkling, Zepperus de sacramentis. However Rantism has entered into and among
the Professors of Christianity, and to gain the more acceptance, it is called
Baptism. Since the Ingress of the Apostasy, great has been the Confusion of
men about this Point, as has beenshewed, and might further be made apparent.
If any Bishop or Priest (says a Canon fathered upon the Apostles) do not
immerge, that is, dip the Party to be baptized three times in the Water, but
content himself with one Immersion, that is, Dipping, let him be deposed, Summa
Council. et Pontif. But the fourth Toletan-Council, under Pope Honorius the
first, taught, That whether an Infant be baptized with three Immersions, or but
with one (in plain English, whether the Infant were dipped thrice or but once)
yet he should be accounted baptized, and the Priest not to be deposed. Here was
Canon against Canon, and the Canon fathered upon the Apostles wholely or in a
high measure made void; but it has been a Sleight of Antichrist, to father
upon the Apostles his smoaky Inventions, that coming under that guise they may
find Acceptance.

But drawing to the Haven, let me seriously tell the Reader, That John's
Water Baptism in its season I own, as an useful Shadow, fulfilled and ended by
Christ's Spiritual Baptism; and that such as are for dipping Believers, are
through the influence of Earth within turned to Shadows without, and Relapses
are dangerous: And as for Rantism, that is, Sprinkling of Infants, with
Godfathers, Godmothers, Gossips, Commothers, Fonts, and all other Antichristian
Appurtenances, the same I deny.

Now, to what I have spoken of Fonts, I further say, that they are usually
hallowed in this manner; The Priest makes two Crosses in the Water with his
Right Hand, etc. then he takes a burning Candle, and drops it into the Water in
form of a Cross, then cries aloud over it and prays, That the holy Spirit
would descend into it, and make it fruitful, that it may have Power to
regenerate and beget anew; then he breathes thrice into the Font, and puts Oil
and Cream into the Water, etc. Further, the Council of Trent taught, That at
the Font a spiritual Kindred and Relation was contracted between the baptized
Child, its Parents, and the Godfathers and Godmothers; such a near Relation as
that a Council decreed as follows, Let none Marry with Godfather or
Godmother, whoever does this, let the same be accounted as a Heathen until they
be separated, and let them de Penance Twenty Years, Canon Nicaeni Concilij ex
Codice Arabico. Summa Council et Pontif. Christ and the Apostles taught not so,
but that true Fellowship, Brotherhood and Sisterhood is in the Light of Life.

Now to what has been spoken concerning John's typical Ministration of
Water Baptism, which many would not have to be a Shadow, I further add; that
the Jews before John's time, under the first Covenant, had their Baptism or
Washing; if any one was made unclean by the touch of a Dead Body, he was to be
made clean by the Water of Separation, so that the Jews had their (...), a
Baptism or Washing after the touching of a Dead body: thus much says Godwyn in
his Jewish Antiquities. He that is washed or baptized (as the Septuagint
renders it) after the touching of a Dead Body, if he touch it again, what
avails his Washing, Eccles. 34.25. In the first Covenant (says the Apostle)
there was much Observation of Meats, Drinks, and diverse Washings, or Baptisms,
as the Greek renders it, Heb. 9.10. Now Christ, the End of the first Covenant,
he put an End to the Shadows and Figures, to the Water of Separation without,
to the diverse Washings or Baptisms without, as Legal and Figurative, ordained
to continue till the time of Reformation, the Prerogative of Christ Jesus, who
introduced a Spiritual Baptism, by a Living Water, having a Living Effect,
washing inwardly, John 7.37, 38, 39.

A TESTIMONY FOR THE Evangelical Communion, IN THE Bread of Life, IN THE Cup of
Blessing.

Thomas Lawson.

A PREFACE to the READER.
Reader, in this following Testimony is spread before thee, how after the
Primitive Times, when through the ingress of the Apostasy, the Bread of Life,
the Cup of Blessing, where the true Fellowship is, was lost within, then they
let in a Sea of Confusion about Bread and Wine without, wherein their Communion
has stood.

1. Some would have it ministered to all. 2. Some would have it ministered to
Believers only. 3. For many Ages it was ministered to Children. 4. Some have
ministered it to Dead People. 5. Some would have both Bread and Wine given. 6.
Some are for giving Bread only. 7. Some say Christ is present
Transubstantially. 8. Some say he is present Consubstantially. 9. Some say he
is present Sacramentally. 10. Some say Bread and Wine are Figures of Christ.
11. Some say, they are the same Christ that was born of the Virgin, after
Consecration; hence Corpus Christi day, and the Feast of the Sacrament of the
Altar. 12. Some are for taking Bread and Wine before Supper, others after
Supper, others at any time. 13. Some would have a whole Meal of it, some are
for a Sup, others for a Draught. 14. Some would have the Bread and Wine
standing, some sitting, some kneeling, some any way. 15. Some would have the
Bread broken by the Minister, some would break it themselves. 16. Some would
have it in an upper Chamber, some in the Church so called, some matter not
where, if they get it. 17. Some are or have been for the Kiss of Peace, some
are for kissing the Pax, so called. 18. Some are or have been for a Glass Cup,
some for a Wood Cup, some for a Cup of Gold, some for a Cup of Silver, some for
a Cup of Pewter. 19. Some are for Wine only, some for Wine mixed with Water,
20. Some have been for taking it every day, some on all Sundays, so called,
some for once a year, some for thrice a year. 21. Some would have the Bread and
Wine given freely, many are for taking Money for it. 22. Many give it as Dinner
time, yet call it a Supper.
Most of these things, if not all, are more or less touched in this following
Discourse, and may be read and seen by such as trace the steps of
Ecclesiastical Writers.

A Testimony for the Evangelical Communion, in the Bread of Life, in the Cup of
Blessing.
BEfore the Armies of Israel went harnessed out of Egypt, the Lord instituted
a Passover, so called, because in slaying the First born of Egypt, both of Man
and Beast, and in executing Judgment upon all their Gods, the Houses of the
Israelites were passed over: What were the Israelites to do? Every House was to
take a Lamb without Blemish, etc. and eat it within the Doors, with Unleavened
Bread: How were they to eat it? With their Loins girded up, with Shoes on their
Feet, with Staves in their Hands: Who were to eat of it? The Israelites; no
Stranger was to eat thereof, no Uncircumcised Person, Exodus 12. Who pass through
the Ministration of Condemnation, to Christ the Evangelical Passover, the
spiritual Paschal Lamb, they truly read this thing.

Now Christ, who came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, before he was
sacrificed up, or the Handwriting blotted out, or nailed to the Cross, the
Hour approaching of his departing out of Egypt (as I may say) a perverse,
froward, gainsaying, contradicting, life-opposing World, to be glorified with
the Father, as he was glorified with him before the World was, he enjoined his
Disciples to prepare the Passover, a Figure, a Shadow; now he being offered up,
the thing was to be read within, the Cross to be known within, which crucifies
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts thereof, the Word of God, quick and
powerful, sharper then a two-edged Sword, to be known within, cutting down
captivating Flesh, and the Fruits thereof, and passing over the Seed which
bears his Image; thus they came to Christ, the Evangelical Passover, to the
Lamb without Blemish, the Food of the spiritual Israel, in the House of their
sanctified Hearts, which is not come unto but where the Loins of the Mind have
been girded up, Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel, Staff in the
Hand; on this no Stranger, no Uncircumcised Person feeds: Christ said to his
Disciples, as Luke relates it, Luke 22.15, 16. With Desires I have desired to
eat this Passover with you before I suffer; for I say unto you, I will not any
more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. Mark, the
outward Passover was to be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God in the Church: How?
By abolishing the old Passover, and introducing, that is, bringing in the
Evangelical Passover, the Substance, Christ, the spiritual Paschal Lamb. Paul
gave record to this, to the Corinthians, Purge out the old Leaven, that ye may
be a new Lump; for even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor 5.7.
Who are come to this Lamb without Blemish, they are crowned with a continual
Festival.

At the Passover Christ took Bread and blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his
Disciples, saying, Take, eat, (...), this is my Body; From these words no small
Confusion has risen among Schoolmen, and Professors of Christianity, as
hereafter may be seen: This is my Body; that is, this betokens, denotes,
signifies or shadows out my Body; the word [is] is often so taken, as by
several Scriptural Instances it may appear: Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The seven
good Kine are seven years, and the seven good Ears of Corn are seven years;
that is, signifies or betokens seven years, Genesis 41.25, 26. The seven Stars
are the Angels of the seven Churches, Rev. 1.20. that is, denotes, betokens, or
signifies them. And the seven Heads are seven Mountains, on which the Woman
sits, and the ten Horns are ten Kings; that is, signifies, betokens or
denotes these things, Rev. 17.1, 12. And Zech. 5.3. The flying Rell is the
Curse; that is, signifies or betokens the Curse: The Shadows of the Old
Testament are said to expiate, because they were Types of Expiation by Christ.
So 1 Cor. 10. That Rock was Christ; that is, signified, betokened, or held out
Christ, a Figure or Type of him. As in the Flower (says Ludolphus) the Fruit
is foreshown, so by the Shadows of the Law Christ to come was signified. But
the word [is] is never put for changed into, Poole. So, this is my Body; that
is, betokens or signify my Body; the outward Bread was a Figure or Shadow of
Christ, who is that to the Soul which outward Bread is to the Body; through
outward Bread the Body grows, is strengthened, comforted, refreshed, satisfied;
this Christ said should be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, in the Church; how?
through his spiritual Return, who is the Heavenly Bread, Bread of God, living
Bread, life-giving Bread, in, by, and through which the Churches grew, were
strengthened, comforted, refreshed, satisfied. Moreover, Christ took the Cup,
and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my Blood,
signifies and denotes my Blood; Wine quenches the Thirst, increases Strength,
banishes Sorrow, causes Mirth, gladdens the Heart, adds Courage; Christ said
it was to be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, in the Church, the primitive
Churches washed in the Blood of the Lamb, were Witnesses hereof, through
Draughts of the Cup of Blessing, in pourings of the Quickening Spirit, they
made Melody in their Hearts to the Lord; this Cup of Blessing made Paul and
Silas sing Praises unto God, though in an inner Prison, and their Feet fast in
the Stocks, Acts 16.

Further, Paul put the Corinthians (who were jangling and in Disorder) in mind
of Christ's Institution, saying, I received of the Lord that which I delivered
unto you; he informs them how he took Bread and the Cup, and bad them eat and
drink in remembrance of him; for as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup, ye de show the Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.

Christ, though he departed as touching his outward Manifestation, yet he
comforted them with Promises of returning; so though he departed in the Flesh,
yet he returned in Spirit; I will pray the Father, and he shall give you the
Comforter, that he may abide with you forever. Again, I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come to you. Again, The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your Remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you, John 14.16, 18, 26. Again, Christ said unto
his Disciples, It is expedient for you that I go away; if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come; but if I depart, I will send him unto you, and he will
guide you into all Truth, and show you things to come, John 16.7, 13. So their
eating the outward Bread, and drinking the Cup, was in Remembrance of him, till
he came; and when he was returned in Spirit, and revealed in them, their
Comforter, their faithful Remembrancer, their Guide into all Truth, then they
had that in them which the Bread and Wine represented.

Paul, writing to the Corinthians, took them from the Outward to the Inward,
saying, Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. And We have
this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. And The Mystery hid from Ages and
Generations was, Christ in them the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. Thus Christ being
in them, what need was there of Bread and Wine to keep them in Remembrance of
him till he came?

Now John, a Witness of his spiritual Appearance, bare record, saying, We know
that the Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding, to know him
that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 5.20.

Paul traveled in birth for the Galatians, until Christ was formed in them (
Gal. 4.19.) in the Apostles days, and while the Church kept the Faith and
primitive Order, the Life of Jesus was manifest in their mortal Bodies, the
Heavenly Birth was brought forth in them, Christ, the Bread of God, Bread of
Life, Living Bread, which who eat of live forever, John 6. the redeemed
Churches, washed in the Blood of the Lamb, witnessed this, so had the thing in
them, signified by outward Bread and Wine.

Further, Paul writing to the Corinthians, sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints, said, I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say; the Cup
of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ?
the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? we are
all Partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.15. This Cup and this Bread know
none but who follow Christ in the Regeneration; the outward mind feeds on
Husks, drinks the Cup of Abomination; but in the Cross a renewing is known, a
Hungring after the Bread of Life is known, the immortal Seed is known, in which
the Families of the Earth are blessed; he spoke of a Cup, of a Bread, which
only the Wise in the Wisdom of God had knowledge of: Now the primitive
Christians, living Stones, being come to the the End of Shadows, testified
against the Shadows, and did not stick in them, not jangle about them; the
Kingdom of God stands not in Meat and Drink, but in Righteousness, Peace and
Joy in the Holy Spirit, Romans 14.17. not in Bread and Wine, but in the second
Adam, the quickening Spirit, the End of Shadows. Paul wrote to the Collossians,
saying, Let no man judge you in Meat, or in Drink, etc. which are a Shadow of
things to come, but the Body is of Christ, Col. 2.16, 17. Bread and Wine are
Shadows as well as the outward Passover, and Christ is that in his People which
the Shadows pointed at. To him that overcomes (says Christ) will I give to eat
of the hidden Maenna, Rev. 2.17. He promises a Food of a more spiritual nature,
then outward Bread and Wine, a Food hidden from the wise and prudent, yea, and
from that Mind that sticks in the Shadows. Further said the true and faithful
Witness, Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the Door and knock; if any man hear my
Voice, and open the Door, I will come into him, and will sup with him, and he
with me: This is the Gospel-communion, here was no outward Bread nor Wine, Cup
nor Chalice, but here is that which the bread and wine pointed at, the cup of
blessing. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship
one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. In the Light Fellowship with the Lord is known, and Fellowship one
with another; and the Word is known, which became Flesh, and tabernacles in
man, this the Redeemed eat, feed on, discern; and though it be said, The Flesh
profitteth nothing, Joh. 6. and that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 15. yet it is said, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you: and he that eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him, Joh. 6. And Paul said, We are
Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones, Ephesians. 5.30. And these are
no contradiction^, but fulfilled in the ground of Self-denial, in the cross to
the mortal, the Lords Death is showed forth till he come, who lives forever,
who abolishes Death, and brings Life and Immortality to light through the
Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. yea, and Joh. 3.13. The same that descended, the same is
ascended, and is flesh and bone, and nourishes the Soul to eternal Lise; here
the end of Shadows is known. Augustine said truly, if truly and livingly read,
To eat Christ, is to believe in Christ; why providest thou a Tooth and a Belly?
believe only and thou have eaten: Faith centers in the eternal Word, in the
quickening Word; so that is revealed which fulfils outward Shadows, other things
as well as Bread and Wine, were not of perpetual continuance, nor needful to be
practiced in the Church, after their bounds and season, John 13.14, 15. Acts
15.28, 29. Jam. 5.14. Paul testified saying, Henceforth know we no man after
the flesh, yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth
we know him no more, 2 Cor. 5.16. Paul was so spiritualized, as that he
centered in nothing below the eternal Substance; he stickt not in Bread and
Wine, or any other Shadow, but in fervency of spirit waited to be comprehended
in the prefixed Life, as a man that so looks for a lost Jewel, that he
overlooks all besides it; outward things reach no further then fleshly
Knowledge, but a spiritual Understanding is revealed in, by, and through that
which is spiritual.

Of Transubstantiation.

Though Israel saw the Wonders of the Lord in Egypt, the Execution of his
Judgments for their Deliverance, though the Lord went before them by Day in a
Pillar of a Cloud, and by Night in a Pillar of Fire, though they passed through
the Red Sea as upon dry Land, and saw the Egyptians drowned, so that through a
sense of his Power and mighty Acts they sang a Song of Praise and Thanksgiving
unto the Lord, saying, He was glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders; yet coming unto Mount Sinai, on to which Moses was called, and
continued 40 Days and 40 Nights, Israel fell into a spiritual Lethargy, to
forget the Lord and his Noble Acts; and losing the sense of the pure, living,
invisible, eternal God, they cried for artificial Gods, Gods of Man's making,
saying to Aaron, Up, make us Gods, which shall go before us; for as for this
Moses, that brought us out of the Land of Egypt, we w^^ what is become of him,
Exodus 32. Aaron made them a Calf, and they said, These be thy Gods, O Israel,
which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt; thus losing the sense of the
Living and Life-giving God, they turned to, cried up, and ascribed their
Deliverance to a Molten Calf, fashioned with a Graving-Tool. In the Apostles
days and primitive times, while their Garments were undefiled, being Branches
of the Heavenly Olive, kept their Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, they had the
Bread of Life, Water of Life, Heavenly Manna, the Word that became Flesh in the
persumed Houses of sanctified Hearts, they drank of the Cup of Salvation, the
Cup of Blessing, they were come to Mount Sion, they were Members of the New
Jerusalem, they were in the spiritual Worship, they came to the Life, Sum,
Substance of all Types, Figures, Shadows, and all through the Operation of
Christ Jesus in them, who led them from the Aegyptian-Bondage of Hellish
Pharaoh, old Abaeddon, the Destroyer; they knew the Prince of Peace, Christ
Jesus; and their Labor and living concern was, that in all things he might
have the Preeminence. But in days succeeding the Apostles, when the Mystery of
Iniquity, which the Apostle saw inwardly working in his day, was more and more
manifested, the Star fallen from Heaven, Sun and Air darkened, the Purity of the
primitive Church spoiled, through the Smoke of the bottomless Pit; through the
Darkness and Delusion of this Smoke, they lost the bread of Life, the cup of
blessing within, so came to reassume bread and wine without, and let in a Sea
of Confusion about the same, some ministering it to all, some to Believers only,
sometime to Young Children, sometime to Dead People, etc. and the more the
Smoke arose out of the Pit, the greater Darkness entered the Professors of
Christianity; till at length, like as Israel, having lost the sense of the
living God, called for Gods without, so had a Molten Calf, and worshipped the
same, ascribing their Deliverances thereunto, even so apostatized Christianity
having lost the Bread of Life, the Cup of Blessing, Christ Jesus, through the
in-steamings of the bottomless Pit, they must have an artificial Christ; how is
that? since the Apostles days, when the Life and Power of Godliness was lost,
then this Doctrine came to be preached, That Bread and Wine after it be
consecrated by the Priest, is no more Bread and Wine, but the very Christ, that
was born of the Virgin, so to be worshipped; that the Bread and Wine by the
consecration of the Priest, is transubstantiated, that is, changed into the
very Body and Blood of Christ; from this came the word Transubstantiation; this
Doctrine is grounded upon those words, This is my Body; for from these words
Papists say, Christ is present transu^stantially; Lutherans say,
consubstantially; Calvinists say, He is present sacramentally, Author of the
Naked Truth.

Whether the Bread and Wine after consecration be transubstantiated or not,
has been and is much controverted betwixt Papists and Protestants. One said,
Corpore de Christi lis est, de sanguine lis est,
Lis est de modo, non habitura modum.
How Bread and Wine the living Christ should be,
It Is controverted much, men disagree.


The Council of Trent, begun in the year 1545. and others taught, That Bread
and Wine being consecrated by the Priest, is turned into the true, real,
substantial Body of Christ, Flesh, Blood, Bones, etc. even the same that was
born of the Virgin, bread into his body, wine into his blood; and that this
consecrated Host being offered to God by the Priest, is a Propitiatory
Sacrifice for the Quick and the Dead, and that men are thereby reconciled to
God, and that it must be worshipped, and carried about in Processions; and that
such as denied the same, should be Anathema, accursed: And not only this
Council, but also the Lateran Council, Pope Nicholas, Pope Leo, Pope Innocent,
Pope Pius the fourth, Pope Victor, Pope Honorius, etc. taught the same; for
denying of this Doctrine, many have been burned to Ashes, as Ecclesiastical
Writers testify, Summa Council. et Pontif. Oruphrius.

Pope Innocent the third invented Pixes and Boxes (as it is said) to put the
sacramental Bread in.

Again, such Reverence came to be given to consecrated Bread without, when the
bread of life was turned from, yea, and the true Worship of God in Spirit and
in Truth, that a Council put out a Canon, forbidding Women to receive the
Eucharist, that is, the consecrated Host, with bare Hands, Council. Antisid.
Summa Council. et Pontif.

Roman Catholics tell of a Miracle of an Ass, that left his Provender to
worship the consecrated Host; on such Conceit as this (says Mede) the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation is grounded.

Of Aderation given to the Consecrated Host.

When it came to be believed, that bread after consecration was the very
Christ, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World, then Popes and
Councils ordained, that at certain times it should be lifted up above the
Priests Head, and that at the heaving of it up a Bell should be rung, and that
all that hear its found, should not only do low Obeisance, but fall down on
their Knees, and with Hands lifted up toward Heaven worship it, and say Pater
Noster, or some other Prayer; they ordained also, that it should be born to the
Sick with great Reverence, and that with lighted Caudles, though at noon day,
for the same they instituted a solemn Feast, called, Corpus Christi Day, on
which the consecrated Host is born about, lifted up and worshipped.

Further, 'Twas enjoined, That if a Priest were called in the Night season to
housel the Sick, and there spent all his Hosts, as he came Homeward he was to
put out the Candle, left the people should adore the empty Tabernacle: such as
read the Canons of Pope Honorius, Gregory the ninth, Pope Innocent, Pope-
Clement the fifth, their Lives and Councils in their days, they may see these
things.

In France (says Heylin, in his Survey of the Estate of France) a couple of
Priests carries the Host under a Canopy, before it goes a Bell continually
tinkling, all in Houses perceiving their God to go by, make some show of
Reverence, all in the Streets with bended Knees, and elevated Hands do it
Honor; to the Protestants, it is as a Watch-Peal to be gone, left for their
^^reverence they be knocked down: in this (says he) is a smatch of Turcism,
who when they hear the Cryers bawling in their Streets, they fall prostrate on
the Ground, wherever they are, and kiss it thrice, so perform their Devotions
to Mahomet; their carrying it about the Streets has a touch of Judaism, from
the Levites carrying about the Ark on their Shoulders; their Adoration of it is
especially from Gentilism; for never any people but Heathen (says he) afforded
divine Honors to things inanimate. Thus when Heavenly Salt, Wisdom from above,
was lost within, multitudes of Inventious swarmed into Apostatized Christendom.

Lanctantius in his first Book of Institutions, taxed the Gentiles of
Ridiculousness, who worshipped Jupiter as a God, Came cundem tamen Saturno et
Rhea gentium confiterentur, seeing they so perfectly knew his Original, much
more are they to be blamed, who impose upon the peole the Adoration of a Dead
God, a principis non ita fuit, it was not so from the the beginning, Heylins
Survey, etc.

Christ said unto his Disciples, Take, eat, this is my Body; this denotes,
signifies, be tokens my Body; what bread and wine is to the body of man, that
is Christ the Bread of Life, his Flesh, his Blood to the Soul; the Doctrine of
Bread-worship, Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Images, and many other
pestilent Errors have steamed into the Church, from the misunderstanding and
mis-interpretation of Scriptures, says Rainold in his Orations. Paul, who had
the Mind of Christ, a feeling and sense of Christ's Institution, said thrice in
a Breath (as I may say) that the Bread after it was blessed, or Thanks were
given, which is called Consecration, remained Bread, he called it so, and he
called it what it was; his words imply not his belief of Transubstantiation,
but expressly the contrary, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.

Again, Mat. 26. Christ took the Cup, and gave Thanks, and bad them drink,
saying, This is my Blood, that is, signifies, betokens or holds out my Blood;
not his Blood after Consecration, but a Shadow of his Blood; his own words
immediately following evidently demonstrates this, I will not drink henceforth
of the Fruit of the Vine; he calls what was in the Cup, the Fruit of the Vine;
now his Blood was not the Fruit of the Vine, but Wine is the Fruit of the Vine;
until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, says he;
now, whoever say, that Bread and Wine after Consecration is Christ's Flesh and
Blood, consider this, Did Christ cat his own Body? Did he drink his own Blood?
you say, consecrated Bread and Wine is Christ's Flesh and Blood, and Christ eat
and drank thereof; what Consquences would follow this Doctrine? Christ, his
Flesh, his Blood, is hid from apostatized Ages and Generations; his Word became
Flesh, living Food, Food of living Souls; Christ is the living Bread, which
came down from Heaven; his Flesh is the Bread that he gives; who came from
Heaven, given for the Life of the World; but perishing Bread and Wine, though
consecrated a thousand times, came not from Heaven; this said he, who also
said, The Flesh profi^^eth nothing, it is the Spirit that quickens; and the
words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life, John 6.

And whereas Paul said to the Corinthians, As often as ye eat this Bread and
Drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. Now if
the consecrated Host were Christ, then he were come; then how is it done till
he come, and were it proper to say, till he come, when he is already come?
Christ was obedient to Death, even the Death of the Cross; and the Corinthians
were in the Cross in the daily dying, having Tastes of the eternal Inheritance,
and in the dying; he comes with perfect Conquest, abolishing Death, and
bringing Life and Immortality to Light. And Paul said, This do ye, as often as
ye drink it in remembrance of me; this plainly shows, that consecrated Bread
and Wine is not his Body; where his Body is there is no need of a
Representation; consecrated Bread works not the Works of the true Christ, the
true and faithful Witness, so is not Christ.

Christ, called also Jesus, by interpretation a Savior, such is his Name, such
is his Nature; he saves his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21. through his
inward Operation they become new Creatures, God's Workmanship, in a word of
Beth-aven, that is, a House of Vanity or Iniquity, they become Bethel, that is,
the House of God, Sharers in the Riches and Peace of the Lords Family;
consecrated Bread effects not these things in the Receivers, though a thousand
times consecrated and received, so is not the Virgins Birth; John testified,
saying, The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. this is
the effectual remedy; the Lords Candle finds many a foul Flaw in man; such as
believe are reduced into the Order of the heavenly Truth: the Apostle further
bare record, saying, He loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood,
Rev. 1.5, 6. and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, Kings to reign in
Truths Dominion over the Earth, over the World, over Lusts, over spiritual
Adversaries, Priests to offer a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving unto the
Lord; to this Dignity Bread and Wine, though a thousand times consecrated,
cannot bring.

Again, The true Christ, the Virgins Birth, is the same today, yesterday and
forever, incorruptible, perishes not, immortal, the Holy One sees not
Corruption; but Bread and Wine, though consecrated, corrupts, perishes, grows
moldy, loses Virtues, Taste, Savor, so is not the Body and Blood of Christ:
and the Disciples were not to labor for the Meat which perishes, but for that
Meat which endures unto everlasting Life, John 6.27.

Again, Through the Body of Christ the faithful become dead to the Law, to be
married to Christ, to be fruitful unto God, Romans 7.4. dead to the Law, dead to
sin, yea, and the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus makes free from the
Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2, 10. but the consecrated Host has not this
Operation in man, but leaves men alive in Sin, dead to God, so not Christ's
bod^, not his flesh, not his blood: Christ said to the Jews, Your Fathers did
eat Manna in the Wilderness, and are dead; such Minds as stick in Visibles are
dead in Sins and Trespasses, though consecrated by Man, they quicken not, it is
the Spirit that quickneth; and he that eats of the Bread (says Christ) that
comes from Heaven, the Word, Christ's Flesh, he knows a Vivification, a
Quickening, he dies not, but lives forever, John 6. and it is the Lord that gives
being and Virtue to all Creatures, not man's Consecration, which cannot keep
Visibles from losing their Virtue, Savor, Taste; it is evident by their own
Constitution, that they were conscious of this, who enjoined, That Priests on
every eighth day should renew the holy Eucharist, that is, consecrated Bread,
etc. lest through Oldness thereof some should be brought into Indevotion, to
have the Spark of their Devotion (as I may say) in measure extinguished, Summa
Council. et Pontif. but Christ is the same today, yesterday and forever, his
Years fail not, he waxes not old as a Garment.

Of giving Bread and Wine to the World; for this it is alleged, that Judas did
eat of the Bread, and did drink of the Cup.

Answ. That was that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Mine own familiar
Friend, which did eat of my Bread, has lift up his Heel against me, Psalm.
41.9. yea, and Christ the Storehouse of Wisdom and Knowledge, said, He that
dippeth his Hand with me in the Dish, the same shall betray me, Matthew. 26.23.
his Fellow-commoner (as I may say) whereby the Indiguity of the thing was much
aggravated: as for Judas, he was numbered with the Disciples, and had obtained
part of the true Ministry, Acts 1. but fell by Transgression, and became a
Member of that sinful and unsociable Society which Christ testified against;
and for giving Bread and Wine, the Sacrament, as it is called, to the World,
have you no Example but Judas? who sold Christ for Money, as many sell Bread
and Wine for Money now, which after Consecration is truly and really Christ, as
many in Degeneration affirm: Christ gave it to his Disciples only, a Shadow of
a more spiritual Bread, of a more spiritual Cup, after to be received.

Of giving Bread and Wine to Infants.

After the Primitive Times, when through the inundation of Apostasy, and
over-spreading of that foul Leprosy, the living Bread and living Cup was lost,
then streamed in a Sea of Confusion, as I said before, the Heavenly Key of pure
Knowledge and Divine Understanding was lost, things of God became as a Book
sealed with seven Seals, the Opener and Fulfiller of the Scriptures of Truth
came in a high measure to be lost, then a Cloud of Mis-apprehensions and
Mis-interpretations of Scriptures involved the Professors of Christianity, then
through a Mis-apprehension and Misunderstanding of that Scripture of Christ,
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life
in you, John 6.53. the Fathers fell into that Error, that None but Communicants
could be saved, whereupon they gave the Sacrament (so called) to Infants, and
put it into the Mouths of Dead Men, etc. Augustine Bishop of Hippo was thus
minded, as appears by this his following Conclusion, that It is in vain to
promise Salvation and Life Eternal to little Children, unless they be baptized,
and receive the Body and Blood of Christ, since the Necessity of them both is
attested by so many, so great, and divine Testimonies.

This Practice of giving the Sacrament to Infants crept in the early Ages of
the World, became wonderful general, and continued above six hundred years in
the Church, till the time of Charlemain; some were so strict in it, as that a
Canon enjoined, That baptized Infants should receive the Communion before they
sucked, or received any other Nourishment: the same is or has been observed by
the Greeks, Aethiopians, Bohemians, Moravians; and that this was enjoined by
Popes, Bishops, etc. these following Authors testify, recourse being had to
their Canons, Constitutions, etc. Pope Innocent, Paganinus Gaudentius Theol. de
moribus seculi. Nicephorus in Histor. Eccles. Johannes Langius, Augustine,
Tailors worthy Communicant, chap. 3. Alcninus, Maldonate on John 6. Author of
the Naked Truth, Grotius.

Notwithstanding Pope Innocent had appointed the Sacrament to be given to
Infants, and it became in a manner universal, of long continuance, yet the
Council of Trent put out this Canon, If any one shall say, that the Communion
of the Eucharist, that is, consecrated Bread, is necessary for Children before
they attain unto years of Discretion, let him be Anathema, accursed, Council.
Trident. Sect. 3. Can. 4. Here the Pope, who cannot err, as it is said, came to
be questioned, his Doctrine, Augustin's Doctrine, and the Church Practice for
above six hundred years, came to be cast out as spurious by the Trent Council:
What was become of the Unity of the Spirit, and the Spirit of the Prophets,
which is subject to the Prophets: Some said, Ebrius, Infantes, Erroneus, atque
furentes,
Cum pueris, domini non debent sumere corpus.


Of giving the Sacrament, so called, to Dead People.

From the beforementioned Scripture, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you John 6.^3. the Fathers in the
Degeneration from the primitive, Faith, Doctrine, Worship and Practice, fell
into the Gulf of that Conceit, That none but Communicants should partake of the
blessedness of Salvation; upon which they not only gave Sacramental Bread, etc.
to Infants, but put it into the Mouths of Dead Men: There were some (says
Spark, the Kings Chaplain, page 127.) that baptized the Dead, and put the
Sacramental-Bread in their Mouths, as their Viaticum, judging it better to have
such a necessary Ordinance by Proxy then altogether to go without it. That such
a thing was in use in the Church may be certainly concluded, from the sixth
Canon of the third Council of Carthage, it is there apparent, that that Council
condemned certain Heretics, who thrust the Sacramental Bread into the Mouths
of Dead Men; yea, and the sixth general Council at Constantinople was concerned
to eradicate the Tares of that Delusion and smoky Conceit, saying, Let none
give the Encharist, that is sacramental Bread, to the Dead; for it is written,
Take, and eat; but the Dead are neither in a Capacity to take nor to eat, Summa
Council. et Pontif. Thus the Cup of Blessing being lost, they received at the
old Serpents hand the Cup of Abomination. Fornication, Delusions and Conceits,
and they were drunk therewith.

Of Time, and Times of taking the Sacrament.

As the Churches in the Apostles days and primitive Ages grew up in the
sanctifying Faith, in the purifying Hope, through the Cross of Christ, the Life
of Jesus came to be manifested in their mortal Bodies, they were true and
living Witnesses of Fellowship with the Lord, through the Leadings and Teachings
of the Anointing; they knew Christ supping with them, and they with him,
without outward Bread and Wine, being in the Heavenly Banqueting House, in the
End and Substance of all Types, Figure and Shadows, but as the Serpent seducing
Eve, brought in a world of Wickedness, so the same by little and little wearing
the Church from the Simplicity that is in Christ Jesus, brought in a flood of
Confusion, an earthly Mind within, turned to earthly Figures and Shadows
without, Elements and Rudiments, losing the Life of Communion within, they
placed it in Shadows without, and much Confusion and Uncertainty has been in
the Church about the Times of taking it, as appears in the Writings of Men.

Very anciently (says Polydor) Christians took the Eucharist, that is, the
sacramental Broad, every day in the Morning, and Fasting, Polydor lib. 5.

After this Augustine said, This daily taking of the Communion of the Eucharist,
I neither Praise nor blame; yet my Persuasion is, that men take it every Lords
Day: his Persuasion very likely took place; hence it came to be called, Panis
hebdomadarius, Weekly Bread. Polydor lib. 5.

Zephyrinus afterward appointed, That all Christians, who were come to suitable
years, should once a year at least, take the Sacrament, namely, at Easter: Once
every day, now once a year will serve; either much of Zeal was in the one, or
much of Coldness was in the other. Polyd. lib. 5.

Fabian afterward established, That men should take the Sacrament thrice in
the year, if not oftener, at Easter, Pentecost, and Christmas, Polyd. lib. 5.
Summa Council. et Pontif.

Anacletus commanded, That they that would not take the Sacrament, should be
excommunicated as Profane Persons, Polyd. lib. 5. Several are of another
Disposition in this our Age, who show not much dislike at peoples Refusal of
the Sacrament, provide they give them the same Price as they do who take it;
but refusing that, War is prepared.

Concerning the Communion Cup.

In the primitive Times, the Church of living Stones was under the Rule and
Government of the blessed Spirit, in and through which the Cry and living
Soul-breathing was, Abba Father; here the Cup of Salvation, of Consolation, of
Blessing, full of Righteousness, Peace, Joy, Assurance, Heavenly Riches was
plentifully drunk of, this being lost through the Smoke, Enchantments,
Delusions, pompous Show, bewitching Splendour, Misleadings, Muzlings and
enfatuating Sleights of Antichtist, and men fast bound in the Dungeon of
spiritual Servitude, and toiling in the Entanglements of Will Worship,
Self-righteousness, Traditions, Conceits, in this condition the Cup of
Abomination and spiritual Fornication got entrance, making Nations drunk, and
in the barren Wilderness of this State, there has been no little jangling
about the Sacramental Cup without, as of what Metal it should be made of; some
have been for Wood, some for Glass, some for Pewter, some for Gold, some for
Silver, as may be assuredly concluded by the Canons and Constitutions of Popes,
Kings, Archbishops, Provincial Councils, etc.

It is very clear (says Polydor) that the Cups used in the consecration of
divine Blood was at the first made of Wood, de Invent. lib. 2. cap. 12.

Zepherinus afterward commanded, That Glass Cups should be used, not Wood
Cups, as before, Polyd. lib. 2. cap. 12.

Succeeders skrewed a Peg higher, the former Decree by little and little
vanished, and it was constituted, That Golden, Silver, or at the least Pewter
Cups or Chalices should be used, Polydor lib. 2.

Bonifacius Martyr and Bishop, said, Formerly Golden Priest, did wake use of
Wood Cups or Chalices; but now on the contrary, Wood Priests use Golden
Chalices.

As the Apostatical Pomp and Splendour increased, so the simple and homely use
of Wood Cups came to be generally hissed at and slighted, so that the
Provincial Triburiensian Council decreeed thus, We decree, that henceforth no
Priest may by any means presume to make the sacred Mystery of the Body and
Blood of our Lord in Wood Cups or Chalices, Summa Council. et Pontif.

Our King Edgar put out a Canan to this purpose, saying, We teach, that every
Chalice or Cup, wherein any one shall consecrate the Eucharist, shall be of
Molten Metal, and not at all consecrated in a Wood Cup or Chalice.

One Remigius an Archbishop, appointed these his Verses to be set on the side
of the Sacremental Cup: Haurit hinc populus vitam de sanguine sacro
Injecto aeternus quem fudit vulnere Christus, etc.
Hence People drink Eternal Life, that is good;
For in this Cup contained is Christ's Blood.


Thus you see what a stir has been about Invention, after that the Simplicity
and Stability of the Truth as it is in Jesus was turned from, and after that
credens was given, that Bread and Wine by the Priests consecration, was
transmuted, that is, changed into the real Body and Blood of Christ.

How Communion in both Kinds was forbidden.

That Christ gave Bread and Wine unto his Disciples is undeniable; Paul
mentioning the Institution unto the Corinthians, mentions both, as it is evident
the Bread represented his Body, the Bread of Life, that nourishes the Soul to
eternal Life; the Wine his Blood, which they came to witness to cleanse them
from all sin, as they kept to the Head, through the Ligament of living Faith,
they came to the End of all Figures, to partake of the one Bread, one in all;
but in the dark reign of Apostasy they reassumed the Shadows, and divided
Christendom into Clergy, that is, Teachers, and Laity, that is, all others out
of Holy Orders, so called; but all the Faithful are the Lord's Lot, as Acts
26.18. translated there Inheritance, but properly signifies Lot, if the Greek
Copies be consulted, and makes nothing for, but against the distinction of
Clergy and Laity, Leighs Crit. However, the Distinction has found continuance
in the Church; and in the year 1215. Pope Innocent the third did first of all,
as it is recorded, forbid that the Lay People should receive their Communion in
both kinds, he would allow them Bread, but no Drink; this kind of Communion (as
it is said) was not before the Council of Constance, where in the thirteenth
Session they deprived the People of the Cup: yea, and a Canon was put out,
saying in downright and express terms:

If any one shall deny whole and entire Christ, the Fountain and Author of all
Graces, to be taken under one Species of Bread, etc. let him be Anathema,
accursed.

Thus in this, as in other things, it appears, that not only the Power of
Godliness has been lost, but great Confusion has followed.

Of Mixed Wine.

Alexander (if I may use the Language of my Author) the seventh Pope from
Peter, being about to consecrate, was the first of all that mingled Water and
Wine together, Polydor lib. 5.

Of taking Money for Bread and Wine.

I have showed before, how Pope Innocent the third, and the Council of
Constance denied the Cup to the Laity, so called; one Eckius complying with
this Doctrine, gives an irrational Reason for it, The Laity (says he) ought to
content themselves with the Bread only, because, equi donation sunt inspiciendi
dentes, that is, a gift Horse is not to be looked in the Month, Apud Manlium in
loc. com. He though belike, that Lay Men could not claim any Right to the Bread
neither.

Bellarmine grants, that they have Right to the Bread, but adds, that in eating
the Bread transubstantiated by the Priest into the Body of Christ, they drink
his Blood also. But Lombard (his Master) contradicts this his Doctrine, saying,
That the Bread is not turned but into Christ's Flesh, nor the Wine but into his
Blood.

Let him that is crowned with Heavenly Wisdom, judge whether these
Contradictions bespeak them to be Builders of Sion, a City of Unity, the Joy of
the whole Earth, or Builders of spiritual Babel, a City of Confusion.

The Council of Constance acknowledged, that Christ instituted and administered
both Bread and Wine, tamen hoc non obstante, yet notwithstanding the Authority
of the holy Canons and the Custom of the Church has and does deny the Cup to
the Laity.

But to return, Neither did Christ take Money for the Bread and Wine which he
gave to any; but as the spirit of Selfishness entered the Temple of the Church,
it produced other Effects: surely there was occasion why the six the general
Council of Constantinople decreed, That no Bishop, Priest or Deacon,
administering the Communion to people, should take any Money whatever of them
for the same; and that, who as did should be deposed, Summa Council. et Pontif.

Yet notwithstanding the Constantinopolitan Canon in Protestant Churches now,
the Parish buys Bread and Wine, and the Priest sells it them again, that the
Priest may have an Offering at Easter, so that many otherwise zealous for the
established Ministry, blame their Ministers, their spiritual Hosts, as they
call them, that first the Parish must buy Bread and Wine, and give it to the
Minister, and then the Minister give it to the People, and after call for a
Reckoning, yea, and force such as neither bite nor sup thereof to reckon and
pay.

Let us hear the Lord's Proclamation, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the Waters, to the Water of Life, the Cup of Salvation, Consolation and
Blessing; a spiritual Thirst is called for, neither Money nor Price. And
further, He that has no Money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy Wine and
Milk without Money and without Price. Here is Bread, and Wine, and Milk at the
Lord's Hand, without Money or Price, Isa. 55.1, 2. but such as are made
Ministers by the will of man, through the strength of Arts, Sciences, Natural
Parts, Abilities, Qualifications, Endowments, Acquisitions, they have another
Language, so another Spirit, forcing Money and Price not only from Receivers,
but from Non-receivers also; so that the Practice of many, I say, not all,
bespeaks them, saying, We preach the Gospel, tantum ut nos pascat, et vestiat,
merely for Food and Raiment, to pick a living by, Trap on 1 Pet. 5.

Yea, and Revel. 22.17. The Spirit and the Bride say, come; and let him that
hears say, come; and let him that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let
him take the Water of Life freely. Here is Communion, Royal Communion, Water of
Life, Bread of Life, the Cup of Blessing, freely, without Money or Price.

But their Voice is not the Voice of the Spirit, nor of the Bride, nor of him
that hears, nor of him that is athirst, who forces Money and Price for Bread
and Wine, the Shadow, not only from the Receiver, but the Non-receiver also;
for where Christ's Doctrine and the Apostles is transgressed, his Institution
for Gospel-Maintenance violated, their Voice is the Voice of Balaam, who was
for Gifts, Rewards, Wages of Unrighteousness, filthy Lucre, who have nothing
but the Shadow, which makes not alive, they make Gain of it, sell it; but who
are Members of Christ's Body, of his Flesh, of his Bones, as freely they have
received the Bread of Life, so they freely give.

Of the Kiss of Peace, and of the Pax.

David, the sweet Singer of Israel, exhorted Kings and Judges of the Earth, to
kiss the Son, lest he be angry, Psalm. 2.12. These are Greetings, cordial
Embraces, not known but in the operating Virtue of the Seed of Regeneration,
and in spiritual Submission to his Heavenly Will. Let him kiss me (says the
Church) with the Kisses of his Mouth, Cantic. 1.2. In the sense-restoring Life
these are felt as Seals and Assurances of divine Favor and Acceptance,
Earnests and Fruits of the Spirit, like Balm to the Wounded. Paul writing to
the Romans said, Salute one another with an Holy Kiss, Romans 16.16. This Peter
called, The Kiss of Love, 1 Pet. 5.14. In after Ages, as Fellowship with the
Lord, and with one another in the Light, in a high measure came to be loft,
then the Observation of Shadows more and more got entrance, then their
Fellowship and Communion began much to consist in Externals, as Bread and Wine,
then Christians entertained a Custom of Kissing one another before they
received the Communion, thereby testifying their Love to one another, as faith
Parens on the Romans; In the ancient Church, when they assembled (says Meds)
to celebrate the Communion, the Deacon was wont to proclaim, Nequis contra
aliquem, Let no Man have ought against his Brother; and then, Salutate alij
alios osculo sancto, that is, Salute one another with an Holy Kiss, which they
did, first the Bishop and Clergy, then the Laity, the Men apart by themselves,
and the Women by themselves, in token of Friendship; this was called, Osculum
pacis, The K^ss of Peace: After this entered a Ceremony, (in the Midnight of
Apostasy, as I may say, still used among the Romanists to this day) 'for the
Priest to send a little Gilded or Painted Table with a Crucifix, or some Saints
Picture thereon, to be kissed of every one in the Church, before they receive
the Bread; this they call, The Kissing of the Pax, Mede. What there is of the
Power of Godliness, or of the Form thereof, in this thing, without further
Remarks, I leave to the Wise to judge.

Of the Feast of the Sacrament of the Altar.

The outward Jew had several Feasts of especial Solemnity, which shadowed out a
spiritual Feast under the Gospel Dispensation, to be truly and inwardly
witnessed in the purified Houses of inward Jews.

The outward Jew was to observe the Feast of the Passover of Unleavened Bread,
wherein for seven days they were to eat Unleavened Bread, no Leaven was to be
found in their Houses, Exodus 23.

The outward Jew was to observe the Feast of Pentecost, instituted in
Remembrance of the Law delivered unto Moses in the Mount, fifty days after
their departure out of Egypt; this was called the Feast of Weeks, in which
they were to offer a new Meat Offering unto the Lord, Levit. 23. a Tribute of a
Free Will Offering, Deuteronomy. 26.

The outward Jew was to observe the Feast of Harvest, the first ripe Fruits of
the Land were to be offered unto the Lord, Exodus 22. As also the Feast of
In-gathering, when Fruits were gathered in, and this was to continue seven
days, called also the Feast of Tabernacles, Exodus 23. Levit. 23.

Moreover, The outward Jew was to observe the Feast of Atonement, etc.

Now Christ Jesus put an End to all these, as Typical, Shadows, Figures, being
the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes, the inward
Jews, the truly Gathered of the Lord, had the true sense and feeling hereof,
bearing record to Christ Jesus, their Passover, their Unleavened Bread, Bread
of Life, their spiritual Lawgiver, making them free from the Law of Sin and
Death, they were come to the Evangelical Meat Offering, to the Free Will
Offering, they bare record to Christ, the First Fruits of them that sleep; they
knew the Evangelical In-gathering, having Heavenly Treasure in Earthen Vessels;
they knew a Tabernacle not of man's building; John testified, saying, The Word
became Flesh, and tabernacled in us, dwelt in us as in a Tabernacle, so they
saw his Glory; and the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will in-dwell in
them, Rev. 22.3. yea, and by Christ they were Witnesses of Atonement; the
inward Jews, Called and Chosen, were come to the End of the Jewish Shadows,
Feasts, as other things; they were come to the Joy of the holy Spirit, to the
Marriage Supper of the Lamb; these knew a Good Conscience to be a continual
Feast; blessed are they which are called unto the Marriage Supper of the Lamb,
if they obey his Call, and frame not Excuses, as those Guests did mentioned by
the Evangelist: and that the Apostles who were come to the End of Jewish
Observances, as o^ Days,, and Feasts, did institute others, I have not found
nor observed, further then that the Churches in the Apostles days usually
gathered together, to wait upon and worship the living God on the First Day of
the Week; and in primitive Times, the Observation of it was as a Badge of
Christianity; when the Question was propounded, Servasti Dominicum? Have thou
kept the Lord's Day? the Answer was returned, Christianus sum, intermittere non
possum; I am a Christian, I cannot but keep the Lord's Day: But Professors of
Christianity are grown perfectly profane, (says one) as that they can play on
that day without Book, Trapp. Let us keep that day (says Ignatius) in a
spiritual manner, rejoicing in the Meditation of the Law, not in the Rest of
the Body, Epist. 3. ad Magnes. The Apostle in Christ, the End of the Jewish
Observation of Days, said thus, He that observes a Day, he observes it to the
Lord, Romans 14.6. so say we. Further, the Galatians Judaizing, turning to
beggarly Rudiments, Paul wrote unto them, saying, Ye observe Days, Months,
Times and Years; I am afraid of you, Gal. 4.10, 11. Now, as the Apostasy
prevailed, the Sunshine of the Evangelical Day was loft, then they brought in
multitudes of Saints Days, so called, to be observed to this and that Saint,
till such times as all the Days of a Year were not sufficient to afford a
particular Day to each Saints whom they desired to honor with a Festival, then
came in All Saints Day, so called, and among other days set apart, in the year
1254. Pope Urban the fourth ordained the Feast of the Sacrament of the Altar,
with Indulgences and Pardons; in this Degeneration of Christianity came in (as
I said before) these things; and as for Christmas, Shrovetide, etc. the very
Names discover their Founders, and those that plead for the Observation of
those Times are generally the greatest Prophaners thereof, in Sports, Games,
vicious Courses, Observers rather of the Rule of Sardanapalus (who said, Ede,
bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas; Eat, drink, play, etc.) then of Christ
Jesus.

Concerning the word Sacrament, and Eucharist.

The old Roman Soldiers took an Oath, to be true to their General, to live and
dye with him; and that Oath was called, Sacramentum militare, Rivet, Horace.
Now when the Roman Empire turned Christians by the lump, and painted themselves
with the Form of Godliness, few beautified with the Power and Virtue thereof,
they began to apply the Term of their Heathen Custom to the Signs or Shadow of
the Christian Church, so that the word Sacrament came from the Heathen Romans,
Leigh.

Tertullian is said to be the first who used the word Sacrament, in order to
the Signs or Figures of the Church, who was about the year 210.

It is a word not found in the Scriptures, if truly translated, yet it has got
such rooting among the Professors of Christianity, as that if any deny it, they
are branded as Heretics and Schismatics by Papists and Protestants: Now, as
it were to allure people into a Reverence and Veneration of it, Papists in
their Translations, have put it in the Body of the Scripture; for, whereas Paul
said, This is a great Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church,
Ephesians. 5.32. their Translations render it, This is a great Sacrament. But true
it is, the English Translation is true herein, and the Papists Translation is
faulty; and their number of seven Sacraments they have from Peter Lombard, they
are not mentioned in any Scripture, but first devised by Peter Lombard,
Bellarmine's Master, first decreed by Eugenius the fourth, first confirmed in
the Provincial Council of Senes, after in the Council of Trent, Leigh, Chamier
de luc. lib. 4. cap. 1. And our English Translations have the word Sacrament in
the Contents of the tenth Chapter of the first to the Corinthians; but the
Division of the Scripture into Chapter and Verse is not from the Authors
thereof, but of late time; as also, the inserting in of the Contents, many
Almanacks inform us of the Authors hereof.

Now as for the word Eucharist; Luke and Paul speaking of the Institution,
mention, how Jesus Christ took Bread, and (...), Eucharistesas, that is, giving
Thanks: Now from the Greek word Eucharistesas, the Sacrament (so called) came
also to be called Eucharist: and after Christ had taken the Cup, and given
thanks, and given it unto his Disciples, after this Consecration, as it is
called, Christ called it the Fruit of the Vine; now if the Wine had been really
transmuted, changed into the Blood of Christ, then it had not been the Fruit of
the Vine; but says he, I will not drink henceforth of the Fruit of the Vine,
until that day, when I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom, Matthew. 26.
Peter preaching Christ to Cornelius, said, That they did Eat and Drink with
Christ after he rose from the Dead, Acts 10.

This Testimony I have given concerning Bread and Wine, which Tertullian,
Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, Chrysostom, Basil and many others call
Figures, Types, Shadows, etc. though their Writings be very uncertain; and my
Testimony is, That Christ is the End of all Figures, Types and Shadows, as
before; true Union, Communion and Soul-feeding is in the Light of the living
God, in Christ, whose Life is the Light of Men, the Soul's Food. Now, in citing
the Testimonies of men who were since the primitive Times, I do it not to build
men's Faith, or my own, on the Authorities of Men, but for the Conviction of
such who plead, that ancient Writers are Unanimous, yea, and Harmonious in
defending such and such things: and who turn from divine Grace manifested, such
know not the Mouth nor the Stomach, which feeds upon Heavenly Food, Bread of
Life, the Word that became Flesh, such discern not the Lord's Body; but
cleaving to that which is earthly, are carnallized thereby, made
earthly-minded, laboring for the Meat that perishes, and drink not the Cup of
Blessing, but become drunk with the Cup of Fornication, from the Presence of
the Lamb.

Now, to what has been spoken, I further add, That the Jews Passover, with its
Appurtenances, was ended and fulfilled by Jesus Christ; Christ wa circumcised;
he taught in the Temple; he said to the cleansed Leper, Show thy self to the
Priest, and offer a Gift according to the Law; thus Christ, the Substance, the
End of the Law, the End of the Shadows, owned them in their season, before he
was offered up, or the Handwriting nailed to the Cross; and as Christ owned
other Shadows in their season, before he was offered up, so he owned the
Passover, in which the Jews had their Bread and Wine, blessed and consecrated
it, proving the same to be a Shadow, so by Christ fulfilled and ended.

1. The Jews in eating the Pascal Lamb, took a Cup of Wine, blessed and
consecrated it, so it passed round the Table; this was called [Bircath-hajajin]
the Blessing of the Cup; in this manner Christ began his Supper, Luke 22.17,
18. 2. The Jews in eating their Pascal Lamb, took Break, blessed and
consecrated it, and after consecration all were to eat thereof; this
consecration of the Bread they called [Bircath halechem] the Blessing of Bread;
thus Christ took Bread, blessed it, and gave it to his Disciples. 3. The Jews
at the end of their Passover took a Cup of Wine, and blessed it, and called it
[Bircath hamazon] so after the Supper Christ took the Cup, Luke 22.20. this
says Godwyn in his Jewish Antiquities. Thus Christ, the End of the Jewish
Shadows, the Life and Substance they pointed at, owned the Shadows before he
was offered up; but being returned in Spirit, the End of the Jewish Passover,
Bread and Wine, was manifested; and the Apostle preached Christ to be their
Passover, the Bread of Life, Cup of Blessings, the End of Jewish Figures.
THE END.

