A SERMON Preached at the Anniversary Meeting OF THE Eaton-Scholars At St. Mary
le Bow, on Nov. 22d. 1683.

By Joseph Layton, late Fellow of King's-Colledge in Cambridge, now Vicar of
Ringwood in Hampshire.

Published at the request of the Stewards.

Dii majorum umbris tenuem, and sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque crocos, and in urna perpetuum ver,
Qui praeceptorem sancti voluere parentis
Esse loco --
Juvenal. Sat. 7. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Carr, at the King's-Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

TO THE Honorable and Worthy Gentlemen, STEWARDS OF THE Eaton-Scholars FEAST,
1683. Sir J. Conway, Bar. Sir Ja. Clarke, Knight. Mr. Chapter Turner, Mr. William East,
Mr. Samuel Layton, Mr. Charles Webb.

Gentlemen,
I Have made bold to prefix your Names to the ensuing Discourse, but I have not
any of the ordinary Reasons for Dedications to allege for my self. I pretend
not to Cancel old Obligations, nor seek for Protection from Censures; but the
truth is (and a free Confession shall Atone I hope in some measure for my
presumption) that being desirous to do all the Honor I could to the School I
belong to, and all the right I could to the Argument I undertook, I knew no
better way, then to produce your Names in your present Station, as so many
Worthy Members of the one, and so many Living Examples of the other.

I am, Gentlemen, Your unfeigned Servant, Joseph Layton.

Romans 12.1. Latter part of the Verse. Which is your Reasonable Service.
YOU have already had (worthy Friends and School-fellows) the advantages of a
Learned and Liberal Education, set forth in Terms befitting such an Education,
and full of such a Learning. Learning, the Refiner of Men's Manners, the
Polisher of their Understandings, the Builder of Cities, the Founder of
Empires, the Counselor of Kings, the Companion of Inspired Prophets and
Apostles. In short, Learning, the Heathens Grace, the Christians Glory and
Aureola, the Ornament of the World, the Arcanum of Paradise. You have had also
the Beauties and Advantages of your particular Education, set forth with all
that Gratitude and Affection that becomes the Disciples of so many worthy
Teachers, and the Foster-Children, the Alumni of so many Kings: After this,
little more could have been added to the honor of your Solemnities, even this
so fertile an Argument had been quite exhausted, if in our late Revolutions,
the Mischief and Malice of other Meetings had not set off the Innocence and
Beauty of yours: And the Practices of Unruly and Unreasonable Men had not
furnished us with a fresh and new Topic of Praise and Thanksgiving to God the
Father of all Mercies, who by the Providence of our Education admonisht, that
we have not so learned Christ; and by the Inspiration of his Grace has disposed
us to offer up this truly Holy, Ingenuous, and Reasonable Service. It is a joy
to see the Members of this worthy Christian Assembly crowd and press through
the throng of business: And from all Quarters of Professions and Employments,
and from all distinctions of Degree and Quality hasten up to this Rendezvous of
Love and Friendship; such a March, and with so good a Will I conceive the
Disbanded Atoms of our Bodies shall make at the day of Resurrection, when they
shall rally up, and reunite again.

And now we are here, It is a Pleasure to consider the Conduct of God's
Providence over us; From what Beginnings we are thus grown up; To remember with
what Staff we past our Jordan: And now, Behold what a mighty Band we are, Tho
this, I say, be joyful, yet let me tell you, it is a greater Comfort to have
made our Passage hither untainted, uninfected with Popish or Fanatic
Pollutions: That ye have escaped the Leaven both of the Scribes and Pharisees,
the Men of mere Text and Tradition: And that ye have brought hither the same
honest hearts, and the same Festival faces, the same Integrity and Alacrity as
ever. And because next to God's preventing Grace we owe this happiness to the
Principles we imbibed in our first and younger years; Therefore it shall be our
Task this day, among the rest of our (...), to render Almighty God our most
hearty and unfeigned thanks, who has enabled us To eschew the Evil and choose
the Good; the God who has preserved us steady and upright, amidst the many
late Confusions and Apostacies: and by affording us some little part of
Solomon's Blessing, A Wise and Understanding heart, has continued us hitherto
in one constant course of regular Piety, and unblemished Loyalty.

Brethren, in the List and Catalogue of your Endowments, your Accomplishments,
could I have pitched on any thing so considerable as this: Learning and
Breeding gives you a vivacity of Spirit, it furnishes you with Dexterity for
Business, with Prudence for Counsel, with pertinent Examples for Practice, and
an Useful Profitable Reputation to your Persons. But above all, Learning
enables you to search into Mysteries, to understand the Nature, Order, and
Connection of things to comprehend Divine Truths, To be wise unto Salvation, and
even to seize upon Heaven it self, with the victorious Violence of a Reason
that is Trained and Tutored in the School, and Armed in the Church.

Even your old School-Authors, Tully, and some others, how little did they want
to become Christians? How far did they go by the light of Reason improved by
Education? You may reckon them in some measure with the Patriarchs, That
desired to see the things that ye see; or with him in the Gospel, That was not
far from the Kingdom of Heaven. At least this we may say, That the Learning of
Greece and Rome disposed the World to receive Christianity; That Plato and
Aristotle were the Gentiles John Baptists, to prepare Christ's way and Make his
paths straight; and among ingenuous inquisitive Men that were aweary of the
Reign of Jupiter, and tired with the Tales of Elysium, it was no difficult
matter to introduce so reasonable a Service as that of our Religion. And for
the Honor of your Profession (for such you shall give me leave to call it) you
may observe, that tho God employed not the Wise and the Learned to convince the
World at first, but used illiterate Persons to make his Power in them more
manifest; yet as the World came in He withdrew his Arm and his Miracles, and at
last he entirely committed the defense of his Cause to Study and Learning, to
Arts and Sciences, then when the Philosophers succeeded the Fishermen, and
Learned Apologies and Orations to Verily, Verily I say unto you.

Among these Worthies ye are to be Numbered, that not only believe but
understand their Religion, and can defend it. And it is God's peculiar favor
to commit this Talent to you, which, as I said, is our this days business, to
give him thanks for that he has enabled us to offer him this Reasonable
Service. In doing which, 1. I shall instance in several Particulars, wherein
your Education has befriended you, toward the enabling you to this Duty of
serving God reasonably and acceptably. 2. To excite your Gratitude the more, I
shall compare your Condition with that of most others, whom we may rank under
Three Heads. 1. The Formal bred and born Christian, that makes no use of his
Reason. 2. The Papist, That enslaves it, trusting to his implicit Faith. 3. The
Enthusiast, That despises and renounces it.
3. Show that this particular Meeting is a Reasonable Service, and that we are
to thank him because he has enabled us to be thankful.


That is to say,

1. A Learned Education by refining a Man's Parts, elevating his Mind, ennobling
his Faculties, and filling them with rich and worthy Ideas, does thereby enable
him to have Just and Honorable apprehension of God: And this is the first and
most important Principle of Religion, for such as we suppose God to be, such a
course shall we take to please him. Some have fancied God to be an unactive
Being in the World, enjoying himself in an Eternal Rest and Retiredness,
accordingly they abandon themselves to Luxury and Sensuality; for how should
they dread that Providence that cares for nothing? Or that Omnipotence that
does Nothing? Others confine him to too narrow a Sphere, providing but for a
little Flock and a small Remnant, wronging all his other Attributes to exalt
his Sovereignty: And they seek private and unaccountable ways to assure
themselves of an ungrounded unaccountable favor. The Papists, that they might
give their People a Notion of God, dress him up in the similitude of a Man; and
though they pretend not to paint Essences, yet they expose him to every vulgar
Eye, and every vulgar Conception, in such resemblances which he was only
pleased for secret Reasons, and in Mystical ways to Communicate to his chosen
Prophets. And they Transcribe Ovid and Propertius to find a style for the loves
of Angels and Glorified Spirits above. And not a few fancying God to be adorned
as they best like, seek after a strange and personal Union with him. And in
this Scene of their Imaginations they pursue him with Effeminate Passions, with
Longings and Languishments, with Extravagant Joys and sudden Despairs, as their
sick and distempered Fancies lead them.

These are Gross and Carnal Conceptions changing the Glory of the Incorruptible
God into the Similitude of a Corruptible Creature, Romans 1.3. But to make him
vindicative and Sanguinary, and with a Turkish Tyranny to fling away Souls into
Eternal Perdition is next to Blasphemy. But your Predecessor Abraham (...),
being a Man addicted to Study and Contemplation, when he considered the
Creation, God's Work, and consulted with his Reason, which is a Beam of God
himself, He found, That to be God is to be most Holy, Wise, Just, Good,
Merciful: In short, That which we can conceive to be most Perfect, that, and
infinitely more so is God. He Judged of him by reasonable Collections, not
fanciful Ideas: And such an advantage have ye, Brethren, who having your minds
purged from all drossy and low thoughts, are enabled by the benefit of your
Education to attain to this first and fundamental Principle of Eternal Life;
Namely, To know Thee the Only True God, and so to offer him a Worthy Reasonable
Service.

2. Hereby we come to know the true Nature, Excellency and Perfection of
Religion. For since God is such, such also must be the way to Honor and
Worship him. And if in any of his Commands there be any doubtful Expressions,
and variety of Interpretations, that is to be esteemed most agreeable to God's
Will, which is most consonant to Reason. God Governs us as he has made us; so
that being neither Engines nor Angels, we act not by Instinct nor Intuition, but
by discourse and rational Progressions. If you consider the Articles, the
Mysteries of our most Holy Faith, none but a considering Man will be induced to
receive them: And for the practical Points of our Obedience, none but a Brute
will reject them. There must be wise Consideration and serious Pondering: The
Beraean Generosity, and a full Conviction of the Understanding to make a Man a
Christian; for Faith is not the Milk of the Nurse, nor the Credulity of the
Simple, nor a point of Honor among Swordmen; nor the Sense of the House among
Politicians, nor a blind Subjection to the Infallible Chair: But it is the
deliberate Choice of a Prudent Rational Man, that without contending for
rigorous Demonstrations, and Scientifical Surefootings, is content to submit to
every degree of Truth, and entertain every Beam of Light, is ready to comply
when the motives to belief preponderate, tho the things themselves be
incomprehensible.

But Oh the loss, the misery of those whose Talent it is to hold the Plough;
How should they comprehend with all illuminated Saints, Ephesians. 3.18. What is the
Breadth and Length, and Height and Depth; and observe the Lines of the Great
Mystery of Godliness, from so many Points of so vast a Circumference
beautifully centring in the Messiah? How should they with the Wisemen follow
his Star, or trace the Great Birth, the Promised Seed from its first quickening
in Eve, through the long-lived Patriarchs, through the Sacrifices and
Ceremonies of the Law, through all the Prophets down to the Midwifry of the
Baptist, when in the fullness of time it ripned into the Stature of a Man in
Christ Jesus? What a Glorious Knowledge is this, to discourse out of the
Scriptures, and from them to be able to give a reason of our Faith: To Summon
in the Antiquities of Nations, the Histories of Times, the Rites and Religious
Solemnities of Priests, the Fables of Poets, the Results of Philosophers? In
short, to press the whole Creation to make bare every Shoulder for this Service
of attesting to the Truth of our Religion, and Illustrating the Glory of Jesus.
These things, Brethren, ye are called to know, that is, ye have been put into
the way to know them, your Fleece, like Gideon's, has been moist'ned with this
Heavenly Dew, when so many others has been left dry. So that having your hearts
filled with these Sacred Truths, and your whole Man Transported with Raptures
of Love, Joy, and Admiration, ye will find fresh cause to bless God for the
benefit of being able to offer him this Reasonable Service.

3. It is a great help toward discerning the Spirits, that so we may better
hold fast the Truth. It is a difficult matter among the many Cries, Lo here is
Christ, and there is Christ, to distinguish the Voice of God; so that it is
necessary to our other Graces to add Knowledge, and to have our Senses
exercised in Spiritual Matters. Is it likely and reasonable that God should
entrust one Man with a Spirit of Infallibility for the benefit of his Church,
and yet no where declare so much? Or that it should never be put in Practice,
or that so Divine a gift should be lodged in a vicious Man, and God should
liken his Vicegerent to the fallen Angels, who with Perfection of Knowledge
abound in Wickedness? Or where is the Reason of fighting for Faith, and
Rebelling for Religion? Our Savior refused all force and violence, tho he
could have called in more than twelve Legions to his Assistance. But the Saints
may do more than the Angels, and Reform the Government even of Christ himself.
We hear The noise of the Whip, and the rattling of the Wheels, and the Prancing
of the Horses; The Horseman lifts up his bright Sword and his glittering
Spear, Nahum 3.2, 3. Every part of Christendom almost is a Stage of War, and
how narrowly did we escape it? And their Pretense is written in their Banners,
For God and Religion. But ye see this is all but Masquery and Disguise. And
when we come to compare these practices, with such Notions of God and Religion
as are reasonable and becoming them, then do we find the Mercy in these times
of deceit and distraction, that God has endued us with a Spirit of
Understanding, and rescued us from the common Errors and Delusions of the Age.

4. It teaches us to give a due Value to every thing; and to give due Limits to
every Action, and choose apt Seasons. It moderates Zeal with Knowledge: It
fortifies Innocence with Prudence: It Inspires Meekness with a becoming
Fortitude, and distinguishes Patience from Pusillanimity: It guides the hand of
Charity, and by a wise observation of fitting Circumstances makes the action
Beautiful and Decorous. Certainly Religion deserves our utmost care and skill
to recommend it dext'rously to the Affections of Men, St. Paul has Commanded us
to adorn the Gospel, and to take heed lest our God be evil spoken of, and our
most Holy Religion Blasphemed through our means. And those that strain at a
Gnat and swallow a Camel, That will rebuke a Servant for Recreating on the
Lord's day, and entice him from his Calling to take up Arms against the Lords
Anointed. Those that are Imprudent and Inconsiderate, that are rude in their
Rebukes, and scurrillous in their Language: That Reproach Kings to their faces,
and thereby make Truth odious and offensive, do a great disservice to their
most Holy Cause, by their untutored, undisciplined fierceness. But Education
makes a Man soft and pliable, and like the Learned Apostle to become all things
to all Men: It makes him watch all Opportunities, and wait at all the Avenues
of the Soul to gain Entrance, to use honest Flatteries, and proper Insinuations
to do a Man good. Were there no other benefit, yet this were Considerable, that
it takes away that brutish Impetus that makes a Man rush like a Horse into the
Battle: It allays his heat, composes his Mind and Countenance, modulates his
very Tone and Action, and gives a Charm to every thing he does, besides the
Reputation it gives to his Discourses.

Reputation, I say, that important bubble, which tho it be but noise and
vapor, yet is the most powerful thing in Nature, without which Goodness is but
a weak helpless thing: Neither is there any fame so considerable as that of a
Learned Knowing Man; all his Words are Oracles, and his Actions Presidents and
ruled Cases: Nature affixed a shame to Ignorance, and gives an Authority and
Reverence to Learning; therefore no impertinent Question, Have the Pharisees
believed in him? And St. Paul, when he would bespeak the favor and attention
of the Athenians, he made use of his acquaintance with their own Poets and
Philosophers. This is another addition to the advantages ye receive by
Education.

5. It gives a Man courage and boldness in the day of Trial, and at all times a
love and hearty concern for his Religion, because he understands it. You have a
late Example of this, they were the wise and well disciplined Christians that
stem'd the Tide, and stopped the Torrent. How little does the Scoff of the
Atheist, or the Cavil of the Heretic, or the Sword of Persecution, or the
Example of the Multitude work upon a mind that is settled and assured in it
self? I know, I am persuaded, I am assured, I have confidence, said the
Apostles. And in the Virtue of this Strength they could endure all things not
only with Patience but Joy, not only with Meekness but Magnanimity. So little
does the two great Vices of the Age, the Droll of the Atheist, and the Rage of
the Religionist signify to a Soul that is Armed with Syllogism and the Spirit;
and at all times a concern for it. It is true the knowing Soul is naturally
calm and quiet; and when after a few previous vibrations it is once settled on
its Basis, there it rests, enjoying its self in its own Circle of light and
temperate heat: While conceited Ignorants are noisy and restless: But when once
they become sensible of the necessity of their assistance, then they afford a
hearty, generous, and lasting Service: It is too true, That the Affection of
many is grown Cold; and by shifting off their Duties upon God's and the
Magistrates Care for the Church, Evil Men had like to have swallowed us up
Quick; and the noise of Arms would have drowned the voice of Thanksgiving, and
Triumphant Fanaticism would have taken away not only the Memorials of our
Education, but the Places themselves too. But among the few that have retained
their first Love I may well reckon the Sons of Learning, the Heirs of Kings,
Men obliged and instructed by their breeding to undertake this labor of Love.
None can so well understand the value of our present enjoyments, nor foresee
the misery of a change, nor more timely prevent, nor more effectually redress;
so that ye have a peculiar Call to this Honorable Work of preserving Religion,
and supporting the Crown, and so making as it were some returns to the Piety
and Bounty of our Royal Founder.

6. Because it is a Reasonable Service, therefore such a Man has a real and
solid Satisfaction when he comes to take a Review of his Method. Certainly the
greatest happiness of this life is a peaceful temperate Alacrity and
Tranquillity of mind; but this is gained only by Reason, and is the result of
Prudence and Conduct. Fools that do good by Chance, or put on by Example, or a
fit of good humor, are carried into Extravagant Transports, their Joys are
indecent and freakish, Happiness sits not handsomely on them, because they laid
no Foundation, nor went wisely to work. It is a delightful thing to stand on
the Shore, after a long and dangerous Voyage, and see others struggling with
the contrarieties of the Wind and Waves. And it is a noble Applause that the
Pilot gives himfelf: And it fattens his Soul to consider the success of his
skill: And in his mind he repeats all the passages, what Rocks and what Sands
he escaped, where he bore up against the Storm, and where he sided and complied
a little: And upon the whole to prove and demonstrate his Course by the Rules
of his Art. Such is the satisfaction of a wise man. What the comforts be that
God bestows by extraordinary Irradiations upon some Great and Eminent Persons,
is a bold curiosity to enquire; but all the ordinary Confidences which the
Spirit of God creates in the Elect are built upon Duty and conditional
Agreements: Hereby we know we are Translated from Death to Life, if we love the
Brethren, 1 John 3.14. And many the like Scriptures are but Rational Inferences
from supposed Premises: And when departing Saints cast the last Eye upon
themselves, their securest Anchor, next to the All-sufficient Merits of Christ,
is, I say, ordinarily but the Conclusion of a Syllogism, whereof God makes the
Major: And every Man by the Assistance of his Reason, and Examination of his
Conscience is to add the Minor. Such a joyful Prospect I presume shall ye one
day have, when after the Toil and Troubles of a busy Life ye shall seek
Privacy, and be glad to retire into the Simplicity of the years ye this day
Commemorate: For I reckon we must once more go to School, to Con over this dull
Lesson of the World again, where Experience will be your Master, and Repentance
your Discipline: It shall be a joy then, I say, upon rational grounds to
conclude, I have run my Race, I have finished my Course, henceforth a Crown of
Life is laid up for me.

Lastly, and not the least, this Education, this Ability, this Knowledge is
best to teach us our own Ignorance, and consequently Humility, Meekness and
Condescension to others. He that knows the intricacies of Things, the variety
of Apprehensions, the different sizes of Understandings: The Power of
Prejudice, and Passion, must needs have compassionate thoughts for the
generality of Men; and can with equal affection maintain Reason, and pity
Ignorance. In Sum, Among all your Gifts and Graces, there is none so Amiable,
so Honorable, so becoming a Scholar, as Humility, and Modesty, and Mercy:
Insomuch that though you could speak With all Tongues, and work Miracles, yet
without this Charity they were nothing worth: So that if we bethink our selves
well, we shall find this one of the most Reasonable Services of all.

These are some few of the many advantages of your Education, as it qualifies
to serve God Reasonably, and with Understanding; than which, next to his
Sanctifying Grace, he has not bestowed a nobler Talent upon the Sons of Men,
and which therefore deserves our most serious Consideration, and our most
sincere acknowledgments. To illustrate this a little more, and settle it upon
your affections, it will not be amiss briefly from these Regions of Light to
look down and behold the Children of Darkness, grovling and wandering in the
Mazes of Error, whom I reduced to three ranks; in our Second Part, 1. Such as
make no use, Formal, Customary Christians. 2. Such as Enslave it by an implicit
Faith. 3. Such as renounce and despise it, under Pretense of the Spirit.


1. Formal, The bred and born Christian, he that sucks in his Religion with his
Country Air, and holds his Creed by the courtesy of England; that
distinguishes Christianity from Mahometanism by Crosses and Half-Moons; and the
Reformation from Popery by Beads and Bibles. In short, He that is a Proselyte
to Custom, and the Laws, a Disciple of Leviathan rather than Christ. And it is
a sad truth: How few are able to render a reason of their Faith, and yet what a
noise and a bustle do they make for the Cause, and the True Protestant
Religion? to whose Support they Contribute no more, than the Antic Faces do to
the strengthening of a Church: It Is true, it is a mercy to be born within the
Pale of the Church, to open our Eyes in the Light of the Gospel, and so it is to
be born in a Temperate Clime. I make no doubt but God accepts the sincerity of
the Plough-man as well as the reason of the Philosopher: That he will favor
his own Gift, and receive those to Glory whom he has predestined to Grace.
Although then These little Ones have their Angels, and a Title to the Kingdom of
Heaven, yet in this blind Felicity they are apt to stumble, and when
Persecution comes, to draw back: It is little more then the Homage which Birds
and Beasts pay; It is seeing by the benefit of Clay and Spittle; a Sacrifice
without Salt. Whereas the Excellency of Religion consists in a free and
rational compliance with God's Commands, to understand the Excellency of them,
and this is it that fixed David's heart, that preserved Lot amidst a crooked
and perverse Generation: And made St. Paul so confident, That nothing of any
Nature should be able to separate them from the Love of Jesus.

2. From hence turn your Eye to the Men of implicit Faith, and you shall see
them creeping before Images, adoring of Wafers, paying Pensions for Purgatory,
and Traffiquing for the price of Sins. In the midst of all this Pageantry, and
this Nonsense, Their comfort is, they believe as the Church believes. But God
calls upon us to employ our Talent, to Exercise our selves in these things, to
Build up our selves in our most holy Faith, and to Stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made us Free. There can be no Articles de Novo imposed
upon the Church, because the Church signifies a Number of Men already agreed
upon common Terms: And to impose New, is to alter the Primitive Constitution of
the Church: But this device serves the ends of both Parties: And the Juggle is,
That what the People part with of their Understanding, and the Use of their
Reason, is made up to them in Allowances and Indulgences for sin, in easy
Absolutions and cheap Penances. It Is a powerful Temptation to be freed from the
trouble of Searching, Discussing, Examining: and it is a strong support of the
Papal Tyranny. But where has God allowed this shifting and shuffling of Duties
from one to another? How is it possible for one Man to understand and believe
for another? But God accepts not the Sacrifice of Fools, nor can any Man Redeem
his Brothers Life. And at the last day, whatever aggravations there may be for
our Pride and our Sloth in this Case, yet there will be no Commutations of
Punishments, no engagements for one another Souls will there be accepted. But
every Man shall suffer in his own person according as He has done in the Body.

Lastly, Behold the Enthufiast, that is above Reason, and the Carnality of
Discourse; and you shall find him to be given over to folly and madness, to
giddy Doctrines, and destructive dangerous Impulses. If he commits a murder
it is with the Sword of the Spirit, and if he throws down Churches it is with the
Breath of the Spirit: In the Transactions with Mankind God declared not only
his Attributes but his Nature, subsisting in a Trinity of Persons, and as such
he will be worshipped: But is it reasonable that the manifestation of the
Spirit should swallow up the work of the Creation, and by being Christians we
should cease to be Men. If the Scriptures which were given by Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost be not perfect, all Mankind is at a loss, in a Maze still, and
the Apostles did not as they said, Declare the whole Truth of God; and it would
disparage the Divine Providence, and affront the Spirit of God, which is a
Spirit of Wisdom, and Knowledge, of Order and Regular Dispensations.

And this, in brief, may be sufficient to let you see the folly and mischief of
all other Methods and Institutions, save those that Minister to a Reasonable
Service: Which brings me to the third and last Particular, The Reasonableness
of this present Service; concerning which so much has been already said by my
Predecessors, that I may be allowed to be the shorter.

1. Nothing is so Reasonable, so Spiritual and acceptable to God as these
Eucharistical Oblations: As for other Services by way of Petition or
Deprecation, they are peculiar to this Life only, and so of a lower Allay, and
are in some sort common to Beasts, for even they lift up their Eyes to God; and
the whole Creation groaneth when it is in pain or want. Only Intellectual
Beings can return Thanks, and Converse with God by Reciprocal intercourses. It
argues a deep sense of favors received, and a thorough understanding of their
worth, and a Soul not only framed and molded by the Holy Spirit to this Noble
Work, but Crowned with Joy and Raptures, and the unspeakable satisfactions of
the Holy Ghost.

It was God's Command, Deuteronomy. 16, That the Males should appear Three times a
year before him; and that not empty, but bringing their returns of Gratitude
with them. Among Christians this is our (...), and as at the Primitive
Eucharists they used to offer Thanks for all the Patriarchs and Confessors, the
Founders and Benefactors of the Church; so we do for all our particular Favors
and Blessings: And as in the Law every one was to give as he was able, so we
are to present him with our Souls and Bodies, and the several proportions of
Goodness, Wisdom, Wealth, Honor we have attained to. If the Souls of departed
Saints have any Sense of what is done here below, no doubt but all your
glorious friends above, will rejoice and applaud themselves in their work, and
reap the abundant fruits of their labor, in seeing their Pupils, their Charge
advanced by the benefit of their Education, to a work so like their own: For I
conceive Love and Learning to be the employment of Angels and glorified Spirits
too as well as yours, who after they have taken out their Lesson from the face
of God, the Beatifick Vision, betake themselves to Laud and Thansgivings, to
Feasts, such as Angels make, and mutual Embracements. If not, if they be laid
up in their secret Repositories till the day of Judgment, God shall be a
sufficient reward and recompense, who will fill your hearts with more grace,
and your minds with more light, and your Families with more Blessings; and your
Names both Living a Dead with the Perfume of good and faithful Servants.

2. It is an act highly Reasonable and infinitely Commendable, to declare your
Gratitude in this public Assembly to those worthy Persons, the Instructors of
your Youth, your Guides, your Teachers, your Angel-Guardians, here below, when
you were little Ones. Among the other degeneracies of the Age, there is this
common one of Ingratitude to Teachers: And the first act our Gallants do when
they write Man is this piece of Inhumanity of despising and villifying their
Education: So that this Assembly may in some measure Atone for many others, and
your Charity cover a multitude of faults. It is much that the regular Method,
and the Indefatigable Industry, and the rich Stock of Learning in our Schools
and Academies should so soon be outstript by a Clubb and a Coffee-house; but
Vice abhors all Learning, and Sloth invents Compendiums; and a great deal of
Conceit, and a little of Mr. Hobbs sets up a raw young Man for a Philosopher,
and a Statesman, and a Man of the World. I shall not stand to reckon up the
Honors that Emperors and Cities in all Nations have given to the Instructors
of their Youth: Of how great importance it is to Season wisely the growing
hopes, the Futurus Populus of a Nation; it is sufficient that our Blessed
Savior, in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, and in Whom all the
Treasures of Wisdom were laid up, yet in his Minority he went among the
Doctors, if I may so say, to School; and he honored and Authorized their
Profession by his Conversing with them: I will in your Names therefore return
to as many as are living and capable of receiving them, your unfeigned and
acknowledgments thanks, and pray that God would return an 100 fold into their
Bosom, all that Love and Care they have bestowed upon us.

3. This Public Legal Assembly is a suitable return for the mercy of our
Public Legal Education. A Blessing no ways to be pretermitted since it brings
so many considerable Advantages with it. It is a common Question, Which is the
readier way to Learning, Private or Public Teaching: For the former there is
urged, A constant Care and Attendance upon one or a few Persons, a particular
and exact observation of their Natural Inclinations, Intellectual Abilities,
and acquired Improvements, and so a just apportionating his Task to his
Capacity. On the other side, There is the light of Example, and the heat of
Emulation, and the joy of Society, and a vivacity of Spirit thence resulting,
necessary to all the Parts and Duties of a Scholar, and a very probable
security of Success; and it is better to know how to secure Harvest, then how
to hasten Fruits. But if the Question be, Which is the best way to make him an
useful honest sound Scholar? For a few Criticisms and Speculations, or to teach
the Greek Grammar a year before others, hold no Comparison with Concord and
Unity; here without doubt the Advantage lies on the Public side: For here are
no unsound Documents, no private poisonous Intermixtures, no preparatory Doses
for Schism and Faction: but all things are Administered according to the settled
Dispensatory of Laws and Statutes: And the Domus Doctrinae joins to the
Synagogue, and Men of Fame and Integrity teach in Solomon's Porch, in the view
and observation of the whole World. Experience teaches us the mischief of
Foreign Seminaries and unlicens'd Academies at home: And as from the remote
Corners of Scythia from Dens and Marshes, the barbarous Goths and Vandals brake
in upon and destroyed fair and Learned Italy, so from these private Holes it
was that our Locusts overspread the face of our Church and Nation. But that
which I would recommend to your observation, and so I have done, is,

That a private, secret Education does not only expose a Youth to the Malignant
Influences of evil Men, but Secrecy and Solitariness it self does naturally
poison the Candor and Ingenuity of his Nature. For as soon as they are seated
in their places, they look upon themselves in a state of Opposition and
Hostility with other Schools; and so they catch at Paradoxes and Novelties, and
study Cavils and Quirks and Evasions, and hunt after Slanders and Stories to
advance their Party, and illustrate the obscurity of their Education. It is
almost necessary they should grow either Proud or Splenatick, or Sad and
Gloomy, or Sullen and Morose, or Envious and Wrathful; and with these
accomplishments they come into the World, and are exactly qualified at least to
become the Author's in Characters, and your Julians, and your Growth of Popery,
and all that Spawn of Pamphlets that have of late disturbed and infected the
Nation.

Solitude is a thing so dangerous, that our Lord himself, speaking of him as a
Man, would not venture into the Wilderness, but under the Guidance and
Protection of the Spirit. In Sum, The several Forms of Angels in gladsom Troops
and Lightsom Places, celebrate the Divine Praise, and study the good of
Mankind: Only Furies in dark and desolate Caves, and Witches in Melancholy
midnight Meetings, and Traitors at Secret Consults and Cabals Complot their
Mischiefs and Destruction.

I have now done with your Patience; And it remains only to pray,

That God would Inspire us with a due Sense and Acknowledgments of the many
Blessings he has bestowed upon us. That we may live like the Children of Light
and Knowledge, and show our Gratitude by our right use and improvement of them,
to his Honor and Glory.

That God would shower down his Blessings upon the Head of our most Gracious
Sovereign Lord King Charles, the Heir of our Royal Founder's Piety and
Patrimony, and the Protector of our Fortunes, and the Encourager, and (if I may
say it with Reverence) in some sort the Companion of our present Meetings; and
that he would Accumulate upon his Head all the Blessings due to the constant
Defender of the Faith, and the Munificent Nursing Father of the Church: And
that the Prayers of all the Poor, and the Orphan, and all that have received
Life and Warmth, or any benefit from the Charity of this Royal Foundation, may
descend upon Himself and his Posterity to all Generations.

Lastly, May Love, and Unity, and all the good natured Virtues dwell amongst
your selves, and preserve you ever, till you meet together again, and Feast in
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now, to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God, be
all Honor, Power, Praise and Glory attributed for these and all his other
Mercies, now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

