THE Enochian Walks with God, Found out by a SPIRITUAL-TRAVELLER, Whose Face
Toward MOUNT-SION Above was Set.

Genesis 5. Verse 22, Enoch walked with God, and was not, for God took him. WITH
An Experimental Account of what was Known, Seen, and met withal there. As to an
Essay to a further Revelation of an Immense and Infinite Latitude of GOD's
Love, to the Restoring His whole Creation, and How, and after what Way and
Manner we are to Look, and Wait for this Last Appearance, and Coming of our
Mighty GOD, and Savior CHRIST JESUS. O come and see, what the Holy One in His
Spirit, is working down, and revealing, in order to His Appearing!

Written by JANE LEAD, in this Year. 1694. P. J. DE LOUTHERBOURG.

Printed, and Sold by D. Edwards in Nevils-Ally in F^tter-Lane 1694

Imprimatur.

July 24. 1694. D. C.

AN Introduction, and Apology To the following DISCOURSE.
MY Friends, who in the universal Love, of the God of Love do dwell, to you I
doubt not but the Matter of this Discourse may find Acceptance, as it is a
Message from above, of good, and Glad-tidings to the whole Creation, from the
beginning of Time, to the final End and extension thereof; for God's bounteous
Grace will thereto reach. But this Love does express it self, not only by
saving, and delivering from an endless Punishment, as the just Merit of
Transgression, and Disobedience which is proclaimed to the whole Adamical
fallen Race by him who was made an Offering for Sin: But be it known, God's
Love is not so clearly seen, or illustrated. If, (O if) Here it should stop in
this visible way of Redemption by Christ; but it must go much deeper in
bringing forth a new created God-like Similitude in the Soul; that what was
dimunished, and disappeared, may be repaired by the Birth of the Holy Ghost,
conceived, and so springing up, Intrinsical, for a through Renovation in every
part of the Soul; This you will find to be the whole scope and drift of what is
written here; God having Taught me by his Spirit, in this great Mystery, of
Inward Redemption; I found my self Impulsed and under a Constraint to make it
Public before my Disease (being aged 70 Years) that so this Treasure might not
die with me; not knowing but that it may be my last Farewell to this World,
Therefore have hastened to do my Lord and Master's Work whilst the Day spring
from on high does shine upon me; if the outward Day of my Life is lengthened
out to me, it shall (all-improving of it) be as my most delightful Employ being
called to it from on high.

Now to come to the matter in hand, as to the Title which this Subject does
bear, it is not an outward flourishing sound, but from a most Essential and
Experimental ground from which this goes forth; which if otherwise, in my
Circumstances, I should not have rendered my self public: For every Woe(...) her
Head. 1 Cor. 11. 5. But Christ being my Head-covering, I have both Commission,
and Munition-strength, upon which I shall proceed, and go forward, and say
something as to the first part, which is the Spring-flower of the Mind,
Essenced in a Never-dying Root, which renders the face of the Mind perfect in
Beautifulness, for Love, and delight to him who is the Express brightness of
the Father's Light, in which you will (as in a Glass) see the Royal Degrees,
and Spiritual Assents, with Festival Entertainments in the Spirit so prepared,
that may be for an Inviting Imitation to the Heaven-born Spirits, as also to
them that are yet unborn, that all may labor, in such a heavenly Habit of Mind
for to be found.

The next part which I have to commend to the Reader is according to the
Inscription of the Book, (The Enochian Life) that so hidden, and unknown has
been; yet by the Spiritual Pilgrim, and Traveller found; and may still be found
by such as shall cease from walking after the Flesh and Worldly ways, and
resolve to take up, to walk with God in the Spirit. For if once you can clear,
and get off here, from these low clogging and heavy, sandy ways, then you may
enter into these high and pleasant Walks with GOD, which, when you are once
come into, you will meet with those various Sweets, and Delights, that will
Engage you to keep to them, because good Company you will here meet; if but few
among Mortals, yet numerous of the Heavenly Society will walk, and talk with
you from those upper Regions whereto your Travels tend, of the which I have
given an Account for Encouragement, and Motive to draw up Holy, and separated
Spirits Hereunto; who have Liberty, and Opportunity, to know beforehand the
Riches, and pleasant Things of this Heavenly Country to contemplate upon them,
for which End I have joined and added to this first Part what was opened and
revealed to me last Year 1693. where you will see a particular Knowledge and
Experience of what the Saints yet abiding in this lower World may enjoy of
Communion with Holy and Separated Spirits of the Higher World, which may be of
great advantage.

Also a little Tract lately manifested in what way and manner we may expect the
LORD JESUS his Appearance about which so many prophecies and sounds in this
present Age have gone forth. I have according to my Gift laid the sure
Foundation for both his present and future Appearance in the World. Sure I am,
he does, and will send his Messenger before his Face, which is the Spirit of
refining Fire to prepare for his more Visible and Splenderous coming in his
Kingdom, to make Kings, Priests, and Prophets, to Reign in, and with Him on the
Earth; and when we shall see more of this multiplying Oil of the Holy Ghost
poured forth upon those that are Lookers for this Blessed Hope, and most
glorious Reign of Christ; then we may expect he may be drawing near.

Therefore in order hereunto, all Public, and private Pastors and Teachers,
should know what to go forth with, and declare, and Preach up the Ministry of
the Spirit to make ready all Nations, People, and Languages to call them in,
and by the Power of the Everlasting Gospel, the which powerful Sound may reach
in Christ's Spirit to the Free and Bound, whether in the Body, or out. For this
Gospel will so far extend, beyond the Limits of time, to Creatures in ages yet
confined, of the which Latitude of redeeming Love you will in this Volume find
declared, of being also a revealed Truth, which I was not from the World to
conceal; And as for those Scriptures that may be alleged against it, they were
to me Interpreted This Point to reconcile, and thus opened, that as the LORD
CHRIST did go and preach to the Spirits in Prison that were disobedient in the
days of Noah, (or before, and since) who in Bonds did remain in low Regions, at
whose appearance did Then find deliverance, or else to what end did he preach
to them? as you may see in Peter; and so again at his second and last
Appearance, when he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, where will pass
just and righteous Sentence according to every ones Work; yet will this Judge
reserve in himself the liberty to Release, and Remission give, to all that in
fiery Purgations have passed, and are humbled thereby.

Take notice of what the Apostle Paul speaks of in this Matter, to be saved so
as by Fire; and as to that great Objection made from Christ's Words, Go ye
Cursed into Everlasting Punishment (which is opposed to the short Limits of
this World; and admits only of number of ages, which Suffering, and Punishments
there may yet be) yet it is not to be beyond the Time of CHRIST: (the LORD's
completing, and delivering up the Kingdom to his Father) for GOD was, is, and
so has designed in CHRIST to reconcile all to himself which was at odds with
him; for it is not to be the least doubted but the Efficacy of Christ the
second Adam by the merit of his Bloodshed, and his Spirit given therein which
will make all good again, which the first Adam had made evil.

Much more I might enlarge, but I hope this may suffice, only to consider That
Scripture of the Romans, Chap. 6. Ver. 14, 15, and 16, which is enough to clear
and satisfy that the Plaster provided, is much broader than what the Wound of
Sin has made.

This (O Reader) who ever thou art, know, I have been hereto from a heavenly
Power driven to clear up, and vindicate the Royal, and Generous Goodness, and
love of the Holy Trinity, agreeing all in Unity, for the reconciling and
bringing back again into themselves whatever of a spiritual quality was
scattered and divided from them, which in the Dispensation of the fullness of
Time will be made manifest to the wonderful Amazement, for all of GOD's
Creation to Love, and Praise, and Exalt, and pay their Adoration to their
merciful Creator that has completed such an Universal Redemption; only suffer
this Word of Caution and Council, That none presume to turn This Grace of GOD
into a vicious and careless way of Living, For Anguish and Terror, of Soul,
and Suffering, will be upon them here, and hereafter; all which, may be
prevented in the time of this Life by an inward Circumcision in Spirit, and
mortifying the Evil Nature bringing it into a Subjection to the Law of the
Spirit of Holiness: For I must solemnly Profess to all such as do loosely and
vainly live, That they will have no part in the first Resurrection, but be cut
off from all those pleasant and unconceivable Ioys, and glorious, and filling
Springs of refreshing from the Presence of GOD, and the Lamb, which in this
present Life may be tasted as the first Fruits of the full Harvest. I do this
aver (as from what I have known in my own Particular) That if there were no
Reward of a future Blissful happy State when this Life shall end, I should
think it a very great Felicity to have a present Participation of the Spirit of
Christ, and thereby be clothed with his Divine Nature, and live in the present
Enjoyment of all those Ineffable Immunities that I have here given a Real
account of according to Experience, which I do hope, and pray with all Power of
Prayer, That what has been by the Holy Spirit of Imanuel unfolded here, may be
Received, and Entertained, as the golden Oil from the Dropping Olive Tree; that
as the anointed Ones of the LORD do multiply for a priestly Kingdom here upon
the Earth; (The which Subject has been Treated of, and Published by the Author
in 1683.) Entitled, The Seven Seals' broke open, by Divine Revelation (some of
which are yet to be had in my possession) and as the Day of the Spirit does
more get up, and shine forth in this present Generation in Heart and Mind,
which only can be expected from such upon whom the Anointing is poured forth
plentifully, That may be so well stored with That Pure Grain and golden Seed,
as they may as Sowers go forth to Sow it every where. Oh how were it to be
wished, and how much would it be my Joy to know such powerful Sowers in this
our Day, which may bring forth a pure white Lilly Crop of Spirits, with whom
Christ our Kingly Shepherd may walk and feed; Then he will be no longer a
stranger to his Fold here upon Earth, but be well known to be our feeding
Pasture continually. But I shall here now stop, and with this Word conclude,
(as if it were my last Dying-Speech) which I do direct to all Ranks, Sorts, and
Degrees, and more especially, to them who are Called, and Liberty have to
exercise a true Spiritual Ministry, That they may know what This Season and
Time may call for, being now past the first and second Number of Time; and are
come to the Half-time: Therefore go forth with your anointed Shield, and with
your Horn filled with Oil of the Spirit. Spare not to sound your Trumpets of
the Spirit, that may gather in from the utmost parts of the Earth, that they
may both, see, know, and partake of this Dawning and Day Star rising first in
our Hearts, and from thence lead most rightly where we may our Princely
Redeemer see Eye to Eye in Kingly Majesty. For the which end it is Incumbent,
and chargeable upon you to propogate this forerunner of our Lord Christ, which
is the Spirits ministry, as the One, and All that I have to leave, and commend
to you who Lovers, and Walkers are in this Spiritual way which has been here
described by the (...)

May 12 th. 1694. A Flower from the Paradisical ground has appeared, the
Nature and Property of which is never to fade, or die; for its descent is from
on high, which is the Lord, the quickening Spirit from Eternity.
THis is the Plant that has put forth it self, distinct from the outward Nature
in me; well known it is by its pleasant Scent, qualifying with Fragrant Love,
so very sweet, and mild, that it harmoniseth the Soul to that degree That it
feels no other life, than a Ghostly Deity; That is the Root which feeds this
Rosy Flower of the Mind, with a certain kind of Balsamic Virtue; that so its
beauty is of a Blushing freshness always.

Now herein lies the greatest of all Mysteries, That under the Covert of a
mortal Humane form, such an anointed Cherub, should There live and move, as
having the fire-sparkling Eye, that pierces into the Heavens, there to view,
and see, what is of its own Kind, and Property, transplanted into That upper
Region: for known it is to me, that Spirits, Pure, and Separate from this gross
Earth, may be both with Christ the Head, and with his body of Saints, who in
the Heights of Glory are.

Yet mutual Greeting, and Conversation allowed may be, as springing from one
Eternal root, and ground, coupled together in Loves golden Chain of Everlasting
Unity.

But it is given me to understand that such Saints which are yet in the Body,
(that is yet Corporeal) they must be highly spirited, and much estranged from
themselves, as considered in an outward creaturely Life; for That part must be
silenced, and shut up; when ever the Soul, in this Body would hold a Communion,
or spiritual Conference with the Kingly Shepherd, and That upper Fold.

Now from hence it is to be concluded, they must be High Graduated Souls, that
are privileged to come up Here to this Heavenly Court. Every Spirit according
to its growth and attainment, so it will be ranked with such as are above; each
one joined to its like in Heavenly places: for so it will be, whilst in the
body of time, and when There from separated (Oh my Friends, who ever This comes
to know) they will little care for any other Society but what is above; for
Christ being Glorified, He mightily does draw pure Spirits to be with him, as
their most proper Center, and Dewlling Place.

The body of Sin, and Flesh, has been indeed a great Impediment to such
Heavenly-minded Souls that in this Liberty of Mind for a spiritual flight would
be; but the Millstone of this Earth does bind, and keep them down, so as they
cannot ascend.

The Question then is, what must be done to get free, to hold up this
all-desirable Correspondency with GOD, and CHRIST, and all the Heavenly Family?

I can give no other Direction, than what my self have been taught in, and in
some degree have put into practice so, as whereby I have found this All-secret
Pass, (or way) for my Spirit to enter, and abide, in the Inward Tabernacle of
GOD's delightful Presence, which is as a foregoing Pledge of what I may hope,
and expect to take up in, when this my Body shall break away.

Therefore that I might excite all Holy, well-minded Souls that are such Lovers
of their Life CHRIST, That they would not be bereaved of his Company during the
Time allotted to live in this outward Body: Then let them observe these Rules
which I give as my Experience.

First, lay aside all Vexatious, Worldly Matters, that are a Cumber, and Weight
upon the Mind, take in nothing that is not absolutely Necessary: be contented
with a little of the World, that thou may have much more of GOD.

And if possessed thou art, of a plenty of these outward Things, be sure to
give a Proof of thy Alienation from them, by giving them all up as an Offering
to the Temple-Builders, to promote, and furnish the Inward Sanctuary, which the
Holy, Spiritual-minded Souls are to make up; Therefore to be Encouraged in
That, it may be by such as do more plentifully, Things of this World enjoy.

And bless GOD, That they have such a Prize put into their Hands as to Honor
GOD, and propogate the Revelation of his Kingdom, by supporting such as GOD
has Endowed, and filled with the Spirit of Wisdom, Revelation, and Prophecy;
with all Purity of Conversation.

Sure I am, it would be a most sweet scented Sacrifice to GOD, if any, there
could be found, that were thus so largely, and well disposed in Mind; that so,
a Sequestration, and Dedication of devout Spirits, might be maintained, for
fulfilling the Will of GOD here on Earth, as it is in Heaven; Ecchoing to the
Saints in the upper World, in Loving, Praising, and Admiring, paying all
Homage, and Temple-Worship, in GOD, to GOD and the Lamb.

I have been, and still am, of the same mind, That if such an holy convocation
could be brought together, in a perfect Accord, and Oneness of Spirit, a great
witness would be given to it, and mighty things would succeed upon it. But woe,
and alas, (and may therefore a Wailing be taken up; that) the pure Spring of
Life in Souls, has been stifled, and choked by the Earth.

I have made it my sorrowful Observation, how deeply buried in the Earthly
Life, the greater part of the Creation is, in their several Ranks, and Degrees;
the Higher Order, in this World, that has all advantages, by fullness of all
desirable Things that this World can afford, whereby they have opportunity to
attend the high and heavenly Calling, being they can subsist, and live without
the Toil, and Labor, which others are necessitated to be employed in.
Therefore let the Great and rich Ones, of this Temporal State, believe and
know, It is incumbent upon them, and GOD expects no less from them, That they
principally Honor GOD with their Substance; and seeing GOD has given them
such Liberty, and Command of their own Time, Highly to prize it, and make sure
to themselves the Pearl of the Kingdom; for That Treasure may go along with
them into the Heavenly World, when they must leave all that belongs to this
Outward.

Now I have a Word given me also, for the lower Ranks, that indeed may have a
more lawful Plea, for want of Time, and Liberty, being engaged in Business that
must give a Livelihood; and therefore they cannot be so much at leisure to wait
the Motions of the Heavens.

To this, the Spirit of CHRIST gives this Caution and Council.

Take heed lest the Cares for the bodily part do not eat out the Life, and
Spirit; and so bereave it of all that is spiritual-feeding, and clothing for
the Soul: and so be put by, and excluded from commensing the degrees of the
Heavenly Vocation and Calling, and loose all benefit of conversation in
Heavenly Places.

Therefore be watchful, and suffer not the Outward to justle out the Inward;
Put but one Grain of Faith into thy Stock of outward Things, and eye GOD
Therein; and the Blessing of Increase shall come on thee: for the Just shall
live both Spiritually and Temporally by his Faith.

We have instances of what the Spirit of Faith has produced, when GOD has
been confided in; It has produced a thousand fold more than all the Study of
the Head, and Labor of the Hands. And as this Lilly of Faith shall get up, and
free it self from the Twisting-strings of Sense which has bound it. Solomon,
in all his Glory shall not be compared unto This Sprouting-Lilly-Day of the
Heirs of Faith.

They who shall be born into This Faith, they need not be thoughtful for any
Temporal Thing, for all Blessings in abundance will be brought in. Therefore
labor not so much for that perishing Mammon, but rather for That white stone
of pure Faith, that fed many Thousands with Bread.

Remembering the LORD's Doctrine; viz. Take no thought what to eat, or drink, or
wherewith to be clothed. The LORD knew, that by the Spirit, and Power of
Faith, there should be a Support, and Supply of all necessary Things.

But it may be said, This kind of Faith, is yet but very rarely in any one
Sprung.

Well, grant it so to be for the present; yet it is a Truth that there is such
a faith that has been, and shall most surely be revived again in them, who
willing are to die to all That which has choked, and stifled, (yea bound this
Lilly of Faith down.)

Now to proceed on to the second Rule for Direction for such spiritual-minded
Souls, as do desire to be well acqainted with a life in God, and therein to
rest.

As the first Rule was to discharge and acquit all unnecessary clogs, and
weights, exteriourly; so This, more interiourly; which is by taking all care to
clear away from the Heart and Mind the Scum that boileth from Corruptible
Nature; from whence Generateth multiplicity of profuse Imaginations, that no
stop can be put to, but as the Spring of the Holy Ghost does open, and drown,
That chaffy dust, which defiles the Temples body.

Now this skill, the Soul must of the Holy Spirit learn, that as fast as the
puddled-matter of this Kind do rise in the mind, so immediately dowse, and bath
thy self in the Springing Pool, where from the Water of Life does bubble up;
for That is our Healing, and it is as near us, as the other contrary Source.

And thus we may keep our Hearts all pure, and clearer reserved, to be the most
Holy Sanctuary for the Priestly-Spirit to minister in, and to make ready a Holy
separated place for GOD and CHRIST to manifest themselves in us.

Upon This account, was the Holy Ghost promised, and also given, to prepare and
make straight the crooked ways internally; for Christ his Spiritual Humanity to
take up in a pure mind. As John the Baptist went before to prepare, and declare
Him to be the Lamb of GOD to take away the Sins of the World; that by John's
Ministry a Reformation and Repentance unto life might be given.

But all this was short of the Spirits Ministry (as John confessed) which is
now come to be revealed. Christ being glorified in a body all spiritual. He
cannot come to Join himself with any Soul, but where this Holy Spirit abides
beforehand, to refine and purge the floor of the Heart.

This is the office of the Spirit. Now hence we do see our selves bound to
treat This Holy Messenger kindly. It is an Infinite valuable Gift; Oh therefore
prize Him at a High rate, for by Him, and through Him, we have all Knowledge,
and Intelligence from our Father's House, and all of that Heavenly Family, We
should never know any thing of That state of life which is after Death, but as
this good Friend, the Holy Unction makes out from the Treasury of God's
manifold Wisdom.

Therefore, who would not for so great a benefit keep their minds all Vacant,
and Pure, for such a Comforter to abide with them, who can tell us of things
that are yet to come, as the time Present, and Eternity: and This he does, and
will do still, for those that love, and delight in his Company?

I must say, and leave it for a Living Testimony behind me, that had it not
been for This precious Sealing-gift of This Holy Spirit, I must have spent my
days, in Gloominess, and Sadness; Sorrow, and Misery: Which by the received
Gift of This Spirit; my age of time has been past away with much Peace,
Pleasure and Joy; though often thronged in upon, by this Worlds annoy, which
could never disrest me, whilst I could but keep the Spirit with me: who had
ever more, New things to bring out of his Store, to quiet, and pacify, what at
any time was ruffled, and so much disquieted in me.

This I have only made mention of, to provoke such, or as many, as This
Treatise may Read, and seriously ponder it in the true Spirit; then will they
know from whence This is written, and prize it greatly, and wisely make
provision for This self-same bright, enlightening Star out from their Hearts to
spring: who will prepare the way for Christ the King to reign, till he has put
down all that can be called Sin; for to This end is the Holy Ghost given, and
still a giving, but in various measures and degrees; some one portion, others
double, and treble, according as a dedication, and preparation of Soul is
found; where most stillness and privacy for a divine contemplative Life is
fixed. There this Holy Guest will frequently visit; whereby it does well inform
and acquaint the devout Soul with what is doing, and transacting in the
Heavenly Country, and Royal City which the Majesty of GOD does enlighten with
his Glory.

The Discourse the Spirit may maintain with us about this upper Worlds Affairs,
will mightily hold us, and wind up our minds, so as we shall fear to let them
down into this defiling World, lest it should raise a cloud of interposition
betwixt the Heavens and us, as too sorrowful it has often been known;
therefore watch, and pray, and cease not to keep upon your Guard always.

But now it may be said, This is a Glorious and high Privilege to receive of
This Spirit, which brings out of GOD's Treasury things New, and Old; but the
way to obtain this Gift is very costly; for the Rules prescribed, carry out to
such a self Abnegation, and Denounceation of a creaturely life in Flesh and
carnal Sense; that it is very rarely that any are able to obtain, and retain
this precious and holy Anointing, whereby we come to know the secret, and deep
Things of GOD.

True it is, This Jewel will not be found, in common earthly Ground; there are
several measures, as I have mentioned, for they that have no degree of This
Spirit of Christ, cannot be his; but if there be so much of this Light as does
check, and reprove of Sin, and it be Obeyed, Then the Spirit will manifestly
multiply for Council and Comfort; and so go on to reveal himself clearer, as he
finds the Heart giving up to be his peculiar Place of Residence; that so he may
keep all in a sanctified Order, in preparation for more extraordinary things to
be communicated: For the Spirit rises higher, and higher, as the Soul is
emptied of its own self.

It may be queried, but is there any in this Age of Time, that can give any
instance of their being baptized with the Holy Ghost, as in the Apostles days?

Yea surely, the succession of which has been witnessed by some or other in
every age since; although not in the same manner as with cloven Tongues, and
rushing Winds. This visible Demonstration of the Spirit was to have its day and
so pass away; and now operates in a more Intrinsical manner and method in
Vessels fitted out thereunto. Therefore what was done visibly, is now more
invisible, inspiring and opening as a glowing Flame in the Heart, lying there
as a live burning Coal, which is known to us to be the true baptizing of the
Holy Ghost which is in present feeling; and when ever it is, in its highest
penetrating power, it may ac^ forth it self in miraculous Deeds, and Works, as
the present occasion may call for: This has been known, and experienced by some
in this Age.

Then again; another evidence of the Spirit, is, Internals Gusts, and Breaths
of divine Air by which the Soul is often mounted up upon the wing of This Word,
or Breath of the Spirit, and so gets up to the Heavens, entering into the
Celestial Globe of Eternity, while its outward body remains in time: This is
known to some.

For as there was an outward personal going up to the visible Jerusalem to eat
the Feast of the Passover, which was a Type of That great Day of the Feast,
which is now kept the in New-Jerusalem above, where the Lord Christ in his
Spiritual Humanity does appear, keeping up the solemnity of That Spiritual
Feast, with the body of his Saints There, and sometimes does admit of pure
Spirits, that yet in the body of visible Flesh are to come up, for to view the
stately Order and Government of That Feast, and to taste thereof: This is the
true eating of the Supper of the Lamb, and drinking the Royal Wine of the
New Testament with Christ in his Kingdom, which puts an end to all Symbolical
Ceremonies.

Blessing, Joy, and Glory, we may pronounce to all which Called and Invited, to
come up to feed upon This Pascal Lamb. They will never care nor desire to go
out here, to take up in lower Administrations; for This is the Sum and
Substance of all, to feed upon the Quintessential Body, and pure Blood of the
Grape; that as often as it presses it self out, it fills again, for a
continual emptying forth; so that none that is come up here may Thirst any more:

This is the True Feast of Tabernacles which I have here described to you; for
no one can go up here without putting on their Tabernacle-Body, which is the
flaming Heart of the Holy Ghost.

But now methinks, I hear some say at the Reading of This, Oh! You have
mentioned a high and lofty State, which is as a new thing that has not been
declared; as that in this present Life there should be found any to ascend to
the New-Jerusalem, to feast and worship GOD There; This, you will say belongs
to the Enochian Life; but That Age of the World is not yet come, so as to know
a Translated State. We grant it, that it is not common, only peculiar to some,
that in Enoch's Spirit are raised to walk with GOD, and so are taken up in the
Spirit wholly. But we may hope This day of the Spirit is coming on, whereby it
shall be known more universally; in the which Angelical Spirits shall ascend,
and That Divine Princicple shall open, that now has been so long shut up: Then
you will know a New-state of Living, that you never knew before; for it will
turn the Love of all mortal Things out of the Hearts-door: This will in very
deed be known.

Seeing we have thus far proceeded in opening This Divine Mystery, we shall not
stop here, but go on to reveal and communicate to such as desire to be
Fellow-Travellers with me to This Holy City, the New-Jerusalem, the Track
having been showed unto me; not by Vision only as in past times: In my printed
Book of Divine Revelation; There you may see what I had by way of Vision,
Printed in 1683; but now the Spirit has moved it self in another degree to
bring forth Vision into an Essential Fruition, which ratifieth That Scripture,
Psalm. 84. Verse 7; They shall go from strength to strength, each one appearing
before GOD in Sion.

Now This I find is to be taken in a twofold Sense, as to That part which is
to appear before GOD in Sion. The first is, while yet in the body of
Corporiety. The second is, when stepped out of it, so, as no more to return again
to it. Now hence I, (yet not I) but the Spirit of my JESUS) shall lead you on
to the first part, knowing well the way, and have taken the measures thereof by
the Measuring-Line in the Hand of an Angel: unaccountable to any but the
Travelers thereto.

Some heads, and propositions I shall lay down in order hereunto, that our
Fellow-Travellers may not fail to find sure footing.

The First is, what Preparation, or Qualification will be requisite for such
intended Travelers.

Secondly, What kind, or manner of way.

Thirdly, The several Stages, or Rests, by the way.

Fourthly, Their arrival to This City of GOD.

And Fifthly, The Welcome, and Entertainment the Travelers meets with There,
from all the Great Assembly of Mount Sion: (the Court of GOD.)

First, then, it is to be considered what this Traveller must be;

Not a Gross, tangible Body, but a Spirit that must thus take up Enoch's Walks,
separated, and translated from a Terrestial Life to a Celestial: This is our
Spiritual-traveller's first alteration (an Earthly Creature turned into a
Spiritual.)

And now we come to enter upon the way, which looks at first onset, as the
Valley of Baca that opens the Floodgate of Teers, and being now so environed
with the Light of the Spirit, that has discovered to it, an inward, and
outward Deformity, degraded of its Angelical Image, by the root of Sin in
nature springing; so that this Mourning and Sorrow, not to be repented of. And
while in this first beginning-way, the Soul will have many Enemies to encounter
withal, and Temptations from within, and without, and the more assaults will
come because it is to rend away, and leave the Walks of This Evil World, and to
betake it self to This New and Living-way. But let not our fellow travelers be
discouraged, but guird up, and go forward, this days Journey will have its end,
though it may go heavily on, this first day; the second will be more lightsome
and refreshing if it do but hold out this Probation, and wrestle it out as
Jacob did.

Then the Angels of GOD will meet the weary Traveller, and accompany it
throughout its way.

There are seven Angels (or they may be called seven Spirits) that are
appointed to be the Guard of the traveling Soul, whilst in this dangerous way.
I shall name them, as I my self have found them a Fortitude of Strength in all
my Journey on to this very Day: So it may be to the Undertakers that will
precisely keep to this Perfect-way.

The first of these Seven qualifying Spirits, and Powers, for a Guard, is Holy,
Passive-Patience; This is an absolute necessary Companion in this way. No
holding out, without the Indowment of a Patient Mind, that may hold out against
all Contradictions; and what will make offer to pull down from this High, and
Heavenly Walk.

The second is, Deep, or Meek Humility, keeping low, and humble; for That
secures the Traveller: For GOD has great Respect for a Soul that walks
softly, and steadily.

The third Qualification, is a Lively Hope, which is as an Eye within the Soul
carrying a Prospect of the Heavenly Sion, That mightily strengthens it, and
bears it up.

Fourthly, a Super-Celestial Wisdom, that directs, manages, and governs the
Soul, as to the fittest times, and seasons for Journeying on; that is, when to
stop, and when to remove on forward, as the matter shall require.

The fifth is the Spirit of Faith; This is a most Excellent Companion that
carries through all Difficulties, because it is the Evidence of Objects of
things in the Heavens, not visibly seen. It is Wings that makes the Soul fly so
High, that nothing of the crawling Earth worms can reach, to molest, or hurt it.

The sixth, Divine Power, that attends the Traveller, is, the Live-Coal of
Flaming-Love, that so vehemently Longs to arrive to the visional Fruition of
GOD, and CHRIST, with all the glorified Train of Blessed, and Perfect Spirits.
This Love-Gale, is so Mighty strong, that it makes the Soul pull up, and run
swiftly in this Race,

Seventhly, That which does most complete this Holy Guard, is, Impregnable
Strength, and Power; for if GOD did not take care to Fortify the traveling
Soul, with His own Invincible strength, there were no possibility to reach this
Mark of the New-Jerusalem-State; but Christ the Lord, takes good care, and will
not omit to provide Munition-strength for accomplishing this Heavenly Journey;
for Christ, the Lord, longs more to see the Soul-traveller safely landed in
his own Bosom of Love, than the Souls desire is to appear before him: So by
this mutual Love-Agreement, the Everlasting Knot of Marriage-Union will be
tied, when there once it is arrived.

Now then, by this time you see what the Company is, that will support the Soul
in its Travels, but the Chief of all is Christ in Spirit, that walks in This
Holy qualified Soul, as in the midst of the Seven Golden Candlesticks.

The second Proposition is, what Stages, or Rests, that may be allowed the
weary Traveller to take up in a while, which are Three.

This second Days Journey is more easy, and refreshing; the Walks gives a sweet
Smell, from the Evangelical Promises, giving assurance by the Atoning Blood of
the Covenant, that all Guilt of Sin is obliterated, whereby the Soul is
Encouraged and Comforted.

But from this it passes on to a Second Rest, which is, the Record, and Seal
of the Spirit; That which was now from the General Promises (Literal) is not to
be staid in. Christ in Flesh withdraws, and will be known no more in That
Figure, but in the All-filling Power, and Presence of Spirit, whereby the Soul
shall know him in Her-self: So He does then become Salvation to the purpose.

No outward Application of Christ, is of That Availance, as a Christ within,
who pours in His Saving-Name as Ointment, which performs the Cure of the lapsed
State of the Soul, because an inward Disease must have an Intrinsical Medicine,
that may penetrate through the Inward Parts, that all may be made whole.

This is the intended Redemption by Christ, and nothing less will set the Soul
to Rights again, so as to give it Boldness to come to appear before. That great
Assembly of Perfect-Spirits Mount Sions-Kingdom.

Now we proceed to the third Rest, which is yet more pleasant, because it is
Paradisical.

As the Travellor passes through this Country, there are various, delightful
Entertainments, Ministering Angels, and Spirits, that in This Divine Principle
do meet the Soul.

There also are the Sharon's Walks, adorned with the Spicy-Beds, that gives
forth their Ravishing Odours.

This sometimes opens in the Soul, with Sweet-Tastes, and Refreshing Draughts;
for the Godhead Diffuseth it self through All of That Climate, so as many
Spirits are made vigorous, and Joyful, knowing nothing but an All-filling
Sweetness, all calm, and still in the mind free from the terrifying Cares and
Combustions of this World (though in it) yet forgotten by it, at least during
the time it is round beset, with this Light, and Heavenly Paradise; so that the
Soul is afraid to be disturbed, as to the lower Descent into mortal things
again.

Now we come to the third particular, which is the last remove that brings up
to That Mount-Sion, which is mentioned in the Hebrews.

Thus the unwearied Soul goes on from strength to strength, and is now come to
the Fourth particular.

That is to the Arrival, to appear before GOD in Sion.

This is a High, and Glorious Arrival; This is a Rest never to be disrested of.
Now open do the everlasting Gates, to receive the faithful Traveller, that has
held out its Probation-State.

It further remains to give you an account (as the fifth particular) of the
Traveller's welcome up There.

The first Appearance, are the Angelical Order, that stands before the Throne,
who commanded are to Usher in the Arrived, bringing forth the Royal Robe which
is all Pure, and Light, without spot of the Fallen-Night, which gives the Soul
an Holy Boldness to appear in That New World, or Principal of Light, as becomes
all manifest; So as Christ the Kingly Priest does to the Soul Appear: and as a
Bridegroom, Greets it with such a kind of Love-Gratulations, as follows;

My Bride, and Spouse, I joy to see thy Soul in my Righteousness, and that thou
have past through a dangerous, Evil, Tempting World, and have escaped with That
tender Life of Mine (in Thee) by which thou art come up a Conqueror here; and
now behold and view the Glory of my Kingdom, which the Father has placed me
in, and over, all Principalities, Powers, and Dominions, both in the Heights
above; and in the Earth below; so as I can give to whom I will to Possess with
me, Joy, for Joy, and Glory for Glory with me, as I have received of my Father,
so freely I give to thee, and as many as from an evil World shall break, and
get away; and in a Pure Naked-Spirit, in Loves flame Thus ascend.

Ask now (Oh Spouse of Mine) what it is, that I should further for the do; I
give Thee Liberty to ask most free, for thou have found favor both with the
Father, and me.

Whereupon the arrived Traveller-worships, and Bows before the Throne of GOD,
and the Lamb; and in great Humility does make this Reply, saying in the
Language of the Spirit.

Oh my Lord! I am come up to this degree, but sensible I am, it is all of
Benignant-Grace, and Love, from my GOD, and Father, and thy Spirit, O Lord
Christ, that my Conduct and Guardian-strength has been in This my Journey. One
great proof I have had of a mighty Strong Guard, with continual supply from Thy
Fountain-Heart, or else I had fainted, and failed by the way.

The consideration of it takes such deep Impression upon me, that I am at a
loss, and know not wherewith to pay my Debt-Offering of Thanksgiving unto thee
my God and King; only accept of what I have, which is beyond all Sounds of
words, that are too finite to express praises for such Boundless Goodness which
my Spirit has tasted so largely.

Hence it is now that I do study to offer That unto Thee, which has been
refined, and purified by the Spirit of Love-burning, given from Thee unto me.

This then which is of Thine Own receive, for I joy to pass it all away as my
true Thanksgiving-Offering unto Thee: No part shall I keep back from Thee, had
I ten thousand Immaculate Lives to give up to Thee, all would be too little to
run their strength of Love into Thee, who has wrought out so great a
Redemption for me.

And now my Lord, seeing I am thus far admitted into Thy Presence, and Liberty
to ssk a Boon of The, for Thou know well what occasion I may have Thereof,
being yet in the Region of time, where obvious I am to Assaults and Temptations
manifold; All be it illuminated in a good degree of Light in Thee, yet subject
to drawings down by Spirits from this World, and the Astral Kingdom, that may
pervert, by mingling with the Super-Celestial Part of the Heart; Knowing and
observing in my day what Miscarriages among great Enlightened Saints have been,
who as bright Stars has shined; and then again, under a Cloud have been.
Therefore, O my Lord (premising these things) I in Fear, and Humility am, and
dare not trust my Self at any time, lest that a Slip out of the Right-Way
should be. Therefore This is my principal Request to Thee, that Thy Spirit may
be my constant Overseer, Guide, and Teacher, as Imediate from the Father, and
Fountain of Wisdom Flowing from Thee: then no Errings from the Truth can be.

This is the one absolute needful Request, for we stand all upon a nice Point;
and if the Petition of Solomon was so grateful to God in His-day; then I in no
wise do doubt (Oh my Lord) to ask of Thee, the Spirit of Truth; which,
(promised by Thee) may never cease to be the Oracle fixed in me, and all that
do desire to be led Rightly; for it is already by Thee given, as a Caution to
beware of transformed Lights that do pretend to the Right; yet Thou only art
the True Light, springing from within Essentially. And as Thou have this Record
been, in me, Oh multiply of This Spirit of Wisdom, and true Revelation yet more
fully; so that what remains yet of Thy Council and Mind to be further declared,
and known, may still (as an Enlightning-Beam) pass through me, and with them
also who mutually shall in Enoch's Walks be found with their faces toward
Sion, (the Court of Thy All filling Majesty.)

Oh! Evermore find Room, and Place, for me, and all of Thine that love thy
Appearance.

To see Thee as Thou art will surely change us into the same Similitude of
likeness unto Thee; for so it becomes each one that still would keep their way
open, and free for Conversation: with all the Privileges that to the dilating
of the Kingdom which shall be given forth; with the Holy Ghost as the sure
Pledge of all those Perfections that may agree with Oneness of Life and Spirit,
with Thee my Lord. Thus I have offered my Requests, and do commit my self to
Thy Disposing, in all Terrene matters and Things.

Here follows the Kind and Courteous Reply of the Souls Immanuel.
ALL Hail, with Love, Peace, and Good will, to the Virgin Spouse, who is in
Spirit come up here, to make Request for That which so much is in congruity
with the Father's Heart and mine.

This answer therefore receive, that This Thy Petition shall be fulfilled on my
Spirits part, who shall not fail to open in thee what has lien under Seals of
Secrecy; Do thou but attend Him, and He will attend thee, and whoever shall
watch in their hearts His movings: for He is the bright Mornning-Star who is to
be the Conduct and Leader of my little Flock, now in my personal absence from
this lower World, where the Evil-tempting Tree does in all Souls spring;
Therefore great need they have I know of This my Anointed Shield, that may be a
defense upon every Onset of perverting Spirits, of which in danger all are,
while in this Body Elementary.

Therefore I have provided This Spirit of Truth to be with thee for Council,
and Comfort, also to Guard thee up to me, where thou may know, and see, by
this Glass of the Spirit what I am a doing, and making ready for the present,
and future Day (when uncloathed of the Garment of Mortality also) But for the
present, come and see, and taste of the Heavenly-Fare, and Powers, and Joys of
my Kingdom: The Spring of Life, and Love shall rise so high, as to drink thy
Spirit up.

Thus with me thou shall feast and sup, and never empty away to go; which shall
be such an Encouraging motive as will make thee to bend all thy Force, still in
Spirit to be with me Thy Lover, in my secret Pavilion, where thou may have
liberty of discourse with me in those weighty Affairs that do pertain unto the
New-Jerusalem-State: So then (Oh Spouse of mine) if This thy Entertainment is,
thou will fly as a Spark of Light to the Body, that is, the Body and Fullness of
all Light. These are the Sweetmeats, I shall leave with my Espoused ones to
feed upon for a refreshing support till a further day shall break (though
through the shadow of Death) which shall consummated the Everlasting
Marriage Feast, with me thy Christ and Living-head; with all the Royal Society,
and with Myriads of Angels that shall their Trumpets of Joy sound, at the Lamb,
and Brides-Nuptial-Day and Marriage Feast.

So Ends these Hony-Drops from the Mouth of our dear Immanuel.

Now by all this which has been declared, you may see the Blessed Issue of an
unwearied, and Faithful Traveller to the City of our God, which may Invite and
Allure such as have not yet set their foot in This way; and for them which
have, to make the same progress, which will requite a thosand times over the
Loss, and pains here sustained in the way.

Oh ye that are Friends and Lovers of this way, and would arrive to be
Fellow-Citizens in the Court above with God and Christ, and the numerous
Company of Spirits, Pure, and Glorious There; give me leave before I conclude,
to commend these following Motives for Encouragement to set forward, and go
swiftly on in this Path of Life.

The First Motive is a full assurance of all Love-Acceptance, with Dear
Embraces, and most free Communications; all Veils, and Bars taken away, thy
Lord Christ upon this Mount will show Himself, and talk with thee as God did
with Moses: Only thou must put off thy Shoes, because it is holy Ground you
will walk upon: as much as to say, come Here, all Bare Pure, and Clear, leave
all at the foot of the Mount, that would contract of the worlds Earthly Dust;
then shall you know, hear, and see, That, which is so ravishing for the feeding
of all your divine Senses, that you will say, It is good to Tabernacle Here;
and so it may be permitted, for so long time as you can abide clothed with the
Transfigured Robe of the Spirit of Christ; but That will be but at certain
times and seasons; but it will be enough to know such a thing as This is, and
yet in the Body of Corporiety.

Now then the second Motive is, that Hereby, It is made acquainted with This
Heavenly Country, before it quite leaves its Mortality in this low World; it
is an high, and extraordinary Privilege, to see, and know its place, and
company beforehand; for our Lord Christ is very free to show unto the
spiritual-minded, the Principalities, and Dominions, and Powers in his Kingdom,
and to give a good assurance of being Joint-Heirs with him of the same Glory,
as you may see John 17, and Romans 8. all this to confirm, what, in every
succeeding Age, may be as a fresh sealed Evidence, given forth by the most Holy
Spirit.

Oh who would not among the Number of these sealed Ones be? Sure it is worth
forsaking, and denying whatever of this Temporal-state of Life, that may
obstruct or be any Impediment, to put by, and hinder its holding correspondency
with the Lord and the Citizens, of That Heavenly Country. The way to hold up
these great privileges you have had, by an Experienced Traveller described.

Now one motive more is This, that by putting on This Habit of the Spirit,
whereby it may be furnished with somewhat of those Ancient gifts, and Powers,
which went forth from the Lord Christ, and the Apostles in their day: which
renewed (most certainly) will be, as a forerunner, that the Reign of Christ
upon the Earth in his Saints is drawing very near; for more mighty and
miraculous Power must be given in This Age, to go forth as a Preludium.

The great Day of Christ's Appearance in the World draws near; and for This
End such Deep and Inward things are revealed beforehand to make ready an
Espoused Bride, that may be found all fair and clear without blemish; for such
a Church, Christ must have prepared to Entertain him upon this Earth. Of this I
have enlarged upon in my other Treatise published.

Therefore as many as this Day are big with an Expectation of Christ in his
Kingdom appearing, to all such lovers, and waiters for it: Let me commend That
of the Apostle Paul's, These. 5. Ver. 23. That you may be found accomplished
with all Spiritual Gifts, and Virtues, and to be found of him blameless; Such
qualified Souls might hasten his coming, for it is not the cry of Lo, Here, or
There, He will appear; but to Those whom he has by his Spirit, quickened, and
raised up in his own Inward Spiritual Body; to Them he will first appear, and
so go forth as Lightning every where,

Many are gazing to see him without, but who are they that watches in all
pureness of Heart and Mind within, which will be the ready way to bring him
down; Who will be (in very deed in this last Age) the Desire of all Nations?

Quer. But Here, meets me a Query, What shall become of the foolish Virgins
that are found asleep; and of other Ranks, and Sorts, that are dead and buried
in Trepasses and Sins, when this last Trumpet shall sound for His Appearance?
Indeed it will be no desirable Day to such as these are, who lived without a
God, and Christ, and are altogether Strangers to This Heavenly Country; having
loved, and embraced this World, and made it their God. Indeed a present woe is
to them, while Joy unspeakable to the lifting up of the Head, of as many as are
redeemed out of the Earth; their Blissful Day is come which they have long
waited for, that do fly as Doves to Christ their Life.

But somewhat more I have had revealed unto me as to those multitude of Souls
that have gone out of this Life in an Evil and Unregenerated State, and yet are
still going in a desparate Adventure, not caring what shall become of That
Immortal Spark of their Souls. How direful and bewailing will it be, that they
have Loitered and spent away, That in which they might have gained the
privileges and Love Imunities which has been mentioned here; for had they but
Improved their own Talent, the Increase would have been manifold, to present
Joy Here, and much more, when time with them is to be no more. Let me tell them
their Loss, and Suffering is so great, and the anguish of their Souls so deep,
as no Tongue can express it. Therefore to the yet Living let the warning
Trumpet found, both to those that are in part regenerated, and to them that
have nothing of it begun. Oh! are you not to be excluded from God's Face, and
from out of the Kingly Shepherds Fold thrust out, while painfully you will see
Them, that lived in the same Tempting Region with you, has over come, and are
as Conquerours set down with Christ the Lord upon his Throne, while you are bid
to depart in, to a Prisonhouse of utter Darkness.

Admit there should be a Delivery, out Here, at the End of all Generations, and
Ages; Yet how numerous years may you abide in These Purging and Trying
Furnaces; one Day (Here, while in the Body) would have set forward your work
more, than Years in those Centers, where you are to be confined; Therefore let
This be an acceptable and seasonable Work to all of this Kind and Sort, who so
careless are of their Soul's Happiness, the present and future State of
Blessedness.

Now a word to Those that are in part Illuminated, but yet stick in che Birth,
and cannot get forth; the Earthly and Temporal World gives a stop to it, that
This Pure Life cannot rise to its Perfection. The Question is, How will it go
with them that gets no further, but dies thus short, as Milions of Souls do
daily out of this World depart, without having put Christ on, for their
Clothing, without which there is no coming to be Expressly with Him in the
Three Heavens?

An Answer to a Pertinent Question.
IN Answer to This Question; Be it Known there are provided several-Mansions,
and Regions, by the wise foreseeing Gracious God, that knew how it would be, as
to This matter, with the greater Number of His own Created Beings; though he had
proclaimed, a Love-Redemption, to All by Christ manifested in Flesh, to
destroy, and purge Sin out of Flesh; which we see is very rarely done in the
time of this Life; where One reaches to This Mark, a Thousand do miss it;
Therefore for such as were begotten by the Eternal Word, and are going on, in
all Good willingness in their Spiritual Progress; (dying short of finishing it)
They will be allowed to be in a Paradisical Region, to Ex^^^ise their Spiritual
Faculties, for the effecting what they were prevented, and hindered of Here in
This Life; and so go on to perfect That State of Perfection, that shall make
them meet, to make the Higher removes, to reach to the Mount-Sion-State, which
is yet more Glorious: And though This has not been understood, or believed, yet
it is a Truth, that I have received from a good Hand; therefore I am bold to
publish it, for all Souls must pass through the Refining, and Calcining
Regions, so prepared for their Purifying; and according to the measures, and
degrees they do attain to Here in this Life: Of this Kind; the less they will
have to do in the Life to come, which will be much more Easy.

Therefore it is much upon me to Excite to a pressing forward, that they may so
run, as to obtain the Resurrection-Mark, while in the Body they are; because it
will turn to a present account of Peace, Joy, and Glory.

But yet we have somewhat further to declare, as to the Clearing, and
Vindicating of the Infinite and Unsearchable Love of our God to the whole
Fallen-Race; Note well from hence.
as to Angels that have had their time to deceive and tempt all Mankind, which
shall have its Period and End; for All must be redeemed and restored, to their
first Estate; at the winding up of all the various Scenes which were to
manifest the Wonders of God's Wisdom in Love, Power, and Righteousness.

But you will say, This is only a private Revelation, though it be, yet I know
from whence it is; and if I were not upon sure ground, I should not dare to
have declared it: knowing it (...) ^tumble many; but I must pass That and must
not baulk a Truth g^^en me to make known, for the squemish Stomach's sake; but
with all tenderness bear with such as may make scruple hereof (for I my self
did the same, till by Divine seeing, and hearing, I was satisfied in this
Point) But that you may not be altogether left to my bare Testimony; Mind That
Scripture in the Ephesians. 1. and Verse 10. That in the fullness of Time, he might
gather together in Christ all things that are in Heaven and Earth consummated
in him, whom the Father has sealed for the Restitution of what Sin had brought
into a disorderly confusion.

Some Scriptures more I could here bring, which are mentioned elsewhere by me
briefly, though not Here.

Oh my Friends! what more joyful Tidings can come to our Ears than This one
Everlasting-Age, that shall swallow up all those Ages wherein, Sin and Death
has reigned; with all those miserable Effects that have been ever since the
Creation of this World? But a new and wonderful Model God will bring forth in a
new-created State; Behold, says the Lord, ` I will make all things new, the
End shall return to its Original-Primary-Being; let none grudge that the Grace
of God of this Latitude is, as to make a complete Restoration; for as there
was neither Sin, nor Center to it, so it must be again, when the Hour of God's
Judgment shall come, to pass a final Sentence thereupon, to cast all into That
Lake, and Bottomless Pit, where all of Sin, and Death, Sorrow, and Curse, shall
become a Nonentity: Then nothing of Diabolical Spirits (any more God's
Offenders, and his Crea^ure disturbers or Tormenters) shall be; all This in the
Prophesy of Eternity will be known, and Everlastingly rejoiced in, as a
forerunner of This Blissful Iubile, the Trumpet of the Everlasting Gospel, of
Love, Peace, and Reconciliation to every Creature capable thereof, in Flesh,
and out of Flesh, that are not yet fully redeemed.

This Gospel, is not a bare Sound, to be heard only with Ears; It is a Spirit
that enters in, and gives the power of a Resurrection-Life, to the Dead that
could no way raise themselves, neither in Bodies, nor out; (as is found in
their several Confinement) will hereby be loosned, and set free.

But it may be asked, when shall such a general, and universal Restoration be,
as for all Apostatized Spirits, and Creatures to be in favor and friendship
with their God, and Creator again?

Now in answer to this Query, as to the time, it is known only to God in the
Secret Cabinet of his Council; only it is thus far revealed unto me, that it
will be at the finishing of the great Mystery, when all Souls will have passed
throu^^ their Purgation in their several degrees, that lacking is here; for in
all Cen^^s are found Souls that shall be brought into a purified State, by
through Humlliation for all their Misdeeds: And also when generating (according
to fleshly Births) shall cease in this World; Then this general Redemption will
be completed, and the Mediating-Office of our great High Priest shall be at an
end; so that he has nothing more to do but to deliver up the Kingdom thus
completed, to his Father, that God may be All-in-All, possessing, and
satisfying himself in all of This his New Creation, which will amount to a
Perpetuity of Endless Joy, from the various wonders and pleasures that will
fill up Eternity, with tuned Instruments of Praises to the Holy Trinity in
their Unity, as it was from the Beginning.

Thus I have given you a true, and single account of what in my Spiritual
Travels I have seen, known, and understood, by being admit into That Heavenly
Court, at certain times and seasons; and shall leave this living Testimony to
the Spiritual-minded, hereof to judge: For no other can receive, or fathom this
deep Wisdom of God. I shall only leave This Caution and Advice, as my
concluding part.

The Caution is to those, who would of the First Resurrection-Fold of Christ be
(as mentioned of has Here been) that they do not cavil, and dispute the Holy
Spirit away from them, by their doubtful Jealousy, concerning the Brightness of
its Rising, in the Pure in Heart; and so thereby may prevent themselves of This
most valuable, and precious Gift, who only is the true Intelligencer of God's
Mind, and the Breaker open of the Sealed Treasures, that are of That weighty
Import, that a Soul, that has found, the Good, and Sweetness here, will fling
all Impediments away; that hinder its manifestation, and operation in the Mind.

But it may be objected, there are many deluded Spirits that pretend they are
of God; Therefore it may admit of a Doubtfulness, and an Enquiry to know the
Right Spirit.

True it is, This may well be granted, to try the Spirits; but then it must be
by such as are of the true Spirit, of sound Judgment, and Discerning, that can
themselves give a Proof that they Here live, and do walk in Christ his Spirit:
And that you may know where This your Anointing is poured forth, by the Fruits
that such bring forth; which renders another kind of Life, than can be imitated
by a false Magus, who may, and do go forth with Erroneous Alarms, and Empty
Sounds; which is to be Lamented, and Mourned for, that it is at this Day so
frequent; which fulfilleth the Scripture that Thus it will be, as a forerunner
of Christ the Lord's drawing near; and that the ends of the World are upon us.
But nevertheless there is a Spirit of Truth, that according to Christ's
Promise, is, and will be, plenteously poured forth; also in This latter Age,
though permitted, is the false, and mixed-spirited, which is a design of the
Adversary to nullify, and make void what is from the true Spirit of Christ.

But let not This stagger, or baffle us out of our Right to a Portion in this
blessed Spirit; but let it put you upon an Earnest seeking, and a most watchful
Survey what Spirits enter you to suppress motions so ready, and numerous; all
which bring them up to the Throne in an humble Scrupulosity that the Lord in
the Spirit, may give forth right Judgment, what is Pure of Himself; and what
not, that may be tumbled in, as a mixed thing. This I advise as my own
Experiment, and being found thus tender, and fearful, of being misguided; you
will be sealed, or have this Witness-Seal, that shall agree with the Record in
Heaven, and the Scripture-Record Here upon the Earth, whereby you will be
settled, and established upon a sure Eoundation, in This shaking, and perilous
Time, wherein, (as it is said in Daniel) many shall run to and fro, to the Low
Here, and Low There, by which that will be tried.

But so far as I am made acquainted with the Mind of Christ, I cannot but give
my Judgment, that it is more safe, for each one in His own Lot, and
Pitched-Tent of the Spirit in themselves, for to abide till the Seventh Angel
shall the Right and True Trumpet sound; Then the right gathering of
Eagle-Spirits, where the bright Body of Glory, will through all Clouds appear;
and as the Everlasting Sun, shine forth at once to be seen throughout the whole
World, as This outward Sun in our visible Firmament; so This Son in the one
Invisible Element shall from Himself enlighten the whole Earth; that, as Doves,
they may fly to their Everlasting Sabbath of Rest.

Even so let us be found waiting for This blessed and glorious Appearing of our
Mighty God and Savior, in the which Mortality shall be swallowed up of
Immortality; Even so, Come Lord Jesus quickly (says the Spirit of the Bride,
who is making her self ready to come to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb) where
in Spirit I do beforehand see the Feast of Joy, and Melody that prepared is.

Therefore my last concluding Word and Prayer is, that you may all upon your
Watchtower keep, and be careful that you let not any thing of This Worldly
Stuff make you fall into a Deadly and Dangerous Sleep; and so be prevented of a
present possession of Those Ineffable Felicities and Sweet Immunities, that in
This little Volume is made mention of. In the which Hope, that to whom This
that is written Here, is, and shall come, may Caution, and Excitement be, to
Gird up close, and remember to keep unspotted from This World: And so you will
have right to eat of the Tree of Life. So Farewell.

FINIS.
July the 16. 1693.
AS my mind was environed with a Divine Light which opened the great design of
God's Love in the Redemption of the fallen lapsed State of all Mankind: That
Scripture being set before me in Corinth. 15. 43. Romans 5. 12. to the end. The
first Man was made a Living Soul; the second from the Lord from Heaven, was
made a Quickening Spirit. And so as from hence it was shown to me, that the
first created Image, and Form was never intended for an Abiding-State; if admit
he had continued as he was first created, God from before the Foundation of the
World purposed far higher, and more excelling Glory; for as much as a Spirit
transcend in its Quality and Essence more than That which is of a Soul in its
consistency. Christ the Lord being one Eternal Spirit, in, and by Which we are
raised out of the Fall, and quickened into Spirit, whereby we come to partake of
an United Purity, Wisdom, Power, and Glory with him.

But here it may be said, this now is not evident, or come forth to all the
whole World, which seems yet to lie in an Apostatized State. Io. 2. 2.

It must be so, for a time, and time, and half time, and then the finishing of
the Transgression and Sin will be: For then will Christ the eternal Root of
Righteousness, in all, and over all, spring: So, as an Universal Restoration to
all fallen Angels and Spirits, in Bodies, and out, will by Christ the quickening
Spirit be set fiee. Ephesians. 1. to 10.

But of This Jubilee, an allowance of time will be for the working out this more
general Salvation, for many are the degrees of purifying, which all Souls must
pass through; The Gospel is preached to the dead, or Souls departed.
and such as do neglect their Day, during the time of this Life, as to the
New Birth, and Regeneration; there is a Law of Necessity for them to go through
it, after the time of this Life, in Centers and Regions, which are provided in
other Worlds, which are to be passed through.

But herefrom arises an Objection, that if it be so that the Grace of God be
of this Latitude as to save All, Universally, Chapter 3. 19. and 4. 6. 1 Cor. 3. 13.
it may open a door for giving a presumptuous Liberty to some; because Grace
has thus far reached as to have any hopes of Redemption after this Life is
ended.

Now as to This, let all know, that it is a Punishment and Hell enough to see
their Fellow Creatures entered into Rest and Joy; and they in Labor and Work,
having all to do, that tends to a Renovation; and how long they may be in
Punishment, It will be according as the Wickedness of their living Here have
been, in all manner of Evil, and Sin, Numerous Years may spend away. All which
time, they live excluded from the Lord's Presence of Joy: All which may be
Argument and Motive unto all to improve their Mortal day, which, if they knew
what others do possess, they would not lose what may be enjoyed of the Powers
of the Eternal world, while abiding in this very World, which is a Forerunner,
and sure Pledge of what after the Dissolution of the Body shall be entered upon;
which Here for encouragement, I do give some instance from what some have
attained unto; who have first given up for lost, the many Lives for to live
That one Life, which is Christ, which only gives Rest from a Restless World,
and weary Life: For wherever God in Christ, in the Spirit does abide so
purely, they may often be taken up in the Spirit, into Heavenly Court, There to
see, and view what makes up the Heavenly-born Family.

But take Notice such as comes up here, will find themselves as another
Translated- Enoch, that may keep their Walks with God; in which Path of Light
may be seen the Seraphims, and Cherubims, guarding along up to This Sion-Seat
of Glory, In which filled up with Light-streamers of Glory, delighting the
Heavenly Train of Saints, There, all appearing in Robes of Glittering Garments,
which Here do follow Christ their Head, in great Order, according to every
One's Degree, Rejoicing with Him by whom they have overcome, and gotten Victory
over all Worlds; now to reign as Kings with Christ their Mighty Lord and King,
this Mount-Sion-World, thus open-fac'd, and was seen.

Then saw I all these Innumerable Throne-Princes, their Homages and Obeisance,
given to the High, and Lofty Alpha, triumphing forth Redeeming-Praises. Oh how
pleasant it is to see what an United Love-Hermony from the Highest to the
Lowest degree of These Glorified Saints, all with Crowns, but some more highly
Dignified; as Kingly Priests, which had Breast-Plates, set all with Stones that
sparkled out with Sparks of Fire.

These, all next to the Glorified Person of Christ, had their Golden Tents, and
their Temple to Worship; the Form of which was only a more Christaline Light,
which God the Supreme Majesty opened to be the Glory of it; to which the lower
Ranks and Orders of Spirits, were sometimes admitted to worship There.

Thus is this Holy and Heavenly Assembly Employed and Exercised with all
variety of Motion tending to a Divine Adoration to the Rock Eternal, which does
multiply amongst them most Amazing, and renewed Wonders, which gives perpetual
Matter to renew Love-Admirations. So that I was given to understand, that in
this World was no cessation of Spiritual Vocation; for out of God's infinite
Depth and Fullness should Matter still renew, and also with Power be endowed, as
fixed in the Humility, all skilfully, and learnedly to act and do after the
manner and way of God their Life Root; and Being subjected always to the Laws
of of this New World and Kingdom.

But Liberty is granted to many of this holy order that of the highest
Saintship are to communicate to them who are not yet come up to their degree,
they may help them much in order to the bringing these their Fellow Members
higher up, the great Saints will much delight in this Office and Service to
their Fellow Members; for their Joy cannot be completed until all come up unto
the Unity of Love, in a pure Deifick-Spirit.

Now to make out this, there was shown to me some chief ones in the Ministry of
Love, as Enoch, and Abraham, John the Apostle, and Paul, with others of their
Order, that had golden Vials given to them to pour forth for Anointing and
Healing; and Peter, with some of his Rank to unlock Centers, and set free
those, who in those upper Regions wanted to be perfectly set free, and in this
lower World also.

Now follows an enquiry whether there may not be a correspondency and
intercourse maintained by these Holy and devout Souls, who are departed this
Body as to any Love or Pleasure in it, living yet here; such assuredly are very
capable to hold, and to have a holy League, and very near Affinity with the
glorified Person of Christ, and with the heavenly Frame of Glorified Saints,
which have put on Bodies of Immortality, for the high Illuminated Souls,
spirited with Christ's Spirit Here, but yet abiding in Bodies Corporal, they
may have liberty of recourse by the Spirit into the divine and light Principle,
where the ancient Worthies are, who would most willingly meet and confer with
us about the things pertaining to our Progress to the Kingdom of Christ; they
are very free to discourse us in what may refer to a perfect Life, that so we
may be made meet to come up to them in unity of love to God, as in
Triune-Deity, which fills all There with a full Body of Light.

But it may be asked how, and after what way does Spirits accompany Souls here
that are Spiritual? Is it by Apparition, or com-mingling by Spirit? In answer
hereunto, according to my present measure and experience I find it very rare in
this latter Age that they visit Souls by visible Apparition, (though sometimes
they may) as Moses and Elias appeared to the Lord Christ, since whose Ascension
all of this kind is transacted more Invisible and Essential, by passing in the
way of a Spirit, and having, and influencing our Souls, through which there is
a sweet congruity, and a reciprocal Love, which is also in our Spirits toward
them, that hereby they often draw up to them our more Superior Angel to be in
Heavenly Places with them, being very affable and friendly to show their
Princely Thrones, and their delightful solaces and enjoyments they have from
the perpetual motion of the Triune-Deity. Now as any Soul here below do find
Christ their Root of Love in them, as their true Original, for securing their
Love, first in the eternal Father, and Spirit in Christ the Lord, then most
easily may we, without being guilty of Spiritual Idolatry in this, pay a
veneration of Love, and high respect to these great Potentates, that have Power
to befriend us upon many Accounts, that we may need their assistance. For
during the time of our Probation in this Life, so it is altogether expedient
that we get acquaintance with the Servants in this high and Heavenly Court, for
they may do us many Kindnesses, as they are in Offices of great trust from
their head Prince and King; it is made known to me, that holy and good Souls
have lost much as to the knowledge of Divine Arts, and Holy Skillfulness to do
and act forth the wonders of the heavenly Power in manifold Wisdom, as Christ,
Moses and Elias, and the Apostles in their day did.

Now it may be demanded, what in Scripture have you to authorize this
Assertion, or Revelation?

First we bring you that of the Hebrews, We are come to Mount Sion, to God, the
Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect. See further
hereinto, Heb. 12. 21. 22. If there were no more it speaks full enough to the
purpose to the confirmation that the Saints here upon Earth are allowed to come
up to the Mount Sion perfect Spirits in Heavenly Places, and do maintain a holy
Conference mutually as there is to be Instanced in the fifth Chapter of the
Revelations, verse 4. How that the Elders talked with the Apostle John, and did
show him several things, Chap. 7. ver. 23, 24. And likewise in Daniel, where
Daniel asked questions, and heard one Saint from the Heavens speaking one unto
another for resolving of Daniel in his Enquirings; so that here is a cloud of
Witnesses to back it, besides what of this kind is known by some in this
present time and Age, who do obtain and retain several of these Heavenly
Intelligents, whereby Knowledge is communicated, and the Invisible things and
objects there made manifest to such as are in Corporal Figures.

Now to instance somewhat relating hereunto, in the first place, we give you to
understand, whoever they be who would this Privilege know, and come to enjoy
with holy Angels, or separated Souls, they are to be freed and sequestered in
Heart and Mind from all mortal Entanglements, as if they were divested of a
gross Body with its Impediments, and so reserving themselves in a most Inward
Purity of Heart and Mind; without which habit of spirituallity, there is no
commencing of this acquaintance with either Angels, or Patriarchs, Prophets, or
Apostles, or any Evangellical Saints since those Ages, for they having put on
Incorruption and Glory, and quite redeemed out of the Earth, they will not
touch no more with such as are defiled with corruptible things; now such
Persons that stand thus pure and clear, they may have much Assistauce from
these Throne Spirits and Powers in their way and travel to their Heavenly
Country; for those Angelical Spirits that once lived in Flesh, do more nearly
sympathise with us in all our Infirmities, and therefore all feelingly they
tenderly consider our tempting-state, and give themselves out most readily for
our help; nay they are Advocates, and do remind the Lord Jesus of their
Prophesies, that they may have their fullfilling upon us. Of this sort and
degree, they are the choicest and greatest in the Kingdom of our Lord, and have
very stately Pavillions which are pitched round the Majesty of the Jehovah God,
whose Pavillion is so dreadfully bright, being mingled with numerous Colors,
so oriental and fine, that as glittering Stones they do shine; and above this
is spread a wonderful Element, which dilateth it self all over these upper
Heavens; it seems to consist only of a transparent golden Mist, which gives
a mavelous golden luster for the Pleasures and Delight of the Inhabitants of
this Heavenly Orb; Here sometimes the Lord Christ enters into the Father's
Royalty, and the Holy Ghost, and the seven Spirits which appear as radient and
sparkling Flames; and when I enquired about them what their Office was, one of
the chief Elders told me they were the seven Invisible Counselors, and mighty
Powers, equal with the Trinity, by which the old Heavens and Earth should pass
away in Mortal Creatures, and also in the room of which should spring all new.

This new mold of Creatures, both here and elsewhere in other Regions are by
these seven Spirits to be performed, and also by the going forth of these seven
fold Powers, that are to do the great wonders in the highest Heavens, and so
passing down to this lower Earth, which time for their sending forth, I was
informed approached very near, wherein they should be seen to move, and turn
all Spheres upside down; Now the next mavelous appearance that opened, was
the Virgin; Her Place and Mansion was pitched betwixt the Supreme Majesty of
the Father, and the Throne of Glory of the Lord Christ; Her Beauty and
Comeliness being great, clothed with the Clouds, in which there was such a
silver brightness, and on them fixed Stars of Gold, with golden Hair hanging
down, with a Crown upon her Head, more excelling than others, and numerous
Virgins, the honorable ones, such as loved, and ministered to the Lord Christ
here on Earth, and also to her; These had Seats round about Hers; it would fill
up a great Volume to give a Particular of the greatness of the Glory and
Magnificency of this Heavenly Court; a thousand degrees of Blessedness it is to
have a Place, and a Name entered among this Assembly.

Now it was shown me that this Glorious Virgin was She of whom the Or Christ
the Lord.
Lord Christ was born in Flesh, who is the Figure of the eternal Virgin, which
was from Eternity, by whom is recovered all of Eves Generation of Lost Births,
in which the Virgin-Purity was deflowred; but out of this Virgins Womb brought
forth, and made manifest in time, Angellical Births again for a new created
Host of spiritual born Creatures, begotten by the Holy Ghost, wherein the
unfathomable Mystery of the Wisdom, and Love of God is made manifest to the
lapsed state which came in by Adam and Eve, so that we are to reckon our selves
born anew into the unity tending to all Purity of Perfection with Christ our
First Born from the Dead, and for to appropriate this Eternal Virgin for our
supernatural Mother; It is to be observed those Words which our Lord did let
fall when he was upon the Cross, to the beloved John, saying to him, Behold thy
Mother (which was the Virgin Mary, who was the Representative of the Eternal
Virgin.) So that from this it may be concluded, that the Lord does transfer
this privilege of Adoption, whereby we may entitle this Virgin for our true
Mother; Now then from hence let us consider what great good we may expect, and
promise our selves from this our eternal Virgin Mother, that now is very great
in Wisdom, Majesty, and Power, who cannot but be more naturally sympathising
with her Children, who are to be brought up after that high born degree and
quality in Wisdom and Sanctity, as may be after the similitude of their Virgin
Mother: Now no little care and concern is upon her as may relate unto her
Childrens divine and spiritual Education to keep them up to it whilst they are
in this perilous, tempting, evil World, and whilst they are making their
passage through it, therefore seeing we have such mighty paternal Powers in
heavenly Places, as the Triunity of the Father, Son, and Spirit, with the
Virgin Wisdom, and the seven Spirits, and the Court of Ministering Angels, and
all the Evangelical Spirits to be our Friends in this most Holy and separated
Place, that all concurring together may fetch us off from the Earth, and the
temptations which therefrom do beset us with Legions of Spirits also, which
invisibly do wind and twist their false Injections into our Minds, upon which
account excited, we are to make use of all these securing Dignities for our
help.

The next thing to be considered of in relation of this new offspring that are
thus born from on high, and yet are found to live here below in Bodies
Elementary.

The Query is from hence, what is to be their Business and Employ, seeing none
in the Heavenly World do remain idle, therefore it is expected that all of
Virgin Wisdom's Children here upon Earth should be in somewhat or other
exercised, which may suit and agree with their Eternal and Spiritual Descent,
which is proper to them that are quickened, and made one Spirit with the Lord
from Heaven, Heavenly. We are not in this Place to meddle with the outword
Man's Calling, what do pertain to him in this World, but here to give out the
Rules of Divine Wisdom, as to her Children, which are in number Three. The
first is, that they learn to know themselves as to their original Pre-existency
in God the Father, and brought forth through the Womb of the Eternal Virgin, a
pure simplified Spirit.

The second Rule is to consider and contemplate the triune God as the Father of
such Spirits holy and sure, seeing the glass of the works of his Creation in
his manifold Wisdom made manifest therein, as Love, Power, Omnipotency, with
all goodness and kindness to what he has Created.

A third Rule is, that we study from all this Knowledge to come to love, and
bluss, fear, and adore, paying all. Reverence, and practical Conformity to the
Life of Christ, all which will lay a Foundation for what is to follow as
tending to what is needful to accompany this high and heavenly Calling, which
may answer to the Kingdom of the Saints in the upper World, which are the gifts
which have been much lost, and have had their cessation among the Saints in
these late Ages, but now the Virgin Mother calls upon her Children to be
looking after the restoration of them, that so they may be employed and
exercised in the works that Christ the Lord speak of, should follow those who
did believe in him, which are to to be the sealing Witness of the Holy Ghost's
coming, and going forth in acting Powers through Mortals: Now it may be asked
what are these Gifts that are so needful and proper to Wisdoms Children.

The first is the Testimony of Jesus the Lord, which is the gift of Prophesy,
which is of very great use and service to the Church here on Earth, to have a
foresight and knowledge of what things are yet to come, that all may be warned
who are the Friends of the Bridegroom to make ready for his Kingdom and
Appearance, which now in very deed is knocking at our Doors. Blessed are them
that understand the voice of Prophecy, and have it in themselves.

The second Gift is to have the Gift of Revelation opened as a spring that
flows with Heavenly Doctrine for a true Teaching-Ministry to go forth with, to
give feeding from a fresh Pasture, which has not ^^^n defiled by unwashed
Feet; the Holy Spirit do now in some foretell such Principal Shepherds are now
to stand in this Latter Day upon the Earth, that shall not speak from Litteral
Tradition, but from the Revelation of the Holy-Anointing, the pure, and most
excellent words of Wisdom, which will not be in the weakness of the L^^ter, but
in the strength and power of the Spirit so made known.

The third is the Gift of Vision, which is not by sight of the mortal Eye, for
that is too gross to see Spiritual Objects. Now to describe the most pure and
right kind of Vision, is to have Eyes within fixed in the head of a bright and
clear Understanding; through this Organ of sight, from pure and divine Light,
God in Christ may be seen, and Christ as in the Glory of the Father, and the
Eternal Spirit streaming forth from both Father and Son. Sometime thus seen all
in One, and at other times Distinct, and yet never divided; Thus is the Holy
Trinity seen through the Pure Christalline Globe of the Eternal Wisdom. Oh ten
thousand degrees of Happiness to such as are thus Divine and Spiritual, seeing
so as to be taken up in viewing and speculating the Celestial and Light-World,
as filled and furnished with such variety of all amiable Objects; as Seraphims,
Cherubims, and several Degrees of these about God's Throne, with the numerous
Company of Angelical Spirits, which once did live in Mortal Forms are There to
be seen, all clothed with Bodies of Spangling-Light. What the eye of the
Spirit and Mind does Here see, may well draw, and effect the Heart abundantly.

Now to proceed to the fourth Gift, which is the Key that opens the Kingdom
of the Power; which being endowed with, do coe-work with the Powers in Heavenly
Places, for binding, and loosning, shutting up, and opening; which Power will
be granted for to act, and do mighty, and mavelous Wonders, according to what
by the Saints in former Ages have been carried forth in this World to do. And
sure, such is the present Time and Age which we now live in, that do call for
Greater and more mavelous Works, than yet have been done. Seeing that the
Confusions and distresses throughout all Nations look so dreadful upon us, that
all Need there is of an Eliah's Spirit to arise up amongst us, that may turn
the Hearts of Fathers to Children, and pour out Oil for Reconcilement, and
healing the bleeding Wounds of Wars and Divisions, kindled up into a Flame
through all Nations, which only the strong empowered Angels that are filled
with Spirit of Anointing, shall in this Latter Day rise, for the quieting these
North-Winds, that from these Tempestuous Seas of this World do so furiously
blow; for it is seen that Deliverances to this Nation, will not by Carnal
Weapons of Slaughter be effected, but by the lifting up of the Standard of
God's Spirit of Power only. Now for the coming forth of which Power we are
looking and hastening for, in order to the making way for that Kingdom of Peace
and Love, that must over the whole Earth spread; Even so, Come Lord Jesus, to
reign on the Earth in thy Saints powerfully.

The fifth Gift is, the laying on of Hands by such as are Baptized with the
Holy Ghost, which being filled with, may convey, and let into, such prepared
Souls which have waited for it; they may Hereof partake, and be inspired from
such a virtual fiery Touch, and therefrom be so highly Illuminated and Deified,
as to be made New Creatures in very deed. From this Ruby Tincturing Dye, a
God-like Purity and Power, may suddenly arise, to Anatomize, and burn up the
gross, corrupt, and earthly part.

For we do experimentally find, that all Spiritual Medicines are too short and
weak, for the rooting out the Venom of Sin, till the Holy Ghost do enter in to
refine, and purify the Vessel within, which may upon some come in more
immediately, by God's own Hand; and then again, by a Medium, as the Holy Ghost
shall take up any to convey himself, by their laying on of Hands, which is not
to be understood barely of the outward hands; but as the inward Power; and rich
Virtue in the Spirit of Faith and Prayer, shall be breathed forth; for so it
was, when by the Apostles in their Day, the Holy Ghost was given forth. Oh how
Great, how Worthy, is this Gift, being the Root and Spring from whence all
miraculous Works, both inward and outward, do proceed.

Now from this Holy Anointing the Healing-Gift may also spring, for the curing
of all bodily Infirmities; for as much as the Mortal Form and Figure, which we
bear, is the Temple of the Holy Ghost; and it being of a corruptible Matter, of
Flesh and Blood, subject to putrefaction, and thereupon painful Diseases do
breed; yet this often helped has been, and Cures have been performed upon the
impotent Body, by the Omnipotency of the Holy Ghost, moving through Mortal
Creatures: as we have numerous instances both in the Old and New Testament, and
also since Christ and the Apostles, by Saints of a lesser Degree, who have been
useful to those upon Sick and Dying Beds, who have been raised up most
miraculously. And this Power will still attend to the Worlds end, such holy
Souls as can retain their Vessels, this All-healing-Balsam, having Love-Pity to
their Fellow Members, may much release, and help in greatest Extremity; But
this Power is not at all times commandable by any Creaturely Will: The
Apostles themselves could not act it forth upon the Sick, but as the Holy Ghost
moved upon them; neither can any that received this Gift, but as the Holy Ghost
stirs this Healing-Pool within them, which watching to Healing-waters, may
flow forth to effect all Cures bodily, which is a great Immunity belonging to
VVisdom's Children, that are observant to all her Rules and Commands, most
willingly,

Thus having given an Account of what the Spirit of Christ has given in, as to
what is expected and required for the accomplishing such as are to make up for
an Espousal Bride to him. Therefore it is absolutely needful, that we should be
furnished out with such Powers and Gifts, as may qualify for such an High
Marriage-Union, with the First Begotten-Son and Heir of the High God, who does
most willingly give out, and bequeath these five golden Talents here mentioned;
that so a Stock of Spiritual Goods being taken in, may be to support, and carry
on the Heavenly Calling withal; which if found diligent in, may mount to a
mighty Increase, for the making of a Dowry so great, and large, as may somewhat
agree with him, with whom we are to be matched unto: So here we see what is
appointed, and cut out to be the Saints Business and Employment, which is not
mean but high and noble, answering to that of the glorified Saints in the
World above, who will in this Holy Calling, our Factors and Correspondents be,
and meet us frequently: And as those who are more skilful and knowing in This
way than Mortals can be, will very friendly the Ignorant inform; and such among
us that may be more knowing still somewhat more secret and deep, out of the
Eternal Virgins Center may us meet. By all which the Saints here upon the Earth
may hereby be made meet, for to be Companions to them of high Degree in Heaven.

I shall now this Subject conclude, praying with all Prayer in the Spirit, for
an Increase of the Number of such as may be diligent Followers of This High and
Mighty, and most advantageous Calling. Happy and blessed, thousands of degrees
are such, who choosing, are made Partakers of this heavenly Vocation, and that
shall so prize the Privilege hereof, as to set light by all that shall hinder,
and stop the freedom of This All-spiritual Employ wherein exercised as high
born Spirits, they may be in Love with the Eternal Unity.

The Manner of Christ's Appearing.
HEarken, O Daughter of Sion, Behold thy Bridegroom comes no more a Servant,
but to be served by all Flesh; The Word that was manifest in Flesh reign in
Spirit, to Prepare for Christ's Kingdom to come into a visible Dominion Here
upon the Earth, by Signs and Miracles, wrought by the Spirit in forms of Flesh
to confirm Christ the Lord is Coming to appear in his Saints, to set them over
the Earth.

For to the Daughter of Sion the Dominion shall be restored through Marriage
Union with the Lamb of God.

This is the first Resurrection of the Holy People, which shall be the
Trumpet-Voice, that shall awaken the rest that lie Dead in Sin.

THe Hour of God's Judgment will thus come upon the Evil Nature that has
hitherto reigned in Man: the Spirit shall be so fully poured forth upon These
first Risen-One, as to go forth with a quickenning Life, to raise the Dead
Spiritually, and Bodily; This shall be the Terrible Day of the Lord, for the
condemning and destroying (not Persons, but) the Sin in Flesh, so it is
declared unto me, which will be fulfilled in its Season and Time; which time
will be when the wind of the Spirit shall rise more strongly, for the
Holy Ghost is to be the latter day Glory prophesied of, and the Expected
Kingdom of Christ to be manifested Here, upon the Earth, in which he will Reign
Personally in his Saints, who anointed are, first, with such measures of the
Spirit, that do highly sanctify, which do prepare for this great Day of the
Thousand Years Reign Prophesied of, but whether it be so to be understood
according to our number of Years, is not to be determined; but glorious Reign
in the Spirit there will be before Christ in His glorified Person will come
distinctly upon the Earth, to turn it into a Paradise, to make these lower
parts of the Earth glorious, upon which in the last of times he will stand, and
model it into a Christalline Land, which will be New-Earth and Heavens, as
declared of in Scripture is; So from hence it is made known to me, what the
work and business of our present Age, and Day is, which is to pass daily
through the Baptizing River, that may drown, and keep all of Sin down, that the
Spring of Righteousness may rise for the true washing of Regeneration; Then
will the Holy Ghost be renewed, and set up his Reign in Souls, and will
exercise Power and Dominion, so as it shall be known Jehovah-Shammah, the Lord
and Mighty King liveeth and reigns Here; for this must be the Forerunner of
that more great and notable Day of Christ, as to his Appearance in his own
Personal Glory. It is advertised me, that there is much to be done in the
Kingdom of this World by a more plentiful Effusion of the Spirit then yet has
been; Therefore each one in their own Jerusalem within be waiting for the
Spirits Day, which is the great Increase, and mighty Power that will turn the
World upside down; Therefore nothing is more expedient for the hastening this
Blessed day of our Lord's Appearance.

Therefore all that are Watchmen, and Holy-Seers to sound out That Trumpet of
the Spirit, that may gather the Dove-Spirits together to wait in Love-Unity,
that the Thousand Years Reign may have a speedy beginning, and entrance; upon
the which it will follow, as enquiries made into This Spirits Reign and
Dominion, shall hereunto be encouraged. Even so, and Amen, in the Spirit, Come
Lord Jesus quickly.

A Dialogue betwixt Christ, and the Spirit of my Mind, which was upon Enquiry,
whether I might not be Initiated into a present Dowry, and Spouse to my Lord:
to partake of the Heavenly Possessions, which he Himself is Inheritour of, as
the Father's Heir?

And it was replied unto me, Yea surely, It will so follow to be, to the Soul
that has put on the Deiformation of Christ the Lord; such, has a Good and
right Claim to His Person and Possessions. And when thus believed, and
apprehended, Liberty is granted for to draw out of this Stock, and Treasury, as
the present occasion shall require; for out of this Fullness an Emptying into
the most holy and sanctified Vessel may be most easily, proportional to its
Growth and Degree. For my Lord said to me,

You are not ignorantly to suppose that I willingly do hold back from that
which stands in Unity with me: But there is a Cause if any stop be.

Then replied my Spirit, Oh my Lord! Let it be given to me to know, and
understand where the Obstructions has lien?

Answered I was, That the Veil of not Knowing, and not Believing the Things
reported of, which do of right belong unto my Virgin Spouse; also wanting are
holy Boldness, and Courage to come freely, and take what is mine, and make it
your own; For be it Known to Thee, It is far from Me, to ingross to My self,
what the Father has so much, and liberally bestowed on Me, was it not that I
might give out as Plenteously? Therefore come with full Assurance of Faith to
Me, and ye shall receive Grace for Grace, Wisdom for Wisdom, Love for Love, and
Power for Power; As I have obtained, and received of my Father in Heaven, so
you from Me all answerably.

Pondering in my Spirit these words of my Lord's,

I Replied. How shall it be, that a Spirit should thus be mingled, and made one
Pure Lump with Thee, so as nothing of it self for to be?

Answered it was. This should be effected by Dying out of Creaturely Censation,
whereby a vacancy of Place, for the Holy Ghost to rise, and spring, and move,
as One Entire Spiritual Body within; for so it will be when ever there is a
cessation, and a rest, from the whirling Thoughts and Motions, which from the
outward Astral Birth is.

This will be the manner of my coming in this Latter-Day, to stand upon the
Earth, which thus emptied is, and refined by the Fire, that never dies; which
Fire is that Seed of God, that shall multiply it self, to bring your Christ
forth, numerously to overspread this World, till all shall be formed a new.

Thus shall each one become a Christ, (or an Anointed) from this Deified Root
opening within their own Soul.

And when this Life of Christ shall out-grow its Minority, and come to Maturity
of Wisdom and Strength; then it shall be known what you are made Heirs to, and
shall possess, while in the age of time you do remain; for Christ fully Grown
will bring such Gain, as Trains of Heavenly Powers will open and fly like
Lightning, that shall reach from one Nation to another, by which the dark
Corners of the Earth shall become light.

This is the New, and Living Model, which your Lord Christ will now begin to
manifest himself in; Therefore hereunto, Let the Holy Anointed Ones, be ever
waiting for me, till Power come over all that is Nature and Creaturely Spirit.

Seeing I have (Oh my Lord) Liberty of Speech further to proceed for Enquiry
into this deep condescending Love of Thine, what upon my Spirit do move, which
is,

How the ardent Soul, that so great a lover of Thee is, may have frequent
admittance into Thy Council Chamger, to know, hear, and learn, what may be
conduceable, to such an high degree of Unity, as has been mentioned by Thee;
For thou art so over clothed with Greatness and Majesty, that it is no light,
or easy thing to maintain such Accesses unto Thee, as required is in so high an
Import as this is: For to know the Secrets that do concern the Kingdom of
Thine, and my Joy, and Glory in Thee? O my Lord, be pleased in This to satisfy
me.

Which was answered most sweet and mildly of my Lord, in these words.

O thou Soul of mine! thou have searched deep, for to find a Path of Life, that
few have found, because it is all Holy Ground, where none but Spirits that have
put on my Spiritual Body can ascend, and keep their feet steady in this Track,
which I to God the Father did freely pass; and so may you, as I in you this
Risen-Body shall quicken up, That so, as hereby you may know it is not my
Personal Glory, that shall prevent such Spirits, in this their humble, and Love
attempt: For I your Lord do well know, it is but expedient you should thus keep
up your acquaintance with me; For great will be your advantage hereby, in
taking and receiving from Me such fresh and wonderful Supplies of Wisdom, and
Knowledge in the Heavenly Mysteries, as shall satisfy, and quiet the Mind in
the midst of an unquiet, and disturbing World.

And now I have informed you, in what you are privileged in, take all care to
keep this way of the Spirit all free and clear, that your Flight may not be
stopped; so then you will keep your Dwelling securely above with me in the
Heavens, and need not be careful what happens to the World beneath; for your
Mountain Situation in God shall never be moved.

Therefore only happy unutterably are they who knows me thus for to be their
new living and ascending way, that as with my Spiritual Body, they may go in
and out, taking what is for their present use, which they may have from me, all
free, as coming in the Faith of Sanctity.

Now having taken in these Communications from my Lord, I found a precious
feeding hereupon, and did feel such a spreading and quickening Life come upon
me, as if all were filled with Christ in every part, which may be compared to
Elijah's stretching himself upon the dead Child, which was made alive thereby.

Thus the Lord Christ draws a lively Draught of Himself in every part in the
Soul, and nourishes it with his own Royal Blood, which runs through every
Vein, by which we know we have put on Christ in his Resurrection-Spirit, and
inward Body, to which Perfect Thing coming, Redemption is Finished.

Highly blessed are those that shall arrive hereunto.

By all these Manifestations, I see the Day of Love is breaking out, to compass
the whole Earth, and Christ will no longer a Stranger be; for so he does
Prophesy in me, That in the Holy Ghost, he will in this Last Age of the World
more wonderfully appear; therefore I am pressed in Spirit to Excite all that
love, and longs for to see, feel, and know Him, as a Present Counselor, and
Comforter, that they would thus prepare by Pureness of Heart and Mind, waiting
for this Love-Star to rise, and multiply it self to numberless Stars of Love,
and Power, that may a Heavenly Host be, to proclaim the Glory of Christ's
Kingdom.

Even so Come, Thou Mighty King of Glory, and make us Kings to Reign over all
That of the Earthly Life, as so redeemed by Thee, Thou Lamb of God, to whom the
Hallelujahs is given.

A Postscript. Being a Question put to the Author; which is this, viz.
Q. GOD, being so Pure, Holy, and Good in Himself; How comes Evil and Sin to be
awakened, since God is the Original, from whence All Created Beings have
proceeded? As (now) both Angels, and all Rational-Creatures are infected
therewith all.

As this was answered privately, so it is thought necessary and serviceable
(for the publich Satisfaction of All in General) to be incerted Here, being of
a weighty Concern for to be Resolved in, (which is not from the Reach of Man's
Knowledge or Wisdom, but from the Revelation of the Spirit of Christ (so given
in, and in This wise opened) viz.

A. That the Great and Mighty God and Creator, had all Principles and Centers,
both of Light and Darkness in Himself; with Good and Evil, Death and Life. But
all of These (tho seeming contrary) were bounded in Unity and Harmony; So that
the Darkness did not mingle, to Ecclips the Light; Nor the Evil to lessen and
diminish the Good; Or the Death to be hurtful to the Life.

The Divine Wisdom kept All in their Place and Station Vnviolated in Himself.
But what the Mighty God Procreated, and Generated out of Himself Angels of That
Kind (which kept not their first Station, they derived from their Creator) All
Essences, both in the Light, and in the Darkness, and were very Noble, Potent,
and Great. But being (now) Distinct, and apart from their Original Root (The
Being of God) They found a Power in themselves to awaken what Principles or
Essence they would (standing in a Free-Liberty, either to the Good, or to the
Evil) But not being watchful, to keep All in our Bounds in a meek Humility; A
Sinful disorder brake forth, and the Luciferian-Spirits got against the
Creator, who, (hereupon) turned them out of the Pure-Angelical Principles, so
as they must remain Apostates from God, till their Number of Punishment shall
be finished. Now, from hence came the Infection of All Mankind. These
Fall'n-Angels envying That New, and Heavenly Image. For God, after This, made,
and brought forth (to Replenish, and fill up the void and empty Spaces of the
Light World) Man, whom he had Created in their Room: Upon which they did
Conspire, how they might involve This New-Created Being, in the same Fact of
Disobedience with themselves, for they were Subtle-Knowing-Spirits, and
understood better than Adam, of what Consistency of Principles He stood in; And
that (through Temptation set on) the hidden Essence of Evil might be awakened
in Him; For He was Essenced both in the Good and Evil; and so, became more
easily corrupted and defiled.

Thus we give the Enquirer an Answer to the Question. How Sin at first came in.
Now it remains to let you know, How this Poison of Sin (that has infected All
of Adam's Posterity) shall be allayed and expelled The original Cure hereof, is
so known, that I need not set That forth, being generally believed that Christ
came in the Flesh to be a Propitiation for the Sins committed in the Flesh.

But now a deeper Thing than This I have to declare and make known as Thus. We
know all Outward-Births have been conceived in Sin; And yet somewhat of Good
(from the Original Root of Nature) has therefrom (in every one) sprung forth.
Now know and consider, there is no other way to make a Perfect Cure, but by
taking the Sting of Sin out; and that by another Birth conceived within the
Soul (which is Christ the Quickning-Spirit) (that which is a Sinless Birth:)
And as that grows up, and becomes strong in Spirit, the Sinful Part wythers
and dies away. Thus Christ the God-man works out Sin within the Properties of
Fall'n-Nature, And so, compleats Redemption Victoriously; For that which is
thus born of God, overcomes the World. 1 Ep. of John, Chap. 2.

But here meets me a Question, viz. Is Christ to be conceived, and born in
every one for Salvation so Intrinsically? Yea surely, This is, and must be the
Foundation-Seal, whereby God the Father will own, and rescue us, a being the
Express Image of his Beloved Son.

But again, it may be Objected, That I have verified, that God's Love is so
great and large, as All Fall'n-Angels and Spirits shall be Redeemed; But the
Question is, How can that be when so many die without any Appearance of this
New Birth you speak of? It is so, that millions of Souls do so (out of this
World) pass away, and much to their Loss and Suffering it will be. Yet know,
The Root of the eternal God is every Soul, tho never so Vile and Evil in this
Body they have lived in and so died. For Christ is the Light that has
enlightened every one that comes into the World. John 1. 0 that this Light and
Life of Christ has been shut up, and Sin has got uppermost, yet Christ (the
eternal Spark of Life) will save Himself in all that have Apostatized from Him;
Nothing shall suffer Loss but the Fuel of Evil-Works, that cannot pass through
the Judgment and Burning; And if this Life be passed over, and little or
nothing of This done; There must be a remaining in a Fearful-Expectation of
going through this Terrible Refining-Work after this Life, in Regions so
appointed for that end. Oh! that all careless, desperate Soul-Adventurers, that
know not the hard Tugs they must go through to clear and get off, what they
contracted of Vile-Matter, and Evil-Deeds in this Life; Therefore let All be
warned to Mortify and Renounce the Earthly-Birth, that so, they may escape the
Fiery-Indignation, that will come upon the Works of Iniquity.

Oh! now then, whilst you have Day with the Everlasting Sunshine of Love in
your Souls, Turn into it, and it will Clarify and Brighten you that (so Saved)
you may be out of all Future-Punishments, and Entrance find into the Joy of our
Lord; which may be known now in This present Time, in the Heavens of a
Pure-Heart; The happy Felicity of which I have already set forth, in this
Treatise.

So, hoping This may give Satisfaction to the Impartial and Sober-minded, for
Information into the Mysteries, that have been under a Veil (which is now
rending away) for the which break of Day, Let us earnestly Pray.

A Visional Appearance, or Prophesy. July 15. 1694.
I Had a sudden Representation came before me of a round Globe, like an Oval,
that had four Circles, and with in the first Circle, was a Pure white Glass of
Light; in which, there appeared the Personal Prince of Glory, with a numberless
Number of bright Bodily-Figures, with whom the Elders were; They had got
Victory over this World, who departed in the Faith of what they now enjoy; And
the Circle that was encompassed, was of a bright flame-colour.

Then, next to This was an Azure Blue-Circle; and here appeared the Faces only
of numerous Persons, that are yet living in Bodily Figure in this World (who
some are known, and others unknown to me) and the Motto that was written on
their Foreheads was, These are Those who are waiting for to break through into
Mount-Sion-Principle, where Christ the Lord, with all that are Redeemed out,
and from the Earth are.

Then, in the third Circle, which appeared like Pale-Lightning, there opened
Seraphims and Cherubims, bright Angels, very numerous that ascended; and were
appointed as a Guard, always Ministering to Those. And did see them break their
Circle,, and come amongst Those, who pressing were into the Light-World.

The fourth Circle was a more Dark Dusky-Colour; And here were those who were
yet to be gathered in, and born again; Some among them were known by Face to
me: they were yet but moving in the Dark-Principle (as shut from the Light. All
of This was conspicuously opened unto me.

And as I was waiting further upon the Vision (as it shut up, and opened again
the next Night) Then I saw One Mighty-Potent-Angel break through the Circle
where the Glorified-Person and their Elders were; and a great Shout there was,
crying, The Principle of Salvation is broken through; and now the Beast's
Kingdom will quickly go down, and worthy is this Mighty Conqueror to receive
(with the Lamb of God) Power and Riches, Wisdom and Strength. Honor, Glory and
Blessing; For the way is broken through for such to follow after, who in the
same Spirit of Faith are, acquitting their Sensual Reasonings.

Then did I see many striving to enter in, but could not till they had
relinquished the Name and Mark of the Beast (which is this worldly Principle)
with all its Polluted Immercements` and Babilonian Trafficks, which, by the
sight of this All-Conquering-Angel, were prevailed upon so to do.

Then a Free Pass was made for many (known by Figure and Name) to enter in, and
to receive Mutual-Power to Multiply and Spread Mount-Sions Glory over the whole
Face of this Earth.

So will all Nations be made to flow in, at the Rising of this
Bright-Orient-Spirit; for great Powers are moving from the Heaven in very Deed.

Oh Mighty Jesus! Thou art This Circle-Breaker, by, and in such, whom Thou will
assume, and take up to open the Fountain of Great-Wonders; by the which, the
Lost-Purity, shall again come to be Restored, and the Heavens (as a Curtain
over the whole World spread.

This is a Prophetical Vision, the fulfilling thereof draws near; Therefore
it seemed good to me to add it to the foregoing Part.

The Author has much of this kind lying by her (in Manuscript) that may yet
come to light, as God shall open an Effectual Door, for more to be Revealed,
that may Conduce, and make Ready, the New-Jerusalem Bride to be married to the
Immaculate Lamb of God: for the which, I say to all, Come, Oh come away with
speed.

The lifted up Standard of Christ, the Trumpet of whose Spirit does now Sound,
that the Dead in Sins may live again in a New-State, from the Resurrection-Life
of Christ, who comes down in a Fiery-Baptizing-Cloud: By which, He will enter
into Souls, who willing are to have This Sin-Defiling-Garment taken away.

The Oil of the Spirit is still flowing; but must now stop for the present,
till Vessels shall be found and made ready to take it in. For the which, the
Incense of Pure Prayers shall still ascend up to Heaven.

FINIS.
THis Book is to be Sold by the Author, Jane Lead, living at the Lady Mico's
College, right against Stepney Church; and at her Daughters Barbary Walton, at
Mr. Mileman's in New-street, at the End of Dean-street, right against the 3
Tuns.

And if any one be disatisfied in any Point handled in this Book, The Author is
ready to give answer thereunto, while she is yet Living.


