A FOUNTAIN OF Gardens WATERED by the Rivers of Divine Pleasure, And Springing
up in all the Variety of Spiritual Plants; Blown up by the Pure Breath into A
PARADISE, Sending forth their Sweet Savours, and Strong Odours, for
Soul-Refreshing.

P. J. De Loutherbourg

By JANE LEAD.

Cantic. 4. 16. Awake, O North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden,
that the Spices may flow out: let my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat his
pleasant Fruits.

Chap. 6. 2. My Beloved is gone down into his Garden to the Beds of Spices, to
feed in the Gardens, and to gather Lillies.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by J. Bradford, near Crowder's-Well, 1696.

A Bundle of Revelations United,
And to be Dispersed to such as are Impartial Seekers, and Unwearied Searchers
into the Deep Things of GOD: Which are only Knowable to that Holy Spirit, that
diggeth into the Rich Mines and Treasury of WISDOM: Of which the Author hereof
was under a Powerful Driving for the Space of about Thirty Years; keeping a
Private Recollection to her self, as they did from Time to Time open, and come
down as a Burning Shower; not knowing whether they should have been made
Public in her Age, but thinking rather they might be kept as a Garden
Enclosed, and as a Fountain Sealed.

PRovidence having opened a Door unexpectedly, through the strong Instigation
of an highly Worthy Person, truly enobled in the Spirit of his Mind, who having
had a savor and Relish of some Foregoing Books that had been Printed, did make
a generous offer, to have the Bank and Stock of what the Holy Unction had
dropped in, brought forth into Manifestation; for the Universal, Enlightening,
Leading and Refreshing, for the Dove-Flocks belonging to the Great Shepherd, to
whom such Pastures lie open to be freely fed upon; I think my self obliged to
Publish for these Ends, what can be recovered of the Process and Diary of my
Life, since I have been under these Love-Visitations from the Spirit of my
Lord. The Time being now accomplished, wherein the Hourglass of the Spirit is
a second time turned up, for the which there is a Call from the New Jerusalem
World, that all Persons of every Quality, Rank and Degree, under what
Denomination soever they be, throughout all Nations, Peoples, and Languages, do
give eart and watch every Golden Sand that this Glass does run, that nothing of
it may run wast. For it is the Morning-Watch and Daybreak of the Spirit, that
is to spread forth its Light and Glory, whereby is to be enlightened the Dark
Ignorant State of the World, who have sat in the Region of Traditional and
Literal Knowledge, according to the Rational Wisdom of Man, which through the
Innundation of the Spirit must all be drowned, and a New Earth prepared,
wherein the Sowing of the Spirit is to be with one pure Golden Grain, that can
admit of no mingling, of what is from Man; for another Time is now at hand,
wherein nothing but what is purely taught of God shall abide and stand.
Therefore as one that has obtained through Infinite Love, and large Grace, to
be Baptized into this Glorious Manifestation of the Spirit, I do beseech and
excite all to whom this Journal shall come, that they do well observe and take
diligent notice of the Method and Way, which God took with me, in order to the
bringing me forward to the Arrivement at the manifold. Degrees and Growths,
which is here in a most simple and undressed manner brought forth, without any
Alteration; but just as the Spirit was pleased to render it self in its own
Clothing. So in obedience to the Call of Wisdom, may the same Visitation of
Immediate Divine Teaching, as a Day Star in your Hearts appear, which may your
Souls greatly revive and cheer.

Now give me leave to tell you the Beginning of my Way that the Spirit first
led me into. In the first place then, after some Years that I had lived in some
good Degree of an Illuminated Knowledge, setting under the Visible Teachings of
Men, that could give no further Light than that they had arrived from others,
through all of which I traced as a wandering Spirit that could find no Rest: but
something still I found within my self that did open to draw in from a more
pure Air, then I could meet without me: Whereupon I introverted more into my
own Inward Deep, where I did meet with that which I could not find elsewhere;
except it were with such as were brought under the same Dispensation, of whom a
few Names were made known unto me. Wherefore I do give my own Experience, that
I would have every one that desires to be Sealed with the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, not to take in any Fears, Jealousies or Prejudices, concerning the
Emanations and Manuductions that the Holy Ghost will dispense forth, as any
shall be found Lovers and Waiters thereupon. For I my self found all other
Grounds and Pastures dry and barren, as a parched Desert; until I came to this
Fruitful Lebanon, where all Variety of sweet scented Flowers, did as another
Eden flourish pleasantly. Which were known and enjoyed by giving up to the
Teaching of the Holy Unction, which as the Waters of the Sanctuary, will never
cease springing, till they become an Overwhelming River, which is the true
Baptizing Water of Life. This you will find to be true, as you seriously apply
your self to this Way and Method of God's Immediate Teaching: Which then you
shall find to open in the Center of your own Soul. And this way manifests it
self in a various Dispensation. Sometimes this is by Inspeaking from the
Essential Word, which gives its own certain Sound, as different Occasions do
offer, upon a Soul's waiting thereupon. For it would be a very deplorable Case,
if Christ should leave his Flock, and seal up the Fountain of all Future
Revelation, that is no necessary to be Renewed in every Age of Time. Therefore
he brings us to lie at the Mouth of this bubling Well of his Spirit, for to
drink in what is New and Fresh, which does greatly delight the Soul; that would
otherwise be apt to faint and flag, before it come to the end of its Race.
Wherefore he does strew our Way, wit^ fragrant Flowers, all sweet and pleasant,
and of many and beautiful Colors; as you may observe when you read the
Similitudes and Visions which are here Published; God many times coming down to
unfold himself in this Figurative and Parabolical. Yet more Essentially and
Deeper, above and beyond all Figures and Representations, of which I shall give
you some account as being under Command not to keep back, or shun to declare
the whole Purport whereinto I have been carried; for the universal Refreshment
and Benefit of such who are as meaned Children from every other Breast, but
that of their Eternal Mother, whence all Wisdom and Understanding does stream
forth Intellectually, which is the growing Nutriment, as it does pass Radically
into the Soul, as the Blood does into the Veins. Now here is a Cessation of
Sensible Images, for all is turned into an Intellectual Sight, Operation, and
Sensation. From this Center of Light, though no visible Images are impressed or
raised thereupon, yet here is the true Ground and Substance of all which are in
an Interior Figure portrayed in the Spirit of the Mind, and brought out no
further, but do remain an Invisible Indea, just as it is with God himself,
before he forms out of the Essential Ground, Shapes and Figures of Things. So
as these may conduce as much to the Informing and Enlightening, Renewing and
Comforting, and even Essentializing of the Spirit into God, as any of the
other; nay, I know it to be the more Sure Ground, and Concenter of the Spirit:
and if it should never know any of those other Figurative Visions; yet keeping
to the Center to drink in the pure Streams of Revelations, as they arise
herefrom, it shall give them an Access into the Full Body and Center of the
Trinity; which swallows up all of Shadows and Pictures, and terminates into the
very Essentiality of a God-Formation, into Substantial Powers acting in, and
from the pure Essence of Spirit in Transnewed Nature. Thus Intellectual Vision,
thus considered, is the very next Step to that Beatifical Vision, or Seeing of
O^d barely, without any other Medium, but the very express Personality of the
Lord JESUS; by being so consummated into the Essence of his Spirit and Light,
as that whatever is knowable and obvious to Him, may also our Sight of Light
be, both here in Time, and hereafter in Eternity. Which is an unknown Mystery:
of which an account may be hereafter more fully given, as it shall be entered
into.

As to the Other Sort of Vision, that is no New Ministration. For it is of Old
that God did thus often make out himself, as a more taking and plain Way, in
raising Images distinct, for Teachableness unto us. And this proceeds from
another Center than that of the Intellectual: it is more Deep. Some Persons may
stand in this Center-Line naturally of Seeing, and Awakening a Formation out of
this Center, according to the strong Impression of their Minds, by various
Figures. If the Mind of such be Pure, and ardently run into Heavenly Objects,
it will raise Appearances suitably: and there will be an Awakening, and Drawing
out of various Speculations of Beauty and Glory, as may forespeak what is to be
accomplished, in a Particular way. This Way of God's Manifestation, has been
frequent in Former, and in This Present Time: But these are Props for the Weak,
that they may not faint in their Way up to God's Mountain of more Perfect and
Naked Vision. Now of this kind of Vision I have been much visited withal: but I
press to get beyond it. Here is no Stay: the Ground from whence these open is
too Shallow. I am driven now to descend Deeper, where the Spirit even level may
be with its own. Eternal Essentiality; that Power therefrom it may have, to
Make and Form whatever it will; in, and from Substance that is Original.

Then as there is of Divine Vision, that opens from the Holy and Heavenly Mind,
which draws in these Presentations; so there is another Sort of Vision that
is from the Starry Influence, and Working Power of the Elements, that in
conjunction are with the Common Spirit and Mind of a Person. And though there
be not any Eminent Work of Regeneration, yet there may be Vision: as Balaam
was, and others, had that Gift, and yet were not Renewed in their Spirits, or
brought nigh to God thereby. Such notwithstanding may have Power to raise many
Images that may foretell and signify what is to come to pass. For there is a
Starry Magia, that some may have a Natural Property to open in themselves: and
it does sometimes awaken into Manifestation in the deep of Sleep, and gives
Warning of Evil that is to come, and Shows of Good; as relating to the present
Manifestation of Time. And this may be, and is, a Common Gift. But where it is
in a Sanctified Vessel, it is far otherwise illustrated then in those who
nothing of that can give proof of.

So now hence we see the different Nature of Vision, and of Prophetical
Intelligence therefrom, that we may watch to every Center opening. For the
Serpent's Subtilty stands ready to mingle, where ever he can enter in. For he
is a great Magical Prince, and the outward Planets are (...) his Operators in
the Constitution of the mere Natural Man. Now of all these, the most Safe is
the Intellectual and Divine Vision, that opens from the more profound
Center-Deep: but yet no^ so as that we are to stick here even in this.

For there is a Center Deeper still, where the Deity unmasked is of all Figures
and Images, known and seen in his own Simplified Being. And when in Spirit
caught up here, we see all the various Wonders, brought forth in the very Life.
Essen-tial Property, as wrought out of God immediately, and in their Living
Figures, as the innumerable Hosts, which do replenish the Heaven of God's
Habitation: which is the purest and most infallible Vision, that our Spirits
may Eternally Concenter in, with all the delightful Satisfaction, that the very
Angels before the Throne of God's Majesty do enjoy. So we may this know as
often as from all Bodily Sense we can get away. For this kind of Vision highly
different is from that which we call Divine, or Intellectual; because it does
all over sublime the Spirit, Soul, and Body, during the time that the
Munition-Flame of the Holy One does as a Pavilion all over spread, and keeps
all of Sense at the Foot of the Mount, while Spirit enters into the
Tabernacle-Glory of the Holy Trinity.

This sort of Vision the Beloved John was in, when being wholly caught up in
the Spirit, he saw all the Variety of the Lord's Kingdom, and (...) express
Personality. Since which we have not known any in late Ages that have been in
the like Transportation in Spirit, and yet alive in the Body, to declare of
what was seen and heard after such a Wonderful Way as he had. But the Author
must (to the Honor of God) own, that something, not unlike to this, has been
to her manisested. Such Grace and Love Our JESUS does again afford, and
brings himself into our Knowledge, by this Way of the Spirit clear and free;
that we may know him that is True, and receive by this Highest
Vision-Ministration, the full extent of his Will and Mind: that is, that we may
both see, and hear, as if we were out of the Body of Corporeity, while yet in
the Body; as Supersensualized to know, and behold purely, through the Organical
Properties of the Spirit, according as every Objection in Heavenly Places in
their Order do move in reference to our Cohabitation within those Circulations
through the Spiritual Body.

Thus have I brought forth out of the deepest Deep, what the present Measure of
my Knowledge and Experience is, in this Mystical Dispensation. Which hereby is
as the New and best of Wine that has been reserved for this Last Time. Whereby
it may be understood, that Christ has not forgotten to make good his Promise,
to renew the Spring of his Spirit, by a continued Succession of it. And as we
see and hear the Fruitfulness of it does more generally abound, and find
entertainment in the World, by a New Generation of Apostolical Spirits, so does
it presage a New Kingdom and State is near approaching. Which is Argument
enough to provoke all that would be Subjects of this Kingdom, which the Lamb
has only Right unto, to be preparing and making Ready, as the First Fruits,
that they may be Qualified to make up this New Jerusalem-Bride. Therefore as my
Fellow Denizens of this City, which is from Above, wherever ye are hidden,
whether as Exiles, or Captives scattered to and fro, I beseech you let your
Inward Ear he attentive, keeping Watch and Ward in great Calmness and Stillness
of Mind. Then may ye bear the Love-Calls, passing through that Horn which is
filled with pure Oil, that will gather and draw you into the High, Celestial,
and Spiritual Pasture, and Fold; where our goodly Tents may be Pitched, and of
which we may go in and out, to that rich Sharon, which springs and flowers
round about our Kingly Shepherd; that so as his Sheep and Lambs we may be
gently led from Fountain to Fountain, and drink and feed together, in the same
Harmony and Unity; as do the Saints in the Upper Fold, so we in this Lower.

I shall now wind up all with a Caut^n to two Ranks: the First shall be to the
Unlearned and Ignorant in this Method and Way of the Spirit's Manifestation.
Which is, that they do forbear Rash and Censorious Judgment upon those Things
that are at present above their Reach. For as they desire not to be prevented
and bereaved of the Great Benefit of Divine Inspiration, and the Assistances of
the Holy Ghost, my Advertisement to such is, that they become Simple and
Child-like, and adventure upon the Conduct and Manifestations of the Holy
Spirit, then will they find another manner of fruitful Life will in them
spring, and no reason shall they have to repent for Acquiescing to the Divine
Will herein. The Second Caution shall be to that sort, which are already
Initiated into this our Mystic and Supersensual Wisdom, that may have with me
run deep into the Ocean of what is Mysterious and Wonderful for Knowledge.
First I must caution you, with my self, to keep very Low, entering into a
Self-Annihilation, so as a Nothing to be, with reference to the Creaturely
Being, that the All-Deifick Unction may arise as an overflowing Tide: and never
to think we have obtained by all that we have yet reached to, what yet remains
of those Immense Treasures, which are yet further to be Revealed. For there is
still a growing Tree of Life, that renews all Variety of Wisdom; as you will
in part find by this Present, as well as by some Foregoing Books by me
Published.

Thus having given you a true Narrative of the Several Removes and Risings,
from one Degree to another, from Depths to Heights, and from Heights again to
Depths; out of which has been Brought forth very Mavelous and Wonderful
Secrets: which it was the pleasure of the Fountain of Spirits to distribute and
communicate; being such Mysterious Things as happily may be rarely found
elsewhere; which has often me astonished, that such Unusual and Strange a
Method the Spirit should take with me, opening such things. But it has been
given me to know, upon a Diligent Inquiry, that there is an Age coming on, the
like to which has not yet been, to whom these Prophesies and Revelations do
belong. So that though the Day of my Life is far spent, so that I may not see
the full Harvest, of what is by the Spirit sown here, to be reaped; yet assured
I am that all is reserved for a Glorious Time, wherein shall arise a New
Generation, that clothed upon will be with such a Mantle, as is interwoven with
Light, Wisdom, Knowledge and Flaming Power. Among which there may be some that
I may bear the Memorial of a Mother to as well Natural as Supernatural; that
may possibly succeed in the same Spirit, which I shall pray may be as Wisdom's
Key, to go on to open in them the Golden Remains, which are yet to be brought
forth, for the promulgation of the Priestly and Prophetical Kingdom, upon the
Earth. So now I shall conclude, requesting you as you shall draw in any Light,
or feel any Refreshment herefrom, that you would join with me in Acclamations
and Praises to the Ancient of Days, who has put into the Hands of a
Good-willer to these Divine Mysteries, to bring forth into the Public, what
might otherwise have been left in Oblivion and Secrecy. And it is my pecu^
Request, which I this place leave, that the N^ons may bless, and pray for such
an Instrument, that has given a Proof of so Universal a Love to All. So that
the Fullness of all Blessings and Showers from the Heavenly Powers, may (...)
upon the Impartial and Single-hearted. Readers and Good-willers hereof, shall
be the constant Invocation and Prayer of her, who while living in the Body
shall never cease to serve all her Fellow Members, in the Gift of God,
Universally.

J. Lead.

THE EDITOR TO THE READER.
THERE having been a Promise made in the Preface to the Ark of Faith, that the
Diary of this Author should follow, the First Volume of the same is now
accordingly Published for an Universal Good. For ^he Author, or the Instrument
rather ^ade use of by the Divine Wisdom, is known to be of so Universal a
Spirit; that nothing less hereby can be designed. And howsoever, what is herein
De^ivered, as well as the Manner of the De^ivery it self, may come to be
opposed, either on this hand, or on that; I think I can say, that I am more
than Morally Assured, That the All-wise God has hereby Ends to bring about,
which the most Acute and Vulturous Eye of the Greatest Rationalist shall never
be able to dive into: and that all will serve but to a Fuller Breaking out of
the Truth, and the Divine Light; that True Light, which Enlightens every one
that comes into the World, so far as it is not Resisted, and according to the
Degree of Purity in the Vessel, for the Reception and Reflection of its Rays.

This is an Age that thinks it self to excel all that have ever went before it,
in the Discovery and Improvement of Truths: and it cannot be denied, but that
of these late years Mechanical Knowledge has been brought up to a very great
Height, which has had both its Good and Bad Effects in the World. But
notwithstanding all the Fancied or Real Light, in matters either Physical or
Theological; which the Present Age does so much boast of; it may perhaps not
unfitly enough be said of those of that make the chiefest Cry, that the Veil is
still before their Eyes. And let these Imagine what they please, and Pride
themselves in the Penetration of their Sight, they must all sooner or later be
convinced, that it will be impossible, without the Immediate Hand of Christ, to
rend away the Veil: or to penetrate through it into the Sanctuary of God, or of
Nature; without the Great High Priest, bearing the Oracle of Truth upon his
Breast, do make a way for them to enter in: and do both open their Eyes and
Ears, that seeing, they may see; and hearing, they may hear, whatever is
written by his Finger, or spoken by his Mouth. Let not the Blind think they
see, or the Deaf believe they hear: but especially let both take heed not to be
Offended at those Little ones (as the Jews were of old) whose Eyes, or Ears
have been Opened by the Word and Power of JESUS.

And that there may be some Such even in This Day, wherein Materialism and
Sadducism do certainly no less, (if not much more) eminently, than in the First
Day of Christ's Appearance in a low Corporeal Form, Reign and Triumph; will not
seem perhaps so very strange, or incredible, as to many it may at first appear
to be, when what is Now here Published, as well as what has been already
Publ^shed of this Nature through the same Hand, shall come to be Thoroughly
examined, and scanned into, by any Impartial Inquirer. Yet indeed such are
justly to be esteemed worthy of all Commendation, that shall not from any evil
Propension, but purely from an Holy Jealousy for the Honor of God, and out of
a true Tenderness and Veneration for the Sacred Scriptures (which undoubtedly
do contain his Revealed Will to Man,) withhold giving their Assent hereto; if
they yet Oppose not, what they may not at present comprehend. Who, if they do
indeed take heed to that most sure Word of Prophesy, and do suspend any
Positive Determination in this Matter, while they have no other but this Light,
as of a Candle or Torch, shining in a Dark Place, are in a good disposition to
receive whatever further Manifestations of himself the most wise God may please
to communicate: And will be then fully satisfied, when the Day shall dawn, and
the Day Star arise in their own Hearts. Which it will not fail to do, according
as they shall be found true to what they have already received, and believing
in the Promises that are therein given for their sakes, from Him who is the
Faithful Witness, and that is the same Now as he was Yesterday, in the days of
the Patriarchs, the Prophets, and the Apostles; and will be the same for ever,
the Yea and the Amen.

For in all Ages of the World God has had some special Friends, though perhaps
hidden for the most part from the World, because they were not of it: with whom
in a more Familiar and Intimate manner he has chosen to converse, and manifest
himself. In all Ages God has been known to be the God of the Prophets: and for
his Honor some have been consident to say, That he never did any Great Thing
in the Economy of his Church, or in the Kingdoms of the Earth in order thereto,
but that he has always before revealed his Secret unto his Serv^nts the
Prophets: and given express Manduductions, and Rules, for the Effecting of
every such Work; as particularly in the days of Moses, of of the Tabernacle
with all its Vessels; in those of Solomon, of the Temple; in those of Ezra, of
the restitution of That, and of the Law; and in those of the Apostles, of the
Foundation of the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ: which is now in the Fullness of
Time about to be rerevealed, at His Second expected Coming, in the Power and
Glory of the Father, to Judge both the Quick and the Dead, according to
everlasting Righteousness and Equity, and to put down all Enemies under his
Feet; that so he may not only for a Thousand Years, which are to him but as One
Day, but for Ever sit upon his Holy Hill of Sion, governing all Worlds with a
Scepter of Holiness, as the LORD of LORDS, and KING of KINGS.

Wherefore the Spirit of the Lord, which has more, or less, in all Ages thus
moved (as in a particular Treatise on this Subject shortly to be Published is
at large Proved) upon the face of the meek and deep silent Waters, in the Souls
of such, as have been first made clean through the Washing of the Word; will
certainly not fail to move upon them in this Last Age, in order to a New and
Glorious Creation of New Heavens and a New Earth. And the Inspiration of the
Almighty, which gives man Understanding, may with some reason be hoped not to
have been quite Exhausted in the former Ages, but that he will appear even unto
Us, as he did appear unto Them; opening Variously the Springs of all Spiritual,
and even Natural Knowledge: and will thereby renew also those Noble Works, and
Deeds of Royal Power, that he did in the days of our Fathers, the Holy Prophets
and Apostles; and in the Old time before them, even in the beginning of the
Creation of God: Before Man had corrupted his way; or had alienated himself
from the Image of the Everlasting Light, and the Unspotted Mirror of the Power
of God. While not having cut himself off from the pure Streams, flowing from
the Glory of the Almighty, he might, as His Representative, Oversee, and Govern
all the Creatures of this Globe, whether in the Earth, or in the Water under
the Earth, or in the Air above it; by virtue of that Sovereign Charter
committed to him, Genesis 1. 28.

Which Charter having been forfeited, the Divine Character expunged, the Seals
broken, all the Ensigns of Royalty defaced, the Virgin Image deflowred, and the
Angelical Life and Might exchanged for that contemptible weak Form, which we
now wear, that is subject to the curse of Mortality and Sin; It is again
renewed to us, much more strongly than at first, through the Pure Humanity of
Christ, which is exalted above all the Principalities and Powers in the
Heavenly Places; the express Character of the Father afresh imprinted, as in
the very Forehead; a new and everlasting Commission established, to go forth
and act in the Tri-un Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which is sealed with
the Heart of Jesus; All the Royal Ensigns are redelivered, the Crown of
Immortality, the Scepter of Righteousness, and the Love Imperial Standard of
JEHOVAH; the Violated Image is restored, the Image of the Beast ground to
Powder, and his Number perfectly raced. So that the Bestial and Antichristian
Kingdom being hereby brought to an end, a new Era of the Kingdom of Christ
does there upon Commence; first in particular Souls, then in the whole Family
of the Firstborn, after that in the Great Assembly of the After-born, and so on
till the whole Mass be Leavened and Transmuted by the Ferment of the Divine
Nature, passing through the Glorified Body of Jesus, that is able to subdue
every thing unto it self. This verily is that Kingdom, which is so much talked
of, and so little every where understood, but less still pressed after: which
is in this Book, and in that also of the Revelation of Revelations (Published
now ten years Ago,) so Essentially and Fundamentally declared; as nothing
Higher, nothing Deeper can upon this Subject be ever laid down, whether in
Time, or in Eternity.

And because Solomon, (whose Reign was as a faint Sketch or Type, of the
Glorious Reign of the true Jedidiah, or Beloved of the Lord) built himself a
Royal Palace in Lebanon, which was a fruitful and a well-watered Soil, and most
beautiful for its situation, where he made Gardens and Orchards, planting in
them Trees of all the variety of most excellent Fruits, also Cedars and
Fir-Trees for Building; with great Waterworks, Pools of Water, and Fountains;
with a fair Tower also looking toward Damascus; and with a Vineyard of
Red-wine, where he entertained his Shulamite Queen, and her Honorable Women:
Therefore is the Palace, or Mansion House of the Great KING, the true Solomon,
or Prince of Peace, here Parabolically represented to be raised up as in a New
Lebanon, whereinto the Tabernacle of the Eternal Wisdom, coming down from God
out of Heaven, with all its Furniture, is brought: and the Children of the
Lamb's Bride are figured out to grow up by the sides of this House, as the
Branches of a fruitful Vine, or as so many several Lillies, from one Stock, or
Olive-Plants from one Root; according to the manifold proportion and diversity
of the Divine Seed cast into the Ground of Nature, by the Great Seedsman.
Whence the expected Kingdom of the Messiah in Restored Nature, which is called
the Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven, is according to the Spirits
Mystical Dialect, compared to a Vineyard, to an Olive-yard, to a Garden of
Lillies, and to a Corn-field: and is expressed by the various figurations of a
New Eden; of a New Canaan; of New Heavens and New Earth; of Fountains, and
Trees, and Plants of all sorts; of Canals, Aqueducts, and Rivers of Pleasure;
of Tents, Palaces, and Temples; of a Mountain, of a Rock, and of a City; of
Sion, Lebanon, and the Hills of Spices; of new found Countries descended out of
the Heavens, or by the Creating Word in the Divine Magia made to appear, as a
new Sharon, and a new Havilah, and a Beulah; of Jerusalem, of Bethel, and of
the Southland of Eternity; of the Pleasures and Grandeur of a Rich, Powerful,
and Wise Prince, such as Solomon, and of all the Badges of Royalty, and Scenes
of Magnifi^t Glory, that do, as in a shadow, precede, attend, or follow the
Marriage and Reception of a Royal Bride. But this Heavenly Kingdom, this
Marriage-supper of the KING, this Inauguration and Coronation of the Lamb, and
of his Bride, to the Kingdoms of the Earth, and to the lost Dominion and
Sovereignty over the whole Six days Work, is not to be expected but after very
great and mighty Preparations; many forerunning Signs of the Son of Man coming
to us in his Fathers Glory, and the Six Ascending Steps to the Throne of the
Great Solomon. All which are most difficult to pass; so that few, if any, have
been able in many Centuries to hold out to the last Degree, or Ascension-step
to this Throne. But they have fell short of the PHILADELPHIAN Crown, and of the
high Prerogatives thereof, viz. the being made Pillars, and Principal
Supporters, in the Descending Temple of the Most High God; the bearing the Name
of JEHOVAH, by an Essential communication of the Properties, Powers, and
Dignities of their Eternal Father, opened to such in JESUS, and by a most Real,
Intimate, and Vital Penetration of that most glorious wonderful Name, burning
in the Bush of their Humanity, and putting forth it self in Imperial Acts and
Deeds; Their bearing the Name of the New Jerusalem-Mother that Freewoman which
is above, and demonstrating livelily its Inscription, by an utter defacing of
that of the Mother of Babylon, and of the Beast upon which she rides; and by a
Majestic environing Brightness as of the Sun, a subduing the Moon, with all
that is sublunary and mutable, under their Feet, and a wearing upon their Heads
a Crown of Twelve Stars, wherein so many Royal Pre-eminences and Ghostly Powers
are contained; The bearing the Names of the Foundations of this City, the Names
of the Tribes of Israel, and the Names of the Apostles of the Lamb; and the
bearing lastly the New Name of Jesus, that ^o Man knows but he himself, who
with his own Finger has written it on their Vestures, and on their Thighs,
that so in all things they may be made like unto him their Head-Life, by the
allpowerful working of His Spirit, with which they are sealed.

There are but few found, who have so much as an Ear to hear what the Spirit
says to this Church of Philadelphia, the First Fruits of the Lamb: or even but
to receive the Promises of the Holy and True One, who is now at this instant
with the Key of DAVID, Opening gradually this blessed state in a few chosen
Names; so that none shall ever shut it more. And he is shutting up in such the
Dark Abyss, and wrathful depraved Nature; so that it can never be again Opened.
But still fewer are they, who have not only an Ear to hear, but also an Heart
and Hands to Act whatever the Spirit says: and who dare to adventure on, to
the laying hold of such a weighty Crown, as is that of the Firstborn. And even
of those that do so adventure forward for this most High Prize, some do stop
having attained to the First Degree, others rest in the Second, and others in
the Third, as thinking that they are already got to the Sixth, and so want
nothing but to be taken presently to sit with their Lord in his Throne. Some
are willing at the end even of the first days work of Regeneration, or
Spiritual Creation, to enter into their Sabbath: and without having passed the
Works of the other Five Days, to sit contented with the first productions of
Divine Light upon the Soul. Some who have beheld one, or two, or perhaps three
Signs of the coming of the Son of Man, have not had patience longer to wait for
all the Signs: but have thence peremptorily concluded, that he was come to
them, and that his Kingdom was in them, before a Redemption has been wrought
out from the lap^ Nature; or before the very Head of the Serpent has been
bruised in them, and slain by the Virgin Seed of the Wisdom of God, in the meek
Second Holy Principle of Light and Love: which by the Inspired Penmen of Old,
is expressed by that most soft, and yet most victorious Name JAH. Hallelu-JAH.

For the prevention therefore of all such Miscarriages, and for the undeceiving
of those who think it a light thing to be a King's Son, or a King's Daughter,
it has seemed good to the Most Wise God and Father of our Spirits to raise up,
according to the necessity of this present day, an Instrument by him fitted,
through many Fires and Waters, and through all manner of Temptations, both in
the Heighths above, and in the Depths beneath, and immediately instructed at
Wisdoms Oracle, for so great a Work, as the education of the King's Children,
and the leading them up step by step to their Fathers Throne, that they may be
Kings and Priests upon the Earth unto God, and unto the Lamb for ever; and may
from the Righteous Virgin Earth spring up as Plants of mighty Renown in a
well-watered Paradise, and as Olivebranches, continually empty the Golden Oil
out of themselves, and drop their fatness, for maintenance of a Perpetual Light
in the Sanctuary, that was before darkened.

This will easily be seen to be the Drift of these Writings, by any one that is
but a little skilled in their Dialect. And it is no contemptible Providence of
the All-seeing Eye of Et^rnity, that this Book, after having laid so many years
as in the dust, should now come to be brought forth into the Light, in such a
Critical Juncture of Time, and in this very Year, which is full of great
Expectations on this hand, and on that. To which nothing is given me in
Particular to say, but only this Word of Caution to the greedy Expectants and
Waiter, for some Outward visible Revolution in Church or State: Let such be
Sober in their Hopes, and take good heed to themselves of their Observations,
or Calculations: and let them not lay too great a ^ess upon any external
Deliv^ance how great soever, or upon the Rise or ^ll of any Earthly Monarch,
Potent^, (...) State: neither let them seek for the Kingdom of Christ in their
own Will, nor according to certain preconceived Notion ^d Images, nor binding
it down to any Sect or Party in the (so called) Christian World: for they shall
find i^ no where but in the Triumphant Resignat on of Jesus Christ. When
therefore they shall be certain that they have drunk of the (...) ^me Cup which
he did drink, that they (...) passed through the strait and wrestling Gate of
Death, that they are entirely passed from all their Own, into the Liberty of
the Divine Will, and have broken down every Image and Boundary, that Man, as
Man, has set up; then let them know that the Kingdom of Christ is near to
them, and upon its very breaking forth in much Glory, Majesty, and Power. And
when they themselves are thus got without the Walls of the Great City, Babylon;
then, and (...) before, let them expect the Descent of the New Jerusalem out of
Heaven. For most assuredly, to none but Virgin Souls; to the true Nazarites,
that for the Hope of Israel do wait in the Inward Temple Day and Night, with
their Lamp-spirits ever burning, that so they may be ready to go forth at their
Bridegroom's Call to meet him; to the Lillies of the Vall^y, who, though they
neither Reap or Spin for themselves, are yet arrayed more gloriously than
Solomon, in the Immaculate Robe of the Lord their righteousness; yea to none
but the Undefiled Doves, that are in him made all beautiful and fair, and that
having washed themselves seven times in the Pool of his Blood, are thereby set
apart, and redeemed from the Earth, to be His Companions; will this Beloved
City come down. Of the Truth of which every one must necessarily be convinced,
that does but consider seriously the Process that this Author has been Led in,
according as the same from these ensuing Memoirs may be gathered, in order to
the drawing down the Powers of the Heavenly Worlds, and the unsealing the
Fountain of the Holy Ghost, and the Book of the Refurrection. Neither can this
Jerusalem Glory be dis^erned by any others, or after any other method than is
herein laid down from the Opener of that Principle, let them look never so long
about, crying, Lo here in the East! or, Lo there, in the West. For this High
Promotion of Wisdom's Children comes neither from the East, nor from the West;
neither out of the North, (as some some are gazing after it at present,) nor
yet from the South. But the Lord comes from TEMAN, where the glorious Virgin
Principle is Unlocked; whence the warm, holy, Supernal South Wind does blow
upon the Gardens of Lebanon, and cause the Spices to flow out; whither the
Patriarch Abra^am always directed his Travels; and where Jacob saw the Ladder
of Heaven, and the Gate thereof. The Key of which Gate is there presented by
the Hand of Divine Wisdom to all her Children, to whom she cries aloud,
standing at the entry of the Celestial City, and proclaims the Joyful
JUBILEE; inviting them to return Now from their Captivity, and Presently to
come forth from the Tottering Babel, which is founded upon the Sands, and to
enter with her Key into this City, which has Foundations. For this She
stands in the top of the Heavenly Places, and puts forth her Voice to them
at the coming in at the Doors: for this She meets them in every Path, lays
hold on them that, having tried them with her Laws, they may enter in Hereby,
and feast at the Table which she has furnished for them. But, alas! I see,
that the most even of those that have been enrolled under Her Discipline, will
be not a little afraid to lay hold on this Key of the Kingdom, when it is
reached out to them: and will shrink from it, beholding how large it is, and
that it is made full of all Solid Gold; even as this very Author did at its
first Presentment, as thinking it impossible for any ever to bear the Weight of
it. Besides this, there is a Mercurial Serpent which twineth himself about it,
whose Life can be destroyed no otherwise but by the Royal Antidote of the
Unicorns Horn.

Let not any therefore think it a Light thing, or easily Attainable, to bear
the Key of the Government on their Shoulders. But let them examine thoroughly
the several Progresses and Steps of this Author, in order to its Attainment;
that are Recorded for the space of about Six Years, in This present Volume. Of
which it must be confessed that much has bcen Lost; so that the Links of
Wisdom's Chain may often seem to be broken. But as the greatest Architect,
Statuary, and Painter of these Last Ages, is said to have become so Excellent,
merely by his Observations drawn from a most Imperfect Maimed Statue, or Bust,
being the Work of a most Exquisite and Masterly Hand: so it is not at all to be
despaired, but that there may be found also in This Day some of Rare and
Excellent Abilities of Spirit, who, notwithstanding any Imperfections or
Maimings of this Spiritual Register, or any Defects in its Exterior Habit of
Languge or Style, may by the assistance of their Supreme Tutor' draw forth,
even from the Disjointed Parts of This Work, such an excellency of Knowledge
and Skill in all True Learning and Solid Wisdom; that they may be found ten
times better, and more Skilful, than all the Magicians, and Men of Fa^ that are
in the Universities throughou^ (...) Europe. For when Wisdom's Key is obtained,
and her Book unsealed in any, according to the Process here described; then may
all the Depths of Philosophy, as well as of Divinity, and all the Hidden
Treasury of Wisdom; in All Worthy Arts and Sciences, be successively broken up.
And thus, as from one Foot of the Rhodian Coloss, (which is to This Day
preserved) every one that is but skilled in the Proportions of the Human Body,
can exactly Calculate what the Whole should be, and Know thence how to frame
one accordingly: so every one to whom God has given some good degree of
Understanding in the Symmetry and Proportions of the Spiritual Body, will
notwithstanding any Intervening Breaches, or Abrupt Transitions, be able hence
to Frame some suitable Idea of the whole Design and Economy of God, in the
Manifestation of his Kingdom to Separated and Virginiz'd Souls.

Now the Manifestation of this Divine Kingdom is Various in Several Persons,
and in the same Person at several Times. Whence this Variety in the Descent of
the Heavenly and Ghostly Powers, (whether in this Principle or in another) and
of the Joys of the World to come, is here not unfitly Symboliz'd out by a
Garden, or Paradise; as it was by the King thereof himself in his truly
Gracious Answer to the Penitent Thief. And yet more Expressively is this
Flourishing State of the Lamb's Elect Bride Cipher'd to us by a Fountain of
Gardens, or Paradises, planted with all Trees of Frankincense, Myrrh, and
Alloes, and with all the chief Spices; out of which the Royal Ointment is
prepared for the Consecration of such Priestly Kings, as are to Reign upon the
Earth in the Lamb's Nature, and Name. Which shall make all the Wild Beasts of
the Forest to fly into Dens and Lurking Holes, and every Venomous Creature to
hide it self from the Great Attick Iomin, in his Representatives, and from the
Fiery Stream issuing out of his Mouth; by which the Spirit of Antichrist, that
Huge Leviathan, shall be utterly Destroyed.

So will the Kingdom of Christ manifest it self, by a Gradual, but Total,
overthrow of that of Him, who has Usurped all the Kingdoms of the Earth; until
all that which he has caused to be as a Wilderness by the Blast of his
Poisonous Breath, be again Renewed, and made to be as the Garden of God, filled
with Wells of Living Water, and Streams from the Upper Lebanon: A Garden giving
forth all the Variety of Flowers and Fruits of Life, according to the Seasons,
and according to every ones Essential Ground, and Internal Soil: a Garden in
which there is not any mixed Tree, existing from the Root of the outward
Elements, containing Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood, Light and Darkness; but
all whose Trees are Trees of Life, all whose Plants are Plants of
Righteousness, all perfectly Good and True, All-beautiful and Lustrous.

How various the Manifestation of this Lebanon-Kingdom will be, no Pen can
describe, no Tongue can express. That is Various indeed: but the Manifester all
the while is but One; and the Essential Word of God, which is the Worker of all
these things, is most Uniform. The Manuductions, Illuminations, and
Inspirations are very different, but still there is but one Way, one Light, and
one Spirit; one Lord, and one God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of
us all; who in these last Days is about to appear yet more fully to us by his
Son, setting him Openly upon his Holy Hill. Thus he who is the Abyssal Unity of
all Beings, clotheth himself as with several Names, r^ forth in several Powers,
wears on his Head several Crowns, and glanceth from his Eyes several Lights.
And yet there is but One Crown, One Power, and One Name, as there is but One
Light; which diffuseth it self in all the variety of Colors. Which Unity and
Variety of Light is well to be heeded in the Reading of this Book, and of all
other Spiritual Treatises whatever, of what Rank or Degree soever they be. For
God sometimes appears in the Darkness, and yet in that Darkness there is Light:
again he appears in the Light, and yet Darkness may be mixed with this Light,
till the Perfect Day do spring from on High. Thus he appears to some at a
distance, as in a great and strong Wind; to others in an Earthquake: in both
which Forms he eminently manifested himself through some, about the Beginning
of the Last Century. Then after this, approaching still nearer, he apppears to
a third sort in the Fire: as at this very Day he powerfully does to some, that
are known to Wisdom's Disciplehood. And lastly he demonstrates his Presence to
some, as to this his Chosen Vessel, in a still small Voice, and in a sweet,
gentle, lambent Flame. Sometimes God manifests himself to the Eye or Ear of the
Receptive Heart, according to the several Properties, Operations, and Influxes
of this or that Name, which he puts on; of this or that Attribute, which he
communicates; of this or that Sphere, in which the Living Wheels of the
Creatures before the Throne of God do move. Thus was he manifested to the
Unregenerate Spirit of Balaam, according to the eficacy of the Name Shaddai;
who saw the Vision of him in this Similitude or Vesture, falling into a Trance:
And this is the lowest sort of True Divine Prophecy. Then was he Manifested
unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob by the Name of El-Shaddai: which is a
much higher Degree than the former; as that whereby is expressed, not only the
Paternal Property in the Absolute Sovereignty of his Will, but also the Meek
Love-Principle co-joined with it in a Federal Rite. After this he was
manifested under the Law, at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, by the Most
Essential, and Great Name of the Covenant, Jehovah; but still according to the
variety of the Vessel, and its fitness to receive the Emanations thereof,
either in a High or Low Degree. Then lastly he was made known, under the
Gospel, to the Apostles, to the Evangelists, to the Prophets, and to other
Ranks mentioned in the Apostolical Epistles by the Name of Jesus: which Name
does Unseal, and Open that of Jehovah; whence the Miraculous Powers did so
abound in the Early Days of the Church, while there was Faith in this Name. But
still it is the same One, Holy and True God that revealed himself both to the
Vile Son of Beor, and to the most Heroic Father of the Faithful; though not by
the same Name. And he is nevertheless One, and having Appeared after Manner,
and in that Name, to the Pro^hets of Old, and then speaking after another
Manner, and by another Name ^n their Successors the Prophets. Neither would he
be the less so, should he even speak to us, after another Manner than he has
yet spoken either to the Prophets, or to the Apostles: or should he make
himself known to us by a Name, whereby he was not known to them. He is still
the same, let the Vessel be never so Different: and is equally to be Adored and
Believed, whether he takes up an Honorable or Dishonorable Vessel, Learned or
Ignorant, Noble or Plebeian; whether the Instrument be a Priest or Levite,
Israelite or Proselite, Male or Female, Young or Old. Some has he called from
the Plow, others from gathering of Sycamore Trees, and others from their
Drag-Nets; whom he has set over the Nations and over the Kingdoms, to Root out
and to Plant, to Throw down and to Build up, by the mighty Power of his Spirit
according to its various Operation, and Manifestation. It matters not what the
Subject is, into which the Divine Influences are received, and through which
they pass: even though it should be an Heathen, as in the Case of Jethro; or a
Brute Beast, as in that of Balaam. The Gradation nevertheless of these
Influences may be computed according to the Situation, and according to the
Proximity and Remoteness of the Subject which is to receive them, from the
Source, or Center of Divine Light, and according to the several Channels and
Ducts that they must first pass through, before they are therein received. But
the All-wise God is never wanting in the Preparation of such Vessels, as may be
suitable for the Reception of such Degrees of his Light, as he designs to
Communicate. And this Beautiful Variety is in the Writings of the Old
Testament, and also in those of the New most Remarkable. For it is one Degree
of Inspiration that Moses had, and another that Is^iah had, and third that
Daniel had. Neither is the Inspiration of the Writer of the Chronicles the same
with either of these Three: And yet both the one and the other are all from the
True Inspiring Breath of God. The Like may also be observed in the New
Testament. But to Treat of this would require a large Discourse. What has been
here already said, will suffice for the Wise in Heart; that they may understand
the Voice of the Lord their Bridegroom, when he shall call to them, in the Cool
of the Day, and present himself walking in the Garden; that they may not seek
to hide themselves from him, but may walk therein leaning upon his Breast, and
refresh themselves with its Flowers and Fruits, that do there present
themselves to be Plucked.

As for the Removal of that Great Millstone, which is thrown in the way, That
God has ceased to Reveal himself to Man since the Days of the Apostles, and
that all Pretensions to the same are but Illusions, and at best but the Dreams
and Fancies of a Natural Enthusiasm; I am not very sollicitous, as well knowing
that the same God, who has already appeared in a most Wonderful Manner to give
his Testimony to Souls concerning what has been hitherto Published from the
same Spirit and Instrument, will not be wanting Now to give his Seal lo This,
or to what Hereafter may come to be Published: and even in a more ample and
fuller manner to Vindicate his Honor, than he has been yet known to have done
since the Primitive Days of Faith. But howsoever the Wisdom of God may, with
respect to these Particular Writings, show it self at present, this Millstone
must shortly be cast into the Sea. Otherwise the Kingdom of God, which we daily
ought to pray for, can never come: And it is little better but a Mockery of his
Name to solicit him for the Calling of the Jews, and the Fullness of the
Gentiles, and for Unity, Peace, and Concord to all Nations; till this Beam be
removed from before the Eye of our Spirits. For which End there has been some
while since a Treatise writ, to Prove not only the Possibility, and the
Expediency, but even the Absolute Necessity of Divine Revelation, both Private
and Public; as in the Ancient Times, so no less in the Present Time, toward
the Restitution and Winding up of All Things: Which the Author of it undertakes
to evince from plain and evident Principles, not disputed by the very Deists;
and having done with them, to Clear up many Passages throughout the Prophets,
and throughout the whole New Testament, which are impossible, as he holds, to
be Accounted for by any other Principles. But how Successful such a New and
Surprising Attempt may be, is entirely submitted to the Disposal of the
Infinitely Wise God, when he shall order it to come forth, for his Honor
alone, and for no other Aim whatever. And unless he gives this Order, and by
his Blessed Spirit do Accompany it, let it never see the Day: And whatever
disagreeable to his Glory, or Inconsistent with his Truth, may have at any time
been sent abroad of such a Nature, let it moulder away in Perpetual Obscurity:
and let it not be remembered by Him, when he makes Inquisition, or even known
among Men. But whatever is consistent with his Eternal Truth, and makes for his
Glory upon the Earth in this Latter Day, let that break forth with mighty and
irre^istible Power, to the Confusion of all Flesh.

Wherefore I do bow my Knees continually before the God of my Fathers; that he
would give me who Wri^e, and Thee who Read This, Wisdom that si^eth by his
Throne: and reject us not from among his Children, the Children of his Kingdom,
and of his Right Hand; but ^eal us, against the Great Day of Temptation, which
is coming upon the Face of the whole Earth, with the Spirit of Truth, the
Spirit of Jehovah, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, of Counsel and
Might, and of a Sound Judgment; Which is the Testimony of JESUS. That so by
the Inspiration of this His Holy Spirit, we being Preserved against all the
Illusions of the False Prophet, and the Subtilty of the twisting Serpently
Spirit, for the Day of His Appearance; may Perfectly Love Him, walking with Him
as Enoch, or as John, in this Paradisical Garden, the Entrance whereto, that
has been Shut up, is setting Open: and may Worthily Magnify His Holy Name,
even as in Heaven it is Magnified by the High Principalities and Thrones, and
by the Harpers upon the Sea of Glass.

To which Burning Sea of LOVE these Secret Spicy Walks will lead thee: while
the Holy Angels and Perfected Saints will accompany thee all the way, reaching
out to thee such fragrant Immortal Flowers, and such Refreshing, Transforming,
and Transubstantiating Fruits, as do spring forth from the very Root of the
Deity. Here therefore I would gladly leave thee. If thou art not already
Entered, Wisdom calls unto thee Hereinto to enter, and to pass quickly the Sword
of the Cherub: which she will assist thee to Break. But if thou art Entered,
then Here abide, and Walk, till thou art brought to the Shore of that Sea, by
this Experimental Traveller described, which will w^ thee over to the New
Jerusalem. Where I with thee, and with all those that follow the Lamb, do long
to sing, Glory to God in the Highest, etc. and to publish the Glad Tidings of
the Kingdom of Our God and Savior; flying in the midst of the Heavens upon the
Wing of the Dove-Spirit, and Proclaiming with a Loud Shout,

FEAR GOD: AND GIVE GLORY TO HIM. FOR THE HOUR OF HIS JUDGMENT IS COME. Rev.
14. 7.

Timotheus.

January 1st. 1697.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
AN Account of the first Appearance of Wisdom's Star to the Author, page 17. Of
the Book of Wisdom, sealed with three Seats page 19, The Key of the Great
Mystery, p. 22. The Mystery of Rebeccah, and of Jacob's obtaining the Blessing,
unfolded, p. 25. The Mystic Death, p. 32. Wisdom's Flaming Heart, with the
Budding Tree for Transmutation, p. 34. The Mystery of Laban and Jacob, or the
strife of the Sensual and Supersensual Life, p. 37. The Faithless and Faithful
Dalilah compared, p. 42. The true Nazarite, p. 43. The Book of Life, and the
Book of Death, p. 46. The Divine Angler, p. 49. The Magical Journey, with an
account of Wisdom's high Stone of Wonder, p. 53. The Eternal Matter of this
Stone, together with the Chain of the Creator with the Creature, p. 64. An
Expostulation of Wisdom's Pilgrim, p. 66. The Voice of the Bridegroom, p. 67.
The Answer to the Spirit of the Soul, p. 68. The Reply of the Bridegroom, ibid.
Thy Preparations of the Second Marriage, p. 69. The Shulamite's Debate, p. 72.
Wisdom's Charge to the Shulamite, admitting her into the New Mystical Paradise,
p. 80. What is required to a Divine Association, p. 85. An Experimental
Re^lation of the Lords Day, and of being in the Spirit, p. 86. The Hidden
Mystery of Faith's Seed, p. 88. Wisdom's Call, and Direction for the Tabernacle
Building, p. 91. The Holy Composition Oil, p. 101, 102. The Garden of Beulah in
the Land of Havilah, p. 105. The Origin^ and Nature of the Royal Ghostly Power
in the Tabernacle-Body, p. 117. The Renewed Spiritual Wooing, p. 120. The
Mystery of Spiritual Sol and Venus, or the two Hoavenly Tinctures, Male and
Female, p. 124. The going up from the Low Valley toward SION-Hill, p. 126. A
great Combat of the Dark world against the Ascending Traveller, p. 131. The
Lamb worried by two Dogs, p. 135. A Visional Manifestation of the Various
Growths of the New Birth, before the Winged Power ^f the Holy Dove, p. 136. A
further Declaration, and Demonstration of this last Fixed State, and of the
Power of the Holy Ghost, p. 137. A Preparation for fresh Assaults from the Dark
Kingdom, p. 140. A Memorandum, how the Leviathan Spirit ^nded the Author's
Companion, which caused a mighty Conflict for several Days: and how he came to
be again Restored, p. 143. The Application hereof made by the Witness of the
Tabernacle, p. 150. Fresh Instances and Encouragements from the Spirit of
Wisdom, p. 15^. The Union of the Zeal of Phineas with the Nazarite Purity, p.
156. A Br^viat of some late Perils we were in, p. 157. The Divine Appearance
from Mount Perazim, p. 163. The Unicorn-Power, p. 164. A seasonable Caution
against Treachery, p. 165. A P^servative against Dark Magic, p. 166. The
Allegory of Balak and Balaam, ibid. The Case of Jacob's Servitude, and
Deliverance, p. 167. The Cloud of Glory upon the Spiritual Tabernacle, p. 170.
Of Maimed Births, p. 171. The Foundation Stones of the Holy City, p. 172.
Wisdom's Rock of Glory, upon which it is founded, p. 173. The twelve
Foundation-Stones that every one is to bear, who is thereinto admitted, p. 178.
A Call to this Searching Spirit from out of the New- Jerusalem, p. 183. The
Reason of the Situation of its Gates, p. 185. Another Call to this Ascending
Spirit, p. 187. The Descent of the Jasper-Stone for this End, p. 188. The Tree
of Life, which is Three, and One, p. 189. The River of Sion, p. 190. The
Spirit's Echo to Wisdom's repeated Call, p. 192. The earnest Expostulations of
this Spirit, with her Mother, and with her Beloved, p. 193. The Nazarite-Diet
for the Jerusalem-Born Spirits, p. 195. The Voice of the Bridegroom to the
Spirit of the Bride, after she had found an entrance into this City, p. 198.
The Bridegroom's further Admonition to her, and to the Jerusalem-Waiters, p.
201. The Love Chain, 203. The Chariot of Elijah, p. 204. The New Book Opened:
or, the Everlasting. Gospel of JESUS, containing the Process of the
Regeneration, in his Mystical Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, Ascension and
Glorification, p. 206. The Paradisical Sowing, p. 207, 211. The Spring: or, the
Resurrection, p. 208. The Ascension of the Bridal Spirit, p. 209. The
Glortfication of the same, p. 210. Another Seal of this Book of Life opened:
or, an Experimental Passage through another Death, p. 212. Quench not the
Spirit, p. 213. The Mocking Ishmaelite, p. 214. The Magdalen Waiter, p. 215.
The Salutation of the Risen Jesus, p. 216. The Immutability of the New
Creature, p. 219. The Witnesses of the Resurrection, p. 220. The Immediate Robe
given to the Risen of Jesus, p. 221. The Wonder-Birth, p. 223. Its Education,
p. 225. The Book of Prophecy, and of Life to be eaten down, p. 226. The Food
from the Altar; p. 228. Aurora: or, the Dayspring from on High; p. 231. The
Threefold Appearance of the New Adam: or, the Three Degrees, p. 233. The
Ocean-Treasury, p. 237. A Digression concerning the Communication, and
Interpretations of Magical Representations, p. 238. The Passage to the Mountain
of Precious Stones, p. 241. The Sapphire-Stone, p. 243. The Spirits eager
Search, and Sighing after this Treasure, p. 244. The Oppositions made from the
outward Astrum, p. 245. The Holy Root of the Magical Life, ibid. The Globe of
Light: or, the Perfect Day, p. 247. The ^ight of Paradise, compared with that
of Mount Sion, p. 249. The End of all Things at hand, p. 251. The Fall of
Babylon, p. 252. The Magical Seals, p. 253. The Restoration of the Magical
Might: or the Spirit Ascension to the Monnt of Olives, p. 256 The Extirpation
of the Imaginary Root, p. 258. The Superimaginary State, ibid. The Eternal
Stillness; or, the Rock of Power. p. 262, A Vision of God's Flaming Eye, p.
263. The Interpretation of the Vision, p. 265. The Believing Rest, p. 267. The
Lily of Faith, p. 268. The Flying Banner, p. 270. The Parting Principle: or,
the Shooting of the Gulf, p. 271. The Box of Spikenard: or, Divine Love, p.
275. The Blessing made a Curse: or, the Ark in the Temple of Dagon, p. 276. The
Traveling forward of the Ark of the Presence, p. 277. The Joseph's Blessing,
p. 278. Joshuah: or, the Conquering Worthy, p. 280. The Ark-Drivers, p. 281. An
Appearance of the Personal Humanity of Christ, and of the Father's Glory, p.
282. The Arcanum of the Holy Ghost taught by Christ, p. 283. Take heed of
Pilate's Spirit, p. 285. The Rules of Merchandise, p. 288. The Oracle within
the Veil The Michael-Unction, p. 293. The Opening in Heaven of the most Holy
Place, p. 294. The Seven Compassings, p. 298. The Golden Fleece, ibid. The
Uncloathing of Joshua the High Priest, p. 299 A (...) against the
Composition-Poyson, p. 303. The Consubstantiation of the Heavenly Bread, p. 304
The Gourd, ibid. The Jubilee, 305. The Covering of the Son of Man, p. 306. The
Pot of Manna, and the Bowl of Oil, ibid. The Fair Achsah presented to Othniel,
p. 307. The All-Golden Grain: or, the true Masculine Spirit, p. 309. The New
Creation, p. 311. A great Battle against it, from the Dark and middle Worlds,
p. 31^. A Renewed Evidence hereupon of the Resurrection Body, p. 316. The Dew
of Hermon, ibid. The Swan-like Washings, p. 318. The Return of the Beast to the
Lake: and the Chaining up of the Dragon, p. (...), 323. The Name and Mark of
the Lamb, p. 321. The Guardian Eunuch, p. 324. A s^t Battle from the Outward
Worldly Principle, p. 527. The Captain of the Lords Host appears to the
Combatant, p. 329. A Call to the Shulamite, p. 350. The Shulamite's Obedience
so this Call, p. 331. The Blessing of Zebulon, p. 332. Vision and Fruition, p.
333. The Golden Globe: or, the New Mold of Imagination, p. 334. Rules for the
Government of the Imagination, p. 337. The Lamb's Book, p. 340, 344. The Lamb's
Feast, p. 341. Ejaculations after the Lamb's Great Appearance, p. 345. His
Fountain-Body unsealed, ibid. The Golden Mist: or, the Circling Breath of the
Deity, p. 346. The Holy Incense, p. 349. The Healing Word, p. 352. The
E^postulation of the Spouse, p. 354. The Bridegroom's Answer by his Spirit, p.
357. The Marriage-Union, p. 360. The Working Mines, p. 362. The Divine Chemist,
p. 364. The Chrysolite, p. 366. The Virgin in Labor to bring forth her
Firstborn, p. 367. A R^sentation of the Lamb, and of his Bride Triumphant, p.
369. Her Cup of Blessing, p. 372. The Royal Purchase; p. 374. Wisdom's
Wardrobe: or, the Virgin Raiment, p. 375. Repeated Cautions and Reproofs from
the Importunate Lover to his Beloved, that she might hasten out of the Land of
her Captivity, p. 376. The Eunuch-Spirit: or, the Sabbath of Rest, p. 380. A
New Onset, causing an Interruption in the Spiritual Calling, p. 382. The
Sabbatical City, p. 383. The Breaking through of the Divine Glory, p. 384. The
Oracular Glory, speaking Mouth to Mouth, p. 386. The Ministration of Elisha, p.
387. The Comforters Message from the Bridegroom, p. 392. The Day of the Spirit,
p. 394. A fresh Attack against the Spirit of Faith, p. 396. The Covering of
wrought Gold interwoven with Scarlet Silk, p. 397. The Caterpillars, p. 399.
The Vi^eyard: or, the Magical Ground, p. 401. The Weighty Drop, p. 403. The
Life of Divine Sovereignty: or, Man is become as one of us, p. 404. The Gods
ascending out of the Earth, p. 406. Ahasuerus. or, the King as the Banquet, p.
408. Esther's Preparatory Fast, p. 410. Her Feast, and Petition, p. 411.
Mordecai and Haman: or, the Princely Spirit of Faith, and the Insulting Spirit
of Reason, p. 413. The King's Answer to Esther's Petition, p. 416. The Flying
Horse of Power, ibid. The United Crown: or, the Nazarite Covering, p. 418. The
Burning-Wheel: or, the Spirit's Workmanship, p. 419. What it is to be a
Standard Bearer of the Spirit, p. 420. The Seraphim covering the Wheels of
Nature, p. 421. The Progress of the Wheel-Work, p. 424. The Cherub-Tent, p.
425. The Way of the Spirit cleansed by the Cherubim Oracle, p. 426. Wisdom's
Armory disclosed, ibid. It is broken up by the Mighty Cyrus, p. 427. The Sign
of the Son of Man, p. 430. The Binding of the Four Winds, p. 432. The
Olive Tree: or, the Sealing of the Deity, p. 433. The Mystery of the three
Heavenly Witnesses, p. 435. The Ternary of Witnesses on the Earth, p. 437. The
Unity of these Three, p. 439. Adullam: or, the pure Virgin-Tabernacle, p. 440.
The Great Day Star, p. 442. The Ark floating upon the Waters of the Sanctuary,
p. 443. The Seven Sealed Doors, p. 444. The Transmutation into Birds, p. 445.
The Interpretation hereof, p. 446. The Accusers Opposition to it, p. 449. The
Victory gained by the Spirit of Faith, p. 450. Another Defeat of his Dark
Magic, p. 451, 455. The Basis of the First and Second Creation, p. 452. The
Birth of Immanuel guarded against the Dragon, p. 454. The Coming of Elias, p.
455. The Conquering Bow: or, no Conquest, no Portion, p. 457. The Sword of the
Lord in Gideon's Hand, p. 458. The Fruits springing from One Eternal Element,
p. 461. The One Elementary Body, p. 461. The Garden-Plantation, p. 463. The
Olive-Berry, p. 464. The Strong Force of United Spirits, p. 466. A Resolution
of some Queries relating to the Wonder-Woman, p. 468. The
Wilderness-Temptation: or, Floods of Jealousy cast out against the Woman, p.
476. The three Ghostly Bodies, p. 479. The Three Distinct Births of the Spirit
further unfolded, p. 480. A Prolongation of the Outward Life, promised to some
that are to Open the First Seal, p. 484. The Messengers of the Isaac-Birth, p.
485. The Excellency of this Third Birth above the two former, p. 487. The Young
Elephant, p. 091. A Letter of Resolution in Answer to some Objections sent from
a Learned Physician to the Publisher hereof, upon occasion of the English
Edition, of The Letter to some Divines, concerning the Question, Whether since
Christ's Ascension, God does any more Reveal himself to Mankind? And may for
the like Reason refer to this present Work, p. 493. How are Spirits to be
discerned? p. 499. Two Testimonies for the Ministration of the Spirit Revived.
The Testimony of Dr. J. P. the Author's Follow, Traveller. The Testimony of Mr.
T. B.
An Advertisement.
WHereas in the Year 1683. there was Printed a Treatise of that Inlighten'd
Philosopher, and Profound Divine Dr. John Pordage, this Author's most Intimate
Friend, entitled, THE OLOGIA MYSTICA; or the Mystic Divinity of the, Eternal
Invisibles, viz. the Archetypal Globe, or the Original Globe, or World of all
Globes, Essences, Centers, Elements, Principles, and Creations what soever;
wherein many Deep and Hidden Mysteries have been Unfolded from a Ray of the
Divine Light; and the same, though Published with, great Disadvantage to the
Author's Memory, and the Great Things therein delivered, has excited in several
Searching Spirits are eager and longing Desire, to see the rest of his Writings
made Public, This is to give Notice, that Leave having been at last obtained,
after many reiterated Solicitations, from the Executors of the said Dr. John,
and of Mr. Francis Pordage, the Publisher of this Book will undertake to
Gratify the World with all the Theological, Theosophical, and Philosophical
Works of the said Illuminated Son of Wisdom, which are come to his Hands; if
there shall be any suitable encouragement given to such a Design. The Titles
whereof are these that follow, viz.

Mystica Philosophica; or, a Treatise of Eternal Nature, wherein the
Distinction of God from Nature is Discussed, and many Weighty Questions, both
Physical and Divine, relating especially to the Human Soul, are Resolved.

The Angelical World: or, a Treatise concerning the Angelical Principle, with
the Inhabitants thereof, and God in this Principle.

The Dark Fire World: or a Treatise concerning the Hellish Principle, with the
Inhabitants, and Wonders, and God manife^ting himself in this Principle.

A Treatise concerning the Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST: Wherein all the Present
Controversies in this Particula^ are Discussed, by a Lover of Truth, who
desires to hold the Just Balance with the Even Weight.

A Discourse concerning the Spirit of Eternity, in its First Being.

(...): or Spiritual Discoveries.

Experimental Discoveries concerning (...) of Natures, of Essences, of
Tinctures; of Bodies of Persons, and of Spirits.

Solomon's PORCH: OR THE Beautiful Gate of Wisdom's Temple.
A POEM; Introductory to the Philadelphian Age.
WHEN Sinful Man first left the Blissful Seat,
Outcast, forlorn; from all that is Good or Great,
From Virgin-Purity, and Virgin-Love
^anisht, and Doomed round the cursed Earth to rove,
^n Bestial Image vile; the Fiend within
^ossession took, without the Beast was seen.
God's Temple wasted lay: His Image bright
Thick-veild in black Egyptian Shades of Night.
That Glorious S^inah which Erst did shine
^n His clear Soul; the once All-beauteous Shrine,
^he Seat and Mansion of the Eternal Trine;
How is it ^ed! its finest Gold how dim!
^ts Sto^es poured out, its Precious ^rim
^cular no more, all clouded lies;
^here Demons now their Oracles disguise.
from Heights of Bliss to Deeper Woes he fell,
^ll falling, sinking still down toward the Abyss of Hell.
^his cou'd^ thou not behold Almighty Love,
(...) Compassions dear, thy tender Bowels move:
^ty and Mercy move. The Heavenly Bride
(...) torn from Her new Lover's side,
Her Bridegroom could not thus forgo. Her Eyes
In Pearly Dews distilling, as he Dies
One parting Glance She threw: Fast hold it took,
And stopped him sinking: Caused him back to look
Repentant. Deeper then, the Heavenly Ray,
Winged with Loves Fires, more piercing, makes its way:
God's Light and Love conjoined; e're long to dwell
Within him, in the blessed Immanuel.
Till then content in Tabernacles low, show.
And Temples made with Hands, some gleams of God to
They Travel hand in hand through every Age
In poor Disguise and humble Pilgrimage:
With only Types of Rest at every greater Stage.
One glorious King, the Virgin did descry,
Enamored, courted, entertained her high:
She staid a while; all Blessings round her fly.
He would have had his Deitess enshrined
With Earth's Magnificence in one combined.
A glorious Temple structure rends the Sky:
The World's Amazement: little in her Eye.
Departing yet, this Favor high We deign
Said She, be Thine a Type of our Returning Reign.
This House a Draught in Miniature shall be
Of an Eternal Temple Raised by Me.
This Revolution finished, on they go
Now Downwards, back again to Scenes of Woo,
Through Deaths still conquering Death; where e're they ca^
Pierce deeper; and take faster hold of Man.
Till in the Virgin meek she found abode
More chaste; and Lodged in her the Infant God.
Here, by the O're-shadowings of the Heavenly Dove,
She unlocks the Center of Eternal Love.
Here Light and Love, but scattered in the Earth
Till now; unite their Beams, and to a Birth
Proceeding, one bless Humane Offspring Crown
With Godhead-Power; Whose Kingdoms vast Renow^
Through Infamy, Anguish and Death must Rise:
A bleeding Victor; a Triumphant Sacrifice.
Here a true Living Temple they enjoyed,
Delighted, Rested in, which though destroyfd
In outward frame the Grave could not withold,
From rising Glorious; brighter far, ten Thousand-fold
Hail Sion s Joy, her precious Cornerstone,
The Heavenly Salems true Foundation,
The God, the Man, the Virgin all in One.
The Builders thee refused; but thou the Head
Supreme, and we are thy happy Members made:
Strictly compacted into one; the whole
One Body in thee, one Heart, one Life, one Soul.
^re long, in the next great Revolution,
When the fair Virgin Pilgrims Stage is done,
Her Travails ended, and her Garland won;
A Temple Glory of Living Stones to rise;
Whose Base shall fill the Earth; whose Head the Skies.
Love yet cannot triumph here, without its Mate,
Till Light and Beauty too become Incorporate.
Thus still disguised to this great Stage they speed,
Contented still to suffer, grieve, and bleed:
Bleed in their Members dear. Through all they move
Up Hill, to Triumphs hasting. Now the Dove
Assistant powerful joins; in each pure Soul.
Oreshadowing, Christ to form. Spite of control
From Demons malice, or fierce Tyrants hate,
God's Image, Light, and Life, they here create:
Still spreading, Tincturing deep; till all is Divine;
And Christ in every ^eature, every line,
Appearing, shall even Here through Soul and Body shine.
In vain Hell's Obstacies and Bars oppose:
Each Seal the Conquerors as they pass disclose,
The Last Now Opening, when the Spirits Day
Its Powers uninterrupted shall Display.
See, see, the Virgin sends a Previous Ray.
From thy dark Cell now great Bohemius rise;
Tutor to Sages; Mad to the Worldly wise.
Wisdom's first distant Phosphor, to whose sight
Internal Natures Ground, all naked bright
Unveils, all Worlds appear, Heavens spread their Light
Early, thou risest Glorious: but in Clouds
Thick set, not sent to the Vulgar, nor the Learned Crowds
Of Reasons Orb, too Low: none thee descry;
None but the well purged Mystic Eagle-Eye
Of some few Anchorete Elected M^gi.
Here all past Sages veil and disappear.
Even Mallebranch beads beneath his Weighty Character;
To Thee resigned: and it is but just, for He
Draws all from one small Rivulet of Thee:
Fountain of Science, Art, and Mystery.
Where Stagyrite, Hermes, Plato, all combine,
De Carte in evr'y Page, and Boil in every Line.
And yet Alone, by Eminence, The Divine.
By whom advised the Firstling Flocks small Band
Prepare, well Trim their Lamps, and ready stand.
'Midst whom for pious Zeal and forward Car^,
Great Pordage with thy Generous File appear.
Adventrous Worthies, set in the Forlorn Hope
With Hell's outrageous Malice first to Cope.
Furious the Dragon storms, all methods tries,
Even by false Magic dark incrept
To crush the Royal Infant Spirits rise.
But on they charge undaunted, strive, and Pray,
Believe, Watch, Bleed, and Travel; force a way
For entrance, and foretast the Glorious Day.
As the Dark breaks loose, still the Light World's displayed.
By the Virgins Magic Wand the cursed Fiends are laid:
Pure Spirit breath's: New Senses open fly;
They see; and all with joint Assent,
Hail Great Bohemius cry.
All Is True; we bear thee Record: Hail to thee,
Fountain of Science, Art, and Mystery.
At last Great Hero throw off thy undress:
Speak, condescend familiar. Now, no less,
A Cherub-Seraph, towering, flaming high
Is sent thy Veil to rend, thy Gordian Knot to untye.
Commander sole of all the Graceful Charms
That flow in Language, Passion, Harmony,
Attempered just. In sum, Second ^o Thee.
The Wondrous Tailor now Revolves again
Ardent, Seraphick and with tenfold Fires:
Thunder, and Fire, and Love compose the Name,
How should it then not breath Harmonious Powers,
Or want Empyreal Flame
Through whose clear Style in each Transparent Line,
Thy rough cut, well-set, Polisht Diamonds shine;
Each Page outstreaming Light, and kindling Love Divine.
All Bars removed at last Heavens Dawn appears,
The Virgin blushes round the Hemispheres.
Shedding Celestial Rosy Tincture pure,
From Sharon's Spicy Beds; of radiant Hue:
Mixed with her own fair Lilies Silver Dew.
The Morning Star, true Venus, high Aspires,
Darting on every side, unblam'd and free,
Her gracious glittering, lambent, amorous Fires.
Bright Morning Star of Gods Eternal Day!
For this we shout aloud, we Sing, we Pray
Amen, Hosauna, Hallelujah.
Ah dear Divine Urania now be kind;
Speak thou, and leave the wretched Man behind.
THE Glorious Era Now, Now, Now begins.
Now, Now the Great Angelick Trumpet sings:
And Now in every Blast,
Loves Everlasting Gospel Rings.
The Glad Triumphant Sounds
Through Vales, ore Hills rebound;
Glory to the Eternal King of Kings.
Glory to the Eternal King of Kings:
The Glorious Era Now, Now, Now begins.
O may through me the Mighty Trumpet sound;
And spread its Fame the Woods and Plains,
The Isles and Seas around.
Let Sportful Eccho's play,
And Dancing all the way,
Swell and Intune the trembling Sounds anew:
All well-tuned Voices raise
To Great Elch^jahs Praise;
Peace to All Worlds, Dear Love to Man, to God his Honor due.
O may through me the Mighty Trumpet sound,
And spread his Fame the Woods and Hills, and Plains,
Tho Isles and Seas around.
Proclaim aloud the mighty Jubilee,
That sets each World of Captives free:
Proclaim, Proclaim the mighty Jubilee.
Let all the Heavenly Nine
Wreath Arm in Arm entwined;
All in one high Love-labour'd Song agree:
Let Muse and Grace combined
With Harmony Divine,
In sweetest Consent, perfect Unity
Melodious Voices join.
Proclaim, Proclaim the Mighty Jubilee,
That sets whole Worlds of Captives free;
Proclaim, Proclaim aloud the Mighty Jubilee.
Hail Morning Star of God's Eternal Day:
For this we shout aloud, we Sing, we Pray,
Amen, Hosannah, Hallelujah.
O Bless the Dawn, salute the Morning Star,
Thrice bless the happy Womb that bare
Sophia's Darling Child,
Lustrous, All-charming, Mild;
Bless, Bless, and Kiss the Daughter fair,
And for the Nuptial Bowers prepare
Of God's Eternal Bride;
Bless, bless the happy Lovers by her side.
Arise ye Lovers true.
Arise, arise ye wondrous few;
Apparitors Divine; ordained, fore-sent,
Heavens beauteous Virgin Queen
To attend and Usher in;
The Mother to Adore, the Bride to Complement:
Blessed Virgin, Mother, Bride in One:
Thrice sacred Band of Love, and Mystic Union!
Arise, arise ye wondrous few,
Arise ye Lovers true.
Long in in glorious Ease obscured ye lie,
Despised, neglected; yet neglecting too,
Nor caring what the Impious trifling World
Could either say, or do.
Orelookt by Man, yet Loved, and favou^d high
In Heavens Regard, and God's Auspicious Eye.
Whom neither high Preferments Charm can move,
Ambition Fire, or Beauty prompt to Love;
And yet to Love most true.
Out of the Everlasting Virgin's Womb,
Sons of the Morn already born anew:
Born into Time.
And Winged at will to ascend the Aetherial Clime,
Angelick Men, Imbodied Seraphim.
All Captives to the blessed Sophia's Charms;
Through Wisdoms Mazes bright,
Wandering in Tracks of Light,
By her still guided and exempt from Harms:
Still kept
From mazy Errors tangling step,
From Paths untrue
By her fair Silver-twin'd Mercurial Clue.
Dear Captives to the bright Sophia's Charms:
And yet more loudly to proclaim
Transcendent Love's and Beauties Fame,
Long wrapped in the Divine Urania's Arms.
Wrapped in the Dear Divine Urania's Arms,
Plundring her Sweets, and Ris^ng all her Charms.
Ye wondrous few arise,
God's Heralds true; throw off your mortal Guise,
Now lift your sweet, loud, speaking, Trumpets high,
Now let your ^ocund Levets fill the Sky;
Tell, tell the drowsy World their God is Nigh.
Now let Eternal Song unbounded flow
With Torrent deep, serene, Majestic, flow;
Disdaining Arts Control
Like Heavens full spangled Canopy,
Most Nice, and yet most Free,
Ranged by Dame Nature's artful Liberty.
Let evr'y Point a Star, each Line
In Constellation shine;
Each Living Word a Soul:
In Thousand differing ways,
Varying to God new Praise:
Now, Now let your Inspired Seraphick Strains
In mighty Numbers Roll.
Proclaim, proclaim the Gracious Jubilee:
And set the Sin-bound Captives free:
Proclaim, proclaim the gracious Jubilee.
O may through me the mighty Trumpet sound:
And spread its Fame the Woods and Plains,
The Isles and Seas around.
Let Sportful Eccho's play,
And dancing all the way,
Swell, and In^une the trembling Sounds anew:
All well-tuned Voices raise
To great ELCHAJAH's Praise,
Peace to all Worlds, dear Love to Man, to God his Honor due
O may through me the mighty Trumpet sound;
And spread his Fame, the Woods, and Hills, and Plains,
The Isles, and Seas around.
And ye fair Virgin-Daughters of the Morn;
^on's first Blossoms; from New Salem born:
High Paradisial Nymphs appear,
The Virgin Queen's attendant Graces dear:
Have, have away,
And join your Powers unanimous to Proclaim
The Wondrous Year;
The Great, the Good, the Now-Revolving Day;
Full Period-Circle bright, of Endless Fame.
Ye Paradisial Nymphs appear;
The Virgin Queen's, Attendant Graces Dear:
Sions first Blossoms; from New Salem born:
Rise ye fair Virgin-Daughters of the Morn.
Arise and Shine
Illustrious Troop of Heroin s Divine;
Celestlal Amazons; untaught to yield,
With Heaven-Aspiring Ardors, sprightly vigor filled.
In this, The Virgin's Day, most forward; bent
Zealous their very Hero's to prevent.
In Terrible-Majestick-Gay Parade,
Hell's fierce Imbattel'd Legions first to Invade:
With Orient Beams of Light,
Scattering the Misty Gloom of Night;
And chasing every black Infernal Shade.
Arise and Shine
Illustrious Heroines;
Cherubick Phalanx bright of Amazons Divine:
Arise, Arise and Shine.
Yet though deep skilled in Spirits Warlike Arts,
Nature has framed, Love Armed ye, too too free
^ar deeper Wounds, to give; and nobler Darts
To fix in pure and captivated Hearts.
In whose High-tinctur'd Forms harmonious move
The fiery quick Serpentine Energy,
Charmed by the mildness of the Peaceful (...),
Inviting still to Love.
Contraries here agree
In strictest Unity,
Each other to improve.
The fierce and powerful Sting, and lofty Spire
Co-mingling to ex^t the Amorous Fire.
You at whose Presence Mortal Beauty must
Abscond, and in Confusion kiss the Dust.
Beauties too flaming Bright
To be endured by Humane Sight:
Which but unveiled would quench the Inferior Outward Light.
The Glances of whose Eyes are Lucid Beams,
In-drawn from the All-radiant, One,
Divine, Superca Iestial Sun:
Where his full Streams,
Pointed in Central Union,
Himself produce in Lustrous Image fair
Of his Beloved Eternal Son.
Henee darting every way
In each reflecting subdivided Ray,
The little Loves intranc't
With innocent and wanton Dance,
Thousand enshrined celestial Cupids play.
From whose Coralline Lip
Angels their Spicy Draughts of Nectar sip;
Quick darting the divine Love-flaming Kiss,
In free Enormous Bliss.
In whose fair Cheeks the Tinctures pure combine:
The matchless Diamonds sparkle Paler Bright;
And in their Orbs of Light
Enchase the Glittering Rubies Sanguine Flame;
In radiant Blush of Modesty Divine,
Exempt from Mortal Shame.
Here Re-aspiring from their humble Vale
To meet the inclining vigorous scented Male,
In their Dewie Fruitful Bed,
Their Sharon Rose the Virgin Lilies wed.
Whom, as with strict Embrace inwrapt,
They lock within their Flowery Lap,
A Stock of Graces numberless proceed;
A Spring of lesser Beauties breed.
The clear tralucent Forms all Shade disdain,
Disclosing freely to be seen,
The Wonder-World within;
Each Argent Nerve, and every Azure Vein:
The beauteous Love-Eye burning in the Heart;
From whence Loves Centres endless multlply,
As thick-set Spangles of the Sky,
Raising a Sting of Joy in every Part.
In every Point a Venus bright;
Each Star a World of new Delight,
Opening an unexhausted Spring of Bliss,
Each Nymph her self a Paradise.
So fine, so pliant the external Mould,
That even therein the brighter Soul,
With all its Graces Train,
Imprints it self distinct and plain,
And as in Fabled Streams,
Where Silver Currents roll
On Orient Pearl, and Sands of Gold;
Displays her rich inestimable Gemms.
Which free exposed to view
In their untarnisht native Hue,
Reflex thr^ Bodies Chrystalline,
In their transparent Mirror shine.
But deeper yet and more amazing Fair
Out-shines, out-flames through her,
Express, the Only Sons refulgent Character.
Now, now ye Paradisial Nymphs appear;
The Virgin Queens Attendant Graces De^r.
Arise, arise and shine
Illustrious Brigade
Of Heroines Divine;
In Terrible-Majestick-Gay Parade:
With Orient Beams of Light
Scatter the mi^y Gloom of Night;
And banish every black Infernal Shade.
Arise and shine
Illustricu^ Heroines,
Cherubick Phalanx, bright of Amazons Divine,
Arise, Arise and Shine.
Have, Have away,
And let your well-trim'd flowing Tresses fair,
Waving in wanton Ringlets, Gild the Air;
Ont-beaming Sun-bright with pellucid Ray:
And as they loosely move,
Fan'd by fresh Odorous Gales of Love,
With Heavens warm Gentle-breathing Zephirs Play.
Have to Proclaim
The Great, the Good, the Now-Revolving Day;
Amen, Hosanna, Hallelujah.
Have to Proclaim
The Period-Circle Full; of Endless Fa^e:
The Great, the Good, the Now-Revolving Day:
For this we shout aloud, we sing, we pray,
Amen, Amen; Hosanna, Hallelujah.
Hero's fall back again,
Lead up the Virgin Train,
And Hand in hand as Love-pair'd Twins advance
In Sacred well-pac't Mystic Dance,
Tracing on holy Ground,
Circling Jehovah's Altar round,
Where Ay Love-Incense burns, Goodness and Grace abound,
Whence Living Coals out-fly,
Generate and multiply,
Seraphick Ardors every way to impart
To each bright-flaming and Love-melting Heart.
The quick Celestial Fire's
Straight their Sweet-warbling Tongues inspire,
While every Voice and every Trumpet sings,
Glory to the Returning King of Kings;
Lov's Golden Era Now, Now, Now begins
Now, Now in ev, ry Breath, in every sound
The Universe around.
Loves Everlasting Gospel rings:
Glory to the Returning King of Kings;
Loves Glerious Era Now, Now, Now begins.
Fresh springing still the Inspired Harmonious Vein;
Tunes up to higher Key and loftier Strain;
In more Enchanting Lays,
Varying new Hymns of Praise,
Jointly the ascending Voice and Soul to raise:
Even till they both aspire,
And join with the Seraphick Quire;
And under Gods bright Eye
In Influence serene they lie,
Dissolved in Rapturous Hallelujahs.
As that sweet little Chorister that flies,
And singing mounts the Skies;
Till all his Breath and Song be spent;
Then down he falls in sweeter Languishment;
So do Angelick Souls in Sounds aspire:
They mount and Sing
Upon the Doves bright Wing;
That gently fans and feeds the Ethereal Fire;
All Emulous to win the steep Ascent,
The mighty Mountains Seven;
Those Lilie-deckt, and Rosie-flowring Hills,
Formed by the All-bounteous Hand of Heaven,
Its Darling Sons with mere Delight to fill;
Till in Melodious Ravishment,
Their Powers, their Voice, their very Soul be spent:
The Light
Becomes too blazing bright:
The Bliss
Unsufferable is.
Then down with speed they take their humble flight,
In Adoration deep; yet but retire
T^ embrace more Near, and be exalted higher.
Now, Loves last, sweetest Mystic Death to try,
Rapt in sublime Exstatick Joys Expire:
Intranc'd, and Silent lie.
Thus in soft languent Slumbers sweet, true Sleep,
That Rests in Gods Abyssal Deep;
The rest in Visionary Dreams they See;
They Taste, they Feel,
What is unknown, Immense, Unspeakable.
Proclaim, Proclaim the Mighty Jubilee,
That sets each world of Captives free.
Proclaim, Proclaim aloud the Mighty Jubilee.
O may through me the mighty Trumpet sound:
And spread its Fame the Woods and Hills, and Plains,
The Isles and Seas around.
Let Sportful Eccho's play,
And dancing all the way,
Swell, and Intune the trembling Sounds anew:
All well-tuned Voices raise
To great ELCHAJAH's Praise,
Peace to all Worlds, dear Love to Man, to God hi^ Honor du^
O may through me the mighty Trumpet sound;
And spread his Fame, the Woods, and Isles, and Seas,
And Heaven and Earth around.
Too long, too long the wretched World
Lies wast, in wild Confusion hurled,
Unhinged in every part; each Property,
Struggling disrang'd in fiercest Enmity.
The whole Creation Groans;
And Laboring with Perpetual Toil,
In Man's Rebellion vile,
Her own Hard Fate bemoans.
But now shall Natures Ja^r
Cease her Intestine War:
Now shall the long Six working Days of Strife,
^ttain their Line and to their Crown arrive:
At last set free
In peaceful Rest of Sabbath true:
Heaven and Earth created new;
^o Celebrate a Universal Jubilee.
Concord divine now meets in every Part.
And Love subdues and Reigns in every Heart,
Ore all,
In Sum or Individual,
Triumphant Harmony, Triumphant Love
In Sweetest Unity,
Combined together move.
Even from the Zenith high
Of the clear boundless Empyrean Sky,
The Throne of God;
^own to Earth's inmost Central deep abode,
^ll is Concent and perfect Amity:
All in Proportion due,
In Weight and Number true:
Even from the Zenith high,
The All-radiant Throne of God,
^own to Earths inmost central (...) Abode;
nothing but Love, but Love, and Harmony.
^here every Voice, and every Trumpet sings:
^lory to the Eternal King of Kings;
^oes Golden Era, now, now, now begins,
Now, now in every Breath, in every Sound
The Universe around,
Her Everlasting Gospel ^ings:
^lory to the returning King of Kings,
^ves Glorious Golden Era now, now, now begins.
Now harmless through the Sky
^et the sweet, whisking, treble Lightnings fly:
Full Base frm Shore to Shore,
Shall in deep Thunders Roar:
^ot Death, not Horror now, but Melody.
Now Mighty Bard sing out thy Sonnet free,
Nor doubt, it true shall be.
Come Thou and join
Thy loud Prophetic Voice with mine.
``Ring out ye Crystal Spears,
``Now bless our Humane Ears:
For ye have Power to touch our Senses so:
``Now shall your Silver Chime
``Move in Melodious time;
And the deep Base of Heavens great Orb shall Blow.
From the bright Zenith high
Of the cl^ar boundless Empyrean Sky;
From the All-radiant Throne of God
Down to Earths inmost central deep Ab^de
Nothing but pure Concent and Unity:
All in Proportion due,
In Weight and Number true,
All Universal Love and Harmony.
This Globe Terrene no longer turned Askanee,
Hitch't in her Poles shall now direct advance,
And through the liquid Ether dance:
And on her Axle Spin:
In an Harmonious round,
Breathing Substantial Dense imbodied Sound.
Then shall surcease the Ungrateful Din
Of jarring Spears and clashing Orbs around:
While this Wonder-Machine,
Engine of Harmony divine,
Shall through the Ecchoing Welkin play;
And every where
Its melting Air,
In clear Triumphant Sounds convey:
Into each obvious rolling Sphere
Mingling her Ringing Atmosphere.
Which as it springs
Still more transparent, bright, and sounding clear,
At first divides in lesser Rings,
Compacted close, in Voice acute and shrill,
More to the Surface near.
Then wider Waves Indented, till
The Circles swell, the Sounds begin to fill.
Still Wid'ning more and more;
Till with deep Gamut Roar,
In full mouthed Peals Orb within Orb resound.
Here in Epitome
Shall the vast Heavenly Spears collected be;
And down through them transmit their Harmony.
Each Sphere, each Star shall now dispense,
With Passage free in direct line;
And full Aspect Benign,
Its various Powers and proper Influence.
Which in Her hallow Womb,
This Globe shall deep Intomb;
Where from her Central working Urn
They shall arise, and into Body turn:
And shoot from Center to Circumference.
Her Caverns dark must now enlightened be,
Unfettered, free;
As one transparent vast self-moving Wheel
Of liquid Crystal; open to Reveal,
Her rich innumerable Stores,
Her various Wonders great, and her own Acting Powers.
These upward move, and on the Surface play,
Adorned all Beauteous, Bright, Amazing, Gay:
And there,
Themselves in Radiant Flowers, Fruits, Metals, Gems display:
All Living, Breathing, sounding free
Into the All-uniting Element,
The One Capacious Air;
Blowing from every Pipe a Different Harmony;
Still from the Lower Circlets upward sent.
``Thus every grateful Note to Heaven repays
``The Melody it Lent.
Thus from Earth's inmost Central-deep Abode,
Even to the Zeinth high
Of the clear boundless Empyrean Sky;
To the All Radiant Throne of God;
All is Con^ent, and perfect Unity;
All in Proportion d^e,
In Weight and Number true:
In every Motion, every Sound
The Universe around,
All is Triumphant Love and Harmony;
Through All the Heavenly Dove
Breaths Hen Eternal Love;
Collecting every various Tone,
All Acts, all Powers, all Hearts in One;
Centered in Beatifick Union.
Proclaim, Proclaim the Mighty Jubilee,
That sets each world of Captives free.
Proclaim, Proclaim the Mighty Jubilee.
Let all the Heavenly Nine
Wreath Arm in Arm entwined.
All in One high Love-labour'd Song agree.
Let Muse and Grace combined
With Harmony Divine,
In sweetest Concent, perfect Unity,
Melodious Voices Join.
Proclaim, Proclaim the Mighty Jubilee
That sets each World of Captives free:
Proclaim, Proclaim aloud the mighty Jubilee.
O may through me the Awakening Trumpet sound;
And spread his Fame, the Woods, and Isles, and Seas;
And Heaven and Earth around.
Let Sportful Eccho's play,
And dancing all the way,
Swell, and I^tune the trembling Sounds anew:
All well-tuned Voices raise
To great ELCHAJAH's Praise,
Peace to all Worlds, dear Love to Man; to God his Honor due.
O may through me the mighty Trumpet sound,
And spread His Fame the Woods, and Isles, and Seas,
And Heaven, and Earth around.
While every Voice and every Trumpet sings,
The Glorious Era Now, Now, Now begins,
Now, now the Angelick Trump His Message brings;
And now in every Blast
Loves Everlasting Gospel rings:
The glad Triumphant sounds
Through Spheres and Worlds rebound,
Glory to the Returning King of Kings.
Glory to the Returning King of Kings,
The Glorious Era now, now, now Begins.
For this we shout aloud, we Sing, we Pray;
Amen, Hosannah, HALLELUJAH.
Have now my Soul, and lay thy humble Ode
Low at the Feet of thy Returning God.
Make have to Welcome Heaven's Eternal Queen;
She is by some already seen;
Come here to Live,
And ere it is long to Appear,
Transfused in Her Great Representative.
Sure when she leaves the blissful Seats above,
And comes to Teach, and Give us too, Celestial Love,
None can the Rebel play
To that dear Scepters sway:
She thinks none here can Disaffected prove.
Great Hero's ye must now give way,
And learn a Female General to obey;
Led on to mighty Deeds and vast Renown,
To Eternal Glories Crown,
By the Divine Illustrious Deborah;
The Highborn Beauteous Amazonian Queen,
Immortal Heroine:
Of all the Virgin Train most dazzling fair.
Mother of All, and All comprised in Her.
Who ere She Dies
Up to Mount Si^n's blissful state arrives.
And in Her Age,
On the Celestial Rosy Bed
Of fragrant Spices lies.
True Ph^e who in Heavenly Flames Revives.
To Her
Heavens lofty Virgin condescends familiar;
Unlocks Her Secret Cabinet, and shows
Where Her inestimable Pearl is hid;
Where run the Golden Mines so long forbid
To Purblind Mortals; Where the Unction flows
Divine and where Lost Paradise on Earth
Restored, Immortal springs, and fairer grows.
She teaches Her how to Project alone
The Divine Magick-wonder-working Stone:
But that to purer Souls as free she may
Her Secrets, Wisdom, Stone convey.
To fix the true Ascension Ladder high,
That leads directly to the Sky,
The rising Cherub Soul even here to Glorify.
And to Proclaim the Gospel Pure;
Wonders unknown of Gods surprising Love:
Which Firm and Sure,
Spite of fierce Demons Hate or Sins control,
For ever shall endure.
To Her she gives all free
Her Privy-Garden Key
That leads us to the Still Eternity:
Which only is
The true Transcendent Virgin-Paradise.
Whence she such Flowers of various Kind and Hue,
Imbalm'd in Odorous Heavenly Dew,
Into her own Spicy Garden brings.
In which each Flower,
Endued with multiplying Power,
Pregnant becomes of Thousands more.
Hence the unexhausted Fountain of fresh Gardens springs.
Here living Trees their glittering Arm^ extend;
Apples of Gold the Silver Branches bend:
Plenty Luxuriant without End.
Here round the Oak of Strength entwines
The softer Amorous Eglantine.
Which hitherto though wild, and barren-wast,
Here bring their proper Fruits too high for Mortal taste.
The stately Elm still Weds the creeping Vine,
Whose Branches wide-Embrac'd prosusely Pour
Their large Escolian-cl^er'd Dower.
The Princely Cedars Heaven aspiring Clime:
And fit to build the Presence-Ark Divine,
The Incorruptible Trees of Sbi^tim
Nor wants Improved that Indian Wonder-Tree,
All Spices in Bpitome.
Whence we the true Perfumes and Incense bring,
To Ingratiate and Atone the Offended King:
Even till the Savor of our Ointments move
The Bridegroom dear to grant his Love.
Amidst the Trees of Faith and Life aspire;
Most Virtuous-rich, and Goodly to behold:
O see 'em Blooming fair
With Orient Pearl, and pure Ambrosial Gold.
Hail Blessed Elysian-flowery fruitful Vale:
Eden transplanted new.
Here Blushing Rose^, Lilies Lovesick Pale,
High-Purpled Mourning Violets humbling low,
With Pinkt Carnatians of collected Graces grow.
Here is the Sun-Flower true
Of steady fix^ Love-Contemplation high,
That from the Eternal Sun never turns its Eye.
Here the Dove-Gales in Gentle Zephirs Blow:
Here Sions Golden Rivers boundless flow;
Pure Nectaro-Ambrosial Streams, that spring
With Quintessential Element Divine,
And the New Kingdoms Flaming Wine,
From the clear Glassy Sea, Loves Ocean, bring:
These are the Gardens of Mount Lebanon,
Where Wisdoms Temple can be raised alone,
By the True second Solem^n.
Whose Glorious Representative shall here
Become its Mighty Founder;
Himself most radiant and Head Cornerstone
Next to the Eternal One.
Hail Great and Powerful CYRUS, Thou art He
Forenam'd and Chosen from Eternity.
True Hyacynth who to thy Jasper Bright
Loves charming Queen shall evermore unite,
Mingling thy Streams of Power with Rays of Light.
Hail Glorious King, DAVID and MARY One:
Hail Types of Greater Glories yet to come:
Hail Pledges of the Blessed MILLENIUM.
Blessed Pair it is Now, Now you begin your Days
when the Divine SOPHIA Sings your Praise.
The Rose and Lilly of the Imperial Crown
The Flower and Beauty of the Heavenly Throne
The V and M of the Creation.
Blessed Pair thrice happy now begins your Days,
When the Divine Sophi^ Sings your Praise.
Hail Glorious King DAVID and MARY One:
Hail Types of Greater Glories yet to Come.
Hail Pledges of the BLESSED MILLENIUM.
Hail Powerful Beauteous Kind Harmonious V. M.
Arise, arise ye glittering Temple Stones,
Arise ye Precious Twelve Foundations.
Have and your Ravished Souls in one combine,
All in One Heart, One Life, One Glory shine:
To Raise of Spirits all compact and Pure
Wisdom's Magnificent Immortal Structure.
Each Princely Pillar Generating more,
Story on Story raised, with Golden Spires,
Waving their Streamers of Celestial Fires.
While the true Doves from every distant Shore
To the Love-Windows fly, and Add their Store,
Till to the Heavens they Build her Lofty-Tower.
Then down in Love the very Heavens shall Bend:
Then shall the Still Eternity descend.
And shouts of Victory the Skies shall rend:
With full-ton'd Acclamation-Anthems clear
And Love Congratulations Dear.
Thus down in Love the Heavens themselves shall bend,
Thus shall the New Jerusalem descend,
And God shall Tabernacle Here with Men,
World without End.
And here at Rest Heavens Glorious Virgin Queen,
^n all her Darling Beauties, Charms Divine,
Majestic Port, and Glories unconfined,
Sits on her Royal Throne, in her high Fa^e Enshrined.
And in the Mirror of her Heavens so clear
Presents her Lustrous Son. in whom Express
Outshines the Glory of his Father Dear.
^n and through All the Eternal Peaceful Dove,
Out-pours the Burning Sea of Everlasting Love.
^hile loud each Arch-Angelick Trumpet Sings
Glory to the Eternal King of Kings.
While every Breath and Sound,
The Ecchoing Spheres and Worlds around,
(...) Universal Hallelujah Rings.
Glory to the Returning King of Kings.
^or this we Shout aloud, we Sing, we Pray,
^MEN: HOSANNA: HALLELUJAH.
MEAN while we turn our Eyes and Ears attent
To Heavens Embassadress to Mortals sent,
^o show her Virgin Mother's Love-Intent,
Through her a sweet Enchanting Ray she flings:
and purer Souls Inviting Thus Divinely Sings.
Now Open wide ye Everlasting Doors
And swiftly Fly the Winged Hours,
^ill your Great Lebanon Prince, the Mighty King
In Solemn Triumph enter in:
All your Fresh Springs with Heavenly Dews to fill,
Flowing from every Spicy Quill.
That you may Drink those Nectarine Draughts so pure.
To Effect the Universal Cure.
Quint-Essence streaming from the Godhead Source;
So Ravishing sweet, of such high Force;
As to transmute Man's Earth, and drossy Mold
To Pearly Beauty, Living Gold.
Crowned with the Sun and Star-bright Glory high;
Clear Substance of a Deity;
Thus meetly Qualified and All Divine:
Companions to the Glorious Trine.
Such Heavenly Virgin Soul^ shall fre^ Command
The Treasures of their Not us Land:
Those hidden Mines, whose Springs of Golden Ore
Shall decaid Nature full Restore.
Fountains of ^ebanons Generated free
Shall from this Golden Ocean be.
The Rapturous Joys whereof no Tongue can tell,
But Godhead-Plants that in it dwell:
Who under the shady Rocks high Banner grow,
Whence Love's spic'd Liquors ever flow.
O come and taste what Pleasures here abound.
Where would ye move in Endless round?
You must from Dross Refine, and Mount away;
Mingling no more with Earth and Clay.
But as New-Risen Souls make your Ascents,
To dwell in Lebanon's Golden Tents.
O England, Hear thy Genius loudly Call.
O Hear, and ere'tis fixed, Prevent thy Fall.
Of Heaven thou most Abhorrd, thou dearest Loved.
Whom one by True Poetic Instinct moved
Well Jews has called, ``A moody Murmuring Race
``As ever tried the extent and stretch of Grace.
Ah stop, take heed heed le^ thou so Headstrong move,
As even to (...) the very C^in of Love.
Still with God^ Prime ^ulgent F^vour Ble^,
And Proved as (...) by bitter Plagues distressed.
(...) spare. Yet cannot thee forgo.
O how (...) ^ary tea^! how His Com^ssions slow!
Ma^k thy mild Savior well; how once he stood,
Shedding at Sale^ Gates his tender Flood,
Ore thee again He Mourns, in Tears, in Sighs,
Wrung from his Bleeding Heart, and Melting Eyes,
Once more, from the Exuberant Mercy-Store,
A Glorious Day shall ^ouch Fair Alblon's Shore:
Take Heed, Prepare: for if thou will not see
The Visitation Dayspring offered Thee:
If thou neglect the STAR that will Appear
First Rising Glorious in thy Hemisphere.
Thou of thy Birthright wilt Suplanted be;
And Heavens full Shower of Blessing pass from thee.
The Morning Star despised must Glide away;
And to a better Land its chearing Beams display.
Then at thy Loss and Folly, for a while,
Shall the Fair-sprouting German Lilly smile,
Yet kind and free Assist thy Laboring Toil.
Then, Britain, then Prepare for Scenes of Woe.
Then Nilus shall the wicked Land Ore-flow.
A -- a's Stately Pride must tumble down,
And B -- b's Lofty Towers must Kiss the Ground.
Then Happy who in Goshen's fruitful Land,
Sheltred beneath the Almighties Wing shall stand,
In ^afety, Peace and Plenty at Command.
Till the short Gloomy Day be past and gone:
And soon another Brighter Morning Dawn.
Gods Hand, and Will, shall be too Glaring plain,
Longer to meet Neglect, or bear Disdain.
Jealous, provoked with Emulation-Fire,
Again shall British Piety Aspire.
As it sunk Low; so shall it now Rise Higher.
His Firstborn, God in Thee again shall. Own
And pour the Vast, the Double Blessings down.
And England's Monarch High, shall wear the Nations (Crown.
The Fivefold-Portion-Right belongs to Thee.
Then shall the Land from Curse and Toil be free.
And England Benjamin Restored shall be.
Onesimus.

A Garden of Fountains, etc. OR Divine Openings and Revelations since the Year
MDLXX.
The First Vision that appeared to me was in the Month of April, 1670. Which
was on this wise;

BEing my lot at that time to visit a Friend in a Solitary Country-place, See
the Preface to the Laws of Paradise.
where I had great advantage of Retirement, often frequenting lonely Walks in a
Grove or Wood; contemplating the happy State of the Angelical World; and how
desirous I was to have my Conversation there, my thoughts were much exercised
upon Solomon's Choice, which was to find out the Noble Stone of Divine Wisdom;
for by acquainting my self with her, all desirable good in Spiritual things
would meet upon me. The Report and Fame that Solomon gave of Wisdom, did much
excite me to seek her Favor and Friendship; demurring in my self from whence
she was descended, still questioning whether she was a distinct Being from the
Deity or no? Which while in this debate within my Mind, there came upon me an
overshadowing bright Cloud, and in the midst of it the Figure of a Woman, most
richly adorned with transparent Gold, her Hair hanging down, and her Face as
the terrible Crystal for brightness, but her Countenance was sweet and mild. At
which sight I was somewhat amazed, but immediately this Voice came, saying,
Behold I am God^ Eternal Virgin-Wisdom, whom thou has^ been enquiring after; I
am to unseal the Treasures of God's deep Wisdom unto thee, and will be as
Rebecca was unto Jacob, a true Natural Mother; for out o^ my Womb thou shall be
brought forth after the manner of a Spirit, Conceived and Born again: this thou
shall know by a New Motion of Life, stirring and giving a restlesness, till
Wisdom be bor^ within the inward parts of thy Sou^ Now consider of my Saying
till I return to thee again.

This Vision took great Impression on me, yet I kept it for the present hid,
but it Operated so much upon me, as indeed I was incapable to converse with any
Mortals; which was taken notice of, that some extraordinary thing had happened;
for the which I begged my Friends excuse, and desired that she would give me
the liberty to be much alone, and to walk in the silent VVoods; where I might
contemplate what had so lately happened. Now after three days, sitting under a
Tree, the same Figure in greater Glory did appear, with a Crown upon her Head,
full of Majesty; saying, Behold me as thy Mother, and know thou art to enter
into Covenant, to obey the New Creation-Laws, that shall be revealed unto thee.
Then did she hold out a Golden Book with three Seals upon it, saying, Herein
lies hidden the deep Wonders of Jehovah's Wisdom, which has been sealed up,
that none could, or ever shall break up, but such as of her Virgin-Offspring
shall appear to be; who will her Laws receive, and keep, as they shall spring
daily in the New Heart and Mind. This Appearance, and Words, was wonderfully
sweet and refreshing in my Soul; at which I bowed, and prostrated at her Feet;
promising to be obedient to all her Laws. So the Vision shut up for that time.

Pondering this in my Heart, with great comfort, that this Day Star had visited
me from on high; I returned to London to my own Habitation, retiring my self
from all my Acquaintance, saving one Person that was highly Illuminated, who
encouraged me still to wait upon this Vision; for he was acquainted with
somewhat of this kind. So after six days the Vision appeared again, with a
Train of Virgin-Spirits, and with an Angelical Host; and called to me to come
and see the Virgin Queen, with her firstborn Children; asking me, Whether I
was willing to be joined amongst this Virgin Company? At which I replied, All
willing to offer up my self most free: Then immediately I was encompassed about
with this Heavenly Host, and made a Spirit of Light. Then these Words from the
Virgin proceeded, saying, I shall now cease to appear in a Visible Figure unto
thee, but I will not fail to transsigure my self in thy mind; and there open
the Spring of Wisdom and Understanding, that so thou may come to know the
only True God, in and by the formation of Christ, the anointed Prophet in thee;
that shall reveal great and wonderful things unto thee, that are to be made
known, and public, in its time and day: Therefore be watchful, and to thy
Mother Wisdom's Counsel give good heed, and thou shall greatly prosper, and
succeed the Prophets and Apostles to perfect what was left behind, for
completing as to Christ the Fullness of God's great Mystery: So go on, and
nothing fear, or doubt; for I thy Glass for Divine Seeing shall evermore stand
before thee. Then my Spirit replied, According to thy Word let all this be
fulfilled. And so this Glory withdrew; but an inward Glory did my Heart sill,
for a burning Love to all of those Heavenly Beings did kindle within my Heart
vehemently.

In the Month of August.
THe Mind of Wisdom thus opened it self in me, as I waited in my Spirit upon
her, she did This having been found without any Date of the Year, and the
Author having forgoten when it was, cannot find any one that more nearly
succeeds the foregoing one.
show me what Key would open the Great Mystery, which lay deeply hid in my
self. It was wrought and carved out of such pure Gold, as had passed through
many Fires; many Keys I had tried, but could not turn in this secret enclosed
Lock, but still it shut upon me, though I thought I had that Key which was
compounded of such Metals, as would have made its entrance, as Love, Faith,
Patience, Humility, which with strong Supplication and Prayer, I presented, as
the Key o^ the work. All which was too short t^ reach it. Whereupon I was put
to loss altogether to seek how this Gat^ should be opened, having compasse^ the
Holy City, and waited and try every way, where I might find Passage Circling
from one Path to another, from Prayer to Prayer, and from Faith to Faith; so
that in good earnest I began to consider I had not found this wonderful Key,
for want of which I might run out in wast all my days, and grope as in the
dark, yet never find the Door which opens into my true Shepherd's Fold.
Whereupon being cast into a deep astonishing silence and stillness, the Word of
Wisdom thus opened it self unto me; Oh thou deep searching Spirit, marvel not
thou have been so long frustrated, for as to thy present state and
dispensation, thou could never reach me to all Eternity, for my Birth in thee
lies deeper then thy present Gift of Faith and Prayer can open; thou have with
many others been in a great mistake. But in as much as thou ^wnest and
bewailest thy unskilfulness, I will make known to thee what Key will turn this
great Wheel of my Wisdom, so as it may move, and manifest it self in thee,
through all thy Properties, if thou can bid up to the Price of it. For
understand that it is compounded of all pure Gold, subsisting in a burning
Furnace of many Fires: And although this wonderful Key is of Wisdom's carving
out, and her free gift, yet, Oh thou seeking Spirit, she will cost thee very
dear, if ever thou obtainest her. Yet she goes about seeking such as are
worthy of her, and will show her self within the Walls of the Mind, and meet
them in every thought that waits for her Laws and Counsel, and brings a Kingdom
which will be well worth thy selling all for. But the great thing, says
Wisdom, now is to discipline and make thy Spirit a cunning Artist, to give it
Knowledge of what Matter in Number, Weight and Measure this pure Key is made up
of, which is all pure Deity in the Number THREE; which is weighty indeed, being
one exceeding weight Glory, sitting in the Circle of the Heavens within Man's
Heart, measuring with the Line of his Power, the Temple and inward Court, with
the Worshippers therein. This is VVisdom's Key, which will make our Hands drop
with sweet smelling Myrrh upon the Handle of her Lock. Which while I was
opening her Privy-Door, with this Key, my Soul failed within me, and I retained
no strength, my Sun of Reason, and the Moon of my outward Sense were folded up,
and withdrew. I knew nothing by my self, as to those working Properties from
Nature, and Creature, and the Wheel of the Motion standing still, another moved
from a Central Fire; so that I felt my self Transmuted into one pure Flame.
Then came that Word to me, This is no other then the Gate of my Eternal Deep,
can thou subsist in this Fiery Region, which is Wisdom's Mansion, where she
meets with holy abstracted Spirits, and gives forth a fiery Law, which if
thereunto thou can give heed, so as to come up to her Requirings, then no
Secret shall be withheld from thee. Thus far am I admitted to, come into the
entrance of her House, where I must stop till I hear further from her.

Now as I was attending to obtain a fresh Visit, being entered into this first
Mansion of her House, to hear and learn further, she said on this wise, That I
was greatly beloved, and she would be my Mother, and so should I own her and
call her, who would now be to me as Rebecca was to Jacob, to contrive and put
me in a way how I should obtain the Birth-right-Blessing. For if I would apply
my self to her Doctrine, and draw my Life's Food from no other Breast, I should
then know the recovery of a lost Kingdom; At which Salutation I was dissolved
and melted, the fervent heat of this Love strongly impulsing me to a resolve,
for to obey her in all things.

Which pure Oil from Wisdom's Vessel stopping, it opened again not till
October the 20th. in the Morning-Watch; then heard I her Voice thus; Sequester
and draw out of thy Animal Sensitive Life, that is too gross: I cannot appear
till that disappear. There must be Spirit with Spirit, Light with Light. No
sooner had I this caution, but I felt Power which suspended the active busy
mind, which for a time was expired into silence: Know then (said the same
Voice) thou shall supplant thy Brother Esau, who according to the Figure, is a
cunning Hunter in the out-birth and field of Nature. While he with his subtilty
seeking it abroad, in the wild Properties of the External Region; I will now
help thee to it ^ear at Hand, even in thy own enclosed Ground. There the true
Scapegoat feeds, of which I will make savoury Meat, such as God thy Father
loves. Hearing this Salutation from my late known Mother, I was deadly ravished
in the Spirit, in the Light of the Lord, and feared to return to the dark House
of my outward Senses again; which opened a Spring of Intercession in me, that
as one of the Friends of the Bridegroom, I might hear his Voice still, which
indeed was so pleasant and sw^t, as I could well have admitted of a dissolution
of my Elementary Being, rather than this Conference should not still be
maintained with this renowned Pearl of Wisdom. But I have learned to observe
her Time and Seasons, I witness her opening as in the twinkling of an Eye, a
pure, bright, subtle, swift Spirit, a working Motion, a Circling Fire, a
penetrating Oil.

November the 10th. 1673.
IN the Morning, about the fifth Hour, my Spirit was called forth to attend
Wisdom's Oracle again, to know further into that mysterious thing, she
discoursed with me, in order to the obtaining the Birth-right-Blessing. Oh thou
Fiery Soul, know thy self now out of thy own Creaturely Being. Whereupon I was
environed with sweet burning Flames which devoured and consumed all the Briars,
Thorns, and accursed Emanations that did offer to put forth. So tha^ Scripture
was witnessed, feeling God'^ being a Wall of Fire, which separate^ the Earthly
part from the Heavenly^ T^en uttered Wisdom her Voice: O^ thou sollicitous
Spirit, I am now com^ to show thee what is required of thee, a^ in the
beginning of my parling I Shunne^ not to declare, what it would cost the^ to
purchase the Key, that unlocks the Gate which gives thee entrance into that
pure and transparent City, where thou art to be an Inhabitant in the Lamb'^
Nature for ever. I tell thee, God requires an Offering from thee, as he did of
Abraham, there is no sparing any part; an whole Burnt-offering through the
Eternal Spirit must be given up. Understand me thus, thou have an Earthly
Principle that has dilated and overspread thee, and got into dominion, and
covered thee safe from my Heavens within thee; but these Thrones and Powers
must be cast down, their Place must be found no more. Thou have made great
Complaints, for want of constant near Alliance and Freedom with God thy
^reator: but marvel not the Cause lies ^ere in dying, yet thou art not totally
^ead. This is the first Baptism thou art (...) know, and how many have herein
fal^n short in not giving their earthly Self Thorough-wounding and killing
Blow? therefore to thee, O beloved of thy ^other Rebecca, I commend to thee my
^aming Sword, be thou now valiant, ^d let it do full Execution in the Camp
(...) Nature; slay utterly Old and Young ^hatever in thee bears not my Mark and
^ame, which is my Image. Few in this ^tter Age have come thus far. There^re I
have had so little pleasure to in^bit with, and to reveal my self to the
^hildren of this Generation; in that a ^re Crystalline Mind is so rarely to be
^und, and in no other will thy God ^pear. Therefore hear and learn of ^e, who
well knows what will qualify ^ee for the reception of thy Fountain-^ght and
Joy, which may be an abiding ^riend and Comforter to thee, which ^as the
Heritage of Jacob, thy fore-^nner in the Line and Blessing. Now ^aving made
known what thy Offering to be, which is one remove that makes way for the
return of thy Bridegroom; the second thing required is the Venison that must be
presented to thy Father, that he may eat thereof, that so the Love from his
Heart may flow into thee, wherein the Blessing will be known; but of this thou
shall have my Counsel, as thou art faithful in answering to this preparative
Work.

At these Sayings of my Mother I well pondered all, tending to the refining me
out of my Earthly Life, seeing I must offer it up, and that time of my
departure out of the first Principle, is drawing nigh upon me, as Wisdom has
plainly showed me; that though I had come with many Offerings, yet till all was
consumed by that one whole Burnt-Offering, I could not be made perfect in the
Virgin-State, where Christ's Second Birth in pure Spiritual Humanity should
appear in me. Which Wisdom told me, was the true and right Venison, that God my
Father would receive from my Hand, who could savor no other Meat Offering but
what should be made up and dressed by the Hand of Virgin-Wisdom, who further
showed me that place, where she would make ready this savoury Meat, which was
in the fiery Essence of my Spirit. Which in very deed I did feel going to work
in her own kindled Furnace, where she showed me her Golden Pot. No Vessel was
to be used but of that pure Metal, wherein was ordered all the several
Ingredients, which I implored her Friendship to let me see; which was granted
unto me, who owned that her Fear was with me, and hitherto I had observed her
Charge, and her Secrets should be with me, and that I should know such things
from a deep Ground, as had not been broken up of late Ages: if I could bear
that hot fiery Furnace, which should boil away the Scum of all that which of
the earthly part had yet its remainder with me. Which Counsel begot this
Exploration with my Mother, as fearing I should not come up to these her pure
and high Accomplishments.

Disponding therefore, I said, Oh my Mother-Wisdom, the terms of thy Requirings
are hard, considering I constrained am to reside in the Out-Birth of a Mortal
Shadow, where Millions of Spirits do me tempt to keep me from this high and
noble Ascent. What an overturning must here be made, that so a Renewing may be
on the face of my old Earth? Which Renovation well answers to that Scripture,
We shall not all dye, but suffer a Change, or Translation. Oh how little did I
understand, till Wisdom unsealed and opened her Testimony, lighting my Lamp
from her Seven Pillars of Fire, which now go before me, that my Way may no more
be dark: Who has made good her Promise, for I felt her strong Impulse, and her
Furnace prepared, burning as an Oven. By which I well know what that Word of
Record means, The Day comes that shall burn as an Oven. She told me, She was
now come to make ready the Venison, that I might have access to God my Father
with it, while I was pondering, seeing only the Vessel and the Fire, with Isaac
I was ready to say, Where is the Lamb? Then uttered she this Word, Thou thy
self must be this Paschal Lamb, which must be sl^in: Then was I taught to say
or pray, strike upon that Life-Vein, which may abundantly return again; thus
yielding my self up to Love's Flaming Sword, I felt a separation was made. Oh
how sweet is it to feel the Life's Blood run into the Foun^ain of that Godhead,
from whence it ^ame? Let none henceforth fear in the lord to dye, for Life
shall spring again ^s to one that awaketh out of a Sleep, in^o another
Principle, or begotten into New World, in which with other In^abitants, with
whom I now my Con^ersation have, in the Light of the ^eity I do dwell. O dear
Sophia, what ^m I, that hitherto thou have me brought, ^at I should know of thy
Magick-Art, ^d from thy holy Flames to be inspi^d, which foreruns the Day of
Pente^ost, which shall known again be to ^ose who follow hard the Prize to ^ke,
This feeling, the Divine Power ^d me touched as the Key that unlock^ the Gate
of the Eternal Deep; I fur^er emboldned was to ask my Mother ^isdom, how and
when she would com^ound that savoury Meat, on which the ^essing entailed is,
for I as one impati^t am till the Birthright confirmed be me. Upon which there
was present^ as in a Charger, a Kid lying in a Com^sition Liquor of Milk, Oil,
and Blood, ^th several Spices, as Spikenard, ^yrrh and Cinnamon, giving forth
strong Odours. Then Wisdom called to me. O go and see what I have compounded
and prepared a Banquet-Feast, whereto as thy Father will come down with his
dear Son thy Elder Brother, and I thy Mother, and will hereof take and feed, so
that the Fountain of Jacob may be thy Blessing, which the Eternal Father
accordingly pronounced, saying, From the Upper and Supercelestial Planets let
thy Eternal Nativity again renew, as from its own Originality; by which the
lower Constellations and Elements shall to these subjected be and bow; as a
Globe upon which thy Feet shall stand; and both the upper and nether Springs
command. The Dews of Heaven, and the Fat Things of the Earth shall together
upon thee meet: This is the Fullness of all Blessings, wherewith the Triune
Unity do thee greet. Henceforward now observe, and obedient be, to what shall
be further Communicated to thee.

After this my Spirit still attended eagerly longing to lay my Mouth t^
Wisdom's Breast, from which the Wor^ of Life so sweetly did flow. Then she with
her Flaming Heart did present he^ self to me. Out of which Heart sprouted forth
a Tree, with Twelve Branches, having upon the Root of it engraven, GOD is the
Pith, Life and Virtue, that makes the Heart thus Fruitful, in various opening
and quickening Powers, giving forth according to each Branch, a different and
peculiar Fruit. Then said she to me, Here does lie the Mystery: do thou it come
and see, how out of the Flames these Branches put forth green and palpable
Fruits, that are not yet grown, yet thou with Patience must still wait till to
perfection of ripeness they be grown in thee, then of the first Fruits of this
Tree thou shall bring to thy God as an Offering, who will accept it as a pure
Offering, that will draw down the Life's Blessing; read and see what engraven
is for thee, and let thy Mind be staid a while, till thou to this ripe Age
shall arrive and comforted be, that this shady Heart as a fruitful Vine shall
overspread within the Walls of thy Mind, a River of Oil shall here outspring,
which will make thy Flames burn still, till so hot the Furnace may come to be
which as the Sun for vehemence shall transmute this Fruit to a Golden Color.
Then thou with savoury Meat to thy God shall come, who will himsef feed upon
their pleasant Fruit, which nourished has been from the Life's Blood; Come now
and into Love's deep descend with me, that thou may know the various
operation of this Tree, and every Branch thereof, namely as the living sense
shall spring in thee according to which thy lot will be, as relating to the
Blessing promised, the which will require perseverance still in the Faith, till
to perfection in Color this Fruit be brought. No other charge I shall leave
with thee, but to abide within this shady Rock, where Love's Flames shall be
thy Food continually. Oh how pleasant is it here to be, all encircled with
Love's flaming Breast?

January the 22d. 1674.
VVIsdom's Word opened yet again to me, saying, Arise, swiftly follow me: I
will show thee Greater Things then what has yet been known to thee. Whereupon
I felt a mighty attractive Power drawing up my Spirit for Ascension; but
surprised I was with a potent Enemy, which did me encounter highly, charging me
with a breach to Nature's Laws, and how I stood obligatory to her, in as much
as I had an outward Body, which I ought to take in the Sense of its Elementary
requirings, and accordingly make Provision, as the rest of my fellow Creatures
in the World, which were under the Government of that great Monarch Reason, to
whose Scepter all must bow that live in the Sensitive Animal Life. These and
such Arguments I was assaulted with, and pursued as Jacob was by Laban, when he
took his Flight to return to his Father's House, so greatly distressed was my
Spirit, seeing it self so oppressed that it could not tell where to make its
escape, or how to discharge my self from being a Subject to his Starry Kingdom:
as I stood in the Line of Nature. I was under the dominion of the Starry
Region, in the strife of the four Elements, which brought in the Curse, where
Care and Fear, and the toil and labor of the Body did consist. Says the
Prince of the earthly Life, How will thou acquit thy self from my Laws, and
break thy Brother Esau's Yoke from off thy Neck?

Thus in obedience having drawn up my Charge, and having good proof and witness
hereof, I presented it to the view of my Mother, who said, Are these things so
indeed? I shall advise with the Deity how to destroy them out of thy inward
Coasts, seeing thou do not join or take any part with them; but have brought
in Evidence against them as Traitors to the Crown, Dignity, and Dominion of the
Lamb, whose Power they would depose him of, in his chosen and elect Seed: and
though these evil seducing Spirits think their Mountain so strong, that it is
never to be moved, yet know their Day of Judgment is hastening on apace, and
they will be given up to be tried by the Fiery Law, which issues forth from
the Ancient of Days, who has appointed a Day, in which he will avenge his
Elect, that cry mightily to him, as oppressed by these invading Spirits. Be of
good Comfort, the Judge is nominated, the Jury is chosen, by whom the Verdict
will be given; therefore b^ true to the Interest of my Son, who i^ appointed to
judge the World in thee, and to cast out Hell, Sin and Death, the Beast and his
retinue into that Lake, where there shall be no return out thence, to assault
thee more with their Dregs and Poisonous Floods. This is to be done by joining
Issue and Power with me, who am come to help thee against the great Leviathan,
who makes War most, where he sees his Time of Reigning is almost worn out, and
that he must have no more place; who thinks it very great Injustice to be cast
out of Man's Nature, before the laying down the Mortal Body. But oh, to thee
let me commend this present state, that in my Virgin-Purity thou may still be
found; for I delight thee all fair to see: then with my presence frequently I
would visit most satisfiedly, wherein you tell me all your Joy does lie: Then
droop not, but most pleasant be, as those whose Name and Place is ever with me.
Call in also those who of doubtful Heart are apt to be: Unanimously go forward,
remembering what the true Nazarite is to be, of Holy Courage and Divine
Magnanimity: no more must such hang down the Head, or to feebleness of Mind
give way, but the Power display, which in the Seven Locks concealed are; it is
but needful that you all Force do draw out; for while these Earthly Spirits do
border upon your Land, they will be scouting out: therefore without my proved
Armor dare not with them to parley; this is the Charge I shall leave with thee.

August the 10th.
OH the Wrestling Wheel that I did feel moving, to grind the Earthly part down;
setting all at Variance in me, that so it might still keep uppermost, and
subdue the numerous Hosts that would my Will have forced; for did that but
yield, then the Field where the Treasure and Substance is concealed, would
obnoxious to the Robber and Spoiler be, who has watched the Prize to take from
me. Therefore in variety of Temptations I placed am, to prove whether or no I
can stand, and let the Waves still beat and go over me, and no ill fear while
the Ark of Faith about does enclose me; the great Swellings of Jordan shall not
afright me, while I do see the strength of Salvation so nigh, that wills and
brings to pass according to the out-flowing of the Omnipotency, which from
the new-born-Will most prosperously effects all things.

Then will it be seen what the Conjoyning of the Eternal Constellations
brings forth upon the hidden Man through their Fiery Drivings which now
thrust forward for Consummation, that I might see the issue of what I have been
made to hope and believe, and pray for: Though Prophecies and Revelations do
for a time most delightfully entertain the Internal Senses, yet short they are
of the Body which consists of the Heavenly Things themselves: as it is well
said, Prophecies, Tongues, and Faith, and Hope shall have their Cessation, but
the Kingdom of the Love, all Concord, the bright Bodified Spirit that has
received Dominion as a super-addition, is beyond the Priestly and Prophetical
Office. But while I was reaching after, and inquiring when I might expect the
coming down of the Seven-Throne-Powers which are the Pillars of this Kingdom,
by whom it will be established for ever in the Perfection of Righteousness, the
Word said to me, Rest a while, these two are the foregoing Ministrations that
will make much for the third, the Holy Order of a Priest to give attendance in
the Tabernacle, is no light thing to be near to the Majesty of Purity, which
requires a perfect Consecration. For the Holy Being will have none about him to
minister to him, but anointed Ones, from whom may be smelt the Spicy Perfume,
that so nothing of the dead unsavory part may be felt; this will qualify for
the Ordination of the Power. Here wait till made perfect, then thy own Hands
shall be sufficient for thee, whereby thou will find ability to fetch in out of
the secret Tower, where is kept for every full grown one, this presented great
Jewel of Power: which I dare not to any commit, till they perfectly become
wise, of a sound and unchangeable mind to keep secret what the will-pleasure of
the Deity is to have from the unworthy to be concealed, no unfaithful Dalilah
ever more shall here with be entrusted, which of a double mind be which goes
after any Lover besides me therefore make proof of Truth, Love and Loyalty in a
fixed Virginity, before this discovery be made forth in Verity: but this know,
the true Nazarite is with Him who will not be deceived in his choice, as the
figurative Sampson was. This mighty Man of strength will take none into his
Bosom, but such as may be confided in. Therefore if thou would his Dalilah
be, of perfect Beauty with spotless Chastity, which will well please this
mighty Prince of Peace, who will not thence refuse thee, when well assured that
thou have declined and forsaken thy Father's House and Kindred, never to turn
back to them more, but constantly to him cleave: then his Head on thy Lap he
will repose, and his hidden strength to thee reveal, and nothing from thee
conceal, being in Joint-Union, no more twain, but one Spirit: The Seven Locks
of his Power he will suffer thee to unloose, and draw out therefrom such Might,
as may slay and overcome the Philistines Host, which such prickling Briars have
been to invade thy inward Coasts, and most holy Place, which is appointed for
the Ark of the Covenant, there to rest. But behold now is risen a Judge and
Lawgiver, one that is mighty to save and deliver out of the Hands of all thy
Enemies, who thy true Covering in the Day of Battle will be: Therefore
henceforth fear not those Warriors that come forth with the Goliah's Spear and
Shield; the Champion which keeps within, shall make them all to stagger, kill
and fall, for the true Sampson will maintain Victory over all; it is well worth
the sheltring under his mighty Wing, here with safety thou may set, and upon
his Love do thou incroach still, who will not offended be, though thou intrude
thy self his Dalilah to draw out his Heart more to thee, till he shall make
known his great Secrets unto thee. I well know this is the only precious thing,
no one can ever privy here unto be made, till Wisdom be the Bride-Garment upon
their Eternal Man, then ravished with thy Beauty, and with a pleasant Aspect
will Emmanuel look toward thee, and give thee to read within the seven sealed
Book: There is the interpretation of all in the History, as from whence I give
thee to understand the Mystery of the Nazarite's seven Locks, they answer to
the seven Seals of this Book of Life, which only is to be opened by the Virgin,
completed in the seven number of Spirits, which are the seven All-seeing Eyes
that only can read in this Book, which is the true Groundwork of all those
wrestling working Properties, which moved are by me, as thou do in thy self
feel, a new Frame and Model for great and precious substance to be taken into:
therefore take heed now, and for no common use let thy inward part any more be;
for these Throne-Powers which have visited thee, will admit no mixture of
company: all of one sort in pure Harmony will meet in this Lovepaved-Sanctuary,
where thy all desirable fellowship will there in the free Liberty dwell, and
where opportunity thou will have in Love's Sanctuary, to dive and search, till
thou find out what lies hid within the Breast of thy worthy Nazarite, who
now has received his full Dowry: the Father has invested him with all Power,
to a full and perfect state of Glory he is now instated; then doubt not but he
has wherewith abundantly to gratify thee: a higher and greater Match I could
not contrive for my self in thee; consider hereof well, and carry it according
to my Counsel; then shall thou his Heart still draw down, the Tabernacle of
witness in thy Heaven, the Rainbow in the Cloud, which thou have seen, as the
Mark or Seal of the Covenant betwixt God and thee, according as it is written
in the Prophets, He shall be given for a Covenant: What to do? not to read over
as a dead Letter; no, thou shall witness him thy Prophetical Spring, a Book
written within thee, to which now with all those seven Eyes do thou turn in,
that this Rainbow in thy New Heavens, as a Throne-Circle may enclose thee with
him as a secret Pavilion, where no adulterated thing can break through to
disturb, while thou art looking into this New Testament, which shall never be
trusted out of this pure Circle of the Life's Covenant, into which by my Virgin
Purity thou only can pass in, if I were not at hand all over in an Oily Pool,
to bath and drench thee throughout, that so the glorified Eye may think thee
all fair, and send forth a Spicy Breath of Air, which only agreeable is for
thee, with thy fellow Branch, as not only worthy ye^ may be, but also bold and
free to take and read this Book of Life, which now upon the opening is, as I
this Day have shown to thee with that other Book, which wide open in the common
and outward place always is to be found, to which thou art by the earthly dark
part invited thereinto to look: and it would there retain thee, but out of this
Book of Death thou may not look, which is a flowing Source of strong
reasoning, that as a Wall, would enclose and captivate thy Mind, that it should
need only the Death's Lines, that has the putrefying been, that have kept the
whole Universe Prisoners in the black Dungeon of Sin: Now to this end I have
presented thee with these two Books, that henceforth thou may avoid
consulting with that which always is at hand, and so readily does offer it self
unto the view. But I am come absolutely to forewarn not only thee, but such as
are growing up with thee, upon pain of my displeasure, you would not turn your
Eyes out any more, for great is your danger, if under the Law of this first
Covenant, wherein Eternal dying is that you still in parley therewith should be
found; but come now, draw in, my wise and obedient Children, I have provided
this other Book, to be unloosened: the Seven Seals no longer shall before it
stand, because I in favor am with the Lamb, who from his Virgin-Spouse will
nothing hide: Therefore in my Light you may in this Book see where you may come
to your lost dignity. It may well be Wisdom's Book of Revelation entitled; for
without me you here could nothing understand, though it stood all open to you,
the Interpreter I my self must be, to tell you Letter by Letter; for you know
not yet what number it is that makes up your New Name, which till you do see
what challenge can be made to the rest of the whole inrouled Mystery, but as in
a Metaphorical Look through my Glass, in the first Leaf unfolded thou will see
the engraving of that Name with Letters of Gold.

November the 3d. The Divine ANGLER.
THere was presented to me a Person, Angling upon the Brink of a River, to
catch Fish; but his Labor was fruitless. So that he gave off, being hopeless.
Then came another Person, and said, Be not Discouraged, but follow me: Behold,
and see, I have got an Angle that has such a Bait; as all the Fish in the
River will fall upon it. And accordingly I beheld multitudes in a cluster
brought up by it. Then cried out that first Person, Surely the Lord, who is the
great Fish-taker, in verity is come here, and has wrought this Miracle indeed.
Whereupon the Person went into the Deep, and having vanished down into it, drew
up the Fish: and cried, If ye will here follow me, ye shall the Principal Fish
take; but under Water ye must learn to Dive, and again know how to Rise.
Consider, and sind out this Parable: for here is Meat for the Strong.

November the 4th. The Opening of this Parabolical Vision.
IT was now given me to understand, what this did drive at. The first Angler
that went, represents the Forward and Willing Mind, that a Fishing would go
to draw up out of the Broad River; wherein the Everlasting God is to be
understood, who is said to be the Place of Broad Rivers; in which holy Spirits,
as in their proper Element do live, and swim. Flesh cannot live in Water, but
Fish is of another kind: which nature the Holy Ghost does present, as a
Similitude for the New Creation, that will live and move much in the Watery
Element, which is a Degree much beyond the Earth, though under Purgations by
Fire. Neither is Fish so gross or corruptible: but they are still under a
Washing Stream, and therefore not used for Sacrifices in the Old Law. Whereas
all that is of Flesh is by that ordained for Burnt-Offerings, that it may pass
through the Purgation in the Flames of the Altar. Now what the Sea and Rivers
of this kind do feed and generate, must signify a Generation of Creatures,
that is nothing so course and brutish as are the Earthly Beasts.

But from this it was shown me, that this River figureth out God himself, and
the pure Angelical Spirits, that move in God as in the Glassy Sea: wherein
contained are the vast Riches that none in Flesh can see, nor fathom; till they
changed be into such a Body as in God their Watery Element to live, and there
to swim, and dive for the unutterable precious Stones, to bring them up,
according as need does require. It is not the Angling upon the Outside of the
River, but the Adventuring into it will obtain the desired Prize. And consider
what Bait is to be the attracting Matter, to draw both Spirits and Substances
of this unto us. Now then it may needfully be inquired into, what this Bait
compounded of is, for drawing Angelical Spirits, that will also soon draw us
after them? It was thus hereupon delivered to me, that it must be the
Composition which consists of all those excellent Virtues, and Properties,
that were and are in the Spirit and Nature of JESUS. For no other can attract
and take in God, but what is so much like to God; who must be Signatured upon
us. For else it will be as fruitless as when the Disoiples went a Fishing: till
the Lord the true Angler come, no Draught could be fetched up. Even so this is
to Instruct us, that we examine, whether or no we upon this High and Worthy
Undertaking, do carry our full and complete Bait with us, which is the precious
smelling Spikenard of an humble, meek, and clarified Mind, that expressly
answers to the very Mind of JESUS. Then doubt we not, that we shall fail, of
drawing to us Spirits sublime, that live in that pure Climate, where we shall
with them most willingly back plung in, and in a pure Body swim always under
the Stream of these Waterings. Jesus the Lord our Bait and Angle will be: Then
in what Riches shall we excel? Oh this allworthy is of our Consideration, in
the Element of this Water of Life how to live, and appear for a while as
Drowned and Dead; till that we shall arise and swim with the rich Pearl in our
Mouths. Then will it be cried, This the Christ indeed, that has the great
Draught brought up, through sinking down into Faith's Obedience. Who now
venture will to walk upon these Living Waters, wherein the Healing Medicine is,
but such Hero's in the Faith, as will not afraid be, to dive into the Bottom of
this River deep? For otherwise the Rich Prize, which is in the Fishes Mouth,
can never be caught up. The Wise in Heart, who by the pure Spirit have been
taught, will what is by the Parable meant well understand.

November the 7th. The Magical Journey.
. 1. IN my Spiritual Journey on, to the Land of all Blessed Stores, a Figure
hereof was acted Magically before me, I being carried to a Gate, which was so
narrow and strait, that there was no getting through, but by creeping upon the
Knees, and that with great. Difficulty too. And so led on was I still, till at
length I came to another Gate, which was somewhat more easily to get through
then the First; but strait enough. So passing on yet further, there was a two
Leaved Gate: but the One Leaf opening was fitted exactly to my Stature in
Height and Breadth, which gave entrance into a Place, where neither Beginning
nor End was to be found. And I said, what make I here alone? And the Invisible
Guide that led me through these three Gates, answered, that There would be some
others that would come after me, when they did hear where such a vast
Plantation was, which was to be replenished with all sorts and kinds of good
things: and yet no Toil, Labor, or Care required is. But know that it is
appointed only for Wisdom's high Magicians to Act here their Powers, that had
passed through all her strait Gates.

. 2. This Presentation, and the Advice attending it, was very powerful; which
still I called over, and searching deeper, to have the Exposition of the Gates
given unto me, by and from the dropping Unction. For though my Spirit saw
nothing but an Infinite Space: yet such a Perfuming Gale I felt, as if all
manner of Flowers were growing. But this Word came also to me, saying, Here is
the Place for Love's Kingdom to grow, with its Natural Inhabitants, that have
left behind the gross selfish Love. That must not come here; for that it is
that makes the Passage so strait.

. 3. For as much as none can come in, till they be unstripped and uncloathed of
the low sensual Nature. For in this place all that counted worthy shall be, to
come in here with thee, must put on Transfiguration, and act in the
Supercelestial Philosophy, as holy Magus's that skilful are to work in the
Furnace, that maintained is from the One Burning Element; which gives the High
Superelementary Matter, the Composition whereof makes up the Store of all
Acting Wonders. Here then on a sudden did I in my Spirit view, several Persons
so Divinely Modified in their Bodies, that in this Mystery highly, Learned
were, that would sound forth such a Spirit from themselves, that might give an
Existency and Being to whatever they pleased to will; sometimes raising up
Golden Tents to go in and out, and at other times making some places which
seemed all empty and bare, to spring up with wonderful Plants, that perfectly
did yield their Fruit, appearing in a Golden luster of Brightness; that was
said to be Magical Food for the Inhabitants hereof to live upon. In other
Places they without digging or moiling, did bring up Mines of all precious
Stones and Golden Oar; which was at the command and service of these Princely
Spirits, that did walk up and down here. And whereas I thought at my first
entrance here, that I saw nothing, after a few Moments of time had passed, thus
replenished I did see this place with Spirits of such an high Degree, that did
attract me immediately to them. Then did they put several Philosophical
Questions to me, which I did not comprehend. Upon which one among the res^ most
Courteously did offer himself to instruct and teach me: moreover saying to me,
He would open to me the Mystery of their Art. For he said he found there was
that Signature in me, that would take Impression, from the Supercelestial
Planets. So he placed me in a goodly Tent, bidding me wait to go forth in the
Pure Acts of Faith, forth, for therein I might come an Adeptist to be in this
High Philosophy.

Here being a Considerable Defect in the Original, the Author waited in her
Spirit to recall the same, and upon the 22d. of March, in this Year 1696. she
received this further Opening, as also in the following Days, here confirmed.

. 4. Wisdom appearing to me, I inquired of her who these were; who told me,
they were the Ancient and Late Wortheis taught by Her, in her Divine Magical
Stone, both in the Inward and in the Outward: and that the Time was now
approaching, wherein she was to make New Artists in this Theosophical Wisdom,
that should put a New Face upon what has been Disfigured, and under a Cloud of
Contempt, Ignorance, and Ignominy. For no other way then this could be found,
but as this Deep Mine, wherein this Treasure has so long lain hidden, should
be broken up. Then the Apostle John to whom this Mystery was well known, and
who was the Person that had before spoken to me, spoke thus to me, saying, As
there is a Natural Stone, so there is a Spiritual Stone, which is the Root and
Ground of what is brought forth visibly by the Sons of Art. And as the Outward
is Bodily, and consists in a Manual Operation, and takes up a considerable Time
^or its Perfecting; so is the ^nward gradually wrought out, and may require as
many Years as the other does Months, before it reach to its Consummation. Then
I enquired of the Angel John, How I should go about Working it? He answered me,
There must be a Cessation of all Working, as to the Powers of Nature: And I
will describe to thee the Method that is to be taken, by the Similitude of the
Outward. As there is a Furnace to be Built in that, so the Corporeal Man
answers to that, wherein the Fire-Seed of the pure Deity does enkindle it self
from the Essence of the Soul, sinding a sanctified Vessel meetly prepared
herefor. Now as to the Matter which is to be wrought upon, it is the Divine
Salt, put into a pure clear Crystalline Glass, that is pure Spirit.
Furthermore, know thou that this Salt is hidden in all Men, but it has lost
its savor, and is the Light Principle that contains all Principles, Man being
an Epitome of all Worlds, though unknown to himself. Whence he may find in
himself whatever he searches for: but this cannot be done, until the
Salt-Stone, which has lain as Dead, comes to be Quickened by Christ the
Fire-Stone, that calcines the Blackness into a Jasper Brightness and Whiteness.
This is the true Theosophical Medicine that does gradually work from it self,
of it self, and to it self, as a Grain of Wheat is sown, and by the Concurrence
of the Sun and outward Planets, forms its self into a Body. It is only to be
watched that no Ravenous Birds do come to pick it up, before it arrive to its
Maturity. For thus it is with the Golden Stone, which lies hid in the Ground of
Nature, which is nourished by the warm fiery Influences of the Divine Sun, and
watered by the moist Sperm of the Spiritual Luna, which causes it to vegetate,
by the Coagulation of the Planetary Powers of the higher Order, drinking and
swallowing up the weaker and lower, by which Dominion is obtained over all what
is Astral and Elementary. Thus the Beloved John did open the Nature of this
Royal Stone, as it opened in him in the ^sle of Patmos, when he was said to be
in the Spirit. And he told me further, That where the Universal Love was born
in any one, it was the true signature, that this Seraphick Stone would have its
Formation.

. 5. With Great freedom I was made to enquire, well knowing this Celestial
Stone had already its Birth and Vegetation in me, whether my Outward Furnace
might not break before it was finished? Then replied this dear Saint, Be not
solicitous, or concerned about that; but be patient in hope, for the True
Philosophers Tree is sprung, and is in a fair way ripe Fruit to produce: Thou
have no other Burden put upon thee, but to set under it and to watch until the
Golden Apples do of themselves drop. Then may thou know the Multiplying
Virtue, and as Eve did give of the Forbidden Tree to Adam, so possibly may
thou, by a new created Virginity of Spirit, give forth to Wisdom's Offspring
plenteously hereof, by which Multiplication from this Virtual Tree shall in
thee both Spirit, Soul and Body renew. It will be a Dispensable Gift, so that
such as have arrived to an high Progress in it, may awaken and multiply the
same in another.

. 6. Then was it further directed as to the Matter of this Stone, that the
Composition thereof was the Four-Elementary Matter, which is to be sublimed and
calcined by the Superior Element, in the Tenth Number of Perfection; and
separated and sealed up in the Glass of the sanctified Mind; that so the
Supernatural Motions according to Eternal Nature may work out Purity, and
Leaven that which is gross. So that there is no need of any thing more to be
done but to watch the Fire, that it may never go out, until it be finished, and
be kept in a gentle nourishing Heat, till it come to its Perfection.

. 7. After this was described to me, it was said to me by Wisdom, and by the
Apostle John, Thou shall now be brought to the Ancient Worthies that have made
Projection upon this Stone, as well understanding it both as to the Spiritual
and Natural Part of it. And when I was brought there, I saw the Patriarchs and
all the great Philosophers divinely taught, both of former and latter Ages.
Then was I led into a Darkness, which by a Magical Power, these changed into a
bright Silver Light. Afterward I was brought into a barren dry Ground, and
these by the speaking forth only of a Word, as, Let this Soil be changed into a
Fruitful Lebanon, brought up all the variety of pleasant Flowers and Plants,
that sent out a mighty hot Perfume. Then I was led on still to a Mineral
Ground, where were all the baser Metals. And the Apostle John, who was the
chief Magician, said, Come and see, what is here to be done also. And he had in
his Hand a little Vial, containing a Liquor like to Gold, and he dropped some
Drops of this upon each Metal; and they were all immediately transmuted into
Lustrous Gold. Then I was led to another Place, where there was nothing but a
Redish Mould cast up: and then by the Word of the Power, which he spoke forth,
this Earth was changed into Forms after our Human shape, but clarified and
bright, standing up as a great Army. And he said, These are the Fire-Stones,
that are to walk in this New Paradisical Region, as Glorified Figures, like
unto such as were here before them. Then I Queried how could it possibly be,
that such Effects could be produced by any that in a Mortal Image did now upon
the Earth appear. Upon which the Beloved John answered me, All this that thou
have seen, is possible again to be done, by Wisdom's White Tincturing Stone
formed within; by which the Great Wonders in the last concluding Age of the
World, shall the grand Revolution make; changing what is gross and vile first
within, and then going further on to Transfigure even that which is without;
that so according to that saying, The Vile Body shall be changed, and reduced,
and brought into the Glorious Liberty, whereby it may possess the Kingdom and
Dominion, with Christ the Glorified Head. Then was it said, This is the true
and faithful Mystery, that understood and unveiled has been to thee; for a
Foundation of Faith and Hope to Wisdom's Children to look into: and to wait for
the Formation in themselves of this White Virgin Stone. Then may they most
freely and easily eat and work; and nothing shall them control, as to those
worthy Enterprises, and Exploits, that are to be wrought, which shall
distinguish them to be the Sealed of the Living God signed with Power from on
High.

A further Opening of the foregoing Vision, given in the same Month of
November, 1675.
THe Word came to me, saying, The Love-Chain is to be unlinked betwixt God and
thee, while the Spirit is the only Eternal Matter and Quality, whereon thou art
to work. Therefore fast hold it will take on thee, so strongly, as to draw, and
fix thee in the Circumference of the very Immense Love, from which the Eternity
is separated, and the Curse of the Elements divided, and totally taken away. O
enter, enter, I say into it: This is the Infinite Space that thou have seen,
which is beyond the Third Gate. This invisible Love-Chain will work thee
through the First Gate, which so strait and narrow is, and so through the other
two; if thou give it all Length and Breadth within thee, to wind thee up
swiftly. For what is so strong as God's Love, for restoring into the desired
Fuition of all Plenty and Goodness? Therefore be strong, and courageous in the
Love, in the passing through these several Gates: and fear not all the Attacks
of the Enemy, till thou enter in this Blessed Land, and be there married to thy
Beloved.

An Expostulation of Wisdom's Pilgrim.
While I was in my deep Agony, a Spirit of Prayer came down, which sent up
mighty Cries and unutterable Groanings. Which, as I did most sensibly feel,
pierced and broke through the Gate of the Eternal Deep. So that my Spirit had
admittance into the Secret of the pure Deity, where I had Audience, and free
liberty to pour out my Grievances, show my Wounds, and who they were that had
pierced me. Every ones Hand was against me, shooting their Bitter Arrows,
adding weight and pressures to her, that was bleeding upon the Cross already,
crying, Crucify, Crucify in Dying, let her Dye. Now I seeing that I was to
tread the Wine Press alone and to encounter the Potent Spirits, the
Throne-Princes of Darkness, I cried an^ was in strong Travel. Yet every Pa^ and
Throw did open the Birth of Lif^ and gave me entrance into the Hol^ Place.
Where I heard first the Etern^ Sounds: and then after that, obtaining the Power
to be in a stillness, where neither Motion or Thought did stir, I was in a
smooth calm Water, wherein no Dirt or Mire did cast up, neither was there the
lifting up of any Tool, or making any noise to drown the Voice, that spoke to
me in this wise.

The Voice of the Bridegroom.

O thou afflicted, tossed and forsaken One, I will marry thee unto my self.
Thou art mine: be not dismayed. Fear none of those things thou art to suffer;
for the Power and Presence of my Omnipotency shall be with thee. Thou must be
my tried Stone, at which many shall fall and stumble; thou have been refused,
and set at naught, but I will magnify my Name in thee, and yet make it
Honorable. Only this I require, that thou separate thy self, and touch no more
unclean Spirits of this World, for I can endure no Polluted thing to come
before me. Therefore holy, harmless, separated from Sin and Sinners thou must
be: then in the holy Priesthood thou shall wait on me.

The Answer of the Spirit of the Soul.

At which I said; Lord, how can this be? For though I have greatly desired this
Office to minister about the holy Things, that so I might be nigh to thee; yet
the Worldly Spirit makes a Challenge to this outward Husk or Body, and says,
that I am not got out of the reach of its Dominion. Hunger and Thirst, Heat and
Cold do attend the outward Man, which do engage its outward Senses, for things
which are External; so that none can live in that pure Abstraction, till
redeemed out of all Care for the present Body. This was that which I bewailed,
and did plainly ask God if it were not possible for the Eternal Mind and
Spirit, to supply all Wants to that which were Corporeal, without the help of
the Spirit of Reason, which is King in that Region where the Curse is.

The Reply of the Bridegroom.

After a little while of suspending my outward Senses, this Answer I obtained,
That this could not be, till there were a Total Death of the Body of Sin;
referring to that in the seventh of the Romans, ver. 6. That being Dead wherein
we were held fast, we should serve in the Newness of Spirit; as being
discharged from the Law of the first Husband, to which we were married, after
the Law of a Carnal Command: Whence we are now free to be Married unto him that
is raised from the Dead, and so shall become the Lamb's Wife, jointured into
all the Lands and Possessions that he has. The Eternal Revenues are belonging
to her, whether Invisible or Visible: all Power in Heaven and Earth is
committed to her, and all things are given to those that are his: whether it be
Gifts of Prophecy, or of Revelation, or of Manifestation, or of Discerning of
Spirits: or that high Tongue of the Learned, which only speaks from Wisdom's
Breath.

The Preparation of the Second Marriage.

At which Opening, my Spirit even failed within me, as desponding ever to get
rid of my First Husband; without which no Marriage with the Lord from Heaven
can be. For know thou not, (was it said to me) that the Law of Sin has
Dominion, so long as he lives? So from hence the Spirit did testify that
nothing less then a Thorough Death would put me into a Capacity of this
Marriage with the Lamb. For he will match himself only to a Virgin Spirit,
incorporating, and thereby changing into his own pure Humanity: and this is a
Begetting into a Living Substance, which springs through the Death of the
Old. Which as the Grain that dissolveth in the Earth, and generateth a New
Body: so in like manner does the New Creature, spring forth; which indeed is
Christ, our Life, whose appearance will put an end to Sin in us. Now what
brought in the Curse, the Care, the Toil, and the Impotentcies which distress
poor Man in this his fallen estate, but a Deviation from his God? And while in
this state, he stands as a Debtor to Sin, being under the Dominion of it, this
makes him obnoxious to all the Calamities which do attend those that live in
Bodies Elementary. But now to hear of a Possibility of a Putting off of this
Body of Sin, this is good Tidings indeed: and verily the Prophet which is risen
in me, has prophesied that such a Day is at hand. And that I shall be a
Witness of Jacob's Star arising, and shall see for my self, and not for
another. Then shall that saying be fulfilled, Death is swallowed up in Victory;
even the Death of that First Husband, who so long hindered my Marriage with the
Lamb. Who by a New Law from Mount Sion has set me free, from the Law of Sin
and Death. Be astonished, O ye who are Wounders and Despisers of this Grace;
which I now see is near to be Revealed. For the Garments of the Bride are
making ready: and it is granted to me to see, in whose hand they be.

O Wisdom, to thee is committed only the Ordering of this Wedding Garment,
which of diverse Colors shall be, that known from all others may be the King's
Daughter, who under thy Teaching and Discipline is committed.

April the 20th. 1675. The Shulamits Debate, and Expostulation with Wisdom.
OH my Mother, how is it that thou have showed me of the Glory of thy House,
and of the Honor, Riches and Dominion of thy Kingdom, and hereby has allured
and drawn the Spirit of my Mind, that I cannot turn my Eye from thee, my Senses
being refined, and with thy Life close touched, that I altogether incapable am
to join to Baal, or to immerse my self with the druggy polluted Life of this
outward Principle, which has no consistency with that transparent state where
unto thou have called me, with thee to have my Conversation, as one that has
obtained Grace, to be surnamed by thee, and admitted into the secret of thy
Counsel, in order to some peculiar Service for thee. If so, why is it I am yet
straightened in force and power? What signal mark do I bear to demonstrate my holy
and consecrated Calling to wait in thy Pavilion? What Commission have I from
thee to show, whereby all unbelieving and gainsaying Spirits may be convinced
and put to silence? true it is I have had free Communications through
Transportation of my Spirit: but what is this without fixation, and Seal of the
Power which may bear Record of its own Omnipotency, working forth to redress
all Maladies and Grievances? seeing I have taken upon me to plead, suffer me
yet a little to empty and unload my self to thee, whom I well know to have the
tender working Bowels of a Mother, and numbrest all my Complaints; the first
Argument is from thy free choice of me, calling me out of all Nations, Tongues
and Peoples, no more to know my Fathe'rs House or the Land of my Earthly
Nativity, but to renounce and separate from all, attending thy Appointments
only, at whose Knee I have been for some time brought up; to hear and learn the
manner of the worship of my God, which is expected in a different Living,
All-Powerful Ministration, which to know is indeed Life; but to act forth from
that Life, brings the Joy, Peace and Glory, which will be the Renown of
Wisdom's Nursery, among whom I have thus far found favor, as to have her
Friendly Salutations, with Word upon Word, sealing Instructions to me: but this
is not enough. Oh the Spirit and Breath that goes forth with all Influencing
Powers, to create new Forms of things: this I know will give the express
signature of a Godlikeness putting forth through Nature's contemtible
Appearance: Here is surely a matchless Glory to break forth, the highest
Mystery, which was ever unveiled, the best and choicest of all Wisdom's
Treasury, yet to be brought out for such as pursue, and make it their only one
Interest, minding and regarding nothing else. Oh my Mother, while herein have I
busied my self in putting and throwing off all Weights, that I might come a
naked Spirit unto thee: How have the pernicious Necessities cried for the
out-part to have Right done it, to act, and work, and plot in Reasons
Counsel-House, as the manner is of all which live in the gross Animal Body; is
known to thy all-viewing Eye, which runs to and fro: and what my Conflicts
have been, and still are, while I have studied to evade and make my escape
through the Throng of Worldly-Wise Reasons Guard, who have by order of their
great Prince, watched me in every going out and in: when with my only Friend I
would my Time secretly in all sweetness spend, contrivance has not been
wanting to draw me down, to wear again the dark Linsywolsey-Gown. I being well
aware through divine caution: These are the Pirates that have lain in wait for
me, to take what Substance is with me embarked. So that Perils on all kinds do
beset, but this my Ark above all Waters does keep floating, (a Man of War is
within) which will keep this Vessel from being a Prize to the subtle Man of
Sin, pitched within and without by Wisdom's Skill: no fear of leaking while I
thy bottom am, so says the Amen. Thus encountering fresh with Temptations and
strong Gusts from the cold North, which I feel many times blow so sharp, as if
they would put back the Spring from coming on; upon which only my Hope is
entertained, which keeps up my Spirit from fainting. Thus while I was pleading
and pressing hard for the finishing Power to come down, that might put an end
to all Strife, whioh is from the Root of Sin. [Here is a Break, by the loss of
the Original.]

Therefore, O Shulamite, do not thou judge thy Furnace to be too hot: it well
becomes thee the same with thy Lord in all things to be, who in thee bears,
and endures, and suffers. Were it not that had high Conjunction with the
Deity, thou would not stand in that Enmity universally, to what from the Root
of Iniquity does spring. How much better is it to be numbered with thy Jesus
amongst the Transgressors, and to bear the Sins of others, rather then thy own,
that the Evil One may challenge no part in thee. How will the Bridegroom
rejoice to see his Bride as a spotless Lily, growing under the sturdy Tree of
Life, who therefrom will pluck and present herewith the most lovely Fruits that
this new revived Eden-Garden do afford; here is private Walks, sweet pleasant
Groves, where the Lamb with his Virgin Bride may fully solace, and none do them
espy; Spirit with Spirit can walk and talk very hiddenly, linked and wrapped up
in the Mystery of the Trinity in Unity, from out of whose Arms none shall ever
more pluck out. Oh thou deep Well of Love which thus freely flows, no need of
drawing when thy Springs unlock: while thou art communing, what Perfumes does
thy Breath send forth? as a Cluster of all rich Compounds is thy breaking up:
Turn away thine Eye, for thou have overcome me with the Sparkling Flames
thereof. How shall I be able to hold a Conference with thee, except by renewing
strength and transfiguring Glory, I be admitted into thy fiery Chariot all
paved with Loves, there with thee my Bride to set, and evermore to fix: for
greater Bliss then this I cannot desire to possess, who my dear Sophiae art.

April the 30th. 1675.
The weightiness of Wisdom's Workmanship being viewed by the Eye of the Father,
which only sees into her deep Magical ground, where she is an absolute
Princess to create and generate Spirits in her own express Likeness, knowing
well what her Offspring have right unto; and therefore their Education is to be
answerable to their high Birth. Having such near Aliance to the Glory of the
Trinity, all must in Wisdom's Children answerably correspond, that she may not
be ashamed to present and make challenge for them what by Heirship is due. Now
finding the whole scope and tenor of my Mother's Laws and Counsels are, to put
me upon Clothing my self with the highest Purity, that in nothing I might be
inferior to the Glorified and Angelical Spirits, who have not such a gross
Animal Nature to deal withal as I have; and yet required to be as Immaculate as
the Lamb of God, I cannot but thus break out.

Ah my Mother, I do not say how can, but how and when must the Accomplishment
of this be, for which I am now in such dying Agonies, that this New Glorified
Life might only appear? While thus in secret Debate I was contesting, because
my Hopes were delayed, as to the present Age, which gives right to an Estate of
Glory at Hand: which is the Manifestation who are Jewels belonging to the
Crown-Royal; O what Raptures of Love's Divine did I feel, ardently desiring a
Dissolution from my own Creaturely Being, and from all others who in corrupt
Nature's Genealogy do live, as one wearied and tired out of all, seeking only
Fellowship and Bosom-Rest with my Mother in the free New Jerusalem, as it is
known in its descent into the Habitable Parts of a renewed Earth, enclosed for
the precious noble Seed to put forth in their manifold Virtues, Powers, Colors
and Operations. All which be kept in their vigorous fragrant sweetness, as a
ready Entertainment for the High Throne-Powers to welcome themselves here in
Mystical Paradise, in which Wisdom has recreated and formed another Adam,
being Male and Female, a Production of her own Virgin-Nature, as upon my
Expostulation was opened to me, who bad me not despond, but be of good cheer,
for she was come to renew the beauteous and fresh Glory of the now declined
withered Garden, formerly called Eden, but now so over grown with prickling
carking caring Briars, unsavory Plants, all concurring to make desolate and
ravenous. For such as the fallen Man is, so is his place among Dragons, and
unclean devouring Beasts and Birds of Prey; out from which I have separated and
called thee to dwell on the Face of that pure Ground, as an anointed Cherub, to
keep all in order in this Holy Place, suffer thou no strange Plant here to put
forth; neither lust thou any more to taste of that one Tree which so pleasant
appears to the dark Eye. Though a new generated Spirit thou art, yet not
excluded from the Serpent's tempting dart, no more then he who was the first
Begotten, who thy Pattern still is to be. Consider him in his Forty Days
temptation, before whom this Tree was set, presenting all Kinds and Sorts of
tempting Fruits, but of none he would either taste or touch: who thereby gave
proof he was an impregnable Rock, fitly qualified the Father's high Trusty of
all his Treasures to be made: the same Yesterday, and to Day, he is, alive for
evermore, in the weak and frail Form of a Human Body, to perfect the same
Conquest for thee, that so complete through Sufferings thou in him may shine
Celestially; therefore fear not to go through the dark Valley, or Golgotha,
where nothing but dead and unsavory Carcasses in thy way do do lie. True it
is, the world without thee is a loathed place, but suffer and bear the Evil
Manners of it for a little space, till thy Restoration perfectly be wrought
out, then power thou shall have to subject all under Foot. Observe for thy
encouragement, that Jesus though from the Womb inspired, yet gradually in his
work did proceed in ^et and appointed times, whereby all Pro^hecies by him were
fulfilled. My Mother (...) this my Agony, did present before ^y anointed Eye,
an earthen Pot set upon a soft Fire, in which was a Liquor of melted Gold,
boiling with a scum ^n it, which was an Idea of my present ^tate, which says,
Show now thy self, ^ee how expedient it is to abide still on ^his gentle Fire,
that will not crack the ^essel, but Refine the Golden Matter in (...), which is
to be cast into several Moulds (...) furnish my House withal: no Vessel ^an be
fixed there, but what has been ^yed in this Furnace, therefore know (...) is
to be no unkindness to thee, that ^ou art still proved hereby: every seve^l
Fruit, that puts forth from the vital Spirit Tree of Love must be dipped in
this Pot of Gold, then will the offering of these Fruits be pleasant, because
weighty and solid. Think not much that Gifts and Powers do not yet come to
their Birth, there is somewhat more to be done in preparation thereto; it is no
pleasure to either Father or Mother to see their Children go naked, and be poor
and impotent, obnoxious to the Spirit of Reason's scorn and derision, who
provides for their Children deliciously; at which sometimes thou art ready to
stagger and tempted hereby to turn back again, fearing to pass through this
Fiery Baptism, without which no New Name will be given; upon which is entailed
that Dominion thou so much desire: Therefore go forward, slac^ not thy Pace,
the greater part is run o^ thy Race, though a craggy and roug^ way
hithertowards it has been, ye^ know before the end it shall all be strowed
with fragrant Flowers, which a^ Glorifying Powers, Love Tokens se^ down from
him, who will thee sig^ with a Spirit so divine, as shall out-d^ all the
Children of Time. Now watchful be, call over all my Charge, obser^ my Word:
start not herefrom, and lo, I will abide still thy Friend and Bride.

May the 29th. 1675.
Wisdom's Pilgrim being ecchoed up, setting her self as a Clock-Work upon its
going motion; still witnessing something strongly winding up the Eternal
Springs thereof; that Times number might not slack or stop, urging still to one
Gate after another, the Hand of Power to unlock, being raised up to a higher
approach and nearness to the Allinfluencing Deity, with whom in the Night
Repose, when deep Sleep had overtaken my Animal Part, my Spirit was wrapped up
in high Conjunction and Fellowship with the Triune Majesty, the Joy and
Pleasure of which was so great, that when I awaked, a Hymn of Praise was given
me to land and magnify the Love which had after this manner visited me,
drawing up out of the Body so wonderfully sweetly; who lay here powerfully in
Love's Arms arrested, kept for some Hours in this warm Bosom-Harbour, where the
Spirit inquired further about these weighty and Heavenly Matters, which, with
great pressing Urgency, received this resolve as relating to those things
manifold, which by the Mouth of Wisdom have been foretold. Who again encouraged
me to hope and wait, for the Day was not far off, in which I might see the
All-filling Body of the Glory, which would be the end of former and latter
Prophecy, whereunto I yet did well to take heed, because it was the Life's
Food, which for the present time might not only afford Support to me, but
others who with me shall wing up their Lord to meet, all Crystalline, having no
Spot nor Stain: to such he will appear and number them among the Holy Train, to
bear the Father's Name, inspiring and showing to me there was various Passages,
which yet I was further to venture and believe the entrance into, which should
yet be more amazing to the intellectual Mind, which shall into its own Deep
descend, to bring up still what will Water the Garden, that it may be always
Summer and Spring. Where I earnestly invocated this might also be the Portion
of my selected Friends, who in this Holy Ministry were choosing to wait with
me, that they might clear, single, and of a perfect Spirit appear before the
bright All-piercing Eye of the Virgin Wisdom, who to our God makes nigh.
Further I did see into the Mystery of ascending Spirits what Qualifications
thereto was required, who are to be Spiritual Flames blown upon by a constant
soft breath of Air from the Holy Power, which lets in nothing which
putrifies or is gross and heavy, none could mount up that had the least Weight
hanging upon them: the Word did express there must be a due Proportion, Light
and Purity answering to each other; the Mind that would associate with God,
must carry a distance to drossy carnal Spirits, and all of that Nature,
according to the high Birth of a Spirit: you shall know it by the Holy
Greatness which it will have, not knowing how to be familiar with what is not
of the same high extraction with it self. Wisdom is very Jealous least any of
her Family should walk out of her Order; therefore that in her Love-Favour you
may all abide, to whom this Word of Counsel shall come, that to the Virgin of
the Lamb be you Loyal, that in your ascending Prayers, you may meet with no
denial.

July the 16th. 1675.
The Light Orb opened and all overspread me, thereby dispelling every Foggy
Mist, so that it brought to my remembrance the Lord's Day, which John saw, and
had all his Revelations in; who was said to be in the Spirit. And truly after
such a manner must every one be seized, that is drawn up into the Mount of
Divine Vision, to hear what God the Lord has of his Mind to give forth. Which
will only be entrusted with such whose Spirits are fled, and departed out of
all Animal Sense, which is gross, heavy and ponderous. But for a Spirit that
would be All-seeing, and intelligent in matters Supernatural, to be uncloathed
of all Earthly Materials it is certainly required; as, through great and free
Love, I have been a Witness of, in all Conferences, and mutual Society with the
Fountain Sourse of all Spirits. For never could I hear, feel, see, or taste the
Powers and Joys of the Light Kingdom, till I was passed out of the Cloudy
Pillar of mine own benighted Reason: which many times set so hard upon me, as I
often feared that I should be violated out of all that which Divine Wisdom had
presented to me; for an Encouragement to those who shall by Faith overcome not
in part, but in whole, triumphing over all Worlds. Which is to be effected, as
has lately been shown to me, upon some debate with the World of Wisdom, my
dear Counselor, who taking notice of some fresh Exercise that my Spirit was
in, animated me thus: Be strong, be resolute, acquit thy Doubting Mind; for
therein lies the danger: for as much as no mighty Work can be effected either
in, by, or through thee, until there be a full, close, and joint Consent of all
the internal Faculties, and Powers. Therefore are there all choice Ingredients
requisite, for the making up of this Almighty precious Faith: and such as are
not to be found in every Ground. For thou art to know that there are different
Soils in the Inward Heart of Man's Earth, as well as in the outward: some being
for one Grain, some for another; and all making together for the Increase of
that Treasury, which is to be brought into the Eternal Granary. Wherein every
ones Work shall be proved, and all Metals tried, of what sort they are.

Now as to this which is the most weighty of all Seeds, and in Truth the Root
of all, there being no Fruit but what puts forth from this Tree of Faith,
from which the Holy One can taste any Sweetness, (as it is written, Without
Faith there is no possibility of pleasing God) thou must therefore dive and
search deeply: for in the Essence of the Deity this Grain of Gold is only to be
found. And if it should not drive forth it self in all its united Force and
Powers, it would never be reached to. But in that Ground where this Plant is
deeply rooted, it will put forth as from a flowing bubling Fountain: which
Water of Life mingleth with the Golden Mould, and so makes the Composition of
this high extracted Mineral; which has done, and will yet do, all the
Miraculous Things, in and through Nature but it will suffer no check, nor
contradiction from Nature. Such is the absolute and uncontrolable Sovereignty
hereof, that it will not admit of any Questioning Spirit to set footing within
its Gates. Here must be no Asking, How can This, or That come to be? If Abraham
had made any of these kind of Objections, he had frustrated all his Friendship
with God, who put him surely upon as hard things to prove him, as any in this
Age shall ever be called to, or need fear to be tried withal. Many worthy
Instances more there are upon Record of such, who by this Faith have subdued
and conquered whatever withstood them; so as nothing was too hard for them, who
skilled were in the use of this bright flaming Shield, which has for a long
time been out of Exercise. For of late Age it has scarcely been known, after
this manner of working, to have been ever used: which is in the way of giving
Being and Existency to that which is Not. This is the Quintessence and Spirit
of Faith, the immediate Begotten of the Father, that acts according to the
Will and Power of the Omnipotency. There is no Sufficiency in any but from this
All Sufficiency putting forth. Which I advise thee to look up to, and wait
upon, in the serene Stillness: and when the Birth is strong enough grown, it
will show it self whose Child it is. In the mean time hide and conceal it, and
wrap it up in the Mantle of Love and Patience. The Nourishment hereof shall be
from that Breast of Wisdom's Word, by which it shall still be sustained, till
it comes to be a full grown Power, and of a perfect Age: and then shall the
Government upon this Shoulder be laid, and both the Inmost and Utmost Bounds of
all that which the Heavens and Earth contain, shall to this Spirit of Faith bow
most voluntarily; as rejoicing to see Immanuel's Kingdom arising, as the
Morning Star out of the East.

I have now no other Word to give, but that thou hold fast, and keep the Word
of God's Patience; enduring all Contradictions, rather then denying or
shrinking back from this which will crown thee, and become thy Glorified Body.
Be strong then, O my Spirit, flag not: for my The Laws of Paradise were
hereupon given down.
Lawgiver out of Sion I do see, who upon my Earth does stand, with his Love-Fan
in his Hand, to divide from what can have no consistency with the Trinity in
Nature.

November the 22d. 1675. Wisdom's Call and Direction for the Tabernacle
Building.
UPon the New Covenant which was opened and established in me, this Word came
unto me further; Where is the Place for my Testimony to be put, except in the
Ark and Tabernacle where I only give the witness of my Presence? This is the
great, high, and most considerable Work of all, therefore thou art noted as
also them that are moved and stirred up to join with thee as known by Name to
go forward in the framing and fashioning of this goodly Tent for the Presence
of the Most Holy to take up in. Then cried the Voice unto me, Put your Hands to
this curious Work, according to the Pattern which Wisdom has given you. At
this I said in my Spirit, Ah Lord, where is the Stuff and Matter to work upon?
Then replied the Word of Wisdom, Ye shall find all with and in your own
Treasure-House, into which the Free-will-Offerings are brought; therefore be
not careful as to that: your business is to order and manage the Materials
provided to your Hands. This put me upon great Importunity for Skill and
Understanding: for it was a New Work to us, and we must obtain a special Gift,
or we should be non-plus'd in it. Then this Word spoke to me, Am not I with
thee who devised the first Tabernacle in the Figure and Shadow, and made those
two choice Ones wise-hearted, for the effecting of that which was but a Worldly
Sanctuary? Am not I come to give you a wise and understanding Heart? Why lean
you not upon me for this Ability and Sufficiency? Nothing would suffice but
Cohabitation with your God, and it could no other way be effected, but by this
New and Living Sanctuary by me framed. Therefore as a tender faithful Mother I
have not concealed any thing that might throughout accomplish thee for free and
mutual Society with thy God, and beloved Jesus: Now take good notice of what I
shall instruct, and give Rules for, in order to this pure and perfect
Tabernacle erecting. Which must be a Transcript from what is in the Superior
Heavens, which the Majesty of Glory fills; that the one may come expressly to
answer the other: and that so the same which bears Record in Heaven, may also
in thy restored and New Earth bear it; where the Everlasting JEHOVAH loves to
be, if he may but find a Receptacle suitable for so great, so wonderful, and so
infinite a Security. Now then consider to what a choice, eminent, and worthy
Service thou and thy fellow Workmen are called; labor that my Stone may spring
in you, which only can make wise Artists to comprehend the Nature and Manner of
this Work; first then know here is no less then a Creating Power, with which ye
must be endued withal, before you can make any thing of this Work: according to
that ancient Prophecy which says, The Lord will CREATE upon every dwelling
Place a Tabernacle for a Shadow by Day, and it shall be a Flaming Fire by
Night. Here is the New Covenant Prediction come to be fulfilled in thy Day,
that ye may rejoice in that which I create, and bring forth in the Birth Power
of All-Wisdom which so readily can take out the Pattern, in which the High and
Lofty One does inhabit. This is not after the manner of a Terrestial Formation
by visible Gold, Silver, Purple, Scarlet, or Linen, which Methaphorically
Imaged out the true and real Sanctuary of God's Being, which is to be created
in thy Internal Part. There the Holy Ark thou must make by me, who can extract
it Magically, casting the Mould from out of that superior and undiscovered
Golden Ground, which at my Command, casts up all precious Matter for thee to
work upon. Which unconceivable and unknown must be, for no common Eye shall
ever this espy: it is the peculiar Gift which only does appertain to those
which are called by Name this Holy Thing to ingrave Wonder-working.

Hereupon my Spirit was as one overturned, being appointed to such a Service,
wherein no Earthly Material, Tool or Instrument was to be used. For all Wisdom
and Understanding from the Rational Terrestrial Man was prohibited, and to be
wholly laid aside, and only the Wisdom which is from above, that indeed is
Pure, was to take place and give Instruction in this great Affair; which tended
to the settling of the Heavenly Promise through the erecting of this Holy
Tabernacle. Thus being in a deep plunge and concern in my self, how, and when
to set upon the Work, as being pressed out of measure, to proceed upon it,
praying with all Prayer for my self, and that other Person nominated in this
Work, I received this Divine Charge, to persist unweariedly without
Interruption. For that if there were a falling back, or but a slacking in
either, it might stop the Wheel. Therefore I was forewarned to be well
satisfied in the Spirits, that I concurred and united withal, lest that should
be mutable and not hold out to the finishing Work: for we should be tried, and
if we were not perfect in One Accord, it could not prosper in our Hand, and
then it were better to engage singly; if not clear, and cordial as one. Then
was brought before me something of a staggering, which would be very hurtful,
if at any time it should in either of us prevail, before we obtain the fixation
in the Body of the Power; for it was showed me there would not want strong
belingrings to weaken our Hands in the Work; for the whole stress lay upon
following and cleaving to our Guide, and keeping to the Paradisical Laws which
in the Ministration of the Spirit can only be fulfilled. Now these things
sinking deep upon my Spirit, drew forth many Inquiries and Heart-searchings,
and Suspicions, least the Work should in any wise be impeded, for I saw the
Dragon upon his violence to snatch at the Birth, which made me cry, O save it
out of his Hands, and carry us out of his reach. Then Wisdom spoke this Word,
No place out of danger, but the Ark and Tabernacle, where your Strong Hold is
the Sanctuary, which is provided foryour Refuge. Then did I apply my self to
ask how long it should be before we might herewith be environed, that so we
might no longer be in Fear and Jepordy. It was replied, That it is much in our
Power both to hasten or to prolong it: there was a possibility of a quick Work
to be made of it, if we would follow it fully, entirely, with all Might; for it
was of that nice, difficult, curious Nature, that every Interruption detarded
it; God could make a Tabernacle to descend ready finished upon thee, but it is
his pleasure to give thee the Honor of the Workmanship and Building hereof,
that thou may hear and learn of Wisdom how to form and bring forth this
enclosed Tent for the God of Jacob to dwell in. Then this Query did rise up
further in me. But seeing the manner of this curious Work, O Wisdom, is to be
effected by a Spiritual Magician, who by a Vertual Power must do all in it, how
can we be capable hereof, till we come to be made such? For who can make
themselves so sublime and perfect, as to reach to so high a degree of Wisdom as
is required in this Work? Truth it is, O impotent Spirit, without me thou have
no sufficiency: therefore this understand, I do not insist, or require thee to
set upon this Matter of so great Consequence nakedly, in thy own strength; for
then soon an abortive thou would make: This does require as great a Skill and
Power as the first Heavens and Earth, with all the Hosts that did belong unto
them, which were generated through the deep Spirit of Wisdom's Understanding.
So know I do call upon this Original Breath infused from my Essential Power and
Life, which resleth in the Cell of thy Eternal Mind, till it be awakned by my
Voice sounding as a Trumpet; saying, Come forth, and gird on thy Spiritual
Powers, and follow me, where thou shall see in what Holy Affairs, and Spiritual
Work, I will employ thee, knowing the Gift of Ability, which already is given
unto thee; which now is required to be stirred up, to the utmost sufficiency
thereof, to join the Chariot of thine Internal Spirit with me, and so be the
Wheel within mine, doing only what you see me do; who am risen out of thy deep
Central Earth, all things anew to create. Seven Pillars hewn out in the first
place here must be, for this Perfect Sanctuary, all Crystalline, out from that
Rock which is the Eternal Jasper-Stone. Next is that fine-twined Linen, which
for Curtains about this Tent is ordered to be imbroidered by the Golden Thread,
and wrought by the Needle of my Eternal Spirit. In the third place, it is to be
paved all with Molten Gold from that Everlasting Mountain which thou did see;
the Covering also of the same Orential Gold must be. All which though
Metaphorically I do them thus present to thee, yet all shall be accomplished in
a perfect Mystery, as the Deity shall all over-shadow thee, who long has
waited this Tabernacle to see perfected in thee, that so the Covenant within
the Ark might find a place of Security. Here thy God will choose to put his
Name only: Where nothing must come near that is defiling. And therefore
appointed are over the Thronely Mercy-Seat, flaming Cherubims, this Holy Place
to guard: Whose cry is only Holiness to the Lord Most High, who within this
Tent defires with thee to dwell, and with Power, Majesty and Glory it to fill:
but know, that here God will admit none into this separated Court to come, but
the High Priest which has the Crown of the Anointing Oil: therefore consider
the wonderful Purity, that is required when thou come near to thy God to
inquire, who will from between the Flaming Seraphims commune with thee in all
Matters and Things in which thou art to receive Commands. For now the real sum
of all that which is required in this thy approach, is purity in the highest
degree, that can be extracted from that Original Sourse, out from which flows
the Golden Streams of All-Holiness, which will be found within thy self, and in
their rising, so cleanse and sanctify them all over, as therefrom this Holy
Tabernacle will it self form, and grow upon thee, till it shall have swallowed
up all foregoing Tabernacles, as Aaton's Rod did devour the rest of the
Magicians Powers. So know that God will be and live entirely to himself within
thee, as his perfect Tent; enduring no Vessel, or Instrument, or Spirit, to
come here, but what has the Inscription of Perfect Holiness upon it. For who
may here ascend but what can dwell in a Flaming Pillar of Fire, and not be
consumed? and be able to say, Evermore let me in this sweet, aimable pleasant
Fire, O God, with thee abide, till I know nothing within me stirring, but the
Ark of thy Strength and the Power of thy Omnipotency, which will be, and is,
the finishing Glory of thy Sanctuary. Where unutterably and perpetually my
Spirit may be folded up as in an unknown Reservatory within this Holy Place of
Purity.

In order to the attainment of which Perfect State, this Word I heard, Abstain
thou from all Meats which are offered unto Idols, and feed upon nothing which
is Common or Unclean, which is not purged by the Fire that burns upon my
Altar: a true Fast ye are to keep in your Spirits from the gross creeping
Things, and flying Fowls of Imaginations that are apt to flutter in the Air of
your Minds, and would feed upon that which is hurtful; making ye Infirm and
Weak, for this Tabernacle-Work. For as ye are called and chosen to the Order of
the Holy Priesthood, there to attend instantly Day and Night, maintaining the
Fire upon the Altar from the pure Spikenard, which is to be made up of all
Spices, into a perfuming Oil, this is thy Service to cast herein Fuel, or Food
for this Holy Fire, to Feed upon: then all Offerings passing through this Fire
are made acceptable because of the Perfume, and Confectionary Art of the Most
High and True Chemist, that makes this Eternal Composition, giving it into thy
Hand to maintain the Celestial Fire with: Out from which expect the Cloven
Tongue must issue forth, for it is the Spicy Flame, which inspireth with the
Holy Ghost; nothing goes beyond or is like to this Oil of Composition, for it
contains all the Sovereign Virtue of the Holy Godhead: it is of the highest
most subtle Tincturing Property, that it can pass and penetrate through all
things; the Extraction being from the Arabian Spices of all sorts, mingled with
the Spirit of Gold, which makes it of a wonderful sublime and vertual Power:
With this Oil the Tabernacle, with all that does appertain to it, must be
herewith anointed, as the Testimony, Altar and Ark. As in the Type, so in the
Antitype look thou for it, it being of that infinite value, that a greater
Gift cannot be given, and as I have directed and given Wisdom to model out the
Sanctuary, and Ark of my Presence; so likewise Skill and Understanding i^ this
high and most wonderful secret to make thee a Confectioner, which i^ the
highest Art attainable; whereby thou will become a Physician to thy^ self and
others. But this requires great Heedfulness, Purity and Watchfulness, with Love
and Faithfulness, to enter upon it with all Earnestness, making it thy absolute
Profession and Calling, not regarding nor minding any one thing else; but
keeping close within the Rounds of my Sanctuary, where the Basket of Blessing
and Store is for thee to live upon. Oh that there were such a Heart in thee as
would believe, rest and trust herein, and not look out besides me, then
should thou know the length and strength of Jehova's Arm, what it should
work, act, and do, in defiance to all Reason's false Prophets, which would not
have thee break off from that rusty Canker-eating Chain, which has linked the
whole Earthly Inhabitants together, living upon one common Store, not being
able to trust to me beyond what their Eye of Sense does see; which is no less
than a fine spun piece of Idolatry, even among the Reformed Party. My
All-piercing Eye this does see, and does hereof still give Warning to thee, and
him that solemnly with thee in an Holy Convocation and Priestly Separation has
engaged, that in keeping of my Charge ye may my anointed Cherubs be, on which
my Tabernacle may rest in its All-flaming Glory: and make your way up to Sion,
and the Free Jerusalem, the City and Mansion House of God your Lawgiver and
King. All which may be witnessed from within, as the diving still deeper within
the Circumference of your own Heavens, the pleasant Sea of Fire, and Glass over
to pass, that ye may know the swift Sail, through the forcible Power of the
mighty Ark of my Strength within thee, to cut off the flowing Tides of Sense,
with which in your Journey on ye may meet. Therefore venture ye not one Step to
set, or one remove to make, till you feel Power your Ark to raise, which
commands all whatever it be to obey. For it is the Anointed of the Lord that
is to go before, his Way to prepare, all Mountains in its way to level, and to
bring down, and all Seas to dry up, and all Worlds of Enmity to subdue. O great
is the Force, Strength and Majesty hereof, with whom it is as a Risen Body,
moving in its Oily Virtue. It is thy impregnable Fort and Tower: out from it do
not thou go, but as an Apprentice here Bind thy self, for to abide; and then in
the High, Spiritual Craft of the All-eternal Mystery thou shall be taught: and
this unparalled Composition of the Physical Elixir, and of the Ointment of
Life, how to make shall be instructed.

But in the First place a Covenant of Secrecy thou art to enter into, not to
Reveal it to any, except to thy Fellow Apprentices; who called are with thee to
work in the same Art.

Then Secondly, Thou art to fulfill the Term and Time hereof, in Truth and
Patience unweariedly; till thou come to be as Exact and Perfect as thy
Teacher is: this Oil both to make, and then to keep in the Alablaster-Box of
perfect Nature.

Now I shall direct thee next how this is to be done; and that by way of
Similitude. Know then that there is a secret hidden Garden, within that Land
called Beulah, in which grow all Physical Plants, which the River Pison does
Water. It is a temperate Climate, neither too Hot, nor too Cold: and the Sun
never goes down there. For there is no Night, but one perpetual Day in the
borders of this Blessed and Beautiful Land. And here do grow all sorts of
Herbs, that have such a vigorous Seed of Life in them, that their Life never
does fade. Here also grows every kind of Spicy Trees, which through the
Exhaling Sun, through the rest of the Divine Planets, do produce a mighty
strong Frangrancy; infomuch that none into this Place can come, but Seraphical
Ones; who are used to this pure Climate. Here are hid within the Bowels of this
Holy Ground, the Veins of pure Gold, with all Oriental Precious Stones. Behold
I have now described to thee the Place, out of which the Confection, and
Matter, of this Magestery, Oil, or Ointment is to be made.

But thou will say, This is a Sealed up Place; none here can come; it is a
Garden so richly furnished, that who is it amongst Mortals, who with the Key
may herewith be entrusted? Although into Paradise my Spirit is admitted, yet
into this All lustrous Privy-Garden I could have no entrance. True it is, that
hitherto it has been concealed; because it was not proper for thee herein to
come, until entered thou had to be Wisdom's Royal and Professed Physician;
withal taking the Degree of her High Philosopher, to know the Nature of her
Stone. The Matter whereof within this Garden has it self hid. Come gird up thy
Spirit, put on the Sandals upon thy Feet, cast over thee the pure Garment of
the Cherubin-work; and follow me into this Secret Place. The Doorkeeper here
does well know my Voice: to the Call of Wisdom he will open, thou shall see.

Which indeed to me accordingly was made good: for my Intellectual Spirit was
hither presently moved, and made to pass; where in Reality, though after a
Spiritual Manner, I did come, with my Guide, into thy unknown Plantation. Where
Magically I did espy Beds of Herbs and of Flowers, in great order they did grow
in a rarisied Beauty, and their Luster they did cast to attract mine Inward
Eye. Then in great and holy Awe I did to my Mistress of the Physical Art my
self apply. Who then said to me, Take good heed, and gather thou there where I
shall express to thee; for thou art come, where the real and choice Simples do
grow out of the All-Essential Good. Upon which no Corrupter ever came, or could
come: or with any of these Springing Essences was ever mingled hereupon. By the
Serpent no Poysonable Rays were ever here at all scattered: it is a Place which
ever from his Eye was hid, by the Divine Constellations. All which Plants here
thou do see, from one Seed do after their kind thus multiply in this Variety.

Now for the Holy Ointment, which I would give thee skill to make, Go first to
that Bed where the precious Thyme is included, and take there seven Handfuls
thereof: then take the like quantity of the Baulm of Hope; and of the Sweet
Majoram of Patience, according to the same perfect number, as the two former.
To these let there be also added the Spirit of Mints Power, the Eyebright of
All-seeing, the Rue of Fortitude, and the Hyssop of Purity. These do thou
gather when the Sunbeams are in their greatest height and Influence: and
extract the Juice out of them, and so dissolve it with the Kidney-Fat of a
choice Deer, that must be slain on purpose for this use. This thou will know is
to be obeyed and yielded to, though it be even thy dear Sensitive Life, which
for this Composition must be dissolved: the Death of which is only Serviceable
for so Secret an Use. Hereupon a soft gentle Fire from the Altar is to be
taken; and then diffuse in the Golden Vessel of the pure Humanity, and thou
shall see what a fragrant Restorative Ointment this will come to be; whereby
all Cures shall be wrought Practitionally, the Knowledge of this Art being
engrafted in thee, as a Natural Scyon co-inherent within thy inward parts, to
transmute and make all that which was of a divided Property, to be of one pure
and rarefied Sort and Constitution; as relating to the healing part, which
through the whole Manhood is to disperse it self to settle all again in its
first Primitive Order.

Then again here is another secret greatly requisite to be learnt, as the Spicy
Oil, which is the Spirit of Spirits, extracted, and drawn out from the Seven
Spirits mentioned: the Ingredients to this are deep, and worthy of Inquiry:
which cannot be illustrated but by way of Metaphorical Description; which the
wise and apt under Wisdom's Manuduction will soon understand, for that all the
Materials are lying or growing so close about thee within this Physical Garden;
which may be called the Eflux of the Deity, which evaporateth through every
Plant and Tree which grows here: from and by which ye may understand the high
and precious Quality of whatever you shall a Composition make out.

Hereupon did arise a Query, Whether it might not be as effectual to take of
these Plants and Trees as they naturally grow in themselves, for an healing
Balsom, and Liquor, for the restoring of Life, without mingling them in a
Confectionary way? To this I was answered thus by the holy and profound Artist,
that said, Through the uniting of many Spirits, Powers and Virtues into one
sublime Substance, there is produced an Almighty Force and Strength, which
would not be while they continued in their separated Essences; but through the
Coagulation by the Hand of Wisdom, into one Quintessence, it would have its
vigorous penetration, as in the accomplishment hereof ye may witness, if ye wax
not saint, but persevere with all diligence, and not be turned aside, though
you do meet sometime with the Waters of Strife; but hold out, or all is lost
which already is wrought. For I would not that either of you who so voluntarily
your selves to me have bound, should grow weary, till I your Work have crowned,
having chosen you out of my Olive-Ground to sprout, that so ye may to each
other empty forth, what I your Fountain have blessed you with, as a fruitful
Womb to bring forth even that mighty Lordly Sprout, which will make your
Heavens and Earth to shout; and all the Hosts of them to praise and celebrate
the Rising Star from the East, therefore with all fear and care go on, and
persevere, till that all things shall be put under him who is born in you the
King of Salem, against whom great Conspiracies will be, but as he in you shall
grow up, he shall them all defeat, through the Crown of this anointing Oil,
which I am to show thee how to make. First then come with me into my secret
Lebanon, where the Beds of Spices are, and take thee seven Ounces of the Mace
of Grace, of like quantity of the Spikenard of Love; the Camphore of Peace; the
Heart-cheering Cloves, of the Saffron of Joy; the Noble Frankincence of all
Faith; the Myrrh of Triumphant Victory; the Casst of a Sound Mind and Perfect
Heart. Take all these and put them under the grinding Wheel which maintains
its uncessant working Motion within thee, till they come to be an Oily
Substance, mixed into one perfect Lump, then diffuse all in the Juice of the
Pomegranat for a certain time, adding hereunto the Powder of Gold of Pervilium,
which is to be mixed with the Magistery of Pearl, and the Ruby-Spirit; all
which close in a pure Crystalline Bottle, into which nothing ever before was
put, and set it constantly under the Sunshine of thy Heavens for the perfect
Clarification thereof: Which at the tenth number will attain to the full height
of a Life-quickning Spirit.

Having taken good notice of this Mysterious Receipt, I laid it up in me as a
Precious Jewel, resolving to follow the Rules of this Intrinsic one, and to
make an experiment hereof if by any means it might be brought to a Triune Body
of such sublimity. All which must be wrought in the Tent of the Virgin-Wisdom,
where no soiling thing must interfere, while this Composition is in doing: And
only Sanctuary Instruments I did see must be used here. Having then order to
discharge all out of this Celestial Place, no Servant which appertained to the
old and first Tabernacle, I durst to admit, for my aid, or help, or in any
service therein to employ. Now all that are to rest within this Place, where
the Glory of the Majesty does it self unfold, with the first Balsam must be
anointed; thus to me it was declared. Oh the great Purity that I did see was
required in ministering about these Holy Things! it cutteth off quite from all
Intermedlings in a putrified Earthly State; the Eye so single and clear is
through this Ointment, purifying it, that it cannot bear any more to behold in
it self either Spot, Blemish, or Wrinkle, knowing well none else in the
Tabernacle of God's Holiness with him can live. Therefore in the Oil of
Consecration I am appointed for to abide, and to drink of this Liquor of Life,
which suddenly may ready be through the diligent Hand that prepares it, as I
do both feel and see: which makes my Spirit so intent hereupon, that while the
great Artist is at work, I know not how my Eye to take off, that so I may be
able and skilful after the same manner this to congeal, and mix in its number,
weight and measure. For indeed ambitious I am this choice Drink always to have
by me, that hereof I may take at pleasure, and also give thereof to the
Thirsty, which in Wisdom's choice are thereof worthy.

And as I was thus spreading my Requests, before the Holy Mercy-Seat within the
new raised Tabernacle, I heard a Voice from thence speak; Anoint every Vessel
within my Sanctuary, that all may be sublimed and scented with that Ointment,
which Wisdom has within thy Tent made. Then in this interim I did feel
somewhat break and fly, as if a bundle had been untied: Myrrh and Spikenard
more pleasant to the Nostrils could not be then this. Somewhat did diffuse it
self so richly, as if it would dissolve me into its own Balsamic Nature. Oh
how affected was my Spirit with that Oily Burning upon the Altar, upon which
the Seven Lamp-Spirits do draw forth Matter to feed upon! the Tabernacle needed
no other Light then what from hence did shine. Thus surrounded in Love's
Pavilion; I did set, refreshed from what here did flow in, all throughout me
warming. This was a good requital for my earnest and all attentive waiting
within the Sanctuary, not out-departing, therein meeting with all satisfying
Provision, which does invite our Spirits here to abide; till the Spicy Liquor
be fully ripe, which upon the preparing is, against the Great Day of the Feast.
This made up is of such choice Rarities as may well provoke our Appetites,
having Intelligence beforehand at what a high rate our Table is to be furnished.

After the finishing of the Tabernacle-work, an order from the Heavenly Court
did come forth for a Convocation of a Seven Days separation to be held by us,
who are called lawfully for to strive to be Masters of the Divine Art,
according to Wisdom's high Philosophical Rules. Therefore in order to the
perfecting of this Balsamical Medicine and Restorative Elixer, this Counsel
further she did to me give forth; saying, Watch, Pray, and Wait, within the
Sanctuary, gathering together as in one, all the Spicy Powers to make a
Perfumed Incense, to offer upon the Altar; from which Celestial Fire will
arise, which will make you Pray in the Holy Ghost with flaming Terror, which
only will effect the Blessing upon this your so great Undertaking, for which
uncessant Invocations are breathed forth from the Cloven Tongue rising from the
Altar-Fire, which is the efficacious Spirit of Prayer, that as a Flame inspired
through the Ghostly Breath, does mount and pass through all things: no
Principle can bind or detain it, but swiftly it pierces and prevails, when
the Oily Incense after this manner is mingled with it; therefore as ye would
Prevailers, strong, potent and mighty be with your God, for to ask and receive;
let the Flaming Incense still your Advocate be, and then your Intercessions of
like force will be as those of Moses and Elias in their Day, as ye will see;
now then a set and an appointed time let there be for these Holy Offerings to
be brought unto the Altar. Draw near ye Holy and Separated Ones, and dedicate
it with what is unblemished, multiply seven times seven your pure Meat and
Drink Offerings, till that you no more conscious are of Sins defilement within
this Sanctnary dwelling; where forbidden is all Servile-working, during the
time that this solemn Convocation is celebrating.

December the 28th. 1675.
An Understanding was now given to me, to know and discern the Root and Seed of
that growing Mystical Body, into which the Kingdom of God was to descend, which
would finish and put an end to all imperfect things, because it consisted of
all Faith, Power, Purity, Wisdom, Strength and All Sufficiency; to make
complete the comers hereunto, that so their might be an absolute Dominion
within our selves, and a gathering into one Body all Spiritual Ghostly
Operations, which are of impregnable Force and Might, till the Kingdom after
this manner shows it self, all lies under the vail of Obscurity, and is little
perceived or owned in one, more than another, be they never so entirely Holy,
till the Deity springs and shoots forth it self into a Body, that can naturally
act like to its Omnipotent Being without limitation. Oh who are hereunto yet
come, and what are all Seize till hereunto we have reached? our Measuring
Line can it dive and search into the deep Abyss of the great Wonders of the
Immense Being? the whirling Wheel of my Spirit finding no sta^ for it self in
all it had seen, known, possessed and enjoyed still stretched forth its
expatiated Mind after that which was still in reserve, and kept by the strong
Rock of the Almightiness, to whom with a fresh onset I resolve to make my
Application, as not to be put off with any thing less than the Kingdom and
Reigning-Power of the Holy Ghost, for which I had run thus hard, and could not
stop the Chariot-Wheel of the high graduated Will, which would all Attempts
make to grasp in with Love-violence, this my fair, wise, rich and noble Bride,
well knowing her Dowry was so great as it would do more then ransom me^ from
all Sins and Earthly-Tributes, perfectly to set me free, and also Enfeof me^
into that Estate to which pertains such Lordships and Dominions as are not
subject to Times Chance, or Fate; all which are Motives sufficient indeed to
make us press hard this Prize to take. We need not murmur or complain that this
matchless Dove and Oriental Pearl so hardly is obtained, when well considered,
no less we can conclude her highly worthy the Lamb's Bride and Spouse to be
only peculiarly reserved for; being the Royal Princess and Queen upon whom the
Crown is to be fixed, including all Celestial Dignity and Throne-Powers thereby
confered to make this Bride alldesirable, from which lustrous Presentation of
her perfect Comlines^ and Beauty into one Spirit I was all inflamed, making
complaint, bemoaning our selves, how we might possibly compass the obtaining
this matchless Virgin-Dove for our Spouse and Bride, who with her piercing
fiery Arrow of Love, had us wounded so deep, as no Cure throughout the
Circumference of this lower Sphere could be found, though attempts and proffers
numerous was not wanting, to beguile and take off our Eye, charging and highly
blaming us for aspiring to love so high, far beyond what Reason could judge to
be aquivelent with our mean Estate. But all this nothing availed, or could
Wisdom's Lovers pacify, whose Quivers did daily upon us let fly, thereby still
to attract us more nigh. Knot upon Knot through familiar communion was here
tied as an assured Pledge, that to her kind Intimacies we might arrive, as we
hard upon this worthy Princess did ply.

January the 3d. 1675/6.
Upon whose Encouraging Aspects and Love-drawings, I made my Address in the
behalf of my self, and that other distressed Lover, that allowed I might be to
ask so great a Boon as her Royal Self to be ours unitedly. Oh dear Sophia, how
would this repair our Loss, and recover Honor upon our Disgrace: Oh tell us
where thy Walks are, that our Spirits may thee meet; engage we will no other
into thy Company to bring, but he in us who is thy beloved Emmanuel, to whom
thou will thy Heart impart, and thy Secrets all disclose; he for us boldly
will, Oh thou Fairest One thee Woo and solicitate, darting back those
Love-quivers, that may for Languishing Lovers passage find into the deep Abiss
of the Eternal Mind, where, as in a pleasant Grove or Bed of Roses, we may sit
waiting for the Honey-Dews from thy Lips, which so sweetly drop, when with us
thou do talk: turn away we cannot that Eye, by which we have beheld thy
Beautiful Perfection. Oh Love so strongly thou do move and work, that no
Repellings taken notice of are; the Celestial Fire makes this Water of Life
within us to boil, that Love runs over as a bubling Spring into the Fountain,
from whence it did begin; which makes our hopes that this mighty Stream and
Tide will fetch home our Virgin-Dove, that with us she may fix, and not out
more from us depart, but abide within the most Holy Bodyfied Ark. Thus I was
quickened into a sweet Sense of an Immutable Felicity enjoying, while nothing
else was suffered to break in to disturb the new seeking Lovers within the
Paradise do walk; this chaste Virgin never is to be seen or spoken with, but
either here or in her Father's most Kingly Court, keeping up to her Princely
State, and will confer with nothing which is below her self; it is in vain for
any to make attempts ^er high Favor to obtain, without they can give proof
that their descent is equal with the Lamb of God. Oh great Mystery, Christ in
us! the true and great Consellor of this Spirit or Wisdom and virtuous Diadem
of Glory; no Ray or Look of Love will she cast, but upon him who is declared to
be the Son and Heir of all the Heavens visible, and invisible Glory; this is
the Decree of the most single pure Dove, that none might her Descent expect,
but such as are throughout sprinkled with the high and sacred Blood, which all
clean and meet do make for the Holy Matron within us to cohabit, in free
Conference. My interior Mind was to prepare for this Crowning Power upon us,
to come down, to effect what yet lay in the Birth of a Sealing Promise, which
again was renewed, and spoke on this wise to the Steward, which had the Charge
of this great and weighty Matter, that is the Spirit of Faith, the true
Eliezer, that only faithful Servant which is to be trusted to take a Wife for
the Isaac of the Heavenly Country from among the Paradisical Inhabitants, which
is of near akin to the Most High God, known and allotted according to the
Determinate Knowledge of the Father of this blessed Seed, to whom the Heirship
and all the Promises appertain: Therefore be strengthened in Hope through the
Hand of Faith, which is put under the Thigh for an assured Confirmation, that
this my trusty Steward will not fail to bring into thy Tent that choice and
lovely Rebecca, which shall refresh and comfort ye after your days of Sorrow
and Mourning, which I have seen you both as one Spirit, in waiting for the
Nuptial Day with this Damsel or Dove of chaste Purity. Now then give proof of
your ardent Desire and Love unto her, and dispatch and send away this Messenger
of Faith which only will and can be successful in this matter, who having the
Spirit of Prayer joined with Faith and Prudence, which makes this Undertaking
to be prosperous, so as not to return empty without this worthy and all
precious Prize, which will answer to both, and all the Joys of your Spirits
mutually to inherit her.

January the 5th. 1675/6.
From this Word of Instruction I was convinced of the expediency of having
conjunction and mixture with the Female Virgin tincture, in which I was made to
understand what Force, Might and Strength lies couched therein, as the Womb
which conceives and brings forth numberless Birth-Powers into a manifest
Existence: therefore no sooner does the Shilah grow up, which signifies the
grown state of Jesus, that for him is designed a Spouse and Bride, that so Male
and Female in one pure Virgin-Body might meet together to quicken, and raise
the dead Essences of the Life, which so long have been sunk into its central
ground, and is not to be awakened but through the uniting Powers of Spiritual
Sol and Venus, which is after an Hypostatical going into each other; mingling
Powers, according to the Nature and Virtue of the precious Golden Seed which in
the divine Matrix is sown, as the Materiallity of that most pure Ghostly Body,
which from hence is begotten and generated, as was expressly unfolded unto me,
that we might know the way and manner of this wonderful propagation the Spirit
and Bride. From this opening the great necessity was shown me, for the
following close this conjucal Band of Marriage-Consummation for effectual
operation, depending thereupon: for the Man-God cannot be without his
Virgin-Female, which has the tinctural Deity, which is the Glory of the Lamb,
Wisdom's Bridegroom, which when grown up in us to Marriage-state, seeks a
Companion that is suitably accomplished with all Divine Perfections, for Joy,
Delight, and Increase in the Heavenly Gifts and Powers, after the manner of a
Divine Celestial cooperation, from whence is the ingendring of all pure
Births, that admission and right have to the Kingdom of Light, Joy and Glory.
In this lies the great Secret of the new model of Nature again formed, and
quickened in a bodified Substance, far transcending that which is brought forth
according to the outward Elements, which is for ever remote from the Father of
Spirits, who has given charge that no Wife shall be taken for his Isaac out
from that strange Birth and Lineage: for all brings forth according to its
Likeness; that which is born of Spirit, is Essential, Mighty and Powerful, as
the similitude of God. Now then says the Spirit, that has all good will to
you, which have made out for this high Match for your selves: Oh go forward and
prosper, send forth all your Royal Train to meet your Rebecca at the Wells of
Joy and Salvation: present her by the Hand of Faith, those strong scented
Love-Bracelets and Chain for her Neck, that may give full Testimony of both
your high floated Affections toward her.

February, the 16th. 1675/6. The going up from the Low Valley toward SION Hill.
BEing now cast upon the Crystalline Shore, and there ordered to set down and
wait for what every Springtide out from this Heavenly Ocean would voluntarily
into our out-spread Net cast in; which in the Love, Fear, and Holy awfulness I
obeyed; resolving to omit no known express of the High Powers in their Orders
successively given forth; having their tendency for the bringing us through all
the Plunges and Labyrinths of the Mortal Sensitive Life. Who like the King of
Shion, would by no means permit the Circumcised Israel to pass through his
Borders and Land peaceably, without commencing War, to afflictand distress,
while we are making toward our promised and prepared Mansion-Rest. Such kind
of Moabites out of their Quarters do arise over us to Monopolize: but the wise
All-foreseeing Star does yet go before, bidding us follow hard after, with
flaming Banners out-flying, which shall strike Terror into all contradicting
Powers, that would us in this our way detain; great Offense we must expect to
give, because we only design a clear Pass, and in no one Earthly Village in
this low Orb to stay; because our New Jerusalem-Bride, has to us cried, Have,
come, swiftly pass: burden not your selves with any Earthly Trade or Stuff:
for my pure ^ubling burning Sea of Glass will bring in all valuable Store
excessively. Therefore a new Wisdom's Word did spring; saying, Abide quiet, and
still under the enfolding Rock of most ancient and known Power, which now
provided for your Court is, while ye are here appointed to stay: bearing, and
suffering the further cleansing of your Vessels, through the rising Springs
which here out with mighty force will upon you break in; till thus they washed
away have all Matter and Mould, which made you no whit to differ from those who
the in outward Form do walk, act, and live according to the dictate of the
corrupt sensitive Nature. Which that ye may be freed and separated from, you
are ordered till Times-Number shall be fulfilled, by this pure Golden Shore to
dwell. Do not mistake to think all yet with you is so perfect, and complete, as
ye need not the burning. Streams from this boiling Sea into you to pass. Know
ye who are yet my Care and Charge, had I not hitherto you brought, all might
have been lost that hitherto has been wrought. For what Conquest could ever
have been gained, while two Seas permitted were to meet, and cast in upon one
Ground? Therefore a stop to the Earthly angry Sea, which foameth from the deep
sense of a Quagmire-Center is determined into a restraint, and binding up; for
care is taken for the prevention of this continued Strife and Mutiny, which
made you in such bitter Conflicts and Soul-Agonies, to be tyring out your days
with endless Debates from Reasons strong Assaults. If once for all you can give
up to the force of this strong working Tide of that Spirit, whose proceeding is
from your God and Jesus, and no more put forth your Hand to prop up what this
Holy Fire's Breath comes down to burn up and consume: If to its Flames ye shall
be casting; into your Hands shall come those pernicious Incendiaries that would
Strife, War, and Debate within the Gates of that Holy Place of your Minds still
promote and maintain. Oh now then of fixed Will, all of one pure Goblet and
Lump, without the mixture of any sort of lower Mettal^e Mass, let me see you
sublimated and wrought into. For I would that ye might yet a Praise and a Crown
to your Bride be found; beyond what the present Age has sounded or brought
forth great Wrestlings and Vauntings by his exalted Spirits out of an unsound
Ground, and polluted Heavens, do put forth, as if the true Lily did blossom, as
from out of a dry Shell and hollow Sands. But the Kingdom of thy JESUS is more
deep, weighty and substantial, as ye shall witness in the patient, passive,
process, if you shall hold out according to my renewed Revelation, which shall
attend the Tabernacle Waiters, and Inquirers, with the spotless Ephod upon you,
as the separated O^es, to whom my Secrets shall first be made known, in and
after another manner, then the Counterfeit Birth-Talkers, make their boast of:
for a difference I will put among the dry Rods which known shall by their
greening, and fresh flowering, and so shall cause to cease all murmuring and
vain Pretendings to my Golden Altar ascending. To which none right have to
come, but such as can bring the blossoming Rods with the Name of JESUS thereon
engraven. Also a Golden Ball I do to thee bequeath, take it and swallow it
down, and after a while thou shall feel it dissolve, and out from thee fly: it
is the Sovereign Composition-Oil, which will preserve that which is conceived
and brought forth, for the donation and manifestation of that Great Day of
JESUS his return, with the last finishing Power that will put an end to all
Travels and Labors, Fears and Sorrows. Which solid thing is already given:
only wait for its breaking forth.

February the 20th. 1675/6.
Upon this Prophetical Opening and Instruction, I felt some of the effects,
working through all parts of the inward Raised Body, and sensibly witnessed by
the pure boiling Streams, with force coming to make me all clear, and uncloyed
of what the Salt brinish Sea had troubled and cast in upon me. Which till I was
thereof ridded, and again unladen, my Spirit was as in a plunge, and Dead Man's
Tomb, wherefrom nothing but Hor^our does give forth, as a dead and unsavory
Gust: which no sooner does the Flood-gate of sense open, from this lower Orb,
but this Suffering upon me does immediately come; for how can two Contraries in
one House agree? no Peace or Serenity is till that only wise and potent Solomon
upon the Throne over all do Reign, admitting none but his own Glorified Train.
Oh when any of a strange Lineage or Nation into this Kingdom, after its
re-establishing do come; how strangely by this Heavenly King are they looked
upon? Such are the slights and disdains with scattering Powers of terrible
Majesty, the nothing belonging to the Spirit of this World, and its party will
in this Holy Place care to stay, though they may, and still do present, and
crowd in themselves for disturbance and annoy: as lately an offense and
grievance of this kind I did meet withal from a high floating Tide of Sense,
with which strange Nations landed upon my Coast from a contrary Sea, who came
Balack-like with great Rewards in their Hands to tempt me to leave the
Tabernacle of my God, and the Parddisical Land, to go along with them back
again; where they told me great Possessions might be gained, and I n^ longer
should expose my self to Povert^ and Reproach, as upon this visible Stage at
present appeared; such provoking Arguments they hard upon me did plye,
persuading me no longer to wait within the Ark and Sanctuary of a forelorn
Hope, as these subtle Spirits termed it. All which Floods upon me were poured;
but Jesus my Rock all over covered me, so as these Waters of temptation could
not sink into me. This tried Stone shunned not to espouse my Cause, and quarrel,
and plainly told me, I should not always Married be with Beasts, which out of
the Wild Forest of Nature does spring: the time was hastening, when they
should chained up, and confined be in their own place of Black Darkness, as
ashamed to come forth when the settime is accomplished for the Bridegroom's
appearance unto us; observing for my forwarning that upon or near the time of
such invading and disquieting Spirits conspiracy, I am foreshewn it, in way of
Vision. As thus, being in the Night season impulsed to breath out some
Spiritual Ejaculations, falling into a slumber, after I found somewhat grasp in
upon me, and struggle to take away my Life, having great Wrath and Indignation
against me, so as I gave up, thinking they would have mastered me, and bereaved
me of Life: but the Holy Watcher was with me, and prevented all Designs against
me, setting at that time a Pavillion Guard of Angels to rescue me from the
malicious Power, that was by the Spirit of Wisdom to me unfolded. Who verified
that many should be the evil Eyes that would watch us both, and rejoice if they
might see our Chariot-Wheels stop, and our Hopes overturned. Therefore the Cry
out and from the Holy Place is, Hold out, be strong, give no place nor quarter
to the Beast, nor to his Train: for your Jesus is coming to take his Kingdom,
and then you shall over all, in like Personality, co-jointly with him Reign.

With these and such manner of initiating Supportations still I found us
attended; that our Faith might hold out, and in our Earth be found, when the
last Trumpet shall be given for to sound: which in our Day we may hear, if we
can see that in our Ground and Field, the fruitful Ear is sprung up, and
looks all White and Ruddy; for to be taken and laid up, with that Fi^t Sheaf
that is entered before us.

Not omit^ing an other forerunning Discovery of the continued War like to be
still held against, the resolved Pilgrim to its Jerusalem persuing: Three
Nights after this last Combat, I saw a Lamb come up, where I was setting in my
Chamber, and run under my Bed: and there followed two Dogs which chased it, and
would no where let it be quiet. So it came out to me, as for pity and shelter;
then I bestirred my self to take these two Molesters, and at last I conquered
and made them cease hunting this innocent Lamb, shutting them up. Then this
chased meek one came and put its Head into my Bosom for Rest, after its
weariness. Much from this was showed me, and I well know is to have its daily
Accomplishment: and therefore in this way is it manifested for Advertisement
unto us, who are thus far in the process of Jesus engaged, that we should not
by any of these things be terrified or amazed, while we see the Trophy of
Victory concludes the Hellish Tragedy very comfortably.

March the 5th. 1675/6.
THis Ghostly Ministration in the Prepared Tabernacle, being all now in my Eye,
knowing nothing else would glorify Jesus his Ministry; The following
Manifestation hereof was after this manner pesented unto me: A large Fowl which
had hatched two Birds I did in that Figure behold, till they were grown to be
somewhat fledged, and able to look out for Food, but not able to encounter the
cold Blasts, nor the Northen Winds, blowing very contrary, and sharp upon them:
which made them shrink for want of fresh shelter, while now they were thus
driven to and fro, the Birds of Prey watched narrowly them to devour. But away
with speed was sent a fluttering Dove with out-spreading Wings over these to
hover, to deliver them from the Kites Claws, which was just fastening upon the
one, who was not so strong to run as the other who had got it self immediately
under the Dove's Wing for shelter. Then say^ I a Hand snatched up the other
Bird, and put it under the Wing of the Dove, who with a swift Flight vanished
with them into the Invisible Orb of Light.

March the 6th. 1675/6.
This Vision was a plain demonstration of the third and last fixed State of the
Holy Ghost, who for our succor and relief will come to safe guard and carry us
up to our prepared Kingdom, as it was revealed to me, that all former
Ministrations would decrease, and unto us cease. Though Wisdom did conceive us
in her Womb, and did bring us forth, and so passed us over in our Minority to
our Jesus; we by him having attained to a more grown State, he does transmit us
over to the care and charge of the Holy Ghost, where only we shall find winged
Power and Shelter, and who will be a glorious Banner over us. Till which we
cannot expect to act impregnantly in the Wonders of the high Eternity, who has
therefore given to us a new charge, that we may press hard, and most vehemently
pursue this day of Pentecost. Which will bring in Omnipotency to concur, and go
along with the pure begotten Will. Oh then we shall take scattering Coals of
Fire from this Holy Altar-Power, which shall introduce a mighty Flaming Breath
from the Golden Stone Within that will dissolve, melt down, and bring forth the
clear Temple-Form; wherein sits the pure Dove with her Virgin Bride: who will
soon make back to drive from us the strong force of all violent Tides, that so
we may upon all Seas float God like, and ride God-like upon the Wing of the
Dove, out of Visible Nature's Eye. Where with Joy we solemnly do each other
greet, being invited by the Governor of this Holy Feast, to set down as joint
Conquerors with him to partake, of what shall be brought forth, in the great
Day of the Lamb, and Bride meeting together. When the New Wine out of the
Fountain-Grape shall run down the New Jerusalem Streets: when all the Store and
Treasure Chambers shall stand open, and nothing shall be sealed up more from
us; Who under the covert Wing, of this swift mounting Dove are brought. For the
which the Spirit of Jesus has most truly brought us thus far, as cause we have
to hope, in that already I do feel something in me to move, with a Cry still
running through me, The Lord your Bridegroom is coming. Which Word as a
Cordial-draught is given, to renew both Strength and Spirit. Again, as we were
waiting together in and upon our Temple-Service, this Word came unto me, Behold
the effect of every Vision is at hand, spare not to strengthen your
Tabernacle-stakes, and to fix your Temple-Pillars: for it shall be said from
this place, Blessed is the high Throne-Glory, who must prepare a Seat for this
Holy One: and strictly watch ye that no unhallowed thing enter in, into this
separated place. For you know not how suddenly the transmuting Ghostly Powers
will spring out of its own Eternal Ground. Who soon will scent and smell, if
any of the old leavened and putrified lump there be remaining. Therefore the
cry so often in thy inward Land does sound, that so no unclean thing may there
be found, and that all Earthly stuff may be thrown out of it. For the Holy
Ghost is appointed in this new raised Temple to officiate; and all perfect
Service to be performed at a higher rate, more Seraphick, and Purer, then in
all former Ministrations whatever. Oh now then to my Call and Cry within you,
take special Recognizance: it is my Elijah's Voice, that the Way of the Holy
Ghost might be made plain and strait. Take heed no Lion or Wolf so much as once
set their Foot on it. Make your Watch still strong, for slimy muddy Pits are on
each hand, the great Levia than there does under Water lie, waiting to see if
here you do set your Feet awry. For this subtle Serpent does well know, hereby
all former and present Prophecyes will be prolonged, if not cut off. So that
if, by any means, he could Ingulf you within this noisome Pit, where all
devouring Fish of Prey do lie, which still would be eating out your Belief and
Confidence, in what does lie beyond the Border of the Senses, he will not fail
to do so. Because it is not for the gross, but for the pure and immaculate Eye
only to espy those Celestial Glories. Whereof not only to the Sight, I do here
you, (my beloved Lambs) invite; but come, I say, and taste, what in my upper
Banqueting House is to be found, to which ye yet so high never ascended, where
the Ghostly Body upon the Crystalline Sea is set. But stay yet ye must, and ye
must it not touch with unwashen Hands; with strong scented Oil your Finger must
drop, while in this Dish ye them dip, to give proof ye are a prepared Guest,
who have put on the Bridegroom your Robe: this will be your Tickets Testimony,
that right you have to eat of this choice Mess, which only for the Bride and
Bridegroom are set forth. Though with many sweet and pleasant Fruits, I have
out of my Paradisical Garden, you fed, and with the Spirit of the Vine, I have
your Thirsts often satisfied, yet none like, or to be compared to this.
Therefore it is reserved as the strong Meat, which only those that are come to
ripe and perfect Age, can bear thereof to eat. Therefore go thy way, and be
comforted, that ye are entered into Love's Eternal Calendar, and may assuredly
of this last and great Gift partake, as ye shall in the bright Temple grow,
reaching to the full Stature of your Jesus. To which Coming, fear not, but your
Father will equally dispense the Holy Ghost, as his free Benevolence. Grow;
grow, get up to this high Nativity with all speed: The Most High has great
need of such worthy high Disciplined Spirits to go forth, bearing the Heavenly
Trophy, and Banner of Glory, which may take away fallen Nature's reproach. How
much will it be the joy of Wisdom your Mother, to see you come up through all
Tribulations to inherit the Ancient and Royal Seat, near unto that Great King,
your Prince, and Personal Savior; through the introducing of his pure Spirit
and Nature: without which ye never had been capable, of so high a Calling, as
to have fellowship with him, not only in the Knowledge, but in the joint
Possession, without any defraud; as ye shall see impartially, when this
Ghostly-Dove with her Cherubin-Wing, does with all Power upon you rest, so as
no more from you ever to fly, or withdraw. O run hard, still cry, knock and
call: I will assure thee from the Word of a God, it shall abundantly answer to
all.

A Memorandum. March the 13th. 1675/6.
FRom the 6th. of this present, to the 13th. I have been exercised in great
Conflicts, upon and through a sudden surprise upon the mortal part of my
Companion and Fellow Laborer in that Paradisical Husbandry; he being smote,
and struck as with a Leviathian Dart upon his Animal and Vital Spirit; the
first time was on the Monday, being abroad, upon his returning home; which went
over again. The next Day about the same time a Fever took him, and in great
Violence ceased on his Heart, and so he wrestled a good space of time, in great
Anguish; which so affected me, that I drew in, and awakned a great Travel for
his escape from these Sorrows of Death, which had so ceased upon him: I having
had some warning of an imminent Danger and Peril, which I saw the Night before
he was first aff^cted, and came down to advertise him hereof, before he went
from home: As thus, there was a deep Pit with great Swelling Waters, under
which the sub^il Levia: than, with his outstretched Jaws, did lie, to grasp in
such as near there did walk. Now the Doctor with my self being that way to
pass, I heard a word uttered, Be ware, come not too near: it is a dangerous
place. Upon which I watchful was, and took good heed, and avoided it, that the
Doctor might not therein be ingulphed; but draw off with all speed. Which did
predict there was some Danger nigh; this being the Pit of Death, as by the
effect thereof soon did show it self: But the mighty Jehovah hereunto a
Counter-check did give, to reverse what the destroying Angel was upon
executing. For this second assault was very grievous, being upon Tuesday; which
did abide on his vital Spirits from 4 in the Afternon, till 10 at Night. In
which interim a Daniel's Spirit did come down, which in us did Pray with mighty
fervency, winged up by Faith; as knowing that in this ascending Power stood our
help. For after I had ceased, and the Doctor began to Pray, I saw a bright Star
dance about his Bed, and a Word came with it unto me, I have heard, and I will
deliver, for my own Name sake, out of the present Jaws of Death. This was a
signal Evidence that Saving Health was near, and that in this Hour of Exercise
Jesus with his Healing Virtue would appear; which soon after was witnessed. So
the Pains for that time were assuaged; and he slept that Night, and the next
Day had respite: So as we did hope this Storm was gone over. But on Wednesday
Night he found himself ill again. So together we did seek the Lord for his
Counsel, whether or no he might venture upon some outward means, to help to
remove that violent Humor, which by that strong Leviathan, would have grasped
away his Life. For without permission from the Court and College of our
Spiritual Physicians, we dared not to adventure; because we had committed the
whole Cure of this deadly Wound, to those All-healing Sovereign Powers.

While then we were supplicating and soliciting to know the Mind of Wisdom
^erein, this Word came; It is suffered ^n condescension to the instability of
^our Faith: however by Grace the corruptible Drugs shall be changed in their
Constitution, and Quality: for else they in this case could not be available.
For know, that my secret Medicine must be the Preparative. Then after this the
Doctor was free to take a Powder, which gave him two or three Vomits, and
Purgations. On Thursday Morning after which he was very cheerful, and thought
himself to be eased of his weight, and talon which had so terrified him: but
after he had Dined, it beset him again, more fiercely and violently then at any
time before; the extremity being so great, as he desired to be released by
Death, as the greatest kindness, which he could in this hour of Extremity of
his Heavenly Father seek and request for. At this sudden onset upon him I was
somewat staggered: for the Black Cloud of Death seemed all over to cover him,
which seemed to make void and frustrate those Words and Tokens I had received
for his Restoration on the Tuesday Night before. But in this juncture of time I
felt a Power upon me to descend, that made me Pray as in an all-Bloody-Agony:
and a mighty Strife betwixt Fear and Faith was in me. But the strong Angel of
Faith prevailed, and I felt something move, that was all aerie, mighty, and
swift, to overcome and conquer: and which would not permit to give him up to
what he himself desired. Then had I a sight of all the dark afflicting Powers
to be put under his Feet, and that they should no longer over his mortal part
have power. The Relation of which I did to him declare: but such was his
anguish, that at that time he could nothing from me hear. So this Day and Night
was passed away in this terrible Conflict. All Night I retired from him,
wrestling with my God on his behalf; waiting and watching what the issue of
this trial would be. For I do not know that I ever was in any one thing more
proved; because of the Word that came, that he should be saved from Death.
Toward the Morning this Word came to me, God is not a Man, that he should
repent, or reverse what he has spoken, as to him for whom thou have prayed.
Then coming to him, I found him yet Ill. Then had I another Word all that Day
followed me, saying, I am come to give him Life, and that more abundantly:
therefore let thy mind hereupon be stayed. So I saw the good Hand of our God
was near, and did the whole Cure; and after this Bleeding, he found a great
alteration, although before that, his Extremity was much mitigated, but not so
sensibly taking it away, as he now in himself did see. So that by the Counsel
of Wisdom, he was hereunto directed most expressly; to whose sight the Malady
was only conspicuons: all outward Physicians in their sight would have been too
short, and their power too weak; and had been befooled and frustrated, if any
expectation had been thence. For the Word for immediate Healing still followed
close one upon another, as matter of doubt arose. Again the Word thus spoke, O
faithless and unbelieving, have I not said I will make him perfectly whole?
Which was the last Confirmation, that I had on his behalf, as to his outward
Recovery. Upon which I fully rested, and was quieted as to him: who from this
time recruited his Natural Force and Strength, which was abated more then he
himself was sensible of. But gradually he shall grow to his former strength
again, as a Monument of Praise to him, who had renewed his Life and Being:
which the Princess of this World did War against, with all the poysonable
Influences of the lower Elements, concurring, and triumphing that their Mortal
Robe was wrought out in him. For the Dragon did see he would much more be a
prosessed Enemy than ever, to all his strong Holds and Territories. But
Wisdom's Antidore of such an high extracted Composition was made up that it
expelled all his poysonable Influences; she coming in with her Adjuring Power
and unresistible Spell, saying, O Death, I will be thy Death: Thus the Victory
was obtained through the Lifeblood, ^prouting fresh from the Fountain God-^ead.

Praise, Praise; Glory, Glory, all in us, all round about us, go forth with
Acclamations, and Thanks-giving-Offerings for such a signal Deliverance, as we
have been mad^. Witnesses of, which for our future Encouragement Jehovah has
wrought.

March the 15th, 1675/6.
After all this, coming into my solitary composure of Spirit, waiting upon my
Temple-Office and Service, where I met with a bright encompassing Cloud, the
Tabernacle-Witness rose, and spoke thus in me, I have now answered to thee the
desire of thy Heart, who pressed me hard to give thee a Sign to effect somewhat
through the operating force of Faith, that it might work to a Deed and Wonder.
Behold, and see this in the reviving, and restoring thy Friend's dead Body:
which is to be great and mavelous to each Spiritual Eye. For know all this
restoration was managed by my Omnipotency, that ye might not doubt the Root of
this all sprouting Power will yet further work out, and that you^ Prince and
Savior may yet live again that has been so long slain. Expec^ him: he is at
hand, to take now for himself in you a Kingdom, wherein the peaceable Reign
shall be by this Soloma^ And the Holy Temple must be Built by Wisdom's Hand,
that the most Hol^ Dove Hereupon may descend most swiftly to rouse, and raise
up the dead Seed which asleep is yet in Jesus; therefore know as a Type of
this, was this late raised Man, who through great Strife has obtained his
Life. Now the same strong Angelical Powers that here did move in thee, on his
behalf, must doubled be upon you both, for the drawing down the Riding Power,
and Triumphing Birth of this more excellent Life of the Holy Ghost.

March the 16th. 1675/6.
The D^ctor being much recovered, and the Mountain, and heavy Talon of Death
removed, he was very sweetly Spirited on the Lord's Day, and carried out in
Prayer, speaking and singing. A few of us meeting together, did own that day
his Signal Deliverance. The next day, being Monday, in the Forenoon waiting
together, I had this Word put into my Mouth immediately and unexpectedly. As
verily as ye have been Witnesses of my Power in plucking him out of the Pit of
Death, and guarding him from the violent Executioner thereof; so this shall be
a Sign that ye shall ascend up into the House of the Lord, even the Holy
Mountain of that God, who has in this hour of distress appeared, and ye shall
surely inherit the precious things, that your Eyes shall there see: Which have
been long laid up in store, to be given to such, as can ascend with their
bright Temple-Bodies, which are now to be your Change of Raiment, that ye may
in this Holy Place both meet and know, I am, and will be unto you what yet
cannot be conceived or believed. Therefore to the charge of Wisdom expressly
keep, and ye shall see what the issue of being obedi^nt to the Law of her Mouth
shall be: who would not that ye should have less Purity, Power, and Dignity
then your Jesus, who is exalted, and has the Command to give, and take,
whatever does lie in the Father's vast Treasury. Know then no less freedom, ye
shall have with Wisdom, in her secret Stores, who nothing will or can deny to
conquering Spirits, who through all Throngs do push, and through all Armies do
pass, and will not be fearful, or so unbelieving, as to be terrified, although
ye should like Elisha be encompassed with Legions of contradicting Spirits.
Which may happen to prove what Magnanimity, and Spirit of Faith ye have, to
trust unto: And whether or no ye will resort to this Treasure, that lately has
been broken up for you, that ye might know where still to retire, and on all
ocasions go to seek out what Power and Armory of Strength, ye shall need for
your present Succor and Fortitude. Oh toward this let your Eyes be most
absolutely fixed: for it is your Father's pleasure, out of this Temple, and
Treasure-House to bless you. Covet nothing here below, but wait ye upon that
liberal Hand, which does all out here command. If ye can arrive to believe
without doubting, then ye shall see what weighty Draughts out of Wisdom's Deep
you will be able to draw up at pleasure; so as ye will no more need, or regard
to go down to this World's enchanted Sorceries for aid. All and enough you will
have in your own Power. Search and see what in this City-Treasury is: as you
are by Wisdom brought up hereunto. Take boldness and freedom to ask, and take
what may make for your Preferment, in all proportionableness to Christ your
Head. Who is the great Prince and Commander here, and would have you dispatch,
and clear off all Earthly Scores, and come after him with all your ascending
Might, where there is depth of Glory to drown ye, out of all transitory Sight.
Remember ye that Word which he said, and do now in Spirit aver it again to
thee, that all whatever the Immense Deity has to the utmost, and full extent
of that fullness in all Riches, Power, and Greatness to an Everlasting Dominion
is now possessed by this Jesus, as his own in common, with the high
Throne-Majesty. And has power to entail the same where, and upon whom he will.
By which Will, ye are elected and chosen by this great and high Apostle, to the
same Profession, and Participation of Power, and Dignity, as joint Heirs with
him. Therefore take heed, that ye derogate not from this your high Calling, but
bear up to the Witness hereof, and to the acknowledgment of the Father, the
Word, and the Spirit of Wisdom, all agreeing to empress the Mark, and living
Seal upon you, that so right to all those wonderful, and rich Goods, that have
been shown you, in the House of your God, ye may jointly enter upon, as your
own Inheritance. Hitherto ye have stood off in the mistrust, and dispute,
whether or no ye might make challenge hereunto, as being anxious of Sin, and
inaffected, which indeed might well clip the Wing of your ascending Power, and
dash your confidence. For no boldness indeed here could be, till Jesus by
Water, Blood and Spirit, did come to cleanse you fully and thoroughly from all
Sin and Unrighteousness, and thereby he himself became your Temple-Body, as now
ye may witness indeed. Therefore Stowage is made for taking in of these
precious things. Open wide henceforth, and let all in, which shall drop from
the Everlasting Oily Mountains, and Heavenly Hills, upon the pure Gardens of
your pure Minds, and whatever shall distill, as upon my choice Lillies on the
smooth Waters of Shiloh.

March the 19th.
Upon this Day is a large Transcript by Dr. P. of some Divine Opening, which he
thought good to conceal under a secret Cipher; and may possibly relate to some
Oppositions against this Temple-Work.

March the 23d. 1675/6.
On the Morning Watch, as I was spreading the present distress of things, this
Word came to me, Salvation, Salvation, and Victory! The oppressed at last shall
go free; If zealous as Phineas, he shall be for me; His Eye is not to pity or
spare, but he is to rise up in his Priestly Power to kill and destroy, that
which has his Nazarite Purity defiled and annoyed. Then no more Curse nor
Plague, but all shall be stopped and staid. I have attempted this Bloody
Offering, nothing more precious is to my Sight: nothing like this could make
way, for the high ascending of my beloved Pilgrim, who so long with Weights and
Fetters from me has been kept down, and evermore by one or other, was still
bound. Oh the free, and undefiled Virgin-Spirit is for me, who makes but one
Heart with me. This Word came very emphatically and powerfully, and has a
weight speaking in them; which my Spirit did breath out for their effect, upon
this beloved Nazarite, that so all Plummets might be cut off, and the
Tombstone removed, which did keep down his rising Body, that is no more to be
touched with mortal Senses; being elected for a high and unparallelled Work,
which will admit of no hanging upon by any thing that is ponderous.

March the 24th. 1675/6. A Breviate of the late Perils we were in.
HAving for some space of time, encountered with high Storms and great
Blusterings, one swelling Wave following another, threatening to tear and to
make a wrack, and split our Ship, in which we were embarked, through the good
Hand of the most high Wisdom: Being now come within the sight of out Landmark,
which so near was to be anchored upon; such were the contrary Winds from the
Troubler, as to put us back again in this our Spiritual Voyage. But the good
Pilote, whom the Seas and Winds must still obey, was for, and with us, sending
forth the Words of Power and Authority, for this raging foaming Sea, which cast
up Miery Mountains, to be still and quiet: which otherwise would have sunk the
Ark of our Faith, which, to the Praise of Jehovah, was mightily in all these
violent fumations born up, and secured, we being charged not to fear, nor to
move out here, but still to hoist up that mighty Sail, and to wait for that
holy Breath and Wind; Which none know, but they that are in it, from whence it
comes, and whether it will carry such, as wholly confide in it; as may be
spoken by the Experienced. For being in great Conflict, upon the Doctor's
account, whom the evil ones Malice was chiefly set against, to keep him down
from rising in his work: having put such an Iron-Yoke upon his Neck, and
Burden upon his Shoulder, as grew more heavy and oppressing, as his Sight was
grown clear, and Judgment sound, having been a long time in great Sufferings
under it, which for the working Wheel sake, which jointly we were engaged in, I
was often and much in private with my God, for a total release and acquitment,
that whatever pestred, and hung upon him now undesirable, might be cut off. For
to me it was said again and again, An untouched and free Nazarite from all
Dalilah's, thy Yoke Fellow must be, or else under the Curb of this grievous
Iron-Yoke, which will crush and stop his Vital-Breath Powers, so as to hinder
the free passage and play of Wisdom's bright Star, which alone will lie as a
bundle of Myrrh in the Bosom of his pure Heart. Single Chastity is all, and the
chief Dowry which she makes Inquisition for, and therefore of all low amorous
entangling Loves, we had need to be well aware: to one only Mate we must for
ever cleave, and so bear his Name, and so we are all his Royal state. These
Counsels still daily followed me, since his deliverance out of the Snare and
Pit of Death, so did I believe to see all Cords would be broken; for that Word
came to me the 20th. Instant, I will arise, says thy God, as in Mount Perazim,
that he may do his Work, his strange Work, and bring to pass his strange Act.
This Scripture was brought to me, and opened thus, being much stated and
presented, as our Cause was parallel with David, whom God highly approved for,
that being newly settled in his Kingdom, after great Wars, was again invaded by
the Philistines, and having brought up the Ark of God, enquiring, had a
resolve, that his Enemies should be subdued before him; as he acknowledged,
saying, That God had broken in upon them, like the breaking forth of Waters,
therefore they called the Name of that place, 1 Chro^. 14. 11. Baal Perazim.
Now this by the Prophet Isaiah, is called over and made mention of, Prophesying
for such a Manifestation of his Rising Power yet to come, when again he will
set his Hand, as in our Day, to recover us out of the Hand of the Spoiler.
Being much distressed for the Work, least these Inundations should stop the
Life-Wheel, either in them, or in my self going forward, this sweet Word was
opened to me; I will arise as in Mount Perazim, your Enemies shall know ye do
not go out in Battle without a God's Armory: Your Ark which is rising, will,
and shall make all, in you, and all without you to re^l, stagger, and fall
before you: for I have yet greater and more mighty Deeds, and strange Acts to
appear in, for my own renown, in, by, and through those, in whom I find a
David's Spirit and Heart according to my own: with such shall not only go forth
my rushing Sounds, but strong Powers, to effect and bring to pass strange and
mighty Acts; whereby it shall be known in whom my Temple-Glory rests. I will
now arise to give my signal Mark of Honor to my defied and contemned ones, my
Spirit shall begin to move even now at times, as ye shall look and wait for it,
within the Tent of Nature, as the forerunning Scatterings of that promised all
Chostly Dominion and Power, that is very ready, and near to be revealed to the
pure Jerusalem-Worshippers and constant Waiters: upon whom my Eye will be, to
confer upon them this great Dowry, which will not be entrusted but with most
constant Attenders in the pure Temple-Body of Jesus; waiting and offering upon
that Altar within, being determinated into a stable, fixed, unchangeable Mind
and Spirit. This is that which is expected from you both; whom Wisdom has with
her Love-guile caught in, with her Golden Cords, that ye may to this great
state of glorious dominion reach, though it does cost you so high as the death
and breach to all other Lives, wherein the vain empty solacements of this
visible State stood: in the despising of which no Repentance shall ever be, but
Reward upon Reward, after all Tribulations out of your Mother Wisdom's Treasury
shall you fetch out whatever good and profitable things you shall thereby espy,
to use and spend, to the account any praise of my Glory.

March the 25th. 1676.
This Morning I felt mighty strong Gusts, and Powers come into me, which
ascended out in Prayers, that the Sign might follow to give the demonstration
of our particular Election, and Calling, as it did upon the first Gospel
Professors; that we might have Power to cast out unclean Spirits: So to cowork
and mingle with the Meek and Eternal Life-Essences of the Lamb, as that we may
be able to send forth such vertual Rays of Powers, and Sweetnesses, for our own
and others Safety, Guard, and Relief. For I heard this Word: Go not out without
your Shepherd's Bag and his Staff; for out of an Invisible Store ye must spend,
and bring out from your own Heavenly Country and Father's House; as unknown and
Strangers in this Land, where your outward Feet do stand; who will not trust,
or credit further to you give, then they shall see that ye have got with you
Great Cesar's Decree, and Superscription upon your Coin, written round about
with that Name, I am the Alpha and Omega: This will, O my Dove Spirits, with
you every where pass: and all your Enemies, and all that are alie^ated, and
Strangers to you, now shall seek to make a Covenant, League and Peace; for why?
they will cry the Name of God, wherein all the believing does lie; upon the
Foreheads of these is written most visibly. This is the Strange Work, that I am
for you bringing to pass, if ye still will guided be, by Wisdom's Counsel, and
her bright Eye, ye shall to this most high Degree arise: and thereby Honor you
Spiritual Parentage. Henceforth forbear to sort your selves, with what is not
of the same most inward Fold, with whom your great Shepherd does walk, and can
only with new risen Spirits talk, and be open and free, as lodging in one Heart
of Purity; together for mutual Joys and Embracings highly Magical, whereby you
will draw out most mighty Force and Strength, to aid and back whatever in my
Work and Service ye are intent upon; as thou have witnessed already a good
Confession of me, so still maintain Truth's liberty: stand up in the
Christ-like Might, and in him thou will tread down strength: and nothing shall
be too hard for thee. Thy defense and security shall be from the flowing Oil,
running through the Unicorn, that mighty is to push and batter down all exalted
Towers, which now will be raised against those, who my appointed
Standard-bearers are, to proclaim my Flag of defiance, in the view and sight of
such as live in great despite, decrying down my Paradisical Laws, Liberties,
and Kingly Rights.

March the 26th. 1676.
The Lord's Day we met together by our selves, a Word was spoken for the
Measuring-Line, to compare and measure our selves by the perfect Love which
casts out all other Fears and Loves but that which is Above, and of the
Virgin-Purity, where the danger was shown of Treachery, to forestall this
chaste Love from our Love for our Jesus. Much in power was sounded forth to
this purpose, and whom it did hit, it was a good Word to such.

March the 27th. 1676.
This Morning great Emanations flowed in upon me, from out of the Vital Center,
as the springing Flowers from the Rivers of Joy. Out of the Sanctuary this Word
of Comfort opened, that though Balack had called out Balaam to curse you, that
are my choice Seed; yet I, Wisdom, as your good Guardian-Angel, have stood to
resist him, and have frustrated all the Tokens of the Diviners. The depths of
Satan began mystically to work, calling the furious Might, as the Prophet to
that furious Avenger. Here has been attempt upon attempt against the Election,
cry upon cry for Fire to consume. But be of good cheer, and do ye fear nothing
more hereof, for your God has Justified: and the Prayer of the Humble and
Penitent has been heard, and has shut out the Accuser with all their
Complaints, whose Mouths are stopped. Balaam does now well see, that he is
under restraint and limitation, finding no Might to effect what in his Eye did
seem just and right. Therefore he subjected is not willingly, but forced by an
uncontrollable Sovereignty and divine Spell, as nothing from the dark Magic
could nullify. Henceforth love and magnify him that has without shadow of
change thus appeared to save, secure, and to deliver from all Plots and Charms,
whereby weaker and faint all Powers of this kind will grow, because all
Attempts shall still be frustrated; while in the single Purity ye my Dove-Mates
shall keep to your allotted One, who is the foreordained Bridegroom, who is
worthy, and will draw you into no Praemunire: ye may safely venture all the
Stock of your Spirit, to the utmost height of all Loves, Joys, Affiances, and
sow all these without fear, into the Ground-Heart of the Immanuel; and ye shall
see what a fruitful Crop this will bring in.

March the 28th. 1676.
The Case of a Laban and Jacob was brought to me, as having a special reference
to the Doctor. That as Jacob grew very weary of living in a strange Land, and
under servitude in Bonds, now longed to be free a Spirit, and to return to his
Father's House, with that Spiritual Stock, and Riches of Life, that Wisdom had
blessed him withal, and to provide for the sustainment of his own Family,
within himself, of which the outward was but a shadow and type of. So it was
shown me in like manner this was the time, and the full Experiment of the
Doctor's long and weary servitude, in a strange Land and Country, who was now
called to separate, and come away to his. Father's House, and to draw in all
his Substance and Stock of Vital Spirit, whenceforth the pure Virgin-Essences
do spring, that nothing thereof might be scattered, or left behind: for all
will be little enough to supply and maintain that which is of pure Generation
in him; wherein will consist his true Joy and Pleasure to him, to his Sons and
Daughters, his Menservants and Maidservants, to grow up to Stature fat and
flourishing in his own House. In this says the Spirit shall be his Blessing;
but while these things are upon the prosecution, great Tribulations from the
Laban Spirit must be expected, for he will never consent to let Jacob go.
Therefore Wisdom did put it into his Heart, to make the breach by stealing
away: for Laban with his subtle Entreaties, would have plied him as formerly.
Which to avoid, he resolved to make his own way, sore longing after his
Father's House, which made him run the hazard of all Laban's displeasure. This
wise understanding Spirit was now given to the Doctor, to be courageous, and so
to resolve to take his Flight and Journey on; having with him, and for him
Jacob's Angel, that will not leave him, till safe conducted into the inward
Court of the Love, and Joy-presence of the Father. Now in the process thereto,
Laban raises an Army, that are of the same Evil Eye with himself, and these
pursue hard to overtake, but God disappoints the Evil intended, and gives
warning, saying, I warn and charge, that ye let my Firstborn go free, touch
not mine Anointed, for he must now Ascend to me; no Bonds or Cords shall
evermore be upon him, but as a free Denison in my Holy City, is he to wait upon
all my Commands. For my Work is so great, that all must be taken up in them. Ye
who hasten up your selves thereunto, must be found in one entire Act, working
with the Spirit of my Might, without sloth. For which end I have now set you
free, that ye may stand obligatory to no other Commands, but wait to receive
Laws and Injunctions as Wisdom shall renew to you. The Oil will not cease to
run, empty your Vessels as fast as you can, it will become in you a rising
bubling Life, till it has made you pure without Sin. By which you will give
proof, that you are the first Redeemed out of the Earth. Go on to this Work, my
elected Ones, the high Powers of Eternity are with you, to effect what the
Spirit of Wisdom does direct unto.

April the 4th. 1676.
FRom the Love-circling of a mighty Seraphim-flame which I felt burn up in my
Heart-Altar, a soft sweet Breath moved as a Mist, or white Cloud: It all
over-covered and filled the Sacred Tabernacle of the Mind, as with a still
silent Glory, which included and comprehended its own Ideal Being in me, coming
to drink and suck up, what of its own, it could find scattered among the Ruins
of Time, and bundle of Mortality. The head-Principality then calls for all
in, to make up the Perfect Man, Bone to its Bone, and Sinew to its Sinew, all
jointed and set in lovely order, which while divided, and in piece-meals, could
be of no force, but lies as dead and useless, till the forming Hand gathers,
and u^ites them each in order to the ^salem's Glory. It was here showed to ^e,
that many Births have come forth ^ismembred; some have wanted Eyes, others have
wanted a Hand, another ^eet, another an Ear. And while any one of these have
been wanting, as to ^he inward spiritual Man, no degrees, of Ascending could
be: none could be taken into the Courts of the Lord, nor ^e a workman for the
Lord, without ^he use of all these Spiritual Members, wherein the full force of
a Spirit does (...). This word of Advice and Cau^ion came with a full gust to
try and ex^mine whether we, who were set out and appointed to be Laborers in
God's Har^est, and Priests to officiate, and Mini^ters in the most Holy Place,
were no way deficient; but sound, perfect, and without blemish, having all
parts en^ire, making up a complete Spiritual Body, each one in our selves. As
also ^ourished up to a strong full grown Man. Otherwise says the Anointing,
which knows all things, ye cannot go Forward to dig and undermine twelve
Foundations deep; upon which my Holy City stands, that does command all Worlds
with their Kingdoms: Which ye are to do, and search into, as strong and mighty
for this Service of the Lord; who says, Come forth and stand before me, that I
may see whether or no ye be clear, single, pure, and sound in every part, and
to no one Creature or thing pre-ingaged, but aloof off in alienation from all
dry, earthly succors do stand. Then will I link and ^x you in and among my
Royal Band, who allotted are Foundation Stones of the Great City, where my Name
is writ upon. This is the highest, and last Service, which I have for you to
do, and hitherto would not hereunto put you; till Wisdom's Spirit in highest
measure be grown up, for the management and carrying on of so high and mystical
a part, which excels, and transcends all Buildings whatever, that have gone
before your Temple and Sanctuary Purity; all inferior is to this. That which
was lacking in them, must be perfected here in this; by this descending and
all-compounding Glory, which meets all in one here, where now are descried the
Lame, the Blind, and the Halt; none of whom are so much as to look within this
high Mountain of Holiness, upon which the Glory rests. Neither can any come
hither, who bring not their twelve tried Foundation-Stones along with them.

To which end the Spirit, which reveals all secret deep things, does give for
the manifestation here of unto thee: That thou, may know what makes thee
further meet, to inherit this City, which has such transparant Foundations.
For so unvariable is Wisdom's Heart of Love, that has moved the Chariot-Wheels
of thy Spirit, and brought thee thus far, even to the Gate, and entrance of
this magnificent place, as by no means here to be shut out, where ye are
designed Marriage. If ye can, all over conquering first ascend to the Rock;
where these wonderful Precious Stones are to be found, ^oth for Foundation and
Garnishing. See then here, whether the flight of thy Spirit must be, namely to
Wisdom's Treasure-House, whom all must be fetched down, for the City building.
Here carried up thou must be in thy Spirit, not only to see in Vision, or in
bare Idea's these Stones of Glory, but to have them put upon thee, as thy
Breast Plate, row upon row; with the engraving of that new Name, which gives
sound Judgment, and perfect Sight and Understanding into all Visibles and
Invisibles. This is a great estate, which I am now setting before you, and also
bringing into yo^ as ye shall be able to bear the Glory of it, which will be
all Consuming to the existency of your present Heavens and Earth. Which can no
longer abide; but they must fall away, and flee at the bright rising of this
Sion-Beauty in Crystalline Appearance, and Celestia^ Clothing. Rejoice ye, O
my Dov^ Spirits, in what I am about to create^ and to lay in you anew, such
Foundations as shall make my Name the Pran^ in these New Heavens and Earth;
upon which my beloved City shall be placed In order to this, ye must suffer the
Plum^met-Line, in the Guardian Angels Han^ to measure the height, length, an^
breadth of this walled City, each on^ within your own New Earth. The Du^ of
which must be all fanned, through the Sieve of immaculateness, which will (...)
no mixture of old Earth pass through The Heavens that now must be in yo^
circling Clarification, continually must be pure, bright, and without mixture.
For consider for whom this City is prepared and builded, is it not for one, who
is terrible in Holiness and Purity, and that only can dwell, with what is like
himself? Behold now, and hear that Word again, saying, I decree all things in
ye New, as chosen Testators of this my will, and as my front Battellers, and
primary Builders, working according to the Lawgiver, and Rule-setter; whose
Eye and Hand shall prove it self great, and mighty, as ye shall thereupon rest
immediately, for all counsel and aid, and shall thereto still ^lye for Wisdom.

April the 5th. 1676.
In the Night-Vision, I with another Person were to make a new remove to some
place, which we had no knowledge of, being under a strict limitation thereto to
hasten. The way, which we were to pass, I saw as a fiery Oven, which when we
came at, put us to a stop: then waiting and looking on it a while, the Flames
died, and soon were vanished. Then the guiding Word said, Pass on, fear not,
the place is not now too hot to set your Feet upon; which after some debate
with our selves, we ventured through. Then was presented to our view, a Knot of
all Precious Stones, as if they had been taken out of a Rock: truly they were
for Colors, and Brightness, and Sparkling, so excelling, so wonderful
Transparent, as all, and the highest of what can be illustrated out from this
Creation, is but a gloomy shadow hereunto. The glance was sudden, and soon
passed out of my view, only pointing and leaving a great Impression, as to the
late Manifestation, and the moving forward to the Jerusalem-Work. Which yet
required a higher, and more Seraphick ascending up of our Spirits, then
hitherto has been: which I was in great Jeapardy about, both for that others,
and also for my own sufficiency, and spiritual ability to go forward, and
through paved Spirits to follow on. For the Vision showed me, we should meet
with hot work, but that it would be allayed and overcome for us. After which I
saw our way made to pass through Waters, before we could come to this City:
That Word still saying, Only believe, and I will pass on before you,
proclaiming my Name, and opening to you the Foundation of it; from whence your
strength shall arise, and your pregnant Power shall be known. Who now then must
be your Master Builder, to instruct you in this your Foundation-Work, but that
Wisdom, which was with Jehovah from everlasting, who gave Being and Existency,
according to the Spiration of the Eternal Will? even so in like manner, must
this moving Will-power again go forth, for the removing and undoing, what the
dark Fire enkindled Properties have done; racing and pulling down that
Babylonish Building to the Ground, that its place may be found no more, nor yet
its turbulent Sea. For I am making away for you, out of all these first
desolate part of things: your Hands with me, I require you to put, and so you
shall stop, and prevent the Floodgates of the Beast, and of the Serpent's
fury. Come now, and I will show you where all these Foundation-Stones do lie:
look, see within the compass of your new Earth, and of the burning Glassy Sea,
treasure-matter, for this Foundation. Building here ye may espy. Therefore the
Golden Plummet of my Spirit shall be given to you, that so ye may be able not
only to sound, but also to bring up what lies couched here beneath.

The first Stone which the Spirit drew up to view, was a bright Saphir, upon
which was engraven the great Name Jehovah Shammah. The second was an
Onyx-stone, with Everlasting Wisdom written upon it. The third was a Beril
presenting the Flaming and Ghostly Breath, issuing forth in sparkling power.
The Second Row, the first is the Jasper, which is all Light sparkling, like to
the Diamond; upon this is engraven the Express Word, or Image, of God. The
second Stone of this second Row is a Sardius, it is a Sardine-stone, which
represents the Virgin Purity, as meet to unite to the Jasper. The third Stone
of this Row is an Amethyst, upon which is engraven the highest degree of
Seraphick Love, that cements all in one. The third Row, the first of which is
an ^rald, upon which is engraven rich Knowledge, or sound Judgment, to the
understanding of all Spiritual Arts and Sciences whatever. The second in this
Row i^ a Chrysolite, a Stone for all clear Revelation; engraven upon it are the
seven Eyes, for its All-seeing: nothing is unsearchable to it. The third is an
Adamant, In this Stone lies Almig^ty Strength; great fortitude and power to
resist all Batteries and Assaults whatever; it is so impregnated with virtual
Power. The fourth Row, the first Stone of it a Jacynth, this sparkling Stone
can live, and subsist in all Fire, and can endure the Touch from all these
Fire-Stones; the engravement upon this is, all precious Faith, that is the
conqueror through the long Patience. The second of this Row is a Chalcedony,
this Stone bears the engraving of high Joy, Peace, and Righteousness upon it,
representing the true Jerusalem-state, and the real Reign of Great Solomon. The
third and last of this Row is the great Top-Stone, which is a Chrysoprasus,
upon which is engrave^ the shout of a King; for here is Salva^ion and Victory.
For the Lord great and mighty has laid all the Foundation here for a sure
Defense.

In Aaron's Breast Plate Four Rows of Stones, Exodus 28. 27. and Chap. 39. 10.
The same Order observed.

1 Row 1 Sardius 2 Topaz 3 A Carbuncle

2 row 4 An Emerauld 5 A Sapphire 6 A Diamond

3 Row 7 A Ligure 8 An Agare 9 An Amerthyst

4 Row 10 A Beryl 11 An Onyx 12 A Jasper

These Twelve Foundation Stones of the New Jerusalem, the Order is thus
mentioned, Rev. 19, 20, 21.

1 is a Jasper 2 is a Sapphire 3 is a Chalcedony. 4 is an Emrauld 5 is a
Sardonyx 6 is a Sardius 7 is a Chrysolite 8 is a Beryl 9 is a Topaz 10 is a
Chrysoprasus 11 is a Jacynth 12 is an Amethyst
Nine of these Preciou^ Stones are mentioned together, Ezekiel. 28. 13.

The Nature of all these Stones are, they are all clear, bright, transparent,
sparkling from an in^ate Virtue.

A Topaz or a Carbuncle seem to be one Stone, Is^. 54. 12.

An Agate and Chrysoprasus all one, Ezekiel. 27. 16.

A Sardius and Ruby all one.

1. The Jasper Stone, the nature of it, it is clear as Crystal, mentioned Rev.
21. 11. and Chap. 4 3. He that sat was to look upon like Jasper.

2. The Sapphire, a transparent Stone, mentioned Ezekiel. 1. 26. and Chap. 10. 1. A
Throne as the appearance of a Sapphire Stone. Also Tob. 13. 16. Jerusalem shall
be built with Saphires.

3. Stone, a Chalcedony, I find to be like the Carbuncle.

4. An Emrauld Stone, mentioned Rev. 4. 3. In sight like unto an Emrauld. Also
Tob. 13. 16.

5. A Sardonyx Stone, it is almost one with a Sardius or Sardine Stone.

6. A Sardius, or a Sardine Stone, it is a transparent Ruby: It is mentioned
Rev. 4. 3. He that sat was like a Sardine Stone.

7. A Chrysolite, is a Gem full of Majesty, shining throughout with a Golden
Luster.

8. A Beryl, mentionened Din. 10. 6. His Body like to Beryl. Tob. 13. 17. The
Streets of Jerusalem shall be pa^ed with Beryl.

9. A Topaz or Carbuncle, mentioned Isa. 54. 12. Thy Gates of Carbuncles. Ezekiel.
28. 13. mentioned also in the Pavement of Jerusalem, Tob. 13. 17.

10. A Chrysoprasus, or an Agate, mentioned Isa. 54. 12. Thy Windows of Agates.
Mentioned Ezekiel. 27. 16. there Chrysoprasus and Agate seem to be all one. It may
well be called the Stone of Ophir, in the Prophecy of Old Tobias, Chap. 13. 17.

11. A Jacynth, or Hyacinth. It is of the Royal Purple Color.

12. An Amethyst.

The Diamond is mentioned, Exodus 28. 18. and Chap. 39. 11. and 28. 13.

The Any x-Stone is mentioned, Exodus 28. 20. and Chap. 39. 13.

J. P.

After this follows Wisdoms Call out of this City; whence she also with much
Majesty descended, and gave Rules for the Carrying on of the Great Work, and
for the bringing down of the said Jerusalem from God: which are not to be found
either among the Authors Papers, or in Dr. P's Copy; But may in part be
supplied, from what was afterward opened in the Treatise of the Eight Worlds.

April the 6th. 1676. A Call to this Searching from out of New-Jerusalem.
O Thou inquisitive Spirit, what is it thou have seen in my Glass? A City which
is founded upon a Rock of all Precious Stones? The measuring Line is still in
the Hand of thy Angelguide, to show thee further hereinto: And now to present
the Walls, that must be raised upon these twelve Foundations. The Line of my
Eternal Spirit is squaring all according to Wisdom's Counsel. What now think
thou are to be the Materials of these Walls but all flaming Seraphims, holding
Palms of Victory, and light glistering Shields in their Hands? These are the
Walls, which shall ever be before me garuished, with the bright sparkling
Powers of Cherubwork, every where engraven by the Pencil of my Spirit: Who
skilful is to write in Gold the Inscription of the highest Perfection of
Holiness, round these Walls. Nothing out here springing will be, but Lillies
and blushing Roses, which represent the mutual Embraces of the Bridegroom and
the Bride. Whose Emblems every where, within this Holy Place, are to be
pourtraied, as a new formed Image, of unchangeable Beauty and Perfection, in
the room and place of that faded, withered coupl^ who lost their Virgin Purity,
staining their Bridal Garments; so as Paradise could no longer bear them, but
fl^d away from them. But, behold! here is a new state of things opening, much
more transcendent then the Paradisical Birth and Generation. For out of this
City will come the true and right Marriage, of which the first was but a Type;
for the Lamb and the Bride will bring forth here a fruitful Offspring; as it
is said of this Zion, Blessed is the Man that is ^orn out hence: Blessed is the
Man that is begotten within these Celestial Walls. For take notice, there is
much difference betwixt the Paradisical State, and Situation, and this of
Jerusalem, which is encompassed all about with S^raphick flaming Cherubims.
There was only One to keep and guard the Tree of Life: it lay open and
obnoxious to the Invaders; as the effects of the Serpent's coming did show. But
here Fortitude and Strength (...) provided against all Assaults: no Destroyer
can come here, the Walls are so high, terrible, mighty, and strong, with their
twelve Gates, which will open to none but to the Bride and Bridegroom, and to
their Offspring, who have the Name of the City written upon their Foreheads.

But thou, whose Queries are come up before me, concerning these Gates, why
they are recorded to stand Northward and Southward; Eastward and Westward? and
to be all alike, no difference, and bearing Names upon them? Unto thee I
answer. As to the first, know, this City is founded and established upon the
top of all Mountains, for discovery unto all: The rising, blazing Glory of it
shall be seen of all People and Nations, and all Languages shall hear of the
Fame thereof: Therefore these Gates are set toward the Four Quarters of the
Earth, that whatever belongs to this Sion, and had its Birth out heuee, may
return and give it up to it again. Now as to the Gates themselves, as it is
said, They are of One Pearl, signifying their Oriental Purity, without mixture;
as it is written. My Name shall be ONE in these, and they one in me, as
selected Ones, to be at the Gate's Entrance, to whom I will give the Charge and
Trust peculiarly to open, and to shut out: for they shall have all Power given
to them. The burden of the Government shall not lie only upon your great High
Priest, but ye shall bear an equal share with him, as so many Elders, Spirited
from the same Anointing. O^ it is a high Dignity to be chosen an Angel-Keeper,
and Opener of these Everlasting Gates, to let in, and shut out, according to
the Light and Law of this City.

Query. Now why have thou seen three Pearl Gates united as in One?

Answer. To manifest the Trinity in Unity. All concluded it is to dwell in one
Pearl spiced Gate, so spiced throughout, as it may smell only of pure Deity,
that can never more admit of Putrefaction.

Q. But further you enquire, Why are they named with several Names, seeing all
is one only Pearl, or Body of Purity? Why twelve Names answering to the twelve
Tribes of Israel, or to the twelve Apostles of the Lamb?

A. It was only so in way of Similitude, for their many Names are all but one,
as deriving their Name from their Anointed Lord. Who was their Head
Principality; according to that which was written, That they were baptized into
that One Name, by the Holy Ghost, and from thence were called Christus, as a
Body, that anew was to present this Assembly in Mount Sion, the Bride of the
Lamb. Who henceforth will be called by no other Name, then the Lord our
Righteousness; which is the true Inscription, that shall be written upon every
one of these Gates.

April the 13th. 1676.
The Jerusalem state opened further upon me, as my Spirit was caught up there
to see and hear, how Affairs were managed in the high Kingdom of the Love;
knowing that my Name was written there, and a place preparing: and now my Mind
was no longer wavering, or nalting betwixt two Kingdoms. For I did see so much
of the reality of this Zion Glory, that all within me was pote^tly provoked to
make after it, according to the Hand of Power which had touched me. The Queen
of Sheba had not more lost her Spirits in the view of what was but the shadow,
and type of this, then I had from the time of its Manifestation upon me; The
Lamb and Wisdom the Bride still conferring and illustrating the Glory thereof
unto me, even so much, as with the Shulamite, Cant. 6. 4. I cried, Turn away
thin^ Eyes from me, for they have overcome me; such was the wonderful, bright,
terribleness of this Beautiful Jerusalem, in its continued presentations to my
Mind, so as I complained of my Lovefaintings and dyings. Now for this my Bride,
she talked with me in the Night, when Sleep was upon the Elementary part, but
my Internal Ear Kept awake to hear new things out of this Sion Pearl Ruby Gate.
An out cry I heard, and my self by Name called upon, Arise, shine, for thy
Jasper-stone is for thee come: make ready, put off, mount away with me: Let no
Essences ever more touch thee, that so my incorporated Spirit may alone give
unto thee the Jerusalem free. Who according to Knowledge, Light, Joy, Peace,
and Love, will, as to thee, my Dove, there live to spend the full Revenue of
this unknown, fresh, renewing Stock of all out flowing Gifts, and high deified
Powers, which will then show whereunto thou art come.

In the Morning, when I came to have these Sayings repeated over to me, by that
Magical Spirit, who inspired those things into me, I did really feel all my
co^poreal Spirits dye and saint within me, and some what to fail, and melt
away. While it was thus with me, I had this Word came to me, saying, This must
be: therefore suffer, and know now a dying into a Life-rising, and free
liberty, within this City, of a God-spreading Glory. Whereof the Throne-River
shall be given thee to drink, which is called the Water of Life: as a deep
rooted Tree, do thou suck it in, and from hence spring in the Love-Unity, from
the Father, and the Jerusalem Bride, which generate their Fruit Monthly. I do
this Tree not only to thee, but to him, who a Mourner is for his lovely, yet
once grieved Bride, recommend: To you both I do it present, not only to view,
and the Beauty hereof to admire; but for encouragement hereunto, that of the
same Fruit ye may bring forth within these high Walled Gates. Where the Nations
that are to be saved, shall partake of these healing Leaves: and more perfect
Cures then ever shall be done herefrom. These Trees therefore which I now show
thee, thou art made to behold through their various Operations how they remain
still together United which though signified in Number Three, yet all but One
are in their rich and high Extracted Quality. Out from which now see your
selves shoot forth as incorporated Branches, having living Food in your own
Root, which encircled round with Sion's broad River, which turned is into a
Golden Nature, as of transparent Amber. For such as the Soil is, whereout this
Tree does grow, so answerably does it give forth its Fruit, for Substance and
Quality, for Virtue and Taste. O great and unknown Mystery! Which lies here, to
be both the Tree, and the Feeder thereupon: as knowing here no Curse is ever to
be seared, because nothing but the pure, good, sappy Life moves here: which
will so perfectly Naturalize you into it self, as will transform you by
constant feeding upon it in your self, into a solid Body, as weighty as Gold;
and so by Degrees it will be known to grow hereunto. This will the whole Course
of your unsteady and Sin-obnoxious state, change into flaming Pillars, for
fixation. The Spring-Tides of this Healing River will grow so high, that it
will be unpassable: no more coming out is from within these Cherubin-Walls, but
growing up as Trees of Righteousness, from the Seed and Water-Fountain of Life.
Which by and through the Measuring Compass of the Spirit, makes heights,
depths, lengths and breadths, all proportionable; to lie square, and to move
here in one Equality, permitting nothing out of order. Still the Golden Line,
measures to the highest Perfection in every degree any one, who comes to
inhabit within this Jerusalem. Whose Streets being all of Gold most clear, sure
Footing there is for Fire-Stones to walk up and down, without fear of sinking;
for all their Goings are here established, and made prosperons. For no
Warfaring Spirit can err out of his Way, Light does every way so beset him from
the Throne-Spirit-Lamps, proceeding from God, and the Lamb, which has out
vied, and abased all other Lights; which hereat pull themselves in, and fall
down, as not able to abide, or contest with this God Essential Light. Ah, but
while with you I am discoursing these things, I hear this loud Ecchoing-Cry
within, Oh when shall we be clothed upon with this New Jerusalem Light, that
it may be our Lot within this City to abide? or else why is it after this
manner so illustrated, through the Knowledge and Manifestation of these things?
Thou do but sadden out Hearts, and multiply our Sorrows, till thou take us
in hereunto. For how can we love to see that place, which we must not come
into? And look upon these Lovely Trees, and not yet touch or t^ them? This does
but sharpen our Spiritual Appetites, to make them mo^ eagerly hunger after them.

April the 14th. 1676.
Our Eyes being now pitched upon this choice and only Tree, among all Eden's
Varieties, none here does please us so, as here to stay: we do see now somewhat
beyond them at a distance.

Wisdom: Therefore ye would have Admission into what I have shown you: or else
ye tell me, that it had been better to have had it still concealed from you. I
know, yea, I know these are your deep Love-arguings; for your Zeal to this my
House and City of Glory is very great; so as you would bring down out hence the
first ripe Fruits: and I know you are in travel for your Bride- Jerusalem to
see. All which is most acceptable to Wisdom's Spirit, who searches deeply, and
will turn up every Fire-Stone to see what yet lies under; Therefore thou that
plyest so hard the perfect thing it self, for to come to be, I as^ure, my Hand
will not sl^ck, but will ^ut it self forth to draw thee forward ^ill thou
through the conquering part shall come. Who then shall challenge by Right this
threefold Tree, thereof to feed upon: then will transmuting work begin. Here
your Eyes will be open indeed, from a virtual strength taken in under the
Honey-Dew, which upon these Branches lie: it may be well said, it is the
Eye Salve in truth, which enlightneth the Eye, that no Secret can from it be
hid; for it beholds every precious thing, whether above or beneath. But to go
on, let me answer what I read still within thy Heart, who says, O Jesus! why
am not I brought without further delay here? Why have thou caused my Ear
Morning by Morning, to hear of those great Immunities, if I may not enter upon
this rich, and stately Inheritance: By which I may show, what thou have; Oh
Jesus, for me wrought, that so all Insidels may be convinced, who are in the
gainsaying Spirit, that a Savior is risen to carry us through, into the Land
of Possession. For glorified I cannot be, till upon Mount Sion my Ransomed
Ones, with their Victorious Crowns and Palms do stand free. Oh this is all, I
must tell thee, a little time more allowed must be, for the full conquest to be
made; I, even I am come with my Fire, and sifting Fan, till I will not leave
one Canaanitish Spirit in thy Land. This is my present work to subdue and bind
all under you: I now a busy, swift and mighty Agent am, for you, who have laid
your help upon me, and have charged me with this great thing to bring it to
pass for you. Your Hearts and Minds I now require to leave with me, as an empty
Tent; for no more a mixed Family shall there dwell. I Wisdom with my own Train
will you fill, turning all out, but my own begotten Fire-sparkling Seed; for
with nothing else, can I evermore agree. When this is done, ye cannot, ye shall
not live out of this Sion-Glory.

April the 15th. 1676. The Nazarite Diet.
Furthermore, I have set forth within thee, those Foundation-Stones, that are
already laid in their fair Colors. I the Lord thy Builder, and Maker, will
modelize all anew, and will alter the Face of thy Mind by changing and turning
the inclination of thy Heart, toward this Tree of Life: Toward which all thy
Desire shall be; for which cause, within thy new Foundation Wall, it shall for
ever henceforth spring. The Root of this high Deified Matter, being found from
the hour of the Life quickening in Wisdom's Virgin-Womb, from which a Body pure,
and Celestial does grow, rising out of the Tomb, where Christ thy Foundation
Seed was laid. For this Tree of Life is proper for none to feed on, but those
that have been dead, and are alive again. For which end the beloved Paul,
desired to know nothing, but what might bring to this Resurrection-state; which
would be the undeniable Witness, that ye have right to enter, and to pass
through the flaming Cherubinical-Wall, being of the same Sardius and
Ruby-Bodies. But before you fully this attain, you have a Time of allowance
granted you for growth and provision, to feed upon it suitably for the
Younglings state: You could not yet be able to bear the strong Powers and
Spirits, which this Tree of Life does produce. Therefore Butter and Honey, Milk
and Oil, are your present Portions, which are appointed you by Wisdom; who well
knows, what your present reception can carry off, and will not overcharge, that
which is but weak, and tender. Therefore has she wisely ordered this
Sanctuary-Dyet, which is strong enough to nourish this new Birth of Life. As,
1st. with the Milk of all Lovetenderness; 2dly. Then with the Honey-Dews of
Predictions, Manuductions, and Counsels. 3dly. With the melting Butter of
consolating Joy. 4thly. With the Oil of Light, which is for the restoring and
keeping clearer the Sight, that it may be able to look into this City, where
the Jasper-stone so wonderfully does shine. Now know these kinds of Food will
bring you up, and make you so pure, clear, and fair, as in the Fullness of Time,
ye shall without restriction. Boldly of this strong Life Virtue take: Which
will a Change to purpose in you make. For consider, what the Nature and Spirit
of this Tree is. I shall here present the several Properties of it, to wit,
Power, Majesty, Wisdom, Riches, Honor, Omnipotency, Blessing, Salvation,
Dominion, Strength, Dignity and Glory. All these are given at once to feed
upon, and to drink in the Juicy Liquor of all these Fruit-Powers: What, or who
can bear it; but the strong grown Nazarite, that has been incorruptibly
trained up for it?

After this for the space of Ten Days, it is not known what Occurred from the
Heavens; as not being found Registered by Doctor. P.

April the 25th. 1676. The Bridegroom's Voice.
The Word in me from Jesus thus spoke. O ye Jerusalem Waiters, by what Gate
came ye in? and what have you here seen, that ye so willing are here to stay?
Taken thou art with the flaming Eye: that thou have no mind hereout to depart,
till ye have got another Heart, which ^o where else could be perfectly
exchanged. Here only is the Place for the Bridegroom and his Bride, after long
Exile to meet again. Oh then be wise, and for your Bridal Spirit, and Garment
of Power undeniably wait. None out of this Treasure-City can ever it obtain,
for in this Sion must all be born again, after many other preceding Births,
which fore runs this great and last Transmuting Birth. Which to that Perfection
is brought, that no desire there will be, for to see another change, then what
this Jerusulem-state will translate thee into. For which cause, I have it to
thee shown, that ye might here into enter in; in that, I see your Minds so
refined, that ye disdain among Beasts any longer to live and feed. Come, O ye
blessed of my Father, who out of these Prison-Walls, and defiled Pastures shall
steal and depart away, as who are no more to touch with that, which makes this
City from you to shut it self up. I have this 1600 Years expected still Comers
up to me, into my Personal Glory here: But few have made their way all clear
unto me, not having skill, or known the Art of dying to the Earthly part fully,
and totally. Half dead and half alive many have so far tried, and therefore
could no entrance find here, because a putrified part still was found. Which
has made me so unknown, and to such necessitated ones to carry it strange;
they not considering the Disproportionableness of my present state, and how
that I am i^stated in the highest degree of the Father's Glory of Purity; that
so if even my Affectons and Heart were touched to descend upon any that
ardently seek Personal Union and Manifestation with me, yet it would not be
permitted, till this Mount Sion-Birth is brought forth, which makes the high
Clarification, and all Perfection of Beauty desirable, without exception to the
everlasting Father of perfect Spirits. Who wills that I should take none into
the inward secret Court, where all Dignities and Princely Throne-Powers and
Glories are, till thoroughly purified, and clothed upon with the Jasper-stone.
This anointed Cherubin-covering, has been scarcely put on; therefore they
could not come up, to bring down the Everlasting Kingdom, which must again to a
certain Number be restored. Blessed are they, who shall know it, in their Day,
looking hereunto, and waiting for it within the Jerusalem-Walls, where this new
Offspring and Generation must be born. Yea, Blessed are ye my Beloved, and
those that are with you United, in Me, for the Bringing down of this Happy Day
upon the Earth.

April the 27th. 1676. His further Admonition.
In or about Break-of-Day, I prayed, as the present state of things were shown
me, and matter therefrom given me: I never felt a greater Efflux of Spirit,
Power, Joy, and Peace came into me, then did at this season, which opened that
Word, and made it known in its Living Witness, saying, Now feel and taste what
the Kingdom of God is, it is made to thee a Substantiality, and shall out-flow
according to its working Property. Henceforth then in Wisdom's Balance weigh
and consider every thing you say, that your Words may no more be Naked, but
clothed with the Guardian Power; Which will come to be of great Consequence,
as managed in Dove-Simplicity, and shall defeat the Serpent's Subtilty. Who
strong Poison had for thee prepared, but could no way send it in, thy Vessel
being with the Antidote Liquor, and juice of Life beforehand filled. Which
still take thou care to keep brim-full, that so nothing which is of crude,
anxious Nature into thee may come, upon thy Ascension, which is to bring down
another Spiritual Form. For I see, it is time and expedient, that to my
Jerusalem Waiters, I should appear to bring them up, where new Robes and
Vestures are fitted out for the newborn Inhabitants to wear. That so without a
Vail upon my Face, I might to you plainly speak, for I have no pleasure to
carry it at this distance toward you, could you bear but the ^ight of my
terrible Crystalline Glory, which I am so deeply ingulphed withal, that I
cannot be conversant after that way and manner, which I was before I ascended
into this high Throne-Power, and Heavenly Place, conversing with those for whom
I went to prepa^ Mansions for, in my Father's House: a much high^t Purity, I
now require in such, who are to be my fellow Associates, then what was existent
in that day. This is a new Law not understood, and will be only received to a
small number; for know that to thee, I will this thing reveal, what Wisdom is
about to do, in order to the bringing the Bridegroom and Bride together. For
while the B^ide is found unready, and all undressed, and out of the Jerusalem's
Glory, I could in no wise acquaint my self with her, otherwise then by
Secretaries, and influencing Breathings, to let her know by these, what she
must further be wrought into, for more minute Sight and Knowledge with me, her
designed Bridegroom and Mate.

April the 28th 1676. The Love-Chain.
According as the Living Word, who spoke thus by way of Prophecy in me, did
further by Similitude present it self, as thus. A Golden Chain in Links was let
down, from the high Throne Sphere, where Jesus in the Love-Kingdom reigns. This
Chain had a Golden Ball at the end, and the Voice said, Hold fast, if thou will
come up unto me: if thou should gad abroad with thy Mind or Eye, and let this
slip out of thy Hand, then thou will be prevented of cohabitation with me in my
Princely Glory. For this is the strong Power of Might, which brings the
Bridegroom and the Bride together. Every Link in this Chain has its proper use
and service, Wisdom is the great Engineer, which did this contrive for my
Spouse and I to meet, and each other to greet. While then in the Heavens I must
be contained, this Chain shall descend still, to help up such as are risen out
of the dark Night dress of a corruptible Life, into a Body of Light. This Chain
is of so high a refined Metal that it admits of no Hand to lay hold of it, but
the pure Lily Hand, which is strong in Faith; who is persuaded, that this
Love-Chain is sufficient to bring one up, after the manner of Elijah's Chariot.
Who was mighty in Faith, and so brought down this Ascending Chariot by this
Chain of diverse Links. But he had first ascended by it, as appeared, being one
who had power with God upon all occasions, even to shut and open the Heavens,
when he pleases, what else are these Links of drawing Powers, but this Elijah's
Spirit of Prophecy and Prayer, of Faith, perfect Love, Patience, Hope,
Weekness, Longsuffering, Peaceableness, Temperance, and immutable Perseverance?
These are the Link-fastening ties on your parts. Then that which answers on
mine, are these, Light, Greatness of Power, and Might, Love, Grace, and
Good Will, Kindness, Pity, and all Tenderness, without variableness, with the
watchful, protecting, and safe-guarding Eye, which shall maintain all this for
a sure binding, and a Wedlock-tye, betwixt bright raised Spirits and me, till
the Great Day of the Visible Marriage shall be Solemnized in the Free
Jerusalem. Till which hold ye fast, and take good heed, that not one of these
Links on your parts be broken: if but from any one of these ye should unlink,
ye would fall down by the way, and never to me ascend. But I know that Wisdom
is thy Friend, who will not suffer thee to break from me: She is a busy Agent
still to spur thee on; her Law of kindness is found to me, thy Jesus in thy
Heart: which will give an Ascending Might, that so ye may come down again, in a
flaming Body of Light. Which is the only design of Wisdom that blessed
Engineer; who by these Golden Links draws you continually nearer to her City.

This was further Opened in the Seven following Days by Wisdom, but the Copy is
here Deficient.

May the 1st. 1676. The New Book Opened: Or, the Everlasting Gospel of JESUS.
THis Morning my Spiritual Informer came, and presented to my view a Book,
wherein great and hidden Secrets were writ; telling me here was neither Parable
nor Allegory, but the plain Doctrine of the Everlasting Gospel. Into which, it
was said, it is given thee to look, for it is an Epistle of good will, and love
to thee, and thy fellow Waiter; that ye may come to a right and genuine
understanding of those weighty things, which lay concealed under the Vail of
the Letter. The sum of which is the Incarnation, Dying, Rising, Ascending and
Glorifying of thy Jesus. All which being finished in his own Personality, I now
look to see that all should be actually wrought in you; to which end, I have
poured out of my Spirit upon you, which may bring you up through all to me.
Read then and see in Wisdom's Glass, what is contained in this Book for a
further instructing of thee into a Gospel Death, and Rising into Victory. Many
are the Deaths ye have passed over, and I grant every Death has brought forth
a rising Body, so that ye are come so far, as to bear the very Image of the
Heavenly Man, in which the Life-Seed does spring. But this is not all you are
to aspire unto, but you are here to dye with Jesus. For in all those foregoing
Deaths, you had not that fellowship as ye shall have with me, when I am grown
up in you. For I the Just One, died for the Unjust; so I must Personate this
dying again in you, after a Paradisical manner, sowing my own pure Grain and
Seed into the Mount Sion Ground. For as it is said, such as the Seed and Soil
is, such a Body in the Resurrection it will be, and such a Body it will
produce. And although you come thus to dye in the Lord, I mean in your Lord
Jesus Christ, in whom your Life lies safe and inoculated, there will be no
danger. And while you are sowing here, be not as others without Hope, for
indeed you sow not that Body, which shall be to the account of a Bare return,
as Spirit for Spirit, or Body for Body: For though it was sown a single Seed,
yet it shall be various and manifold: though the Seed is sown contemptible, yet
it shall rise honorable; and though sown as weak, yet it will rise mighty in
strength. So mighty, potent, strong, and honorable this Resurrection will be,
as it will bring forth the Seed sown, with another manner of Body, then what
has yet been known. For ye shall know all Blessedness indeed, by thus dying
into me; fear it not therefore, but valiantly spill your Life, and mingle it
with me: then shall ye know a cessation to your own busie-acting Properties.
For that Spirit, which dies into me, cease to Sio, sweetly sleeping and
slumbering in Sion's Golden Dust, till I my secret Trump shall sound with the
Vial of Life quickening Oil poured in; which shall make the dead in you to come
forth with an unchangeable habit and form of the Holy Ghost, of which I speak.
I will after this manner rai^e up at the last Day: which day to thee is very
near, if thou can sink and dye so totally into me, who do promise to thee
long here lay buried thou shall not be.

This is the Connection to the former Part.

Before I the LORD will move again to the finishing of the last glorious
Mystery, the first that can dye thus into me, shall rise as the first Fruits
out of me, into a Body Celestial, and mighty Powerful. For my Seed shall never
Corruption see: it shall soon rise into a Mount Sion Body. Lay but the
Groundwork hereunto sure, and ye shall see and feel another Spirit and another
Form after this passive Sleep. For after it ye shall awake in that Image, which
shall be no more despised; being all complete, and giving proof of my
Resurrection and Life. Oh blessed are they, who can say, that they were dead in
me, and are alive evermore, to Reign with me in my Kingdom, waiting for me
their Lord from Heaven to bring them thither. For in this new risen Body, I
shall not be ashamed of thee, it is so Signatured into the Father's Nature of
Purity, that in it thou may freely ascend to me. Where I will in the Light
Airy Region meet with thee, and bring thee through all the Pearly Gates. O
come, resign, and dye; know me no more out of this Dying, and Resurrection
State. Thus Death is not Metaphorically, but Really the last Enemy that is to
be destroyed. Here Sing ye may, that dwell in Sion's Golden Mold, and
triumphantly Cry. Oh Death, by this Spiritual dying, I am mortally become thy
Death, and so swallowed up, as you can nothing of it see. Go, go preach thou
this for the Everlasting Gospel to such as have an Ear to hear it: rejoice, and
give Glory to God on high. Now when the Hour of this Judgment shall fully come,
by ushering in the New Jerusalem freedom through the Streets of Nature: This
Gospel Ministration, (which is all Love, Grace, Mercy and Peace) by those shall
then be proclaimed, who do partake of this Resurrection, as the first Fruits.
They shall be honored with this Message, to all those who in this Noah's Age
are asleep in their dark Prison-Houses. For an Almighty Voice I in you my
Sion-born Spirits, will utter forth, to call in more to know this
Death-Liberty, and Life-Resurrection, and Ascension into all Fellowships, and
free Communions with the High Eternity, and Me, the chief Head of all Sion's
new risen Body. Whereunto being come, no other Banner will I display there, but
that Love, which casts out all Bondage and Fear.

May the 6th. 1676.
In the Morning, being the first Day, pondering and considering this last
Opening, which showed me the necessity of dying into my Jesus, and of sowing
the Seed of my Eternal Spirit, as an unmixed Grain, sifted from all Chaffiness,
or Cockle, or any such thing, for to twist about it: Thus the Word said, If
thou can thus sow thy self singly and purely into me, as into the Heart of
Sion's rich Soil, and there passively a while lie, as in thy Tomb, and unknown
Sepulcher: (Where none after This method have of latter days been before thee,
not knowing or understanding the Mystery of This reposing Death) then
accordingly will an unmixed, glorified, yea, deified Body, arise with all
rarefied Senses, Powers, and operative Faculties, meet for all Heavenly
Employment and Service, which can no more be drawn downward to mind inferior
matters, or things. These impressing Savings dropping from the Lips of my
Jesus, caught my Spirit into the pleasant dying, and dissolving part. For this
kind of Death was not so grim, nor terrible to me, as what had formerly passed
upon me. Yet somewhat of a Spiritual conflict was awakened in me, and the
Powers of my Heavens were at strife about the laying down of this more refined
Life. For I found some sharp contest with an opposite Power, who said, What
will you further dye, and cease from now, that the perfect thing is sprung in
you? Will you have all now of this Holy Nature sink down, and bury it in
Paradisical Ground? sowing only in Hope, that it will arise a Body, and fair
Lily in the Tower of sion?

This Objection met my Spirit, as if I were herein to do a superstuous act: but
still to Wisdom's Word I adhered. Which followed me all the Day long, bringing
a Scripture to me out of Isa. 26. Thy dead Men shall live: together with my
dead Body, they shall rise. Ver. 19. Awake, sing ye, that dwell in the Dust.
From hence was shown me the present sweet fellowship with my Jesus in this his
own Body, that is to be our Grave and embalmed Tomb; whereby we are to be so
Spieed with his Deified Humanity, as to see no Corruptibility, being called out
to empty, and spill our whole Life into him. This being the public Day of our
Meeting, my Spirit was with this new Matter filled: but I quenched and stopped
the going forth of it, and spoke out little of this Secret. Which I know would
have gone forth with Mighty Powers attending it. But some being there, that
would not happily have digested this new broached Matter, I did for fear stop
it; though it stifled the Breath of Power, and thereby was hurtful both to my
self and to others. Which verified to me that Word, Quench not the Spirit,
despise not Prophesying: Which I shall henceforth be cautious of, and
correspond with according to my Power, and inspiring Breath. Going afterward
to my Night's Repose, I had a mighty disturbed Sleep, being in a Place, where I
saw only the Doctor and my self, where did arise out of a burning Lime-Pit, a
suffocating Smell, which was so offensive, that I told him, we must make all
have out here, or we should be stifled, such great heaps of Chalk-Stones lay on
every side, as we could make but slow Pace out, neither could I see what way to
pass by, till on a sudden a Gate opened, and a Person called us to come, and
put forth his Hand, ^o help us over those great Stones, that lay in our way; so
coming out into a Place, where we met to worship, and praise our God, among our
own selected Number. But while we were in our Spiritual Exercise, I saw one
amongst us, as a mocking Ishmaelite, thrusting out a great pair of Lips, and
deriding our Powers: with that I was stirred up in Spirit, to go to that Party
and give a rebuke; and they became ashamed thereat, and was Speechless, for I
was made to discover their Nakedness. After this I fell asleep, and about Break
of Day, I was awakened with these Words, The Trumpet out of Sion sounds, to
call forth the Dead in Jesus; awake, awake, ye that sleep in Sion's Dust. This
Alarm much eased my Spirit, and drew it into an inward waiting; for I know
there would somewhat follow, if watched thereunto, keeping and abiding in the
still Rest, and waiting from under this Altar to be raised, by that Life
quickening Spirit, that I do feel stir, and echo again to my Cry from under
the Altar.

May the 8th. 1676.
This Morning being wholly attentive to my Lawgiver, for further Manifestation,
Impowerings and Inspeakings. I found Mary Magdalen's restless Spirit with me,
to attend the Sepulcher of my Lord, from which I could not go. Knowing well,
what I had sown into that Holy Ground, from whence I expected a good Return;
While looking and expecting. I saw nothing but a bare empty Tomb left here, no
Jesus was at present to be found. Which brought a damp and heaviness upon me;
but mourning in Hope, the Angel that rolled away the Stone, did speak Comfort
to me, saying, Though thy Lord, into whom thou did shed thy choicest
Life-Seed, and did sow all thy Love-Spirit, is now fled from thy sight, and
thou art hereat amazed, be of good cheer: he will not leave thee a restless
Seeker here. No sooner were these Words pronounced to me, but I heard another
Voice within me sound, saying, Hail, O Mary, why do thou fear? I know, I know
thou have entrusted me with all thy Life-Treasury; therefore in great Jeopardy
I did see thee, lest I should not again descend unto thee. Then would thou
have counted me, as a Thief and Robber, to go away with all thy Life, Spirit,
Power and Strength, leaving thee void, empty and distressed. But now thou shall
know that I am returned again to thee, to give thee a Resurrection, with my
self. For I see thou can not live without me: therefore Ascend thou shall in
Spirit, to be with me, that thou may not only behold me in my Glory, but know
thy self also with me, as a Partaker of the same Glory. Only satisfy thy self
that for a time, some Intervals may be, because of thine Abiding still in an
Elementary Body, which may be a Cloud upon thee. But yet as often as it is
possible, allowing the Circumstances that do attend Corporeity, exhale I will
thy Superior Part and Spirit up to me. Therefore be not dismayed, though there
may happen many Assaults and Attempts, that will make War against this
Resurrection-State. Which Offenses will come in through the withdrawing of this
inspiring Unction. Whose Power is arising yet again, for reforming all these
Abuses, and Ecclesiastical Disorders in my Visible Church Militant. Therefore
be not snipped in thy Hopes, but be thou of good Courage, who have for this
Pearl of the Holy Ghost, hard and unweariedly sought, and art upon the growing
Body for it. For who so worthy thereof shall be, as those, who gradually shall
through all Sufferings, Dyings, Risings, Ascendings, come up through all a
Conqueror to me. Verily I say, if ^ye shall in such a raised Spirit appear to
me in Mount Sion, you shall have free Liberty to take what you will out thence,
^s Copartners with me in the Kingdom of the Father's Sovereignty, whereto I ^m
by all this calling you up. Therefore see, see what I must do further in ^ou,
till thoroughly ye be assimulated in^o me. Oh it is a mighty thing for me ^our
Jesus, back again with my Life's Blood to return, and shed it abroad into such
full Streams, as may engender the Eternal Body of the Love, to which the mighty
influencing Word of Wisdom determines to bring, and make you perfect in. Now
then decry all reluctance down, which yet may be found stirring against this
Perfect thing. For this my Rising Body, will clear it self from all Weaknesses
and Imperfections to which end, I do again descend into Nature, to raise this
Seed, and to cloth it upon with my own Spiritual Body. Which must be put on,
jointed and knit together by Organical Properties, and Powers, and by Spiritual
Sinews, and Veius of Life running here throughout, all created and formed of
Pure and Divine Matter. This is the New Creature, into which God the Holy Ghost
will breath again and operate freely, and will never more be under any clog, or
evil strangling Power from any dark Magic. For all by, and through dying into
me, are acquitted of that Nature. I as a new Lily Flower out of thee will
spring: and out of that inward Ground, which has been thus tinctured, and
watered with my allcleansing Blood, (that purifies from all that is corrupt,)
the Pearl shall be ^ound.

May the 11th. 1676.
This Morning I awakned from a Voice, echoing within, saying, I am come
Pro^hecies to fulfill: With that I felt some^hing into me enter, and it filled
me, and ^ll my parts, in such a sacred manner, which gave me to believe, that
the new ^ompacted Body, which had been open^d and promised, was now stirring
and giving proof of its Real Existency; and ^rowing within me, to bring forth
that Perfect Life, without the stain of Sin: Referring to that Scripture,
Knowing that Christ being raised, dies no more; for through that Death, Sin
was finished. So likewise it was showed me, that we were thus to reckon our
selves freed and ^ead, through this living Body felt, and smelt as a Spicy
Balsam diffused by ^he Spirit of Jesus: From these words ^peaking thus; This
Body is my Everlast^ng Birth of Life, that once coming to ^e quickened, shall
never dye more. For though there was a falling away, and dying from out of
Paradise, and from that pure Birth there grew a deforme^ change; Yet now fear
not, since a trye^ Stone, for a Foundation of Eternal Lif^ is laid in you, who
chosen Witnesses ar^ of my Risen Body. Which shall i^ like manner give proof in
a Numbe^ known; as it did in that Age, when particularly was manifested to the
Worl^ in the Singularity: but now hencefor^ expect me to appear in the
Pl^rality; to act over the same perfect Li^ again, in such who are
predestinate^ thereunto, from the choice Love o^ God the Father. Who by Wisdom
does bring forth again this New ^tion, in the express Likeness of me, the^
first born Jesus. Who by pure diffusin^ and Incarnating my self in you, ca^
thereby save, and redeem you out o^ and from All Sin, so as to be spotless,
(...) immaculate, even as I was; hereby restoring storing to you your lost
Virginity.

May the 12th. 1676.
I Perceived the whole drift of the lord of Wisdom was now to impress to us,
the perfect Nature of Jesus, for (...) essential growing in us, to be felt in
^e quickening, powerful stirrings, that (...) we might know in our selves the
^rd to be risen. For it was said to me, ^ear, O ye whom I have seen, careful to
^ther in all your scattering Loves, to ^pty them into me, as a Proof that ye
^ll enter your selves into no other be^es; Who to you will not be a ^ad, but
living Tomb, out from which (...) shall have Bodies come forth in Or^nical
Powers, with all the Senses re^wed, as the effect of your Resurrection ^te. For
verily as I was in this World, ^ye are by the same Spirit in the like ^rity, to
honor the Father and me, (...) ab^tement hereof can be allowed, you desire to
come up unto the same ^ity, to be near the Father's Throne ^jesty, where I am
to fix you near ^me. If you will now remember to ^d fast by that Globe, and
with me Ascend, by every Link demonstrated by that Golden Chain, ye shall pass
through all Centers and Worlds most conqueringly: As I am risen in you, that
most powerful and Aerie Body, which indeed has hereby made you only meet for
the Heavenly Company and Society, shall accordingly in you arise: Neither doubt
ye, who appointed are to wear the White Robes of the Resurrection; While ye do
yet appear in mortal Shapes that it shall still so cloud, and hide this my
Celestial Body; but that like the Sun, it will break forth in its mighty force
and strength of Glory, through the visible dark Body. For this Life mus^ not be
stifled, but shall display it sel^ most free, in, and after the same manner and
way, that is Recorded of me nay, and that too more abundantly. For I have the
Patent by the Father no^ sealed to give forth mighty Powers an^ Gifts; whereby
Bodies that are framed and brought into my Model of Perfection, shall be new
and fresh Witnesses o^ those attending Powers, that shall giv^ sufficient
Proofs that I am again Rise^ Therefore fix your Eyes steadfastly o^ me, and look
after my Life; for I a^ the same that was Visible, and am now drawing you after
me.

May the 18th. 1676.
Wisdom's Star with its Bright Glance, gave notice to us, where we might come
to congratulate the Pure and Wonderful Birth of our Saving Jesus. Which coming
to behold, as the effect of that late preceding Dying into him, from which a
Birth so suddenly did spring, and therefrom did witness a most sweet and
pleasant Existence, growing from the Life-Tree, which is rooted in the deep
rich Soil of the All-Eternity: These were the Glad-tydings, which to my Ears
were sounded, with these Words, Come enter into your self, view and see, that
the Life-Birth has wrought out it self God-Man, fully. Great care and charge
of this young Plant, you are to take, and to nurse it up with its own
Virgin-Milk, and ye must not dare henceforth, ever to lay it to any other
Breast, upon its Life-Preservation. For this ^mmixed Birth is designed to be
brought ^p, by the Incorruptible Word, which must feed it up, until it be wise,
and all knowing, and impregnably strong, and get about it all its defensive
Armor. Without which there is no living, where such abounding of Evil is
hourly scattering their malignant Influences. All former Births have been too
weak, to encounter with the strong and subtle Leviathan, who has this World so
much his Friend, to plunge poor fallen Spirits into his Gins; and no way there
is to escape his Wiles, Assaults and Temptations, but by entering through this
new living Birth-Gate. Which is contracted from that High, Pure, Elementary
Substance; and therefore must always subsist answerably, upon its own native
Food. O let it not seem strange, that this Life-Birth of Jesus, is now upon its
rising again: it will be defended and protected by the conquering Right of the
Mighty Alpha, who will have regard unto this Kingly Heir, while he is in his
Young and Infant state, that he may not be bereaved of his Kingdom. There is no
fear of this last high and perfect Birth, to be hereof supplanted; because the
Foundation-Seal is upon it, which is the Lord, that quickening, growing Life
and Spirit, that makes all that is not for it, to fly away before it.

May the 19th. 1676.
Now knowing in my self another Spirit, acting and moving in this new begotten
Birth; I was now apt for Phylosophick teaching, in the all hidden Magia of
Wisdom's Secrets: In which this holy born Thing might attain skill and
understanding, as being thereunto constituted. For as its Birth is from Mount
Sion, high great, pure and Spiritual, so must its Learning and Education answer
thereunto. No Tutour, Teacher, or Governor to it must be, but what out of the
Royal City, the New Jerusalem does come from thence by God the Father's
Commission. Who will new string our Tongues, so as the Stammerer shall speak in
that one pure Language, which is only understood by Jesus and the Brotherhood.
Oh the Spirit of this New Creature dives deep, and is of a piercing
Understanding, and of a quick Ear. Now upon this Birth's opening, and showing
it self, as the true Nazarite, it was set much upon my Heart, and great
awfulness was upon us, who were Witnesses of this rising Birth, how to carry
it, and behave our selves toward it. So we sought earnestly by Prayer to be
directed in the management thereof, as desiring to answer this great Love-Gift,
according to the requiring of the gracious Donour. This was my Morning
consideration, after which being much kept waking in the Night about it, I fell
into a slumber about the Morning, and here was presented unto me a Book open,
and a Finger pointing to me to read it, being very fair and legible. Which I
engaged my Mind to understand the meaning of, but it seemed to be written in
another Language, then I had yet learned, and so I could make nothing out of
it: But when I awaked, and had waited a while in the interior Silence, it was
said to me, This was the Book of Prophecy, which could not literally be read;
but it was given forth for the new living Birth to feed on it, and to be eating
it down: and so ye shall feel it become a springing Source, bringing forth
deep, precious and weighty things; After this way and manner the holy Birth
shall be disciplined, and thus taught by a secret, intrinsical, mingling and
conveying Power, that shall all other Teachings drown, nullify, and
obliterate. This shall only be of force and authority, according as it was with
Jesus, who only is to be your Precedent, of whom by way of derision it was
said, How comes this Man to be so understanding and knowing, seeing he never
was learned? He being poorly and meanly Educated, as they judged, and not come
up so high in their Form, as to be bred up a Scribe: therefore it was
admiration to them, how he came by that Wisdom and Knowledge: Which so outvied
all, and made them astonished, when they reasoned with him. He brought forth
all his Sayings, from this deep central Birth of the holy overshadowing
Breath-Power, which issued continually, affording still fresh and new Matter.
Now then to you, who have partaken of the same Life and Birth with your Jesus,
and are come to feel this Word of Life stirring within you, ye are charged to
live by this Word, which is the Book of Life incorporating it self in you.
Mistrust not, but you will find enough herefrom to nourish, and strengthen all
your Internal Senses. Expect no less in this Birth of Life, then what was
manifest in your Jesus; the same budding Fruits there will be from the same
Spirit, as ye grow up in it. Fear not, but the anointing Powers, and Gifts will
open and flow, as Antecedents belonging hereunto. And whereas you have desired
to know, how you may manure this holy Birth? You are required to bring him into
the Temple of the Lord, and there to dedicate him up in the Covenant of an
Everlasting Priesthood. Whose growth will be great and signal in the Courts of
Holiness, for evermore.

May the 20th. 1676.
This Morning this Word run through me, and still cried in me, Know tho^
what a Treasure thou stand charged withal? Consider the high worth o^ this
Birth, and give all Attedance to it wait upon it, and minister to it, as you^
great Prince and Savior. For behold it is come to Redeem you out of all Si^
and Thraldom, and will be a growing Tree of all fruitful Boughs excellently and
richly laden. Therefore be choice of it, and tender it as the very Apple of
your Eye, and permit nothing to offend it. Your Will-Spirits, who from the high
Eternity are tinged, are commanded to Watch and Ward about it, and to unite
entirely with this perfect thing. For it is a Stone out of the Sion Rock, that
will be your Covering of Strength and Salvation, and the opening of the
Storehouse of all Blessings to run out freely: It is but natural for you to
grow and spring out of this Central Birth, operating from within. Your charge
is only to attend this Altar-Fire, and the pure Celestial Oil, that is the
Freewill, which the holy flaming Body does subsist of, from the Everlasting
Mountain of Holiness distilling down to your Hands. Therefore your only
Business is to wait, to take it in, and upon this Holy Altar to pour it; That
so hereby, it may become a very strong, sweet, and savoury Meat, to the
nourishing of the pure part, which must be one with it, through our being
turned into a Golden perfect lump. So solid and stable it must be, as neither
Clay, Iron, Brass or Tinn may or can here penetrate in. No contrary Metals can
run into this pure Body, or what is not of its own high extracted Matter.
Therefore now this thing consider well, and suffer this Lily Birth alone by it
self, to dwell undisturbed, in the Sacred Temple, till grown out of all Fear
and Jeopardy, to the state of Eldership; to which full grown Body and Head, the
Crown is made only fit.

May the 22d. 1676.
These Internal Openings and Manuductions following me still, so as they would
hardly give room, for any thing of a Worldly Sense to enter in; contrary Seeds
in my inward Ground could not be born, there being something in me that was now
grown so strong, as to resist, and throw out all other light and scruffy Grain.
For my Granary must be reserved for the one pure Birth-Seed, according as my
Jesus has his Mind to me revealed. Who said expressly, Come, come, shut up the
Grates and Windows of thy low, carnal, earthly Senses, by which the Light of
the Mortal Day does enter in, to rule, according to the manner of this World's
Inhabitants. Know ye your selves, who have my new living Birth upon you:
Impressed you are under the Charter and Laws of the Jerusalem free; born from
above, and not from beneath; though in the World, yet not of it. This Birth of
Life is a mere Stranger, all its care is to keep it self, that the Evil One may
not touch him, nor mislead him, through introducing his false Light into you,
as his Rational Star within this low Orb, to bind you under these Planets, that
rule over the fallen outward Birth. Which now you are to reckon your selves
freed from, by this Aurora, the Morning Birth of this great and Everlasting
Days-Man. The Light that now is breaking open upon you, is to give a sight into
that City and new Creation, to which ye do belong. For ye are under quite
another kind of Government, having taken upon you that high Apostolical
Profession, which enters you into and makes you partakers of that high calling.
For here is a Spiritual Service and Employ allotted, for every Sion born
Spirit, so soon as they are grown up to the understanding part. As the outward
rational Spirit and Body, as soon as grown up and capable of Traffic and
Commerce, are their own Crafts-Masters in, and over things Temporal; by which
Corporalities do subsist: Even so likewise see what Calling the great
High Priest and Apostle took upon him, as our Pattern, so soon as he was grown
up in Wisdom and Ability, so as to take upon him the Office and Function,
whereby he might set upon the Work and Business, for which he was sent into the
World by God the Father. Who never was found sloathful or negligent in
Spiritual Business; for he was always found in Spiritual Action, working the
Works of his God and Father in his Day.

May the 23d. 1676.
Who The Father.
now has also imprinted the Name Jesus in you, as the Mark for you to follow
the same honorable and high Calling, whereby ye may obtain a rich and
plentiful Spiritual Livelihood: therefore be vigilant, and always upon the
right hand Industry, through which will be blessed Income Eternally.

A Vision seen by me in the Night, after my first Sleep.

I saw one as in a Figure of a sprightly Youth, presenting himself near my
Bedside, which amazed me, and I was afraid to take knowledge of him, who made
out to me, as if he would draw my Aspect to him, but I could not find any Power
for Speech with him. This disappearing, another in taller Stature, and more
Manly Countenance, drew upon me, seeming to desire Familiarity with me; and
then I looked when this Appearance would have spoke, but it was passive, and
silent, only pleasant in its Countenance, who on a sudden withdrew. Then again
was a presentation of a Person in a middle Stature, comely, sweet, and amiable
for attraction; yet I being bounded in my Spirit, was hindered: otherwise I
could have run with my Spirit into him. After this I was drawn, to consider in
my Mind of this threefold Appearance. Then it was thus spoken in me, thou have
Imagically seen the threefold degree of the Immaculate Life-Birth-Growth, which
it must reach in you, who are designed to Personate your Jesus in his full
grown state here upon the Earth. It is a high Prerogative to attain to all
these Degrees; for where is there any in this last Age past, or present, that
have seen my ancient Prophecy made good, which is, that there shall not be in
my City and Mountain of Holiness, an old Man, that has not fulfilled his days;
that is, has not reached to the express Degree, of me their full grown Head.
Many indeed have in my Birth been Quickened, and their outward Figure been
extinguished before they have brought forth the Life into visible
Manifestation. Others again have attained to the Breaking forth, so as that
they have seen, and handled the Word of Life, but still in the Infancy of days.
Others may have reached so far, as that Youthful state, which was in the first
Idea shown to thee. In which as in a Glass, ye may see your own present state.
But oh here you are not to stay, or trifle out your time like Children to play
it away; but now putting away all Childish knowledge and understanding, to grow
now in every part, from my vigorous Heart's Birth, infusing its strength
through you, and growing up to that complete Structure and Image which is after
God, in the Perfection of Holiness. Know ye, that you cannot tell, till you
come into the strong Man's state, what ye shall be able to do, work, and act.
You will find Power and Might from a full grown Body, to subdue and bring all
Creatures and Worlds under: in which will consist the great Sovereignty of my
Kingdom, that comes into none, till they know the second remove, into the Young
Man's understanding Degree; through which the World is conquered, as it stands
in the Property of Sin, and in its enmity to God. Come up my Children dear, let
me meet you, growing up in this second Birth Degree, perfect, pure, and clear,
then I will appear to you in my Last grown state, in my Ghostly Body, which
when you see, not only like to me, but that ye be the same with me in it, then
ye shall see the days of the Son of Man. For the Ascending Might is to bring
down this Dove flaming Body, Saphire-like. Which is the only defensive Weapon
of War, that will make all Spirits stand in awe of you, and the glittering
Sword of the Spirit out of my Mouth shall make all your Enemies backward for to
fall. By me ye shall trample, and miraculously over them, as ye knit Power with
Power, and Might with Might, from this Body of Light, which fed is from the
Blood of my Life. You now hereby do see, what the Hope of your Calling is: be
hourly exercised herein, work hard in the Fiery Furnace, which is kindled
within; out from which you may expect that pure, strong, bodied Spirit will
come, which will really translate you into the Mount Sion state, with me your
beloved Dove-Mate.

May the 25th. 1676. A Vision which I saw in the Night.
This appeared as I was walking in a green Pasture, with one or two with me
only for repass, suddenly within a Bowshot there was manifested a pleasant calm
Sea, which seeming so near, I said to them with me, Come, let us go and set
down by the side of it: where I also saw a heap of Precious Stones, and I heard
a Voice say, There is a great Treasure, and Valuable Things are there hid. Then
I resolved thither to make with all speed, but when I came to set forward,
neither I nor they with me could go; there were such Bogs and Quicksands, that
none of us durst adventure. For somewhat reflected, and said in me, You cannot
go till you be shod with the Golden Sandals: these you must have, before you
can set sure footing to go over to this Ocean Sea; therefore stay a while, and
provide them, and then you will not sl^de. Considering this in the Morning, and
knowing that all Presentations of this Magical Nature, have their certain
Effects, which I have observed ever since I came under the Discipline, of the
Word of Wisdom; who has been my Glassy Eye, to spy out things within that
Ocean: and having now from this new subject, matter to exercise my Spiritual
Senses, in laying aside the Garment of my outward Sense, which to the
Intellectual Understanding is the great Impediment; the Glass which represented
these things, became altogether Clear in me, so that in seeing I did see; being
divested of all outward Covering. For which Cause, the Spirit of Wisdom does
take advantage, when the External Reason is laid asleep, and the Animal Sense
drowned, even then by Internal Idea's to manifest the Objects of the Inward
Worlds: Which was God's method for the discovery of his Mind, in foregoing
Ages, or by any other way, for the busy working of the Astral Mind of Reason,
is the greatest Let to Divine Vision: this I can give witness to. Therefore
this Command I often have received, from the Most Holy Inspirator, to unstrip
her from her dark Leaden Body; which has not the true Organ of Sight. The
holy, bright, Aerie Spirit can admit of no such clog; it is like Readiness Armor,
to the nimble, sprightly David, it must be thrown off. For there is for this an
absolute necessity for such, as will hold any free Parley, and Conference, with
their now glorified Jesus, they must come to be in the Spirit, as John was,
when he in Vision saw and talked with him, who was for that time without any
touch, or feeling any weight of his gross Corporeal Senses, for he dyed out of
them, as he says, he was as one dead, which made way for the opening of this
New World's Scene, and unclasping that Book of Revelation, which before was hid
and concealed.

But here rises an Objection, Who can fall into such a Trance, and Sleep at
any time when they would enjoy such close free manner of Communion with the
High Principality of Glory?

The Eternal Word of Wisdom does give this Answer to this Query. True it is,
that no Natural Person can fall into this Divine and Spiritual Lethargy, so as
to still, and quite suspend all operation of the Ratinoal Faculties; for
through these, the fallen Birth-Life moves, and acts and can never do Violence
upon it sel^ to seek its own Destruction, for this i^ most Unnatural. But where
there is another Life Birth introduced, and risen in opposition to this, and
that can prove its lawful descent, out from the Eternal Womb of the
Virgin-Body: This may take authority, and arise in its Magical Might, and
depress the Sensitive Life, that hinders, and clouds, and keeps one back from
these Seraphical Sights. Now I say to this pure Essential Thing, begotten by
the Holy Breath, and infused in, let that potent Will, which is free, enter in,
and be one with this pure Conception, then ye will soon master the Contrariety.
If at any time the Starry Birth in you should be unruly, then make use of that
precious Stone, which into your Custody is put, that can, and will, if put
forth, dash and crumble all into Dust, which shall henceforth, either within
thy own Precinct, or without, make attempts against this high Birth state:
Which grow must still, till it fills with Power every part, to act a Tragedy
upon the Serpent, and all his fallen party, that strives so hard, and would
have cut off the Tide and Stream, which from the Sea, thou did steer and run
so free, that no Gally could be swifter, then this strong Arm, which as a Boat
has wafted thee over: where now sit down, and wait upon my Love-Ocean Heart.

This seems to be a Digression from that Thing Represented, which is now
returned to, upon the Third Day after.

May the 28th. 1676.
I saw again in a Vision, a Stream from this pleasant calm Sea, of which I
mentioned, that for want of being suitably shod, we could not pass over to it:
which gave much Exercise to my Mind thereby, stirring up matter of Enquiry and
Intercession to my God, pleading from the Spirit of Jesus, why that Gulf
should remain, betwixt this Ocean-Treasury and us, Who had now declined, and
turned our Faces from all Things Terrestrial, that so we might come to possess
what Wisdom's Glass had opened of this Scene of Glory? This being the Matter of
my Contemplation, after which in the Night, falling into a Transical Sleep, of
a sudden I found my self in a Boat, that did run with the greatest swiftness,
that neither the Bogs nor Quicksands, which formerly I saw, could stop it. For
the Waters from the Sea had risen high over all, bringing me safe and secure to
this Seashore; where I was to sit down fixed, upon the Mountain of Precious
Stones, there to choose and pick out, what was of greatest value. And when I
came to my Spiritual Sense, waiting for the Interpretation of this Vision, it
thus spoke in me. The Ocean Sea which thou did see, does present God the
Immense Deity, who contains all full, rich, and weighty Substance and Treasury:
who by no Corporeal Spirit could ever be reached; for there was a Gulf and
Eternal Separation between, as this boggy miery Passage did present, thereunto:
But only by Sion born Spirits, whom I have seen in the true Sorrow and
Mourning, because hereunto they could no Path find, for sure footing, whereby
might be attained this rich Mine, where all the desirable Good does lie. Now in
tenderness and compassion unto thy sorrowful Spirit, this Arm and Stream has
risen, which represents thy Jesus, who from the Ocean-Love of the Immense
Deity, does to thee flow to bring thee back to the Head-Fountain, where thou
may come to know God the Holy Ghost, covering thee as the Waters do the Sea:
till when upon this Jesus fix, who this lovely Mountain of all Precious
Substance is. Where be thou sure now to look, turning over every Stone, till
thou come to find that only Sapphire Stone, which will change gross Metals,
into bright transparent Gold, and shine through dark Bodies a flaming Light.
These things presented are to the Eternal Eye so to speculate upon, as thereby
thy whole Mind may be transmuted over hereunto, in order to the fulfilling of
what in Vision thou have seen.

May the 29th. 1676.
O how unutterable was it? What Joy did I feel upon this secret Parley, which
my dear Immanuel, whose Words like Butter and Oil did distill, so that hereby
was lifted up the Banner of my Hope, that possibly we might yet live to see the
Day of the Holy Ghost; who out of his Mountain-Treasury is for to come, to put
an end to all Sin, and mortal frail Impotencies, under which we do yet groan,
looking and hastening for this Perfect Thing to come, which will restore us
perfectly to our Angelical State. Even so, blessed Dove and Bride break up this
in us, who are waiting here upon this Ocean shore, for this new Springtide. Oh
let it open upon us wide, and we will not be afraid, though it shall violate us
away from all visible Ties, from which we do now see we must be parted and
separated. For we can never see thee, till we do withdraw out of gross
Corporality, that so clothed we may be with Jesus, that Celestial Body; who is
our Bridal Garment, of which we shall not be ashamed, when God our King shall
call us to view, and examine, who the prepared Brides are, for the New
Jerusalem Marriage, to which we now are summoned.

May the 30th. 1676.
This Day upon some occasion ministered from the outward Astrum of this World's
Principle, was stirred up a secret embroil, that for some space of Time I was
held out, so as I could find no entrance for my Spirit among the Seraphick
Quire, where my Attendance was required Morning by Morning, to hear and learn,
for my further Instruction, in the Eternal Magia: Which I felt as a deep bundle
of Life-Treasury beginning to open. But such a wise, subtle, pure, swift Breath
or Mist it is, that it shuts up, and does withdraw, so soon as any thing of a
Mortal Sense upon it does fly. It is such a high glance of Magisterium, that it
will refine out of all gross, fleshly kinds whatever. No parley with External
matter, this unknown Power will endure, as my dear Inspirator has anew showed
unto me, and has given me caution not to prevent its Descending, by mingling
the Will-Spirit, who is chosen for its Mare, with any low inferior sense of
things, which may grate upon it. Whoever comes to be highly Learned in this
Philosophical Art, must be trained up from their Spiritual Birth Infancy, and
hereupon wait continually for to know. For the Divine Spell is a Mystical
Thing, and of that principal weight, as the whole Mind, Will, and Heart, must
hereunto be engaged: and all is little enough to turn this Cherubim Wheel of
the Magia still about. For which you must after the manner of a Spiritual grown
Body, labor hard, till ye have the Mystery of this Art fully attained. It is
beyond all things, that ever yet was named. Therefore strive hard for it: but
ye who are yet but young in this Art, may be ignorant, what kind of Stock you
are to work upon; know then to thee this Mystical thing I will reveal, that
thou may not the Nature hereof Mistake. It is an Immaterial Nothing, and yet
gives Being and Existency to All things; moving and piercing through the whole
Body of the Creation, yet not discerned; generating all things anew, through a
Virtual Life quickening Breath: this comes in and goes forth without Sound and
Noise. It is communicable only to such, as have covenanted, and firmly bound
themselves, to be made by it Wise, Subtle, Pure, Spiritual, Discerning also in
all Sublimities: whereby proof may be given what Magical Coals of Fire are
kindled, that ye may scatter and make to fly, as directed by Wisdom's Eye. Of
this ye may know yet more deeply, as ye from this Holy Root still weed out all
light and scruffy matter.

May the 31st. 1676.
In the Night I was as on a sudden surprised with a round Ball of Light, that
fixed it self upon a Post or Pillar, which seemed to be on each side of me, and
wherever I went, they moved with me, very lustrious and shining as a Star in
a Cloudy Night; I could go no where but they circled about me, the Light was
terrible, but not hurtful; yet pleasant to the single Eye, that was opened.
This in way of Vision was given to espy; and immediately after, this Transient
Sight passed away, and that Scripture opened upon me, Isa. 40. in these words,
The Lord shall be to thee an Everlasting Light. which shall drown and swallow
up all fore going Day-breaks, which have had their several Sun-risings in thee
by degrees, which are true and good in their Day, But behold, here is yet a
Prophecy, to be fulfilled, which shall be as the Light of Seven Days put
together. What or who shall be able to live, and walk in such a Firmament of
Light, where there will be no Intervenings of any shade of Night? Know then
there is such a holy conceived highborn Being which yet is clouded under
inferior Lights, and subjected to them for some Season; till it has
accomplished the first working Properties of the Seven Days Creation. Wherein
Day and Night must by their Proper, Sun and Moon be governed, and all
transacted according to the motion of the Planets, the Out. Birth being under
their control, in the divided state betwixt the Day and the Night: sometimes
it is light, and sometimes dark; one hour is Spiritual and Heavenly, the next
Carnal and Earthly. But to this, God in the Lamb, who is that one Everlasting
Day, is now coming to put an end, as to the first Creation-Light, in such who
have ceased from those Works, that have been wrought by the Sun and Moonlight,
of the fallen gloomy Day, which has overspread the whole Creation. Out from
which ye are assured to come, and to sit down under the bright-shine of this
uneclisped Body of the new Creation-Light. Hereto coming once to fix, your
former Sun and Moon will blush, and for very shame-pull in their Heads, and all
their twinkling Stars will forth with withdraw; as ye shall surely see, when
you will find your selves in another Orb, for enclosed ye shall be with the
Seven Lamp Spirits before and behind, which are the Light of the seven days New
Creation out of Sion, to hold parallel with the Seven Days Creation in
Paradise. Which abolished must be, and whose Sun must set, at the rising of
this sevenfold Sion. Glory, which to the Lamb's Birth will anew open, and upon
it rest. For which great thing ply your God and Father hard, that so ye may in
this bright Cloud of Glory, be carried up out of sight, from all Terrestrial
Lights. By which ye ^ould by no means come to behold Eter^al Objects. But in
this Light of the ^verlasting Bride, ye can see into every Mountain of the New
Jerusalem, as your own native Country; from which driven and scattered into
this mixed state between Day and Night, while standing thus, indeed ye could
never find Mount Sion's Path. For Paradise is to this but as a glimmering
Glowworm: not a City that had Foundations was ever erected there, which
plainly declares, the Most High had not his fixed Residence there. For out of
Sion the whole Majesty of the Trinity will shine, by which Light ye can only
see your way for Return unto your lost home. Oh^ the excessive Joy which
Paradisical Inhabitants will know, who can the conquering Gulf get through,
and com^ into this Jasper-like City, where sigh^ and fruition of God, the
Bride, and the Lamb, produces most unutterable pleasure, beyond what Adam,
though h^ had continued in his first Image of P^rity, could not, without a
remove, t^ such kind of Felicities as these eve^ have reached. Now then I say
to yo^ upon whom this Light has glance^ keep your constant Pace with it clos^
and follow hard upon it, and doubt no^ but it will bring you to that pure Whi^
Throne, of your everlasting Dove Brides in the Heavenly Cirle to ride.

June the 1st. 1676.
AFter the Opening and Interpretation of the Vision of the Globes of Light,
that moved with me, wherever I went, a Voice run through me, crying, The End
of all Things is at hand: Watch therefore and Pray. Upon which Word I pondered,
and drew near in my Spirit to that burning Center, from which the Voice did go
forth, where I did further sound the meaning of that Cry, which ecchoed still,
saying, Come and see, the first created Light begins upon its Eclipse to be.
For the evil corrupted Birth of Life, had sent up such Fumes, and Unsavory
Incense, as must needs darken the first Heavens and Earth, that away they must
flee before the New Foundation-City ye can enter into. Therefore to thee, let
it not seem harsh or terrible, that an end of all things, which came in through
Mortality of Time, is determined: for absolutely despoiled of all false,
glittering vain Glory and Light must be that City, which is only built upon a
Sandy Foundation: Which has indeed, according as it is written, deceived, and
made drunk all Nations, with its adulterated Wine. As the Heavenly City is
compacted, and made up of choice, pure, polished, and living Stones; so again
is Babylon of dark, muddy, course, and earthly Metals, ponderous Bodies,
Inhabitants that know an higher Sphere. Out from which I am with a strong
mighty Hand bringing you my Elect Stones, therefore up, have out, and fly away
upon the Wing of my Eagle-Spirit, touch, taste, mingle no more with her
Sorceries: a new state and place is prepared for you. Scorn and deny all her
charming Delicacies, for Vials of Wrath upon all will be poured out, that are
in combination with this Harlotry City, though it be as a Mountain at present,
that has filled the whole World, and enticed its Inhabitants with her Whorish
Attire, yet in one hour all shall blasted. Therefore with fear, draw off
others, whom you see yet in her strongholds do stay, that have not their Eyes
opened their danger to see, in holding such mutual Compliances, with that which
is so subtle and deceivable. Of which cease not to warn them practically, as
Noah did: when he his Ark prepared, and went into it, then all the World did
lie in their Unbelielf, which was a Figure of what is now approaching nigh,
though after another method. For the second Revelation will now work, and an end
of all Flesh, as Grass is come before the Alpha and the Omega.

June the 20th. 1676.
Having suffered for some Space of Time a Protraction of those Emanations, and
wonted Manifestations, that still did meet me in my close and abstracted
Attendance upon that sweet Intelligencing Spirit of JESUS, it returned now so
much the more strongly upon me, to remind me of the Work and Calling, which my
Friend and I had so solemnly put our Hands to, even the Plow, which prepares
for the Seed of the Kingdom to spring forth, through the Spiritual Enclosure.
Which I well experience, is not to be given over until the end of the growth.
For when all in our Field shall white unto the Harvest be, then the Sickle or
Sword of the Spirit comes forth, to reap and gather us into the Everlasting
Storehouse, under the Care and Custody of our Forerunner JESUS. From whom I
had about this time many Calls, and Cautions, to strike up the Sail of Faith,
and to watch against all those subtle Spirits, which would break in to cancel
the Seals thereof, which are the Evidence of what is not at present seen, or
yet come to be enjoyed. Moreover it was shown me the Danger that we were in
this Particular liable to, through the least crack or breach upon our Faith's
Seal; By which alone the Magia works, and raises Powers from that Original
Might. Upon which Center there is yet such a strong Enclosure as no Creaturely
Being can break open; because its Signature is compounded and made up of all
contrary Properties, degenerating wholly from this mighty Engineer of Faith;
which works all through, and in, the Central Fire of Love. O who can here
work till fully uncloathed of the gross clothing of the Animal Sensitive Life,
so as to reach to this Original Wisdom and Might, which was existent in the
first Paradisical Adam; who lost it by the Sin entering in, and can only be
regained again, through the extinguishment of it, and the Dying out therefrom
Totally. Which gives a full Answer to those Objections, which so pestered my
Mind, and which I Recorded in Writing June the 5th. receiving Satisfaction now
again herein, upon a fresh waiting and inquiry. Which after this manner spoke
in me: Thy Queries, O searching Spirit, are to be resolved by and from the
manifold Wisdom; with whom all Secrets are hidden, until the Spirit of Faith
arise to find them out.

This having Opened during a Remove of the Doctor from the Author, was not
found in his Copy. Whence also the Objections herein referred to, upon the 5th.
of this Month, are not to be recovered; as neither is whatever else may relate
to this matter, during this Interval, until the last Day of this Month. That
which next follows, is likewise from the Authors own Hand.

June the 30th. 1676.
Wisdom. Now as to the Necessity of the Use of all thy Rational Properties, it
is good in its Kind, meet and suitable for the Degenerated Estate, to guide and
govern the Outward Terrestrial Man; as the Head Principality of this Visible
Kingdom, unto which Wisdom and Scepter all Nations do bow. But know thou
not, what it was that withdrew, as soon as this awakened and got the Headship?
Should I open thine Eyes to see all at once what came in hereby, thou would
not but disdain, and quite fall out with thy Rational Man, so as never to it to
be reconciled again. For the Coming in of That, was the Going out of the pure
Magical Might, and Power, which should have been retained after the Similitude
of God the Creator; who designed to Generate Spirits to live in his own
Property of Princely Purity and Power, to his Honor, and not to his and your
own Reproach; as is now too manifest. For, alas! there is now quite Another
Thing gotten in, then what was found in the Beginning: which Reason protects,
and is a Wall of Defense about, maintaining its Sovereignty without Check or
Control, so long as the Beasts Reign is to endure. Which shall be put an end
to by degrees, and first in some chosen Witnesses hereto allotted, who after
Sion's Freedom do at this time importunately look, and weary are of being
Tributaries to these Usurped Powers: From which nothing can you Totally free,
but Total Death, after that way of Spiritual Dying, which both Mystically and
Magically, by and through the Heavenly Constellations does operate. This is a
Death worthy of all Acceptance indeed, which at once shall put an End to all
Earthly Sense and Sin. Then room there is, O Soul, for the Superior Life to
come in, which shall reign, as God enthroned in Nature's Kingdom, that is
restored to its first Institution. First Breath then take, and saint not, but
forward to the Mount of Olives go: the Mountain is indeed high, to which you
are to ascend, but my holy Gales shall drive you on, that so you may come
thither to sup with the Lamb.

A Sheet is here wanting.
July the 8th. 1676.
THis Morning after some private Ejaculations to the Throne Majesty, this Word
came unto me, Will ye actually deny your Active Life, as you denied passively
your passive Life? Even that Life, which ye so often have decryed down, because
it is found in that room, from whence proceeds all Unbelief, and
Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, which naturally generateth those Essences;
from whence the Thoughts that are light and evil do spring. The great conquest
will be to put a stop to these, till thou have found the way utterly to
undermine, and for ever to bind them. Yet thou shall be allowed, warranted, and
justified, to stifle them, before they can come to a Birth. Though Reason may
tell thee, this would be as a new Entity, and that it would straitway overturn,
and overthrow thy breathing Existency; yet give thou not any ear to such
Objections that are cast in from that Principle; perhaps then no more in a
Creaturely Being thou can be known. Well, admit it, and suffer thy Creaturely
Self thus far for to expire, as to the imaginary Life, be assured that all
Peace and Safety hereby will accrue. For by this silent Vacancy, another Source
will open. All dyings thou have indeed gone through to this, which is the main
Head-Vein, which does lie so deep under Ground, thereby preserving under it
self hidden even from the Vultur's Eye. Oh this Original Root is that which
must be struck at: Up, and Out with it, and overturn it, and thou will see what
does lie in the depth beneath it, to wit, every precious thing; which without
care or toil, will voluntarily spring, when this imaginary Root is quite cast
out. For the croppings of this Evil Seed will never free thy inward Ground.
Come then and descend with me, and I will show thee where this Grand Enemy does
lurk, who unconceivably does send forth those dark Fumes, which has hitherto
prevented the overflowing Breath of the Holy Ghost. If then thou can not to a
cessation from every unruly motion come, which works from the Astral Spirit,
then try the Power and Might of that Spirit, which in thee does reside, and
cross these strong Tides, and through all break, and leave behind the Flowings
of Jordan, and look not back, but forward do thou pursue, and keep up to thy
Region high, and as an Eagle Spirit bear up most mightily, no more returning to
take up any weight of earthly stuff, which in the Imaginary Mind does lie. But
away, away, ascend with thy Jesus unto another Principality; where other
Presentations will all thy Senses employ, when once thou have forgot, and lost
this World, out of thy Eye and Heart. What other meaning do thou think those
Words do bear, which are upon old Records, which says, Except ye deny,
relinquish, and suffer the loss of that Life, which is bundled up, tied, and
knit together with the stringing Sinnews of the imaginary Mind, ye cannot enter
into Life, into the Life of God and Christ; which to know, is Life Eternal.
Therefore it is again said, That none can receive the Kingdom of God, till they
can come to be as a little Child, that is new born, who is passive, having no
thoughts of reluctance working, to hinder the opening the Everlasting Kingdom
of the Light, Joy, Love, Power and Peace. Would thou know why so few have got
entrance here? It is, because they could not untwist, nor get from under this
binding Cord of the Natural flowing Cogitations, which beset the Spirit every
way, holding it under a most slavish Captivity. Yet is it not perceived; but by
most it is believed, that this whirling Wheel must run round of absolute
necessity, and there is no way for it to be avoided, while subsisting in a Body
of Elementary Corporality. True, O Spirit, those who in this gross state only
care to be, do walk and abide with, and amongst those, which are of their own
likeness; relishing and corresponding with what does proceed from this unsavory
part. But from you, I your Lord, expect another thing, who have taken the Vow
of a Nazarite's Life upon you, invocating me so often, for a remove, and
translation, into the same Life and Liberty with me your forerunning President,
Now then, I must plainly make known to you the Mind of God and your Father,
which is to Famish all those numerous and multiplying Essences, which mutiny
against the Eternal Stillness and Eternal Nothingness, where the all sublime
Goodness, and Everlasting Rock of Power, is to be seen, felt, and known. Verily
this is the way, I can only describe to thee, and those, who the mark of this
high Calling would reach, and would be traffickers within the Holy City, which
is all Crystalline. Through which none can pass, that has the least Lumber of
imaginary stuff yet hanging upon him. Now weigh these Sayings, for they are
from the Yea, and Amen, who has good will to make riddance of all those
superfluous Thoughts, that have been as the gulf separating Principle. To
which thoughts by one act, God moving in the Mystery of the Fiat, yet once
again, will put an end quite to them. For a New Heart will be created, out of
which will flow continually such a choice Treasury, answering to the Sight of
the Flaming Eye.

July the 16th. 1676. A Vision of God's Flaming Eye.
This Morning as I was in my Spirit, let down into the deep Abyss, attending
the pure Openings, from that Central generating Source or Fountain Life; In a
moment there appeared to me an Azure blue Firmament, so Oriental as nothing of
this, in this Visible Orb could parallel with it. Out of the midst hereof was a
most wonderful Eye, which I saw Sparkling, as with Flaming Streams from it.
Which I am not able to Figure out, after that manner, in which it did present
it self unto me. But according to this Form it was, as much as I am able to
give an account of it, it was thus, or after this manner. There was a Flaming
Eye in the midst of a Circle, and round about it a Rainbow with all variety of
Colors, and beyond the Rainbow in the Firmament, innumerable Stars all
attending this Flaming Eye. From which the Word said, the Earth and Heavens
shall fly, and nothing abide, but what can live in this Eternal Eye, as
ministering Stars of Glory, before the Throne of him: who like to this Circling
Eye, which thou have seen, has neither Beginning or End.



A. The Eye. B. The Globe of Light. C. C. C. C. C. The Flames. D. The Rainbow.
E. The One Element. F. The Supercelestial Moon.
After this Word it disappeared, leaving its Flaming Influences upon my Heart.
And further of this secret Vision he did say, he would it impart, as I for its
Manifestation did wait: and the signification hereof should come to be
witnessed, by that rising Birth, which is called up to this Globe, among these
Stars to fix, in this more excelling Firmament.

July the 17th. 1676. The Interpretation of the Vision: or, of the Flaming Eye.
This Vision of the Flaming Eye is given for to see, that which is worth
pondering for thy pure Mind continually. For glorious Idea's will multiply,
that hereupon all thy Senses may be employed, in such sweet Rarifiedness,
wherein there is no danger of Excess. While this Vein from the Heart of God in
thee does run, it will feed that which does come from the pure Font, and hereby
stop the running issue of the Imaginary part. Which I will assure thee will
complete the Victory, because it strikes at Sin's Originality, which had its
beginning from the Conceptive part of the Heart, there it came it, and there it
must be banished out. Then it will be a New Heart, in which the Flaming Eye
will fix; Which in Vision thou did see, with its innumerable Stars in the
Firmament, which are generated from this Globe-Eye, so unmerously will holy and
pure Cogitations from hence arise, and so habitual strong and forceable, as to
out-pass all strange Essences, that would come therein again to lodge.
Therefore within this Circling do ye abide, that so you may keep out all evil
Motions, which the Serpent knows are the Foundation-matter of his Kingdom, and
will sting you with them, if ye do not fully exclude them. Which ye no way can,
till ye hasten away, and with your Spirit fly to this bright Firmament, where
this Eye all Dangers will for you espy, and know all secret Mysteries, making
you wise in that one great needful thing; which will make all strait, that
crooked and out of the way is. For such is the property of this Fire piercing
Eye, that it will look through the Host of the whirling Imaginations, and put
them to a stop, that so they may not pursue, as to overtake those that are upon
Faith's flying Banner: on which keep, till it has brought you within Zion's
Gates.

This great and weighty thing concerning Cessation and Annihilation of all
fruitless Imaginations was still the Call within me, to come into the Believing
Rest, for that this was the true dying into Jesus; which passive Life is the
pure Mother, out from which the Birth of the God-acting-Life is to be expected.
For the Faith of the cooperating Power works here all in all. The New Heart
being replenished with ministering Powers suitable hereunto, that will perfectly
bring things to pass, as the Mystery is moved in its own Sphere, driving on by
the mighty force of this Birth of Faith. Which produces great and mavelous
things, according to the sublime Nature of it. For it has no other ground to
go upon, but the absolute Coeternal Deified Will, which Will wills in the
New created Heart as in its own Royal Seat.

July the 18th. 1676.
This Morning I was in great Heartsearchings about this precious Lily of Faith,
if I could by the sight reflecting from the Eternal Eye, it any where espy.
Querying thus with my Lord Jesus, Ah Lord, if the right Plant be in me, as it
was found in thee, why does it not act forth? Where are the Signs which should
follow, as the Seal of Believing? What makes the Birth of it stick thus long,
whose going forth must make way for the Holy Ghost? Tell me, Oh thou inspiring
Word, why has it had a Name to live, and yet has been as dead? For it has
not been Justified by such mighty Heroic Works as in the foregoing Ages did
bear witness to it. And this has made it as a Body without a Spirit, actless
and fruitless. Thus I earnestly expostulated, that if we had it existing in us,
then we might have skill to use and manage it, for the reviving of this worthy
and unknown thing, which has been a Stranger in the Earth, but is now a
stirring in our Heavens, and a turning up the Mould, that has from our Eye
this all-precious Grain hid. Where then does it lie? (said the blessed Alpha to
me) thou have to the heights for it ascended, and for it have sounded into the
Depths, but thy Aim has been too ^ort to reach it, and thy Eye too dim for to
espy it, though it is so nigh: Yet not known to any, till they do retain the
bright glance of the Flaming Eye, which has not only the specious Faculty, but
the streaming Power of Might, to bring back again this worthy Champion, that
has been by the combining Powers of Reason put unto flight. Which so soon as
Tidings come, that they are dead, who so wickedly have conspired against
Faith's life, then it will return again and appear on the Earth mighty and
supreme, to open the Door, for the Holy Ghost to enter in. Then this Mystery of
Faith will be finished: To which ye are directed, that by contending for it, ye
may obtain it unto Victory.

July the 19th. 1676.
As we this Morning were in our Spiritual operative Powers, each one bringing
forth out of the Treasury; the Doctor being much carried out upon the Subject
of Faith, it was spoken to me, This is the Ministry, which goes before to make
way for the Holy Ghost. And I saw, as a Confirmation hereof, a Flying Banner,
passing swiftly by, as a Trophy of Faith's Victory. Which each one must bear,
before the Day in which the Holy Power will shower upon us, till which in one
Spirit of Faith we were directed to wait together. After which also a Word run
through me, There is need enough to provoke each other hereunto. For the Day is
now nearer, then when first ye did set upon this Believing. Oh now let us go
through, that we may reach to all the Degrees of Faith, which will assuredly
make up our fallen Breach. For this is the Power that will make us all whole,
as the true Weapon-Salve, which is anointed by the Hand of our dear Jesus, to
smooth and make ready for the Flying Banner of the Holy Power, for to descend
into us, who in this Faith do wait, within the secret Gate of the New Jerusalem
state: where into by no means must we bring any Spirit that may make mutiny,
for to break the holy League, which must be still maintained with him, who is
the Covenant. Who hereby renews our Peace, and Joy, in believing without
annoy or staggering; which hinders the purchase of the Field, where the Pearl
is found, which Field is called Faith's Eternal Ground.

July the 24th. 1676.
In the Morning-Watch, this was first cast up upon the Shore of my Mind, by way
of expostulation with my Jesus, whom I felt hover over me with throng^ng Powers
of Love, as an Invitation for Discourse, after the manner of a Spirit, without
the noise of Words: This thing (...) say, was with me to offer in way of Query,
How it comes to pass, that after ^uch mighty high winged Prayers, and ^trong
Gales rushing in through them, ^s I had witnessed, but the Night before, in
such ascending strong Center-Raptures and Powers coming down, that yet the
Gulf was not shot through? That is the parting Principle, which still shuts
out the Spirit of the Bride, from her native home, where she may have power of
Command to act and bring down, what may make for renown to the Virgin Crown,
while walking up and down in these Earthly Bounds. My Spirit took all boldness
to know why it should be so fruitless in its Mediatorship now, over what it was
in foregoing times, when Prayer of Faith was, as a ready Messenger, to fetch in
whatever was wanting. I did lay hard upon the Mighty One, using the same
Arguments, as Dalilah did with her Sampson, how, O my Jesus, can it be, that
thou do love me, without thou show me a^ that is in thy Heart; that so I
may know where thy great Strength lies: and this by coming thereto, as thy
loyal Bosom Spouse, in whom thy Heart may rest in, without any suspicion, that
ever I will betray so great a Trust, if thou will but once reveal this secret
thing unto me? For I desire, I seek, I look only after this, to be united to
the Lock of thy Power, and Might, as a springing Plant from thy Godhead. Which
will give me all Power to answer to the present state requiring, which is made
up of nothing, but Sin and Self original, and Ill Consequences bundled up into
innumerable Grievances. So that verily I did see the whole visible fallen part
of things all putrified, unsound, unstable, weak, low, and poorly spirited:
therefore out of this deep sense, I could not but cry, Help, Oh help thou
mighty Prince and Savior nigh. For who do see themselves lie in this Golgotha
state, but are willing to take the Wing of the Everlasting Morning, and
herefrom fly to the Rock that has the Clifts of Munition, to hide all that are
weary of this loathed Place? Therefore with unutterable Sighs, and Requests, I
did this our deplorable, and defective state, beseech my Jesus to read over,
and to take away the Reproach thereof. For I argued with him, that if thus
Indigent we should still be, it would sure reflect upon the Lord our New
Covenant-Restorer, who nothing was to leave short or imperfect in those, for
whom he became an Undertaker to his Father, to bring them back again. After all
this on my part, by way of Spiritual Parley, this Word came unto me, saying,
Arise, arise yet, and wait; Why art thou jealous, that Love is wanting, or the
Arm of my Power abated, because I do not tell thee where the hiding of this
Lock of Strength is? I know, I know thy sore Longings of it for to partake with
me, that it might free thee from the fallen state: Which is in such Shame and
Derision, that thou can not lift up thy Head with any Confidence, because the
Accursed Thing is every where in and about this lower Sphere; where thy abode
is yet for to be, in Temptation and Fear: but faint not, thy Bridegroom is
near, who will the Shield of Faith anoint with the Oil of the Holy Ghost, which
will be Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, after all thy heaviness. The reason
why thy Praying, as to matters of so high a Consequence, has wrought so
little, is because Faith has been so dry, for want of the pouring out from on
High the Golden Streams out of the Oily Fountain, of the one pure Deity, which
would make all Prayer mighty and operative, when this Balsamic Oil does slow
from the Fountainhead.

July the 26th. 1676.
As my Spirit was Contemplating, after some Breathings forth in Prayer, these
Words came to me, To love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, is more then
all Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices; this is that which I prefer above all, and
to which I do look to in all that draw near to me with Love unfeigned, and with
a whole Heart transmitted over to me, and no part kept back from him that calls
for Incorporation of Hearts. That so there may be but one Heart of Purity, as
with thy Jesus in his Humanity. This Love is the Box of Spikenard opening
therefrom, whence thy God smells the sweet savor, from which the Curse
flies, and will be no more found to hurt, blast, or destroy the springing Vine
about the Walls of thy Mind: From which the Wine of the Kingdom will flow to
refresh the Heart, then shall you find you are not far from the Kingdom, that
consists in Love, Joy, and Peace.

Then followed upon this, that Scripture about the Ark, being sent away by the
Philistines. It was showed me, it would not abide with the uncircumcised in
Spirit, but Dagon would be smitten, and fall before it. For in contrariety, the
Wrath-Vial opened, and though the Philistines thought they had got the
Blessing, in regard they had heard and known what Victories and Salvations it
had wrought, yet it became a Curse, where they held it in Unrighteousness, and
in an unhallowed impure Temple, setting up other Gods equal and jointly with
it; which by no means would be endured. God will be All, or nothing at all: to
such as would retain his Ark-presence, in the mixed unsanctified Mind, there is
nothing but Gall and Wormwood to be found, instead of Sweetness. The
Ministration therefore that shall be afoot on Earth, must be all upon a New
Bottom, which is figured out by that new Cart that the Ark was put into, which
represents a new Heart, in which the immaculate presence of the Lamb will be
retained. No unconsecrated Uzzah must take hold thereof, but only the Hand of
Faith, and the Flaming Spirit of Love that yoaked are together, as strong and
able, without more addition of help, to bring this to its own place, within the
Vail and Tabernacle, where its Rest is to be. For the All-seeing driving Power
is with these two Kine, upon whom no breach shall be, as formerly, when the
rash Bethshemites that were not purified, looked into it.

July the 26th. 1676.
Again, this Word came to me from the Lord, Up, stay not here: the Ark, though
in the House of Obed-Edom, that is, in a Nazarite Heart, yea, here the Blessing
is not ever to rest and abide, but it must move forward; for there is yet much
Land to be possessed, which only the Eye within the Ark can spy. Therefore be
sure still to enquire at it, who can tell you where the most pleasant
Situations are: for to some the Lot may fall out to possess a more rich and
fruitful Soil than another shall, according to the donation of Royal Favor;
which in all Ages advances to Spiritual Dignity, according to the
determination of Divine Will. Oh it is worth seeking, to be enlarged with the
Borders of these Everlasting Habitations, to possess the utmost Bounds hereof,
which is a Joseph's Blessing: Who as thou may read in the History, Joshua
17. 15. grew so strong and great, that they would not be contented with one
Lot, though they had Beth-horan the Upper, and Beth-horan the Nether, which
was indeed a fruitful Soil: yet they pitched forward for the Mountain or
Forrest-Trees, which they by greatness of Power obtained above their fellow
Brethren. So now as thou growest strong, and encreasest in People, that is to
multiply till thou come to be of mighty force in Spiritual Powers, to
encounter with them, who would keep thee out of the Land of Blessing; thou must
come to Enlargement to the very utmost Bounds of the Everlasting Hills and
Mountains. And as there are seven Nations to War against and cast out, to
answer to these, thou may need the Seven Throne-Spirits, which will multiply
within thy Ark to an unconquerable Strength, that so all Enemies will be chased
and made to fly from before this sevenfold Eye. Which shall be thy Guide, to
see every way to bring thee up to the South Land, within the Borders of the
high Eternity. Therefore gird up, for as I was with Moses, so I will not fail
to be with that Joshua, who within thee is the Ark of the Almighty Strength,
that will go before thee. For as the Father was with me, so I will be with you
in this present Warfaring state.

This Word mightily raised my Spirit up, for it confirmed what went before, as
to the going on to possess, what was yet behind. For when we grow so nigh the
Kingdom, as to come to the matter of Possession, then Joshuah must arise in the
greatness of his Might, to fight the Battles for us. For the great and strong
Nations will come out with great fury against us, because they see they must
have no share in our Lot, but be totally cast out.

Question. Now in this great and last Battel-Engagement, What will be required
of us in order to Conquest?

Answ. It was shown me, that the rising Spirit of Faith in our Jesus, as an
incorporating Power in us, must go forth with the self same Word of Command,
that it did in Joshuah's time to command the Sun to stand still, and the Moon
to stop; that the first should not go down, nor withdraw its shining Strength,
neither the latter its meek, watery Brightness. For by the Light of this renewed
Day, where no Night can come to intervene all dark Reasonings, Doubtings, and
Fears are expelled, by the Majestic Light of Faith. How easy is it, I do see
to wage War in the Light of this Eternal Day, and then quite to overcome, and
get the mastery, and to subdue the five Kings: Which were presented to me, as
those five Senses,

Which are all armed for the Fight,
To maintain their Sensitive Right.
But so long as the Bow of Faith is in the Hand of our Jesus, we need not fear;
for he has said, He will make bare his Arm for us; therefore we need not fear
any of their Weapons of Cruelty. Let us now courageously War and Work while it
is Day, and the ^un of Power is thus shining upon us, to give us our
Possessions with and among the rest of the Conquering Worthies. In the Name of
Joshuah, the Jesus which is with us, let us move forward, for Jehovah's Banner
goes flying before us, till it shall bring us to Shiloh, where the Lots shall
be cast for us, and we rest in them for ever, according to the description of
our Star, Leader, and Seer: Even so Amen, dear Jesus.

July the 27th. 1676.
Oh then if ye intend to be the Arkdrivers, that so ye may bring it back again
to its own resting Place; consider how expedient it is, first for you to be
bathed in this Consecrated Oil, which has been to you presented; for who may
it dare to touch, but such as are scented with this spicy O^ntment, that so all
their Garments may give a good and sweet savor thereof. For this Ark being
retained in a clear washed Heart, in what variety of Birth Powers will it go
forth, and what fresh Testimonies? ^o which give all heed as to the true
anointed Oracle. For out of these Thundrings, Voices, and Glances of Light from
the Majesty will proceed.

While then I lay under the pouring down of these sweet Breathings forth from
my dear and familiar Jesus, sighing, after the accomplishment of them, as never
thinking I had enough of these Love-Emanations, I saw a sweet amiable Person,
in a solemn manner presenting himself to me, saying, I am he that hears thy
Mournings, who am included in thy Suffering, and Sorrows, as thy true Dove
Mate, sympathizing with thee: but behold this state shall not always be, but
thou shall arise with me into the high Dimensions of the All-circulating
Kingdom of Light. Then appeared after the vanishing of this Personal Humanity,
a bright Glance without any Form, but only an overshadowing Light, which left
this Word with me, This is that Light, Strength, and Majesty, that rises over
all the dark mourning indigent Life. Here thy state is presented twofold, first
as the Ark floating up and down upon the Delug^, not come to its resting place,
till the Eternal Dove-Spirit brings it up to the Burning Mount of God, where
the Flaming Glance of Light is perpetually generating, so as in this great Body
of Light, thou with me shall live to act, according to the Energy of the
Father's Will in the All-Spirit of Might. Come on now if ye would of my High
Calling be, and therein actually employ your selves, then no more stand
halting, looking with a double Eye, as part upward, and part downward. Since
this will never complete your business, Up ye, make you my fellow-workers in
mighty Deeds, till you come to take to the One only thing; for Diversities be
great stops and hindrances to the attaining of this Practical Part. Sowers ye
have been, throwing here and there in various Fields with many Seeds, but this
has not yet turned to that great account, which I design to bring about for
you, if ye will abandon all other Callings, sticking and Binding you^ selves
over to me, for the learning of the one high gr^nd Mystery. Which I cannot
teach you, till coming to be ever with me, ye behold and see after what manner
I do manage those Works of Trust, which concur for the full Manifestation of
God's Kingdom in its lustrous Power and Glory. Have not I often heard your Cry,
for this Kingdom to be revealed, which cannot be, till you come to enter into
the Holy Calling of the divine working Properties, which are variously
manifested, according as in the Glass of God's Wisdom is known. The one great
and principal Instrument to turn, wind, move, and ^ct all by, is the strong
Arm, and nimble swift Spirit of Faith, to whom nothing will be hard or
mysterious to find out This H^nd of Faith has an Eye, that is fi^ed in the
Palm of it, so as it has a piercing Sight, to see what was, is, and must
further be yet wrought, till the whole Science of the Eternal Mystery shall be
understood and wrought out. Here then is required to learn of thy Jesus all
that, which was acted forth in his Hum^nity, there has been a great default,
and hanging off as if it were a Criminal thing to expect, or make out for the
same Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, whereby the same Life might reign in
Power again. Whereas much more is to be looked for, because he that was dead,
lives evermore to see greater things, then those now to be accomplished in
them in this Age, that in the unfeigned Faith, and steady Eye shall search deep
to know, what their part and share with him will be, in that most high and
singular Profession. Which none can come to imitate till truly simplified as
newborn Babes. Oh that is the great thing, to come to be little again,
pretending to know nothing, but as its Knowing shall proceed from that Prophet,
which is risen to destroy and nullify all other Traditional Teachings. Which
are far too short to find out what in the Arcanum of the Holy Ghost does lie
hid, which will open the Heavenly Depths. Whereof a Witness thou may be, if
thou can stop thy Ears to those many false charming Cries; of which beware,
lest thou be swayed by the Multitude. Who will assault the Will of thy potent
Might, which is, as in the place of Pilate, that has power to reserve or
release, to kill or save alive. Take heed of Pilate's Spirit, who fearful is to
displease, the great thronging outcry of People, thereby preserving Barabba^,
the seditious, false and faith-murthering Life; to crucify Jesus, the
inspirating Word of Truth, and Spirit of Prophecy. If thou make this Choice,
and be only owning its Authority, then he will be free to train thee up, to
know every degree of the High Calling, which may make thee of mighty ability,
when once fully understood. Fear not, but it shall surpass, and outvy all low
Earthly Employs, that hitherto have vaunted high, above all that is called the
New Creation working Property. But now arise I will and set afoot this new
Mysterious Calling, that has not yet been understood, but it shall be revealed
only to those, who shall be thus wise in Heart, to suffer their Ears to be
bored through, so as my Counsels to hear, and retain, without demurr or doubt.
Thus and after this manner did I hear the Bridegroom's Voice, sweetly alluring
to impress his own likeness, which gave me boldness, to retort back again upon
him with the freeness of Espoused Mate, to offer what lay upon my Heart. Oh
thou Celestial Joy of the Internal Part, how is it that thy Calls are thus day
by day renewed? What more is to be done, till thou the working motion in Nature
do absolutely raise anew, to be all in all in mighty Supremacy, according to
the moving of the last finishing Mystery that God the Holy Ghost may expressly
swallow up all our Mortality. Thou have said, We have long enough dwelt in the
first Mount, and bid us pass on, till we this Day of the Bridal Glory see, but
have not shown me when or how it must be obtained? or who they are that shall
the first Fruits here bring to thee? Oh! I want a clear and full description
hereof, my dear Jesus. Then should I be of one fixed Mind, and delivered from
all Jeopardy, if once sealed up, to be privy to the Secrets that still are shut
up within thee; Who must be the Revelation of that, which my Spirit has
desired with desire to see, before I lay aside the Corporality. Oh! now then in
plainness declare to me the Particulars of my High Calling, which thou have
said we must follow thee in.

July the 28th. 1676. Here follows that which opened upon this my Inward
Communing with the Spirit of the LORD JESUS.
True, O Soul, I have strongly moved thy Will toward me, yet thou art upon the
Jealousy, as if I kept much hid from thee. Now as to that thou must be
subjected, and always allow me my prerogative to open, and to shut, to reveal
or to conceal, who know my own Times and Seasons best, when and to whom to
break open my Seals, that so knowing in my Book of Life, who those may be that
shall persevere, and look not back, but are waiting for the fulfilling of all
my pleasure. But know that to thee much has been given, the Dew has lain upon
thy Branch, while others have been dry, and thy Fleece has been watered: and
yet thy expectation may be much more abundant in, and from him, who is the
Alpha and Omega. Who is now from Heaven revealed, for this end, to instrnct
you, who are seeking to be fellow workers with me, for the bringing to pass
that which will Crown the Love Laborers herein, who can with me endure to bear
the burden and heat of the Day: then for a Reward, expect the Golden Penny
will come in the Mouth of the Dove. Who then will make all Labors to cease,
for the Everlasting Gospel will run through those who shall give themselves to
be faithful Workers. Therefore be apt, wise and diligent now to every Rule,
which shall be revealed unto you, who have chosen the same Calling with me, and
you may know Effects answerbly.

The first Rule. You are called out of this Babylonish Country, into the Land
of Immanuel, where in the first place you are to learn the Language of that
Country, among the Divine Magicians and Spiritual Natives there: and then in
the next place to understand the Manufactory, how to deal and traffic in that
high Merchandise of the Pearl of the Kingdom, with all the Precious Stones of
value, as the Bdellium and Onyx, which this Land does afford.

The second Rule. You are called to Trade from that Stock, and Golden Coin,
which bears my Image and Superscription; that will procure all the Precious
Goods of this Heavenly Country. For it is Expedient that you should be made
skilful in, and understand all these weighty Things, that may be serviceable to
your self, and those that are in the same Calling and Vocation united with you.
And I would not have you, after the Manner of the World, to go on Trust, upon
another Talent, but to Improve your own, which I have committed to you.

The third Rule. Seeing now your JESUS has furnished you with a good Stock,
the Golden Mine being set open to you, you may Adventure to Buy, and to lay up
in Store as a true Joseph, the sevenfold Increase of the Corn of Heaven; that
in all times of Famine, may replenish thee with all the Heavenly Family, that
in this High Calling numbered with thee shall be.

The fourth Rule. Now further on thou must proceed, till thou reach to a larger
Patrimony yet, which is to Adventure upon that Vinyeard, which enclosed is with
Love's Flaming Wall, where the Red Wine does flow out of the Grape. For this
also thy Purchase must be: Vessels prepare thou not a few, for it will run,
till thou can no more find to bring.

The fifth Rule. Now all this Treasury Embarked must be, and quick Sail upon
the Floating Sea, which is the pure Love-Deity, must have: and here fear not to
be robbed by any Pirate, while I your Pilot shall present with you be, to Land
you safe upon your Spiritual Goods here, and taking New Lading in, to make
still fresh Returns, for the Universal Profit and Benefit, to all those that
have Dependency, and Need of such Relief.

Afterward this Manuduction ceasing, another opened in this wise:

July the 29th. 1676.
This Night I was much in Prayer and Contemplation, according as the Center
cast up variety of Spiritual Matter to exercise my Internal Powers, as
sometimes offering this and that, for to be resolved in by the Word of Wisdom,
Which I knew was nigh unto me. Then finking down into the unknown Deep, where
the unmixed thing might open, which I did both feel and hear, even to a Soul
satisfying pleasure; this Word spoke to me thus; (as in all Cases and Matters
of doubt) Whither should ye go, have not you found, that within you is the Ark
of Enquiry? To which ever more do you give great heed, which shall fill all
your Treasures, that so no Famine of the Food of Life shall ever be known in
your Habitation. For the Tree thereout will spring, whose Fruit is ever
thereupon to be found, because its Root is in Oily Ground, all from the depth
beneath, answering to the Fountain from above, which meets together in the God
of Love, from whom the Word of Truth does richly flow.

July the 30th. 1676.
This Day being filled with great Zeal, Love, and Power, finding Faith mightily
raised to believe that some good thing was nearer to be revealed to us that
were diligent and servent in Spirit; While we were met together in our private
Exercises, the Powers did open and stir. In which interim, I saw in the Spirit
of my Mind, one in the Figure of a Man, but not in gross Corporality, but
rather like a Seraphick, or as a fl^ming Body, pouring out a Vial of Oil in the
color of Amber, upon our Heads. Which Sight was a satisfying Resolve to the
large and big expectation, for the pouring out of the Spirit. This Word
attending it, wait still, for with this ye are to be filled, preserve it pure
in your Vessels, and it shall never cease to run, so long as your Needs
require. For this is the inspirating Power, that will fill with Ghostly Might
to do the Father's Will. Great Michael-like, who may proclaim, that he is come
to give, and shed abroad of this Oil, that will give Light and Joy, all full
and sweet.

August the 5 th. 1676.
THis Morning I heard this Word, saying to me, Ye have compassed this Mount
long enough. Which was opened to me further, as thus, you have gone your
Rounds, and are come unto the measures of the Second Temple-Worship, which is
the Holy Place: ye are compassing the most Holy City also, which is the higher
Court, but ye have not yet found entrance into it. But now to this Holy of
Holies draw you near each one with his Golden Trumpet, and do not fear; for the
Oil of Faith must run, to make a clear and certain Sound, at which the Heavens
may rend and open wide, that ye may read and see, what within the most Holy do
lie. Now as you have served in the due order and course of the New Testament
Ministration with an Eye to what this will bring up further into. For the Ark
of this Covenant can rest in no place, till it be fixed in the beloved City,
which presses hard until it comes to the Rivers of Broad Waters, that run
pleasantly within Mounts or Walls. Which is that restless rising, that ye feel
stirring, that makes after its own place. Now as you have been upon your daily
Offerings and Services, in this second place of Tabernacle-Service, which for
its time during, ye have done well to obeserve, yet from hence you must make a
Remove, to a more excelling Habitation. Where you may come to possess, what
Prophecies, Prayers, Revelations, and Faith expectations have hitherto detained
you in. But you will say, how shall we arrive hereunto? for this is a great and
wonderful state, we know not, whither it may be decreed for our Age? As to this
matter of doubt, consider there is no date of Time determined, though known and
seen in the all-knowing Eye of the Detty, when and upon whom the Godhead Power
shall descend and ascend, to fu^fil all general and particular Revelations and
Prophecies. Therefore here is all Liberty and Scope for Faith to stretch forth,
and put in for its right, having a Propriety in this high and super-eminent
thing, according to the free donation of Grace, which has and shall still
abound toward thee. Now then be assured, that no Bar shall stand before you,
that ye may not summon in, and call up Power to break down whatever is
Opposite, so that ye may raise the Eagle-Body by Spiritual Force and Might,
that only can mount up to take this worthy Prey, that shall decide all
Controversies, that do arise to cast in fear and doubt. Awake, call up, and
gather together all those Celestial Powers, which within thy Heavenly Orb do
dwell; For they must go forth as the Lord's Hosts, in their Day, to lay close
Siege, and by a wise Spiritual S ratagem to scale the Walls of the most Holy
Place, that so thou may have entrance; for it is allotted, that by mere
Conquest, the Prize within this City will be taken. Now then raise up all the
Internal Force, you are able to make, and set upon storming it violently,
sounding forth the seven Trumpets, from all the Seven-Throne Spirits; which are
fi^led with Oily Power, and will be of mighty conquering force, to Alarm down
that last reserved Almighty outgoing Breath, which does bring absolute
Sovereignty in all Heavenly (...), renewing that Eve^lasting Morning, which
from the Ancient of Days did spring, when all the Sons of God shouted for Joy,
and as Stars of Glory did si^g, knowing nothing then of Mortality or Sin. To
which state ye, by this Life-quickening Ghost, are to be reduced again, that so
in the Primi^ive Angelical Figure, you may appear, as mighty O^es to act,
according to what you have by Conquest obtained, within this Seraphick Kingdom,
through Love's violent onset. Where ye shall then be confirmed Denizons, having
all freedom to exercise your Heavenly Calling with me your Jesus, having
faithfully fought for your Corporation-Liberty, serving out your time in the
Faith and Patience, according to the Father's Will. Which for a Recompense the
holders out are to be endued with all Power, Dominion, with that unknown
glorious Liberty, which shall empower you, all Wonders for to declare, by that
Living Word, which was, is, and will arise up in this sparkling, consuming,
all-acting, dividing Flame; that is come to melt down every Metal, and to try
which and which is sound, because nothing but pure Gold for this Profession
will hold, or shall the Seven Trumpets in the Hands hold, thereby to ascend
into my upper Sheep fold, where all my Lambs are clothed with Fleeces of the
most fine Gold. Therefore now, Oh my Friends, see who they are that must ascend
up hither to me; Lo, I have the Way disclosed, yet to you more full and free,
that so you may rise up, and go forward, greatly Conquering till that ye may
come to the Seventh Trumpet Compassing about. Which Seventh Compassing, makes
all Gates within the Pavilion of Light open for to fly, that the desired
Throne-Majesty you may there espy. Which I know will suffice, and please your
Eye, when in my Glorified Nature you shall be able to great with boldness, the
Father of Spirits and Glory; having upon you my tried Golden Fleece: without
which ye will be speechless, but with it ye have all freedom to commune, and
with your God to talk, and to have place evermore with him to Sing the New
Jerusalem Hymns, which flow out most naturally from the Seventh Conqueror, who
is brought up hither to hear the great Last Shout.

August the 12th. 1676.
I did hear from the Angelical World great and mighty Sounds round about me,
with one distinct Word, saying, Behold him, who descends upon the White Throne.
Who are there ready with their Garments washed clean and white, thus to meet
their Jesus. Which Word or Alarm cast me into some Fear and Despondency, being
conscious that I was not clothed with such a perfect White Robe, as might
answer to that White Throne; for to such only was this Call to.

Q. Therefore what must now be done for us that we may straitway find our
selves here enthroned?

The Reply was this, Oh fear not; remember how Joshuah's filthy Garments were
taken off, and then he could stand before me; even so it is decreed; and an
express Charge is given to your Guardian Angel, to uncloath and pluck off your
Purple Robe of Sin, Ignominy and Scorn. For there is yet reserved one principal
White Robe, which yet was never seen; but the Body upon which it is put, must
be all Immaculate, for it will be no Covering to any polluted thing, because it
is pure and transparent throughout. Be of good cheer, for this also is with me,
who want not Love, Power, and Strength to bring this great translation about.
As for your Spiritual Adversaries, whom I see so vigilant, they shall never
tire out that Spirit of Faith; which shall be animated still by that Word that
rises fresh and new. Keep but your Faith me, and I will from all Viper Spirits
secure you, that no hurt shall be to you, though their Scorpion Tongues would
send forth Anguishing Fire to detain you, if possibly it were in their own
hellish dark Sphere, which shall fly from you, as you fixed be, to desert all
but what can enter with you into this bright Ivory Throne of the
Everlastlasting Deity. Whereto I now expressly charge you, to put all things in
order hereunto, and be most free for the Unbodying your selves; that I may see
no more a vile Nature upon you, who am come my self to be your Body. For no
other will this unmixed Garment fit being spun out from the Golden Fleecee,
which is all of the working Power of he Holy Ghost, who interweaveth it in
great variety, with bright Oriental Golden Clouds: For to express, that this is
^he clothing of Sovereignty, and Righ^eousness, in which I will avouch you
before the High Throne-Majesty, my all fair Spouse, and Bride: Who may sit with
me on my White Throne, freed out from all former Slights and Contempts. Until
this state of Zion-Beauty shall appear, watch, and keep Company only with Lilly
Spirits, feeding upon the Olive-Berries, that grow upon the Mountains of
Bether, whereby you may become all lovely and fair, ready and meet for this
high Princely decking. Wearing your present Garments so loosely, that so soon
as I call, ye may let them fall, though you may think there ^s something good,
which is not to be parted withal, as to that be not concerned, for what is
pure, and has been tried by Fire, shall still endure, all serving to make up
One entire, and perfect Body, which shall be for a more sublimated use and
service, then what ye have hither served in, when under the Law of Sin; but now
are ye under another denomination, as Spirits made free, to walk in White
Garments, within the Celestial Globe of Light. Where now we enjoy each other in
Spirit, but there is yet a superaddition of Joy and Glory, when Body and Spirit
shall ascend together, passing through all Vails, Clouds, Rocks and Stones,
nothing being able to sever her or it from the most Holy Place; for which state
do you passive stand, till acted to go forth, by the mighty and strong Lion,
who must rise the Prey to take, which has been reserved for the Lyon-like
Heart, which no fear has, nor repulse will take, but will enter through the
Everlasting Zion Gates, to which haste, haste.

August the 13th. 1676.
This inspeaking was to me. Let muddy Matter no more be cast up in thee, for
thou art called among the Golden Flocks.

August the 14th. 1676.
This Morning my Spirit was all free, and serene, meet to entertain Communion
with him, who is clothed with the Golden Cloud, and Rainbow on his Head, who
said thus unto me, Escape the Spider's Web, who is always spinning to invite to
come under her covering: Know you not a Composition of Poison is there? who
cannot hurt you, except she can find you there to hanker, and so keep your pure
mounting Spirits, from their own incircling Globe, and Heavenly Sphere; Where
you know, I fail not to keep you Company, when at any time you are found there.
For an uninterrupted Conversation is to be entered upon, by that which is all
pure, born from the Virgin-Womb, which is distinct from the dark and all
defiled part, and cannot incorporate with it. Oh therefore avoid, and quickly
stop that muddy Source, the smell of which is so unsavory to him, who can bear
nothing but what proceeds from my implanted Nature, that so we may together as
upon one Stalk grow, For to bring forth that choice Kernel, which may be ripe
for the Golden Dove to swallow down. For herein lies the most hidden of all
Secrets, which is to come up to the full grown Ear of one and the same pure
Lump, and Matter clear. Then Celestial Food ye shall know through this Virtual
Consubstantiation; of which none shall have right to partake, but the
Bridegroom, and his Mate. Therefore do not think, that I am slack in coming for
to reap: I wait in Longsuffering with you, till I become a pure hardened Grain
in you, and so become Heavenly Bread to satisfy the Life, that is born out of
the Mystery. Whereof you are of the Number, appointed to grow up a pure Body,
for the holy Air to pass through.

August the 15th. 1676.
This Word came, which was often repeated in me, Arise Jonah's Gourd must fail,
though it was appointed for your succor and shelter, for its appointed Season,
as a Shadow from the Heat, Wind and Storm. Which was thus made out to me, with
respect to the present Gospel-Ministration, as it stood in diverse Services,
though of the Lord's own Institution, which carries a great force with it,
consisting of pure, and Spiritual Exercises, offering up by Prayers and other
constant Oblations, which have been too short, because transient Powers have
only opened therefrom, wherein has been some Refreshing: yet rest not hear,
for some better thing is provided for you, whose expectation must still run
higher, looking to obtain that fixed Body, that can dwell among the Heavenly
Quire, going out and in, by Commission from your Great King, whom only you are
to fear and hasten to.

Then again this secret Word sprung, What toil you here? Have you not heard,
that there is a Jubilee Year, wherein you are called to return to the Land of
your Possession, to enjoy what is laid up in store, which was sown in the sixth
Year of your Immanuel, who was such a fruitful Grain, as thereby ye may obtain
a Sabbath of Rest, eating of the old Store, till the third Year, which will
renew all things again to that Increase which never yet has been.

Also, this Scripture was spoken to me, Ye shall not go through the Cities of
Israel, till the Son of Man come again, Matthew. 10. 23. Which thus opened it
self: Ye have had many Removes in your Israel. Dispensations, yet you have not
gone through all, there is one strong hold that is to be taken. Which being
entered into, you will soon see your Son of Man so to appear, as ye shall not
know him, from the Son of the Most High God in Humanity, glorious and clear,
riding upon the Heavenly Sphere.

Also, this Word came unto me, The Golden Pot within shall still be filled with
Manna: it is for the Priest alone to feed thereof, within the Holy Place. Where
the Golden Bowl of Oil shall also out flow, to those that can come near it,
with their Consecrated Body, which scented is with the pure Unction.

August the 16th. 1676.
Being very inquisitive with that strong Rock, from whence I expected still new
Aid, Counsel, and work of Direction, for going forward in the Process with our
Jesus, till we were entered into the Land of Rest, Life, and Liberty, and it
being made now all my Care and Concern to keep journeying on, making riddance
of all that would hinder our ascending Might. In order to the prosecution
thereof, this Word came to me, Know thou not, that the most principal City,
is yet to be inhabited by you, which can only be entered upon by Conquest: Now
what less, then the Spirit of Courage, Might, and Valor, which did rest upon
Othniel will serve you in this matter? For the taking of this strong City by
Conquest, a Reward will be given by faithful Caleb, the good Heart, who here
represents the Eternal God and Father. Who engages to give Achsah, who is his
only Virgin Daughter, unto Othniel, who is the Man of War, the strong Michael
who fears not but he shall still overcome: to whom is given the utmost Ends
of the Earth for his Inheritance, Moab shall be his Wash-Pot, and over Edom the
Most High will rule. Oh Lord, it is most true, thy Power and Sovereignty is not
to be questioned, I know, thou can do all things; but what is this to me;
till this Mighty Man of Valor do arise, to bring me into this strong City, or
the City of Strength, wherein will be all our defense? Thou have said, Go on to
possess what yet remains behind, pointing to this Walled Place, that is fenced
round with Bull works; by which we, who have often made any Attempts against
her here, have as often been repelled. How, and by whom can we make this
Enterprise, if thou, Oh mighty Othniel, do not undertake this for us? A
necessity there is, I do see, for thee to assume, and to take in us the strong
Battel-Ax of Faith's Magnanimity, that will force the most Mighty to yield. Oh
how long must we War, before the Bride shall come for to be our own in the New
Jerusalem City? Ah sweet Jesus! speak comfortably to us hereto, to whom it has
been said, Ye look for her, who never can in this Lifetime be here enjoyed.

August the 19th. 1676. This Reply was given to me.
Oh why should ye hearken to any thing, that would quench and kill your Faith.
For Diffidence has been the grand Stop and Hinderance: for how can that
possibly be obtained, which cannot be believed in? By which great Absurdities
are committed against the whole Trinity, whose Faithfulness and Truth must
hereby be nullified, and all those Promises made of no effect, which are of
standing Record. But they will not any Credit hereunto give, then which nothing
more can take off from this further process, as who else might have reached to
all that has been predicted; had there been but found in any that All-Golden
Grain of Faith so strong, till it had cast out all Fear and Doubting: which
makes the true Masculine Spirit, that is for the taking of the most weighty
Prize, that is in the Kingdom of Heaven. Who willingly suffers such noble
Violence, and would rejoice to be so entered upon. If it might find any so
resolved in this present time, I will assure thee, there it no Prohibition,
against the possession of this Royal thing, which I have so often to you
propounded. Which stands free to yield to them, who through Faith's Stratagem
can enter through the Gates of this Jerusalem. You well know what force will be
effectual, which I still incite, and call upon you to improve, summoning in all
your Army. The Seven Throne-Spirits will be your aid, but be sure to set Love's
Flaming Streamer, and Faith's challenging Banner in the forefront of all,
because they are of greatest Potency: which will bring a dread with them upon
the fearful and unbelieving Spirits, because terrible to them is this Army of
Banners. Who the first Onset will make, with and by the sound of our Trumpet,
which yet has never been heard to sound. For which wait ye, till it shall be
given into your Hands.

August the 20th. 1676.
This Word visited me with a mighty inward Cry, Let the old Creature dye and
pass away. Bury this Dead out of sight, that it may dissolve into the New
Earth, which I have prepared. From whence ye may expect, that new Creaturely
Body, which is all available, and goes beyond the first Fruits of
Circumcision. For Renovation in the Mind may be brought forth, and yet this New
Creature not raised, which is the very Body appertaining to the Ghostly Spirit,
which can only mount, and give this New Creature the Wing of Ascension. Here is
a new creating Word, which now upon the Sounding is: what excellent new framed
Piecemay be expected hence from its Matter and Composition? What think you now
must this New Creature be made of, that it may transcend the Old? That must
dry, moulder, and vanish away, as it is decreed: that so room may be for the
new Body to take place. Which is to be coagulated from the Virtual Golden
Mould, as the material Matter of this All-Spiritual Creature, which is
appointed for Mount Sion's Communion. Oh! the first Adam was created for
Paradise: out of the Dust of that Earth, he was made a living understanding
Soul, sparkling in the pure Innocence. From which degenerating he has changed
both the inward Principle, and outward Body, into the Nature of Sin and
Corruptibility. Which now must be put off, before the most Holy will know you
in the way of delightful Conversation; for which end every Trumpet does sound,
till ye be framed and raised out of Holy Ground, made all of one entire Piece,
a Massy Lump, which may out-ballance that, which as a Shrine adulterated is,
with other false Metals: as in the first Adam's state you have seen, where the
Good and Evil do dwell, that makes all the Strife and Uneasiness. For which, no
other way is found, for the putting an End thereunto, but by a total dissolving
of the old Creature, wherein this Mixed thing is found.

Here arose this Objection in me, Ah my Lord and Master, I grant and acquiesce
with thee, concerning this new Bodifying, for the Eternal Spirit to act
through, in pure new raised Humanity, but why is thy Word still directed to me,
who find hereunto no Sufficiency: for it is the business of a God-creating
Power, I do see, as thou do take this Prerogative unto thy self, saying,
Rejoice in that which I do create?

Answ. True, Oh Shunamite, this Glory thy Father only appropriated unto
himself, and none else can assume it, or counterfeit it; For here are no
painted Forms that can serve; for to make Images without Life will not do.
Hereby shall the face of the Covering be discerned, that has deceived all
Nations, that have still cried the Temple-Body, when it is no other but a dead
piece of Formality, which is at least no way able to effect beyond the Species
of a poor piece of impotent Mortality, which under great disability does lie.
Therefore the Voice in thee does Cry, Call, and Incite, that thou may look
within for this Creating Might. Lo, it is not so lost or gone out of Sight, but
it will be found upon search and seeking, being at hand to renew and change the
Vile, and bring forth another Body and Spirit, that may God's Virgin-Bride
inherit, with all her Mountain Arabian spicy Wine, which is refined from the
Lees. That is the Spirit, which is purely extracted from the Deity, to move in
a Body that is all contacted of Sion's Matter: For the New Creation will be
filled with such Inhabitants, as mighty Princes, each one in their own Power
moving, with such anointed Shields, as all Earthly Weapons will be too blunt,
and too short to annoy such Spirits, or new Creaturely Bodies, that are
compacted of this sublime matter. But here this Jesus, whose Spirit searches
the inward deep of this Soul meets with somewhat, which is still questioning
and asking, How can this great thing be? seeing I am not come to live out of
sensible Mortality, that is touched with every Essence, which appears from
that ground, sometime listed up, then again cast down, according to the
mutation of the Starry Region. Well, I know, (says he) it is so, but art thou
here confined for ever to stay? Has Bounds been set, that beyond this thou art
not to pass? Do thou think my Calls and Invitations are only verbal? or that
I put you upon that, which the Omnipotency of co-working Power cannot make
good? Only believe, laying the stress of all upon my Creating Word, which will
move, till the Number Three be witnessed, for the raising of this Temple, which
all filled shall be with their own silent Company, walking all in holy Order,
according to the living, Testimony. Which opens a new. To which inspiring
Word, ever more watch, and it shall be your safe Guide and Guard, till you are
come here to abide within this fixed Sphere.

August the 22d. 1676.
In the Night I was much in Prayer, minding my Lord God of the many particular
Prophecies, concering our Jesus coming to quicken and assume his own Spiritual
Body in us, being mighty earnest in Soul-wrestling for the accomplishment
thereof, against which I saw a great Strife and Wars by Spirits and Powers,
from the high fallen Angels above, and the middle Regions and Depths below, all
conspiring to keep down the Body, that is sown in that New Tomb, where none but
Jesus the Lord lay. After this Conflict in Prayer, I fell asleep, where the
dark Magia followed me with Apparitions from their Kingdom, which I endeavored
to adjure. Upon which I awaked, waiting for the sweet Emanations and Teachings
from my Immanuel, who a present Word of Comfort ministered to me, saying, Behold
the Dews from Hermon-Hill, shall distill upon what you have sown; ye shall not
always lie in the Dust of the Earth. For this Dew is as the Water of Life, that
will make the dead Body again to live. As my dead Body, it shall rise
Metamorphosed, as the Lily all white and fair, to take in the Golden Sun, and
the Crystalline pure Air. Such a Body will be meet, to move from, and to draw
in that Everlasting Gospel-Breath, which will tinge whatever it does touch. Now
as to the time, when this Legacy will be due to you, you must look into the
last Testament and Will of me your Testator. Who have made an Everlasting
Covenant, firmly ordered in all things, where all Precious Promises concerning
things to come run in general to those, who successively in time shall come
into the Resurrection-Body, for to be born. For none else can make challenge to
that great income of the Holy Ghost, which is the principal Gift in my Will.
Why have you let this lie as dead, and making no more matter about its search?
And why see ye not whether this Revenue belong not to your New Names, which ye
have been baptized into? I would not that ye should be ignorant of what might
come to you, if you live in the Resurrection-Body, till it gets up into its
mature Stature, a full grown-Body, which may be of ability, for the discharge
of so great a Government and Trust, as in that day will be committed. In the
mean time live, and so behave your selves, as those that are known to be, not
only Legatees, but real Joint-Heirs; Looking for, hastening, and minding the
Father of newborn bodified Spirits, who is the Ministrator by me left in
trust, to make disposal out of Wisdom's Cabinet of this one considerable Jewel.
Which will become none to wear, till they come up to be full grown, meet also
for that Garment, which has been made and wrought from Everlasting, which is
ever new and fresh, through which ye may see the Comely Proportion of your New
Creaturely Being. For it is all transparent and shining, answering to the Place
and Company, with whom you are to walk. Though ye yet bear in Visibility your
despised image, till your invisible Body be grown up big enough, to fill out
this Bridal Robe, by which you shall be discerned to be in the Lord's Body.
Which will roll away the Reproach that came in by the poor fading Fig-Leaf
Clothing. Now observe and see to what an estate you may grow up unto, if ye
keep up in the Faith: if ye unwaveringly believe, ye will see it.

August the 23d. 1676.
In the Night season I heard a Voice crying, Holy! Holy! who can enter where
the Terrible Majesty of Holiness does dwell? Then was presented to me somewhat,
all over covered as with Swans Wings, no other proportion seen, and it was
said, This all white Nazarite may enter in: here is no Partition Wall, or
Skreen that will intervene. After this passed away, it was opened to me, This
was no other then the White Dove Body of the Holy Ghost, that could wing up
into the Jerusalem Court, where the Ancient of Days did sit, to receive and
welcome the Spirit of the Bride, thus embodied and all attired with Plumes of
White, signifying the necessity of passing through the Swan-like Washings.
Which do make us thus pure and white, for the bringing into this Virgin-state,
where nothing is heard to cry, but Holiness to the Most High. For said the
Word, No other can enter here, therefore see what you must attain to be,
Swan-like, keeping upon the River pure, which does proceed from the Throne.
Where do you abide, till you come to the tenth Number washing-Tide, that may
present you the all fair and lovely Bride to enter in, and looking find, where
their needs no more Sea for washing, but firm Golden Ground there to walk with
your Dove-Mate. Who does wait to see you come up as Sheep from the Washing,
each one bearing Twins in the fruitful Nature of the Holy Ghost, from within
that overspreading Wing to put forth, and to take its Flight to this City of
Light, wherein Holiness is writ without and within.

August the 27th. 1676.
Being upon my Watchtower, to heat and learn what further Remove we must go
forward to, and Eagerly pressing to get out from under the Reign of the Ten
Horned Beast, who does daily at us push, as being exalted to that Pinnacle of
Power, which does command all these lower Worlds, imprinting its mark on the
whole Universe, who are under his Planet born, and in his Kingdom found; Out
from which our Lord with many Trumpets sounds has called us; this Word anew
was uttered; Ah, come and see the Thousand Years Reign of the Lamb are upon the
Entering, by those who are worthy to find a part in the first Resurrection. This
only will free from the decree of unavoidable Death, which is the Wages of the
Sin-deformed Beast, who is to return again to the Lake, at the time when Jesus
begins his Reign. Lo, the old Dragon, who in the Beastly Nature has governed,
will be laid hold upon, by the strong Angel, who has prevailed to chain him
up, and also to obliterate both his Image and Name that have lived and reigned
in this visible World, in such mighty Fame. But strong and omnipotent is he,
who says, Behold, I come to sound that Trumpet, which shall bring forth a new
World, for an end of the Old is come before me, in them, who will be found the
first model of this new Creation, which will consist all of new raised Spirits
with their full grown Bodies, bearing the Lamb's Mark and Name as Sheep of
another Pasture and Fold, feeding in such a rich Soil, as makes fat and
flourishing, meet to stand in the view of the great King, whom you must come up
to, in your new risen Immaculate Spirit and Body, that we may see you are the
right Heirs, now grown up for the Kingdom, to whom the Key of the Government
does belong. Being passed through this Kingdom, standing out against all his
imposed Traditions, Mark, and Name, whereby you were to be proved, whether or
no ye would bow to his unrighteous and pernicious Power and Scepter. Against
which still maintain your Ground, and hold out, for your ten days Tribulation
are not all fully expired; in which time, the Dragon will have great rage,
knowing his date is almost worn out, as to those that have gone through the
beheading for the Resurrection-Life sake. For which death's hour of Temptation
holding out, a weighty Crown will be sent down, and put on by him in the sight
of all your Enemies, who will maintain his right upon and over the Earth with
these his tried Stones, to unite his power to as with them to reign, till you
shall see all, and every thing put under which now is above you, for when my
Name is known to spring within the Resurrection Body, and to open in Majesty;
doubt not, but thereto every Knee shall bow and will bring their Gifts, and
entreat your aspect and favor. The God, and Father of Lights having anointed
you above your Fellows, and reinstated you with me to a Throne of dignity,
where all in the lower Sphere shall be judged by you, having received Kingly
Power, not for hours or days, but for to endure throughout all Generations.
Now consider as wise Princely Virgins, what for a while, ye may yet encounter
with during the Dragon's reign. Do not fear him, nor his Scorpion Stings, which
now will hardly come into you, his place being demolished and his Towers
falling, and the new Body rising, wherein nothing of his Kingdom can be more
found: which he seeing, it will make his Kingdom to tremble, that power is now
assuming that will bind the crooked Leviathan, who still sends out his
poisonous Floods, to destroy this Birth of Life which shall reign over all, by
him who has gotten the Victory over the Fall, and came up with great boldness,
showing your bloody marks through the fight of Faith, whereby ye may make claim
to the Bride and the Ivory Throne, there with her to lodge, live, and reign in
everlasting fame: Amen, cries your Bridegroom from Heaven.

August the 28th. 1676. The Guardian Eunuch.
This word passed through me, who shall among all the royal Seed of the
captivity be found worthy to stand before the great and mighty King? Even those
in whom is found no blemish, but beautiful and well favored, and of a wise and
understanding Spirit. Seek me out such, says the most holy, to abide in my
Courts. Whom upon search having found, a Decree is given forth, that they be
committed to the custody of Melzar, the high Guardian Prince of the Eunuchs,
who shall take the charge and care of these, whom I would have the most Eminent
in and throughout my whole Realm. In order to which a daily portion of the
King's Meat, and of the same Wine, whereof he drunk, is assigned for them to be
nourished by. Well knowing, what a fair and comely Body, such high Heavenly
extracted Food will bring forth, to make strong and mighty, meet for the King's
business. Here is a time also prefixed to be kept up to this Diet alone, and to
abstain, and not taste of the low, gross, Elementary perishing Food, which
makes lean, ill-favored, and blemished, who must not come into the Sanctuary
of the most High. Against such there is a Law, to exclude them all, from coming
near to the pure Majesty. Therefore this Provision is made, that ye may without
exception be trained up under the Prince of Life, who himself was a pure
Nazarite and Eunuch for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. Who will be to you herein
a lively Pattern, giving day by day full Meals, and Draughts, out of the same
divining Cup, whereof your Lord himself does drink. That so ye may be Spirited
with an all-peircing sight, to know what is done and acted within the Kingdom
of Light. Interpreting and revealing such Wonderful things to them, which yet
remain dark to those, who do abide in the dark Cell of this lower World; doing
such mighty deeds, as may make them for to cry out, Surely the Gods are come
down to dwell in Flesh. This and much more, will be your glory, if you can for
a while be shut up in the Eunuch Reservatory where you may be taught the
language, that is only spoken amongst the Church of the first born in the
heavenly City. For you must have a time for the learning hereof, and you must
entirely mind this Science. For it is the great King, that will give ability to
stand before the eternal King, when you can understand and take in through the
pure and divine sense, all the deep and weighty things. Which in and through
the high Tongue are in the Seraphick Language only sounded forth. Therefore
henceforth see it all needful to abide here, under the care and tuition of your
worthy Prince and Governor, the true and faithful Melzar, who at the end of
the three Years, may present you all fair, able, and wise. That when the King
comes to prove you with hard Questions, ye may not be to seek, no more than the
beloved Daniel was, who was found in all Matters excelling all the Magician^
who stood before him. Out of thi^ Similitude, there is marrow of Life to b^ had.

August the 29th. 1676.
Being met together this Day, as the Doctor was praying, there was a sudden
glance opened of a Person, presenting himself in a way of visit to us, looking
as one that had some particular care and concern, which revived that Scripture,
I am come into my Garden to see what Fruits appear, and how my Spikenard
outflows; as also the Word spoke thus, This is the beloved Prince of the
Eunuchs. After this I felt a full gale of Spirit, which breathed forth it self
in Prayer, all which give a Testimony of our Acceptance; and could the Eye of
the Spirit stand open, we should see our Jesus often circumferring about us.

August the 30th. 1676.
About Four of the Clock in the Afternoon, my Daughter R. came to me, with a
Message, that there was a Letter came from my Sister Re. to Cousin Rob. Wa.
that now there was an opportunity opened for my Redemption out of all Straits
and Cares, being privately ordered by my Brother to send for me down to her
House, and so to come to him, and to abide during his Life, where all things
should be provided, and need not to have any other dependence. All which
hearing, being pressed upon me with many Arguments, to dispatch and close with
this present Offer, which is I did not, then I must expect that all other
Relief would be withheld from me. No Friend would either pity o^ aid me. My
Daughter laying much to my Charge, for slighting such Providence. Upon the
consideration here of, it was said within me, Thou art i^ a great strait, yet
nevertheless stand by thy Vow and solemn Engagement, where by thou have given
away thy Right, a to the disposal of thy self. Now tho^ art the Lord's, who
has given to the^ a binding Earnest, for to go on forward jointly with thy
appointed Mate to tha^ Work, which this present offer is much too low for to
retard.

Then rolled upon me many great an^ heavy Weights, which would have pressed
down my Faith, seeing man Archers drawing up against me, with outstretched
Bows, but were prevented. For I was immediately taken into Shelter up to the
Rock of Strength. I found my self as in a moment mounted, where then I could
charge again upon the subtle Adversary from that Ammunition-Tower, which still
furnished me with Faiths impregnable Power, which soon quelled and allayed the
Fury of the raging Oppressor. For I found the Captain of the Lord's Host drew
near to defend every Shot, off from me, lifting up his mighty Standard, and
speaking comfortably, saying. Hold fast, let all go: but what I have in charge
committed to thee, be sure to keep, and thou needst not fear any of those
Sufferings thou art threatened with. Take no thought, for while thou art upon my
Business, I will supply all things needful, for I have given order for thy
Sustainment. Go forward, ply your Heavenly Calling with him, who to my Heart
answers in this very thing also. Ye must both look to fill up what is yet
behind of the ten days Suffering, for the Dragon has great Rage, he well sees
how near his Date is out, if you be able to stand out this Hour of Temptation,
which must allow, thereby to prove your Fidelity, that so ye may come off
Conquerors, that your Jesus may begin his Reign, and put that Power into your
Hand, that ye shall at pleasure bind and chain up this great Leviathan, that so
he may no more go forth to hurt, destroy, or make Wars against the peaceable
Government, which shall rest upon each one, when the great last Trumpet
sounds, to call up to worship in the Mountain of Jerusalem. Then ye shall see
me Eye to Eye; which will recompense this Long-suffering, and Faith-Warrings
against the Dragon and Beast, who go into everlasting Perdition, maliciously
working to allure and plunge those upon whom he can fasten his Temptations; but
arise, shake off all, and in his dominion no longer stay: Return, return, oh
Shulamite, unto thy fair Jerusalem-Mansion, there the most Holy will meet thee,
and secure thee from all beleaguerings, hiding thee within the Pavilion of his
Power. To this, oh my Soul, do thou enter, and for ever rely, for here is
hiding from the Serpent's Eye.

August the 31st. 1676.
Upon these sweet Words of Counsel and Emanations, I sprung out in Prayer,
renewing my Vows, formerly made, pouring forth the Oil of Joy and Gladness upon
Jacob's Pillar, which is the standing Witness betwixt me and Jehovah Nissah.
Henceforth resolving to adventure only with Jacob's Staff in my Hand, finding
fresh Power animating my Faith, so that I neither feared Famine, Nakedness, or
any Distress that could happen. Being resolved to abide, where my Lot was cast,
and to go through with my Associate, with whom the Spirit of Caleb was to
proceed, and to go forward unanimously with me, till we might reach to the high
Calling and Apostolical Power, which I felt mightily impulsing to hazard the
loss of all, reckoning nothing of Validity, or worth making Interest for, but
that which spoken of has been, yet reserved for us in the Everlasting
Treasury. Whereto upon all accounts, I will apply my self, for thereout will be
given to that Eye, which waits steadily. Which was assured and confirmed to
me, from that Example of Moses, his Hands being held up. The Lord said to me,
if ye will be prevailing Conquerors over your deadly undermining
Soul-destroying Foes, your Hands of Faith must at no time fall down, but when
you find them heavy, call in Aaron and Hur, the Spirit of Prophecy and Prayer,
which props up and maintains the Affiance still to rest upon the Stone of
Strength and Almightiness, by which great Conquest and Success will come to be
witnessed. Thus happy shall ye be, in holding out firmly, because the Shield of
your help shall tread down all strength for you.

September the 1st. 1676.
THe Doctor this Morning, Praying with me, the Word said while he was in
Prayer, Here is a Ship in full Sail, directing to that Prophetical Blessing,
which was pronounced upon Zebulun whose dwe^ing should be at the Haven, where
all rich freighted Ships should unload themselves.

September the 3d. 1676.
This Morning considering of some Passages, which were read to me, of a
Forerunner, who had wonderful things by Vision revealed unto him, with which I
was much affected, they being so weighty, much answering to what I did believe
might be brought to pass, according to the Spirit of Prophecy, who did see into
the same Mystery of Christ coming: While I was Praying in my self for to see
this wonderful Time a Pair of Balances was put forth by a Hand, as out of a
Cloud, where appeared a great Roll writ upon within, and a Golden Ball or
Globe. These in each Scale were weighed. The Golden Globe immediately carried
the Scale down, and thus it was said, Vision is not so weighty as Fruition.
These Writings are as the Bonds of Obligation, but the subsisting thing is from
this solid Body, which turns Vision into Fruition: which set thy Heart chiefly
upon.

September the 4th. 1676.
After this passed, I considered how to be changed into this Globe of unmixed
solid matter, groaning after the contaction of his Heavenly material thing,
which in Vision I had seen. Then heard I Wisdom's Word to cry within me,
saying, Thy Mind must be cast into a new Mold of Imagination, that so thy
thoughts may come to answer mine. That Scripture being brought to me, Let the
unrighteous Man forsake his thoughts, and turn to his God. At this Word, I
said, Oh my Lord, who can nullify and put a stop to his own thoughts, which is
a connection to his Life. For every sight of the Eye, and hearing of the Ear,
does stir up and awaken these Essences; therefore there is no possibility of
stopping the current of them, but they will run their Course, as the Sun, Moon,
and Stars in their Order will Under whose Constellations while we are living,
such common thoughts will arise, which though not wholly evil, ye^ because they
are not holy and perfectly good, they cannot be according to what proceeds from
the Heart of God, who would that our Thoughts and Ways should be like unto his.
This case I presented before my God, and my Lord Jesus to be answered.

September the 5th. 1676.
Who the next day thus resolved me, saying, As thou have desired that great
sublime change, which is the Transmutation into the pure solid Body; so know
thou, that for the obtaining of this, there must of necessity be a
superimaginariness, from which fanned are all chaffy Cogitations. For such is
the Man, as the Conceptions of his Mind are. Now this is only on thy part to
do, whereby the circulation of profuse Imaginations may be stopped, when wisely
and foreseeingly, thou do prevent all occasions, which administer such hard
matter, for such a muddy Spring to generate it self into such Multiplicities,
as generally fill the whole House of the Mind. I Jesus do therefore come to be
thy anointed Eye, that so thou may discern the thoughts of thy Heart, what to
embrace, and what to forsake. For know, that a thought is a more considerable
thing, then hitherto ye have understood, for their Nature are most subtle,
swift Spirits, who numerate as the Sand upon the Seashore, so as they make a
World invisible in every Creature. From whence first come all Wars,
Insurrections, and Mutations, these being first inkindled from the Fire-flash,
which opens from its own center, which divides it self part into the Evil,
and part into the Good. For so it is now, that two Sources are opened in every
Creature, his Will standing free, being redeemed out of the necessity as
adhering to the Earthly, the treasury of the Heavenly, being free to resort to.
But that part from whence the pure River does bubble up, and spring, multipying
divine Conception, is a very deep Well, into which the Will-Spirit does launch,
s^nking down into the Depths, before it can fetch up those precious Thoughts,
which work from the Source of all pure Deity. They will through an habitual
Course so unite, as to rise up, like an Army of great Might, able to put the
other to flight. Here is the great Conquest, to subdue every Thought, and first
to bring down these high Towers of the imaginary part. Demolish but these, and
you will do your work to purpose. Now that ye may be wise to know, how to stop
this muddy Source, observe these following Rules.

Rules, for the Government of the Imagination.
First, Wind out of all occasions, which from this World may minister and
present fruitless and unnecessary Objects, and Things which will kindle
Essences, according to their empty and profuse Likeness.

Secondly, Keep thy self much within thy Holy Temple, and Holy Place of
Silence, where the Trinity with their whole train, delight for to descend: with
whom being much conversant, the sight of the Eye, and the hearing of the Ear,
within this Heavenly Sphere, will both beget, nourish and maintain pure
Cogitations.

Thirdly, Thou will see, feel, and know a fruitful Womb always bringing forth
that which may grow up to the Ghostly Fountain-Body. To which giving heed, thou
may at the Mouth thereof set, and draw up Water of Life, I say of Life
abundantly.

Fourthly, Oh then love to live within thine own Fountain, which is blessed;
desire not to taste of any other, which may be Salt, or Sweet, or of a Mixed
property.

Fifthly, Wait upon the Effusion of this rising Sanctuary-River, which will run
till it become broad all over. Which is the right and true covering of the
Spirit. Under this no evil surmisings can dwell, all of that Nature hereout
will be expelled, at the opening Source of the holy Ghost.

Sixthly, This is the true and everlasting Sign, that shall no more be worn
out, nor be cut off; but it shall be a sure Nail fastened within, for the more
signa^ and lasting Impression: That thou mays^ see all shadowy Ministrations of
little use and service to the Substantial thing. Which will grow from the pure
rarefied Mind, that has got victory from superfluous Thoughts, from which do
thou divide, and then another Spirit within thee will reside.

Seventhly, Having considered thus the Immutability and Unchangableness of this
substantial Thing, growing from the pure Mind, and of all the Thoughts
therefrom arising; and also considering the great Mutability and Instability of
whatever grows, and proceeds from the Imagination; it remains that thou
wholly divide and separate thy self from every vain, superfluous, mutable, and
Imaginary Thought, looking up only to receive such Idea's into thee, as are
Solid, Necessary, Immutable and Spiritual. According to which thou art to try,
examine, and prove whatever would enter into thy Heart, and accordingly to
Acquit or Reject them, if thou would remember to keep a true and perfect
Sabbath unto thy Lord, rising in his Spirit from all that is Earthly,
Elementary and Imaginary.

September the 6th. 1676.
My Friend being at Prayer, my Spirit ardently joining therewith; This Word in
the Heavenly Orb was spoke: What shall be done for these diligent Seekers, and
Heaven-violaters, who for the Kingdom thus pursue? Upon which Word pausing, and
finding that within my self to Echo hereunto; I waited to hear what Answer
would follow hereupon: I then in my Spirit saw there was a demurr, or
consultation thereupon, but had not at that time any positive Answer from the
Lord.

September the 7th. 1676.
In the Night I awaked upon some Voice, that was uttered, but could not
remember, what it spoke. And then I saw a Book that was opened, of an unknown
Print, that I could not read it, which also passed out of sight. Then was this
Word sounded forth. Here are the Children of the Bride-chamber, who to me do
cry for stronger Meat; they have weaned themselves from the nutriment of the
Breast, telling me they can digest Spiritual Flesh. Then was let down a Charger
to me, with a Lamb that had been slain, and the Word said, Take hereof, and
eat, this is Paschal Meat. Then said I, Lord, not so, this is raw and
undressed, who can feed hereof? Then this was drawn up, and behold one, as in
the Figure and Stature of a Man, but not in a fleshly Image, only the fashion
of a Man all bright, as the Body of Heaven for clearness: out of his Mouth went
a white Mist or Breath, having seven Pipes or conveying Powers, one of each
side, and another at the Navel, where somewhat was, as the Form of a Belly, but
all after a very lustrous manner. Out of his Mouth went forth pure Breath and
Air, then out of the Pipes, that were fixed on the Breasts, sprouted Milk. Then
from the Heart went forth Streams of Blood, and upon one side grew out a Branch
bearing Olive-Berries, then a Stalk, which did bear some kind of large solid
Grain. Then on the other side from the Navel-Pipe did spring clear
Crystal-Water. After this manner did this Spiritual Body appear, and said to
me, Draw near, for this is the great Day of the Feast, where the Spiritual Body
does convey it self in variety. Here is high spirited Blood and Flesh for the
strong in Spirit to digest.

Whoever can on this my Body feed,
Of no perishing thing he will have need.
September the 8th. 1676. The Interpretation of the former Vision.
The Representation of this former Conveying Body of my Lord Jesus, did not
only affect my in-seeing Eye, but by it I found my Life-Spirit fed, succored,
and strengthened. The very sucking down these Spiritual Sweets, (as compounded
all at one draught) had their operative Power for some hours after. And again
this Morning they did plentifully give out themselves, after the manner of a
Conduit, that has many Pipes at once springing; yet all in their Order, and as
soon as one stops, another opens. Oh who can of these deep Manifestations
judge, but such as are overtaken with these Golden Floods, that from the
glorified Body do thus open, for the nourishing up of every part, till we
answer hereunto in a perfect lustrious Body, like to like. Which my Spirit
prayed vigorously for, seeking also to have a clear understanding of this
Vision, waiting in great and pure awe, for my Immanuel to give me his Mind
herein. Who said to me, By this is shown thee what the Counsel of the Trinity
has determined to do for you, that have out-grown the Child's Food. Here are
new and fresh sprouting Powers, which will make my imbreathed Spirit grow into
a Body. As a Nazarite it is to be, who must wait continually hereupon, and must
be under a restraint, so as only to take in what these Pipes shall give forth,
that so the pure Crystalline thing may live in you, which will Leaven you
throughout. Whereby the Most High and wonderful Consubstantiation will be
effected to the glory of the New Creation. Then I further queried about the
Book, and the Lamb which was first presented to feed upon. It was said as to
the Book, though opened, none could it read, because we were not come to such a
growth of understanding, as being such as are newly weaned from the Breast.
Then it was opened to me concerning the Lamb, that it was the Dying
Dispensation, which did go before the rising Living Body, which quickens and
brings to Life again, as it is written, I am the Lamb slain, that is risen, and
do live to feed my Flock for evermore, from that Body, wherein is the chiefest
store. Then it was revealed to me, that the Book which I saw opened was, and
still should have been sealed up, had not the Lamb in me over Death prevailed,
but now the Seals are undone, and it is given to the Redeemed for to look into
it, though not learned yet high enough, to comprehend those great and wonderful
things, which are reserved for the full grown Spirit: Who understands all of
the high Tongue and Seraphick Canaan Language, in which we shall be taught, as
we are strong, and have aptness of Ability to take in, from this sevenfold
Fountain-spring, of which evermore, Lord Jesus, give thou us in to take.

September the 10th. 1676.
This Morning I was in a most deep inward converse with my glorified Jesus,
putting such weighty Questions to him, as I found rise in me, one was this,
saying, Ah Lord! by what shall I know, that it is now thy very self, that talks
daily with me, and that has unsealed thy Fountain-Body to me; for there is
somewhat of a greater proof, must yet go forth to make thee ownable and
Praiseworthy, where Contempt has been poured out. Now then, what will thou for
such yet further do; and that thy Name may carry all through in Power and
Authority, according to the Example of thee our dignified Lord. Who will not in
thy Redeemed scarce be known, till they see the self-same Chariot come down, in
which thou thy self do ride with thy Scepter and Crown, throughout the
created Heavens and Earth, and therein to be glorified. Oh for this I am
pressing, because nothing less then this thy great Appearance in us, will
overturn the Nations within and without. Therefore show us, Oh Lord, and
answer, what may make the way more clear and shining to us? After these
Ejaculations emptied into the Bosom of my Immanuel, I saw a pure stream of
Golden Color, wave up and down, which pierced through me, feeling a new
kindled Heat from it. The Eye of my Spirit saw it as thin as the Mist, only as
the color of the Sunbeams. Then said the Word in me, What do thou now see
but the Spirit and Breath, which gives Life to the conveying Body, which thou
did see. Who also shall be the harbinger from me to thee, as the living Sign
and Witness: no greater ye will need. It is that deep searching Spirit, who
will go and come with speed, and will take and bring from my Fountain Blessing,
and give forth, as ye shall be able to suck and draw from it, as from a pure
attractive Will. Then shall you know it to be your Comforter and Friend, who
will for you search out all hidden things, which are freely given by Decree.
This is the Spirit that is appointed to be your Overseer, an holy Watcher, and
to find out, if any thing be defective, within the Temple of the most holy
Body. Where he must agitate for the Father, and me, all those high Affairs,
which may answer to the bringing in, and establishing that desired Kingdom,
from which the Scepter of Love, Power, and Righteousness, will never depart.
Because this fiery Mist shall still purify the Heart, and be to it a safe and
defensive Guard, from the Poysonable Waspish Spirits, who move from the
Serpent, to disquiet this your peaceable dwelling within this circling Breath,
which from the Deity does proceed. And it is a Gift worthy of all Acceptance
in deed, as ye may find, if you be not to it unkind by oppressing and laying
Burdens on it, which it cannot bear. For it will take no burden, or concern
upon it, but what may augment the Heavenly growth and flourishing state. Where
it may dilate the Powers of a Supersensual Faith, and Love-mounting-Life, and
ever of it speak. Know you then, for what use I do send down this ready swift
Messenger, not to minister about any thing, which is of a worldly Sanctuary, or
that which works after the Traditions of Men, in all deceiveableness of Sin,
whether considered in the more gross or refined part. This pure Breath will fly
from all Putrefaction, and will be detained no longer with you, then ye
minister what is pleasing to it. For as it receives from me to give to you, so
it expects to bring some pure offering from you, that I may have an express of
your growth and fruitfulness, that so I may not repent the Watering you with
this Golden Mist, which may Produce a new Face of Covering upon the Earth,
which will be all invitable to your God and King to walk and delight himself
therein, finding nothing that may therein offend the Trinity. The Spirit
seeks all, in which he may present you a meet Habitation, for the God of Love
and Peace to dwell richly in his own Temple. Then fear not, but you will excel
all Counterfeit Christ's; for this Spirit of Truth will search out all deep,
high and mystical things, that are of service and use to the Reign of your King
Jesus. Who is to be exalted over the Earth, first in those who close with his
Will and Commands: Then in the second place, this inspiring all-breathing Life
highly regard it, for it is that noble thing, that will not give over
searching, till it has found that rich Stone, which is the Introduction to the
Kingdom.

September the 14th. 1676. The Holy Incense.
Being in Prayer, I saw somewhat like a Cloud or Vapor of Smoke rising,
turning into a Flame, and so ascending upward. Then said I, Lord what means
this? Then was replied, This is the Incense which does scent and perfume thy
Supplications. All Intercessions are weak, and no ways prevalent, but as the
Spirit enters the secret Holy Place, and does bring down from that Altar,
which is fixed between the Cherubs, and from thence to let fall a perfuming
Coal among the spicy Odours. Which are all compounded by the Artificer, within
the inward Sanctuary, who has the Charge of all the Holy Things. Therefore it
is such a principal Ointment, as none is to be made like to it, being so rare,
pure, and sacred, that it is not to be poured upon Man's Flesh, but it will
devour and consume them, if they shall but go about to counterfeit the same. As
it was by those, which offered strange Incense before the Lord. Therefore none
has Right hereunto, but the most harmless, holy, and separated, who have not
defiled themselves with the Dead, and creeping things of the Worldly outward
Court. But know and consider whereunto ye are come, upon whom this Spicy Union
has fallen; into whose Hand the Golden Vial is given to offer with your
Prayers this cloudy pure Incense, which is of a most high deified Nature. The
all-searching Spirit has found out this sweet perfumed Matter for you, that so
ye might have success in your Altar-Oblations. Oh then now with Joy enter the
Tabernacle, that is anointed with this perfumed Oil, for ye may expect this
Golden Incense upon the flaming Altar will have all prevalence. Because it is
derived from the Everlasting Mountain of Myrrh and Frankincense, which is the
most precious Fuel for your Offering; which must ascend beyond the Sphere of
Seraphims, to reach the Heart of your great High Priest. Who is set over all
the lower Priesthood to view and see, who in the holy Order of Consecration do
keep, bringing their Censers to be filled with Fire, from those perfuming
Coals, which can be found no where but in this Altar, which are exalted within
the Heavens. The Spirit taking and scattering these Coals, that so the Earth in
you may be all a flaming Light, burning from this Incense Matter, which
perfumes the Breath of all your Prayers, so that your God may smell that which
may bring down Blessings according to your Will. Being so compounded in every
part, with the Spikenard and Altar-Fire; as to be one continual ascending Power
and perfuming Pillar of sacred Fire. With which my dear Lord, do thou mightily
shine upon those who appointed are hereunto, and them more highly inspire.

September the 18th. 1676.
Having for some few Days met with some exercise of Illness upon my outward
man, whereby I was made sensible how great a disadvantage that was to the
Spirit of the Mind to do its Office and Work in, as to its House and
Habitation, where it displays it self; making the very outward Animal Spirit of
the Body intelligible of Divine Things: which when depressed by Sickness, is
much otherwise, for that then the receptable Comprehensive part is much shut
up. The feeling of which made me bewail the defectiveness of this outward Body,
because it was disproportionable to that high graduated thing, which acted
within it. Upon which I sought the Lord with great earnestness, to give such
soundness to the Terrestrial Man, as it might answer to the Spiritual Operator,
who was the moving Wheel. After some little space of time, I heard this Word
run mightily through me, I am thy Saving Health, which shall arise, and get the
Victory over thy present Infirmities. To which Word I gave credit, and did see
all the dark Magic Influence fl^ as a dark Vapor from me. A hail Body is of a
necessary connection to a sound Spirit, for the Lord's Service, whereby the
Heavenly Calling may be perfected. Against which, the working Powers of that
grand Enemy are always at work, by one wile or other still to prevent me:
running to and fro, as a most busy. Agent: but to my God I did fly, who said,
he would spread over me the healing Covering of his Sovereignty for my
security. Then I prayed for the Guardian Power to surround them, who with me
were obnoxious to the stroke of the Dragon's Enmity, letting his Arrows fly
every way upon the Heaven-Setters. But it was said, Fear not, for on them also
is set an impregnable Guard. Thus I was comforted over all Fears, Distresses,
and Tribulations, being assured no Weapon should prosper against the Work,
which we were charged with. For if on our parts we did not flag, the Right Hand
of Strength and Power did engage to be with us, and for us; even so Amen, let
it be, O Lord, evermore.

September the 20th. 1676. The Expostulation of the Spouse.
I was in a Spirit of Mourning, for the Personal Absence of my Lord, whose
Representations and Touches had awakened and drawn all the Virtual Powers of my
Spirit after him, insomuch as I took freedom to tell him, whom my Soul thus
loved, that since, he had after such a high and total manner engaged my Heart
unto him, above all others, that now it was but right and equal, he should
marry me, and so in every respect answerably provide, and settle me, according
to the greatness of that Marriage state; Preferring also to him this Argument,
that it was his own free offer to Love first, or I should never have presumed
to have claimed such favorable Aspects, or such kind of Spiritual freedom with
one, so much raised above me. But verily now since my Lord made the first
Proposal, and thereby has gained my Interior Will, with all its attending
Affections, it is now but reasonable that I should be answered in my
Foundational Hopes and Expectations. Which are not grounded upon old recorded
general Promises, but upon new and particular Words, dropping fresh from the
Mouth of my Jesus, or else those deep Impressions had never took hold of me so,
as to make me set light by all Creatures, and Things. Believing I had made such
a choice, as was sufficient to answer to every requiring, and to set me free
from the Servile Bondage, to these sort of Creatures, that knew nothing of the
Mystery of Faith. I did set home these and many more Arguments upon my Lord
with all ardency, and I said that I did now look for Performance, and entreated
further, that he would consider, that the Honor of his Fidelity was herein
concerned. For I had declared to the World, that I was his, and he was mine by
Covenant and Contract, and therefore with what shame should I come off, who had
rejected all Loves and Lovers, for to tie my Spirit in this Espousal Knot, to
this great Heir and Prince of Glory, unto which Royalty, I did believe er'e
long, I should be invested; If my Jesus would be true unto me, according to the
various Promises left as an Earnest with me. Who being so right and just a
Person, as I had no shadow of ground on his part to suspect, neither would I
knowingly act any thing defectively on my part, or delay the mutual Nuptial
Day, which would make much for the Praise of such a restored Glory. Therefore I
was much importunate with my Jesus, that he would do now, and act according to
the earnest Expectation of the New Creature, and the Honor of his exalted
Name; that it might be no longer derided or defamed by those, who would rejoice
to see wholly self-denying Spirits frustrated of their Bridal-Joy, and
Coronation-Day. And that he would be pleased so to act, as now to let them
stand upon the visible Stage of Dignity, as they have been of Reproach and
Defamation, despightfully used for their Bridegroom's sake: As also to bring
off all their disgraceful Calumnies, who has now the disposal of all Princely
Majesty, to put upon his present disguised Bride.

September the 21st. 1676.
I having after this manner unburthened my loaded Mind, by way of
Expostulation, hearkening what answer herefrom would proceed to a suspended
Lover; I heard this Answer.

Here now follows the Bridegroom's Answer by his Spirit.

Oh thou desponding Lover, I perceive thou art still upon the doubtful and
questioning part, suspecting my Truth and Loyalty, lest I should despise and
slight thee in thy mean estate. First thou have charged me to draw and steal
away thy Heart, not only from thy self, but from all others; so as thou say,
thou art as a lifeless, useless, actless Creature, having emptied all into me,
so as now nothing will suffice, but the Conjugal Knot to be knit, or else thou
think thy self never sure of me. Thus I have born thy Love-passionate
Charges and thy unkind Surmises, because I had deferred, upon deep grounds best
known to my self, the publication of my determinate Marriage with thee. But O
Soul, may it not suffice thee, that I do maintain all intimate Friendship with
thee; and though I cannot as yet, make a visible Personal Appearance for
duration, and for demonstration to the World. Yet in and by that faithful
Witness and true Unction, I am still present with thee, I am no Stranger to thy
Affairs; my Spirit gives an Account of all things unto me. I have left all of
thy Concerns to be brought before me, and administered unto, as occasion
requires, by this Life-Breath which I have so secretly infused. Wherever I
bestow this Gift, it gives a sufficiency from it self to do and act all, that
is above and beyond a Creaturely Power. For it is of an Eternal Almightiness,
proceeding from the Father of Spirits, who generateth what is like himself
essentially into me, the First Born of this Second Creation; That henceforth
the Power of Donation might rest with the Principal Head to pass and convey my
self in Spirlt. And I see the way of Holiness made for this pure inspiring
thing to walk in, which must find an Habitation suitable to its own Purity,
that so all may be at an agreement. Then in mutual Loves and Joys my Spirit
conversant is, and will take in the Sense of all the Grievances, and report
them unto me. Who now have all, that is the Father's infinite Stock of Life, to
enrich with Wisdom, Honor and Dignity at my pleasure. I long and wait to have
it drawn out from me, therefore now make use of this all-searching Spirit, whom
thou may make a Friend of, that may advance thee to a high estate, even in
this present time wherein thou art spinning out, as others, Times Mortality,
which hitherto has brought forth very little of this Life's Treasury. No
eminent thing has yet been wrought, for to illustrate, and make me shine
through the Cloudy Body; where through I would manifest again the Name Jesus.
Come, O thou Complainent, rise out of thy fainting disponding Bed, and stir up
this Gift, which is with you, work, and keep Pace with it. All must be brought
to pass by the diligent Hand of this Spirit, uniting with thy Spirit, and thy
Spirit with this Spirit, who will work all in all in thee.

September the 23d. 1676.
Being in deep Meditations, I was saying in my self, Oh that I were beloved of
my Jesus with that Love, with which he loved John: To whom he did appear so, as
it is written, by which his Spirit was drawn to hear and see those wonderful
things, that are to us reported of Ah Lord, why will thou not give me to lie as
near thy Heart as he, and as close at thy Feet as the beloved Mary, that I may
drink in every Word, which falls down from thy precious Lips; out from which
are the very Issues of Life. While I was thus pleading and invocating, there
was presented a Triangle-Heart, clear as Crystal, that you might see through
them; linked thus.



1. The Heart of Love. 2. The Heart of Joy. 3. The Heart of Peace. 4. The Heart
of the Bride. 5. 5. 5. The Golden Chain with Seven Links. 6. 6. 6. The
Communications of the Hearts 1. 2. 3. to the Heart 4.
Then heard I this Word, Here is place for a Pure Heart, within this Triangle
Heart of the Deity for to join. Then I saw another Heart within the Circle, to
spring with many more, which were still generated herefrom, all White and
Crystalline, but they were without the Chain, this only one was within. Then I
enquired, what Heart this was, which was so nearly admitted? It was Answered,
It is that Heart, which through mighty ardent strong force of Love, has broken
through, and got into this Secret Enclosure. Where it has great opportunity
and advantage to search and know what from this threefold Heart does flow.
Which have their several diffusions, according to their Titles: The first was
under the denomination of Love: The Second was Joy: The Third Peace. All which
agreed to empty themselves forth upon this other Heart, which had pressed in
for Shelter. And whatever Heart can abide within this Circle, may attract
strong infusing Powers, that are all pure and vital, to act in the
Triangle-Might. From this Idea, I had great and full Confirmation, that the
Heart of the Trinity was most free, and ready to embrace and receive them, who
of one Spirit and Heart were together fixed, to break through the Golden Chain,
so as none might be nearer to the Heart of the Trinity, then such who have rent
and divided from all Creaturely Hearts, that so they might know what from this
Triangle-Heart of Love, Joy, and Peace, does ever flow.

September the 24th. 1676.
This Morning I was much upon the Consideration, when I should begin to work in
the Name Jesus, as I did believe in it, and had Promises from it. Now this was
all in my Eye, to have the Spirit manifested for Activity. For I know, this
only would be profitable, as it refers to the Glory of the Most High, when
Works do express the working Source that is opened from the Deity. Being with
my God very urgent on this matter, according to the impulse upon me, from the
Expediency that I saw, for the Life to work out this way in variety, according
to the measure of the Gift of the operation of the Power: This Word of Counsel
and Caution sprang, Oh thou, whom I see restless and tossed to and fro in thy
Mind, no rest thou art indeed to find, till thou come to the working Mines.
For there is the Trial and Probation, who can be skilled to work in the Furnace
of an hot burning Sphere, which is not remote, but very near. Henceforth know,
O thou fluttering Dove-Spirit, that I have not left thee without a weighty and
rich Talent, which is in thine own Custody, though it lies deep with a
threfold Cover upon it; which must be unfolded, before thou can see this
precious thing. The first is the gross dark Mould of this Earthly Climate,
which is very stifling to this pure thing. The second is the strong binding
Reason, that lies as a Mountain weight upon it. The third is the low natural
Senses, which multiply as the Sand upon the Seashore flowing in, to stop and
discourage thee from this great Attempt and worthy Service. Which if once fully
set upon with a Resolution to go through these Three Removes, thou will then
come to the Golden Wedge, which will make thee great, rich, and mighty in the
pure Ghostly working Property. I your Jesus, do tell you faithfully, where the
subject matter does lie to work upon. Your Complaint hitherto has been to me,
as if I had carried away all the Stock and Treasury, and engrossed it to my own
proper use, or reserved it only for you, till you had slipped out of the Body.
But know it is otherwise, do but knit and join all your Force and Power with my
deep Fathoming Spirit which is given to you; and he will find, and also work
out, what concerns your Freedom, and Investment to the high and self-same
dignified Glory with me. Hither toward ye have indeed prayed, and sought, and
believed, and hoped; but ye have not wrought in the Furnace, where this Golden
Wedge is to be all melted down, to run into every part of your Body, as the
Lifeblood does in your Veins. Then you will know that unquenchable and fixed
Efflux of the Spirit, that will be all Virtue and mere Power to work and act
according to its sublime Constitution, that by virtue of this dissolving Stone,
will put forth to do marvelous things. Which may be revived after a more
wonderful way, then yet in and through frail Humanity have been existent. Oh
now then, seeing that is made known unto you, where the Treasure does lie, and
that you have my Spirit, not only to espy, but to work hand to hand with you
mightily. Therefore resolve as in one Spirit, ever fixed to be to break up
that, which does lie upon this Princely thing, each one in your selves, to whom
this Secret is revealed. Do not only Pray, and wait, but War, and work
together, till ye have wrought out this imprisoned Power, that may yet be
exalted upon the Throne of Sovereignty. For verily no better, then a violent
unjust deposing of your and my Spirits reign has been. Call and engage all
Might and Force, to recover his Kingdom again, that ye may sit in the Place of
Judicature, and have all Nations come in at your Beck. All which by mere
Conquest you must effect, if to the Crown and Dominion ye seek to get. I shall
now leave with you this worthy, and all desirable Jewel to the courage and
liberty of your own potent Will, and my Spirit shall not fail to assist you
with all its Armoury. So that ye may have Victory over that, which would still
enslave, and confine you within the compass of Mortality, with all its
appertaining Enormities, which this Stone upon its breaking through will
certainly free you from. Now as there is a strong Guard of Rational and
Sensitive Spirits, which do multiply out of the Earthly Center; so be of good
cheer, that this one Spirit shall multiply to the Thousandth Number, and stand
up as a mighty Army to win the Field, where this Golden Mine is reserved. As
mighty Worthies march ye forward: hold out the bloody Cross of Defiance, spare
nothing which does plead for the first fallen Creation, because nothing of it
can subsist with this pure Stone, but what is Crysolyte. All my dear Jesus,
hasten this Stone out of this Burning Furnace in my Altar-Heart.

September the 29th. 1676.
This Night approaching to Morning, great Spiritual Travail came upon me; and I
was in Soul-heaviness, through the sharp Pangs which I was overtaken with. For
I felt the Birth strong to make way for its deliverance: mighty throws of the
Spirit did work, and I therewith co-working was, that if by any means I might
embrace the firstborn of Might, to whom the Throne-Power and Government was to
be established. While I thought on these things, my Spirit thus burst out, Ah
my Lord, I have often been in these strong traveling Cries, but yet too feeble
am, to bring forth that which is to be the Ruler of Nations, even he, who is to
be clothed with Royal Glory, Strength, and Majesty, to attend the Throne of
the Deity; who will admit only such dignified Spirits there to resort and
dwell, who are born again of equal quality within; so as it may be no Robbery
to derive from thee, O God, this Fire-Birth, which makes the pure Nazarite:
Whose Proceeding, as also Working forth must be, from that everlasting Womb of
Eternity; which does miraculously introduce it self into a poor despicable
Corporeity, which is not perceived, till it comes to a full grown Body,
impregnated with Life in every part, and so growing till it comes to its full
Birth-hour: which I did believe was after the manner of a Spirit to be
effected. For this Word was expressly spoken to me, Fear not, thou shall have
this same also, which shall be caught up and nourished for a certain time, and
then shall come again to thee; For while he is a Babe, and in Minority, Dangers
and Perils will beset him, from this envious World. Therefore his Birth must be
hidden and concealed, and there needs to be no Proclamation of it, because none
but Spiritual Powers and Invisible Hosts were called forth to be privy to this
secret Birth.

Then I beheld, till I saw the Virgin, who traveled to ascend, after the
Child, being overshadowed by a White Cloud, therein wrapped up out of sight,
freed from all Malice and Despite, being kept, and for while reserved within
the Eternal Circle of Light. Then the Voice in me cried, and said, Behold that
which thou have seen to ascend out of the Forms of Nature, shall again descend
in a full grown God-Manhood, to accomplish, all, that has been predicted and
declared by the Spirit, who has searched out the Depths of the Birth of
Wisdom. Then upon this was revealed and presented to me, the Figure of a Lamb
all white, having Seven Heads, upon which were Seven Crowns like Garlands, with
fresh Roses and Lilies. And one riding in the similitude of a Woman, clothed
with a Flaming Garment, like the Sun for Glory and Brightness, with a Cup of
Pearl-Royal in her Hand, filled full of flaming Liquor of Gold. Then the Spirit
said, This is the Lamb and the Bride, which shall the Dragon and the Beast,
with all his horned Power ride down, with all his Mark and Name, which the
whole World has worshipped and admired. He has had long his Time, to impose
strange Laws, and Injunctions: and has been in Universally obeyed. Whose
Sorceries, Witchcrafts, and Deceits have worn out many Generations, who were
ignorant of the Depths of this subtle Serpent, and who hereby have died short
of their Kingly Crown; The seducing Prophet persuading them, that they were
under a necessity, of owning this false usurped Power and Authority, which so
well agreed, and answered to the Apostatized Life of Sensuality. But oh, to
you, whom I have seen Revolters from this strange King, and his Government, I
the Spirit of Jesus am sent, to declare to you the Father's Love and Intent.
Whose Heart is set to redeem you, from all Sins oppressing Tyranny, from the
World's Spirit, and all that is Rudimental. I have sought out for such, as for
my purpose might be, who are resolved to deny, and throw off all weights, and
thronging Spirits, that would traffic within my Holy Place. For assuredly, I
do of such take special notice, who do forsake all this low O^b for me, to
follow my new revealed Tracks. Then cried my Spirit, since, O my Lord, I have
thus far found Grace in thy sight, give me to understand the meaning of this
last Representation, to wit, of the Seven Crowned Lamb, with the Effigies of a
Woman riding on him. So this was opened unto me by the divine Intelligencing
Spirit, which informed me, that the Lamb which I saw with Seven Crowns,
signified Jesus, who yet never assumed his Reigning Power on the Earth for any
duration. For while he was Personally in the World, he was under Suffering and
Reproach: and ever since he has been veiled and obscured in his Spirit; the
Earthly part has yet been too hard in the Lamb's Warriors. But now to any
such, in whom the Virgin Bride is come down, to travel in the greatness of
Strength, to bring forth this mighty Birth of the God-like Nature, they may
expect and look for great things to be produced, as the effects of this
wonderful Birth. Which is caught up to the Throne of God, and will not return
back, till he comes with all full command, to give the Seventh Number-Crown,
and fix it on them, to whom he is first to appear; conveying most freely and
clearly his Sovereignty to them. But that which is the most deep thing in the
Vision, is the great Mystery of the Woman, which sat upon the Lamb, with a Cup
in her Hand. Whose Representation is to show, that this is the Virgin of Sion,
the Mother of the New Jerusalem, who is come to divest, and lay open the
Harlotry Spirit, that has brought in the Abomination of all Idolatry, and has
made drunk the several Sects with the Wine of a Luciferian Spirit, enchanting
all Nations through her Magnificency and Power, having the Riches and Honors
of this World, to give as a Reward to her Worshippers: Therefore to
countervail, and the more highly to excel all that, this Princely Virgin, the
Eternal Wisdom and Power of God, has appeared with the Lamb in the Spirit's
Sovereignty, to let thee know, she is the only Mother and Bride to whom is
given the Cup of Blessing. From whence are substantial, durable Riches, Power,
Dignity, and Sovereignty, that shall know no limit or end of Glory and Kingly
Dominion: and thereof also will be to all Eternity a^ increase. Therefore let
it not repen^ you, who have been Lovers and Admirers of this illustrious Stone
of Wisdom trust to her, expect all from her, looking only to her united Power
with the Lamb; who will assuredly come in you to Reign. For the Anointing Oil
is i^ his Horn, and the melted Liquor of Gold in the Cup, to which you are
called to take a full sup: then you will know another manner of Reward then all
the Enchanting Principle of the Beast, and Sin-trimmed Whore can afford; who
will be all dispoiled, as the Lamb and Wisdom in you shall yet more evidently
appear, to imprint the Mark and Name of the Great Salem. Upon whom says the
Spirit of the Bride-Love, wait, and fix, and stir not therefrom; for so she
will be your Springing Garland.

October the 2d. 1676.
SO soon as I awaked in the Morning, I was saluted with this Word, Turn not
away thy Foot, but walk in that secret Gallery, where my Spirit may with thee
commune of the Matters, which appertain to the Kingdom: Which thou have prayed
for to thy Jesus, hoping it may be admitted in thy despiseable form of
Mortality. Which may accordingly be admitted, through the watchful observation
of this Inspiring Word, which is given to be thy Guide. Who gave me Rules of
further Instruction, upon the occasion of what I was very earnest now in Prayer
about, saying thus, If thou expectest thy God should do somewhat, which is
extraordinary, and eminent, for thee, then thou must walk answerably with him,
in a singular way, according to the Oily Light of the infused Unction, which is
come to give the true Knowledge and Insight, into that Life-habitation, which
is hid by the Thicket of the Mortal Principle, through which thou art to pass,
as swift as a Dart, not minding or staying in any thing, till thou reachest the
Mark: Which is the Cup, wherein the Burning Gold of the Holy Ghost is ready
prepared, for such as can pass through this World, and not be with it touched.
Then said I, Oh my Jesus, thou requirest hard things of us, who have thought,
that none for this Prize had out-bid us, but now I see ahigher rate upon this
Jewel of the Kingdom is set; so as I do not Marvel at the great adventure, that
must be made for it. O who can hereto be persuaded, that of necessity, thus it
must be, that all we have gotten and enriched our selves with from this
accursed Egypt, must be given for the Land of Canaan, that so we may come to
the City of our Rest, to inhabit it with our Kingly Bridegroom.

Moreover this Word came unto me, Shake off all that dismal Widowhood, which
presents thee still before me in heaviness. Ah! Lord, said I, how can it be
otherwise, till the white Virgin-Robe and Airy Body be put on me, by which I
may press through the Clouds to thee. Tell me then, how I may put off, and
change that Garment, which is so muddy and heavy, that I cannot fly with it as
a Dove in to the Pavilion of Divine Secrecy, so of^ as I would. For I cannot
make any Ascension unto thee, but I find great ^trife, to lay aside this upper
Garment of Sense and Reason. For I know there is no coming unto thee with it,
it smells so of the common shore of this corrupt Earth, that nothing is more
unsavory. Who then can cure us of this Malady, but thee, O Lamb of God,

Who have the All-transmuting Power,
That can shift our Garments in one Hour.
For sure it is a lawful Ambition to be translat ed into that State, wherein it
may be said here are those, who are clothed with Garments all white, shining
like the Jasper-Light. Then replied the Spirit to me, Seeing then thou art only
sad for this cause, as not being so richly clad, as might give thee Confidence
to come in, and among the great Tabernacle-Assembly in the Heavenly Court to
present thy self; know that I thy Spirit and Comforter will Merchandise for
thee, into Wisdom's rich Mines. Where the Purple, Scarlet, and fine Linen,
with Gold and precious Stones, are for the Sanctuary-cloathing to be found, and
in Faith's Ship shall be transmitted to thee. Which Materials being brought to
thee, thy Hand, with my direction, shall work a sparkling Covering; that thou
may appear in it all glo^ous in my most high Court.

October the 5th. 1676.
The Love-jealous Eye that is over us, surveying and searching out the Evil as
well as the Good, in all the Circumstances of things, appertaining to us, was
most kind and friendly to foretell us all that might prolong or prevent the
making good what is contained, and shut up in the Promise of the New Covenant.
O the sweet, gentle Reproofs of the Spirit! how acceptable be they, when they
drive forward, and will not let us rest, or lodge on this side the Mount of
Olives, but call up to mind, who it is that thereupon does stand, echoing and
crying, O my Dove, what is the cause of thy demur? Did thou not engage that
thou would fit out my Bride, and make her ready, that her Bridegroom might be
out of all suspicion? But her delay makes me conclude, she is loath to take too
abrupt a leave from the Moabitish Land, fearing to displease them, as if her
Eye was still hankering after some Reward from this Harlotry Vagrant. All which
is included under the Curse, and therefore cannot to my Spouse make any
Addition of Blessing, but will seek to dispoil her from her greater, more
weighty, and eminent Riches with her true Honors: through the sub^le
Pretenses, that all these by her given, are provided to gratify the outward
man's Exigencies, who has need of all these things. Which smooth Arguments have
deluded Multitudes, ingulphing them deep into an irrecoverable Pit of
Perdition. Of which common Snare, O ye that are called and culled out to live
upon another Fount and Spring, take good heed: it is for such as you thereof to
be aware. It is for you not to be here caught, but still to go to Jacob's Lot;
observe therefore, and diligently enquire, when you are to depart out of
Babylon, and when the set-time is that your Laban's Service shall expire. Now
my charge unto you is, that when I your Jesus expressly alarm you, to take your
leave of all, and from all things, and to make a quick dispatch after me, that
you linger not out your time, with so many Taking of Leaves, and long Salutes,
whereby to express so hard a Come-off from this Evil World. For my Spirit will
hide nothing from me, but does give a true account, how your Mind and Will
stands toward me. He is that impartial Spirit of Truth, who on both sides is
faithful, who does as well take of yours, and snew to me, as of mine to you. He
cannot and will not make any force, without the free consent of your own Will;
nor treat with you any otherwise, then by Love's Entreaties, and those many
considerable Advantages, set before your true Spiritual Eye, which in this
Light of the anointed One, ye may spy without defraud or hindrance. And as for
thee O Shulamite, what think thou, does thy God and me more disgust, then
when my Spirit brings this Report to my Ear, that thou can not yet give
full credit to thy Espoused Lord and Husband, without wavering? My Spirit tells
me, that Love is not grown so perfect yet in thee, as to cast out every
questioning thought; which makes thee so often in Jeopardy. For could thou
undoubtedly believe in my Faithfulness, and highly great and all-sufficent
Responsibility to answer to all, and whatever relates to thee, as thou
stand in thy exiled state: I say, if in this persuasion my Spirit could thee
fix, thou would openly decry down the Beast and his great Benefactor, who
does sit on him to give Rewards, out of the false, pernicious Magic Cup; and
thou would only look to thy own Eternal Dowry, from the Hand of her who is
all over clothed with Strength, Glory, and Majesty, thereby to cover those who
are lodged in the Bridegroom's Heart. True it is, ye have not only witnessed a
good Confession with your Lips, but have also in some degree given the Sealing
Proof, by bringing out the first ripe Fruits. O know ye, who are my Garden
Plants, for what end are all my Golden Dews to you conveyed through my Spirit?
Are they not, that ye may see this fruitful Tree of Life, within your own
Lebanon, to spring, both for Food and Healing? Whereto ye are brought by that
Spirit and Power, which is in mine Elect, who are given by the Father, to be
jointsharers with me in the third great and blessed Lot of pure Breath and Heat
from the everlasting Deity. Even so to us, my God do them this infuse richly,
according to thy Word.

October the 6th. 1676.
This Word came to me, saying, None but my Eunuchs, who are separated, and have
cut themselves off from all other People, can know how to sanctify to me a
Sabbath of Rest, whereby they may cease from the toil of their own Hands. In
this Day, their Strength will be to sit still, to feel the all-piercing
Unction, that has such a high and wonderful slight, as to effect all work
without cry or noise. This I tell thee, Oh Soul, as a Secret in thy Ear; for in
this lies a deep Mystery, which is only known where the Train is purely laid,
running as out of a Spout, from the all-flowing Godhead, into the pure Eunuch
Spirit. Who has suffered a dismembring for the Life of Holy Generations sake,
through the secret, unknown way of cooperation, and essential contaction; by
which the holy thing, that is of Ghostly Authority, comes in this manner
existent, in and through Nature's frame, to get in such who are thus qualified
to shine forth as Day-Stars, in the Lamb's Celestial Firmament. After the
Spirit had revealed this unto me, it said, Who but such potent and high raised
Spirits, (pointing to some one or other, known by Name) should be called out to
bear his Name, and to shine in Wisdom and Power, as Lights before the Gentiles,
that thereby the Sons of Strangers and Aliens, may come to join themselves to
the Dayspring from on High, which though in the Clouds of Mortality, yet known
may be by the fruitful operation of the Spirit of Jesus, which works mightily
in contradiction to Reason's Eye. Reserve your selves therefore still to hallow
my great Name, in keeping within the Walls, upon which the Guardian Cherubims
are set for your defense, that there ye may keep my Sabbath from polluting: no
Burdens must there be carried through. And so you will know the beginning of
my Eternal Rest.

October the 7th. 1676.
Being upon some occasion interrupted in my Spiritual Calling, by touching with
that, which was ungrateful to the pure Spirit of Jesus, he told me, That he was
of that Seraphick Nature, that he could not delight to be where any worldly
trafficking Spirits did resort, having a disgust to whatever did spring from
this fallen accursed Principle. And therefore it was agreed, that I must keep
his Temple-Habitation pure, for that no reception must be there, but for the
Holy Trinity. The outward Court, where the common Senses flutter up and down,
is sufficient to take in what is to be considered for the Mortal Man. Who also
might well be cast upon the Spirits care, and firmly relied upon: For such in
whom this is, so shall grow, and spring as a Sabbatical Lily, without any
thought, how their Food and Clothing do come in. Ah! upon this my Spirit
cried, Lord I have been a long while getting up my Faith to this pitch, but
cannot come to the degrees of this all-conquering Faith, which may thrust out
every tittle of an Earthly Confidence. Which I well know are as the miry
Rushes, that have been a stop to this rising Lily, which grows no where, but
out of Faith's unweedy Soil. Thus, by way of Expostulation in Prayer, I
presented what the Spirit showed to me was short, and defective, and did impede
the success of the Work, going on jointly by the Lord's undertakers. Who were
thus animated and counseled by his Spirit. After that I had supplicated, and
owned the good Hand of God, in joining me to one, that had a good degree of
Love, Courage, and Constancy, to go forward with a fixed Eye, to the Mount of
Transfiguring Glory, this Word spoke to me concerning him, He is a Son of
Obedience: Therefore meet with thee to prosecute the Spirits design in this
visible Earth. Then received I only this further Charge, to keep the inward
Court of our Minds all pure and clear, as we love to entertain the Spirit of
our Jesus there. Who soon did scent every unsavory Breath, that did blow in
this Garden, which should be all perfumed from the Celestial Powers and
Planets, that are all to be blown up from his own Savours and sweet Perfumes:
So that our dear Lord, and Spirit might thereby be refreshed in us, and that
continually.

October the 8th. 1676.
Some part of this Night sweetly passed in Contemplation and Prayer, toward the
Morning I saw in Vision, a bright round Ball, pourtraid like a Man's Face,
breaking through a Cloud, and immediately two Stars broke through after it,
which were very bright and blazing. The Interpretation of which I waited fo in
my Spirit; for no Representation is without his Signification unto me. But the
Lord did not that day explain i^ to me, but I did feel an impregnative Virtue
fill me from that time, till the Afternoon. Being then met to breath, each one
from his Gift, as the Dr. was speaking, the Word said in me, Blessed is the
Glory of the Lord, which makes its remove from place to place, that the
Tabernacle-Body may bear witness to this Glory. Which verily was felt and
discerned in this very juncture of time. For the most Holy did leave the
Impress of his Glory upon us; for it did run as Lightning through my inward
parts. Thus our Jesus makes his Pace swiftly to us, to give often refreshing to
our Hearts: Hereby lifting us up from the Earth by the Spirit of his
Eagle-Might, which presses into the Heavens, there ever to live in the Bosom
Loves Rest.

October the 9th. 1676.
But still I was in great Concern, to understand the meaning of the Sun-like
Face, and Stars, which I saw the Night past. So putting my self in an holy,
awful posture, for the Spirit to place me unitedly to himself, to understand
and know as it self did know the simple Mind of the Deity: It was thus revealed
to me, that suddenly there would break out of the dark beclouded Night of our
World, an open bright Face, that should not speak to us in a deep unknown
Spirit, but Mouth to Mouth; When we shall be generated as Stars from this
Ghostly Body of Glory: Who plainly testified such a Remove would be made; If we
will be constant to the Spirit, our assigned Guide and Mate. Who will arise in
us, unto this high degree and state, as to swallow us up into this shining
Face, so that no Cloud shall be betwixt the Majesty of Glory and us: For as our
Jesus is, so this rising Spirit of Glory will bring us, into the same
Transfiguring Body of Glory.

October the 10th. 1676. The Ministration of Elisha.
As I was casting my self this Morning, into my wonted posture of interior
Silence, to hear and see what would arise out of the Spirit's deep, I was
before I was aware, surprised with a Natural Sleep, but suddenly awaked with
this Voice; Search and see what is recorded for thee, in 2 Kings 4. throughout;
not knowing, as to my own rememberance, what therein was contained, till I
looked. Wherein was the Declaration of what great and mavelous things Elisha
wrought eminently, as nothing of the New-Testament-Ministration did them
exceed. So when I had perused them, I asked and enquired by that inspiring
Spirit, who was nigh, what Portion therein was for me, that was thereunto
pointed for to look, earnestly seeking a plain understanding herein: which
through favor I did obtain after some space of time.

October the 11th. 1676.
This Word opened in way of Resolve. Know, O Soul, thou have this Elisha-Spirit
with thee, of which great Improvement may be made. If thou can know how to
draw him out, it will be possible to multiply manifoldly. Therefore I thy Jesus
directed thee to view the excellency of this Spirit, and to provoke thee to ask
a numeration of this, to lay out upon my account, so far as may reach to the
glorified state of my new exalted Humanity. As to the first part of Elisha's
ability of Spirit, which took in a sympathizing sense of the poor Widow's cry
unto him: This thou may read inwardly, as thy own deplorable condition, who
have often cried to thy Prophet, of the Oppression of this cruel Creditor, the
Prince and Spirit, who rules in the evil World, that would have taken thy two
Sons, both for Bondmen. Who are to be understood, as they relate to thy inward
and outward Man, to imbondage both, and hold them in perpetual Captivity as
Debtors, through the degenerated Principle to the Law of Sin, which makes
obnoxious to the Curse of Servitude to this wicked Usuper. From which my Elisha
Spirit is to come to set free, through the additional Blessing of Increase, out
of that Pot of Oil that is found beforehand in thee, but of no sufficiency to
redeem out of the Creditor's thraldom, till the Spirit of Multiplication do
take Knowledge and Compassion, to show what will buy thee out of all the
World's Servitude. Wherein thou have known such Perplexities and tyrannical
Thraldoms, that have constrained thee to look out for Liberty. Now then hearken
to my Counselling Word, ye who do agree as united Spirits to break this Yoke
from off your Neck, resolving no longer to be under Tribute, repair to your
Prophet Elisha, and only make him privy to all your Necessities. Let the
Prophet's Widow in this case be the Pattern in thy Eye, and in all Extremities
fly to no other. Call upon this Elisha-Spirit, for he is to be raised from the
dead, to work mighty Deeds. First in the hidden Man of the Heart, which
prepares for the working through the outward part, every Vessel must be
cleansed within, before the Golden Oil of the Almightiness will fill them. When
this is perfect, and purely done, shut the Door upon thee, and thy two Sons,
and let none come in to spy. For the Foundation-matter, for Miracles to work
upon, will run from a most secret hidden Vein. The method here of will be quite
changed, as to what was in the days of Elisha. Who though he acted parallel
with thy Jesus, in the days of his humane state of Minority, not having reached
the Coronation-Glory, could not till then set afoot this New Ministration, that
opens from the Line of the Holy Ghost. Who is that full grown Vein of Life,
which has so long under Ground been hid, because of which, no miraculous thing
has of these last days been wrought. For none has cared with my Spirit to
plunge so deep, and therefore it is for a while to lie hid, till they have
found out the right Needle, which may pierce this third Vein, that proceeds
from the Godhead. The Lifeblood of which, will be the running multiplying Oil,
which is costly indeed, thou needst not crave a greater Portion. Be not afraid
to sink down into the Spirit's Pool, or Pot of Oil, that is within the House of
thy Heart. It was Elisha's Spirit that entered in, or else the Oil had never run
so free: So do ye likewise with your Spirits. Descend, where this spring of
Blood does so deeply run, which will be of such rich Merchandise, as it will
make all of this Creation-traffick, to be of no validity. Observe with all
heedfulness, the track and way of the Spirit, in its own Eternal Ground. Follow
hard, venture to pass through every Region, whether in Darkness or in Light,
loose not this your Leader out of sight: Who will certainly bring you to the
Oily Flood, which meeting with the flaming Juniper-Wood, will send forth such
sparkling Powers and miraculous Glories, as may plainly declare, the Spirit of
that one Elisha is risen.

October the 12th. 1676.
This greatly beloved Spirit and Comforter, sent from my dear Lord Jesus,
coming now to be known by Name, Power, and Virtue, through a more free and
intimate way of converse, had hereby forestalled all other, taking off all
delight and pleasure, saving in himself alone; I knowing that with him were all
the Secrets of the Bridegroom, and that no other besides him could give me to
understand the high and deep Concerns, relating to the Kingdom, which by my
Jesus are now in agitation. Therefore who by us is to be prized like to this
Visitant, that can give such a true account how Matters and Things there do
succeed, during the time of our Exile? Who so ready and officious is as he, to
find out for us, the grand Mystery of the Knowledge of the Deity, which does
lie hidden in pure Nature's Ground? And though it is so nigh to us, yet without
this Unction Light, we might have looked long enough, and never have understood
or espied any thing of this Glory. But now he is become our Friend and
Counselor, and does bring us glad-Tydings, from the Heavenly Quire-Whence this
Morning he proposed this Question to me, Do thou believe, I am the very,
only, and true Discloser of the Father's Will, who designs to bring thee into
the New Jerusalem, to see there the Lord Jesus, in all his Princely Dignity? If
satisfied thou art herein, then wholly rest upon me, as thy sufficient Stay and
Guide: then press, I say, into me, Who am the All-flaming Stream, with whom
mingling thy self, thy Natural Property shall be so altered, as thou will be
able to pierce into the very Body of the Deity, which is my dwellingplace.
Where I am careful to fix together with my self, such who are given me in
charge by him: who has great regard for you, and has Commissioned me to
demand, and ask of you, who have made such Love-acknowledgements, whether or no
ye can leave, and forget all whatever is so affecting to the sensitive Eye, and
without much debate to fly away with me to Mount Sion? For there the perfect in
Spirit do rest, from all Cares, Labors and Strife, for that is a City free. Oh
now take leave of this imbondaged state, and trust to me for what your Lot
shall be in that lovely Land. Where into now venture, through all the cross
Streams of Rationality, as valiant Worthies, resolved thoroughly to follow me,
who cannot live in this Region, but only for your sake. I am sent from above,
but with no intent to abide long here beneath, only to cloth you Essentially
upon, as a Bride, to enter in with me; where ye shall see no more Evil: and
though in the World, yet so separated from it, as those who are no more of it.
Read and see a full discharge brought down by me: if ye can receive it, then it
will be your everlasting Liberty.

October the 16th. 1676.
This Word also opened and cried in me, Who shall see that one Day, that shall
be lengthened out to Thousands of Years. It is the Spirit's day, in which none
can live, but such who are entered into the very Body of the Spirit, that can
bear the Light of the Temple-Glory within the Holy City. The Light of this Day
is of that excessive Burning, that it will scorch up every Covering which is
not of the Spirit. Therefore ye who have prayed to see this New Creation-Day,
consider what you must suffer first, to come upon your vile corruptible Body,
which must be fashioned in this pure Spirit's property. Which by its Golden
Flood may wash and wast away the muddy part, with all that contemptible
covering of Clay, which in this Day of Burning, can in no wise be able to stay.
Now then know the Time and Season of this my Spirit's Visitation, and be
subject to every transforming Power. Which works yet by degrees, till it has
brought thee unto a solid Body, as refining into that Clarity, that the
sevenfold Sun ye may plainly see, in its strength of Glory, without a Vail upon
your Face. Do not say, How shall this be brought to pass; seeing I am a piece
of brittle Mortality, subject to an universal Creaturely malady, nothing
differing from what I see expire Daily? These are the thoughts which do arise
in thee, out of Fear, and Spiritual Modesty. But thy Humility must be the only
Foundation for the Spirit of Faith to rise and effect, what may be done in
order to the rising of this everlasting Day, of the Spirit's clothing Body of
Light. Which, Oh thou Shunamite, shall make thee all fair, and give thee
acceptance in my sight.

October the 18th. 1676.
O! the resistency, that the Spirit of Reason did raise, pleading
Impossibility, that ever gross earthliness should be so covered over, and
impregnated with a Ghostly Body, generated and consubstantiated from that one
Eternal Element, so as to hide the now appearing frail piece of Mortality. The
Spirit of Prophecy in me, which opened and declared of these things, which were
to come to pass in us, said, If hereunto we could set our Seal of Beiief, and
give place to the Spirit of Truth, they could not fail of their accomplishment.
But if Faith over Reason did not get Victory, the Amen did testify, the Spirit
would be too weak to bring forth such a miraculous Body for himself organically
in every part, to the fulfilling of the great Mystery, which has been so often
and largely predicted of. Here I had renewed subject matter for Prayer, that
our Faith might not fail, earnestly invocating, that the holy Breath might fill
up our Sails here withal continually. Upon this I did see in Vision: A Covering
let down upon me of all wrought Gold, interwoven with Scarlet-colored Silk; so
as it looked wonderful rich to my Eye. Which I viewed with great marvel,
attending the Word of Signification, which thus opened in me, saying, This is
the Workmanship of the Spirit: Who has only Wisdom and Skill to inlay the
weighty Gold, and work it in with the Silk to make it thus lustrous, as thou
see. But herein lies a greater, deeper Mystery yet, as it both presents
Deity and Humanity thus interwoven together. To show how your Humane
Will-Spirit must be wrought into this All-deified Spirit; which to the
ground-form of Silk gives the shine and glory in the variety of Flowers
embossed thereupon; according to the similitude, which to thee was let down,
with the engraving of the Sacred Name, that is, that Princely Clothing; upon
which is written Salvation, Strength and Honor; the unparalled Workmanship of
the Spirit of Glory, that now to you my elected Ones, is come to call in the
assistance of your Wills, to work and join with him in all Power and Might,
till ye come to be inlaid into his De^fied Being, and thus curiously wrought
without the least default; For not one wry Stich must be found in this
Covering, but all according to the perfect. Rule seen in the Pattern. Know, I
Jesus have sent my Spirit into you, to work in Secrecy, this all-covering
Tent. It will be Business enough to keep Pace, and to follow the Hands of these
working Powers, that never will be idle, calling still to the Spirit of your
Wills to comply, and for to hold out with it steadily. For this is a Work which
must be stuck to, it will admit of no Nightslumbering, the Furnace is to be
kept in a constant heat, for the Golden Thread which enterweaves with the Silk,
is still to be drawn out of the central Fire. Oh now ye who have pried after
this rich Covering of the Spirit, you see whereunto you must give your selves,
that this all glorious Covering of the Spirit may rise and shine upon you, that
so ye may enter my Everlasting Courts with Confidence and Joy. Where your
Bridegroom will greatly rejoice over you, when ye are thus clothed upon with
the bright Body of the holy Sparkling Sapphire. Into which suffer my Spirit to
work you, that I may with freedom, own, receive, and enjoy you, as my
all-lustrous Bride. Even so, Oh holy One, prosper thy Work in us.

October the 21st. 1676.
In the Night I had this Representation of a Vine, upon a Wall, which was very
fruitful, but not come unto its full ripeness. There appeared several sorts of
Fruits, besides Grapes, all springing from the Vine-Root. Which while viewing,
there came a cluster of Caterpillars, with black Heads, fastening upon the
young sprouted Fruit to eat it off, in this its Minority. At which sight I was
much concerned, how to prevent the marring of such choice Fruit. After I came
to weigh and consider the thing in the Spirit's understanding, the Word of
Revelation opened, and said, This Vision was for caution, and warning unto us,
who were now incorporated into that Vine-Root, to bring forth Fruits, according
to what the Spirit has sowed and watered, so as they begin to consubstantiate
into Fruit. Whereunto we coming to this first primary putting forth great
danger does attend this new crop of the Spirit, though they seem as harmless,
inconsiderable Worms, yet they unconceivably destroy, and eat, and suck away
the very Juice of the Grape, leaving only the empty Husk. For which cause,
says the Spirit, I have this warning given, lest ye should not be heedful
enough of this my painful Husbandry, which I have brought forth in you. For
these little Foxes, and crawling Worms are as pernicious to my new planted
Nursery, as those greater Beasts of Prey: Therefore ward and watch, keep all
Invasions of this kind out, when ever they do set upon thee, and would assault
to snip away my first Fruits. Then take to thee speedily the Bucket of Faith,
and let down into me, who will open the Heavens to bring down Showers, that
shall wash and scatter away these devouring Caterpillars out of thee.

October the 21st. 1676.
It was further shown me, as I was in Prayer, upon this occasion, how our
Vineyard might be kept, each one from being preyed upon. This Word was shot in
from the Lord upon me, Keep thy Eye upon this new springing Lily, sit under the
Shadow of it, and go not out from it. Its fruitfulness will befriend thee, when
this World with all its fruitfulness, shall be as a dry Tree. Therefore make it
thy only Shelter and Stay, for the Essential Power of the Deity flows forth,
as the Spirit in thee can draw it forth. That then ye may fully scent this
Flower of Lise, and live upon it day by day: then thou needst not wander from
the Spirit's Tent. Who has sufficiency to keep thee, if thou could go
forward, and work with him in this Magia Calling. Which divine Skill and Art,
has been hid from the whole Creation, and a false Craft has stolen away the
Heart universally. While this has been hid under the Seven Seals, and none
worthy found to break open this deep Magia Ground, where that weighty Gold is,
that will buy out thousands of such drossy Worlds, in which all ignorant and
earthly Inhabitants do trade. But to you that separate, and are willing by me
to be persuaded, to find out that old ancient Vocation, where neither Curse,
Sorrow, nor Pain do attend; which was, and is to be renewed again: to such as
can get free from this Principle, and live in def^nce to it, as not fearing,
nor caring evermore to make friendship with it; there is a better Store upon
the opening unto you. To whom I am as a forerunner upon this account, sent to
assure you, there are such precious things given by the Father into my Hand, as
ye shall not need to sue to this World for its favor. For the time is nigh,
wherein the now despised shall be described what they are.

October the 25th. 1676.
Through the abundant Openings, out from the Light of that Day of the Lord,
encompassing my Intellectual Part, filling me as a burning Lamp within, showing
still some one thing or other new, upon which I cried, and said, Ah my God,
what will all this Knowledge and Light with me amount unto? For to know deep
and secret things, is both sweet and pleasant, whether they be for present or
future Existency. But this is not to be all my Dowry, though they are of great
use and service; yet here I cannot stay, neither dare I take up fullness of Joy,
there is something else yet behind, which must fill this Heavenly Body of
Light. Oh that one weighty Drop, that I do see ready to fall off, on that
bright Sapphire Body, will be the Birth-Seed, that extends not only to Will,
but to perform and do what it sees in the Light. When this shall drop, the
Nature as it stands in the Line of the Fall, with the weight thereof, shall be
broken and dissolved, for no patch of Clay upon this Gold, is evermore to be
seen, as it was declared to me. Who upon this. Expostulation, further said, and
brought this Word with a fresh application unto me, saying, As the Father has
Life in himself, so has he given the Son to have Life in himself also; which
Words in John 15. 26. were thus opened to me, Here is a stock of Life to be
given out, in an absolute way of propriety, but to whom is it, but to the Royal
Birth, of such as are born into the Spirit. Whereof ye, who through strong
travail are hither come, are to be fellow-sharers in this Life with God the
Son. But ye are yet but young, and do not understand what this Life will extend
unto: if preserved choicely, you shall find in it the the root of that matter
to work upon, which is sufficient to create and translate, according to the
will and skill of thi^ Life-Operator. Which derives a Power out of its own free
Birth-center, which has no dependency out of its own Being. Call to
remembrance that saying Man is become like one of us, and he would still have
exercised the same authority as a God, had the evil been only known and
eschewed; for which end Jesus has sent his redeeming Spirit, to clear off all
your old Accounts, as being found in the Debt-Book of Sin, and also to convince
you, there is no necessity that you should run one Mite more upon that score,
ye being born of a free estate of Righteousness of your own, which now you are
charged to expend upon. For in the time of Ignorance, before you came to know
what was sown in your Ground, ye might be more excused. But now I have
revealed, where does lie the rich Revenues of the all sufficiency, ye need
neither seek, ask, or borrow, did you know ^ow to stir up, and awaken your own
Magia. Through which, all wherein you have been taught, must thoroughly ^e
wrought, as the mighty Engineer to bring forth what has lain under the Vail of
Faith and Hope. Plunge, plunge ^et deeper in, within the Circle-Birth of ^his
pure thing.

October the 25th. 1676.
As I was considering of this Discoursive Opening of the Spirit, it was
immediately confirmed to me, by a presentation after this manner. The Word
said, Behold the Idea of another Paradisical Sphere. I saw a Tree spring
suddenly out of a great River, with three laden great Branches, then sprang
diverse more young Plants, all sprouting from the Veins or Strings from this one
Tree. Each one with no more, then three Branches, but of different growths:
Some new budded, others bearing Flowers in order to Fruits, others grown to
palpable Fruit. All round about this one Tree. Upon which it was said to me,
These are as so many Gods, which are ascended out of the Earth, to replenish
that which lay void and desolate. Here each one has, and is growing up in a
Life of Subsistency, and Almighty Sovereignty, deriving all this Power and
Might, from the Tree of Life. Which sheds its Kernel-Seed into this River; for
such is the Nature of this Thron-River, that it no sooner falls in, but it
springs immediately into this threefold Form of the Deity. O stagger not,
neither be confounded at this, for except ye had been born again of this Water
and Tree of Life, that sheds the Golden Seed of the Spirit, ye should never
have known, the existency of a Life-Sove^aignty. Therefore to you not only the
^ight and Spring of Understanding is ^iven, but the everlasting Life-Line from
his Tree does run free, because you have ^rned in your Spirits and hearkened to
^y Inspirations. But remember your ^ife has many subtle, treacherous ^riends,
that pretend to it, that will say ^s Peter did, far be it to thee to give up ^e
loss of all the old Life, and only rest, ^bsist, and alone depend on this. But
^ow, this is but the tempting Voice of ^e Serpent, as in the days of Eve, by
those Fall be thou aware. And now ^hile ye are but Infants, suck and draw
^ightily from this Tree of Life, and you ^ill soon grow to be strong, to have
this ^se trusted in your own management. ^o you, whose Ears are so open to hear
^e, I do greatly delight to commune with ^ou, that if by any means I might
encourage you to hold out, and not slide back from my Precepts. Which will
assuredly entrust you in all Zion heights and Spirit depths of unfathomed
Treasury. Now haste, haste to your covering Strength of Glory, your Nazarite
Hair, while abiding in this Paradisical Sphere, will soon grow upon you, that
so therein may be your defense from all Philistines Powers. Now then in Jehovah
Magnanimity abide with me his Spirit, evermore to dwell and be. So Amen, dear
Lord I pray thee.

October the 26th. 1676.
Being met together to attend the Manifestation of the Spirit, by which we
might profit each other, in the Afternoon as the Dr. was praying, this Word
came to me, Make use of the present Opportunity, when ye have the King at the
Banquet, then is the time to prefer your Request. Upon which wa^ brought to my
remembrance, the wise P^licy of Esther to King Ahasuerus. Which that Night was
more opened, enlarged, and applied for our present and further Peace, Joy and
Encouragement to follow on to know the whole Counsel of our God concerning us,
who now reveals all Secrets by the Spirit, who presented Mordecai in the
Person of himself, being left to him as Orphans. The whole trust, care, and
charge being cast upon this faithful Mordecai, to bring us up to that degree of
Humility, Meekness, Courage, Zeal of Life, and to all sweet Spiritual
Disposition of Mind, that the King, the Father might greatly desire us; for
herein consists our Beauty and Comeliness, which is so taking. Vashti was
refused because of Arrogance and Disobedience, but Esther finds favor, being
mild and pliable, yielding to her Guardians Commands, though to the peril of
her Life. So assuredly said this Comforter; Be ye but wise and obedient to me,
who will put you upon nothing but what I do foresee, will arise for your great
promotion and considerable advantage, as ye my dictates shall obey. Who do make
use of this History of the Scripture yet, that my Mind may be more easily
understood, you not being able to bear nor understand me in my own Tongue, till
further learned. For which I am come down to your understanding through the
Skreen of the Letter.

October the 27th. 1676.
Now this Morning it was set before me, according to the Example of Esther,
that for a certain time, it was expedient, that we should sanctify our selves,
by a true Fast in pure Abstinency from their Assembly-Feasts; 2dly, From
tasting any thing that is ministered from this gross Element, but to draw apart
from all, keeping our Internal part from being defiled, shutting up from all,
reminding only the overturn of Haman's device; That great subtle Adversary,
that had laid the Plot against the new introduced Life, to cut it off before
the King had put Honor upon it, to bring it through the City-Royal, upon his
own Eagle-Body of Power. Now seeing the malicious design of the Serpent, with
all his Confederacy, was gone very far in this matter, there was no other way
to reverse the Decree, but by famishing the Earthly Life, with all that
pertains thereto, casting out the disobedient Vashti; that so such a Virgin
might be sought out, as might please the King, and upon all occasions might
have his Ear. Now Esther is only to speak what Mordecai, the Divine Life puts
into her mouth, Words of Wisdom, to outdo all the Serpent's subtilty. This
prudent Mordecai fore-sees for Esther all dangers that are like to accrue,
gives present notice, that so Evils may be escaped, before they do overtake. Oh
here through this Similitude, how freely and plainly did the most Holy Spirit
reveal what lay hid in the Mystery, further advising us to prepare a Banquet,
after the touch of the Golden Scepter, which gives the Token of Acceptance.
Mordecai contrives with Esther jointly, what Provision to make, only knowing
what the Royal Court fare is, bringing in those choice things which the King
feeds upon. So that this Banquet consists all of Fruits, but not raw, or gross
ripened from this old Element, but such as are preserved with all sweet
restorative Spices, fetched from the Land of Havilah, where the Golden Liquor
flows, and the sweet Canes do grow. The Wine to this Feast all answerable
hereunto refined from the Lees, served out of that one Golden Cup, that none
ever drank out of, but the great Donor of the Feast, who will only receive it
from the Hand of the Bride. Then said the Spirit to this Bride, All things are
now ready, invite the King and your God unto this Supper. Your Banquet thus
ordered, you need not doubt of the King's company; and though the proud
Haman-Spirit may here intrude, yet fear not, for his doom will be suddenly
given. Oh Esther, who art in great favor with the King, put forward, and spare
not to ask, that now thy Life may be forthwith given unto thee in a Princely
Subsistency. All that is in thy Heart, at such a time as this, may verily be
answered, and thou go away with Joy of Heart, not that only thy Accuser is cast
out, but thou art come near to the Scepter of the Kingdom, to live without
toil, or bryarly Cares. Thus did the Spring-Unction make it applicable to us,
by reiterating all this over again, that so hereby we might be assured
whereunto this Golden Scepter, let down by the Hand of the King, would bring
us, who in an Esther-like Spirit of Humility and Faith do draw near to it. It
was also further noted to me from the Spirit, that whenever we had these
Tabernacle-Feasts, and the presence of Glory in it, we should not get only a
Promise to alter the Handwriting that had gone out against us, but to press
such Arguments, as thereby to overturn the whole state of our Captivity, under
the Babylonish Haman-Spirit, and to get Letters written, and sealed in the
King's Name. Which will give the Authority and Credit in this our Enemies Land,
to stand for our Lives, and to have defense, even the Omnipresence of Strength
granted out of the King's Armory, to do what we would in the Spirit of
Mordecai, that goes in and out in the presence of the King. Who with Esther the
Bride, has won the Day, which is Light, Gladness, Joy and Honor to the Lamb
and Bride.

October the 28th. 1676.
The Spirit of Jesus made this further Observation out of this History unto us
from Mordica's great Princeliness of Spirit, who knowing he was of the blessed
Seed, though at present under Captivity, still maintained his Integrity,
trusting in the God of Abraham, and would bow down to no other, though Haman
was great and potent, having Power by permission from the King, to save or
destroy. From hence the living Word i^ me said, According to this Example,
follow ye this my faithful, Mordecai Spirit, from whom, and into whom you are
born, though for probation suffered to be carried to dwell in Babylon, where
tempted ye have been, because you have had no Power or Might to rule, or
deliver your selves, while that Haman's insulting Spirit of Reason was yet
alive within you, who represents the Strength and mighty Fortitude of Reason,
that can plead such inducing Arguments as carry a mighty sway, complaining of
the strange and different Laws of my Spirit, after the manner of Haman. Whose
Spirit is alive at this day, to deceive with all subtilty, and now his Wrath
and Rage is the more enkindled against ye, because ye have slighted and refused
to bow, and own his Lordliness. Who does exalt himself in Name and Nature, that
so none must live in his Land, but such as will worship him as God. But you in
whom my Life Mordecai has stirred, maintain your Heavenly stateliness in this
matter, stoop not, though your Life is to be cut off, with all the Comforts,
Privileges and attending Honors of it. Fear none of these things; remember,
Mordecai's Reward shall assuredly be yours. The great King of Heaven like
Ahasuerus, has given this World's Preferments into the Power of the great
Haman's Spirit of Reason, who is a Prince does reign over all, that your God
may see who will hold out in their Integrity, in refusing to be under the Laws,
though none greater in this visible Kingdom then he. Now this History I have
taken up, and applied to you, to observe in every Tittle, that you, with me
your Jesus, may come to Royal Honor and Dignity, by refusing the Beast, and
the Dragon's allurings from this visible Babylon. And by adhering with Esther
in all sweet Humility, to the Masculine Spirit of my undaunted Mordecai. Thus
ye shall rise unto Strength, Glory, and Immortality.

October the 29th. 1670.
This Morning, this Word so soon a^ I awaked, saluted me, saying, Arise, an^
call upon thy God, who gives the^ what to ask. From which I preferre^ my
Requests, finding a pressure of a^ ascending Power, that carried my spirit to
view a Place, that was with variety of Colors paved, and there I saw a Woman
standing of so amiable a Counte^, the Complexion so unutterabl^ pure, for
fineness and clearness of Skin as no mortal Image must compare therewith. While
I was in admiration hereof, a Voice spoke, Oh Esther, what i^ thy Petition, thy
Beauty has ravishe^ my Eye: Thy Place is to abide in my Royal Court. A little
space after thi^ I found my self mounted upon a Horse^ to be carried whither I
knew not; bu^ I was not concerned at all, for I was fu^lly satisfied in my
Guide. I heard a Cry after me to detain and prevent my going forward, but the
Person that took me up, said, Be still, and give no Ear. These are but the
Screeh-Owls of the Night, and Birds of prey; which would stop and steal our
Treasure from us. So I was carried on with great swiftness, into a secret
solitary way, from out of the sight and noise of all active Creaturely
Inhabitants. For it was said, Thus it must be, if you will see a New Creation,
with the replenished Life Plants, that grow there all-flourishing and clear,
according to the pure Element that is there. At which offer, and upon the terms
specified, I for my self, and for my traveling Friend, did perfectly agree, on
^o proceed, as this our Dove-Mate should us bear upon her Wing of Power. Not
fearing to adventure through a Desert state, and to draw off from all
Communions, which are of this visible Sphere. For another Voice in my Ear did
cry. Depart, and come out, touch nothing, neither mingle your Offerings with
Korah, or his Company: who though they may appear with Censers in their Hands,
yet do you not them come near, for the Earth does close upon them as their most
visible dark covering. From whom Away, with me, your flying Horse of Power.

October the 30th. 1676.
Being in my private Ejaculations, this Word sounded in me, All Prayings,
Prophecyings, Speakings, are of no validity but what proceed from the
Headcovering: which is the Miter-Crown of Purity and Power, which the Unction
alone for you must draw down from him, who holds in his Hand the Seven
Star-Powers to encompass you round, that so no nakedness may be more found upon
you. For what is more empty, naked, and void, then Words that are not touched
with the Altar-Coal, that gives Impregnancy wherever it falls? Therefore
hereunto watch, and go not forth in any of these ministering Services, without
you wrap up close this Nazarite Covering of Strength about you; for want of
which your Labors have been fruitless, and my Spirit has been under reproach
and derision to you; which shame I am come to take off from you, to whom this
Caution I do give, not to be too hasty, to run out, before you have put on your
Garment of strength. Better it is to wait in Secrecy, till thy Coverting is
all finished by him, who in his own method moves and works all effectually;
into whose Mold being cast, ye will certainly come forth a much more refined
piece of glorious workmanship, for the illustration of the Spirit's
Ministration. Which Wheel has by the decree of the Almighty begun to move; Now
see to it, and keep it still going side by side, with the Spirit that is the
Life-motion of it, who will plunge you in, to know and see yet greater things,
as you can keep strait course with it. Then may you dive into the Seven
Star-Pool, which will draw out the last Trumpet-shout, of a God Omnipotent, for
a Covering throughout to thee. Who but thee, oh thou Spirit, in the burning
Wheel can work: which for us effect quickly.

October the 31st. 1676.
Toward the First Day in the Morning, I saw the Dr. as in a public Theater,
bearing a high Testimony for the Spirit, in a Youthful figure, and Hair grown
brown and bushy. Who was acted forth that he bore down many that seemed to
doubt and question, what he from the authority of the Spirit witnessed to. Upon
which it was said to me, This should be fulfilled in his season; upon whose
rising Day, wait to the fulfilling Joy: From this presentation it was given me
to conclude, that the D. should assuredly be made an able Minister of the
Spirit in some signal proof of it. Which I sought my God for, in reference to
the Glory that would be manifested, through the lifting up the Standard of this
mighty defensive Spirit. Whom we do begin already to feel, is so busy again in
us, as gives good ground of hope, that somewhat is to be brought forth, that
shall make a free and clear place for the Holy Ghost, to act forth his own
Power in the Humanity.

November the 1st. 1676.
THis Day upon Mr. Bromley's account, the Dr. was engaged to speak in Public,
whose Sails were spread and filled with Breath from the Anointing Power. After
which I found my Spirit much called into an inward stillness, to find out the
original Wheel, that turns the whole Creation about. As seeing all things
short; though they are brought forth in Spiritual Appearances; they pass away
as yet too weak to bring forth the transfigured state. Upon which
consideration, I went to my Nights Repose in some heaviness of Spirit, mourning
after the Life-working Power, to deliver me from this, and every surviving Hour
of Temptation; importuning for a naked access to the Throne of Majesty, where I
might have freedom to open all in plainness of Speech, and to hear without any
other Medium, but the Spirit's Ear, what God would answer to me. Upon which I
had presented four moving Wheels of Flame Color: As they turned, they opened a
deep in the ground, which still dissolved, and melted away where ever they
went, so they kept on their circling course, having at last no more ground to
move upon, all being burnt up before them. A Seraphim with six Wings all
covered them, only through every Wing an Eye was seen; and then the Wheels were
lifted up, and did ascend. Then a Voice came unto me, saying, Mark and see,
what you must be turned into, if you will see the bare and naked Majesty of
Glory. Can thou think to bear the presence of an Immense Light, that is of
such a transparency without a Cherub's covering upon all thy working Wheels. If
thou will come to the heights of Zion-Glory, come prepare for to be undone in
thy own sensitive Life, the very Pillars of the House o^ Nature will be shaken,
the keepers thereof will tremple. Man must cease, when God descends into his
Holy Place; these flaming Coverts of the Spirit, will le^ nothing of the Flesh
inherit with it. Therefore till thou do agree to thi^ there can be no
possibility of coming in to that great Assembly, where the Mos^ High does over
all Worlds reign, wit^ his Train of glorified Spirits. When had after this
manner discoursed, the result of my importunity was thus given to me; I was
convinced what such an access for continuation there would cost. For it was
showed to me, there must be down right Payment, Words would not alone pass. All
our earthly Goodness and Godliness was to be given away for this Cherub's
Covering, and no longer in the Tents of Babylon to stay; there to live in the
midst of a People of unclean Lips. Now the great thing is, how this shall be
brought to pass, for who shall live, when God does this? Yet seeing the
all-knowing Spirit has plainly hereof advertised, that so to us it may not
come as a surprise, when these burning Wheels shall wholly undermine and
consume what it finds of that putrified Earth in us, Oh then I do see the six
Winged Seraphim will be our Covering, through which we shall behold, the Lord
the mighty King upon his Throne of Glory, according as has been foretold, and
there his mighty Voice shall hear, which now sounds in our Ears, from that
Seraphick Sphere.

November the 3d. 1676.
As I was introverted into my self this Morning, calling over those things
revealed, upon the Representation of the four Wheels that eat out the Earth,
which it moved upon; this Word moreover cried in me, Suffer these Wheels to
turn in thee, though it be painful, rejoicing that ye are come to dwell under
this Cherub-Covering; where under abiding with all wariness, the Eagle-Bird may
fly out thece in great Might, Strength and Glory. Which Words I took great
Observation of, for much is to be understood therefrom, as is to be believed in
by us, whom it concerns.

This Day in the Evening at our own private Meeting, in which the Lord did much
appear with us, it was given me to speak from the new covered Earth, which was
once as a solitary parched Ground, but now it was showed me, that it is now
become all covered with the utmost variety of springing Flowers, all
flourishing, which will still abide in us, so long as the Watercourse keep
their due springing Tides, with the Spiritual Constellations, opening from the
Cherub-Bride, who dwells in that hot Beaming Body of the Sun, that renews
Life to every growing Plant that is brought forth under the Cherub-Tent. Oh
here I did see in some few, a fruitful Field or Soil, and a full replenished
Garden, which invited him, who is our true Seeds-man in, to view and see, what
might be more eminent, and excellent in us, to engage his walking presence with
us. In whose company, we do witness the out-breathed scent, of what is planted
by his own Hand.

November the 4th. 1676.
This Day going out, I suffered loss, meeting with some scatterings, which for
that space stopped the Wheel-work; which being sensible of, I had no quiet,
till the holy Watcher came down, and moved it forward again, clearing all that
did clog, and made it move heavily. This Word with an Emphatical Power to me
came, saying, Oh wherewithal shall a Young Man cleanse his Way, but by taking
heed unto my Word? which was further confirmed by another ecchoing Voice, a
little space after, Regard this as a seasonable Warning. So that from hence, it
was fully set home upon me, that every speaking Word from under the Cherubim
Oracle, from whence the holy Sound does pass, the Light thereof is to be obeyed
in all things. And it would be as the Burning Wheel, refining, and making pure;
for no longer then our Minds and Hearts, as the Highway of the Spirit are
cleansed, can I said the Holy One, walk there. For my delightful Pace is
through the green and flourishing Path, where on either side Plants of
Righteousness do stand, all in their Youthful Statures.

November the 5th. 1676.
This Morning it was said to me, There was a secret reservatory, where the
hiding of all the Armory Power was. Then something of a strong fenced Place,
standing upon a Hill was shown me, which was so high, that it would be very
difficult thither, to ascend. Which caused great thoughtfulness in me. In which
interim of time, the Dr. coming in to Pray, this Vision passed away, and I
understood nothing more of it that day. But while the Dr. was in a very
contrite frame, so expressed by Prayer, this Word concerning him was spoken.
The humble Person I will save, whose Cause I have heard, and will plead. Which
gives a new Sealing Witness to all former Words, that the Love-Eye looks
still, toward those that are lowly of Heart, taking heed to the inspeaking
Word, watching daily thereunto.

November the 6th. 1676.
This Night the Wheel-motion was very restless in me, to find out this Armory
Power, of which I had a presentation, greatly sollicitous was the Spirit of
Prayer, pleading to find an entrance into that secret place, where I was
assured the hiding Gifts of Eternal Powers were concealed. Which being found,
that would then, by a willing suffered-force be fetched out to effect the great
and high intent of that mighty Cyrus, who will be raised as that principal
Shepherd, to go before us unto this strong fenced Place. Who said unto me, Be
still, thy Time is not yet fulfilled to enter this Tower of Strength. There is
an Eagle-Bird under the Cherub Wing, which is a hatching, for which you must
wait a while, till it is all fletched and flig: that only can mount you up. It
must be this Eagle Eye that can fly so high, to face this secret Place, upon
which the Sunbeams do lie so hot, that no other can come nigh her. It is but
fruitless Labor, to climb up with a ponderous Body to the top of this
Mountain. Therefore keep close, and warm under the Dove's Wing, and your Spirit
will answerably grow into the Nature of a swift flight to reach to this place.
Which is called by the Name of Shammah; the everlasting Armory of Wisdom and
Strength lies there to be drawn out by such as can assume the Eagle-strength.
Oh hereunto watch with all heed, and keep under the overshadowing Wing, that ye
may come hereunto at one Flight, that ye may be out of all further care and
fear. This is so strong a Fort, that commands all Worlds that stand under it.
They will indeed find the impregnable Power, who do attain the full growth of
this swift winged Might. Then it will be in your own Power to scatter and make
fly, whatever opposes you from the Spirit of Enmity; all which shall be
subdued from the Armory of this strong Tower, that henceforth to you who are
diligent Seekers shall be opened. Look and see, for the Eagle-Shell is
assuredly upon the crackling.

November the 7th. 1676.
At this time it was much upon my Spirit, to seek and make after that which
might evidence not only to our selves, but to the unbelieving World round about
us, that the Life-acting Power was with us. For else whereby should we be able
to make out our conjunction with the Spirit, but by stretching forth the full
Banners of it, as the great Testimonial Witness of the mighty Presence taken up
in us? As I was deep upon this Consideration, this Word from the Lord came to
me, saying, What more signal Sign can you desire to demonstrate your true
Spiritual Birth by, then this; that you have not heard of, and seen the Sign of
the Son of Man in the Heavens, as Distinct from you; But behold this is given
you, the very same to be; which in its time, will show it self to be the Son of
God, by and through the Resurrection from the Dead. Till which time, ye must
suffer under a Vail, in Conformity like to your Jesus; who was of no reputation
in the World; as giving him no Credit, nor Honor, till by Death they saw the
Vail rent, and the Earth shake; then they began to be convinced, that this must
needs be the God-Man. Even so on thou must proceed, to give witness by thy
Death mystically, as he did naturally give proof thereof, by Rocks rending, and
Earth-tremblings, which will be at the yielding up of the Ghost. This happily
somewhat has been reached to, but yet there must be an open show thereof.
Crucifixion is a lingering Death; let the Blood and Water so freely outrun from
thee, that may bear Record to all, that thy Spirit is ascended into the
Father's Bosom. From whence may be expected thy return, to bring down that
Spirit, which will raise that Body, through which that Signal Sign shall be
manifested, that can assume Authority to release, what has been in Captivity:
And ye shall go forth with the Scepter dominion. Ye have but this one thing to
effect, to show out your selves risen from the Dead. Then you will find that
every Breath which proceeds from you, is of such force, as to command the whole
Heavenly Host.

November the 9th. 1676.
As I was this Morning cast into some perplexity, about the instability, which
I found my self incident unto, that I could not keep afloat upon the broad
River, still to swim in the full Stream of the Spirit. But some entervenings
would happen to stop my pace, and prevent if it might be, the arrival to that
most sweet and blessed Port, which has been designed for us. I for this called
in the High Throne-Councel, to know what shall be done for us, who are sensible
of these petty sinkings. When the Lord has given the Word to come after him,
though it be upon a boisterous Sea, could we steer our Course upon Faith's
Boat, the floating tossing S^a would soon come to be Calm. But oh! my
staggering Spirit is not to such a steadiness come, as with my Jesus all like a
Spirit there to talk with him, who may yet now again be seen to walk in the
deep Ocean. These things being the matter of my Meditation and Consultation
with that Word, which was to me very nigh, it suddenly cried within me thus,
What stability can ye come unto till the four Winds are withheld, which awaken
the old condemned Life in all its Essences. Then was presented a Hand from
under a Wing, which knit up these blasting Winds, that they might not hurt the
new replenished Field, out of which are expected the Seven Years Plenty. Then
hereby I saw, it was only this strong Eagle-Hand, which could the rough
East Wind stay, that caused those swarming Flies to b^z and make a noise,
sucking away those Honey-Dews, so soon as they do fall. It was also further
noted to me, that these Winds were of that evil consequence, as to put to wreck
the Sailing Ship of Faith, whereby all the out-ventured stock of Life is to be
brought in. These four Winds were also named to me; as 1 st, Wormwood. 2 dly,
War. 3 dly, Anguish. 4 thly, Destruction. These being let loose, did blow up
the Natural Senses, breathing fresh Life every moment into them, So maintaining
the Spiritual War. For so long as the carnal low Sense lives, and is hereby
revived, it will be active after many a deadly stroke, to nullify that
supersensual Life of Revelation, that cannot take its place, till these
Lifebreathing Winds be bound up. Then was showed me an Engraving like a Seal,
with the Emblem of an Olive Tree with three branches, and it was said to me,
When ye are Sealed with this living Print, you then shall know a fixed Life.
These Winds can no more hurt, if once they may but stop, till ye are feelingly
impressed with this Olive Tree. This is another manner of Life, then what is
subject unto Mutability. For what is greater then for the Life of the Holy
Trinity, to be appropriated penetratingly by way of Sealing? Now for this great
preparation thereto, is required the one pure unleavened Lump, all passive
without Life, to receive the Impression. Which accordingly was performed, by
the overshadowing of the Dove, that gave the living Witness of being Baptize
into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. By which the Contrary Winds
were restrained, that they could not blow up the dark Mists and Fogs any more.
So from hence feeling in me a pure Serene Calmness, the Powers of the Eternal
World did let fall sweet pleasant Dews, from which the Fruitful Sharon did
spring, to entertain the Trinity, within the circumference of this holy Ground,
which is now so strongly enclosed, and fortified, that nothing common or
unclean can pass hereunto: for the pure Winds from the Heavenly Element gave
forth a new fresh Air, all clear and bright; so that in the Light thereof,
liberty was given for Holy Walks, as in a Supercelestial Region, there to take
up the Souls true Central Rest. Even so sweet Jesus, never let me venture out,
lest those perilous Winds should me overtake; to unfix me out of the even
Temperature, wherein all stability will the Mind most safely and securely Fix.

November the 12th. 1676.
Now upon this Sealing opened and enlarged the great Mystery of the three
Heavenly Witnesses, which gives light to the Understanding, and makes it
capable of knowing and comprehending the Souls true Originality; as to what it
was, what it is, and what it is to be: what it was in its first pure State,
then how it fell, and lastly what it is to be, and after what manner to be
restored. In which three Particulars these Witnesses do unfold themselves, and
bear Record; but the chief and principal of these is the Third, or the
Restoration; whereby God raises the Fallen Tabernacle, going forth in a new
Creation and Formation; to produce a suitable Habitation for himself, wherein
the Father does in the first place record his own Name; which is demonstrated
in opening a Flood-gate of Love; expressed in the Gift of his Son; not only to
be born for us, but be born in us, bearing witness that we are hereby passed
from the Misery, Death, Curse, and the Wrath of God, into the Liberty and
Similitude of the Deity it self, wherein the Righteous and Immaculate Nature of
Jesus does spring as the Lily in the Valley. For it is not a bare Record or
Report of these Witness, but it is an essential Body. All-Deiform, which is a
Record that can never be obliterated; for that the Holy Ghost is the sure
Pledge hereof, which does keep alive this Impression, by his continued Motives
and Operations. So that what is Invisible in the Heavens, is made Visib^ to the
Dove Eye, through which thy Soul has its Seeing By which Seeing it is
marvellously enflamed, and affected, with those Objects that so beautiful,
excellent, and enamouring are, that do wonderfully take the Mind off from these
low Animal and Natural Things, the Super-celestial Life being raised, and
employed altogether upon what is so ineffably Joyous and Glorious. For thus the
higher Heavens are brought down by this Trinity of Witnesses, into the
habitable part of Man's Earth.

November the 20th. 1676.
The Ternary of Witnesses upon the Earth, answering to the Impression, from the
three Branches of the True Olive Tree, were now heard to give in severally
their Testimony, agreeably with that which is given in the Heavenly Places, in
order to the bringing about the greatest and highest of all Ministrations,
which is that of the Holy Ghost; and to the completing, and defending of the
Kingly Birth, from the Virgin Woman, which the Dragon ever watches against, to
destroy it. And hence was it given me to understand the several Offices and
Business, belonging to each one of these, to make ready for the Birthday and
to protect this Highborn One from the raging Floods and the tempstuous Winds
of the Adversary. The Spirit's Work is to reprove, convince, exhort, counsel,
caution and comfort, in order to the carring on this great Affair. The work of
the Water is another witness, as you find it in you, as a bubling Pool,
cleansing every part within, that so not the least defect may be found in the
Matrix, whereout the Birth must open. Then the Blood is a great Testimonial
Witness and Evidence, as in a mystical manner conveyed, tasted, and drunk down
by them, that do carry the matter of this Birth, for it does produce a vigorous
Life, that will be known and felt, to refresh both Mother and Babe. So keeping
all these in their several acting-Properties; they will be the clear evidence
unto thee, that the Ghostly Birth is working out it self. Therefore with these
three, let thy Will-Spirit agree hereunto, to throw out every misconceived
thought. For now all things must be new again, by the Father, Word, and Spirit,
through this new Birth wrought. That ye may come to a mighty Record among the
New Jerusalem Stones, where all are waiting this rising day to see, because it
will fix in thee, an unknown Liberty both in Spirit and Body.

November the 21st. 1676.
It was also further expressly opened unto me, that we were at present brought
thus far, as to witness these three, as Spirit, Water, and Blood, being
Witnesses in our Earth, which did fore-run the Ministration of the Holy Ghost
For they must go before, as the Ministration of Jesus, who came by Water, Blood
and Spirit, that is Death, Life, and Resurrection, from which he passed, and so
must we. As he did bear our Record in Heaven, which will be a different thing,
though agreeing to one and the same end, as thus, the three first make way, as
the Water Baptism into the Death, the Blood into the Life, the Spirit
quickneth, and gives a Body of the Resurrection. So the Ministration of Jesus
has its twofold Use upon us, in order to the second thus, which are to bear
Record, as the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost in our Heavens. So here is to be
understood the rising Degree, or changing from Jesus in Spirit, to that degree
of Unity, of Father, Word, and Holy Ghost; all which agree to enter into a
Virgin Mind, thus prepared, and in it after a high Mystical mauner themselves
conceive; so as to include them as one only Being; contracting the Virgin-Will
and Spirit with it self, hereby becoming one inbred with it, as that Heir, who
was darkly prophesyed of, in Micah's day, who said, the glory of Israel was to
come unto the Adullam, the very pure Tabernacle of the Virgin-Nature, born
again of Water, Blood, and Spirit, so made indeed a meet reception, for this
holy thing to be sealed up, as in an unknown Pavilion, or hiding Place of
Strength: which must be till it has attained every measure and part, to the
growing big, and filling up the Birth's place, with Breasts full of Milk, the
Spring Word of the Spirit diffusing into them, the natural course of the Bloody
Issue of Sin also stopping, all which will be evident Signs unto you, that are
still apt to be questioning, whether this Ghostly Birth is in you forming.
Therefore be still and wait, for that great traveling hour, that is to come
upon ye, before which sometimes ye will be in Pains and Heaviness, because ye
may meet with many a throw of Temptation, all which will work the Birth
forward, therefore be not dismayed, Oh Daughter of my Zion, so long as thou
walk steadily, not going out of Sion Court, where you are to wait at my
Council Board, to enquire what shall fore-run, and be in that traveling Hour,
which will make great Spoil of the Mortal Shell, which must break away at this
great Birthday. Therefore look and expect this will make a mighty alteration,
for the Heavens will rend, that the Throne-Spirits and Powers may descend, as
helps and Guardian defense, and Witness-bearers to this Sion-Birth. For which
great Provision is aforehand to be made, to answer to the greatness of the Sion
state, all of the rich concealed Furniture, and Golden Cups, Pots, and Vessels,
at such a time as this will be brought out, with all the rich Robes for those
to wear, who do attend upon this Birth. Great and mighty Preparations thou do
see, are hereunto expedient for to be. Because this World is so blind,
ignorant, and unbelieving, that it will be no less needful to rebuke by all
high and Spiritual Magnificency, in the very height of Sion Glory, and to
outvye hereby, not only vain pompous Glory, but those Abominations, and false
exalted Ligh^ set up in Temple-Worships, as no better then false Births
Coverings, which will not be removed, till this mighty Standard of this Holy
Ghost, come to be lifted up, and set upon the top of Sion-Hill in Visibility.

November the 22d. 1676.
I saw as a Preludium of this rising Birth of the Holy Ghost, a bright
Firmament opne, and all dignified with splendorous Stars, some much more
blazing then others. And one Star increased, so great as it became like the
Body of the Sun. Which Vision was thus opened unto me, after some days being
called over in me, by a fresh vivification of Spirit, that showed me, that the
one Star, which I saw so suddenly increase to that largeness, as the very Body
of the Sun, it was the Virgin-Woman, that was all to be encompassed, with the
Birth Light of the Holy Ghost, which would arise out of that Orb, at which the
rest of the Stars, that did encompass it, should shout for Joy, and be
Witnesses ^hereof, at the opening of this greater Day Star, which should
enlighten the whole Earth. Oh this left great Amazement in me, provoking to
some traveling Sorrows, for to see this mighty Wonder ^rought forth, as in
Vision, so existently in that Star, who is hereunto by the Omnipotency elected.
A further Confirmation hereunto, was the Idea of an Ark, that was shut up,
floating up and down, not upon muddy, troublesome Waters, which once covered
all Mountains and Hills, whenas the Deluge was upon the Old World: but these
Waters were pure and healing, like the Waters under the Threshold of the
Sanctuary, that wherever they came, quickened unto Life. And it was said to
me, Behold the Dove is in the Ark, and will be this place of broad Waters, that
shall cover the Earth, no more to kill or destroy, but to save alive, according
to the New Covenant, that all shall know God from the least to the greatest.
When out of this Ark the Dove shall fly with the Everlasting Gospel, as the
Olive Branch which carries in it that oily Property; we will kindle a sweet
Fire, that can mix with these pure Waters, and not b^ quenched, but still
maintain servent hea^ to declare and speak, as indeed from a Cloven Tongue,
that may tinge, where ever it sea^ters such high enkindle^ Breath abroad. Ah,
Words of such a^ ou^flowing Power, will carry force to purpose upon the Hearts
of the prepare^ Hearers, to whom this last Trumpet by the Dove shall sound,
Blessed is that Ark where fresh she will out fly to pronounc^ Salvation, Peace,
and Good Will from on high. Fear not, but believe, such a^ Ministration may be
nigh to those, who in this new framed Ark do most closely and obscurely lie,
till the Birth-Doors shall come for to be opened by the strong Angel. Know upon
every Door, here i^ a several seal, to the number of seven to which belong the
Seven Spirits. Up pon every Opening thereto watch, an^ stand still, till Time's
Number is finished for the going forth upon the broa^ Water-floats. The
glorious Lord, tha^ has been hidden under this Ark, is now for to appear and
unfold what the Seve^ Thunders has foretold of Ages past For which says the
Alpha and Omega, do hereunto call you, whose Hearts are right and perfect to
me, not only these things to know and see, but Eminent In^truments to be for
me, by the bringing ^orth a new, and more excelling Gene^ation, then yet have
been existing.

November the 23d. 1676.
In the Night season, I saw my self, as ^f I had been transmuted into a Bird of
great largeness, like to a Hawke; and found all my sensible Faculties and
Understanding in that appearance, sluttering in an Airy Region, and this
Commission Word I had, Go forth, and take a Prey, which attempting, I found a
whole. Flight of Birds, in some way of resistance, I being alone, they thought
they should have encompassed me about, and so out-mastered me. Then I called
for my Bird-Mate, who was immediately, as in a large flying Body with me, and
so we jointly commanded the whole Flight of the lesser Birds in that Region,
and then they voluntarily came to shelter under our Wings. And methought it was
a mighty Change, which I did not know how I came into, but all Care, Fear, and
Sorrow were fled away. I did feel during this time no low matters of an Earthly
Sense at all to touch me. I did during this time, feel also another sort of
Birds like Bats did us pursue, which could not hold out their Flight, because
of the excessiveness of this Light Reigon, but down again did fall, and again
would strive to rise, blindly, to trouble and hit against those who were winged
for to obtain the Prize.

December the 4th. 1676.
Look back to November 23. 1676. and there is the Vision, and here is the
Interpretation of it.

THere was much from this Vision manifested to me, first was, that this showed,
there must be a passing out of a gross, ponderous, heavy laden dark Image and
Body; for in the pure Airy Region, only Aetheral Spirits in Winged Bodies of
Power could live and swiftly move. Such a Translation it became us to wait and
look after, that it might be really accomplished, as the Figure does call up
to. For it was said, this must be till we come this Change to see, all to be in
the very Body, by virtue of that Crystalline Stone, that formed must be within,
who to its own Clarity must sublime us throughout, before we can go forth, like
Eagles to mount, and to take our Prey. As to the resistency which I saw it, was
thus to be understood, that at the first going forth, though thus empowered and
spirited, yet it would not be understood by the very Elect, who were to be
gathered to that Region: for something of Reluctance there would be, till
further confirmed by another Witness, that also should wing up in Spirit and
Powers, And should marvellously draw and gather in the Scattered, who to
Wisdom's Ministry do belong, which must prepare for the state of Mount Paran,
and so for the New Jerusalem. Then queried I further about the last Flight, who
were so few in Number, yet very troublesome, blindly lifting up themselves
against us. It was showed me, that there were dark sensitive Spirits, whose
center was in the dark Holes of the Earth, that had some particular knowledge
and relation to us, while we appeared to walk with them after their Similitude,
but being herefrom changed, and something being formed in us, that has given
us a Winged Raise, and so made the Separation and Alienation, they would pursue
to bring us down, that they might know us in their own Likeness, for in this
Transformation they cannot, without they could come to be, as we are. Which is
impossible, till the Holy Lump in them be made, and they be separated for this
state, from all low things to live, whereunto we are called and appointed to
live in the Ghostly Body, where we shall meet the Lord our Bridegroom, in the
Airy Region.

This Word much followed me, The Birth in you is the Son of God, but it does
not yet appear what it shall be: when as it shall work quite through, expect
great alteration, even unto Transfiguration. At which I rebounded with this
Answer, Ah Lord, how thick down do flow thy Prophecies, but what makes the
working Wheel so slack to effect this mighty thing. Then said the Spirit in me,
Thou art in haste, before the Earthly Mold be laid waste, not considering that
ye are but come unto the restoring Ministry, that is preparing for the Birth of
the Dove, out to fly, that carries all Wonders in its sevenfold Eye, which is
your Lamp within, that gets formation by degrees. Therefore it is not to be
stirred, before it comes to its full Age: all that you are to do, is to drink
in, what is brought to Hand by its Virgin Mother, for daily succor, as the
Word of Counsel, Caution, and Direction, which is at present; all which ye are
to expend upon, for stay and strength, till its Birthday shall in and through
you break.

December the 5th. 1676.
In the Night in my Sleep, the Accuser, and watchful Enemy assaulted me hard,
upbraiding me with false and deceivable hopes, that I had in this Ghostly
Birth; demanding, why we should more then others in the World seek for it, that
were left in the same common Faith with others, ever since the Holy Ghost
withdrew, which was not again to be born through any one in Flesh, according as
we looked for. Then this Word was present with me to repel, Oh get thee behind
me, thou Spirit of P^dition, that go about to pervert Truth, and would
make void the Love's Election of God. Knowing well thou stand not in his
Counsel any more, but art afraid; nay, it is thy terror to see Faith risen so
high in any one, as thereby to conceive such a mighty Birth as this, that will
so rise, as to overturn thy Kingdom and Reign, that has been so long in the
Earth: for hereby cast out thou will be. Therefore we will not doubt, nor throw
away our Confidence, because the Birth we trust to, has already upon it, the
Foundation-Seal, being already named, which cannot be obliterated, without it
be by yielding to thy daily renewed subtilties. Which as in the day of Eve, so
again thou would be prevalent; storming high, so much as thou see the Day
grow nigh, of overturning the Babylonish Captivity. Much contest I had of this
kind both sleeping and waking: One thing more I remember was his charge, that
he some proof would see of the Father's Almightiness from his Birth in us. With
that I roused up my Faith, and said, that thou may. and wilt, unto thy
perpetual downfall: therefore away, depart with all thy Wiles from me. For I
will no more give Ear to the underminings of such a Serpentine Spirit, who
would circumvent me, in the process of my New Birth after the manner of Jesus.
After this I fell into Sleep again, toward the Morning, then I felt such
bitter Agonies in my outward Man, as if my Life had been just parting asunder,
and throws and pains, as if my Back had been cleaving in two, which awaked me.
And I was amazed, when I came unto my self, that I found all was so well with
me: for I perceived the Evil One had beleagered me in his dark Magic, but
could neither hurt me in Mind or Body. The watchful Eye of my Jesus being
vigilant to preserve me from his Fury.

December the 6th. 1676.
After this Conflict, I waited to understand the meaning of this terrible
onset upon me, and it was thus spoken in me, Satan has desired to winnow
thee, and watched his opportunity to surprise thee, while the Animal Life was
reposed; and might he have been permitted, he would certainly have undermined
the Virgin Birth, by overthrowing thy Faith. Which is the very Life-pulse of
this Birth, for if that stop, the Life soon grows weak, therefore still
maintain, and keep up that Faith, which is the material matter of this Birth,
that the Evil One hunts to destroy. For could he make void Faith, he well
knows, that is the very Basis of the New Creation-building, and thereby would
throw down all, what ever has been wrought. Consider, oh ye upon whom this
Probation time is come, which will be the Birth growing, that you carefully
provide, and gird on this defensive Weapon, oyling it well, that no rust on it
at any time be found. As it is given you to believe, so mind to stir up this
Gift in you, remembering what all precious Faith has done in this World,
through the very mortal Case. Nay, as ye read, the very Visible Creation was
brought about, by the Word of Faith, and can be no otherwise Restored, to its
first primary Purity, Liberty and Glory, but through the rising Life of Faith.
Of which the Serpent's subtilty broke the Golden Chain, and cut that Silver
Cord, which held up the Paradisical Creation; by introducing his Temptation
into Adam. Who hereby broke his Faith and Covenant with his God. Now then by
one Man's disobedience to the Faith, all became faithless, by which then it was
impossible to retain the similitude of God, for hereby he lost the use of the
most holy generating property, and brought forth strange Births, as ye at this
day do find the sad effects thereof. But now yet once again, an open Birth-Door
is set, for Wisdom's Life-Seed to enter in at, which shall bring forth a new
Creation store, much excelling all the Births that have gone before. To which
good thing, so much prophesyed of, give great heed. Marvel no^ that the
accursed Serpent's Seed is so enraged night and day, his Venom to let out: it
is because he suspects thou art designed for some eminent use, through that
principal Birth, that may be a means to ransom many out of Turkish thrall.
Therefore at this Animal Life he did strike by his wounding Dart, but I thy
Jesus stood with Faith, the Weapon Balsom, nigh, thee to heal. And will not
fail thee still to guard against his Wiles; keep but my Faith, and from it do
not shrink. And so give charge to such, as engage with you upon the same
account, and you will see certainly the issue of that Birth, that shall most
perfectly restore the fallen Creation in your selves and others, in such a way,
as yet no late President has been, since Immanuel's Birth did descend.

December the 7th. 1676.
In the Night season, after some rising Ejaculations had ascended, and I
falling into a Sleep, I was suddenly awaked, as if some Person had been in the
Bed with me. Which in some kind of fear I rose up to see; but saw nothing, so
lying still in the consideration a little while, I felt sensibly a Hand all
overspread upon me, with an influence of great Heat, at which I marvelled what
it should signify. Then this Word spoke, saying, Fear not, this Hand is
stretched out, for to encompass the Birth, and by the Heat to fix the Life's
impregnancy, that it might be past the Dragon's power any more for to slay. Who
cannot cease to watch it with an Evil Eye, for which cause I have overshadowed
thee with my Airy Body, which may bring forth accordingly, as Faith shall
operate in its own Mystery, which is the great thing whereby the Parad^sical
World shall spring again, without toil and care. For this cannot be, until such
a Birth be brought forth, that has all Faith to go forth with all Power, as
without guilt of Sin; for that quenches the Seal of Love, and Bird-limes the
Wings of Faith, which is also a twisting Cord to bind down its Eagle-Body: but
it is able to free it self from all, that brought it under the bondage of Evil.
Now this renewing Birth, set your Minds fully upon, for it will be to you, the
Noah that will comfort you, by restoring a New World from which the Curse will
fly. I your Jesus must abide in my Heavenly Reservatory, till this Birth in you
grow ripe, for it is the Elias that will come in another, and more perfect
Ministration, then ever yet has been, that must prepare for the Coming of me
your Lord from Heaven. Who left this Work to be accomplished by the Buth of the
Holy Ghost, which was to bring forth the most perfect Restoration, that so you
might come to know Elias track, through the burning Chariot, for Translation.
It will certainly fall upon the Lot of some one, or other, that are hereunto
predestined, to bring forth this mighty Elias in Spirit, as the first born in
Wisdom's Day; to go before, and overturn, and make ready for my absolute Reign,
yet to be in the Earth, in order to the New Jerusalem descending Glory.
Therefore take heed, be circumspect, believing this Birth for to see, wing up
your Faith, and Pray, and travel mightily, that ye may be those Worthy Ones, to
bear a Living Testimony for me. For a great and weighty Government will be
entrusted with you, when Wisdom's Birth shall be fully ripened: for a much more
glorious state then that of Solomon, shall be established upon the Ghostly
Nativity. Instead of a Terrestrial, there shall be a Celestial greatness of
Dominion, from this Birth-Lily springing, that has like the two Witnesses been
long slain in the Seed, and buried over with Earth, so as forgotten in the
World. But now expect the raising of them up in each of you, who shall stand as
Olive Trees before me, still naturally flowing out with your Golden Oil; it
shall not be as formerly, by way of Gifts now and then, but this Fatness and
Olive-Sweetness shall spring out of your own Root, being hereinto fully
changed. Then will you know the constant and fixed state, and no more want your
Eternal Bride and Mate.

December the 9th. 1676.
A mighty Saying was ecchoed to me, brought forth out of the Counsel-deep,
pronouncing it should be our Lot, to live by the Sword and Bow of Might, by
which Jacob of old took great Spoil out of the Hand of the Amorite. Which was
thus opened unto me, that this Word came to me, to let me understand, that our
Blessing and Portion would come in by mere Conquest. For thus said the Holy and
True, Behold and see, here is the Gift that I give to you, as a Father's
Blessing, which is the Sword of my Spirit, and the Conquering Bow, whose Arrows
are all of Gold: with these expect ye must get your Living, and also bring,
into me, your God, your worthy Prey. Now therefore gird on this Sword, that is
so richly oiled with the purest of Unction, and go forth all prosperously. It
is not only a defensive Weapon, but it will cut down and destroy; and resist
every Balaam Spirit, which stands in your way. None ever was possessed of
this Sword, but that strong Potent Will-Spirit, that knew the Way to the Golden
Pool of Oil, there still to bath it, whenever occasion is for it to burnish,
and display. The sight hereof will cause all about you, to stand in fear and
awe, when they shall see you are so God-like, armed with strength of Power,
which is so commandable, that all resistency will fly away against it. Oh this
is that Spirit Weapon, which makes riddance first within thy self: it will
suffer no Amorite, or Cananite near its Borders to dwell; But Gideon-like make
havoc, hew, and cut down every Grove, where false Worships has by blind Zeal
been set up. But verily the Day is near, for the Sword of the Lord in Gideon's
Hand to appear, which will make a quick riddance in the Earth. The Lamp of my
Spirit in your Earthen Pitchers is now seated, though the time has not yet
been for them to shine out, by reason that the Olive-matter of the Holy Ghost
is not yet come to that Perfection, to sound forth the Trumpet for the total
Victory, over all Centers and Worlds, which shall certainly be conquered by
this out-going Birth. But while this is perfecting, here is Conquering Work,
that ye may not sit idle, but now to go on every day, somewhat to effect.
Therefore another Weapon is given into your management, which is my Covenant
Rainbow, which will be to you of great consequence, if you have skill rightly
for to use it. The use of an Eagle Eye, that may this great Birth-mark espy.
Here lies the grand deep-sighted Wisdom to shoot forth such a Golden Shaft as
may hit, and thereby make way for Wisdom's firstborn to come forth, through
sending out this mighty Arrow of all precious Faith. Nothing like this you will
find, will be of traveling force to help you out in your Births Agonies, which
upon you will come, before you can embrace this Ghostly Body imbodied with a
Soul and Spirit. That will spring all a new, from the creating Word imbodied in
a corporeal shape. Which for a time shall remain a high degree of Wonder: For
to see the Ghostly Power to send forth through contemptible Humanity, that high
scented Breath of Air, which may be felt, tasted, and smelt with whom it is
resident.

Then this Question in me arose.
Ah my Lord, when shall these Powers be set awork, so as the doubtful in Heart
may somewhat hereof see, and we thereby from all upbraidings be set free? I was
thus answered, The Day is not to be put far off, for now is the acceptible time
for Salvation to be wrought. There is conquering work still to be done within,
the Flaming Sword must cut down every Briery Root, and burn up every Thorny
Thought, which do near this Lily Birth spring, and vanquish all vaporous Clouds
that thicken the Heavenly Air, with all the gross Animal Life of Sense, which
is the greatest of Impediments. It is that Esau that holds Faith's Birth by the
Heel, that it might not break forth. Therefore in the strength of Jacob's
Angel, do you strongly wrestle: for by his Sword and Bow you must make your
way, and Conquest gain, that so you may command both the Heaven, and earthly
store. For Heirs of all Worlds ye will be: then gird up, and go forth all
armed; the munition of the Spirit is with you, so as nothing can harm you, who
carry the precious and essential Root of Life in you. Even now, while but in it
its Younglings day it is, yet it will be a defense of Glory, that now and then
will sparkle through, by which it may be known, that in you is intombed a
Precious Stone, a White Stone, that has the Virgin's Name engraven on it,
which must be for the Lamb a Spouse and Bride. Therefore the Cry of the Spirit
is, Prepare, make ready, and Pray fervently, for your Everlasting Birth-Door to
open, that the Heir of Glory may enter therethrough: Even so let it be.

December the 10th. 1676.
The sweet living Pool this Night was mightily opened, and stirred by the holy
driving Spirit, that brought choice and super-eminent good things, out of the
high Kingdom's store, saying also to me, Come, taste, and see, how you like the
Heavenly Country-Fruit, that is ripened from that unmixed Element: Draw up unto
my Table, for you shall sit with me, after the manner of a Spirit, and eat such
things as are set before you. For I, your Lord must take special care to feed
and nourish those, that are with Young, with the highest of Birth degrees. And
indeed I did according to this Salutation, find a sweet and pleasant taste to my
Spiritual Appetite, and a satisfying fullness. Hereupon followed an occasioned
great enlargement of Soul-magnifying in Prayer, which at this time was more
then usual, mingled with an oily Incense. Which feeling, I took all advantage
to put forward, for the holy Birth-issue in each other, who were noted in the
Life-Book, as was at this season asserted to me, with many other Words of
signal Favor, that so we might have no cause to repent our Choice, in being
professed Traders, for Wisdom's Merchandise, which would turn to that account,
that we should not be ashamed of, though now for it under disrepute, as not
understood, or known, but God will reveal us in his time. After I had prayed, I
was encompassed with white waving Clouds for a good space together, with this
Word, So shall ye your Lord in the Airy Body meet. Therefore we must be all
pure and clarified, and constituted in and through the essential Birth of Life
for the fruition and sight of the Flaming Body of Light.

December the 11th. 1676.
This Day this Word came to me, I thy original Sower am come into my Garden, to
see what wanting is, to make up the full Beauty and Glory of my Husbandry, in
your most refined and separated Mould. I see you are careful to keep it, for a
higher degree of Seed (as not being satisfied with what is sown and sprung up)
though there be many young and fruitful Plants, all Plants of Righteousness.
Yet here is one principal Tree that is wanting in the midst of these, to grow
for the better feeding and establishing of these. All which are worthy of
acceptance to me your Spiritual Sower. I am come now to that Plantation, which
I can call my own, where the Virgin Lily of Faith, and the blushing Rose of
Love, and Marigold of Hope, and that sweet-scented Violet of Meekness, and the
Cordial Gilliflower of Patience, and the Honeysuckle of Abnegation to all
whatever proceeds from this cursed Earth, all these are pleasant in my Eye: Ye
being found faithful an^ vigilant in these, behold one reserve I have yet more
for you, who are beloved, as the most principal and weighty Seed, which is from
the Olive Tree, a Berry hereof I bring, to let fall into your selected Ground.
This is that from which ye may expect an Olive Tree to spring, that will feed
all the rest, from its oily property, which will flow not by constraint, but
voluntarily, and will all these Plants reestablish and refresh, as shall be
felt in you, as Witness-bearers hereunto. This is that Olive Tree which
emptieth it self forth upon these several Plants, being higher graduated and
enriched, containing in it the all fluent dispersive Life that ascends upward,
and again flows downward with oily Dews. Which as a Mist Waters the whole
inward Ground for a daily flowery Spring, that I your Lord, may walk in the
midst of these fresh scented ^lowers. For as much as they were weak in
themselves, and apt to withdraw and dye, therefore I have sown this pure
Olive-Seed in the midst of them, which will arise to fulfill and perfect what
the several Seeds Births have left behind, and short of bringing this to
effect. For this Life-Tree acts all free, because it has in it self
all sufficiency, not by a forced Might, or constraint in Contest with a
contrary Birth of Life. No, in this Olive Tree, there is no such dividing
property, it is from the one pure and perfect Essence of the Deity, which never
cease till it has wrought out all Contrariety whereto it comes to be a fixed
Root. Now then try your selves hereby, for thus it will work, to give proof
that this Seed is of the right Olive-kind. It is indeed come in you withal
great Love to restore; therefore as the thirsty Ground open wide for this pure
Oil-Olive to drink in, that so all Sin may be cleansed out of your Ground, for
this Original Righteousness to take place, laying the old Foundations waste.
Whereout the false Births Seeds so plentifully did spring, to which a stop must
be verily be put. For though every Fruit of my Garden-Plantation in you have
had its opposite, suffered to spring up by it, yet it must be so no more, after
this Anointing has throughout searched, and drenched every part, that
belongs to the new formation store.

December the 12th. 1676.
Being still followed with fresh Manuductions to wait for the Manifestations of
what is yet but in us as the Spring, I was opened in my Spirit to be very
sollicitous, that we might be of that account with our Lord Jesus, as for to go
through this Birth in all its gradual Perfections, till the Holy Ghost should
absolutely have a Throne in us. Upon which earnestness, this Word came to me:
Where two are agreed to prosecute, what has been predicted with the particular
Love-design, it shall certainly be fulfilled in its Day, and in God's most
glorifying season. Therefore unite, and strengthen each other, from the Oily
Might which shall upon you still increase, till that great Blessing you seek,
out of each one successively has its proceeding Volatile, according to the
Nature of a Spirit. Who out will fly: no curb or restraint upon this Birth
Power shall lie, when found all of one sacred Matter and Mould, for the holy
Breath-Spirit to move and raise up to its own A^ry Sphere, all in a body of
Light and Spirit pure and clear. This may only be called the true redeemd
state, that delivers out of all Fears and Sin-obnoxious Cares, into the highest
Liberty, where all free access into Mansions of Glory, may by the taking Wing
from this everlasting Birth, spring, and so enter into the Holiest of Holies.
This only is possible to such who the anointed Shield of Faith do bear, that
will not be daunted nor quieted, but ride on upon the mounting Horse of this
Spirit of Faith, till ye may cry over all Victory. For of all that has been
said of this Birth, verily this Faith is the Sum and out going Power, that will
make the Passage, and reach God's Omnipotency.

December the 13th. 1676.
In the Night I had a bright shine all about my Bed, which was signified to me,
that as without, so it should be all Light from the seven Oily Lamps, that
should be as a covering Flame to cloth the Virgin Woman, who should be
impregnated with the Birth of the most holy Seed of God. Then queried I, who
this Woman should be? It was said, the Name was known, and written in one, that
was to be of a perfect Heart, meet for high and Heavenly Converse, and so
thereby contract a Sunshine body of Light, Crystalline and clear, to wing unto
the Heavenly Sphere, which is the Habitation for Spirits of Light. This Woman
that is certified of by John in the Revelations has not had its fulfilling
Prophecy to this day, therefore yet to come, as it was in Spirit said to me,
and that the pure and perfect in Heart might come this Woman to be, as the
Wonder of all Wonders, which has been since Time's Creation. The Birth of
Jesus was great and mavelous, but this shall far excel it, because it will
be of such high extracted Quality, as no Terrestrial can or shall see its
God-like-form, but as its going forth may be felt and understood by Effects, to
be indeed the Birth of the Holy Ghost. Then I further started this Question to
my Lord, and Spiritual Informer, Whether this Birth should distinctly be
manifested from this Sun-like Creature? that is said to travail with it to
bring it forth. For this Objection arose in me, that the Virgin that brought
forth Jesus in a Fleshly Figure, she remained still the same, no transmutation
came upon her, no more then upon others only living a holy Virgin Life, but no
matter of Wonder after Christ's Birth wrought, a^ by or through her have shone
forth, but all still by the Birth that proceeded from her. Who in that Day gave
proof by Miracles of the pure Deity working through Humanity. This great
Question was thus resolved me, through the Word of Life opening, which
testified as follows; True it is, that in the humane Birth of thy Jesus,
there was a visible show of distinction, because of the Corporeity which then
was needful to be born; but in this case it will be otherwise. For this is a
Birth of mere Spirit without any commixture of Humanity, only it will pass and
act, sometime, through this Virgin Humanity, which it has chosen to be its
Birth-Womb or Temple-Body, whereby it may act its Deeds of Wonder, answerable
to its Birth-Deity. So that here the Mother of the Virgin Birth will be more
dignified and honored, then the foregoing Ministration in the Birth of Jesus
was. Therefore an oriental bright flaming Garment is allotted her, with a Crown
beset with Stars, plainly declaring, that to her is given the Command and Power
to bear sway within the Celestial Region, and by and through that near
relation, and conjunction with this mighty Birth, when born, to go forth to
seal, and save the Nations, that shall bow to its Sovereignty. For this Birth
consists of marvelous Power, none can its mystical Being sound or find out,
for it operates in every Creature and thing after a Magical manner. And in this
one pure Virgin, she will first unseal that everlasting Source of ^reasure, and
therefrom distribute, according to the degrees and measures of the Holy Ghost,
who shall give his quickening Powers first in them, who for this successive
Birth, have their Minds purified and refined. For this a touch-flaming Stone
there is, that will inkindle Life in each one, as its pleasure shall to
introduce it self most free. For by way of Birth it will grow, in all that
hereof shall participate, and after like manner generate. But oh here will be
the great thing, who shall be counted worthy, to be the first of this Ghostly
Generation for him to begin withal.

December the 15th. 1676.
This Word came, Behold yet, and see, here is Birth-prize within your most pure
Womb-Hearts now laid, there is no prohibition, but all Love-Emanations, and
Incitations by Spirit-provocations, to put you upon the believing the
possibility thereof. And know for a truth, that this Birth will go forward, and
grow mightily, if you do but keep to these two Rules, and observe them nicely:
The first is to eschew drinking out of that Cup, wherein is mingled very
subtlely Red Wine, that is sugared with all sweet sensibility, that flows
readily into this Wine, being from the strange and Wild Vine. Therefore it must
be refused, in regard of the evil Consequences that do attend it. For the
Poison of every earthly Essence is mingled here withal^ which contributed, does
feed up that ol^ Life-Birth, by which this is warned to depart out; for what
does feed up the one, does starve the other, they cannot be Twins in this
sanctified and holy Vehickle, which only is allotted for the Nazarite. For whom
a choice and particular provision is appointed by the Father of it. Now charge
in special to yo^ is given, who herein may be concerned that you henceforth
refuse to taste an^ of their delicious Fruits, that do sprin^ from the
neathermost part and lowe^ Region, for they are all crude and sow^ for want of
that kind way of ripening from the everlasting warm heat of the one blessed
Element, which by givin^ proof of your Fear, Love and Ca^ herein (lest thereby
this Holy Thi^ should suffer) ye must faithfully abstai^ from all her crude
earthly Fruits, the may ye hope firmly, and claim bold^ Stores and Supplies out
from the Tre^ sury of a God all sufficiency, that will most marvellously excel
all of this earthly growth millions of degrees, for Vigor, Strength, and
Pleasantness; That for the nutriment of this holy Birth-Stone shall be
conveyed, though unseen, yet tasted and felt, by them that shall carry this
Birth in them, till it comes to its full Number and Date. The second Rule that
was given us strictly to observe was this, alluding to the Woman in the
Revelations, that was clothed with the Sun, before she brought forth,
signifying to us, that Clarity and Virgin-Purity was the signal mark of such as
should her personate, in the Heavenly state. Therefore what less will become
us, then Garments of Light, having no streaks of the Night of Darkness upon
them, as it is written, all Light in the Lord. Who is our fine
Linnen-Righteousness, to exercise the simplified Nature of the Virgin-Spirit,
who this Birth is to bring forth in the World. Then also I had this further
Advertisement, that it would be very requisite for us, who carried this living
Birth-Stone within us, for to seek a Desert, solitary Place, void of all the
commixed Solaces of this World, who would envy, and hate, and chase such as
should apply themselves hereunto, as Noted Ones, who do wait for this great
Birth refreshing. Therefore be wise and wary, said the holy Guide, and make no
mention yet what the Lord is for, and in you doing. Remembering that Word, Let
not him that is but putting on his Armor, boast or glory, as he that puts
off, having given proof of Victory. So ye are to consider, that your Walks here
in this dark Valley, and amongst the Dead, is very slippery and unsavory, and
may well offend the holy pure, conceived thing within you. Now then fly to a
solitary Wilderness, where you may preserve your selves and Birth, from the
Dragon's Eye, that awakeneth and stirs up every where against it. For as
much as he, with his piercing Eye does see who nearest the Birth-mark are; now
then up and away, take flight with that Wing which is a strong resolved Will,
that carries swift as an Eagle, into that Path and Way which the Vultur's Eye
shall not espy, during the time of your most secret hiding in this Wilderness.
Which to you shall be as a Lebanon; for the Angel of my presence shall here
walk with you, if herein you shall obey, then will I feed and nourish you, with
that which is choice and primary Food indeed, such as the gross and sensitive
Life never understood, I do only require the act of your flying Will, to abide
where you will see nothing grow, that can feed your earthly sensitive Appetite.
Here is no other Life to be known, or exercised, but that of Faith, which must
fetch in all Provision belonging hereunto. Therefore my Spirit does allure you,
who are justified and nourished by the outflowing Acts of Faith, which through
a constant exercise will be of that predominancy, as to eat out and swallow up
the mutinous Essences, which strive so hard to make void this Life of Faith.
Now then do you receive from my Hand this Crystalline Cup, wherein is the Water
of Life from the Fountain Rock: I do also place the Golden Pot of Manna by you,
that so ye may have no need to wander out, but hereof freely take; it will feed
up unto the full grown Body of the Ghostly state. Now then be wise, and give no
Ear to the crooked Serpent, who still will be casting in his Floods of
Jealousies and Fears, saying, What make you here in such a desert place, shut
out from all the pleasant things which are lawful to be enjoyed, with, and
amongst your fellow Brethren. But these his sugared Baits meddle ye not with^l,
who hereby would subtilely supplant you of that good thing, which yet not being
seen, carries with him, and his worldly adherents such little esteem. But be
assured, there is that high extracted Matter sown within you, from which will
rise the Star of the Wise, that shall win length of days, durable Riches and
Honor by Strength and Dominion, and shall bring in another Kingdom. Therefore
hold out your Wilderness-Temptation, and let none out-bid you, or take away the
Crown from you. My Words forget not, the Spirit does speak them.

December the 18th. 1676.
Upon this call into the Wilderness, it is shown that Temptations would meet
us, though high Manifestations of Love and Care would be here also expressed,
for we are appointed to give eminent proofs of Faith, as the forerunners of the
Sealing Ministry of the Spirit, which still follows believing. But we must
expect many an assault, as sometime upon one and the other, who are entered into
this abstracted dedicated state. Therefore much more the vigilant Enemy does
make his onset upon us, as we daily do experience. As having lately some
occasion to take notice of the Pulse of Faith, beating low in my Spiritual
associate, whereby I was mutually touched, and thereupon moved to invocate,
that our Faith might jointly be kept up, or else the Birth could not be
perfected, as was shown to me, which made me wrestle mightily. Upon which this
Word was given to me for him, that sometimes an Elias might despond, and make
request that his Life might be taken away, saying, as Elias also, this Evil is
from the Lord: what should I wait any longer in expectation, what am I better
then my Fathers? All which over-casting Clouds will happen sometimes upon ye;
what Faith could act higher then Elias, yet now in a fainting Fit, what lower?
Thus it was set before me concerning the Dr. my Friend's heaviness, and
sadness, which sometimes seized him further. It was given to me for his
Encouragement, that an Elias should yet be born through all hard onsets, to
open the Heavens, and bring down the Blessings of Fruitfulness, upon the dry,
languishing Earth within our selves, and power to open and unloose the Seals of
that Spring, that shall make our solitary Habitation as the Eden of the Lord.
Who will walk among the Stones of Fire, and commune with us, that so our
Warfare may be all pleasant, till Time's Number for the full Manifestation
shall be accomplished for us.

December the 20th. 1676.
Being driven in Spirit to withdraw, as into the Desert Mount, there apart from
my self to be, as to the sensitive part, and to all things in the earthly
Consideration. Knowing that herefrom I must absent, if at any time I would be
present with the Lord. Who for the joy and pleasure that does flow therefrom,
might well invite us to wait in this blessed Wilderness. Where as dead and
unknown to the World, we are attending to receive the high Throne Visitants,
who will never appear but at such times and seasons, when we are able to clear
our selves of this lower Sphere. Such pulls in from the Sodomites, by Lot's
good Angel, we often do meet withal, who would have us dwell in the House and
Tent with our Immanuel. Who will make ready the Tabernacle of God himself to
dwell in us, as we can walk in his narrow Track, and avoid the broad Way of the
Sodomites. As these Teachings were ministered by the Spirit unto me, falling
into some drowsiness, which I was willing to do, for the composing of my Head,
that was disturbed with pain, by reason of a flux of Rheum; While I thus
reposed, I heard a Voice say, Awake, for I have a great Secret for to reveal.
Which roused me out of my Sleep, and immediately I saw in the Spirit this to
pass before me, to wit, distinct Bodies, nothing of fleshly Matter, only like
Corporeals in Figures, but the Substance was as if it had been transparent
Glass, formed into the Idea of a Creature, so clear as if nothing but
Crystalline Water had filled up every part of these Bodies. Then this Word did
proceed as out of them, Behold and see, these be generated each from one, and
have their several Regions to walk in their appointed time.

December the 21st. 1676.
This Morning I was greatly sollicitous to understand the meaning of this
Presentation, which very readily and emphatically opened its Mystery, as thus,
there were three distinct Changes, which we were to pass into, before the
highest Degree could be attained, as from Faith to Faith, still higher, and
from Glory to Glory, as the Speaking Word said in me, Here see, what the
several states are, which you must strive hard to get through, here are three
Births of the Spirit, one still greater then the other. As this observe by him,
who herein was your Pattern, who broke through all these Births Gates making
way to give an assured hope, that ye may enter in by the same threefold Degree
with your Jesus into every several Region, till lodged for Eternity into the
one fixed Element with the blessed Trinity. No more Removes therefrom to make,
for there is your everlasting Rest; but till this, the process of your Jesus
you must keep in your Eye, and exactly follow. As now consider your selves with
him, in the first Nativity of the Spirit, wherein the Christ-like Spirit is
under Sufferings, lodged with Iniquity, oppressed with Infirmities, obnoxious
to the ruling Powers of the Stars, subject to the cruelty of the evil Rulers
amongst Men, who exercise subordinate Power, under their H ad-Prince, in this
worldly Region. Which your great high Apostle himself suffered under, paying
the whole of whatever could be challenged from him. For you must know, there
is a Debt due from every one, which must be paid, though it was answered by
that public Representative in his own Person; being therefore offered up once
for all, as a visible Sacrifice, and Propitiation for Sin; as that which was
only to show what was still successively to run from this Line of the New Birth
of Christ in the Spirit. Now then there is no way to free your selves from the
Tyranny of what Sin has brought you under, but by yielding unto the
Death-mystical. Thereby the Debt will be discharged, and you set free out of
all that, which since the fall has exercised Authority over you, and thereby
you shall know the first formation, into the clear and pure Airy Body: which
will carry you, though obscurely, as Christ your Lord did, that shall hereout
appear in another form, as he did when risen from the Dead, who did only to a
few appear, discending from his Paradisical Sphere. Even so by the same
quickening Spirit, pass over with your Jesus, till you arrive beyond Paradise,
and come to assume that third Birth Degree, which alone is appropiated to the
all-Ghostly-Trinity: which as in one, shall swallow up every lower Degree; that
now must go forward in you, in order to this superior Birth. Which only can be
born out of these, who are ascended to Mount Sion, as the proper Region for the
pure Virgin to travail with this Birth in. Oh it is so high, great, and
principal, that out of this holy Climate it cannot be manifested; therefore
consider what holy separated and sequestered Spirits, the hopes of this third
degree of the Spirit's Birth, do call you, for to give up your selves unto?
Faint not, but stick close unto that, which as a munition of Rocks, will be to
you for Strength, Light, and Counsel, till to this last degree of glory you
shall be brought, and therein your Jesus will appear. Therefore do you set
forward: be as those that are dead, and yet alive. Be Ye not any longer, but
let the second Degree of the Spirit's Birth live in this very time of your
attained process; having so far obtained the potent Power of the free willing
Spirit, as this to effect by the Birth-Spirit, which is already born in you,
which will so far perfect the Death, as to bring forth that Body of the
Resurrection. Which gradually proceeds from the Root of that Eternal Spirit
which raised Christ from the Dead, this shall also be that generating
Life-quickning Spirit in you, to bring forth the last and principal
Birth-degree: which growing will be, till the complete Death and Resurrection
are passed through. Th^n may ye expect the breaking forth of this high and
great Manifestation of God the Holy Ghost, who will Reign indeed Omnipotently,
over all that has lain under the Fall. No Song of full Redemption can be sung,
till this Kingdom of the Lamb and Bride mutually do meet. The counsel of the
Spirit is to you, who have this pure Unction Matter in you, that you give it
all scope and liberty, for its further driving forth in you. For ye may be, as
many who have gone forth in this generating Birth, but have stopped the
Life-Vein, before it could come to breath in a risen Body all of pure Air.
Therefore double your Watch, and be heedful, for it is no light or trivial work
that you must herein set upon: for were you to begin your whole Life again,
days few enough they would be, to clear and acquit all, to make room for this
rising B^rth forth to go. But to such as shall hereunto set themselves with a
perfect He^, Hezekiah-like, I will, says the S^irit, add unto their days some
degrees of the Sun of their outward Life, which shall not go down till you have
finished that Faith, which will give the power to open the first Seal; where
does lie under the Sapphire Stone. Obey, and flee to your appointed Wilderness,
that this fore-running Life of Faith may have all supremacy over your sensitive
part; to work down, and bury in the Death-Grave, all which would this Bir^h
Lily with its Rose-Mate oppose. These things in charge the Spirit of Jesus does
mutually leave with you, the terms and conditions are faithfully revealed to
you: you may either win or lose this great P^ze, as to the Manif^station hereof
in this Principle. But be ye wise.

December the 23d. 1676.
It was this Morning further manifested to me, that those three, who so
appeared unto me, were the same, which appeared to Abraham; bringing the good
News that the Isaac-Birth was near. Only they were in humane Shapes: these were
all in a pure Mist, and formed into Airy Bodies, only for Spirits to behold.
But this was the Secret that was opened to me from hence, according as was
cried in me, which was this, as the Word opened: Understand now, and k^ow, oh
ye Intellectual Spirits, for what end did these appear to thee. What less, but
to advertise, that the great and last Birthday of the Spirit is drawing near?
The barren Sarah shall again bear from the Youthful Nature of the Virgin, which
has its time for to flower in Nature's Ground, for the Trinity to consummate
all, by this one passing act, of transfused Spiritual Generation. This is that
which must do the Cure upon the Mortal Sore, as this whole Birth-Trinity is
born in each one. Births there have been from the Fathers and Sons property, as
that of Isaac, and of Jesus in the Flesh, being figuratives, which have had
their Mystery fulfilled. And here has been the stop, being baptized into the
Father and the Son, but not knowing that last and Celestial Baptism of the Holy
Ghost. Who bears no other similitude, but what answers, and is consonant to
that eternal Element, from whence this Ghostly Body is contracted. Which is all
Breath of Power, a Flame of Purity, clarified Earth; through which Golden
Streams do run through every Vein, to make up a transparent Body: which may
well become the Holy Trinity for to dwell in. Here is the Birth that is not yet
come into the World: there has wanted the Woman-Virgin clothed with the Sun,
for to bring it forth. Who must be drawn aside from all, and kept up only for
this mighty traveling Work, who has an appointed daily Portion from the high
Father of this Birth, sent in for the nourishing of this which is so highly
compacted of the threefold Seed of the Deity. That so nothing of defect,
shortness of power and disability may be, which have been complained of
hitherto. But when this Trine do agree as one, to pass through the Virgin-Mind,
then shall such walk, as full Victors, over the Sea of Glass, having Bodies
sutably framed unto those Spirits, which ye receive in the second
Birth-Ministration. Which for want of such a Ghostly Body, through a
Christ-like Spirit, yet remains weak, till the whole Mystery of Father, Son
and Spirit comes, and shall appear, to Move, and open in the eternal
Birth-center evermore.

December the 26th. 1676.
It was further noted unto me, from that Vision of the three Spiritual Bodies,
That all Discovery and Revelation of the Will and Mind of the D^y, would now be
from these three, bearing Witnesses for themselves in our pure eternal part.
Who there will never cease to be a Speaking Oracle for Manifestation, if we
stick closely to observe and obey what daily proceeds herefrom. For it was
said to me: Turn and dive deep in, for the Living Word is become a bubbling
Spring, that shall work out all m^d things: that would corrupt, and make void
the Law of my Spirit; which henceforth to you, is to be a standing Rule. For
all other ways and means for Information and Discourse, with the most Holy, are
now ceased. God used and took up outward Figures to reveal his Mind by in
former Ages and Times, as by the Ministration of Angels; and then by his Son;
who came to reveal what was meet to be known and understood in that day of his
visible Appearance in the World. Who could hardly bear to hear what was
reported by him: who would have had as little credit in the World, as any now,
if there had not been the Sealing Power of the Godhead; by which the World was
convinced, for Obedience to the Faith, which then was required. But this
Ministration of Jesus shutting up, what must the Just now live by in these last
times? Your Jesus does not turn you over to a dead Stock to live upon, as to
what was done and written in his Day; but transferreth you over to a lively
Manifestation, and fresh Openings from his Spirit's Birth in you. Whose
leadings and drawings observed, it will further point you, to what may still be
generated from Spirit to Spirit. Yet in a higher Birth-Degree, for that which
is at first but a Spirit of Prophecy and Revelation, will turn it self into a
fixed Body. All which proportionably is to ascend into the New Jernsalem, for
to bring it down in the transparent Ghostly Power. For when Spirit and Body do
mutually agree together, and knit after the manner of that secret Formation,
then it seeks its own Region to dwell in. For if the Trinity will appear among
these low Inhabitants, then a Body must for them be prepared. Oh then see what
the Light and Life-quickning has yet in you to do; to wit, a traveling Work
still, that as Jesus has had his Birthformation, so now the Holy Ghost may be
fully, formed; that so ye may not need to have a Star-Leader, or depend upon
this way of Revelation that now you are waiting upon. For you shall know in the
first Root of knowledge, as God himself knows: But in the present time, the
Spirit measures out according as you are able to bear; which are but as
Sprinklings, to what the broad Waters shall co^er your Earth withal. However
hereunto ye do well to attend, as unto the sure Word of Wisdom; that shall drop
in the all-healing Gold, to make ready for what has been foretold. One thing
more in order I do require, that seeing I have made choice of you, to bear my
Name mystically upon your Breast or Table-Heart, where I do answer all your
Enquiries; that you reserve for me, that most Holy Place to commune with you
there alone, suffering no polluted thing to enter in; for to raise any fume or
dark Vapor upon the Breast Plate Stones: which will ecclips the luster of
them, so as no Light they will give to you, for further proceeding. And if they
should be clouded through cold earthly Damps, your way would soon be dark: and
at a loss ye would find your selves. Therefore beware of darkening your
Foundation-Light, for witho^ great heedfulness, ye may cast a Shadow upon
(...); then no certain discovery or resolve ^an be given, though ye make never
so ^rict an Enquiry. This was the cause and ground of all Apostatizing in
former and present Ages; having stifled the ^peaking Oracle by crouding earthly
^uff into that, which should be the se^arated and consecrated place; for the
^iving Testimony thereout to open, for ^aily Instruction and Guidance. Which ^s
of absolute expedience in such a dan^erous state, where so many cross, false,
and by-ways do offer themselves to the Eye. But keep you to your own
Breast Plate of light sparkling Stones, and they will give to you sound
Judgment, and Sion-Laws: and as need is, still Renew you; till you in all
things shall be perfected, for Jehovah Shammah to fill up your Temple-Body with
Glory.

December the 28th. 1676.
In the forepart of this Night, I was much pondering, and considering the
weightiness of the Ghostly Formation, how difficult a thing it was, and hard to
be by any brought forth: though many have hard ^ravelled for it, yet there
wanted both Strength, and Perfection of Righteonsness, which I saw we also were
deficient in; Therefore not sufficient to carry through such a wonderful
Restorative Birth of Life. But as I was complaining, and owning our impotencies
and unmeetness hereunto, this Word came: My Grace can make strong, where sense
of the greatest Weakness is; therefore hope and believe down all
Discouragements. Which Word much comforted and quieted me; and I fell asleep In
which I saw a young Elephant that was to be bred up, and it was presented to be
my care and charge to feed it. When I awaked, it was said to me, That as this
Elephant for strength, so we should grow to be; And no burden o^ weight what
ever cast upon us, should cause any shrinking, or bowing under it. For such a
strong Elephant-Power should by degrees grow upon us, if careful we would be,
here to feed up thi^ young Elephant, which was by this Figure presented to us;
The Mystery hereof lying hid in us, for its appointed time.

A Letter of Resolution, in Answer to some Objections sent from a Learned
Physician to the Publisher hereof, upon occasion of the English Edition of The
Letter to some Divines, concerning the Question, [and may for the like reason
refer to this present Work.] Whether God since Christ's Ascension does any more
Reveal himself to Mankind, etc?
Dear Sir,
I Do not at all wonder at the Difficulties that are made by the excellent
^rson your Friend, to credit those more Secret and Extraordinary Favors of
God, which some are Witnesses to in these Latter Days; and ^e might be, were
they but qualified to receive them. For it was not but after much doubting, and
long Examining, as I have said, that I came my self to be satisfied in this
matter: and therefore I can with the less difficulty allow it in others. I Am
indeed made truly sensible that Unbelief is that Sin which does so easily Beset
us: and having found it to be so in my self, I know how to pity it in any one
else, and cannot but think the Warning of the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews against it, to be as highly seasonable as it is little regarded. Its
plain enough, that no other then this can be there understood, as well from the
Context, and whole Design of the Apostle, as from the entire History of the Old
and New Testament. For this very reason it is that we are encompassed about
with such a Cloud of Witnesses, who exercising the most Heroical. Acts of
Faith, were admitted to a more immediate Conversation with the Divine Being,
during their Pilgrimage on the Earth, and to a more illustrious Communication
of his Light and Love, then the Presumptuous and Incredulous Spirit of Human
Reason can ever dive into; that we seeking to tread in their Steps, might come
to be, in like manner Illuminated and Inspirited as they were; and laying aside
This that besets us in the way to the ultimate Perfection of our Nature, by the
Union of it with the supreme Good, may run with Patience the Race of Faith that
is set before us, which they have already run. And certainly this very Sin,
which so much hinders us in running this blessed Race, and from obtaining the
same glorious Privileges which they Here obtained, is also a Sin that is easily
to be avoided, (as some you know would have it translated) if we can but
reflect a little, according to the direction here given us, either upon Enoch,
or Noah, or Abraham, or Moses, or David, or any of those Worthies mentioned in
the foregoing Chapter. And still much more if we do (as the Verse immediately
following leads us to) but look up to Jesus the Author and Finisher of this
Faith; who being the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever, will not be wanting
to work it in us, as he has wrought it in them; but conditionally that we do
look unto him with a constant and fixed Eye. Upon which give me leave to say,
for your Encouragement, as well as for my own, that there is a certain Person,
well known to you and me, whose Angel did lately appear in full Day, in an
upper Room, where a few Names were met together, to wait for the Promise of the
Father, in the Latter Effusion of the Spirit: and these very Words were spoken
by an Internal Speaking, which are the second Verse of this twelfth Chapter;
and which therefore I the more heartily press upon you. Now as to that little
Book, in particular, I freely confess there may be several things in i^ which
may appear to be beneath the Majesty of God, or against the Truth of the Holy
Scriptures, before they are rightly and truly understood, and so may be apt to
offend all those that are possessed with contrary Preventions. But if we have
not Care, our Zeal will carry us much too far, and we shall soon effectually
overthrow, as to us, that very Foundation which we would establish. This Excess
of Anti-Enthusiasm is truly a most compendious method, of Moving the Boundaries
of that we acknowledge Immovable. For if we should be for throwing away our
Bibles presently, when we are not able to answer all the Objections that a
Skeptical Wit is able to bring against them, as unbecoming the Divine Majesty,
I am afraid but very few would be able to keep them long. Though indeed there
be nothing in them, but what when apprehended through, and according to the
Spirit, by which they were written, i^ most highly worthy of it: this yet
matters not. And if I should stay to receive any single Book either of the Old,
or of the New Testament, till I were so well furnished, as to reconcile every
Passage with all the rest, it might be perhaps very long before I must admit
some Books that are recognized to be Divinely Inspired. None can be more firmly
persuaded then I am of the Truth of Saint Peter's Word, that the Heaven must
receive Christ till the Times of Restitution, but then I am not able to see how
this does in any wise contradict his Internal Appearance and Speech to such
Virgin Souls, as he has washed and sanctified in his Blood. Nay, I do not
comphehend why he may not manifest himself in this manner to Thousands of
Persons in as many distant Places at the same time; and never all the while
come down from the Throne of his Glory in the Heavens: I dare not limit the
Operations of his Spirit, which pierces every where, I had much rather adore
them, and wait in a Child-like Disposition to be Disciplined by Him. And indeed
when I consider the utter Impossibility to explain any thing of the Soul's
Nature, without admitting his immediate Causality and Influence, I do not think
it so very strange to conceive that he should by opening the Inmost Center of
that Principle or Life, which is his own Inbreathing, reveal himself to it as
Present, and hold therewith a very familiar Communication. And seeing it is
undeniable that Christ since his Reception into Heaven, has actually both
appeared and spoken to some Persons, by the Sacred Records themselves; it is no
more difficult to suppose, that he may do so again whenever he pleases: and it
will be certain that this can never be the meaning of that Text which this
Gentleman seems to understand. He that has appeared to Saint Paul and to Saint
John, since his Glorification, and shown to them things which they knew not,
and who has expressly declared, Behold I am with you to the end, can hardly
methinks be supposed to have bound up himself for ever, not to manifest himself
in the same or like manner, by Vision, Intellectual Revelation, or Ecstasy, to
any others while they are in these Mortal Bodies, for the sake of some Great
and Glorious Good. Now what there is in all that Book, so far as it is said to
come from him, which does not directly tend to this end, and which is not
highly becoming the Majesty of God, I most profess I am not able to find, after
the most curious Research it is possible to make. As for those special and
tender Endearments, which are used by Christ to his Church, and more
immediately addressed to this holy Virgin standing in the Figure of it: They
are sufficiently warranted by Scripture: and were they not, very much might be
said to vindicate them. Whatever particular Objections he or you may have, I
shall be ready to consider with all Meekness and Sobriety, whenever they are
produced. But I tell you beforehand, that it will be very hard to bring any,
which were not brought against the ancient Prophets in their time: and which
may not be as easily removed from one as from the other. As for those common
Imputations mentioned in yours, they have always been urged, and always been
despised by Persons under the Leadings of the Holy Ghost. And I leave you to
judge, as a Physician, whether all that is related in that Book can be
accounted for by Fancy, Vapors, or Cerebrosity: more particularly what you
read in these Sections, 11, 27, 31, 33.

For Mr. Mede I have indeed, a very great Deference, and too much ever to
believe that he could intend to contradict himself, or do it in such a great
Point as this, and not know it. All the World who have but looked into him, or
even but heard of his Name, must needs know what was his Sentiment as to the
Glorious Reign of Christ: and if that Great and Judicious Man ranges the
Milluaries amongst Heretics and Apostates of the Latter Times, it is easily to
be gathered that he could mean no others, then such who by their gross and
unworthy Conceptions corrupted that very Truth which he so strenuously
asserted. For if this be not a Truth, I know not any one you can make out from
Scripture. And I dare say that your Learned Friend must own that how much
soever it may be exploded, it is yet a Doctrine more clearly to be found in the
most Primitive Antiquity, than the greater part of those which at this day so
much divide the contending Parties of Christendom. Now as for your Friend, whom
you dare to trust, he is indeed a Disciple of Wisdom, and a Son of the
Prophets, but he is yet but in a low Class, and very young in this Heavenly
Life. But could he Experimentally declare more then hitherto he can, it might
not be very expedient upon many weighty Reasons so to do, till the great
Effusion of the Miraculous Powers do make the way clear for such a Declaration:
However he can say that he is not a Stranger to the Baptism of the Holy Ghost,
which is by Fire. He has seen the Fulfilling of some Prophecies already, and so
is the better encouraged to expect that of others. His Trials, Deliverances,
and all the secret part of his Life, both at home and abroad, has been
strangely singular: and what God designs to do with him further, he knows not,
but desires to stand entirely Passive to his Will.

Now it remains that I should answer your Last Request, which concerns the
distinguishing the Impetus of our own Imaginations from Divine Inspirations;
which contains in it two Questions, 1st, How the Persons themselves that are
under them can distinguish them? And 2dly, How others that have them not, are
to judge concerning them? But of all that relates to this you may expect a
Particular Account by another way, in Answer to some Queries that were proposed
to me. And in the mean time I recommend to you for your Guidance, the very last
Revelation in the Book. I have this only to say to the First, at present, that
the Imagination ought to be perfectly mortified; the Death and Cross of Christ
being the true Path to Illumination: And to the Second, That Care is to be
taken, neither too hastily to Approve, nor too hastily to Reject; but to Try
all Spirits, and to hold fast them that are Good, suspending to pass Judgment
on those that are not understood. May the God and Father of your Spirit,
enlighten it in his own good time, to his Glory, by the Internal Revelation of
his Son Jesus Christ, through the Operation of his blessed Spirit, that works
in you: that so by your own Experimental Conviction, you may be able to
Convince others, and so by promoting that Divine Knowledge, whose Increase is
foretold by the Prophet Daniel, you may shine as a Star in the Firmament of
Wisdom. So committing you, with your dear Companion, to his Gracious
Protection, I take leave to subscribe my self

Your known Friend.
London, Septem. 9. 95.
Query. How are Spirits to be Discerned.
IF this Query refers to the Persons themselves, who are, or suppose themselves
led by a Good Spirit, it is Answered, That the Manner of Discernment is by
Sensation, which is not to be described. This Sensation like the New Song, the
New Name, and the White Stone, they only who do experiment, and while they do
experiment, are able to distinguish. But then it may be Queried, How shall they
who suppose themselves to be led by a True Spirit, and are not, be enabled to
discern aright in this matter, since they are without this Spiritual Sensation,
by which the others are assured concerning the Truth of their Visions and
Revelations? Ans. They are to seek for it of God, by a perfect Mortification of
their own Wills, and especially as to these very supposed Favors; and by most
instant and violent Prayer. Thus some who upon the Commission of an evilthing,
have been deprived of the Good Spirit of God, which they did enjoy, and have
been delivered up to a Spirit of Delusion for some time, Satan all this while
exactly Personating an Angel of Light, giving forth false Oracles, and opening
a false Paradise upon them; have been again restored to their former Enjoyments
and Divine Sensation, the Scenes of the false Paradise made to drop into
pieces, and the true One to Open, and the Evil Spirit forced to stand before
the Angel whom he had Personated. If it be further Queried, Whether, and How,
do those that are truly led by the Holy Spirit, discern the Spirits by which
others are led? The Answer will be, That all are not able to do so, but only
some that are arrived to a very high Degree, and great Experience in the
Supernatural Life. As for the Manner of Discerning, it is the same with respect
to others as to themselves; there being no Mark so certain here as that of
Internal Sensation. Thus Spiritual Things are spiritually discerned, felt, and
received: and the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. But if
in the last place it be demanded, How then shall those who are Strangers to
these Leadings of the Spirit, and who desire alike neither to fall into any
Error, nor to resist the Truth, be able to govern themselves in this Matter?
To this the Answer is very easy, That they are not to perplex themselves in
this Inquiry, so long as they remain either Carnal, or Rational, but to
endeavor by all means, according to the clear Path chalked out in the
Scriptures, to become Sdiritual. To which State when they are arrived, they
need not fear being able to judge or themselves: and if with respect to others
they shall not be presently capable to judge, they can be under no apprehension
of any danger, so they do but follow the pure Dictates of the Spirit to
themselves; and therefore they will desire this satisfaction, no further then
as it shall be given them from Above. However even they who are not arrived
beyond the Rational Life, need not be much mistaken, while they continue so.
For if that which is said to be Revealed, be of weighty concern either to that
Particular Soul, or to the public, and if it directly tend to Purity of Life,
and to the Exaltation of God, and the Humiliation of Man; then if it be not
plainly disagreeable with what has been for Certain before Revealed, even they
according to their mere Natural Reason ought not to slight it.

Two Testimonies for the Dispensation of the Spirit Revived.
I. The Testimony of Dr. J. P. the Author's Fellow Traveller.
Christian Friend,
NO other Foundation can be laid, that what Christ has laid, for he has laid
himself in his Saints, to be established upon, whicn is the hidden Mystery of
God: But to know and to feel Christ in us in his Burning Flaming Heart of Love
by way of Wedlock and Marriage-Union, between the Soul and its Bridegroom; This
is a deep Mystery, that few are counted worthy to comprehend. But all these
Feelings, these foretasts of Divine Love, with ravishing Joys, do but leave us
to the Warfaring State, against all our Spiritual Enemies, to conquor Hell,
Sin, Eternal Death, Dragon, and all Hell-Devils, together with the Beast and
the Earthly Life in our selves: for to the Conquerors, the Glassy Sea and the
New Jerusalem, as a reward will be given; for it will open within the
Soul-Center. Let us remember our Calling: We were called to Fight with our
inward Spiritual Enemies, for the Garland of Paradise, aad for the Garland of
Flowers, which were wont to be given to the Conquerors. And we are to contend
for the the Crown of Pearl: which is Christ's perfect Deity in his Eternal
Humanity in our Souls, we are yet to strive with all earnestness, for to obtain
the Banner of Victory, over the Hell, Sin, Death, and Curse in our Souls; by
reigning with the risen Lamb (...) dominion, over all Devils and wicked
Babylon, from whence we are called to Separate from. Yet Good and Evil are
wrestling within us, Day and Night in Strife, Life and Death, Light and
Darkness, are in Contention, who should Reign, and which should have the
Dominion; therefore in the Unity and Harmony of the Love, we are to persevere,
till we see Christ's Coronation-Day; till he in us, and we in him, come to see
him Crowned, and all our Enemies under his Feet. This will be our Reigning-Day
indeed, when Hell, and Sin, and Death, and Mortality in us shall be swallowed
up of Immortal Life and Glory: When we shall know but one Heavenly Life, moving
and acting through every form of the Soul. Seeing such a Ministration is left
us by Christ, on this the Grave to be enjoyed, when the Seventh Angel shall
sound his Trumpet, and it is so near us, and we near it; let us give all
Diligence, all Watchfulness, all Labor for the Possession of it. Then Christ
within us, and Christ without us will meet, in one Center of Glory; and both
will make up but one Wonder. These Lines I hope, will be no Block in your
Christian Progress: If a Spark of Love-^ire inflame your Soul, to seek after
the Center of Perfection in Christ, I shall rejoice, Christ in us can do it in
a moment, by opening the Glassy Sea in the Soul's Property. This is the Mark we
are pressing after, as fellow Travelers. Wherefore we make our selves
Strangers and Pilgrims to this Earthly Principle. I commend you, dear Soul,
into the Arms of our Emmanuel, who will bring his Constant and Faithful
Seekers, to be with him in his Kingdom of Glory. So I rest

Your fellow Traveller in the Patience under the Cross, J. P.

II. Mr. T. B's Testimony of this Dispensation.
THis Dispensation does not only keep us close to the Person and Offices of our
Lord Jesus Christ, but with it or in it is conveyed the very essential Grace,
or the Body, Spirit and Power of Christ, to abide in us as a constant Spring of
Divine Teaching, and of Spiritual Sensation, and as the true and great Root of
Regeneration, which is Christ in us the Hope of Glory: So that in this
Dispensation, we do essentially and vitally enjoy, that which many other
Christians do but discourse of, and breath after, as a thing mostly unknown;
keeping close to it, i^ purifies us Soul and Body, and leads us most directly
into Mount Sion, or the Heart of God; this is most essentially true, and a long
considered experimental Testimony.

T. B.

FINIS.
Errors Corrected.
Page 7 line 22 f no read now. p 8 l 8 r Parabolical [way: and] yet. p 9 l 1 f
Indea r Idea. p 13 l 5 for Objection r Object. p 32 l 19 f [,] r [.] while. p
33 l 13 dele to. p 34 l 4 dele as. p 37 l 17 f [,] r [.] p 53 l 4 f This r This
(is). p 64 l 19 f 1675 r 1674. ibid l 21 r is (not) to be. p 65 l 4 f Eternity
r Emnity. ibid l 16 f Fuition r Fruition. p 76 l 23 f is r are. p 80 l 22 f
Trusty r Trustee. p 81 l 3 dele do. p 87 l 13 f World r Word. p 93 l 15 f
Security r Purity. p 94 l 24 f working r wonderworkingly. p 95 l 7 f Promise r
Province. p 96 l 4 f belingrings r Beleagerings. ibid l 7 f cleaving to r
cleaving (close) to. ibid l 20 f strong hold is the r Strong hold (is,) is the.
p ^8 l 18 f with me r with mine (s^. Chariot). p 100 l 25 f aimable r amiable,
p 106 l 7 f Life r Leaf. p 107 l 19 f was hither r was (upon the fiery Wheel)
hither. ibid l 2^ f thy r this. p 108 l 20 f Corruppter r Corruption. ibid l 8
f mingled hereupon. By r mingled. Hereupon by. p 110 ult f Coagulation by r
Coagulation (or mixing) by. p 115 l 7 f set r sit. ibid l 19 f our Ap, r our
(spiritual) Appetites. p 116 l 10 f terror r fervor. p 119 l 18 f into one
Spirit I was r two into one Spirit was. p 112 l 19 f Spirit or Wisdom r Spirit
of Wisdom. ibid l 18 f meet r neat. ibid l 21 f was to pr. r was (in great
concern) to pr. p 123 l 3 f akin read a Kin. ibid l 14 f which r (in) which.
ibid ult Spirits (will be). p 125 l 4 r propagation (through) ibid l 7 f
Man-God r God-Man. p 127 l 8 f Shion read Heshbon. p 128 l 6 f Court r Covert.
ibid l 13 for the in outw. r in the outward Life's Form. p 133 l 8 f passive,
process r passive Process, dele to commate. ibid l 18 19 f shall by r shall
(be) by. p 131 l 16 for uncloyed r unclogged. p 132 l 4 f Serenity r Security.
p 134 ult for to be r (fit) for to be. p 142 l 2 f nativity r maturity. p 143 l
15 f ceased r seized. p 144 ult for dance about r Star-glance about. p 853 l 19
f believe r believe (it). p 156 l 11 f Salvation r pointing to the Doctors
Salvation. p 154 l 23 f whether r whither. p 159 l 26 f we are all r we shall
wear all. p 162 l 21 f for any praise of r and way of. p 163 ult f believing r
blessing p. 166 ulr f to that r to be the. p ^67 l 18 f in Bonds r and Bonds. p
168 l 13 f to him, to his r to see his. p 170 l 18 f unto r unto (you). p 172 l
12 f are Found r are (to be) Found. p 177 l 21 f away r a Way. p 180 Col 1 l 3
f Ex. 28. ^7. r Ex. 28, 17. ibid Col 2 l 5 Rev. 19, 20, 21. r Rev. 20. v. 19,
20. ibid Col 3 l 8 f or r and. p 182 l 14 and 28, 13. r Ezekiel. p 187 l 12 f the
Bride r (as) the Bride. p 194. l (...) f will r will (the), p 203 l 3 f
Secretaries r secret Rays. p 204 l 10 f hold of r hold on. p 221 l 12 f besides
r besides (me). p 229 l 18 f Freewill r Fuel. p 231 l 6 f upon you: impressed
you (...) upon you impressed you are. p 234 l 18 f is r are. p 236 l 17 f over
r overcome p 237 l 5 (...) repass r repast. p 241 l 2 f did steer and run r
did see r^n. p 243 l 23 f which r with. p 245 l 24. f who it r who is. p 250
l 1 for Mountain r Mansion. ibid l 3 f driven r (you have been) driven. p 252 l
11 f an r no. ibid l 25 f shall r shall be. p 253 l 9 f Revelation r Revolution
p 266 l 2 f came it r came in. ibid l 7 f numerously r numerously. ibid l 12 f
circling r circling (Eye). p 269 l 6 f Aim r Arm. p 271 l 8 f Covenant r
Covenanter. ibid l 23 f comes r came. p 274 l 9 f of r after. p 277 l 16 for
yea r yet. p 278 l 11 and 12 f Horan r Horon. p 281 ult 282 l 12 f For
out-proceed r For out of the Thundering Voices, glances of Light from the
Majesty will proceed. p 288 l 14 f so r am. p 295 l 3 f Mounts r Mount Sions.
ibid l 28 f whither r whether p 305. l 12 f hear r here. p 319 l 21 f looking r
footing. ibid l 22 f their r there. p 321 l 21 f we r he p 322 l 16 f to r so.
p 326 l 9 f King r Thing. p 334 l 5 f contaction of his r contraction of this.
p 336 l 5 f their nature are r in their nature they are ibid l 10 f Mutations r
Mutinees.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas some Things have been Scandalously set forth, and Printed under the
Name of this Author to the Reproach of Truth, and the Dishonor of that which
is Holy, it is thought fit for the putting a Stop to such Impostures, and the
Evil which might thence ensue, to give a Catalogue of the Books which the
Author has hitherto Published.

1. THe Heavenly Cloud, or, the Ascension Ladder. 4to. 1682. page 40.

2. The Revelation of Revelations, an Essay toward the Unsealing, Opening, and
Discovering of the Seven Seals, the Seven Thunders, and the New Jerusalem
State. 4to. 1686. page 130.

3. The Enochian Walks with God, found out by a Spiritual Traveller. 4to. 1694.
p. 38.

4. The Laws of Paradise; Given forth by Wisdom to a Translated Spirit. 8vo.
1695. page 69.

5. The Wonders of God's Creation manifested in the Variety of Eight Worlds.,
as they were made known Experimentally to the Author. 8vo. 1695. p. 89.

6. The Mess^ge to the Philadelphian Society whithersoever dispersed over the
whole Earth, together with a Call to the several gathered Churches. 12ves. p.
108 1696.

7. The Tree of Faith: or the Tree of Life, springing. up in the Paradise of
God; from which all the Wonders of the New Creation must proceed 12ves. p. 122.
1696.

8. The Ark of Faith, page 33.


