Judgment Brought forth unto VICTORY, AND Mercy kissing Judgment; BEING THE
WORK and MERCY of God, (upon my Soul) which conduces to his Praise.

Also a Tender Invitation of Love unto the Professors, and to the Profane; to
come unto Christ, that they may have Life.

Written in the Fear of the Lord, and as moved by his holy Spirit through his
Servant, Francis Lea.

For we have not followed cunning devised Fables, when we made known unto you
the Power and Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; but were Eyewitnesses of his
Majesty -- That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also
may have Fellowship with us; and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Christ Jesus.

Printed in the year, 1671.

To the Reader.
HEre all Priests, Professors and Profane may see (as in a Glass) their own
Spirit, which he lived in, while he remained amongst them; whom now the Lord
has of his free Love plucked out of the Fire as a Brand. And so read this Book
over, with a serious mind, in the Fear of the Lord; and with the same
seriousness, Consider your conditions, wherein he has left you, (for you are
in the self-same condition and state as he sometime was in) that so you may
Repent, and come out of it, least you sin out your time, and there be no more
Space for Repentance, when time shall be no more.

J. H.

JUDGMENT Brought forth unto VICTORY, etc.
I Could willingly have forborne writing, did not the Love of God constrain me
thereunto; and because I have formerly walked as one of the Vilest among the
Sons of men; therefore is it laid upon me to declare something concerning the
same: as also to demonstrate, and declare unto others, the Work and Mercy of
the Lord toward me; by visiting me with his Everlasting Lovingkindness, and
the Tender drawings of his unspeakable Love.

In days by past when I knew not the Lord, but walked in disobedience unto
him, who in my Infancy, many times caused Tenderness to arise in me; insomuch
that I often with tears besought the Lord, to Lead, and Guide me in his Way;
and if at any time he did see me erring therefrom; that he would send his
affictions to be as a wall, to stop me in my evil walking: Yet notwithstanding
such desires did often arise in me, I lived and walked in disobedience, and
Rebellion against the Lord; who sent his Afflictions gradually upon me;
sometimes stripping me of one thing, and sometimes of another; which makes me
to say as David once did; before I was afflicted I went astray, but now (Lord)
have I kept thy word.

As words are to short to set forth, and declare the Lovingkindnes of the Lord
toward me; so must I with shame and confusion of face say, that they are also
to short to demonstra^e unto others, the horrid Transgressions and great
Iniquities, which I have committed against the Lord, whose Patience and Long
suffering, has been great toward me; even in that day and time, when I was
walking about the Brinks of Hell: Yea, when my feet took hold on Hell, and my
footsteps on the Chambers of Death: so that there was but a small moment,
between me and Eternal Flames: and had not the Lord (who is rich in Mercy)
spared me at that time, but cut me off, as justly he might have done -- Eternal
Flames would have been my Lot, and Endless Torments my Portion; and my
habitation must have been with the Damned, and Tormented for ever.

But I cannot Omit, but must particularly mention, this one evil, and ever to
be abhorred passage of mine. When I had long lived after the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life: and had been wallowing in the
Pleasures and Vanities of this evil World; and the Lord therefore having strip^
me of my outward estate, which I knew not then how to use; but was spending it
in Riotous Living: Now after this evil manner and course of Life I continued,
until I had nor where-withall to live as I had formerly done; and not being
willing to Condescend to live after a mean and low condition; and having heard,
that some by Contracting with, and Selling their Souls to the Devil; was
supplied from him, with such things as they desired: then I often pondered
these things in my mind; and the Enemy taking all advantages as possibly he
could; I oftentimes was in much solitariness, and sadness, to think how I had
formerly lived, and now to be stripped of all: -- whereupon I made a Resolution
in my heart, to Contract with, and Sell my Immortal Soul unto the Devil: upon
this Condition; that I should be furnished with what things soever I desired,
whilst I lived: and oftentimes, when I was alone by my self; did I call unto,
and upon the Devil, for the very end, and purpose aforesaid; and did use all
ways and Means that I could think on, to obtain my wicked desire; but the
Lord was pleased to prevent this evil design of mine; though I must say to my
own shame, (but to the Honor and Glory of God who prevented me therein) that
none evermore Desired and Endeavored to Sell their Immortal Souls for the
Transitory and Fading Pleasures, and Vanitie's of this evil World then I once
did; not Considering that saying: What would it profit a man to gain the whole
World, and to lose his own (Precious and immortal) Soul.

Now when I had thus wickedly spent my time; and lived as the Prodigal who
spent his portion with riotous living; then I sought to join my self, sometimes
to this Profession, and sometimes to that; and would fain have sat down under
this Form, and the other Profession; thinking thereby, to have Obtained
Satisfaction unto my Hungry Soul; but, alas, I found that their Husky Doctrines
could not satisfy; nor their Sin-Soothing Principles give Rest to the Weary
Soul: For oftentimes this cry unto the Lord, rise in me: O give me Christ, or
else I dye; and with tears did I often seek the Lord; and besought him to
manifest the Way of Truth unto me: and the Lord who is rich in Mercy, and full
of goodness and Truth; heard the Cry of his own, and reached forth his Arm of
Power; which he made bare for my Salvation, in a needful day and acceptable
time.

The manner of my Convincement.
AS I was reading an Answer, which was written (by that faithful Servant of the
Lord, George Whitehead) unto a perverse, False and Scandalous Pamphlet, written
by one William Burnet against the Principles of Truth, held by the People of
the Lord, reproachfully called Quakers; as I was reading the said Answer I
heard the Voice of the Eternal Son of God, to speak on this wise -- This is the
Truth confer not with Flesh and Blood, but when he uttered his Voice the Earth
trembled, and the Foundations thereof were so terribly shaken; that (Praised be
the Name of the Lord) they never came together any more and Gods Precious and
Everlasting Truth, which was after this manner made known unto me, I
immediately received in the love of it: without Conferring, or Consulting with
Flesh and Blood.

Now no sooner had the Lord opened my dark understanding; and in some measure
revealed his Righteous Judgments against the Man of Sin: and poured forth his
fierce Wrath and Indignation upon the Worker of Iniquity: But this old Enemy of
Mankind, sought by all Ways and Means Imaginable, to draw me from that pure
manifestation of truth, which the Lord in measure, had made known unto me: and
so many and great were his Snares and and Wiles; that I often Cried unto the
Lord, that he would Preserve me Faith-full, and give me Strength to withstand
the Adversary of my Soul: And earnestly did I beseech the Lord, to pour forth
his Righteous Judgments* upon all that which was contrary to his Holy Mind and
Will: and the Lord who had Regard unto the Cry of the Just in me, which had
Long been oppressed as a Cart with sheaves; and even Groaned, and Traveled to
be delivered, from under the Cruel Yoaks of Bondage, poured forth his Fury upon
the Oppressor; which Burned as fire against him; at the appearance whereof, the
Just rejoiced, and the Righteous was exceeding glad.

And no sooner was the Innocent and Just in me delivered from under the hands
of Pharaoh; but he persued vehemently after him; then I Cried unto the Lord,
and said -- O Lord, how shall I be able to stand! How shall I be able to
escape! O! Better had it been for me, O Lord, never to have known thy Truth,
and thy Way, then after the knowledge thereof, to fall from them, and sin
against thee; O Lord, I beseech thee; let not the Enemy Prevail against me; O!
let me not fall: Thus was I pouring forth my Supplications to the Lord; and
spreading my Sorrowful Complaints, before the Most High; not knowing, how I
should be able to withstand, and escape the fierce Persuit of Pharaoh, and his
Strong Host: For I saw no Way of Deliverance; But as it were Mountains of each
side, and the red Sea before; and the Enemy even at my heels, as if he were
ready to overtake me. Yet the Lord in that day of never to be forgotten
Calamity and time of sore Distress, wonderfully wrought Deliverance, by his
Mighty hand and Outstretched Arm of Power: So that I can indeed say, the Right
hand of the Lord has Done Valiantly; Pharaoh and all his Host, has he
Overthrown in the red Sea of his fierce Wrath -- Glory and Everlasting Praises
be given unto the Lord for Ever.

And though the Lord had wrought so Great Deliverance for me, by his Mighty
Hand, and Outstretched Arm; Yet the Evil One strove to raise, and beget
murmurings in me against the Lord; tempting me to Look back again unto Egypt;
and many a time was I ready to Look back, and thinking to Return again: And had
not the Dealings of the Lord been toward me; even as a Tender Father toward
his Child* I had not Remained in Truth unto this Day: For many times was it
with me like Jonas, who said, I do well to be angry unto death; and the Enemy
taking all advantages, who was many times stirring me up to write against the
Truth; so that I have sometimes thought in my heart to forsake it; and my Hand
has been near setting pen to paper; to write against the Truth; Yea the Enemy
had once so far Drawn out my Eye, to look at the actions and behavior of some,
that were in Truth before me, that it had like to have been my Fall and utter
Ruin: For such struglings were within me concerning the same, as if Life and
Death had been striving for the mastery. Yet the Lord was pleased to let me see
the Enemy who had thus strove to Work in me, an Enmity against the Truth, and
in some measure brought him under, and gave me Victory over him: and then I
desired of the Lord, that he would judge out the Evil one in all his
appearances, and Preserve and establish me in his blessed Truth: though
afterward, by reason of Many and great Exercises; I have often said in my
heart, surely I shall one day fall by the hand of the Enemy: O Whose Trials!
Whose Exercises! Whose Sorrows! and whose Afflictions are like unto mine! Was
ever any ones Condition like unto my Condition! Surely nay. And when the Lord
has at any time withdrawn his Refreshing Presence from me; then have I sat
Mourning as one Desolate and Forsaken; often wishing that I were in some
Solitary Place, where no Eye might behold me, and there to mourn continually
before the Lord, and to pour out my complaints before the Most High: So that I
have often said in my heart: Has the Lord forgotten to be Gracious? Will he be
favorable no more? Has he in Anger shut up his Tender Mercies? Thus was it
with me many a time; for many were the Inward and also the Outward Exercises
and Trials, which did attend me: But through the Tender Mercies of the Lord, (
whose tender Care toward me, words cannot express). have I been hitherto
Preserved, and the more I consider the Tender Dealings of his unspeakable love
toward me, the greater Admiration arises in me, Concerning the same; insomuch
that I have often said, O Lord, what manner of love is this! wherewith thou
have Visited me! For truly, O Lord, among all the sinful sons of Men, I have
the most deserved to be made a Monument of thy fierce Wrath, and sore
Displeasure; but thy Mercy has been such toward me; that thou have Spared me
to become a living Monument of thy Tender Mercies, and to Publish and Declare
the same unto the Sons, and Daughters of men.

And though I have been oftentimes like a ship Tossed to and fro, and many
times ready to make shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience, and the Blessed
and Everlasting Truth of God: Yet the Lord has been pleased, to speak
Comfortable things unto my Soul -- O thou tossed with tempests! Afflicted, and
not Comforted; behold! I will lay thy stones with Precious Colors; and thou
shall no more be called Desolate and Forsaken; for thy Maker is thy Husband;
and though for a Moment I have hid my face from thee, yet with everlasting
loving kindness, have I Visited thee, which shall never Depart from thee: And
though in days bypast, thou have walked in Rebellion against me; yet now shall
thou walk before me; and I will Take Delight in thee, to Do thee Good; for I
have Removed thine Iniquities from thee, as far as the East is from the West:
And thou shall be an instrument in my hand, to turn Transgressors from their
Evil Ways; for my power will I manifest in thy weakness; that no Flesh should
Glory in my Presence. Then said I, O Lord, if thou will Destroy, and subdue the
Enemy of my Soul, and bring me into Everlasting Peace with thee; Then will I
teach Trangressours thy Way, and sinners shall be Converted unto thee.

Now many times when I have been deeply Exercised and besought the Lord
concerning the same, saying, O Lord, Wherefore am I thus Exercised? And
wherefore am I thus Tried? the Answer has been; How can thou speak unto
others Conditions, except thou pass through the same thy self? then said I, O
Lord, Exercise me, and Try me how thou will; so that I may but in Faithfulness
walk before thee, for my Life is given up to sorve thee, and it is my Whole
delight to do thy Will; for, O Lord, thou know, that it is neither Honor,
nor Riches, nor Length of Days, nor any External thing which my Soul desires
of thee, but that to Faithfulness, and with joy, I may finish my Testimony, for
thy Holy Name, and Truth, which thou have been pleased to make me a Partaker
of. Now unto the Only Wise, Eternal, Infinite, and Omnipotem, Lord God; be
living Praises, Honor, Glory and Thanksgiving; for unto him alone are they
due, who is God over all, Blessed, and Renowned, for ever and ever Amen.

Written in the fear of the Lord; as and moved by his Holy Spirit; through one
of the Meanest of the Lords People; who was once a Servant of Satan; but
through the Tender-Mercies of the Lord, his Servant I am F. L.
Fleet Prison in London, the latter end of the 1st Month 1671.
A Tender Invitation OF LOVE UNTO PROFESSORS, etc.
My Friends,
I have been one that was diligently seeking the Lord, among your dead forms,
and empty ways of worship; which can satisfy an hungry Soul, no more then
Chaff and Dust, can satisfy an hungry man; for I must tell you plainly, that
Soul satisfaction cannot be had amongst you; for if it could, many Thousands
besides my self had not come from amongst you; but would still have remained
with you. Wherefore in True and Tender Bowels of unfeigned Love to you all, am
I Constrained thus to write unto you; and so much the more, because the Day
hastens, in which it will be said unto all, who profess Christ in Words, but in
Works deny him -- Depart from me, I know Ye not, Ye Workers of Iniquity: What
then will become of your husky Doctrines, and sin-soothing Principles? who seek
to apply, and impu^e Christ's Righteousness to your selves, though actually
sinners: For all your empty Notions, Airy Imaginations, and your Crying Lord,
Lord, with your self Duties and Performances; and all other your Trash, and
Trumpery, will not any ways avail you in that Day, when the Secrets of all
hearts shall be Judged by Christ Jesus, according to the Gospel: and then you
will find, that God will not be mocked; but such fruits as you have Sown,
Brought forth, and Pleaded for, in your life times, shall you have a Recompense
of Reward for in that great day; and what Sentence soever is then passed upon
you, shall stand; for from this Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, shall you
have no appeal unto any other. Therefore while your Day and Time lasts Prise
it; and Turn unto the Gentle Reproofs of Christ Jesus, (the Light of the World)
in your own Consciences; and then you will not be crying out for want of Power;
for unto all that Believe in, and Receive him (the Light) he gives Power to
become the Sons and Daughters of God: whose Love is so large; and whose Mercy's
are so great, toward the sinful Sons and Daughters of men; that he would have
none to Perish, but that all might come unto him, and have Everlasting Life:
And for that very end, does he so often appear against your Evil actions, and
gently Reprove you for the same, when no Eye sees or Ear hears you.

But perhaps some may say, that this Light, which you called Quakers declare,
and write so much of is but, a Natural light, and not sufficient to save -- My
friends, I am one among the many thousands that witness Salvation by this Pure,
Holy, and Divine Light of Christ Jesus, which is able to Save unto the
Uttermost, all that come unto God by the same. And therefore, let me desire you
all, who have any True Breathings after God, and the Knowledge of his way's, to
come forth out of all Professions, and lay them aside for a time; and do but
Give ear unto, Regard, and diligently Obey that, which appears against your
Evil Way's; and if that Light of Christ Jesus, which we the People of the Lord
called Quakers have proved, and tried, and which has so often appeared unto
you, to Discover Sin, and Manifest Iniquity, in the very first appearance
thereof; does not do such works that none else can do; and bring Salvation unto
all that Believe in, and Obey the same; then Believe it not, but if it does --
O! then Believe in it, for the very works sake; and love Regard, and Obey the
very least appearance of it; and by so doing, you may come to witness that
saying fulfilled in you; He that is faithful in alittle shall be made Ruler
over much.

But if any should say, why are so many gone from, and forsaken those
Principles, which you called Quakers are so confident in to be the Truth? Why,
my Friends, it is now, as it was in Ages past; for many did then as well as
now, turn their backs upon Truth; but their so doing was not then, neither is
it now, or will it be for any a plea, and argument sufficient, not to receive
the Truth, because others who have known it, have not been faithful unto, but
forsaken it: For if because those in Asia had forsaken the Truth, (as Paul said
they had, who said, all they which are in Asia, are turned away from me, 2 Timothy
1.15.) others therefore should have followed their evil steps, than Truth
thereby might have come to be buried in Oblivion. Wherefore let not the Evil
Walkings of any that have received Truth, and have not walked faithfully in the
same, but forsaken it, be as a hinderance unto any one of you in receiving of
it; but Turn unto it, and Embrace it, while your Day and Time lasts; that so
you may lay down your heads in Peace, when you are to go away hence, and be no
more; which that you may all do, is the hearty desire of

Written the latter end of the first, Month, 1671. Your assured Friend. F. L.

A Tender Invitation OF LOVE Unto the PROFANE, etc.
My Friends,
I Once lived and walked with you also in all Manner of Profaneness; but the
Lord who is rich in Mercy, and full of Goodness and Truth, was pleased to pluck
me from amongst you, even as a Brand plucked out of the Fire; and because he
has been pleased to Spare me; and has made me to become a living Monument of
his Tender Mercy's, therefore am I- constrained thus to Publish the same; and
indeed while I have a being in this Earthly Tabernacle, must I Declare of, and
Sound forth the large Love of God, which he freely extends unto all the sons,
and Daughters of men; and at this time is it laid upon me to visit you also, in
True, and tender Bowels of Love unfeigned; and to beseech you all, to put away
the Evil of your Ways, and Doings, which have caused a separation between God
and your Immortal Souls -- O! That you would a little consider your latter end,
and the sad Estate, and Condition which you are now in; for if the Lord should
say unto any one of you; this night thy soul shall be required of thee; how sad
and miserable would the Estate of any such be: Wherefore, to prevent the same,
I beseech you all, to Turn unto that, which makes manifest your Evil Doings;
and you will find by so doing, that you will not only come to see, but also to
leave off, and witness Victory over, and Salvation from, your Evil Words and
Works.

But if any should say, that, that Eight, which the People called Quakers
direct all People unto, is a great delusion, and therefore to be avoided.

I answer, if that Light of Christ Jesus, which shows the Drunkard he should
not be Drunk, and the Swearer that he should not Swear, will also, if loved,
followed and obeyed by them, Lead them out of, and Save them from their
Drunkeness, and Swearing, and all other their Abominations; why then should it
not be Regarded, and Peoples minds directed unto it? for I hope, none will
count that Principle a delusion, by which any one comes to Know, and Witness a
Leading out of, and being Saved from Sin. But that Principle of Truth (which
the People called Quakers Direct all People unto, and Admonish and Exhort all
to follow, does not only Manifest and Convince of Sin, but also is able to Save
unto the Uttermost, all that Belive in, and Obey it; as the Scriptures of Truth
do largely Testify concerning the same; for that which convinced the World of
Sin, Joh. 16.8. lead the Saints into all Truth verse 13. and all things which
are Reproved, are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make
Manifest, is Light, Ephe. 5, 13. but God is Light, and in him is no darkness at
all; 1 John, 1, 5. who is able to Save unto the Uttermost all that Believe in,
and Obey him; Therefore to Direct all Peoples minds unto that, which Shows,
Convinces, and Reproves of Sin is no delusion; but that Faith and Doctrine
which was once Delivered unto, and Preached by the Saints, which we are
earnestly to Contend for.

But Friends, I do believe that none of you will deny, but that when you have
Committed any Sin, you do Perceive some thing to Manifest, and Discover the
same unto you; which has made many to say; God forgive me I was drunk such a
time; and I Swear very often, at such a time; though they have afterward
Committed the like Offenses again; Now the reason why your Sins are so
Prevalent, and you so often Commit them again, is because you have n^ Tender
Regard unto, but Slight that, which shows you Sin in its first appearance;
which if you did Obey, then you will not Act and Commit Sin; the Wages whereof
is Death Eternal. Now if any would a void, and Escape that Death, which is the
Wages and Reward of Sin; let them Turn, and join unto that Pure Principle of
God in themselves, which never Consents unto the least motion of Sin; but as
has been said before, appears against the First Motion of it; for God has
placed a Witness for himself in every Man, and Woman; which will Teach to do
justly, to love Mercy, and to Walk Humbly before God. Wherefore Gease to do
Evil, Learn to do Well; amend your Evil Ways, and put away the Evil of your
Doings; and let the Time bypast suffice; and Turn unto the Lord, and he will
have Mercy upon you, and to our God, who will abundantly Pardon.

Written by one (that heartily desires that none might sin out their day, but
Obtain Mercy and Salvation by Christ Jesus) who is your Assured Friend. F. L.
The latter end of the 1st Month, 1671.
THE END.

