A Mite into the Treasury, Being a Word to ARTISTS, Especially to
HEPTATECHNISTS, The Professors of the Seven Liberal Arts, so called, Grammar,
Logic, Rhetoric, Music, Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy. Showing what we
own herein, being according to God and Godliness, and of God; and what we deny,
proceeding from and savouring of those deceitful Lips, which seduced Man from
his Primitive Station, a State of Blessedness. Several other things are herein
touched, as in the following Contents appear.

Indocti rapiunt coelum, nos cum doctrina,
Nostra trudimur in Infernum, August.
Unlearned Men take Heaven by Violence,
Proud Rabbis Hell, when they depart from Hence,
Poor Fishermen do find the way to Heaven,
When Scholars go astray, who Arts have Seven;
For Humane Learning, and such kind of Preaching,
Is nothing to the Blessed Spirit's Teaching.
War with the Devil, by B. K. Thomas Lawson.

London, Printed by Andrew Soul, 1680.

The CONTENTS.
OF the Original of Languages, and of Grammar. Cap. 1. Of Logic. Cap. 2. Of
Rhetoric. Cap. 3. Of Music. Cap. 4. Of the Rise of Musical Instruments in the
Churches professing Christianiiy. Cap. 5. Of Arithmetic. Cap. 6. Of Geometry.
Cap. 7. Of Astronomy and Astrology. Cap. 8. Of Divinity and Heathen Philosophy,
and against teaching Heathen Books. Cap. 9. Of School Titles, Degrees, as
Doctors, Batchellors of Arts, etc. Cap. 10. Of the Rise of Distinct Habits,
Gowns, square Caps, etc. used by the Clergy, and by University Students. Cap.
11. Of the Clergies Garmemts being of one Color. Cap. 12. Of the Pall. Cap.
13. Of the Suplice. Cap. 14.
A MITE INTO THE Treasury, etc.
CAP. I. Of the Original of Languages, and of Grammar.
College Doctors (as it is said) have for their Arms the Book with Seven Seals:
And why? Because they are skilled in the Seven Liberal Arts or Sciences, as
though the Seven Liberal Arts, acquired by Natural Search, could open the Book
with Seven Seals: This is Absurd and Foolish, if not Blasphemous.

John saw in the Right Hand of him that sat on the Throne, a Book sealed with
seven Seals; and a strong Angel proclaimed, Who is worthy to open the Book, and
to loose the Seals thereof? No Man in Heaven, nor in Earth, neither under the
Earth, could do this, all Mouths were shut; no Critical Grammarian, no Subtle
Logician, no Painted Rhetorician, no Melodious Musician, no Nimble
Arithmetitian, no Accurate Geometrition, no Airy Astronomer durst appear, or
was found worthy; Then one of the Elders said, Weep not, the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah has prevailed to open the Book, and to loose the Seals thereof, Rev.
5. So let College Doctors say what they can, it is not Natural Arts, nor
Artists, but the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and he alone that can open the
Seals thereof; all others are excluded as Impotent and Unworthy.

Josephus in his Antiquities writes, That the Children of Noah dwelt diverse
Years after the Flood upon Hills and Mountains, as fearing a second Flood,
until such times as Shem, Ham and Japhet adventured to make their Habitations
in the lower Grounds. New Nimrod, upon Promise of Defense and Protection, took
upon him Rule and Dominion over others, to be their Captain and Commander, and
to provide a Remedy for their Safety, in case of another Flood; he invented the
building of a Tower, so high, as no Flood of Water might overtop it, it
contained in height 5164. Paces (as Hidore says) so that it seemed rather a
wonderful great Mountain than a Tower; the passage to mount up was wide, and
went winding on the outside, in which the Carriages were born, and drawn up by
Camels, Dromedaries, Horses, Asses and Mules with Carts; the Almighty beholding
their Proud Attempt, Propterea dedit ora sono difcordia, et omnes.
Jamlinguis varios, varias dispersit in oras.
Virg. Evangelis. That is, Bereaved them of their Natural Speech, which till
then (as Josephus writes) was but one, to wit, the Hebrew Tongue, as most
affirm, and instead thereof gave them Seventy Two different Languages, as
Authors Report; from this confused Chattering among them, arose much Anger and
Vexation, because one could not understand another: So these New-languaged
Masons were forced to leave the Tower Unfinished; they run up and down like
Madmen, laboring to find such as they could understand; and this labor of
seeking one another endured till such times as they were grown to so many
Companies, or Troops of Men, as there were different Languages among them, to
wit, Seventy Two; and each Company, or Troop, that understood one another,
resolved to depart diverse ways, to seek themselves new and several Habitations:
Hence, according to the distinct Tongues, as many different and distinct
Nations were begun. Thus of one Language and one Nation, through Nimrod's
Arrogant and Ambitious Enterprise, came Seventy Two Languages and Nations, as
diverse affirm; Verst. and others.

This Tower was called Babel, which signifies Confusion, because there their
Language was Confounded; so from this, when we hear a man speak confusedly, we
say, he Babbles, or we call him a Babbler. Here is the Original of many
Languages, Proud Nimrod brought in Babel, C^, many Languages: Let Linguists
glorying in their Languages (...) this.

Thus of one Nation (...) Language, many Nations and Languages were brought
(...), who were as Barbarians one to another; then to the end they might be
capacitated for the management of Foreign Transactions, Negotiation and
Correspondance with other Nations, a Concern entered Men's Minds, for the
learning of Foreign Languages, and in order thereunto Grammar was invented,
defined to be an Art teaching to Write and Read rightly; and one Epicurus a
Heathen, as Authors affirm, was the first that taught Grammar, Pol. Virg. lib
1. cap. 7. Alsted, Vossius, etc.

Suetoneus says, 'That Grammar and Rhetoric had almost the same Original; for
men observing what was fit and proper in Speech, and what was unfit and
improper, what was to be imitated, and what was to be rejected, hereupon
hammered out this Art,' Pol. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 7.

The same Suetonius says, 'That Grammar formerly was neither used nor regarded
at Rome; and that at length one Crates Melotes brought the Study thereof to
Rome, being sent to the Senate by King Attalus between the first and third
Carthaginian War, about or a little before the Death of Eunius,' Pol. Virg.
lib. 1.

In the time of the Saxon Heptarchy Austin the Monk, with others, came from
Rome into this Nation, and brought the Faith and School Education of Papal
Rome, received from Ethnic Rome, to among the Saxons; so that many Profane,
Obscene, Lascivious, Corrupting and Depraving Authors came into our Schools,
which are yet continued, notwithstanding the Endeavors and Attempts of many to
cradicate the same.

Seigebert, King of the East Angles, of the Romish Faith, having learned in
France the manner of their Schools, translated from Athens to Rome, and from
Rome to Paris by Charles the Great, made Cambridge an University, about the
Year 630. The Lectures there were begun by four Monks: Friar Ode read Grammar;
Tericus read Aristotle's Logic; Friar William read Rhetoric; Friar Gislebert
read Divinity to them on Sundays and Saints-days, so called.

About the Year 668. by means of Theodore, a learned Greekish Monk of Tarsus,
whom Pope Vitalian had ordained Bishop of Canterbury, the Greek and Latin
Tongue, with other Liberal Arts, as Arithmetic, Music, Astronomy, etc. began
first to flourish among the Saxons, says Milton.

About the Year 895. King Alferd, through the Persuasion of Monk Neotus, made
Oxford a public University, and appointed Maintenance for the Professors of
Learning there, Geor. Lilius in Chron. Brit.

Further, I say, that if all Heathenish, Obscene, Lascivious and Unprofitable
Books were decryed, whose tendency is to Deprave, Spoil, Corrupt and Debauc^
Youth, and all Honest, Useful and Profitable Books were faithfully translated
into English, the Latin Trade need not be so magnified, which some Honest and
Wise in their Day had in their thoughts. But in as much as the learning of
Languages are useful for the Management of Foreign Transactions, Negotiations
and Correspondence with other Nations, as before, I speak not against the same,
nor against Grammar, contributing to the attainment thereof, only I give my
judgment as follows; and do wish:

1. That Grammers were not so tedious, finding that the great heaps of Rules,
Exceptions, Criticisms and Nicities therein are a discouragement to many, and
pursued by others, as the only Necessaries, Sound, Useful, Solid and Profitable
Matter; being in the mean time neglected, the Comments of Grammarians (says
M.Fab. Quintilian Institut. lib. 1.) are so stuffed with Impediments and
Hindrances, as that they are scarce well understood of the Composers; it is a
Rule of knowing Hebricians, (...) that is, Let a Man always teach his Scholars
in a short way. Further, Vossius says in his Grammar, That the great heap of
Rules are very hurtful to Children.

2. It being that Grammar consists of Rules and Examples, I could wish that all
Examples therein were Sound and Savoury, that in reading thereof, nothing but
what savours of, and encourages to a virtuous course of Living, might be
instilled into the Reader; how precious were it if their Souls, like Gideons
Fleece, did drink up betime the pearly Dew of Divine Grace, and Heaven-bred
Wisdom! Children are to be trained up in the Lord's Way, and in the Lords
Language; not in the Way of the Heathen, nor in bad, vicious and infecting
Words; evil Communications as the chosen Vessel Paul bears record) corrupt good
Manners.

3. It being that Grammar is an A^t, teaching to Write and Read rightly, ought
it not to be observed in Writing, Reading and Speaking? Yes. But all that in
Writing or Speaking use Ye or You to one Person, High or Low, Poor or Rich,
such are out of the Right, Sound, Proper Speech, and deviate from the Form of
Sound Words, and from the Rule and Order of Grammar.

The World consists of many Nations, whereof each has a peculiar Language,
Speech or Dialect; yet all concur, and are unanimous in the account of Number,
Singular and Plural, I, Thou, He, imports but One, We, Ye, They imports more
then One; and 'twere as proper to say Thou to a Thousand, as to say You or Ye
to One Man, both being Absurd, Improper and Ridiculous.

Do not all Grammarians in teaching their respective Languages or Tongues, as
Eaglish, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Italian, Caldee, Syriack, Arabic, Persian,
Ethiopian, Samaritan, Captick or Aegyptick, Armenian, Saxon, Welsh, Cornish,
French, Spanish, Portugal, High Dutch, Low Dutch, Danish, Bohemian, Sclavonian,
Polonian, Lithuanian, Irish, Swedish, Turkish, Muscovian, etc. I say, do they
not all distinguish between Singular Number and Plural, which is, Thou to One,
You or Ye to more then One? I say, Yes.

Do not Roman Authors, and others, as Poets, Comedians, Tragedians, Orators,
Historians, Philosopers, highly esteemed in Schools and Universities, observe
this distinction? Yes.

Are not Children blamed, yea, and entertained with Orbilian Severity in
Schools of Literature, if they use one Number for another? And why they should
not in other places, upon all accounts and occasions observe the true property
of Speech, in relation to this distinction of Numbers, let them show a Reason
that can.

Object. It Is true, say some, this distinction of Numbers cannot be spoken
against, in order to Grammatical Consideration, and Verity of Speech; but a
Custom to the contrary has got entrance, so that it is uncivil and improper to
use the Word Thou to some particular Person.

Answ. To account Thou to a single Person, High or Low, Rich or Poor, Uncivil,
Clownish or Improper, it is no less then to accuse God himself, Christ, the
Upright Patriarchs, Holy Prophets, Seers, Evangelists, Disciples, Apostles,
Gospel Bishops, Elders, Pallors, Deacons, Primitive Saints, Holy Martyrs, who
never used any other Language; yea, and it is no less then to accuse all
Languages upon the Face of the Earth, which according to the property thereof
observe this distinction.

Luther, much esteemed in his Age, and deservedly owned plainness of Speech,
holding out You or Ye to one to be Ridiculous, Foolish, Absurd and Impertinent.
Lud. Int Oper.

Erasmus derided the impertinent Speech of using You to one, E^s. Col.

Must the Language of the Ancient of Days, of Christ, of the Holy men of God be
slighted, because of an Unsound, Absurd and Impertinent Custom crept in, in the
Night of Apostasy? Must the Glorious Work of Reformation be shut out upon such
frivolous accounts? The Apostle of the Lamb bore Record, saying, If any Man be
in Christ, he is a New Creature, old things are done away. Not only the Works,
but the Foolish, Absurd and Impertinent Wordt of the Old Man, that the Work of
Reformation may prosper. This using of You or Ye to a particular Person, a
principio non ita suit, it was not so from the beginning: Tertullian, an
Ancient and Learned Latin Father, said thus, 'That is true, which was first;
that was first, which was from the beginning; that was from the beginning,
which was from the Apostles.' The Apostles, who derived the ground of their
Works and Words, from him who was before all Time, used no such impertinent
Speech. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, in or about the Year 399. did not so
magnify groundless Custom, as his Testimony implies, who said, 'Custom is not
to be prefered before Truth, but ought to give place to the Truth.' Not only in
Works, say I, but in Words also. Again the same Augustine said, 'Custom crept in
among some, ought not to hinder the Truth from Prevailing and Conquering: For
Custom (says he) without Truth, is nothing but Gray-hair'd or Old Error:
Wherefore (says he) forsaking Error, let us follow Truth.' Christ is the Way,
the Truth and the Life, who was never sound in such absurd, improper and
impertinent Speech.

Further, James Howel says, in his Epistle dedicated to the Nobility and
Gentry of Great Britain, which he annexed to a French English Dictionary,
compiled by Randle Cotgrave, Printed in the Year 1650. That it was the Style of
France at first, as well as of other Countries, Tutoyer, that is to say, Thou
to any particular Person they spoke unto; but when the Common wealth of Rome
turned into an Empire, so much Power came into one Man's Hand; then in regard he
was able to confer Honor and Offices, the Countries began to magnify him, and
to use You unto him. See Symmathus his Epistles to the Emperor Theodosius, and
to Valentinian.

Again, Pope Clement in his Letter to Sigismund the Emperor, wrote We, when it
was sent from him only, and You, when it was sent to Sigismund the Emperor
only: See the Turkish History, page 1081.

Thus the Language of the Spirit, of the Holy Men of God, of all Nations came
to be denied, and an improper, impertinent and absurd Custom of Speech came to
be entertained, and is spread as a foul Leprosy, and is pleaded for, yea by
such as would be accounted sharers in Reformation.

CAP. II. Of LOGIC.
Logic is defined to be the Manner or Art of Reasoning and Disputing well, of
which I have to say, as follows.

The Ante-diluvian and Post-diluvian Patriarchs, that is, the Fathers that
lived before and after the Flood, Prophets, Seers, Evangelists, Apostles,
Bishops, Elders, Deacons; yea, all the Holy Men of God, Children of Light,
Children of the Day, formed in the Womb of Eternal Wisdom, were Qualified and
Empowered from above, to defend and maintain the Cause, Concern and Worship of
the Lord, in their respective Dispensations, with having recourse to Pagan
Means, Fallen Arts, Earthly Wisdom, Infectious Sophistry; as many Instances
left upon Record clearly demonstrate.

The Lord said unto Moses, when he sent him with a Massage to Pharaoh, Go
therefore, I will be with thy Mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say, Exodus
4. Here he was drawn from the Puddle of Profane Arts and Sciences, Worldly
Wisdom, Deceitful Sophistry, to have Reliance and Dependence on the living God,
the Wellspring of pure Wisdom, savoury Knowledge and sound Understanding; and
he streamed out heavenly Eloquence, saying, My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain,
my Speech shall distill as the Dew, as the small Rain upon the tender Herb, and
as the Showers upon the Grass, Deuteronomy. 32. Moses in the Wisdom from above,
contended for the Concern of God, his Will, his Worship, maintained the same
against Pharaoh, Magicians, Wise Men, Inchanters, Apostates, without recourse
to Pagan Means, Arts or Sciences.

Again, Christ, who is Alpha and Omega, the Amen, made a Promise unto his
Disciples, saying, I will give you a Mouth and Wisdom which all your
Adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist, Luke 21.15. Thus the
Disciples derived heavenly Wisdom from Christ, whereby they defended and
maintained the Concern of Christ, his Kingdom, Doctrine, Worship, against all
Adversaries, Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, Painted Sepulchers, Faithless
Lawyers, Spoiling Philosophers, Painted Orators, Subtle Sophisters, Pagan
Logicians: Christ commended them not to Heathen Schools, not to Aristotle,
Plato, or any other Heathen, to enable them to refute Heretics, but to his own
Gift, his Wisdom, Armor of Proof, his Sword put into their Hands, enabling
them for his Work.

Again, Certain Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, Cilicians, Asians disputed
with Stephen: What was the issue of the Contest? it is there Recorded, They were
not able to resist the Wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke, Acts 6 9, 10.
Thus Stephen obtained Victory over the Champions of the Dragon: And how? Not by
Heathen Wisdom, Pagan Logic, Spoiling Philosophy, but by the Sword of the
Spirit, Shield of Faith, Wisdom from above; in this Armor he prevailed. So
Pagan Logic, an Art of the Old Man is not Gospel Armor, whereby Stephen
refuted the Adversaries of Truth.

Paul, though eminent in Tongues, Natural Parts and Abilities, and knew what
Key opened into the rich Cabinet of heavenly Wiscom and Treasures; yet he
excluded Natural Arts and Endowments from being that Key, saying, The Natural
Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him; neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned, 1.
Cor. 2.14.

A Natural Man, though mounted to the Terret of Philosophic Elevations, and to
the Zenith of Scholastic Notions, and stored with the Quintessence of
Serpentine Wisdom, and profess himself to be a great Sophist, that is, Wise
Man, yet groping in the gloomy Region and dark Night of Degeneration,
Alienation and Estrangement from God, he cannot thereby open one Seal of the
sealed Book: The Seven-sealed-Book is a thing of God, so no way to be opened
and read but by the Spirit of God. Plato, a Heathen Philosopher, through Divine
Glimpses said well, Virtue is not acquired, but infused.

This Paul, a skilful Warrior of Christ, desirous that the Church might be so
harnessed, as to hold out against all the Assaults of the old Dragon and his
Confederates, Instruments, mentions the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. or all
the Armor of God: What be they? Girdle of Truth, Breast plate of
Righteousness, Shield of Faith, Helmet of Salvation, Sword of the Spirit, Feet
shod with the preparation of the Gospel. Here Is no mention made of Subtle
Logic, nor of Painted Rhetoric, nor of Spoiling Philosophy, nor of Pagan
Ethics, Physics, Metaphysics; he that mentioned the whole Armor of God,
mentioned not any of these, which clearly demonstrates they are not of the
Armor of God: Whose then? Of the Old Dragon the Devil: The Apostles harnessed
with the Armor of God, reduced many to the saving Truth, they stopped the Mouths
of Gainsayers, they bore faithful Testimony to, and contended for the Living,
Life-giving, Soul-quickning Truth, against such as was harnessed with the Old
Dragons Armor, the Wise, the Scribe, the Disputer of this World, Subtle
Logicians, Crafty Sophisters, Painted Orators, Spoiling Philosophers, Drunk
with the Dregs of Pagan Ethics, Physics, Metaphysics, Heathenism.

By what is said, it is evident that in the Patrirachal, M^saical and
Evangelical Dispensations; yea, in all Churches Professing Christianity, while
the Primitive Faith, Doctrine and Worship was sincerely maintained, the
respective Membess thereof were qualified and empowered from above to defend
the same; and such lively and truly influenced Confessors of the holy Truth,
are true and divine Logicians, influenced from above, to Reason, Dispute for
and Defend the Faith delivered to the Saints, and all this we own. And as in
this Generation the Lord influences his for the performance of that Work and
Service unto the which they are called: So the insinuating Serpent, the old
Dragon, has his Agents and Instruments in every Generation to carry on his
Work, and they are bred and formed in the Womb of Earthly Wisdom; this is seen
not only among the Professors of Christianity, but also among the old Heathen,
who had their Logic, which they defined to be the Art of Reasoning and
Disputing well: And this Art was brought in and invented by one Zono Eleates a
Heathen, who lived in or about the Year of the World 34 24. as Pol. Virgil
says, Lib. 1. Cap. 16. After arose Aristotle, a Heathen Philosopher, a
Logician, whom many Apostatized Christians have, and do call, the Prince or
Chief of Philosophers, the Great Rule of Universities, the sore-runner of
Christ in Naturals, as John was in Spirituals: But neither this Aristotle, nor
any of the company of Pagan Philosophers, Logicians, were entertained in
Christendom, while a pure Virgin to Christ, the Spring of Heavenly Wisdom and
Heavenly Treasures they found in them.

But upon the sounding of the fifth Angel, the fall of the Star from Heaven to
Earth, the opening of the bottomless Pit, a Smoke arose, which Darkened both
Sun and Air, Disfigured the Face, Stained the Beauty of the Primitive Church;
then in and through this Smoke, Christ, the Wellspring of pure Wisdom, and
Soul-enriching Treasures, being lost within, Apostatizing Christians
entertained and received Heathen Wisdom without, and received into their
Schools the Philosophy, Logic, Ethics, Physics, Metaphysics, Poetry,
Comedies and Tragedies of the Heathen; they assumed the frivolous clouding
Terms of subtle Pagan Logicians, then disputing for Dead, Empty and Life-less
Forms of Worship became an Art of the Old Man, the true Armor being lost
within, they entertained Pagan Armor without, received and gloried in Pagan
Terms, yet taught in the Schools of such as would be accounted eminently
Reformed, not only from Paganism, but from the Superstition and Idolatry of
Italian Babylon.

Thus the infectious Cloud of Heathenism is continued, Pagan Terms gloried in,
as Predicable, Predicate, Predicament, Category, Categorick Proposition,
Hypotherick Proposition, Syllogism, Categorick Syllogism, Hypotherick
Syllogism, Rhetorical Syllogism, Expository Syllogism, Rhetorical Induction,
Logical Induction, Enthymem, a Rhetorical Enthymem, a Logical Enthymem,
Dilemma, etc. and multitudes more which might be numberd. The Papist Castanaeus
complains, That not only Youth, but he himself was grievously vexed with the
multitudes of Terms and Distinctions, of which he gathered Thousands: What
Logic Choppers intend by these I judge it no way useful to explain; herein
they soar in the Foggy and Infections Element of such like Pagan Terms, above
the Apprehension and Comprehension of Vulgar Capacities, gaining Repute and
Admiration in the Breasts of such as are infected with Antichristian Delusions.

Again, not only frivolus are the Terms of Aristotle and other Philosophers,
and Pagan Logicians, but their Opinions are Absurd and Blasphemous, as of their
Magicks, Southsayings, Conjurings, casting of Nativities; their Doctrine of the
Worlds Eternity, that it was made of the Atoms of the Sun; of the Souls
Mortality, of the Transmigration of the Soul from one Body into another, of
like Temperament and Quality: Diagoras denied that there was a God; Protagoras
doubted whether there was a God or no; Aristotle denied the Providence of God;
Plato held out a Purgatory; Porphyrius, an Enemy to Christian Religion, held
out the Worshipping of Angels; Aristotle taught Free Will; Epicurus held that
the Soul was Mortal; Aristippus held that Pleasure was the chiefest Good.
Rainold.

Notwithstanding, through the over spreading of Apostasy, Heathenism, as
Philosophy, Logic, Poetry, etc. got entrance into Christendom; yet in the very
Night of Apostasy the Lord had his Witnesses who bore record against the same.

Gregory, Nazianzen, Eusebius, Ambrose, Augustine, Origin, Lactantius, Gregory
of Nyse, bore Record against the Judgment of Aristotle, as Sordid, Base,
Impure, Foolish, contrary to Truth and Godliness: Upon the Consideration of
which (says Dr Rainold) let no Man wonder, if I choose rather to confess the
Truth with such worthy Men, then with Aristotle to commit Error. Orat. Rain.

'At or about the City Hierapolis (says this Rainold) there is a Cave, whose
Vapors no living Creatures, but Eunuchs only, can endure: Such like (says he)
is the Style of Aristotle, unsavoucy to all that are alive unto God, only
Eunuchs, that is, such as are deprived of true Judgment, and are enslaved to
Aristotle, can endure the same.'

Cleanthes being asked, Why among the Ancients, when there were but few
Philosophers, more became eminent then now? 'Because (says he) then they
minded Matter; that is, a virtuous course of Living.' Now the Contest is only
after windy Words. Stob. Sermon. 80. Noviss. Pol.

Ariston compared the Words of Logicians to Spiders Webs, being indeed very
Subtle, Witty, but Unprofitable. Stob. Sermon. 80. Noviss. Pol.

Licinus the Emperor called Heathen Learning the Plague and Povson of the
Commonwealth. Trapp.

Luther speaking of Popish Schools and Monastries, wherein Heathenism was
taught, said, 'This is my mind and desire, that these Stables of Two-Footed
Asses, and Schools of the Devil, were levelled with the ground, or changed into
Christian Schools, by a Godly Transformation.' Luth. de Instit. Puer.

Logic is so far from leading to the Knowledge of Universals, that it rather
thursts Men down into Errors. John Bapt. Van Helm. his Physic Refined.

'The World (says this Helmont) has suffered it self to be circomvented by
Aristotle, who boasted of Logic to be the Mother of Sciences.'

Aristotle (says this Helmont) extolled the Method of Disputing invented by
himself, and he takes away all Knowledge from a man unless he has yielded
himself to be instructed in Logic.'

Jerem (on Psalm. 140 and 141.) does not unworthily compare the Art of
Syllogizing to the Plagues of Egypt, and he calls Logical Demonstrations Dog
like Discourses.

'Schools (says this Helmont) supposing Logic as Necessary, do oppose
themselves to the Commands of the Apostle.'

'I wonder (says Helmont) at the great Blindness of Schools, in so greatly
magnifying Logic.'

'Schools of Logic (says this Helmont) must needs confess, that through
Boasting, Deceit and Ignorance, it has deceived the Credulous World.'

To say, that Logical Discourse is very necessary for Gospel Ministers, to
refute the Subtilties of Schismatics and Heretics; that thing (says this
Helmont) would be to be wise above what is written, above the Aposties, and to
commend the Abuses of Schools above the Holy Scriptures; this were to
Dis-throne Gospel Weapons, and to Inthrone Paganism: 'Twas not by Pagan Logic
that Stephen refuted the Libertines, Cyrenians, Alexandrians, Asians,
Cilicians, but by Weapons from Heaven, Acts 6.9, 10. It Is not Pagan Logic that
Christ promised his Disciples, whereby they should be Conquerors, Luke 21.15.

'Doth he not seem to walk in Vanity and Darkness of Mind, who vexes himself
Night and Day in the Study of Logic (says one) and charges his Memory with
the distinct knowledge of Verses.'

'Logick is nothing but the Art of Contention and Darkness, whereby all other
Sciences are made more obscure, and more hard to be known.' Cornel. Agrip. de
vanitat. Sient.

'Almost all the Rabble of Scholars busied in the Inventions of Philosophers
or Sophisters, seem to do no more then learn to commit Error, and to make the
Truth more obscure.' Corn. Agr. de Va^.

Tindal, a Martyr, said, Whosoever ordained Universities drunk with Heathenism,
be it Alexander of Hales, Thomas Aquinas, or any other, he was a Starfallen
from Heaven to Earth: For there are brought in (says he) Moral Virtnes for
Faith, Opinions for Truth; and said, They were a confused Cloud. Tindal of the
Revelation of Ant.

Aristotle wrote many things absurdly concerning God, as 'That He is a Living
Creature; that he works not freely, but by a kind of Servile necessity; and
that therefore he deserves no Praise, since he does but what he must do.' Trapp.
on Romans 1.21.

'As for Aristotle's Divinity, which he calls his Metaphysics, it is (says
Ramus) the most Foolish and Impious piece of Sophistry that ever was written.'
Trapp. of Arts.

From the Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle Pestilent Errors first of all
Invaded, and have long Possessed, and at this day do Waste the Christian
Church. Orat. Rainold.

Where Aristotle Reigns, there Ungodliness has great Dominion Orat. Rainold.

How foul a thing is it, that that may be spoken against you, which Ambrose
spoke of the Arians, 'They have deserted the Apostle, and follow Aristotle.'
Orat. Rainold.

Some in our days have been seen to repeat Aristotle upon their Knees at
Oxford, before their Masters, being at Dinner: The muddy Lake of Heathenism,
opened in Rome Ethnic, steamed into apostatized Rome Christian, is received in
Protestant Kingdoms, among whom Rome has too much Room.

Many in their day bore Testimony against Pagan Philosophy, Philosophers and
Logicians; among many, one Ramus, born in France, Master of Arts, was much
aspersed by the Sorborne Doctors, who accused him of Heresy in Philosophy, as
an Heretical Philosopher, for that he being but Young, durst take upon him to
correct Aristotle, the Prince of Philosophers, the great Rule of Universities.
This Ramus published a Logic (received in the most Reformed Universities, and
Aristotle rejected) with some Animadvertions upon Aristotle: He was the Kings
Professor of Logic in Paris, Dean of the whole University, where he remained
till the Massacree at Paris, where many Thousands of the Protestants perished
by the Papists, who (because of Ramus his Love to Protestants, and Testimony
against Aristotle) ran him through, and being half Dead, threw him out of his
Window, cut off his Head, dragged his Body about the Streets, in the Channels,
and some young Schollrs were encouraged, by their Tutors, to whip it in a most
contemptuous manner, and at last cast it into the River Sein, in the Year 1572.
Clar. Mart. Fox Mon.

By what is said, it is manifest that the Wisdom which is from above, with its
outgoings and products, we own, and desire the increase thereof, to the
seasoning and rectifying of the Nations: But the Wisdom from below, with its
Propagators, not able to open one of the seven Seals we deny; Aristotle forsook
his Master Plato, that he might defend his own Error; and shall we not refuse
profane Aristotle, to defend the Truth of the Living God? says Rainold. Yes,
Christ is to have Pre-eminence in all things, the Treasury of Wisdom and
Knowledge.

CAP III. Of RHETORIC.
Rhetoric is defined to be the Art of Speaking Ornately, Firely, Eloquently,
with Rhetorical Colors and Ornaments.

Adam, as he was the Workmanship of God, he Lived, Moved, and had his Being in
God, his Thoughts, Words and Works, Products of that Life, into the which he
was Incorporated, Savored of that Life, had a Divine Luster in them, Stamp and
Excellency, and were Fragrant and Aromatical in the Nostrils, and Precious in
the Eyes of the All-forming Power: But the Serpent that deceived Man, and
incorporated him into another Power, therein to Think, Speak and Act, brought
forth an other Language, out of the simplicity of Truth, savouring of the Womb
of its Original; though Plausible, Painted, Eloquent, Garnished with Colors
and Ornaments of Pagan Rhetoric, yet it is Abomination to the Lord, Stinks in
his Nostrils, and in the Nostrils of such as are truly Reborn, as Christ bore
Record: Those things that are highly Esteemed with Men are Abomination unto the
Lord.

This is my Testimony, that that Language which the Lord speaks in and through
his People, Sons and Daughters, is the only and heavenly Eloquence and
Rhetoric, if I may so call it; though Plain, Simple, and be accounted Rude,
Clownish and Babbling by the VVorldly Wise.

Moses brought to that Mouth that taught Adam and Eve in their Primative State,
streamed out heavenly Eloquence, saying, My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, my
Speech shall distill as the Dew, as the small Rain upon the tender Herb, and as
the Showers upon the Grass, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Yea, and David streamed out saying, My
Heart is inditing a good Matter; I speak of the things which I have made
touching the King; My Tongue is the Pen of a ready Writer, Psalm. 45.1. And the
Lord promised, saying, I will turn to the People a pure Language, that they may
call upon the Lord, and serve him with one Consent, Zeph. 3.9. This pure
Language, wherever it is witnessed, is the true Eloquence. And Christ says to
the Church, come and coming out of the Wilderness, leaning upon her Beloved, Oh
my Dove! that art in the Clefts of the Rock, in the scorer places of the
Stairs, les me see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice; for Sweet is thy
Voice, and thy Countenance is Comely, Cant. 2.14. Mark, the Voice of the Church
is Sweet, though not Painted with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, nor Garnished
with Pagan Rhetorical Flourishes; it is Sweet to Christ, though judged Rude and
Babbling by Worldly Sophisters; her Voice, her Prayers, her Praises, arising
from Divine Indwellings, a live Cole from the heavenly Alter, as Fragrant
Perfumes is Sweet to his Nostrils. God respects not the Arithmetic of our
Prays, how many they be; nor the Rhetoric of our Prayers, how neat they be;
nor the Geometry of our Prayers, how long they be; nor the Logic of our
Prayers, how methodical they be; nor the Music of our Prayers, how melodious
they be; but his Eye and Regard is to the Divinity of Prayers, how Heart-sprung
they be, says Trapp. on 2 Cor. 12.8.

Further, though there was a Divine Excellency in Paul's Speech, seasoned with
Salt, Heavenly Wisdom, yet he says plainly to the Corninthians, That he came
not with Excellency of Speech, nor with Enticing Words of Man's Wisdom: He came
not with Frothy Flourishes of Pagan Rhetoric or Oratory, nor with Enchanting
Words of fallen Wisdom, which the fallen Mind ascribes Excellency unto, but
falsely; but his Preaching was in Demonstration of the Spirit and Power, 1 Cor.
2.1, 4. There was a Divine Excellency in his Speech, though called Babbling by
Worldly Sophisters, as it is to this day, Acts 17.17, 18.

Thus it is clear to every seeing Eye, what Wisdom, and what Speech was
justified and contended for among the Children of Light in every Age and
Generation, and in the Church succeeding the Apostles, while a Virgin to
Christ; but as the black Vail and foul Leprosy of Apostasy overspread and
disfigured the Face of the Christian Church, then heavenly Salt, true Savor,
heavenly Wisdom being lost within, then they Entertained and Magnified Heathen
Wisdom without; then Pagan Rhetoric came to be embraced and taught to
Christian Youth, defined to be the Art of Speaking Finely and Eloquently; which
Heathen Rhetoric, a Pagan, one Mercury is said to invent or bring in, him the
Heathen called the Messenger of the Godds, and Godd of Eloquence, Merchandise,
Chivalry and Thievery; but Aristotle says, that one Empedocles was the
Inventor of this Rhetoric, Pol. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 13. who as it is said, stole
away from his Company by Night, and cast himself into the Mouth of the Burning
Mountain Aetna, that so the People not finding him, might conceive he was taken
up into Heaven, so might honor him; but his two Pattens cast up again by the
Vehemence of the Flame, betrayed his Policy and itch after Honor: Thus they
that magnify Earthly Wisdom, Pagan Rhetoric, may see what manner of Man the
Author thereof was.

Yet though these things be Magnified in Pagan and Christian Kingdoms, the Lord
has had his Witnesses in the darkest of Days, against Serpentine Wisdom,
Rhetorical Flourishes, the Wisdom of this World, which is Foolishness with God:
I might produce a Cloud of Instances.

'Wisdom of the Flesh, Rhetorical Flourishes serves the Worldling, as the
Ostrich Wings, to make him outrun others upon Earth, and in Earthly Things,
but helps him never a whit toward Heaven,' Trapp.

'Men have neglected Sound, Savoury and Useful Matter, the very Quintessence of
Lerning, and have devoted themselves to an Excess of fine Speaking,' Bishop
Wilkins his Real Caracter.

'The grand imposture of Phrasing has eaten out all sollid Learning,' B.
Wilkings.

'Phrases (says this Author) are an Imperfection of Speech, which like other
affected Ornaments, derogate from the native Simpicity of it, disguising it
with false Appearances; and that such canting Forms have eaten out sollid
Knowledge, through men's admiring them.'

'Eloquence (says Angustin) in a Lewd Man, is as Poison in a Golden Cup,' lib.
1. De Anima.

'The use of Rhetoric (says Suetonius) was some time forbidden at Rome, but
by little and little, it appearing Profitable and Honest, many for Maintenance
and Honors sake pursued it, and through it many aspired to the Terret of
Worldly Honors,' Pol. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 13.

Julius Agricola, a Roman Emperors Lieutenant, in Britain, prevailed with
Noble Men to breed up their Sons in Liberal Art, brought them to effect the
Roman Eloquence; then they begun to imiate the Roman Fashions, the Gown, Proud
Buildings, Baths and Banquetings, which the Foolisher sort called Civility; but
was indeed a secret Art to prepare them for Bondage, Milton. And these things
are too much countenanced among the Professors of Christianity; the Simplicity
of Truth, and the Language thereof is slighted; Man's Wisdom, Heathen Wisdom
magnified; a pursuit of Roman Eloquence, through the Imitation of their
Orators, Rhetoricians, Poets, etc. is encouraged; and this is not without Pride
and Vain Glory. The Apostle, wise in the Wisdom from above, touched this,
Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifies, builds up.

The Equity of a Poor Man's Cause is often stifled by that grim Monster fleshly
Wisdom, frothy Flourishes of Pagan Eloquence. 'A Poor Man (says Trap.)
complained to his King, That such a Lawyer had taken his Cow from him: I will
hear (said the King) what the Lawyer will say to the Matter. Nay (says the
Poor Man) if you hear him speak, then have I surely lost my Cow indeed.'

Secrates in his Apology; said to his Judges, 'My Lords, I know not how you
have been affected with mine Accusers Eloquence, while you heard them speak;
for my own part, I assure you, that I, whom it touches most, was almost drawn
to believe all they said (though against my self) was true, when they scarce
uttered one word of Truth,' Trap. Such are the Enchantments of painted Oratory,
Pagan Rhetorical Flourishes.

Cross-Bearers, who in Self-denial grow up in the Wisdom that is from above, so
become VVisdom's Children, justify Wisdom; if these Stumble, Fall, Err, Sin,
they have not so learned Christ, as to Paint or Cloak the same; but knowing
that he, he who conresseth and forsakes finds Mercy, they rejoice in Judgment,
being brought forth into Victory. But subtle Sophisters, Erring, Sinning, so
Trim, Deck, Dress, Garnish, Cloak and Paint their Sins and Errors, as that they
pass with most for Truth; only VVisdom's Children, honored with an heavenly
Eye and Savor, discern and comprehend the same: There is an Arabic Proverb,
Errans eruditus errat errore erudito, that is, Learned Men have learned Errors.

By what is said, it appears, that the Wisdom from above, its Products, Divine
Eloquence we own, and desire the Nation may be scasoned thereby: But the
Wisdom from below, introduced by the Serpent, Pagan Rhetoric, Eloquence,
Enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, we deny, knowing the same to be Foolishness
with God, and altogether unable of opening any one of the Seals of the seven
Sealed Book.

CAP. IV. Of MUSIC.
ADam, as the Workmanship of God, Lived, Moved and had his Being in God; he
was bound up in that Life, whence Praises, Songs of Thanksgiving, as sweet and
fragrant Odours ascends unto the Lord; whoever draws Water out of the
VVellspring of Salvation, it is not without Joy and Heart Melody unto the Lord;
this the New Man knows, not the Old. Moses, the Children of Israel, Miriam,
Deborah and Barack, David, Mary, Zacharias, holy Men and holy Women of God,
overcome with the Sense, Feeling and Sweetness of the Lords Presence, and
seeing Deliverance brought and wrought by his Arm, Songs of Praise and
Thanksgiving streamed out from them; and Praise is comely in the Mouth of
such; and such Singing, and such Songs we own.

But the Serpent prevailing, Man became Incorporated into his Venomous and
Infecting Power, the Foundation of a World of Wickedness was laid, a false Joy
was brought forth; and this is the very Sourse or Spring of all Wanton Poems,
Lascivious Comedies, Deluding Tragedies, Frivilous Fables, Foolish Balads,
Obscene Songs, invented by the Adulterated Mind, used and pleaded for by the
like Mind; yea, among such as profess Christianity; but Real Christians are in
Christ, and such as are in Christ are New Creatures, Old things are done away;
and such Singers, and such Songs are in the fallen Spirit, Joy of this World,
the which we deny.

In the increase of this dark Kingdom came in Music, called one of the seven
Liberal Arts, defined to be the Art of Singing well, the Study of Poetry, of
Heathen Poetry; of this Music, Vocal or Instrumental, or both, one Amphion, a
Heathen, the Son of Jupiter, is said to be the Inventor, Plin. lib. 7. Others
ascribe the Invention thereof to one Dionysius or Menoury, Pol. lib. 1. cap.
14. But Jubal, the Son of Lamach, who lived many Generations before these, is
reported by Josephus, in his first Book of Antiquities, to be affected with
Music, and to use the Psaltery and Harp. Pol. lib. 1. cap. 14.

David, the sweet Psalmist of Israel, in the Service of the House God,
appointed Singers of the Levites, instructed in the Songs of the Lord,
appertaining to the Temple Worship, 1 Chronicles. 6. and 1 Chronicles. 25. These Singers
be arrayed in white Linen, they Praised and gave Thanks unto the Lord, whose
Mercy endures forever. These Singers arrayed in White, shadowed out the lively
Members of the Evangelical Dispensation: A Remnant of the Church in Sardis were
to walk in White, Rev. 3.4. Again, John saw a numberless Multitude of all
Nations, Kindreds, People and Tongues clothed in white Robes, Rev. 7. And John
saw the Armies in Heaven clothed in fine Linen, Rev, 19. What is this fine
white Linen? What are these white Robes? Not Aarons white Robes, no imitation
thereof, not the white Linen of the Singers of the Temple, not Surplices, such
as are now used by the Conforming Ministry and Queristers in Cathedrals: What
then? John tells us expressly, That the fine white Linen was the Righteousness
of Saints, Rev. 19.8. And who, or what but Christ is the Saints Righteousness?
So Christ the Righteousness of Saints, is that very thing which the white
Linen of Aaron, and of the Levitical Singers, shadowed forth. So to plead for
the Shadow, or for an Imitation thereof, the Substance being come, it is
Antichristian. And Paul said to the Ephesians, to the Saints and Faithful
Brethren, who were come to the Righteousness of Saints, to the end of Shadows;
Be not Drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess, but be filled with the Spirit,
speaking to your selves (not in VVanton Balads, Obscene Songs, but) in Psalms,
Hymes and spiritual Songs, Singing and making Melody in your Hearts to the
Lord, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. and Col. 3.16. Such Singers we own, their Psalms, Hymes
and spiritual Songs we own; they stream out of the Mouth of the New Man, not of
the Old. John tells us of a New Song, which none could learn but the Hundred
Forty and Four Thousand which were Redeemed from the Earth, Rev. 14. And Paul
said to the Sanctified at Corinth, When ye come together, every one of you has
a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has an
Interpretation; let all things be done to Edifying, 1 Cor. 14. So a Psalm was a
Gift particular to the New Man, who sings with the Spirit, and with
Understanding. The Primitive Church, while a Virgin to Christ, sung with the
Spirit, with Understanding; had to Clark no give them in other Men's
Experiences; but Christendom being become a Sea, the Spirit lost, turned from,
in which true Joy and Singing is; then stepped in Formal Singing without, without
the Spirit, without Understanding.

The Wanton, who spends his precious Hours in Jollity, he sings, I am weary
with my Groaning, I water my Couch with my Tears.

The proud Atheist, who has banished the Lord out of hie thoughts, he sings, I
have set the Lord always before me.

The vain Minded, who delights in the Company and Society of vain (...), he
sings, I have hated the Congregation of Evildoers, and will not sit with the
Wicked.

He that is as a withered Tree, Plucked up by the Roots, Fruitless, he sings, I
am like a Green Olive Tree in the House of God,

He whose Heart is as a Cage of Uncleanness, he sings, My Heart is enditing a
good matter.

The daily Feaster, such as the Residentarians, whose Legs can scarce bear
about his Gross Corpulent Body, he sings, My Knees are Weak through Fasting,
and my Flesh fails of Fatness.

Satan's Captive, who wallows in the Mire and Puddle of Sin and Iniquity, he
sings, O Lord, truly I am thy Servant.

The Son of Belial, who by Persecution would wear out the Flock of the Lord
from off the Earth, he sings, I am a Campanion of all them that fear thee.

The Lawless man, whose Life is a Life of Rebellion, subject (as I may say) to
the grand Charter of Sin and Death, he sings, The Law of thy Mouth is better
unto me than Thousands of Gold and Silver.

He that Adder-wise stops his Ears from the Heavenly Doctrine of the Lords
anointed Ones, he sings, How sweet are thy Words to my Taste, yea sweeter than
the Honey to my Mouth.

The Ambitious Man, puffed up with the Breath of Satan's Bellows, he sings, Lord,
my Heart is not Haughty, my Soul is even as a Weaned Child.

Do these and such like sing with the Spirit? Do they sing with Understanding?
No. Now who are of God, they are distinguishing Persons, and with us they
contend for singing in the Spirit, and with Understanding; this Song none but
the Redeemed can learn; this Song of the Lord cannot be sung in a strange Land,
Captivity, Spiritual Babylon; and such as are of God, they deny all dead formal
Singing and Singers, who formally sing other Men's Conditions, out of the
Spirit, without Understanding.

That the Primitive Christian Church, while a Virgin to Christ, sung David's
Experiences or Testimonies in Meetre, that I deny; but through the Engress of
the Apostasy, Singing in the Spirit being lost, then a formal Singing in Meetre
entered in, whereof I have read, That

In or about the Year 383. Psalms began to be sung, being brought in by Damasus
Bishop or Pope of Rome, though not turned into Meetre [Mark this]

In or about the Year 1552. in the sixth Year of Edward the sixth, the Psalms
of David first began to be composed in English Meetre by one Thomas Sternhold,
one of the Grooms of the Pivy-Chamber, who Translating but a few, left both
Example and Encouragement to John Hopkins and others to dispatch the rest; a
Device first taken up in France, by one Clement Merot, one of the Grooms of the
Bedchamber to King Francis the first: At first they were sung in private
Houses, after were taken into the Church of the French: And of other Nations,
they were first allowed for private Devotion, after, by little and little,
crept into the use of the Church, afterward Printed and Bound up with the
Common Prayer Book, at last added by Stationers in the end of the Bible; see Dr
Heylin's Ecclesia. Restaurata. page 191. But though by this Author called a
Device, yet now it is called a Vice, yea a Symptom of a Heterodox Judgment to
deny or question the Observation of the same.

Benedictus, an Abbot of the Monestary of Peter and Paul at Wire, brought with
him from Rome one John the Arch-Chanter, who first taught in England how to
sing in the Quire, after the manner of Rome, in the Year 724. Fox Acts and Mon.

The Levites, that were Singers, were divided into twenty four Ranks or
Courses: Hence the Apostatized Church brought in Queristers, so introduce the
Levites for a proof for their Office; but the truly Redeemed Church receives
not Jewdaism for Christianity, neither their Practice for Christ's Institution
and Appointment.

It Is a Custom of many Countries and Nations, says Macrobius, to accompany
Dead Bodies to their Burials with Singing: And why? Because their Souls are
believed to return to the Original of Musical Sweetness or Pleasure, that is,
to Heaven. lib. 2. De Somne Scrip. Noviss Pol.

Ecclesiastical Histories mention many Testimonies which have dropped from the
Mouths of Men, Eminent in their Day against dead formal Singing, used in
Churches professing Christianity.

Cassiodor, a Learned Man of Ravenna, about the Year 510. says That the
Fathers made no great account of Singing in Churches; and that most of them
knew nothing thereof; for in the days of Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, about
the Year 348. Flavian and Theodor, first of all in the East, brought in the
Rite or Custom of Singing at Antioch. Histor. Tripart. lib. 5. and Nov. Pol.

Augustine says, That it was received into the Church of Millain, when Ambrose
was Bishop thereof, about the Year 373. Nov. Pol.

Anastatius shuning all Vanities, forbad the Custom of Singing in the Church.
Nov. Pol.

CAP. V. Of the Rise of Musical Instruments in the Churches Professing
Christianity.
THe House of Israel, the outward Jew, Praised the Lord on diverse kinds of
Instruments, as Harps, Psalteries, Timbrels, Cornets, Cimbals, Trumpets,
Organs, Instruments of ten Strings, 1 Chronicles. 15. 1 Chronicles. 25. And these, says
Thomas Aquinas, the great School-man, figured forth something to come: And what
was that? Even Jesus Christ, say I, the End, Sum, Substance of all the Jewist
Types, Shadows and Figures; the Spiritual Israelite, the Inward Jew, the Gospel
Church, made up of Living Stones, in and through Christ, streamed out a Melody
unto the Lord, sweeter then all visible Musical Instruments, Ephesians. 5.18, 19.
Col. 3.16. The Evangelical Church come to Christ, whose Meat and Drink it was
to do his Fathers Will, in whom alone he was well pleased, a bundle of Myrthe,
she was come to the end of the Jewish Worship, of all its Appurtenances,
Musical Instruments used in the outward Jewish Church, John saw as it were a
Sea of Glass, mingled with Fire, and them that had gotten the Victory over the
Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the Number of his Name,
stand on the Sea of Glass, having the Harps of God, Rev. 15.2. What are these
Harps? Not Jewish Harps, not Visible Harps, not made with Hands, but Harps of
God, such as he gives to the Jew inward, peculiar to the Evangelical
Dispensation, the End and Substance of the outward Jewish Harps.

And while the Primitive Church remained a Virgin in Christ, knit and joined to
him, through the pure Ligament of Heaven-bred Faith, making Melody in Heart to
the Lord, there was no use of the Typical Jewish Musical Instruments in the
Christian Church; but the Star being fallen from Heaven, to Earth, Smoke
arisen, which darkened Sun and Air, which stained the Beauty of the Primitive
Church, the Sum, Substance, the Heavenly Harp, (as I may say) being lost
within, in and through the Smoke of the Pit, then they turned to Musical
Instruments without, as Organs, Dulcimers, Cornets, Sackbuts, used in Cathedral
Churches, so called, as in others: And this is the ground of Musical
Instruments (the Type) in the Churches professing Christianity, even that which
led them from Christ, the Life, the Substance.

I might produce a Cloud of Witnesses against the using of Music in Churches
professing Christianity.

Instruments of Music were not heard of in the Latin Church till the days of
Pope Vitalian, who about the Year 660. invented and brought the Use of Organs
into the Church, of whom ^ap Mant.

Signius adjunxit molli conflata Metallo
Organa, quae festis resonant ad sacra diebus.
Vitalian the Organ he invented,
The which for use in Churches he intented.
Here is the Author of Organs in Churches Professing Christianity, not Christ,
not the Apostles; but the Pope Vitalian, Balani Angliae Episcopus, ^ospin
Leigh's Body of Divinity.

Ames, Aquinus, Rivet, Zanchaeus, Zepperus, Altingius dislike the use of
Organs, and such like Music in the Church. Leigh's Body of Divinity.

Rivet speaking of the Organ says, 'It is much better to abstain therefrom,
then to introduce or continue the same, because there is more Danger therein
than Edification.'

'The use of Musical Instruments (says Dr Tailor) are apt to turn Religion
into Air and Fancies,' and to take off some of its Simplicity, and are not so
fitted for Edification.

'The Apostles (says Hospinian.) had not the use of Organs, or of other
Musical Instruments in their Churches.'

'Organ-Musick (says one) seems rather to become Children, than the Church.'
Hosp.

Marianus Scotus says in his Chronicle, 'That about the Year 757. the Organ
first came into France, being sent out of Greece from Constantine the Emperor,
unto King Pipin.' Hosp.

Lactantius sharply blames the Gentiles for placing the Worship of God in those
things which the Foolishness of Men highly esteem, lib. 2. Institut. Hosp.

Erasmus speaks Learnedly and Gravely against the use of Organs in Churches,
saying, 'People flock thereto, as to a Theater or Stage, that their Ears may be
Tickled or Delighted. What (says he) at this day is more Burdensome than our
Music, imitating the Notes of many Birds? It were therefore better that these
Organs should be taken away.' In Annot. ad 1 Cor. cap. 14. Hosp.

At the Princely Banquets of the Heathen they sung the Praises of their Godds
and Heroes upon the Harp; Pol. lib. 1. cap. 14. From this Custom and Example,
it is grown Customany; yea, among such as profess the honorable Name of Christ,
to have Music at Feasts, Banquets, Dinners, notwithstanding the Prohibition of
the Prophet, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and of the Apostle, Be not
conformed to this World.

After the Apostles days, through the Prevailing and Encroachment of
Apostatical Delusion, Singing in Spirit, the Ingrafted Word, the Harp of God
being lost, they not only entertained Formal Singing, and Jewish Musical
Instruments into the Church, but also the Heathen Liberal Art Music, Vocal,
Instrumental, into Schools, a part whereof is Heathen Poetry, which to the
Depraving, Spoiling and Corrupting of Christian Youth, is yet continued and
contended for; and this we deny, and bear our Testimony, That Heathenism, as
Lascivious Poets, Comedies, Tragedies, Frivolous Fables, Spoiling Philosophy,
are as the Dead Sea, in which none can Live unto God; and in the very Midnight
of Apostasy, the Lord has had his Witnesses against the teaching thereof in
Christian Schools; others have not been silent.

A certain Lacedemonian being asked, What he thought of the Poet Tyrreus? He
answered, He was apt to Deprave, Corrupt the Minds of Young Men. Plutarch.

Some put Amethyst in their Cups against Drunkenness; much more in the hearing
of Poets, a right Rule is to be minded, lest they infect the Mind. Plut. Plin.

Eusebius brings in Plate, sharply blaming the first Education of Youth, as
Destructive, which was used by the Greeks, in reading the feigned Comical and
Tragical Inventions of Poets, Cap. 49. Page 618.

The Heathen Romans having Conquered this Nation, and Inhabiting in it, erected
Schools to teach the British Youth, and brought in their Lascivious Books,
Poets, Comedies, Tragedies; which to the Corrupting of Youth are yet continued.

Edgar, a Saxon King, having some sense of the Abomination of the Time, put
forth a Canon, That on Festival Days every one should abstain from Profane
Heathen Songs, and from Diabolical Games and Pastimes: But now it is not heeded.

In the days of Queen Elizabeth, the Lords of her Privy Council sent Letters to
her high Commissioners in Causes Ecclesiastical, in order to the rectifying of
School-abuses, saying, The Youth of the Realm receive rather Infections in
Manners, than Advancement in Virtue, from the Heathen Poets taught in Schools.
They were concerned for the removing of Lascivious Poets, taught in Schools;
but -- Inimicae tenacias haerent; see the Preface of the Book called, Anglorum
praelia.

Augustine, in his Confessions, accounts Terence a Comical Poet, unworthy to be
read; and blames Grammarians who teach it. Orat. Rainold.

Primitive Christians found Sophisters and Philosophers to be the principal
Enemies of Christianity: Upon this account they condemned all Heathen Learning,
Comedies, Tragedies, and other Poetical Writings, judging they did not conduce
to sollid Learning, Herrald. Anim. in Arnob.

Berno, who lived about the Year 1008. being furnished with all sorts of
Learning, said That he for many Years had rejected Poetical Fictions, Heathen
Historians, Worldly Learning, as Dung. In Epistad Magnifr.

Socrates drove out of the City Lewd Demons and Atchievers of Naughtiness,
handled by Poets; and he taught Men to shun Homer, and other Poets, and
exhorted them after the search of the Living God. Just. pro. Christianis Apol.
prima.

Augustine called Heathen Poetry; The Wine of Error, Drunk of Drunken Doctors.
Jerome called it, The Meat of Divils.

'The Devil takes pleasure in filthy and dishonest Music, and uses the same as
his Vehicle or Chariot, whereby he enters the Minds of Men, who delight in
Diabolical Music.' Alsted.

''Tis a profitable Work to draw Christian Youth from the reading of wanton
Poems to sound History.' Alex Ross in his Preface to Verg. Evangel.

The Lacedaemonians made no account of Poets, but drove them out of the City,
because of their Wantonness. Pult. in Lacon. Noviss. Pol.

Jerome complained, that Priests, neglecting the Prophets, did read Comedies,
and sung the armorous Sayings of the Bucolicks. In Epist. de dueb. fill.

Obscene Poets are to be neglected, for they corrupt good Manners, and fraught
the Mind with Naughtiness. Fran. Petrar. de regne. Lib. 2.

The Lacedaemonians would neither hear the Comedies nor Tragedies of Poets,
because contrary to all Laws; they hold out Whoredoms, Incest, Adulteries,
Injuries, Thefts, and other Flagitious Crimes. So it appears that Pagan Poetry,
and Ingredient of the Liberal Art Music, has been testified against.

CAP. VI. Of ARITHMETIC.
Arithmetic, one of the seven Liberal Arts, is defined to be the Numeral
Science, the Art of Numbering; the knowledge whereof is useful in Civil-Acts, in
the Government of Commonwealths, for the due Provision and Order of Armies,
Viewing of Artillery, useful for Merchants, Auditors, Treasurers, Receivers,
Stewards, Bailiffs, etc. It Is said to have its Rise among the Merchandising
Phenicians; but Josephus, in the first Book of his Antiquities, ascribes the
Original of it to the Jews. Pol. Vir. de Invent. rerum, lib. 1. cap. 18.

Plato, a Learned Heathen Philosopher, ( Aristotle's Master) so accounted of
this Art, as that he wrote this Sentence over his School Door, Nemo
Arithmeticae ignarus hic ingrediatur; that is, Let none enter here who is
ignorant of Arithmetic.

It Is my Judgment, that none can groundly deny, but the knowledge hereof is
useful, as to the Concerns of this Life, useful in its place; but such who
ascribe the opening of the seven Seals to this or any Natural Art or Arts
whatever, the Book is sealed to such, not one Seal thereof opened; the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, whose Prerogative it is to open the Seals, he is denied,
and Nature and Natural Arts are lifted into his Throne.

Herein any Member of Italian Babylon with his Mass Book, Mass for the Dead,
Fabulous Legend; any Mahumetan with his dreggy Alcoran; any Flint hearted Jew
with his Talmud, a mingle-mangle of Jewish Divine and Humane Matters; any Dead,
Dry, Unfruitful Formalist, may grow Profound, Exquifit, Nimble, yea, and though
involved in the intricate windings of Degeneration, out of the Royal state of
Regeneration and Heavenly Transformation may apprehend the Feats, Terms and
Parts of this Natural Art, as Digits, Articles mixed Numbers, Ciphers,
Terniries, Golden Rule direct, Golden Rule reverse, a Cube, Phythagoras's
Table, Algorism, etc. yet be Strangers to the Divine Exercise which leads to
Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who alone opens the Seals of the Book.

Though there be an Use and Service in this Natural Art, yet the Children of
Light, the Children of the Day, are, as I may say, the wise Arithmeticians, who
being the Disciples of the Lord, are kept Alive unto the Lord, and are daily in
the Numbering of his Mercies, Living Mercies, Mercies Heavenly, Mercies Earthly:
'Twas the breathing of David, the sweet Psalmist of Israel, That the Lord would
teach him to Number his Days, that he might apply his Mind unto Wisdom.

Again, the Eagle-Eyed Apostle John, proposed (as I may say) an Example to wise
Arithmeticians, saying, Here is Wisdom; let him that has Understanding count
the Number of the Beast, for it is the Number of a Man, and his Number is Six
Hundred Sixty Six, Rev 13.18. And John saw such as had got Victory over the
Beast, and over the Number of his Name, Rev. 15.2.

Herein, together with other places is evidently intimated. 1. That a Beast, a
Beastial Man shall arise in the Churches professing Christianity. 2. That this
Beast, or Beastial Man, should have a Numeral Name, that is such a Name as
should contain a certain Number in it. 3. That the Number contained in the
Beasts Name, should be, being computed, Six Hundred Sixty and Six.


Hence this Conclusion necessarily arises, that he is the Beast, or great
Antichrist, that has that Numeral Name, which contains in it the Number of six
Hundred Sixty six.

Now what remains, but that he be faithfully and impartially sought out who
bears this Name, and that we be informed what this Name is? Ireneus (whose
Master Polycarpus had been St John's Disciple) informs us, 'That the Name
Latinus contains the Number of six Hundred Sixty six; so was believed to be the
Name of the Beast: For (says he) they are Latins who now have Dominion;' but
we will not boast thereof (says he) Implying that the Name of the Beast should
be the greatest Insamy of the Church of Rome; as if he should have said, In
this we have no ground for Glorying, but rather for being ashamed. Iren.
against Heresies.

Again, the Numeral Letters of the Name Roman in Hebrew, according to the
Computation of the Jews, makes up this Number of six Hundred Sixty six. So
whether we have recourse to the Word Latin in Greek, or Roman in Hebrew, the
Numeral Letters make up six Hundred Sixty six, whereby we are led as by the
Hand to the Monarch of Rome, who has long possessed the Kingdom of the
Latins, and Rome the Seat of the Latin Kingdom; his Church is called the Latin
Church, his Letanies, Masses, Prayers, Exorcisms, Indulgences; in a word, his
whole Service is in Latin, set up in the Year 666. by Pope Vitalian. Latin
containing the Number of the Name of the Beast, being also his Language; yea,
and it is judged unlawful to perform the same in any other Language: 'Twas the
definitive Sentence of the Council of Trent, If any shall say, that the Mass
ought to be Celebrated in the Vulgar Tongue, let him be Accursed. So doubtless
Lattin and Roman is the Numeral Name of the Beast.

Object. No Pope was called Latin, and but one was called Roman: How then can
the Pope be intimated thereby?

Answ. John speaks not so much of a Personal as of a National Name, for he
will have the Numeral Name to be the Character, whereby it might be known where
Antichrist should have his Rise, and his principal Reign, to wit, in Italy, at
Rome: Italy of Old was called Latinum, the Inhabitants were called Latins, from
their first King Latin, as it is said, being also the National Name; and how
that Church rings with the Term Roman, who is ignorant? As Roman Faith, Roman
Religion, Roman Catholic, Roman Church, and that out of the same there is no
Salvation; and that Rome is the Mother, Queen, Lady and Mistress of all Church,
and that all ought to return to her Lap.

CAP. VII. Of GEOMETRY.
GEometry is defined to be the Art or Science of measuring the Earth, etc.
which in Concerns among Men is Useful and Serviceable in its place: The
Invention hereof, Strabo, Herodotus, and Proclus ascribes to the Egyptians, on
this occasion.

The River Nilus, now and then by its overflowing, Confounded and Disordered
their Landmarks; upon this the Egyptians found out the Use and Benefit of
Geometry, to the end that every one might be settled in the possession of
proper and respective Rights: Yet Josephus in the first Book of his
Antiquities, seems to ascribe the Invention thereof to the Hebrews, Pol. Virg.
lib. 1. cap. 18.

A Natural Man through search may apprehend much of the Feats and Terms of this
Art, their Points, Physical, Optic and Mathematick, their Lines, Parralels,
Diameter, Perimeter, Triangle, Rectangulous, Obliquangulous, Obtusangulous,
Acutangulous, Multangulous; their Rhombus, Rhomboides, Cone, Cylinder,
Parallelogram, Quadrat, Quadrant, Diagram, Astrolabe, etc. Yet that hereby, or
by any other natural Acquisition or Attainment, he can find out the knowledge
of the Almighty, or open the Seals of the Book, that I deny: For the things of
the Spirit of God are Spiritually Discerned; and such as live in the Spirit,
they come to be honored with that Divine Understanding, as to set every thing
in its proper place.

CAP. VIII. Astronomy, Astrology.
THe Living God (says the Paraphrast on the Samaritan Pentatench) formed Adam
and filled him with the Spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge, that from him, as from
Fountain useful Knowledge and Arts might flow unto his Prosterity: For besides
the secret Virtues of Living Creatures, of Plants, of Stones, of Metals and
Minerals, he perfectly knew the Influences of Supernatural Bodies. Theoph. Gale.

That Adam, as he was the Workmanship of God, was wise in the Book of the
Creation, it is an undoubted Truth: So many of the Holy Men of God, as Moses,
David, Solomon, Job, Daniel, etc. who grew up in that Image, in which Adam was
Created, they grew up in the Wisdom of God, became wise in the Book of Life,
and in the Book of the Creation; yet I read not that they were called
Astrologers, or were stained with their Fooleries, Dotages, Imaginations,
Uncertainties, Conjectures; but were Witnesses in their respective Generations
against such, and that Spirit by the which they were acted; what they saw of
the Book of the Creation, 'twas in and through the Wisdom of God revealed in
them; and that we own.

The Sons of Seth, who was the Son of the first Man Adam, as Josephus says in
the first Book of his Antiquities, understood the Doctrine of Heavenly Things,
who (to the end that what they knew and apprehended might not be lost, nor
swallowed up in the Sea of Oblivion; forasmuch as Adam had foretold a future
Destruction of all things) made two Pillars, the one of Brick, the other of
Stone, that if the Brick Pillar should be destroyed by the Rain Water or Flood,
the Stone Pillar remaining might show the Writing fresh and entire to the
Nations: On these two Pillars, says Josephus, they graved those things which
appertained to the Observation of the Stars. Pol. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 17.

Josephus in his first Book of Antiquities, clearly demonstrates, that Abraham
first taught Astrology unto the Egyptians, when he went down into Egypt, and
that the Caldeans and Greeks received the same from the Egyptians. Pol. lib.
1. cap. 17. To this I say, Abraham was perfect in his Generation, the Father of
the Faithful; and the sum of his Doctrine unto his Children was, That they
might walk in the Way of the Lord, and observe his Statutes, and being wise in
the Wisdom of the Lord. I do not deny, but that he might take occasion among
the Egyptians, to speak of the Wisdom and Power of the Lord, in producing the
wonderful Fabric of the Creation, of the Sun, Moon, Stars, and their Influence
over and upon Inferior Bodies, all which bespeak the unutterable Power and
Wisdom of the great Former: To which Testimony of Abraham, the Egyptians
adding the corrupt Ingredients of their own Inventions and Imaginations,
Fooleries and Mis apprehensions, might patch up their Art of Astrology;
Corruption optimi fit pessima; Best things being Corrupted become Worst.

Job knew that his Redeemer Lived, and in the Wisdom of his Redeemer he saw
much into the Creation; he spoke of Thunder, of Vapors, of Clouds, of Rain, of
Snow, of Hail, of the Sea, of Fountains, of Metals, as Gold, Silver, Iron,
Brass, of Stones, of Precious Stones, of Subterraneo^s Fire, of Stars, of
Living Creatures, of Earthquakes, of A^cturus, Orion and the Pleides, of the
Sun, of the Heavens, etc.

Now from the Writings of Moses, and of other Holy Men of God, the Heathen
desirous of Knowledge, adding their Inventions and Imaginations thereto, patcht
up their Ethics, Physics and Metaphysics; from the same Sourse or Spring
came in the Art of Astronomy and Astrology, which some will have to be one and
the same; others distinguish them, calling him an Astronomer who Reasons or
Treats of the motion of the Stars; him an Astrologer, who from the Course or
Conjunction of the Stars, take upon them to foretell what shall betide Men,
States, Persons, People, etc.

The Spirit of the Lord, in which the holy Men of God lived unto the Lord, and
saw much into the Creation, being turned from by the Heathen, they became Drunk
with strange Conceits, Inventions, Whimsies, Imaginations.

Diverse things were Devised or Invented by the Egyptians, as Calculating of
Nativities, that is, from the Day or Hour of ones Nativity, foretelling what
his Fortune shall be, as it is called, what Death he shall dye, and what manner
of Man he shall be, Pol. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 17. Are Astrologers now, though
professing Christianity, and Redemption from Spiritual Egypt the House of
Bondage, clear of these Dregs?

Do not many Ungodly and Profane Astrologers, from the Observation of the
Heavens, Contemplation of Celestial Bodies, Course and Conjunction of the
Stars, take upon them to foretell what Good or Evil shall betide Men, States,
Persons, People, so to determine things of future Contingence? Yes.

To which I say, the great Former of all things, the Almighty having made two
great Lights; Moses mentions their Use, End and Service, The greater Light to
rule the Day, the lesser Light to rule the Night, Genesis 1.16. He says not, that
they were made for that end, that Men by the Contemplation thereof should
Predict, Foretell, Prophecy, Prognosticate, what Good or Evil should betide
Men, etc.

True it is, The Heavens declare the Glory of God, etc. Psalm 19.1. And not only
Sun, Moon and Stars, but every Product, as with open Mouth, Proclaims, Preaches
forth the Power and Wisdom of the great Former; But that men by the observation
of them should foretell what Good or Evil would betide Men, Seats, Persons,
People, etc. this I cannot receive,

One reasons thus: What says the Astrologer? Why is the Star of Jupiter or
Venus in Conjunction with Luna, at the Nativity of Children, happy, or a
portender of Good; but the Star of Saturn or Mars contrary?

The Prophets of the Lord, his holy Seers, (as holy Records tell us) foresaw
things, and what should befall in the World, to Men, States, Persons, People;
but this they did by the Indwellings of the Anointing, the Word of Prophecy;
not by the observation of Celestial Bodies: And how fallible Astrologers in
this thing are, we have annual evident and pregnant Demonstration.

Pharaoh having Dreamed, not any of the Magicians of Egypt, not any of the
Wise Men thereof could Interpret the same, though doubtless eminent in
Astrological Judgment; but Joseph Interpreted the same to him; not by the
Contemplation of the Heavens, but by the Gift of God: Pharaoh said, Can we find
such a one as this is, a Man in whom the Spirit of God is? And for as much as
God has showed thee all this, there is none so discreet and Wise as thou art,
Genesis 41. Joseph's Interpretation Pharach ascribed to the Lord's Work, and not
to any Astrological Judgment of Joseph.

Nebachadnezzar having Dreamed, he sent for all the Inchanters, Astrologians,
Socerers, Southsayers, Wisemen of Babel, promising Gifts, Rewards, and great
Honor, to such as could declare to him his Dream, and the Interpretation
thereof; if not, they should all be put to Death. Notwithstanding, Wealth
Honor and Death was set before them, which set their Wits upon Work, yet they
could not answer the King; notwithstanding their Astrological Prudence: But the
Lord that reveals Secrets, revealed that secret unto Daniel, Dan. 2. So the
King was answered; yet not by Astrological Judgment of the Artists of Babel, or
of Daniel, but by the Revelation of the Lord.

Relshazzar, King of Babylon, saw a Handwriting upon the Wall; so sent for the
Astrologians, Caldeans, Southsayers, Wise Men of Babel, promising great things
to him that could read the Writing, and interpret the same; but it was hid from
them: But Daniel read the Writing, and showed the Interpretation thereof; not
by Astrological Judgmeat, but by the Gift of the Lord, Dan. 5.

The Caldeans said, That the Planets conduced very much to the bringing of Good
or Evil to Man: Whereupon Hermione complains in Ovid; Quae mea caelestes
injuria fecit iniquos?
Quodque mihi miserae Sydus obesse querar?
What fault of mine has made the Heavens unkind?
And that a Star should not be well inclined?
Diodorus, Pol. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 17. And this conceit has got entrance among
many that profess Christianity.

That the Seven Days of the Week are named after the the Seven Panets, it is
thought to be the Invention of the Egyptians. Dion. Histor. Pol. Vir. Lib. 6.
Cap. 5. And this is observed not only by Astrologers, but also by Schools and
Colleges professing Christianity: Thus the Mist and Darkness of Egypt is
continued among the Professors of Christianity.

In most Ages and Generations the Lord Has had his Witnesses, against the
Vanity and Naughtiness of Judicial Astrology.

There shall not be found among you any one that uses Divination, or an
observer of Times, etc. Deuteronomy. 18.10.

The Lord frustrateth the Tokens of the Liars, and makes Diviners Mad, etc.
Isa. 44.25.

The Prophet bears Testimony against the Caldean Astrologers, saying, Thou art
wearied in the Multitude of thy Counsels; let now the Astrologers, the
Star-gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators stand up, etc. Isa. 57.13, 14.

'The Art of Astrology (says Pol. Virg.) was devised or invented to make sound
Minds Rave, or go out of the Way,' lib. 1. cap. 17.

Calvin, Born at Noviodune a City of France, a stout opposer of the Apostatized
Roman Church, about the Year 1548. discovered in a Book the Vanity and Falsehood
of Judicial Astrology, which many began then too much to heed. Clark in the
Life of John Calvin.

Bion said, 'That Astronomers were very ridiculous, who when they cannot see
Fish swiming near them on the Shore, yet say, That they see Fish; that is, the
Constellation Piscis, in Heaven.' Stob. Sermon. 78.

'The Prosterity of Noah (says Theoph. Gale) degenerating from the pure
Philosophy, that is, Wisdom of the Patriarchs, plunged into the bottomless Pit,
of Diabolical Astrology and Idolatry: For in their Contemplation of Celestial
Bodies, the feeling of the Creator being lost, they were first of all hurried
to the Admiration of them, afterward to the Adoration of them.' So those
Glorious Creatures being lifted up to the Throne of the Creator, became the
Object of monstrus Idolatry, Romans 1.21. Deuteronomy. 4.19.

Epiphanius, Basil, Chrysostom, Augnstin, ancient Fathers, eminent in the
Church in their respective Days, give Reasons why Judicial Astrology is to be
exploded, cast out.

Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, sadly complains in his Confessions, That he was
Deluded, in making any account of that Art; and bitterly Inveighes against it,
and the Professors thereof. Nov. Pol.

Judicial Astrology was often forbidden by the Canons of Councils. Conc. Tolet.
prim. Nov. Pol.

Phavorinus was wont to check Judicial Astrologers by this witty Dilemma or
Argument; 'They (says he) do say, That either Unfortunate or Prosperous things
will befall: If they say Prosperous things, and deceive thee, thou shall be
made Miserable by expecting; If they say Unfortunate things will befall, yet
Lie, thou shall be made Miserable through fearing: Therefore by no means (says
he) must we have to do with such like men, who take upon them to foretell what
shall happen.' Gel. lib. 4. cap. I. Nov. Pol.

Many have been the Testimonies against this Art; yea, and that of many eminent
in the Church in their Day, whose Testmonies herein we own: And as Nations come
to be rectified, and seasoned with Heavenly Salt, this and all other Arts not
savouring of God, but tending to deprave People, and lead them into an uncert
in Airy State will be Witnessed against.

Astrologus caveat quinquam praedicere, praecept
Nam cadet Impostor dum super astra volat.
Astrologer, foretell not, soar not high,
Lest down thou fall, in mounting up the Sky.
CAP IX. To such as Trade (...) Sea of Heathenism, Philoso^ ^ool-Masters, etc.
A Philosopher ^ture of the Word being considered, signifies, A (...) ^isdom.
Now there is a twofold Wisdom, a Wisdom from a (...) Pure, Heavenly, full of
good Fruits; and such as gr^w up in ^s Wisdom, so become Wisdom's Children;
such as grow up in the K^owledge of the Lord, and in the Book of the Creation,
such a^ only such are the true and divine Philosophers, though the Gown, and
other Philosophical Ornaments, as some call them, be not received by them.

'There were (says Alsted) Ante-diluvian Philosophers, that is, Philosophers
before the Flood, as Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Malaleel, Jared, Enock,
Methusalem, Noah, who did not only understand heavenly Mysteries, but also the
Knowledge of Nature, the Book of the Creation, the which they taught in their
Families, as in Schools.' And

'There were (says he) Post-diluvian Philosophers, that is, Philosophers after
the Flood, as Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, Solomon, Daniel, etc.' These he
bears witness to, to be true and divine Philosophers; and this we own.

Tatianus gave pregnant Evidence, saying, 'That every Age and Order among
Christians, were Christian Philosophers; yea, that the very Virgins and Maids,
as they sat at their Wool work were wont to speak of God's Word and Works;'
Trapp. And while the Christian Church remained a Virgin to Christ, no Heathen
Books, of Poets, Heathen Philosophers, Comedians, Tragedians, were entertained
among them.

As there is a Wisdom from above, the very Sourse and Wellspring of Divine
Philosophers, Anointed Ones, Christian Philosophers, who receive from above,
and the Tendancy of what they receive is to honor him, who is above, the God
of their Mercies; so there is a Wisdom from below, Earthly, Sensual and
Devilish. Now Prgans of several Nations itching after Wisdom, to some scraps of
Moses, and other Writings relating to Morals, Naturals and Supernaturals, to
which they adding the corrupt Ingredients of their own Inventions and
Imaginations, steaming from the Lake of Wis^om from below, they patch up their
Ethics, Physics and Metaphysics; hence came the Philosophy of the
Egyptians, Phenicians, Caldeans, Phrygians, Lybians, Ethiopians, Scithians
Thracians, Persians, Indians, Brachmans, Spaniards, Italians, Greeks, Drutdes,
of Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, of the Cynicks, Stoics, Epicureans,
Scepticks, etc. And all Pagan Philosophy and Philosophers the Primitive
Christians denied, and entertained not, as all their Lascivions Poets,
Comedians, Tragedians, and bore lively Testimony against.

Constantine the Emperor took care that the Scriptures might be taught to
People, judging it most meet that Christians should be instructed in the Faith
of Christ, and not in Heathen Philosophy; Eusebius. lb. 4. But the Apostasy
prevailing, and the Mystery of Iniquity prevailing, Heathenism came to be
entertained in Schools professing Christianity; for in the third and fourth
Centuries Philosophers had the Education of Christian Youth, and no man had any
Reputation among Christian Doctors, who were not well initiated in Heathen
Philosophy, Rhetoric, Poetry, whereby the Sluices of great Impurity of Manners
were opened; yet in every Age and Generation the Lord had his Witnesses against
the teaching of Heathen Authors, Obscene Books in Christian Schools. Many
Testimonies hereunto relating may be read in a little Book, called, Dagon's
Fall before the Ark.

Licinus the Emperor called Heathen Learning, The Plague and Payson of the
Common-Welth. Trapp of Arts.

Our Country man Theophilus Gale advises well, 'That all the Placets or
Opinions of Philosophers, should be brought to be tried by the Scriptures, that
there it may appear what should be Embraced and what should be Rejected.'

The Primmer, Psalter, Testament, Bible, etc. are taught in Schools to learn
English, not Play-Books, Ballads, Romances, Fables, Heathen Philosophy: Why
then is not Latin, and other Languages learned out of Pure, Wholesome, Sound,
Savoury Books, but out of Lascivious Heathen Books, Poets, Comedies, Tragedies,
etc.? Were it not more Christian-like, that in Books provided for that purpose,
Youth read the Nature, Use and Service of Trees, Birds, Beasts, Fish, Serpents,
Infects, Earths, Metals, Salts, Stones Vulgar and Precious; as also Rules of
Gardening, Agriculture, Grasing of Cattle, Building, Navigation, Arithmetic,
Geography, Chronology, Sound History, Medicine, Knowledge in Law, Improvement of
Lands, Chyrurgery, Traffic, Government, Ordering of Bees, Propagation of
Plants, by Roots, Seeds, Slips, Layers, Suckers, by Grafting, Inoculating,
Imping; of Geometry, of Useful and Necessary things, whereby they might be
Qualified for Concerns of this Life, for the Help, Benefit and Advantage of
others in their respective Generations, then to be trained up in Lascivious
Poems, Comedies, Tragedies, Frivolous Fables, Heathen Orations, Pagan
Philosophy, Ethics, Physics, Metaphysick, which after the Apostles Days
darkened Sun and Air, disfigured the Face, spoiled the Glory of the Primitive
Church?

Universities stained with these things make more Loose than Learned. Prove.
22.6. Train up a Child (says Soloman) in the Way he should go, etc. Ought he
to go in the Way of the Heathen, or learn their Abomination? No; it is a shame
for Christianty, it loudly proclaims want of Reformation in Churches Professing
Christianity, that Books savouring of Levlty, Indecency and Obscenity are
therein instilled into Youth; ancient Canons have been exhibited against the
reading of such.

Through the ingress and overspreading of the Apostasy in Christendom, the Fume
thereof so Darkened and Deluded People, as to account Heathen Poetry, and such
like pregnant Evidence, for their groundless Traditions, Controversies, etc.

Roman Catholics say, We may find their Holy Water, and Sprinkling of
Sepulchers in Juvenal 's 6th Satyr. Their Lights in Sepulchers, in Suetonius 's
Octavius. Lamps Lighted on Saturdays in Senecas 's 96 Epistle. Distribution of
Tapers among the People in Macrobius 's Saturnals. Purgatory in Virgil 's
Aeneids. Thus proving their Doctrine by Heathen Authors: But the Evidence of
one Poor Fisher, one Tent-maker, one Peter, one Paul, is a Thousand times of
more Validity. 'Twas the Language of the Holy Men of God, to say, Thus says
the Lord. Of Apostatized Christians, Thus says Juvenal, Seneca, Virgil: This
is against such as would defend groundless Traditions by Heathen Armor.

Humane Wisdom, Pagan Philosophy being entertained in Christendem, by little
and little did wear out Seriousness, Soundness, Solidity, and the Simplicity of
Truth. Damascen first among the Greeks, about Eight Hundred Years since, as
Lumbard first among the Latins Six Hundred, forming Divinity into the Rules of
Philosophy, brought in the Method of School Divinity; but where Wisdom from
below prevails, there is a sound, a talk of Divinity, but it is cast out of the
Region of their Hearts.

CAP. X. Of School-Titles, as Doctor, Bachelor of Arts, Master of Arts,
Bachelor of Divinity, Doctor of Divinity, etc.
IN the Primitive Times Gospel Ministers were Called, Qualified and Empowered
of and by the Lord, to fulfill the Charge committed to them; they labored
together to beget others into the Life of Righteousness, to erect a Spiritual
Building, a Heavenly Structure on the Rock of Ages; they affected not Titles,
nor itched after the same, to gain Reputation of the Children of this World;
they had Names suitable to the Work and Office they were concerned in, as
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, and labored together for
the Perfecting of the Saints; Batchelors of Arts, Master of Arts were not heard
of among them; Heathen Learning and Arts, the Wisdom of this World, they bore
lively Testimony against: But the Divine Call being lost, through the ingrest
of the Apostasy, then they entertained Heathen Learning and Heathen Arts, to
qualify them for the Work of the Ministry; then arose an Insatiable itch after
Titles, to gain Honor, Reputation and Reverence among such as are under the
Delusion of Antichrist: Diverse Degrees and Titles are conferred, according to
their standing; Bachelor of Art in such a time, Master of Arts in such a time,
etc. When University Students have got a Degree in the Arts, then they have a
Gown and a Cap, for the sign of it; and the Name Bachelor of Arts, in Latin
Bacca^urius, which implies as much as Laurel Berries; Why so? The Pagan Romans
accounted Heathen Apollo their Godd of Wisdom, and they dedicated the
Laurel-Tree to him, and such as were judged deserving, they became Laureati,
that is, were Crowned with, or did wear Garands of Laurel, in token of Honor
and Glory: Po^ tell us much of these things. Now the Romans, through Consta^
the great, received Christianity by the Lump; and not knowing (...) dying with
Christ, that his Life might be manifest in their mortal Bodies, they continued
much of their old Stuff, and other Nations received the same from them; as now
in our Universities, Students having got a taste of the Berries of the
Laurel-Tree, dedicated to the Heathen Godd of Wisdom, Apollo (as I may say)
that is, having attained to such a Degree in the Knowledge of Natural Arts, or
such a Standing, without much Proficiency, then they have a Gown and a Cap, to
distinguish them, and the Title of Bachelor of Arts derived, as you see from
the Heathen; and this Title, this Gown and Cap, are as Signs and Liveries of
that, whereof they by their Natural Education are made Masters; and such as are
attained to such or such a Degree, in Scotland, are called Laureati, Laureat,
from the Laurel-Tree, Thus Heathenism crept in, is continued.

Object. The Title of Doctor was in the Apostles Days.

Answ. True; but this and other Titles there, were Names of Office, relating to
the Work they were concerned in, and called of the Lord unto; this might more
properly be translated Teacher, so a Name of Office. Wickliff touching this
thing, said, 'A Name of Office differs much from the Name of a School-Degree,
brought in by the Heathen.' He ascribes these School-Degrees to the Heathen.
Wickliff in Sermon. Domini in Monte.

Zuinglius on Mat. 23. said, 'Thou hears here, that the Titles of Masters and
Doctors are not of God, because Christ forbids this thing.'

Wilson in his Christian-Dictionary says, 'Ambitious seeking after Titles
ought to be eschewed.'

John Wickliff, Condemned at Constance, who Suffered as a Martyr for his
Testimony against the Apostatized Roman Church; his Testimony was, 'That
Graduations and Doctorships in Universities and Colleges, then in use,
conduced nothing to the Church of Christ.' So it is apparent, that Protestants,
yea, such as were Pillars of the Protestant Religion, saw an Evil in
Heathenism, and the Ambitious Titles thereof.

Object. These spoke against the Fooleries and Abuses in Popist Universities.

True it is; and their Fooleries and Abuses remain Fooleries and Abuses
wherever they are Practiced; the self-same Outward and Antichristian Forms,
Fashions and Follies remain in Universities, as in the Darkest of Popery, even
unto the Hoods, Caps, Scarlet Robes, Doctoral Rings, Gloves, their Doctoral
Dinner and Music. Dell.

CAP. XI. Of the Rise of Distinct Habits used by the Clergy, and by Students in
the Universities.
IN the first Priesthood Aaron and his Sons had Garments assigned them, in
which they were to execute their Office, and the denial thereof, in that
Typical Dispensation, had been a Transgression; those their Garments were a
Shadow of somewhat to come: Now Christ, the End of the first, Priesthood, of
its Appurtenances, of the Law, he put an End to the distinct Aaronical Robes,
as to the rest of the Typical and Transient Shadows of that Ministration.

When Christ sent out his Disciples, Apostles, he taught them not to have
recourse to Aaron's Robes, nor any Imitation thereof, nor that their Garments
should be of one Color; their Eye was heaven ward, for the Garment of
Salvation, white Linen, What Is that? The Righteousness of Saints; and in this
white Linen, Righteousness of Saints; the Evangelical Royal Priestood, was and
is clothed, without respect to Distinct Habits, or to any, but what is Common,
Ordinary, Decent and Plain; and who Minister without this white Linen,
Righteousness of Saints, and place Religion in Distinct Robes and Colors
without, such are false Witnesses, made by the Will of Man, Run Unsent.

Polidor Virgil seconds this Testimony, saying, 'In the Beginning of the
Christian Religion, Ministers being about their holy Performance unto the Lord,
put nothing on, but as at other times: They endeavored rather to clothe
themselves inwardly, with the Virtues of the Mind, and to put off the Vices of
the Body, then to put on new Garments.' Pol. Virg. Lib. 6. Cap. 12.

And while the woman was clothed with the Sun, while the Moon was under her
Feet, while the Christian Church was a Virgin to Christ, and while her
Ministers were Stars in Heaven, the Care and Regard was for the Robe of
Righteousness; no Jangling about Robes without, but the living Concern was to
beget many to the Lord, to know Establishment in the Word of his Grace: Of such
Ministers it is truly said, Even as the Heart has not a Moments Rest,
But Night and Day moves in our panting Breast
That by his Breathing it may still impart
The lively Spirits about to every Part.
So those, to whom God does his Flock Betake,
Ought always Study, always Work and Wake;
To Breathe, by Doctrine and good Conversation,
The quickening Spirit into their Congregation.


Now, when this white Linen, Righteousness of Saints, Sun's Clothing, the
inward Ornament and Garment of the Evangelical Ministry, Pastors, Teachers,
Prophets, Deacons, Elders, Bishops, (through the steaming in of Apostatical
Smoke, Ignorance, Darkness, Heresy, Traditions, Serpentine Wisdom) was lost
within; then they began to jangle about Garments without; and that none should
be capable of Orders, or Ecclesiastical Livings and Benefits, but that
conformed thereto. A principio non ita fuit; It was not so from the Beginning.
Then Gospel Simplicity came to be slighted, Worldly Pomp, Splender and
Ostentation came to be pursued, then the Life, Sum, Substance being lost, they
entertained Aronical Rites, and Heathen Inventions into the Christian Church,
Darkning Sun and Air; from this Sourse or Spring ushered in Distinction of
Garments without, Gowns, Hoods, Tippets, round Caps, square Caps, Gowns, with
standing Collars, the Pall, Rochet, Surplice, Copes, Bonnets, Cowls, Black
Coats, Miters, Girdles Sursingles, etc.

And to the end that Prelacy and Clergy might be had in outward Reverence and
Honor, and as Badge to distinguish them by, it was enjoined by Eccl^siastical
Canons and Constitutions, what manner of Robes all Masters and Fellows of
Colleges and Halls, all Students of both Universities, Ministers,
Archdeacons, Prebendaries in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, Deans
Batchelors of Arts, Masters of Arts, Batchelors in Divinity, Doctors in
Divinity, Bishops, Archbishops should wear; and if any conformed not thereto,
What followed? A Thunderbolt of Excommunication, Suspension, etc.

Tertullian, an Ancient and Learned Latin Father, a Philosopher, being
convinced of the Truth of Christianity, he laid away his Gown, grown in fashion
by the Romans having Dominion, whose Garb it was, and took upon him the usual
Country Habit; for which he was derided, as many are now, for not conforming to
the World. Tertul. de pallio.

In Tertullian's time every one that was made Presbyter did renounce his Gown,
which was the Roman Vestment; and the Clergy and Laity in the end came to be
both alike Habited; but notwithstanding the Example of the primitive Church,
wherein the Ministers, Stars in Heaven, were redeemed from the Pomp, Pride and
Fashions of the World, and were no way distinguished from other men, by their
Vestures; and notwithstanding the Practice of Tertullian's Time, yet Pope Pius
the fourth commanded, that the Clergy should be clad in Gowns, and in the Habit
peculiar unto them; Onuph. in vita ejus. Thus the Gown (invented by the Greeks,
from their Example entertained by the Lydians, and from the Lydians, passed to
the Romans) came to be the Habit of the Clergy, by the Popes Authority, and
others after. And how this is observed, every respective Parish, and College
Students give pregnant Evidence. Tertul. de pallio, Pol. Virg. lib. 3. cap. 6.

CAP XII. Of the Garments of the Clergy being of one Color; Of their Black
Atire.
FVller in the third Book of his Ecclesiastical History says, That about the
Year 1102. it was ordained; that the Garments of Clergymen should be of one
color: so that that Custom is of no great Antiquity. Black Color has been so
reverenced, accouned so peculiar to the Clergy, that in late Years it caused
Admiration, if any other Color presumed to preach, as if the Ministry of the
Gospel were entailed on that Color; but the Lord is opening the Eyes of
Thousands to see the Folly, Emptiness and Frothiness of such Conceits: The
Habits of Black Gowns and Black Coats have been borrowed from Rome, or from the
Idolatrous Chemarims. I (says the Lord) will cut off the Remnant of Baal from
this place, and the Names of the Chemarims, by Interpretation Black Coats, as
profound Hebraicians say, Z^ph. 1.4. Junius and Tremillius on this Scripture
gave this Version, Nomen Atrotorum cum sacerdotibus; that is, the Name of Black
Coats with the Priests: Hosea Prophesied against them: Josiah, by
Interpretation, The Fire of the Lord, suppressed them; and Christ, the heavenly
Josiah, is at work to make a Reformation in the Earth, to Burn up Wood, Hay and
Stuble, the Inventions of Men. Jcrom, a Learned Man, a Reverend Father in the
Church, about the Year 348. bad Nepotian, being to enter into the Clergy, To
avoid Black Attire. And a Bishop was condemned by the Council of Grangre, for
introducing the Fashion of Long Sad Colored Cloaks, which that Assembly
Condemned, as unbeseeming the Priesthood. Tertul. de pallio, with the Notes of
Salmasius.

CAP. XIII Of the PALL.
THe Pall was an Episcopal Vestment coming over the Shoulders, made of Sheep
Skin, in Memorial of him that sought the Stray Sheep, and having found the
same, laid it on his Shoulders, Wrought and Embroidred with Crosses; it was
Ordained by Gregory the great, a Pope, That the Metropolitan Dignity, with the
Honor of the Pall, should be at London; yet for the honor of Augustine,
called, Apostolus Anglorum, that is, The Apostle of the English; 'twas
translated to Canterbury. The Roman Poet Vergil mentions the Pall, Aen. lib. 1.
For the Ground of it is from the Pagan Romans: I have not read of it either in
the Mosaical or Evangelical Dispensations.

Apostatized Christian-Romanists derive many Doctrines and Ceremonies from the
old Pagans, or therein symbolize with them, and many things as Mire and Clay
sticks and cleaves to such as would be accounted high sharers in Reformation.

Of the Cornered Cap.
"The Mystery of the Cornered Cap, used in Universities (says a certain
Anonimous) is, That they are to go into the four Corners of the World to Preach
the Gospel; though (says he) when Richly settled in their Microcosm, little
World, a Parish, they seldom go out of its Corners, upon the account of
Preaching, but exactly search the same, reaping Profits and supposed Dues from
the Living and the Dead."

CAP. XIV. Of the SVRPLICE.
AAron and his Sons, who were to Minister unto the Lord, in the Priests Office,
were to have Coats of fine Linen, and Linen Breeches to cover their
Nakedness, Exodus 28. Now Christ, a Priest forever, after the Order of
Melchizedec, he put an end to the Law, to the Priesthood, to its Appurtenances,
being the Antitype, the Substance of the Typical and Transient Rites of the
first Priesthood. The Disciples, Apostles and gathered Churches, they walked
with the Lord in white Linen, they had Robes made white in the Blood of the
Lamb, the Armies in Heaven, the Primitive Church, knowing Christ to be the
Captain of their Salvation, followed him on white Horses, clothed in fine
Linen: And what was this Linen? Not Aaron's imbroidred Linen Coat, nor his
Linen Breeches, but the Substance of these Shadows, their fine Linen was the
Righteousness of Saints, and Christ is their Rightousness.

Now, as the Apostasy prevailed, the fine Linen, Righteousness of Saints was
lost, then they began to Jewdaize, yea, and to Gentilize, in Imitation of
Aaron's Linen, or of the Pagan Priests, to introduce these Surplices. Anno.
769. Pope Adrian the first, in his Time was a Council held at Frankford, in
which it was decreed, That whosoever did any Service in the Church he should
perform it in a Surpliee; yea, the very Sexton.

The Priests of Egypt put on White Robes in their Idolatrous Worship, so were
called Linigeri; yea, and the Ethnic Romans observed the Feast of Ceres in
White Apparel: Ovid, a Compiler of their Antiquities speaks thereof. Fast. lib.
4. Alba decent Cererem, vestris Cerealibus alba^
Sumite; nnnc pulli velleris usus abest. (1.)
White pleases Ceres, in her Cereals wear,
White Vestures; Black is out of Date with her.


The D^uides had Oak-Trees in great estimation; they Worshipped the Misleen
that grows thereon, as a thing sent unto them from Heaven, they performed their
Rites being clad in White; in imitation of the Linen of the Jews, or of the
Heathen, came the Surplice, so called, of its plettings, fouldings and
gatherings about the Neck, Sur in French is as much as Sursum, above, upward;
and Plis is as much as plico, to fould.

One asked Edward the first, Why he, so potent a Prince, went in so mean a
Garment? Old Father, said he, what can I do more in Royal Robes, than in this
my Gabbardine? But such regard is had to these Surplices now, as that the
Refusers thereof are branded as Heretics, Non-conformists: This is not the
first Testimony that has been born against them. Doctor Knewstub told King
James and the Bishops, That the Surplice was an Ornanent of the Priests of
Isis, the Egyptian Goddess, which was before Aaron: See the ground of these
things. It Is used for Decency, some say. I Answer, Is not this to be Wise above
what is Written? The Apostles, who had the mind of Christ, wise Judges of what
was Decent, entertained no such thing, neither from Jew nor Gentile.

Many eminent in the Church in their respective days, bare faithful Testimony
against the introducing or continuing of Jewish Shadows or Heathen Inventions
in the Church professing Christianity.

The Waldenses, faithful Protestants, from whom streamed a Sea of Blood, for
their Faith and Testimony against the Apostasy of Rome, bore Record, That
Priests Robes, Altar Ornaments, Palls Corporals, Chalices, Patens, and such
like Vessels were of no validity, use or service in the Church B. Usher.

Bucer refused to wear a square Cap, and being demanded the Reason, he
answered, God had made his Head round.

Philpot chused rather to be secluded the Convocation of the Clergy, then to
wear a Hood and a Tippet: He dyed a Martyr for the Faith of the Protestant
Church. Fox Acts and Mon.

Didoclavius in his Book to Damascen, page 891. says, 'Hoods, Tippets and
spuare Caps, were Introduced by Antichrist, to promote his Splendour. And says
be, 'It is a Stage Play Dress, and altogether Ridiculous, being a
distinguishment of some Men from others, by Signs useless, and destitute of all
Ornament: Upon their Shoulders (says he) there hangs down a Hood, such as
Fools used to wear, being neither handsome nor convenient.'

Object. Arts, though sprung from the Heathen, and Ceremonies, being admitted
into the Christian Schools, and into the Church, and found useful, ought not to
be spoken against: But Laymen are to acquiess in the Judgment of their
Teachers, and to comply with Aristotle's advice, Oportet discentum Credere; that
is, A Learner must believe, to wit, his Teacher.

Answ. Lascivious Heathenism, Poets, Comedies, etc. and frivolous Pagan Arts
are of the Evil Communications which corrupt Good Manners: And Pagan Wisdom,
Jewish Shadows, Heathen Inventions, arising out of the Pit, after the Apostles
days, dar^ned Sun and Air, disfigured the Face, and spoiled the Beauty of the
Primitive Church; And are these things useful? They are without Use or Service,
tend to promote the Splendour of Antichrist: And a Learner must believe, says
Aristotle. Well, he also said, Oportet docentem non mentiri; that is, A Teacher
must not Lie. Upon this Doctor Rainold thus and soundly Reasoned.

'If thou teach false things, which I ought not to believe, thou deals very
impudently if thou require me to believe them: If thou will be believed in what
thou teaches, teach what thou ought; if thou teach not what thou ought, I will
not believe what thou teaches,' Rainold Orat. it is a sad Judgment to be given
up to believe Lies; it is a Symtom of a Mind or People Intoxicated, Poisoned
with the infernal Drugs of Antichristian Delusions. But the Day is dawned and
dawning, the Day Star is risen and arising, giving Wisdoms Children to Justify
Wisdom, and to War in Righteousness against the Old Serpent and his Wisdom,
which is Foolishness with God, which has brought the Kingdoms of this World
into a Spiritual Timpany, puffed up with Pride, Ambition, a Name of Living, yet
Dead.

THE END.

