A DECLARATION OF Vice Admiral John Lavvson; Commander in Chief of the Fleet in
the narrow Seas, by Authority OF PARLIAMENT: With the Commanders of the several
ships now with him in the Downs, in order to the Removal of the Interruption
that is put upon the Parliament, the 13th. of October last.
WHereas on the ninth instant there was a Letter, from the Lord Fleetwood, came
on board the Ship James, directed to the Vice Admiral, in which he desired,
that he, and those concerned, might give the Freedom of their thoughts
touching a Government for the Commonwealth: In Answer to the which was
Returned by the Vice Admiral, and all the Commanders present, That being
burdened in Spirit, at the sense of the unhappy breaches and distractions
amongst the good people in the Nation; it was their humble apprehension, that
the hopefullest ways and means to make up the breaches and divisions, was a
happy composure betwixt the Parliament and Army, and that the Parliament might
return to their Trusts, which when the Lord please to Grant, they could
heartily join with any in Petitioning, that all words spoken, or things done by
any person whatsoever, concerned in the difference betwixt the Parliament and
Army, since the 13th of October 1659. might be for ever obliterated.

Now forasmuch as the same burden lies upon our Spirits still, in the
Apprehension of the sad Consequences that are like to ensue; for that We do not
hear of any Composure, but that the Breach grows wider, thereby eminently
threatening the loss and utter Ruin of the Cause and Interest of Christ and
His People, which for so many years has been so contested for, and cost much
Blood and Treasure, both by Sea and Land. We apprehending still that there is no
other Visible means under Heaven to heal the Breaches, and secure the N^tion
from the Common Enemy; Do Declare, That through the Lords Assistance, We shall
in all Christian ways and means, Endeavor the begetting aright Understanding
betwixt the Parliament and Army, and a happy Composure (if it may be) without
Bloodshed: But if there be ye^ an Endeavor by Force to hinder the Parliament,
That was Interrupted the 13th of October (1659,) from returning to the Exercise
and Discharge of their Trust; Who have so often been Declared the Supreme
Authority of these Nations, That then We shall to the utmost of our Power, with
our Lives, and all that is Dear to Us, use our whole Interest for the Removing
of that Force, and restore Them to their Freedom and Privileges.

And we do further Declare, (as in the presence of the Lord) that we have no
Aim nor Ends to Advance particular Interests, but the Interest of Christ, and
the Good and Weal of all the People of God; in their Rights, Civil, and
Religious; and of our poor suffering Nations in General. And do utterly
disclaim the Interest of Charles Stuart, and all His Adherents, or the Interest
of any Single Person whatsoever, or House of Lords; Therefore We doubt not but
to find the Concurrence and Assistance of all the (...) and Upright-harted in
the Land. For whose sakes, next to the Cause of Christ, (God being our Witness)
We have Engaged.

And We therefore Invite all our Brethren of the Churches, Army, Navy, and
Militia of the City of London and Country, and all that profess Love to God,
and His People, to join with Us, and give Us their Christian Aid and Assistance
in the performance of the Premises, whereunto We are persuaded the Lord has
Called Us; least when too late, They and Us have Cause to lament the
non-Improvement of the Opportunity that God has put into our Hands, once more
to Assert the Privileges of Parliamen^, and Liberty of the good People of this
Nation.

And that it may appear to all People, That We have no Rancor or Malice against
the Persons of any, or thirst after Blood: We do Resolve, when the Lord shall
please to Restore the Parliament to the Exercise of their Trust; Humbly to
Petition Them, according to the Heads following, Viz. 1. That Indemnity and
Oblivion may be Granted to every Person and Persons, that have acted in the
late unhappy differences, betwixt the Parliament and Army, since the 13th of
October, 1659. that shall not further persist in Obstructing their retorn to
their Trust. 2. That the Interest of Christ may be advanced in Justice and
Uprightness; that the Government of the Nations may be settled upon these
Foundations, and that all Laws not agreeable to the Word of God, may be
repealed, and all Laws that shall be enacted, may be Consonant to the Word of
God. 3. That all people of God, may be preserved in their Liberty to Worship
God, as the Lord Jesus shall lead them out, so that they make not use of this
to the prejudice of others. And that Superstition, and Idolatry, and
profaneness, be not Countenanced. 4. That care be taken for the maintenance
and Encouragement of pious and learned Godly Ministers within the Nation,
otherwise then by the way of Tithes. 5. That all possible encouragement may be
given to Navigations, and the much decayed Trade of the Nation; and to that
end, as soon as possible, those great Impositions (as Excise, and other new
Imposts,) may be taken off, and some other way found for defraying the Charge
of the Nation. 6. That no man be impressed, or forced, to serve in any Military
Employment either by Land or Sea, otherwise than in the defense of his Country;
and that the Seamen might be paid every 10 or 12 Months, at the farthest, to
Them or their certain Attorney. 7. That a comfortable Provision may be made for
any man that serves at Sea, that shall be maimed or dismembered, and to the
Widow and Orphans of such as shall be slain, which may be out of the Chest,
and Prize-mony, which is the price of their Blood. 8. That some way and means
may be found out for the Employment of the poor of the Nation, that are able;
and such as are impotent and lame may have a Maintenance for their Subsistence,


Signed on board the James in the Downs, the 13 th of December, 1659.

