A Looking-Glass FOR THE Episcopal People Showing them how they walk Contrary
to the COMMON PRAYER They Profess and Teach.

Wiitten in True Love, that all might come to know the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, by a Lover and Friend of Truth, though by the World Reproachfully called
a Quaker,

Francis Lea. That was the true Light, which Lights every Man that comes
into the World,

John. 1.9. There is a Spirit in Man; and the Inspiration of the Almighty
gives them Understanding,

Job 32.8. Printed in the Year, 1674.

A Looking-Glass FOR THE Episcopal People, etc.
SInce the Lord God of Everlasting Love has caused his Everlasting Truth to be
Revealed in and amongst a Poor Despised People; who by the Seed of Ishmael and
Stock of Esau are Reproachfully called Quakers, many have been the Reproaches,
Mockings, Scourgings, Whippings, Stockings, Stonings, Imprisonments unto Death,
and Cruel Persecutions, which many of the aforesaid People called Quakers have
suffered and patiently born, both from Professors and Profane, who like Pilate
and Herod have often combined together, to oppose the holy Truth of God, and
despightfully use the Followers thereof by all Ways and Means imaginable: But
He that sits in the Heavens shall Laugh; the Lord shall have them in Derision;
and then shall He speak unto them in his Wrath (which is coming more and more
upon the Ungodly) and vex them in his sore Displeasure. For the Mountain of his
Holiness will he Exalt upon the Top of all Mountains; And hither must all the
Nations come that will be Saved, to walk in the LIGHT of the Lord; which is
become as a Stumbling-Stone and a Rock of Offense to the Carnal Professors of
this Generation; and as Foolishness to the Learned Rabbis and Doctors of the
Times: But to Us that have Believed and walk in this Holy LIGHT of the Lord, it
is become the Chief Cornerstone, Elect and Precious, which in the Lord's due
time will Dash to pieces all Images, though never so seemingly Glorious, and
all Image-Makers, and all that do or shall oppose the same. And though many
have called it Natural and Insufficient, etc. Yet We that have believed in it,
and have known the Efficacy of it, must Testify unto all, that it is the LIGHT
of Christ, the Word by whom all things were made; and therefore not Natural,
but Divine and Spiritual; Nor Insufficent, because the LIGHT of Christ, who is
able to save unto the uttermost all that come unto God by him; in whom was
Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, John 1.4. Which LIGHT the Book of
Common Prayer does amply and largely confess and testify unto, as follows.

Com. Pr, Collect the 3d Sunday after Easter. Almighty God, which show to
all Men that be in Error the LIGHT of thy Truth, to the Intent that they may
Return into the Way of Righteousness, etc.


HEre is a very Ample Confession and Testimony to the true LIGHT, and the
Vniversallity of It. First, Because that God does show it to All Men that be in
Error (to wit) the LIGHT of Truth, which is the LIGHT of Christ, who said, I am
the Way, the Truth and the Life, John 14.6. whose Life was the Light of Men,
John 1.4. and who said, I am the LIGHT of the World; he that follows me shall
not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life, John 8.12. who also
said, I am come a Light into the World, that whosoever believes on me should
not Abide in Darkness, John 12.46. Secondly, The Sufficiency of this Light is
hereby vindicated from all the Calumnies and Reproaches of those that do or
shall oppose the same: Because the Intent of God's showing it to all Men that
be in Error, is, that they may Return into the Way of Righteousness; which they
cannot do if the Light which God shows them be not sufficient to lead out of
all Error; For how can a Man be said to Return into the Way of Righteousness,
unless he first know a Leading out of, and a turning from the Way of Error and
Unrighteousness. But God shows to all men that be in Error the Light of his
Truth, to the Intent that they may return into the Way of Righteousness.
Therefore let none slight the Lord's Love, who shows his Light unto them, but
join to and obey the same, that they may know a Returning into the Way of
Righteousness, which is the Way of the Lord, whose Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness and Righteousness, and all whose Paths are Peace and Holiness. And
blessed be the Name of the Lord many are come to be lead by this Light (out of
all the Ways of Error, Darkness and Unrighteousness) into the same; and
because they are Witnesses of and to this Light, and do in tender Love exhort
People to be Followers of the same, have they been both by Professors and
Profane persecuted, and evilly entreated, as aforesaid.

Com. Pr. Collect the 5th Suday after Easter. Lord, from whom all good things
do come, grant us thy Humble Servants, that by thy Holy INSPIRATION we may
think those things that be good, etc.


THE Cry has been and is by the blind Leaders of this Generation, that
Inspiration cease now, and is not to be witnessed; and because a Remnant
which God has gathered by his Powerful Arm do testify unto all, that
Inspiration does not Cease, but abides with and continues among God's People,
are they accounted Deluders, a Dangerous People, Pestilent Fellows, Movers of
Sedition, etc. by those who know not the Truth, as it is in Jesus; but hereby
is it plainly manifest, that Inspiration does not cease, because by it people
may come to think those things that be good, as by the Prayer above mentioned
is desired and prayed for; which does imply, that without the Inspiration of
the Almighty people cannot come to think those things that be good; for if they
could, why should the people pray unto God to grant them by his holy
Inspiration that they may, if they can think good Things without it? Wherefore
those that deny Inspiration, and account those Deluders that preach up and
exhort People to press after the same, do plainly manifest, that they do not
think those things that be good; and if People do not come to think good things
(as by the Inspiration of the Almighty they may be enabled to do) they will
never come to do them: But those that are Witnesses of God's Holy Inspiration,
as the People called Quakers are, are thereby enabled not only to think, but to
do good things also; for it is the Inspiration of the Almighty that gives
Understanding, which made good Elibu to say, ( Job 32.8. who well knew from
whence a good Understanding came) There is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration
of the Almighty geveth them Understanding: Which All ought to seek after, that
thereby they may come to have a good Understanding (which those that deny
Inspiration want) and then they will come not only to think, but also to do
those things that be good, as they come to witness the Holy Inspiration of the
Almighty.

Com. Pr. at the Communion. Almighty God, unto whom all Hearts be open, all
Desires known, and from whom no Secrets are hid, cleanse the Thoughts of our
Hearts by the Inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, etc.


COme all you that say, Inspiration is Ceased; here is another Confession and
Testimony to the Inspiration of God's Holy Spirit, which will stand over the
Heads of you all; for, by it comes the Thoughts of the Heart to be cleansed, as
many pray for, as aforesaid, Cleanse the Thoughts of our Hearts by the
Inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, etc. then not to Cease; if the Thoughts of the
Heart are to be cleansed by it; for if it should, then how would the Thoughts
of Peoples Hearts come to be cleansed, if the Inspiration of God's Holy Spirit,
which people pray for as a Means to cleanse the same should Cease? And if the
Thoughts of the Heart are to be cleansed by the Inspiration of God's Holy
Spirit, then those that preach up and exhort people to press after the same, as
the people called Quakers have done and do unto this Day, are not Deluder's nor
Heretics, etc. but truly Orthodox.

Com. Pr. Letany. That it may please thee to Bless and Keep the Magistrates,
giving them Grace to Execute Justice and to Maintain Truth.


THE Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared unto all Men, etc. Tit.
2.11, 12. and therefore as well unto the Magistrates as unto others: and if the
Magistrates would be taught by that Grace, it would teach them to deny
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts in themselves, and to live Soberly, Righteously
and Godly in this present World: and then the Lord would bless and keep them,
if they would be taught by his Grace so to do; which would also enable them to
execute Justice and maintain Truth: For Magistrates cannot truly rule for God,
and execute Justice and maintain Truth, until they come to be taught by his
Grace, and witness the Lord to Rule in them. Wherefore if the Magistrates would
maintain Truth they should first seek to be Witnesses of it in themselves, and
then they will seek after the Preservation, not the Destruction of those that
live, walk in and preach up the Truth, as the People called Quakers have done
and do to this day, who Seek and Labor in true and tender Love to turn all
people to the Light which God shows unto all men that be in Error, and to the
Inspiration of God's holy Spirit, and to his Grace that brings Salvation, which
has appeared unto all men, etc. and yet they have suffered for testfying unto
the same to this day. Now if the Magistrates would execute Justice, they should
punish the Evildoers, who hate the Light, neither come to it, lest their Deeds
should be Reproved, John 3.20. for if they do not, but punish those that do
Truth, and come to the Light, and bring their deeds to it, that they may be
made manifest that they are wrought in God, Joh. 3.21. (as the people called
Quakers do) then they bear the Sword in vain, which the Magistrates ought not
to do; for they should be a Terror to those that do evil, and a Praise and
Encouragement to those that do well: And those Magistrates who do not execute
Justice and maintain Truth after this manner, will instead of pretending to do
it be found Fighters against God, his Truth and People.

Com. Pr. Letany. That it may please thee to Give to all thy People Increase of
Grace, to hear Meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure Affection, and to
bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit.


IT would greatly Rejoice us to have all people come to hear the Word of God
meekly, and to Receive it with Pure Affection, and to bring forth the Fruits of
the Spirit: for blessed be the Name of the Lord, he has given and does give to
his People Increase of Grace, who have been and are faithful unto its
Appearance, and they are come meekly to hear his Word, and have received it
with pure Affection, and daily bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, which are
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness. Faith, Meekness;
against such there is no Law, Gal. 5.22, 23. Wherefore the Magistrates should
not make Laws against nor persecute those that bring forth the Fruits of the
Spirit, and deny all the Unfruitful Works and Lusts of the Flesh; and are come
by the Inspiration of Gods holy Spirit to think and do those things that are
good, and to have the Thoughts of their Hearts cleansed thereby; but to Favor,
Cherish and Protect them, because against such there should be no Law: But if
they should not, but still go on to persecute the Innocent, then will they
plainly manifest unto all, that they do not hear meekly the Word of God, nor
have received it with pure Affection, nor bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit;
for Persecution, Cruelty and Oppression are not the Fruits of the same.

Com. Pr. Letany. That is may please thee to bring into the Way of Truth all
such as have erred and are deceived.


THis is that which the People called Quakers have long desired and prayed for,
and earnestly seek after, That all those who have Erred and strayed from the
Ways of God like Lost Sheep, and have followed too much the Devices and
Desires of their own hearts, and have left undone those things which they ought
to have done, and have done those things which they ought not to have done, and
are crying, that there is no Health in them, being miserable Offenders, that
they might beturned to the Light, which God shows to all men that be in Error,
to the Intent that they may Return into the Way of Righteousness, and truly
witness a being lead into the same thereby: And for bearing our Testimony to
this Blessed Light, and seeking in Love to turn all people unto the same (that
they might not be any longer deceived with Error) have we suffered so much
Persecution unto this day: Yet it is our earnest Desire, that none may any
longer kick against the Pricks of it in their Hearts and Consciences, which
testifies against all Iniquity there, lest the Day of their Tender Visitation
pass over their Heads, and the things which concern their Peace be hid from
their Eyes.

Com. Pr. Letany. That it may please thee to Desend and Provide for the
Fatherless Children and Widows, and all that be Desolate and Oppressed.


IF some had well minded this Prayer there had not been so many Fatherless
Children and Widows as were made by the Act for Banishment, etc. when Parents
were banished from Children, and Children from Parents, and Husbands from
Wives, only for meeting together to worship God in Spirit and Truth, and for
bearing their Testimony to the Light and Inspiration of God's Holy Spirit, and
for bringing forth the Fruits of the same, against whom there should have been
no Law. Neither would there have been so many made Desolate and Oppressed, as
were by the late Act, entitled, An Act against Conventicles, etc. by means
whereof many Innocent People were Robbed and Spoiled of their Goods by
Unreasonable and Ungodly Men: Wherefore it would do well for all that are in
Authority, seriously to lay these things to Heart, and for the time to come to
provide for the Fatherless and Widows, and all those that have been made
Desolate and Oppressed by the hands of Robbers and Spoilers: For the Cry of
these things are entered into the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, who will certainly
plead the Cause of the Fatherless and Widow, and Relieve the Desolate and
Oppressed; that so those who have established any Laws against the Righteous
and Innocent, may for the time to come Disannul and Repeal the same, and break
off their Iniquities by Showing Mercy, Doing Justly and Relieving the
Oppressed; and then peradventure the Lord may lengthen out the Tranquillity of
their Days.

Com. Pr. Letany. That it may please thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors
and Slanderers, and to turn their Hearts.


THis has been and is our hearty desire, that God would Forgive our Enemies,
Persecutors and Slanderers, and turn their hearts: Yet how have we been
Persecuted and Slandered unto this day? But we have so Learned Christ, as to
Love Enemies, and to do Good to them that Hate us and Despightfully Use us: But
many, who often repeat the aforesaid Prayer, saying, We beseech thee to hear
us good Lord, are yet so far from Forgiving their Enemies, that they Persecute
their Friends, Neighbors and Countrymen, and Slander them, in calling them,
Heretics, and Seditious Persons, etc. and make Laws against them who preach up
the Light and inspiration of God's Holy Spirit, as the People called Quakers
have done and do at this day: Is not this a Mocking of God, for people to pray
him to Forgive their Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, etc. and yet they to
persecute God's People, and slander them, as many have done: But God will not
thus be mocked; for such as Men Sow, such shall they Reap; if they Sow
Violence, Cruelty and Oppression, they will certainly Reap Tribulation and
Anguish, Indignation and Wrath forever.

Com. Pr. Collect on St. Stephen 's Day. Grant us, O Lord, to learn to Love our
Enemies by the Example of thy Martyr St. Stephen, who prayed for his
Persecutors, etc.


THis is a good Prayer; and would it were practiced by all, as much as it has
been often prayed by many, that the called Christians of this and other Nations
might come to learn and practice the same: But the Professors in New England
were far from either Learning or Practicing this Prayer; for instead of
following the holy Example of the Martyr Stephen, they fled the same, and Ran
into the Steps of those who shed his Blood; and instead of Learning to Love
their Enemies, and Praying for their Persecutors, as all true Christians ought
to do, they Martyred their own Countrymen for telling them the Truth, and
seeking in True and Tender Love to turn them to the Light, which God shows unto
all Men that be in Error, to the Intent that they may Return into the Way of
Righteousness. Wherefore come all you Papists and Protestants, and truly learn
and practice this Prayer, that so Violence, Persecution, Cruelty and Oppression
may have an End, Quod faxit Deus.

Com. Pr. Collect on St. John Baptist 's Day. Almighty God, by whose Providence
thy Servant John Baptist was wonderfully born, and sent to prepare the Way of
thy Son our Savior, by preaching of Repentance; make us so to follow his
Doctrine and holy Life, that we may truly Repent, according to his Preaching,
and after his Example constantly speak the Truth, boldly rebuke Vice, and
patiently suffer for the Truth's sake, etc.


IF this Prayer was better minded and practiced by those who often repeat the
same, then the Truth would be better maintained, Vice more boldly rebuked, and
true Virtue cherished, and those that have patiently Suffered for testifying to
the Truth (as aforesaid) would be more encouraged then they have been or are:
But instead thereof the Truth and the Followers of it have been and are
Discountenanced, Vice Cherished, and those that have reproved Iniquity in the
Gate have been made a Prey; Yet according to the holy Example of John the
Baptist shall we constantly continue to Speak the Truth, Boldly to Rebuke Vice,
and Patiently to suffer for the Truth's sak^; And also according to the holy
Example of the Martyr Stephen, who prayed for his Persecutors, shall we
heartily Desire and Pray the Lord, That he would be pleased to Forgive all our
Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, and Turn their Hearts.

Wherefore let all People truly Mind, Love and Obey the Light, which God shows
to all men that be in Error, that so they might come to witness thereby a
Returning into the Way of Truth and Righteousness, and then they will come to
be true Christians indeed, and to answer the End of God's Love, and the Intent
of his showing his Light unto them; which that all people may do, is the hearty
Desire of him

Southwark, the latter-end of the 8th Month, 1673. Who Wishes and Seeks the
Good and Welfare of all, F. L.

THE END.

