OBSERVATIONS UPON Mr. WADSWORTH's BOOK OF The Souls Immortality, and his
Confutation of the Opinion of the Souls Inactivity to the Time of General
Resurrection. 80.
Printed London 1670.
IN his Epistle to the Reader, Page 2. he says, There are certain sober
Professors of Christianity, who, tho they deny the Existence of the Soul
separate from the Body, yet they maintain the Resurrection of the whole Man at
the Last Day, to receive Recompenses according to their deservings in this
life: and thereupon asks the Question, Is not that sufficient to uphold
Religion and a due Reverence of God in the World?

In answer to which Question, he says, There are some Professors among us who
deny the Resurrection of the Body, as some of the Quakers are said to do; but
yet believe the Returning of the Spirit to God who gave it: and then concludes,
That between one of these Opinions and the other, all Recompenses future to
this life, may come to be discredited and exploded.

Upon which his manner of arguing, I observe, That he seems to set up, if not
invent, the Opinion of Denying the Resurrection of the Person, and yet
believing that Humane Spirits return to God who gave them. Concerning which
Opinion, I say, I never heard of the like before, which makes me think it may
be an Invention; and the rather, because he gives no better Confirmation of the
Truth of it, then that some of the Quakers are said to hold it; whereas I
rather apprehend the truth to be, that neither the Quakers, nor any other
Christians, ever did, or do, deny the Resurrection of the Dead: and further, I
conceive that no reasonable man, who reads and believes the Scriptures, can
deny, or very much doubt, the truth of that Prime Article of our Faith, The
Resurrection of the Dead: and further I conceive, That if the Souls Immortality
had any thing near a like clear proof in Scripture, that we find in it for the
Resurrection of the Dead, both I and all other Doubters of such Immortality,
would be ready to assent and submit to that Opinion; whence I apprehend he
pretends to set up that which he calls the Quaking Opinion, on purpose to
discredit and de^ery the Practice of men's setting up their rest and
expectation, upon the clear and undeniable Article of the Resurrection of the
Dead. But that Article is too well founded and too clearly evidenced by the
Scripture, to be shaken or brought in question by any Inventions of Men
whatsoever. Page 4. Mr. W. says, Having sometimes found my own mind hopled and
troublesomely entangled, with the perplexity of conceiving how my Soul could
possibly exist in a separate state from my Body, to which I (...) so strictly
united; and with which I found it by experience so much so sympathize in this
its union. Thus he con^^^^ himself to have doubted of the Humane Soul's
Separate Subsistence; adding, That he believed diverse others might be troubled
with the like doubtings; and his intent in writing this Book, was to propound
to them such Arguments as had satisfied the doubts of his own mind. Hereupon I
observe, That this Author was by Profession a Minister of the Gospel, as
appears by the Title Page of his Book; that he was a man of great Reading, Wit,
and Industry, as plainly appears in the tenor and course of his Writing; that
he was a true and sincere Professor of the Christian Religion, and knew very
well (as in some places of this Book he testifies) that the Primitive
Christians and later Churches, both Romish and Reformed, the Mahometane
Churches, the Heathen Priests, Poets, and Philosophers, and a great number of
the Jews and Proselytes of that Church, have professed with a great Unanimity
and Universality, to hold and believe the Natural Subsistence of the Humane
Soul in a State of Separation from the Body; and yet the Natural Evidences of
the strict Union betwixt the Soul and Body, and the necessary Assistance which
the one of them gives to the other, for the production of Life and Action in
the Person, appeared so strong to the Rational Mind or Faculty of this Writer,
as they had power to make him doubt of the possibility, or at least the
probability, of the Souls Natural Subsistence in a State of Separation from the
Body: and hence I am apt to infer, that if a Man framed de meliori luto, so
munited and assisted, as this Writer was, did fall into doubts concerning the
Natural Subsistence of the Humane Soul in a state of Separation from the Body,
it seems nothing strange or wonderful, that other persons less fortified,
should fall into the like doubts and scruples that he did, without falling from
the sincere Profession of the Christian Religion; because perhaps they may
recover from those doubts and errors wherein they are now involved; and next,
because such Error as may be in this Opinion, seems merely Speculative, and to
have little or no influence upon the Lives and Practices of Men; however some
may put a higher value thereupon, then perhaps the thing it self may deserve,
for that it commonly seems to affect more the terror of the dying, than the
restraining evil persons from sinning: and even at men's deaths it seems to lay
more terror upon the weak and fearful, than upon the most sinful and wicked
persons: and in the practices of men it seems provable and granted by all
parties, that what will make a happy Immortality, will likewise make a happy
Resurrection; and what will make the one miserable, will make the other so too,
because the Tree lies as it falls, and as Death leaves us, so shall Judgment
find us: and therefore I conclude, that if men do happen to fall under such
scruples, and do even doubt the Natural Subsistence of the Humane Soul in a
state of Separation from the Body, and for obtaining better satisfaction
thereupon, do declare such doubts and, scruples to the world, with the reasons
and grounds upon which the same is founded, they may not for their so doing,
really deserve to be black'nd with the Names and Titles of Epicure, Sadducee,
Deist; Atheist, and other odious Epithets, which men of eager Spirits do
frequently use to bestow upon others who differ from them, in any sort of
Opinions which may be controverted amongst them, and seems to be a practice
very much opposing Charity and the Doctrines of the Gospel.

Page 5. Mr. W. says, His Mind in this Treatise, is to confirm the faith of
those who believe the Souls Immortality, or to raise up those that are fallen
into the doubts and scruples before mentioned; of which sort he was informed
there are not a few among the otherwise serious Professors of Christianity in
England; who notwithstanding such scruples, might pass with our Author, for
good Christians: who are to stand and fall by their Masters Judgment, in such
Cases, without being subjected, or subjecting themselves to the sharp Censures
of other violent or uncharitable persons. He says, Besides such doubters, there
are other men in England, who do not only with you deny the possibility of the
Souls Separate subsistence, but do also deny, the being of any sort of Spirits
whatsoever. I desire to rectify one of his Expressions in this Paragraph, in
the saying, There are other men who with you deny the possibility of the Souls
Separate subsistence; which I would have thus read, There are other men, who
with you deny the probability of the Souls Separate subsistence: and if this
alteration happen to be refused me, I will also refuse to be comprehended under
the words, with you.

Page 7. He says, Men cannot be certain that Souls do not subsist in a state of
separation after Death, or that they are not in a state of happiness or misery,
till the Resurrection. I answer, That if such things were once made certain and
clear to us, we should need to remain no longer in a doubting condition, as we
now do; and therefore we do heartily wish and desire, that God would please so
far to inlighten some man or men, with a certain or clear knowledge of the
truth in this point, as that they may be able to clear the same to the
understanding and minds of such persons as are very desirous to be farther and
fully instructed in this great Point, and diverse other particulars thereupon
depending.

Page 5. Mr. W. seems to expect rather thanks than blame, for endeavoring to
clear up to men's minds the truth in this Question; and in this I am fully
agreed with him, and am ready to give to him or any other man, who proceeds
heartily and fairly (as he does) my sincere and hearty thanks, for such labor
of love, with intent to draw others from the evil of their ways of Error of in
Practices.

P. 6. Mr. W. says, I conceive some who embrace the Opinion of the Souls
Materiality, may be otherways good Christians, and are by this Opinion the most
enemies to themselves; and therefore he deserves their thanks for endeavoring
to draw, them out of it. And I commend his Charitable Profession and Practice,
wherein he exceeds diverse other maintainers of the Souls Immortality, and give
him my iterated thanks for endeavoring to draw me and others out of those
Apprehensions or Opinions, which he thinks at the best, to be our mistakes and
errors: and thus I part with his Epistle to the Reader, to make some such
farther Observations upon his following Treatise, as to my own understanding
shall appear fit and reasonable to be done.

HIS Treatise stands divided by himself into several Chapters, to each of which
I purpose to apply the Observations intended to be made toward the discovery
and clearing of the Truths therein delivered, and the answering of such
Objections or Inferences as he may have drawn from them or built upon them,
without true or sufficient grounds for his so doing.

CHAP. I.
PAge 1. he pretends here to speak of the Soul, as if the Point in dispute were
already granted him, or were judicially determined to be on his side; for he
says, speaking of the Soul, that when she is born down with melancholy damps of
her muddy tabernacle, so as to think that at death she shall be turned into
senseless stupid dust, she strait grows sad and affrighted; and then upon the
consideration of her own Immortality, she clears up her doubts, and receives
great comfort upon the Opinion which she has of her being so qualified.
Hereupon I observe, he seems to take for granted, that the Soul has thoughts
or conceptions of her own, by reflection upon her self or otherways, without
being therein assisted by the bodily Organs of that person wherein she resides:
now whether she has such thoughts of her own or not, himself very well knows
to be one of the main Points in our Controversy: for that all Materialists do
maintain, she has no thoughts, activity, or being, but in the Body; and
therefore can do nothing without it. I have formerly quoted Aristotle de Anima,
where he calls it a very Improper way of Speaking, for men to say, The Soul is
sorrowful or learned, or wise, and that they might as well say, the soul weaves
or builds; because all these and the like Qualities are not Powers of the Soul,
but of the Man, and therefore our Author should have said, when the man is born
down by the sad Contemplations of Death or any other accident, he may take
comfort from the high Conceptions of his Immortality; but in the mean time, it
seems Mr. W. stumbles dangerously at the very Threshold or Entrance of this
Dispute, and must either have that granted him which he knows his Opponents do
utterly deny; or otherways all that he says in this Paragraph must pass for a
Non sequitur, without serving to any purpose in the Dispute of that Question
which he at this time pretends to handle.

P. 2. He goes on and says, He cannot believe his Souls confidence of her own
Immortality, to be a distempered fit of her spirit, prone to believe that to
be, which she desires may be, because he finds men of the best tempers and
practices to be of that Opinion: as if this Opinion of the Souls Immortality,
were a plant that co0uld spring and thrive only in a pure Conscience and a Mind
united to God. He says, This confidence of the Souls Immortality is so
appropriate to the wisest and best of men, as it seems an absurd suggestion,
that it should have risen from men's own Imaginations: but it seems rather
evident, that the Souls of men having in some measure recovered their pristine
holiness and integrity, they thence begin to know themselves and their alliance
to the great God, and see plainly, that they do not only bear his Image in
righteousness and holiness, but likewise in Immortality. Upon this Paragraph I
observe that no man charges the Opinion of the Souls Immortality, that it is a
bare Imagination of men's idle brains or fantasies, but we are ready to grant
that this Opinion is founded upon ancient and great Authority, and was first
introduced into the Heathen World, by the Doctrine of Phericides Syrus, whose
Scholar Pythagoras, built upon that Conception his Opinion of the
Transmigration of Souls from one Creature to another with a general Community
both to Men and Beasts; which Opinion was generally received by the World of
his time, and was thence propagated to future Generations, and continues at
this day to be firmly believed in the Eastern Parts of the World, of India,
China, and Japan. Plato became a Scholar to the Successors of Pythagoras in
that Doctrine and Opinion, which by his Genius became somewhat refined, by
rejecting a Community of Souls, formerly supposed to be betwixt Men and Beasts;
and confining the Transmigration of Humane Souls to the Bodies of Men only;
conceiving withal that some more perfect and pure Souls amongst them, might so
have acted in Bodies wherein they lived, as they might deserve to be delivered
from the Drudgery of acting Humane Bodies any longer: and therefore were
received up into higher Regions and Places, where they enjoyed such Happiness
and Powers of Acting, as far exceeded the most Happy State upon Earth. This
Opinion of Plato found great Credit amongst the Learned Persons which came
after him, and particularly in the Heathen and Christian Schools of Alexandria;
as appears by the Writings of Origin and Pantenus, who were Christian Doctors,
and Teachers in those Schools at Alexandria: and this Opinion seems to have
been also spread amongst the Nation of the Jews and Proselytes of their
Churches; because that when St. Matthew comes to relate our Lords Doctrine, and
Direction rather to fear God than Men, for that God can punish men after Death,
which is not in the power of men to do; he words it thus, Fear not men, because
they can only kill the body, but cannot kill the soul: Which plainly proves it
to be that Apostles Opinion, That the Soul might have, and had a natural
Subsistence in a State of Separation from the Body; and that his believing the
Truth of this Doctrine, was the Cause why he worded our Lord's Direction in
this Point, as we find him to have done in the Text before quoted. By what has
been said before, it appears clearly, we do not charge the Opinion of the Souls
Immortality with being the Product of Men's idle Brains or Fancies, grounded
upon their own Desires, of having it passed for an established Truth; for we
have showed and agreed, That the same is grounded, in a learned Antiquity, and
very great Authority, whence it has grown to be the most general, and near the
universal Opinion of Mankind; which having been so entertained, Mothers and
Nurses have instilled the same into the Minds and Learning of their tender
Infants, who by Fathers and Masters, are after farther confirmed, in this so
early radicated Opinion; which is after farther illustrated, and proved to
them, from Pulpits, and the Ministers of their Churches: And this Deduction
manifests, That we do not Charge the Opinion of the Immortality, with being the
Product of Men's idle Brains or Fancies; or their Desires concerning the Truth
of it. As to what he pretends, That the Immortal Opinion thrives only, or
mostly, amongst the wisest, and best Practicers of the Christian Profession. I
conceive him therein to be mistaken, and think, that for every wise and good
Man which he can produce, prosalted to believe and maintain the Opinion of the
Immortality, I shall be always able to produce twenty Sensualists at least, and
evil Livers, who will be ready with great Zeal and Constancy, to maintain Mr.
W's Opinion of the Immortality to the uttermost. As to his saying, That Men
attain to the Image of God in Righteousness, and true Holiness, and
Immortality. I find in my self no inclination to grant him, That any Men,
whilst in this World, do attain to the Image of God in any of these
Particulars. I find it written. That God made man after his own Image, and in
the Image of God, made he man. But I do not find my self able to explicate, or
conceive the true and full Scope and Meaning of these Expressions, nor wherein
the Image of God in man does consist; but am very apt to think, That man was
not made like God in Immortality; because then there would have been no need of
the Fruit of the Tree of Life, to make Men live for ever. But we read, That God
made that Tree and Fruit grow out of the Earth, to that very purpose, that Man
by eating of that Fruit, might become Immortal, and live for ever; and that
upon his Sin he was debarred from eating of that Fruit, and lost that Remedy,
which God had provided against the stroke of Death; and in that Condition has
his Posterity remained ever since his Commission of that Sin against God: And
therefore I think St. John informs us truly, when he says, We know not yet what
we shall be, but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: And
therefore I leave the Pretenses to such Knowledge; to the Time of our Lord's
second Appearance, and sitting upon the Throne of his Glory, when Men of good
Practices may hope to be like him; and that I think is sufficient to satisfy
the reasonable and most exalted Desires of Mankind.

P. 3. Mr. W. says; Whilst the Spirit of Man continues its Conflicts with the
Flesh, and the Lusts thereof, (as she will whilst she abides in the Body) it is
needful to maintain in her the Thoughts of her Immortality. Here I observe,
that when he speaks of the Spirits contesting with the Flesh, he says, It
continues that Conflict with the Flesh, and the Lusts thereof, as it will
whilst she abides in the Body, and therefore it is needful to maintain in her,
high Thoughts of her self. By this manner of Speaking, he first expresses, that
Spirit by the Name of it, and presently, without giving any Reason, slides down
upon it the Title of She and Her, as if the daily Contests betwixt the Flesh
and Spirit of Man intended a Contention between his Body, and an Immortal
intelligent Spirit within it; expressing that Spirit, by Terms of She and Her.
But I differ from him therein, conceiving that by the Flesh and Spirits so
contending one against the other, is chiefly, and even only intended, the
Contests which are daily found between Men's Affections, and other Sensual
Powers, and the Minds, or Rational Faculties of the same Person; and his
sliding the Terms of She and Her into this Discourse, with design to have it
thought, that these Contests are maintained by an intelligent immortal Spirit
against that Body wherein she lives, looks to my Apprehension, like a sort of
Legerdemain, which may perhaps prevail upon very unwary Readers, but will not
be suffered so to pass, by considerate Examiners of his Writings.

P. 4. He says, That She, his Immortal Spirit, will continue her Conflict with
the Body so long as she is in it. I am ready to Agree, That such a Contest
between the Sensual Appetites and Rational Faculties of Men, is likely to
continue throughout, and during the whole Life of the Person, but that this
sort of Contest is so maintained between the Immortal Intelligent Soul, and the
Body of that Person whom she enlivens, I am very apt and ready to deny.

P. 4. He says further, If we seek Encouragement against the Fear of Death,
there is no Truth can arm us with a better Resolution, than the Belief of the
Souls Immortality. And I grant, that if this were a Truth, sufficiently
evidenced to the Understandings and Consciences of Men, it would be a great
strengthening to such Persons as have a very good Opinion of their own Merits,
to make their Passage through the Gates of Death, with great Boldness and
Assurance; but to those who are working out their own Salvation with fear and
trembling, and are very humble in the Contemplation of their own Merits; who
tremble more at the sight of their Sins, than they are confident in the Merit
of their Actions (who I think make the greater Number of People in the World;)
his Opinion of the Souls Immortality, and the immediate passing from Death to
Judgment, and fiery Condemnation of ill deserving People, gives Terror and
Affrightment, rather than Comfort and Support to, by far the greatest part of
People in the World; and if the Tenet be not true, and cannot be sufficiently
proved to the Understandings and Consciences of Men, it may then pass for a
Scarecrow to the Bad, and a Staff of Reed to such good People as may put their
Confidence in it.

Mr. W. further demands, Can any hearty Lover of the Lord Jesus, think of the
Interruption of his Communion with him, from Death to Judgment, without great
Regret and Trouble of Mind? And he says, He is sure the Generation of the
Righteous think it much otherwise. To this I Answer, That the Generation of the
Righteous, may think, some one thing, and some another; and thereupon I
conceive, that diverse of them will be very well contented with such a Portion
of Happiness, as the Spirit in the Revelation tells us they shall enjoy, in the
Words; Yea, says the Spirit, they rest from their Labors, and their Works do
follow them; and at the end of that, Rest shall overtake them, and be joined
again to them, at the end and time of their intended Resurrection.

P. 5. He further demands, Is this enough to quiet the fervent Longings of the
Divine Nature in us after Immortality, and to satisfy our lively Hope of an
Eternal Life with God and the Lamb? Away, says he, This is but to trifle with
the greatest Concernments of the Lords People. To which I Answer. This seems
but a Rhetorical Flourish, without any true Substance in the matter of it. It
seems a kind of Cant, which I do not well understand, when he speaks of,
quieting the servent Longings of the Divine Nature in us after Immortality.
This may perhaps seem plain to Men of his Kidney and Constitution; but to me it
looks like a Riddle me, what is this? For I know of no Divine Nature in one
man, more than in another; and I do not conceive it natural for Men to be
troubled with such Longings after Immortality, as he pretends here to describe.
I think Men do sometimes long for things which they do desire, and have a
likely and very strong Hope to obtain; but those who entertain no Hopes of an
Intermediate State betwixt Death and the Resurrection, must be very weak in
their Rationals, if they trouble themselves with any Longings after such a
State, or receive any Disappointment upon their going without it.

P. 6. Mr. W. enters into somewhat a long Discourse, wherein he largely
Censures and Condemns such, as maintain the Souls Extinguishment at the
Dissolution of the Humane Person. I will spend no Time in giving particular
Answers thereunto, but content my self with only saying thereupon, that it all
wants Proof, and passes with me for a Non sequitur, which has no strength of
Argument in it, concerning that Question, about which we now differ.

P. 7. Mr. W. quotes that Prophecy, which gives, A Woe to those who make the
Hearts of the Righteous sad, whom the Lord has not made sad; and Applies those
Words to those who oppose his Opinion of the Souls Immortality: And thereupon
this seems to be the Case, those who maintain a Point of Doctrine, contrary to
Truth, which may make the Righteous sad, the Woe pronounced by this Prophet,
pertains to that Maintainer; whence if the Souls Extinguishment at the Death of
the Party be not true, it may probably make the Hearts of some Righteous People
sad, whom God has not made sad; and then our Prophets Woe may justly be
imposed upon such Maintainers: But if otherwise it should so fall out, that
this Opinion be True; and that of the Souls Immortality, be an Error: Then
those whose Hearts are made sad by that Doctrine (which I conceive are by far
the greatest Number of People in the World) are so sadned by an Erroneous
Tenet, delivered without a sufficient Warrant from God. And in this manner, the
Hearts of such People will be made sad, whom God has not made sad: And
thereupon I conclude, that if the Doctrine of the Soul's Immortality be not
True, the Woe delivered in this Prophecy, will as justly take hold of the
Maintainers of it, as it will do upon their Opposers, if they maintain an
Error, although they may think themselves to have the Right in this Point.

P. 7. He pretends that we have, or may have once learned to know, that God
has framed us for an uninterrupted perpetuity of living. I say to this, I am
assured in my self, and both can, and do assure my Reader, that if I did know
or believe, what he says in this Place to be true, I would readily submit to
his Dictator-ship in it, without any further proceeding in a Dispute of this
Nature: But I do neither know, nor believe, the Truth of what he says in this
Place, conceiving it still more probable, that the Soul extinguisheth at the
Death of the Person, and is neither Immortal nor Intelligent, having no other
Place of Subsistence, but in the Body.

CHAP. II.
PAge 8. Mr. W. says, That he will enquire into the diverse Acceptations of the
Word Soul in Scripture, or what is there usually intended by that Term; and
says in Scripture there are five Significations thereof.

First, he says, The Soul is there taken for the whole Person of Man. Secondly,
Soul is there taken for the Body of Man only. Thirdly, Soul is taken for the
Life of the Body. Fourthly, he says, Soul is taken for the dead Carcass of a
Man. Fifthly, The Word Soul is taken for the Rational Soul of Man; whereby he
stands in a kind of Level with Angels.
By which I suppose he intends the Humane Soul, producing Life and Action in
the Person which he says is Immortal, and labors to prove it so; and therefore
brings Instances out of Scripture, to show the Truth and Practice of these
Significations. And hereupon I observe, That his first Acceptance of the Word
Soul, for the whole Person of Man constituted of Soul and Body, is very common
throughout the whole Course of the Scripture, well proved by the Instances
which he gives, to which Hundreds more might be added, if any need should arise
for the so doing: But the Instances of his Second Signification, seem not to
prove what he intends by them; for that the Iron entering into Joseph's Soul,
seems not to be intended only of his Body, but of his Person; for that his Body
without a Soul, could not be sensible; or capable of suffering thereby.

His next Instance is, of sending Leanness into the Souls of those that eat the
Quails: It seems, the Word Soul here, does also intend the whole Persons of the
Eaters; for that Bodies cannot eat, or be nourished without their Souls.

Concerning his Third Saying, That Soul is taken for the Life of the Body: It
seems, the Instances which he brings, do all apply to the Life of the Person,
and not of the Body only; for all men know that the Body can have no Life
without the Soul; and therefore, these which he pleases to apply to the Body
only, ought really to be intended of the whole Humane Person.

The Instances which he brings, to prove the 4th. Acceptance of the Word Soul,
to signify sometimes a Dead Carcass, he offers to prove by these Words, Ye
shall not make any Cuttings in your Flesh for the Soul. Here he pretends the
Word Soul, signifies nothing but the Dead Carcass: But I refuse to Agree with
him in it, conceiving as I do, that the Word Soul here, intends the Dead
Person; for I do nor believe men to have been so sottish, as to have made
Cuttings in their Flesh for the Dead Carcasses of their Friends, as he
supposes; but that rather they made such Cuttings in their Flesh, for Grief and
Remembrance of their Dead Friends, not for any of their Parts, but for the
whole Persons of them.

His 5th. Signification of the Word Soul, which he takes to intend singly, the
Rational Immortal Soul of Man, he proves by Instances, Psalm. 19.7. The Law is
perfect, converting the Soul. He pretends the Word Soul in this Place,
signifies Man's Immortal Soul, singly considered, and without the Body. This I
deny, and say, this converting of the Soul, inrends converting of the Person,
or of the whole Man, as he is a Compositum of Soul and Body. Again, he Quotes
Deuteronomy. 11.18. Lay up these my Words in your Soul; which I think somewhat plainly
to signify, as if he had said, Lay up these my words in your hearts, or in
your selves, constituted and compounded of Soul, and Body. He Quotes again,
Deuteronomy. 13.3. Love the Lord with all your Soul: To which he might have added,
with all your Heart, and all your. Strength: Which make this Text clearly
appear to intend, Love the Lord with all the eminent Faculties of your Person.
Then he says, There are more Significations of the Word Soul, in Scripture,
besides those Five which he has named; and which by Examination of his
Instances, have been found to run all into one, which intends the whole Humane
Person, as it is a Compositum of Soul and Body. He instances (as one of his
other Significations) the Words, Deliver me not up to the Soul of my Enemies:
Which I think intends, To be not delivered up to the Persons or Powers of his
Enemies. He says again, The word Soul sometimes signifies some one Power of the
Sensative Soul, as the Breath of Man or Beast; and sometimes for some single
Power of the Rational Soul, which I think he should have termed some single
Power of the Mind, or of the Man: And therein I am ready to agree with him,
that the World Soul in Scripture, does diverse times signify the vehement
Desires or Affections of the Person; but I do not remember, that the Word Soul
is any where used in Scripture, to signify the Soul of Man (by our Author
intended) except only that Text of St. Matthew, which says, Men are not able to
kill the Soul.

P. 11. He says further, he takes the Word Soul, to signify Man's Intellectual
Soul; because in no other sense can the Soul be said to be Immortal: And I
deny, that in that sense, it can truly be said to be Immortal. Then he says
further, That the Soul which is now plainly alive, while in our Bodies, shall
never cease to live, or be annihilated. And this I conceive to be the thing
which he undertakes to prove; and when he has so done, in a sufficient
convincing manner, I do fully intend to be his Proselite, and to submit my
Belief to his Direction in this Point.

P. 12. He discourses of the Soul's Annihilation by the Power of God, which, as
a thing not now questioned, or controverted, nor very material in this present
Disquisition, I pass over without farther Observation thereupon.

CHAP. III.
PAge 13. Mr. W. says, I shall now lay down Five Propositions, which I conceive
have a great Tendency to Clear up this great Truth [Of the Soul's Immortality.]

The First whereof is this, That the Soul and Body of Man, are not one and the
same Being, but are Beings really distinct: Because, says he* they were created
one after the other, and not at one and the same time. And this he says is
evident, from Genesis 2 the Words whereof run thus in our Translation, The Lord
God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the
breath of life, and man became a living soul. He says it should have been thus
rendered, God breathed into Adam 's nostrils the breath of life, or soul of
life, or living soul. But I am more ready to rely upon the Authority of our
Translators, than upon the single Credit of a Person engaged in Controversy,
and to whose Cause this sort of Translation may be helpful. Both of us have
before concluded and agreed, that the Word Soul in Scripture, does often intend
and signify the Person; and so I do fully believe, and conclude it does in
this Text, and bears the same Sense, as if it had been said in proper Words,
God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the
breath of life, and man became a living person. He says, and pretends that
these Words in Genesis are a clear Demonstration of the Soul's being created by
God after the Body finished; that he knows not what to add, to make it more
clear: And I am very apt to believe that he speaks Truth in it, and really does
not know what more to add, to make it more clear to the Understandings of Men;
for if he did, I see no cause to believe, that he would be sparing of his Pains
to that Purpose. I am not able my self to collect out of this Text, that the
Soul and Body of Adam were created one after the other; no, nor that any Soul
at all was created for Adam, either before or after the Consummation of his
Body. The Words themselves of the Text, do not express, that God created a Soul
for Adam, but say, God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and by
breathing that breath into him, he became a living person. Genesis 1.5. The Text
says, God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle after their
kind, and every thing that creeps upon the earth after their kind, as he had
before created great whales and fishes in the water, and fowls to fly in the
midst of Heaven. Our daily Observations may assure us, the Lives of all these
are maintained by the ambient Air, and the Breath which from thence they draw,
and without which they cannot subsist or live, for the space of some few
moments, which has been often experienced by the Air-Pump, in the case of
Infects thereinto injected. This Brutal Breath, Eccles. 3.19. is judged by
Solomon to be the very same with the Humane, in these Words, Yea, they have all
one breath. In the flood of Noah we read, That all in whose nostrils the breath
of life was, died in that flood. And clear it is, they so died, because the
Waters stopped the passage of that Breath, by which they before lived: And if
it shall be demanded, by what means these Creatures obtained their first
Breath, I conceive it was given them by the same, or the like Means, that Adam
afterward received it. A Specimen of which we find recorded, Ver. 37. where a
vast number of dry Bones received a sudden and powerful Resurrection: For
first, They came together, bone to his bone. Next to which, lo, the sinews,
and flesh came up upon them, and then the skin covered them above; but there
was no breath in them. Then God commanded that Prophet to prophecy unto the
Winds, and say, come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these
slain, that they may live. So he prophesied as he was commanded, and the breath
came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet an exceeding great
Army. And thus I conceive it fared with Adam, at his first Creation, the Bones,
Ligaments, and principal Parts were framed and fitted, one of them to another,
upon which were formed their Flesh and Sinews, over all which, the Skin was
lastly super-induced: And after this manner it seems Adam's Body was first
created and perfected, although he lived not, because there was yet no Breath in
him; his blood and Humors were turgid, and full of Mettle, fit and apt to
tin'd, and have the Flame of Life kindled in them, with the first Blast of that
Breath, which God intended to breathe into him for that purpose: And this Flame
of Life he then appointed to be continually maintained in the Bodies of Beasts,
and in the Persons of Men, by breathing and the constant fannings of the
ambient Air, so as (...) Creatures can live but a very few Moments (...):
Whilst (...) Creatures breathe, they lives (...) they cause to breathe, they
cense to live. What (...) should prove in this Point, is this, That God (...)
Creation, and (...), did create for him, and for the Information of that Body a
new, spiritual, intelligent, circumscribed Substance, that should come ab
extra, and be injected into that new created Body, by the mighty and miraculous
working of God's Power: (...) he be able thus to prove, I confess it will
follow, (...) ^his Soul had a separate Subsistence, before its being ^ast into
the Humane Body; and thence it will also be a very probable consequent, that
when at Death it shall be again divided from the Body, it will be able to
subsist in a state of Separation from the Body: But till the Being of such a
Soul shall be better proved, I hold the Opinon of its Extinguishment at the
Death of the Person, to be more probable

P. 14. To prove that the Soul and Body are Two separate, singular, and
different Beings, Mr. W. quotes 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. where St. Paul says, I pray God,
your Spirit, Soul and Body, be preserved blameless. Himself confesses, he knows
not well how to distinguish betwixt Soul and Spirit in this Text; but yet he
declares himself certain, that there is a Distinction asserted betwixt them,
and the Body: And I Reply, That the being of a Distinction betwixt them, is no
good Proof, that the Soul can subsist in a State of Separation from the Body;
for that the Relatives in the Holy Trinity, are really distinct one of them
from the other, and yet no Division, or Separation, can possibly be admitted
amongst them: And I farther conceive upon this Text, that by St. Paul's Words,
of Soul, Spirit, and Body, he intended no otherwise, than that their whole
Persons, Soul and Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And I desire my Reader to observe here, that which I think to be
a Failure in our learned and pious Author; this Text of St. Paul truly and
fully quoted, runs thus, The very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray
God, your whole Spirit, Soul and Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Mr. W. quotes it thus; I pray God, your Spirit, and
Body, be preserved blameless, etc. By which it appears, that he omits the Word
wholly, and suppresses the Word whole in the beginning of the Text, and then
cuts it short in the end, before he comes to the Words, Unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and choosing to supply them by an Et caetera. It seems, this
fallacious way of quoting Scripture, did not fall upon our Author by chance,
but had a set Purpose in them; and that he left out the Words wholly and whole,
in the Text, because they may seem to Confirm and Fortify my Exposition of it,
which is, that the Words, SPIRIT, SOUL, and BODY, do all intend no more but the
whole Persons of his Correspondents: And he cuts off before the Words, Unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he might avoid producing a very strong
evidence against the Opinion which he maintains: Because St. Paul does not pray
God to preserve their Souls or Spirits at the time of their Departure out of
this World, but to preserve their whole Persons, Souls and Bodies blameless,
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: As if he knew of no time of Reward or
Punishment, after this Life, unto the second Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. A
like Charitable Prayer to this, is delivered by the same Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.16.
where he says, The Lord give Mercy to the House of Onesyphorus, and the Lord
grant unto him, that he may find Mercy in that day, viz. The Day, or Time, of
our Lords Second Coming. And so Chap. 4 he says, My Departure out of this World
is at hand, and henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord Jesus, the Righteous Judge, shall give me at that day; and not
to me only, but to them also that love his Appearing. These last Words fixed the
Time, when such Crowns shall be distributed, viz. The Time of Christ's second
Appearing to the World. And because the Point thus fallen under Examination,
seems one of the most important, which is now in Question between us, I will
produce some further Evidence, strongly tending to maintain my Part of this
Question, and place our Lord himself in the Front of my other Witnesses. He
says, Luke 21.27. Then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a Cloud, with
Power, and great Glory; and when those things begin to come to pass, then look
up, and lift up your Heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. Joh. 14.2. Christ
says, In my Fathers House are many Mansions; I go to prepare a Place for you:
And if I go and prepare a Place for you, I will come again, and receive you to
my self, that where I am, you may be there also.

Here the Time, when Christ would receive his Chosen to himself; and to be
where he is, is declared to be the second time, with his coming to Judgment.
Joh. 5.27. God the Father has given Authority to the Son, to execute Judgment
also, because he is the Son of Man. Ver. 22. Christ says, The Father judges no
man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son. Ver. 28. Mervail not at this
[that the Father has given Authority of Judgment to the Son, because he is the
Son of Man]; for the time is coming, in which, all that are in the Graves shall
hear his Voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, to the
Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of
Damnation. Here Christ, because he is the Son of Man, is made by his Father the
Judge of Quick and Dead; all the World shall h^ar his Voice, and come to
Judgment before him; and if the Father judge no Man, but have committed all
Judgment to Christ, because he is [or as he is] the Son of Man, What room is
there left for intermediate Judgments, o^ the (...) going to God for Judgment,
at the Death of every (...) as is pretended from Solomon's transient (...)
returns to God that gave it, (...) of the Soul to God, (...) intermediate
judgment, (...) going before (...) and seeking to be united again to Him, as
Men have thought it drew its Original from him. Joh. 6. Ver. 39, 40, 44, 54. In
the Four Verses quoted, and marked out of this Chapter, our Lord declares both
to his own Disciples, and to the Jews, That whosoever does his Will, and keep his
Commandments, he will raise them up at the last day, [and give them Happiness
and great Rewards] without mention of an intermediate State, between Death and
that Resurrection. Luke 14.13, 14. Our Lord himself directs, When thou make a
Feast, call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, and the Blind, and thou shall be
blessed, for they cannot recompense thee; for thou shall be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the Just. And so Heb. 11.35. After a large Catalogue of the
Saints Sufferings, the Apostle says, That they would not accept of Deliverance,
because they expected a better Resurrection. The same Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.32.
says, If after the manner of Men I have fought with Beasts at Ephesus, What
advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
die, [And there is an end of us.] As if he had said, the Sufferings of
Christians for the Name of Christ, shall avail them nothing, if there be not a
Resurrection of the Dead; and I demand some one Text of Scripture to be
produced, which expresses, or with any Clearness, says, That any Man, or Men,
ever did, or suffered any thing, to the Intent, or with Expectation of having
their Soul or Souls carried into Abraham's Bosom, after the Death of their
Persons. To our Fore-quoted Texts, may be added the Testimony of St. Peter, 1
Pet. 4.13. Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are made Partakers of Christ's Sufferings,
that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding great
Joy. So Chap. 5.1. he says, I who am also a Partaker of the Glory which shall
be revealed, exhort you that are Elders of the Church, to do the Duties
faithfully; and when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown
of Glory, which sadeth not away. He does not say, Have Patience unto to the
Time of your Death, and then your Souls shall be transported into a place of
Bliss and Happiness. 1 John 2.28. That Apostle says, And now Little Children
abide in Him [Christ] that when He shall appear, we may have confidence, and
not be ashamed before Him at His coming. Jam. 5.7. That Apostle says, Be
patient therefore Brethren, unto the coming of our Lord; which he says draws
nigh, without mentioning of any Reward after Death, unto the coming of our Lord.

Jude 17. Says, The Lord comes with Ten Thousand of his Saints, to execute
Judgment upon all the Ungodly amongst Men. And thus I have quoted a great Cloud
of very knowing Witnesses, viz. our Lord Himself, and all his writing Apostles
which are come to our Hands, for the undeniable Proof of this Point, viz. That
the Faithful died, and suffered many great things, in assured Hope and
Expectation of great Rewards to be given, and Punishments to be inflicted, at
the Time of our Lord's second Appearing, of the Resurrection, and of the Last
Judgment, without finding any footsteps of the Souls Immortality, it is
Separate Subsistence from the Body, or any Rewards or Punishments to be
bestowed upon it, in the space of time intermediate between Death and our
Lord's Second Appearing. I now return to a further Consideration of our
Author's Quotations, who Page 14. goes on, and quotes 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are
bought with a Price, therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit,
which are God's. Which I think intends no more, than if it had been said,
Glorify God in your selves, or in your whole Persons, which are God's. Then he
quotes Mat. 10.28. Men that can kill the Body, are not able to kill the Soul.
We shall hear this Objection more fully offered in another Place, and thither I
refer my Reader for an Answer to it. He next quotes 1 Cor 7.1. where the Words
are, Dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
Flesh, and of the Spirit. Here, by the Terms Flesh and Spirit, the Apostle
intends Man's Sensual Af^^ctions and Appetites, by the Term Flesh, and the
Rational Mind or Faculty of Man, by the Term Spirit: And this Tropical sort, or
manner of expressing himself, I conceive to be very much used in this Apostles
Writings. Next he quotes Gal. 5.17. which says, The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the
other. This I think to be another of this Apostles Expressions, to be taken in
the same intent and meaning with the former, as a Conclusion to the Texts
before quoted. He says he could quote more Texts, to prove that wide
Difference, which he pretends to be between the Soul and Body. I say to this,
that if he knew of more Texts very pertinent to this Purpose, I think he ought
not to have spared his Pains in the Quotation of them: But says he, The Texts
which I have already quoted, are abundantly sufficient for the Proof of my
first Proposition. Which first Proposition I think to have been, That the Soul
was of a quite different nature from the Body, viz. That the Soul was an
Immortal Intelligent Spirit, which can subsist by it self, and in a state of
separation from the Body, and the Body it self, but a Compositum of Dust and
Ashes, into which it shall be again resolved, soon after the Death of the
Person. The Later Part of this Proposition, he neither has offered to Prove,
nor needed to do it, because it is a Truth granted on both sides; but his
labor has been to prove, That the Soul is a seperable intelligent Spirit, and
of a quite different Nature from the Body. But I think he has here given very
little Proof to that Purpose, so far from being abundantly sufficient, as that
I think it scarce touches upon the Verges of his intended Proposition; but how
sufficiently he has thereof acquitted himself, I do freely and willingly leave
to the Judgment of such Persons, as may happen to peruse our Writings.

P. 15. Mr. W. delivers his second Proposition, which he says is this, That the
Soul and Body are not only Two in number, but that they are two Beings of a
very different Nature. His second Proposition seems to be so near of kin to his
first, that the Difference between them is not very evident; and the Proof
which he gives of this second Proposition, seems to be coincident, with the
Proofs which he gave of the former; for he says here, That the Soul was
immediately created by God. Which Supposal he had before laid down as a Proof
of his first Proposition; and I have given it before such an Answer, as
satisfies my own Understanding: And therefore I shall need to say no more of it
here, but that it passes with me for an unsound and fallacious Opinion; whence
I think fit to reject, without further Examination, all the Inferences and
Arguments, which he may pretend to draw from so unweak and unsound a
Supposition. He quotes for a Proof of it, Genesis 2.7. which was before examined,
and in this place I shall say no more of it. He says further, The Body and all
its Parts, are but lifeless, senseless things, in themselves: And herein I
grant he says true; and so are the Three Elements of Fire, Air, and Water, and
yet the two former are of so Active a Nature, that they are always in Motion,
like those Particles which we call Motes in the Sun; and therefore may justly
have the Reputation of self-moving Principles: And Water has a propensity to
Motion, so natural, that give it but a declivity, and it can have no rest till
it come to a place so even, as it may stand in an Equilibrium, free from the
Impulse of any declination whatsoever. It seems then, that upon rinding and
kindling the pullulent steams of Old Adam's Blood and Humors (ready for that
purpose) that Breath which God then breathed into his Nostrils, became the
Breath of Life to him, by kindling the Flame of Life, in those Steams of his
Blood and Humors, which God had made ready for that Operation; and this Flame,
or glowing of the Blood, was immediately caught and disperss'd into the Vital,
and all other Parts of the Body, putting them all in Motion and Attendency, to
perform all those Operations, for which God had made them, and we may conceive,
were intended to be produced in the Person then Created, and in all other
Persons which should after be Generated by Him: Whence it seems, that what is
called the Breath of Life to Adam, the same Breath, or ambient Air, became the
Breath of Life to all Posterity: For by this Medium, sucked in by the Lungs,
the Flame of Life first kindled in the Body, is fanned, and kept glowing in the
Blood and Humors thereof. And thus the Flame of Life must be continually
fanned, maintained, and purified by the Breath; and by the Vigor and Activity
of this Inflammation, the Blood and Humors are kept in perpetual Motion, and
in a durable and endless Circulation, so long as the Parts of the Body are able
to endure the Activity of such Motion; and until by Age, or Decay of some of
the Bodily Parts, Corruption, or Stagnation of the Blood; or by some Accident,
this Flame of Life happen to be totally extinguished throughout every Part and
Member of the Body; and such total Extinguishment of the Vital Flame, I esteem
to be the Death of the Person. Finding, and believing, That the Breath of Man
and Beast is so necessary in them, for maintaining the Flame of Life, that by a
short stoppage of the same, by a Halter, a Bow-string, a piece of Phlegm, or by
a Fly sticking in ones Throat, stopping the Mouth and Nostrils with a Cloth (as
Hazael served his Master Benhadab) or any like Accidents, both Man and Beast
soon die; and therefore such Means are often used for doing Execution upon
them; and the Reason thereof seems to be the Suffocation and Stifeling of this
Vital Flame, which can no longer by Natural Means be maintained, without the
fanning of this Breath of Life, drawn from the ambient Air, which passing
through the Lungs, is thence communicated to all the Entrails of the Body.

And from these Grounds I Argue, That tho the Blood and Humors be but Matter,
and unintelligent in themelves, as well as the Flesh, Bones, and other gross
Parts of he Body, yet God's great Wisdom has so framed the Microcosm, or
Person, and so organized the Bodies of them, as that every Part is fitted and
ready for those Acts, for which they were intended; and these Organs rightly
moved and acted, by the Spirits inflamed, and Humors of the Body, do in a
right Mixture one with another, and by the working of such Spirits among and
upon the Organs, produce or effect thelocal Motions, Senses, and such
Intelligence as pertain to Men and Beasts, and are produced, acted, and
performed, in the several Species of them, so long as those Spirits and Humors
are maintained in the Body, by a due Refection and Nourishment; and so long as
this Vital Flame continues to be fanned by the due Respirations both of Man and
Beast. And this I give for an Answer to the second Proof of his second
Proposition, concerning the vast Diversity, as he calls it, of the Nature of
the Soul from that of the Body.

Mr. W. goes on to a Third Proof of this Diversity, and says, The Body is
often tired, and spent, and indisposed to Action, when at the same time the
Soul has a Will, and is bent to Action. Which I thus Paraphrase, The Man, his
Mind, Affections, or Will, may be strongly bent to Action, when his Bodily
Members may be very weary, and his Spirits spent: And thus expressed, I grant,
and know that what he says may be true, viz. That the Spirits working in his
Brain, and moving his Affections and Will, may continue their Working and
Vigor* in that Part, longer than in the outward, and more rem^t Parts of the
Body. And this is that which our Lord* I think, intended, when he said, The
Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak.

P. 16. Mr. W. goes on and says, The Body is very frequently (...) a very sick,
weak, languishing Condition, when the (...) as good a plight, and sometimes
better, than when the (...) most healthy and strong; surely if their Natures
did not v^^^ly differ, they would be sick and well together. Here I prosess to
differ from our Author in a Point of Fact. He says, The Soul and Body are not
sick and well together: Whereas I profess to think, they are sick and well
together, and that they have both one common Sense, of Hearing, Seeing,
Smelling, Tasting, Feeling, and that they both together, or the Person, has
the same Perception, Fancy, Judgment, Will, and Memory; and they both have, or
(which is the same thing) the Person has the same Affections, or Passions of
Ambition, Covetousness, Lust, Wrath and Fear. These all are naturally ingrafted
in the Person, and are natural Incidents to the Compositum of Soul and Body;
and that this Union is the most amicable, friendly, and pleasing, that Men know
to be enjoyed in our Earthly World; and that the Body is so far from being a
Prison, or Cage for the Soul, that there is no other Place in the World,
wherein the Soul delights, or wherein it can subsist, but in the Body; nor is
there a Separation, which we know in the Earthly World, that is more grievous
or afflictive, than the Separation of Soul and Body is commonly found to be to
the Person, who is a Compositum of them both. Upon which Considerations I stand
inclined to Affirm, That the Person who is a Compositum of Soul and Body, and
those his Two Constituent Parts, are generated together, are born, live, and
grow together; are sick, and well together; and so are pleased, and displeased,
and love, and hate together; are joyful, sorrowful, and fearful together; are
honored, and shamed together; they decline, and decay together; and yet the
Out-ward Part somewhat sooner and faster than the Inward, and so they grow
impotent, and helpless together, that they die together; and that lastly, they
shall rise together, in that Universal Resurrection, which shall be effected at
the second Appearing of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, when he shall come to Judge the
World.

Mr. W. here quotes 3 John 2. as serving to prove his Purpose, where St. John
says to Gains, I wish above all things, that thou may prosper, and be in
health, even as thy Soul prospers. It is a common Practice for Men in their
Letters to wish Health and Prosperity to their Correspondents, and this the
Apostle practices in this Text, and the Words Even as thy soul prospers, seem
to intend, Even as Gains himself prospers, in the Faith and Profession of the
Gospel.

He quotes again for his Purpose, Romans 7.23. where St. Paul says, I see another
Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind. Which Text I conceive
intends no more, than the War which the Sensual Affections and Passions make
against the Opinions and Dictates of the Rational Faculty, or Mind of the Man,
which is visibly known and perceived to continue in the Person, from the Cradle
to the Grave; and prove no more a War betwixt the Soul and the Body, than Love
and Hatred, Sorrow and Joy, or any other contrary Affections of the Man, may
do. He quotes further for his Purpose, 1 Pet. 2.11. Abstain from fleshly Lusts,
which war against the Soul: Here the Word Soul, seems to intend the Man
himself, or the Rational Faculty, or Mind, of the Person. Then he concludes,
That the Soul and Body, as they are Two Beings, distinct in Number, so are they
in Nature. And thereupon I say, how well he has proved, what he says he has
proved, shall be left to the Readers of our Books to Judge.

His Third Proposition Affirms, That the Soul is a Being seperable from the
Body, which he says, he intends to prove; and to that Purpose, P. 17. he quotes
2 Cor. 5.1. where he says, St. Paul calls our Bodies, our Earthly House; which
the Text does not expressly do, but says, We know, that if our Earthly House of
this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, a House not made
with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. I do not here perceive a necessity of
taking these Words, Our Earthly House of this Tabernacle, to signify our
Bodies, but find as much, or more Reason to conceive, that by those Words our
Apostle did intend the whole Fabric of the Earth; in which, or upon which, the
Men of that Age then lived, and we still do live: We find sufficient Scripture
Testimony, to prove, That our Earthly House of this Tabernacle, shall in the
end be dissolved; and for the shortning of the time, when this shall be done,
and the speedy coming of our Lord to Judgment, was a great Subject of the
Saints Prayers at that Time; and I think diverse good Men of that Time, held
Opinion, That possibly they might live to the second coming of our Lord, and
however did not expect, that He should have so long delayed His Coming, as we
find by Experience He has done, if we take Our Earthly House of this
Tabernacle, to signify the Earth upon which we live, that seems to Agree well
with the following Words, We have a Building of God, not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens. 2 Pet. 3.7. The Heavens and the Earth, which are now,
are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment, and
Perdition of ungodly Men; and then the Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the
Works that are therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then that all these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness. He does not say, If you expect your separate Souls
going to Heaven, you must live after that manner; but if you expect the fiery
Dissolution of that Earth, upon which ye now live, you have great reason to act
as he there directs. Nevertheless, we, according to his Promise, look for a new
Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. Wherefore (Beloved)
seeing ye look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in
peace, without spot, and blameless. Thus he says, they must practice a Holy
Life, in consideration and expectation of those things, which were not to
happen till Christ's second Appearing, but then were expected and hoped for by
the Saints, and Church of those Times: And of these New Heavens and Earth, St.
Paul seems to speak, when he says, We have a Building of God, a House, not made
with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. Such a House as the Hands of Men cannot
make, the Pattern whereof is now in Heaven, and shall descend hither to be our
Habitation at our Lord's second Appearing: And these are the things which he
says are not seen, and yet are Eternal; but when that Change shall happen,
they shall be both Visible and Eternal: And for this we groan earnestly,
desiring to be clothed upon with this House of ours which is from Heaven, Ver.
4. We that are in this Tabernacle [of the Earth upon which we live] do groan,
being burdened, not for that we would be uncloathed, [or not desiring that our
Persons should be dissolved by Death] but clothed upon, that Mortality might
be swallowed up of Life. This shows that he did not desire Death, in hope of
his Souls immediate going to Heaven, but rather he longed for Christ's second
Appearing, when all these things shall be performed; and those which at that
time are found alive upon Earth, shall not die, but be changed in a Moment, or
twinkling of an eye, and so clothed with their Houses which are from Heaven,
and by that means, their mortal Bodies shall put on Immortality, fulfilling our
Apostles Words in this Text, Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life: And this
Change seems to be the clothing, upon which he both intended and desired; and
it was a Practice of the Church of those Times, as before is said, to pray for
the speedy Coming of our Lord Jesus, and Consummation of the Mysteries of the
Gospel. And thus I conceive, I have better Expounded our Apostles Text, and
given a truer Meaning thereof, than Mr. W. will be found to have done, and
conclude thereupon, That this Text can give but a feeble Support to the Opinion
of the Souls separate Subsistence.

P. 18. He further quotes Ver. 6.7. Whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord, and walk by Faith, not by sight; and therefore we are
willing rather to be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord. The
Meaning of which may be, that we cannot be present with the Lord in our Fleshly
Bodies, which are subject to Corruption, whilst they continue in their Natural
State; and therefore he desires the Change, or Translation of such Earthly
Bodies, into that of Glorious, or Heavenly Bodies, which shall be done when we
are clothed upon with our House, or Houses, which are from Heaven, by changing
our Earthly Bodies into Heavenly; which shall be performed to the Saints that
live upon Earth, at the Time of our Lord's second Coming; and though they be
absent from the Lord in their Earthly Bodies, yet they shall then be present
with Him in their Heavenly ones. And our Apostle proceeding, says, Ver. 9. We
labor, that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of Him: And then
closes his Discourse, Ver. 10. with that which seems to be the Reason of all
his Desire and Endeavor, viz. Because We must all appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his [Earthly]
Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Which intends,
the Last and General Judgment, without any Pretense or Apprehension, that an
Intermediate Judgment, is at all meant or considered in that Expression. Mr. W.
quotes further, 2 Pet. 1.13. I think it meet, so long as I am in this
Tabernacle, to stir you up, knowing that shortly I must put off this
Tabernacle, viz. I will endeavor, that after my Departure, etc. It seems that
Peter, by the Term Tabernacle, did intend his own Fleshly Body, which with
Propriety enough, may signify that Humane Body, which is the Receptacle and
Tabernacle of Life to every Man: And Death is commonly amongst us called a
Departure out of this World, of such Persons, as lately before were living
Members of it; and therefore I do not perceive what Force there is in these
Texts, of Proving the Soul's Separate Subsistence: Nor do I perceive, that Mr.
W. lays any proving Weight upon the Sense of the Texts, as they are here
quoted, but endeavors rather to enforce a Meaning from the Greek Words, (...),
which he says, Signifies, After my going out, viz. Out of my Tabernacle;
although our Translators have rendered it After my Departure. Which I think to
be a Translation, which he cannot mend; and if so they had rendered it, by,
After my going out, I should have sooner have taken it to signify, An
Extinguishment of the Vital Flame in his Body, than the Departure of an
Intelligent Substantial Soul out of it: And therefore I think, the Enforcement
of this Argument, which he would derive from the Word, (...) is but trifling.

P. 19 He Appeals to all Men's Judgments, that are not prejudicate, whether the
Apostles do not by the quoted Texts, intend, That Men's Souls are of such a
Nature, as can subsist in a State of Separation from their Bodies. I doubt not,
but if I, or any other Man, shall declare our selves to think other ways; he
will Reply we are Prejudicate, and that is all the Fruit that can be expected
of such a needless Appeal.

He says further, If these Apostles had believed the Soul and Body to die
together, they would never have used such ensnaring Metaphorical Expressions as
these, that do so clearly hold forth a Seperability of the one from the other.
To this I Reply, That if at all they hold forth this Opinion, it is in a
Dark-Lanthorn, with the Light Side toward him, and the Dark toward me: But I
rather conceive, that if they had known the Being of a Substantial,
Intelligent, Seperately Subsisting Soul in Man; and that those of the good,
went to Heaven presently after the Death of the Person; they would probably and
even certainly have preached, and declared the same: And we should have found
it so plainly and clearly delivered in some of their Writings, which are come
to our hands; and the not finding it so delivered in any of their Writings,
gives us great cause to doubt the Truth of that Opinion.

Mr. W. for a further Proof of his Opinion, quotes 2 Cor. 12.1. where that
Apostle relates a Trance or Vision, which he had, and wherein he could not tell
whether he was in the Body, or out of the Body; and thereupon he quotes the
Assembly of Divines, which sat in the Rump-Parliament Time; and that they say
the Apostle doubted, whether God framed the Representation of these Heavenly
things in his Soul, in a State of Union with the Body, or whether God Separated
the Soul from the Body, and transported it into Heaven: And thereupon, P. 20.
Mr. W. says, That many Philosophers, and some Divines, affirm, That Paul 's
Rational Soul might be separated from the Body, and yet Paul not dead;
professing himself partly to be of the same Opinion: And if by being out of the
Body, the Apostle does not mean such a Separation, he would be told what is
meant by those Words, Being out of the Body. He was Conscious to himself of a
common, and I think a sufficient Answer thereunto given, viz. That St. Paul was
wrapped in a Trance or Ecstasy of his Mind, wherein those things which he saw and
heard, were so lively represented to his Perceptive Faculties, and so thoroughly
imprinted upon his Memory, as they could not be more perfectly perceived, or
better remembered, if he had truly perceived them by the Use of his Bodily
Organs, so as he could not certainly know, whether he was really wrapped into
Heaven in his whole Person, or whether the same was only a Trance and Rapture
of his Mind. Mr. W. intending to prevent this Answer, says, It is not enough
for Men to offer that Answer to his Question. And more to entangle the Matter,
he propounds a New Question, demanding, If it were an Ecstasy, what was the
Nature of that Ecstasy? I Reply, I pretend not to be able to tell him the
Nature of any Ecstasy, Trance, or Vision, which may happen to Men; because I
suppose them to be super-humane Actions, inexplicable from the known or common
Principles of Humane Nature: And therefore, without farther Answer to his
Question, about the Nature of an Ex^asie, I profess to Believe, that the Answer
before given, viz. That St. Paul was in a Trance at that time, is enough,
notwithstanding his saying, That it is not enough; and that it will pass for a
good Answer and Solution of his first Question, upon which all the rest
depends. I do not pretend to make such Interpretations of difficult Scriptures,
as are likely to satisfy all Perusers, but count it enough, if thereupon I can
satisfy my own Understanding: As to my best Judgment, I have done upon this
Text, without being afraid of Men's Censures, of losing the Meaning of such a
Dark Scripture, instead of Interpreting it. Mr. W. proceeds to say, Till I hear
a better Sense given of this Text of St. Paul, than I have here given of it, I
will conclude from hence, that the Apostle Paul does imply, that his Soul, and
so all other Men's Souls, are, whilst in the Body, of such a nature as may be
separated from the Body. To this I Reply, Our Author has Power to take this
Text of St. Paul, in what Sense he pleases, or thinks most reasonable, as all
other Readers may do, and may thence Infer, and Conclude, as their Judgments,
or Affections, or Prepossessions, shall persuade them: But I profess my self to
conceive, they build upon sandy Ground, who draw that Inference from the
Relation of St. Paul's Trance, or any other Text quoted to prove Mr. W's Third
Proposition, That the Soul can subsist in a State of Separation from the Body;
Because I judge the Evidences by me produced, and my Constructions upon his
Texts, do more clearly prove the contrary.

Mr. W's Fourth Proposition is, that the Scriptures affirm, That when the Body
dies, the Soul is actually separated from it. In Proof of which, he quotes
Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit
shall return to God that gave it. Upon which he says, It is most clear, that by
Dust, is here meant the Body; and by Spirit, the Soul of Life in Man. In which
Construction I do not much differ from him, but do easily Agree, That by Dust
here, is meant the Body; and that by Spirit, is intended the Spirit of Life in
Man: And thereupon I Observe, That these Words of Solomon, are a single and
transient Expression, concerning a Subject not mentioned in the rest of the
Chapter, either before or after, and without a particular Occasion given, or
offered, to speak of the State of Souls after Death; and seems to have
something of a Chance in the delivery of it: And as I find no Introduction to
this Expression, nor Occasion given to speak of a Rational or Intelligent Soul
in Man; so I do not perceive, that they do either mention, or intend, the
Spirit of Man to be such a Soul, as Mr. W. pretends it to be. Solomon, was here
treating concerning the Decays of Man's Life, and recounts by what degrees,
Death makes its Approaches, till at last it prevails over the Person, and then
the Dust returns to the Earth, as it was, and the Spirit returns to God who
gave it. And the Question upon this Text seems to be, what is meant by the Term
of the Spirit, and what is meant of its Return to God who gave it. Our Author
says, That by the Spirit is intended the Soul of Life. And I think, I differ
not far from him, when I say, That by the Word Spirit, is intended the Spirit
of Life: We know that Solomon had a careful Education, under a pious Father,
and was endued with a strong Inclination to search out the Natures of Things;
and thence we may certainly Conclude, that he had carefully perused, the
Patriarchal Book of Genesis, and the other Mosaical Writings, and there had
found written, Genesis 9.4. Flesh with the Life thereof, which is the Blood
thereof, shall ye not eat; and surely the Blood of their Lives will I require,
at the hand of every Beast will I require it; and at the hand of Man, at the
hand of every Man's Brother, will I require the Life of Man: Whosoever sheddeth
Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed, for in the Image of God made he
Man. Also Deuteronomy. 12.23. Thou may kill of thy Herd, and of thy Flock, in any
of thy Gates, only be sure that thou eat not the Blood; for the Blood is the
Life, and thou may not eat the Life with the Flesh. And Moses says, cause
that was the Life of the Creature. There has before been quoted God's
breathing the Breath of Life into Adam's Nostrils; and the breathing the Breath
of Life into Adam's Nostrils; and the breathing a like Breath into the Persons
raised out of Ezekiel's dry Bones, which caused Life in them all. Genesis 6.7. God
says, I will destroy Man whom I have created, from the face of the Ear^h both
man and beast. Chap. 7.22. All in whose nostrils was the breath of life, upon
the dry land, dyed in the flood, [both Man and Beast were suffocated, and
drowned in the Waters of the Flood, by stopping those Passages, through which
this Breath of Life should other ways have entered.] Dan 5 23. Thou have
praised the gods of silver and gold, but the God, in whose hand thy breath is,
thou have not glorified. Intending God in whose hand thy Life is; such a Life,
as through the Power of God, is produced, and maintained by Breath and
Breathing. These Quotations seem to prove, that the Spirit of Life in Man, is a
Compositum of Parts, as well as his Body, and that the Composition of such
Spirit of Life required, is, of Blood, and Breath: The Blood and Humors of
their Bodies and their Spirits, are absolutely necessary for the Life of Man
and Beast, by maintaining and nourishing, the glowing, and yet lambent Flame of
Life, which acts their Organical Bodies, and causes a continual Circulation of
their Blood to that Purpose: and no less necessary for the producing and
maintaining of Life, is that Breath, which God first breathed into Adam, and
since has communicated, and continued to all his Posterity, which have been
procreated from that Time to this. There passes a Principle of Life in Semine,
which by Fimentation, Fermentation, and Coagulation, in loco idoneo, arrives in
its appointed time to a Vegetation, and perhaps lives without Breath, or
Breathing, or with very little Assistance thereof, until Nature drive it forth
into the open Air; where after it has once taken Breath, it can by no means be
kept alive, for many Moments, without the requisite Refreshment of Respiration,
which perpetually must fan the Flame of Life, for maintaining the same, in a
State of Purity, Vigor, and Activity. And thus the Spirit of Life in Man and
Beast, appears to be a Compositum of the Breath of Life, and the Blood of our
Lives acting by inflamed Spirits of the Blood, the whole Motion, and Power of
the Body, and i^s Organs, as well in Motions local, as in the sensitive,
rational, and affective Operations, and Powers of the Person: So as these Two
Principles of Breath and Blood, (Material and Unintelligent, though they be) seem
to effect and produce in the Creature, both Life it self, and all the Powers
and Faculties thereunto belonging. And this sort of Spirit in Composito, is all
the Spirit of Life, which yet I am able to perceive to be in Man or Beast; and
this causes me to apprehend it must be Mortal: And that as it was procreated
and born with the Body, so it must cease at death with the Being of the Person,
and be therewith raised again at the General Resurrection of the Dead.
Notwithstanding the Evidence which I have produced, for the maintaining this
Opinion, I rest assured, my Opposers will maintain, That there must be another
sort of Soul or Spirit in Man, for producing and managing, his super-excellent
Faculties of Intellect and Memory, because they cannot perceive, or understand,
the Quomodo, or Manner how, this Material Soul, compounded of Breath, Blood,
and the Spirits of it, acted by the Circulation thereof, can possibly produce
the Effects and Operations last specified.

I do not perceive, that they very much boggle at the Opinion, That these
Ingredients may possibly produce, Life, Motion, sensitive Faculties, and
Affections; because they cannot with any good Face of Reason: and therefore do
not deny, That by such a Material Compounded Spirit of Life, the Brutes, and
all their Powers, are daily, and certainly enlivened, acted, supplied, and
supported, And I think they are not well able to deny, That the Spirit of Life
by me propounded, is the Causa sine qua non, of Intellect, Memory, and
whatsoever other Supreme Faculties there are found, in the Constitution or
Nature of the Humane Person. And thererfore I will not say much in the Proof
thereof, which our daily Experience sufficiently demonstrates; our Sense of
Seeing often proving to us, that Men and Beasts, by hanging, strangling,
drowning, or by other Suffocations, or Stoppings of their Breath, are soon
delivered over to the Dominion of Death; and thereby the Words of David are
verified, When thou take away their Breath, they die. And therewith shall be
finished my present Argument: Whence I go on to enquire after Solomon's Meaning
in the Words of this Text, The Spirit returns to God who gave it.

I dare not, and thefore I do not Affirm, That Solomon intended this sort of
Spirit, which I have described, to be truly that Spirit, which he says Returns
to God who gave it; and with intent to give a Reasonable Account thereof, I
think fit to Premise, that there are Two other Sorts of Souls or Spirits,
commonly taken notice of in the Learned World. The First of which, and the most
taken notice of, is that Sort Soul, which is often spoken of, and described by
Mr. W. and his Party; and which they say, is an entire, complete, intelligent
Spirit, acting the Organical Body whilst it therein remains, and specially the
Kepheline Organs thereof; producing eminently therein, the high Faculties of,
Perceiving, Understanding, Judgment, Will, and Memory; and they s^y, that after
the Departure of this Soul from the Person, who thereby is dissolved, it can
subsi^t by it self, in a Separate State, and therein, move it self, and have
full Enjoyment of the forenamed Powers of Reasoning, Acting, and Thinking; and
that very soon after its Separation from the Body, it goes to God, or before
His Tribunal, to receive his Intermediate Judgment, upon the Acts done by the
Person in his Life Time; and that pursuant to the Sentence therein given, such
Souls are either accepted into Heaven, and Happiness, or that they are cast
down to Hell, to be there made Partakers of Eternal Sufferings; and that they
have Sense, and Perception enough, to take a full Taste of these great
Differences: To which the Romish Church Annexes, That besides the Souls that go
to these Two Places, there are other Souls, which are sent, some to Limbus's,
Paterum aut Puerorum; other to Paradise or Abraham's Bosom; and others (of
which they think there are a great Number) into the scorching Flames of a
Purgatorial Fire where they must undergo great, yet Temporal Sufferings, for
expiating the Crimes of their Dead Persons, and Purging away that Dross which
they had contracted in the Bodies of their Persons upon Earth.

The Second sort of Soul, whereof notice is taken by the Learned, is supposed
to have a different Original, rising from an Opinion very ancient in the World,
which was, That the whole World it self was one immense Living Creature, or
Machine, animated or acted by one universal Soul, Spirit, or Being; which the
old Philosophers termed, some of them the Soul of the World, and by others it
was called the Spirit of Nature, which they so both described, as they appeared
to intend an universal or infinite Spirit; from whence, or from whom, all the
Life and Motion found in the World was derived. Some of those Learned said,
That all the Life of Grasses, Flowers, and Plants, was derived from that Spirit
or Being; and that upon their Dying, that Vegitable Spirit which before was in
them, returned again to the Spirit of Nature, from whence it first proceeded.
Others went not so deep, but contented themselves to say, That the Spirit of
Life in all those Creatures which had spontaneous Motion proceeded from this
Soul of the World, or that universal Spirit or Being, which Animated or Acted
the same; and they conceived, that when such Creatures were duly fitted for
the receipt of Life, this universally knowing Spirit, was moved by a Natural
Congruity in the thing, to emit from it self such Sparks and Particles, as were
parts of it is own Being, for the communicating and giving such a Spirit of Life
to those Creatures, as their Natures required and that when such Living
Creatures Dyed, those Sparks or Parcels of the Spirit of Life, which they had
before received, returned immediately back to the universal Spirit of the
World; as to the Fountain from whence they issued; or as to that Totum, of
which themselves were but the small Sparks or Particles; to which they were
again joined, and were received into it, as true and real Parts and Particles
of the same. This apprehension has been of a long continuance in the World,
coming down from the Discourses of Ancient Philosophers, to the time of the
Divine Plato, by whom it was Cultivated and Confirmed; so as all his Doctrines
and Writings seem to have reference thereunto, and taste very strongly of that
Opinion, and all his Scholars were much addicted thereunto, even down to latter
times; and the same Conception seems to have a Being and Substance in the Minds
of some learned Persons, until this time. My Discourse concerning this sort of
Spirit, has been delivered with intent to discover and evince, That Solomon's
Spirit returning to God who gave it, was spoken and meant by him concerning
this last sort of Spirit, and I intend to recite some Arguments for the proving
of this Construction. First I Argue from the words or terms of the Text it
self, and say, That it Solomon intended such a Soul as Mr. W. has described,
the Text it self seems not to be properly worded; because I think nothing can
be properly said to return to another thing, except it had been a part, or
concomitant of that other thing before; but Mr. W.'s sort of Soul, seems never
to have been a part or concomitant of God before its being put into the Body,
for the enlivening and acting of the Person; I do not therefore well perceive,
how such a ^oul can be properly said to return to God: but the Expression
therereunto properly belonging, should have been worded, The Spirit goes to, or
goes before God, with expectation to receive his Judgment and Sentence,
according to the demeanor of its Person upon Earth; and I do not perceive how
this Souls going to God for Judgment, can be properly called a return to God
who gave it. Secondly, I Argue, I find not so much as one Text in Scripture,
which says, the Souls of dying Persons go presently to God for Judgment, nor
any Text from whence this Opinion may be drawn, by a rational Inference; and
that which makes nearest approaches to it of any that I know, is the Parable of
Dives, where it is said, the Beggar died and was carried by Angels into
Abraham's Bosom. I know my Opposers will think it needless to ask them, what is
intended by the words, The Beggar was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
Bosom; and doubt not but they will soon make a bold Answer: It neither was, nor
could be the Beggar himself, that was so carried in his whole Person, Body and
Soul, into Abraham's Bosom; and yet the Words of the Text, seem to import, that
his whole Person, Soul and Body was carried thither: But if we shall grant
their gloss upon this Text to be true, that his Soul only was carried by Angels
into Abraham's Bosom, we may draw these inferences from that Relation, either
that his Soul was so ignorant, as it knew not how to find a way to that
Habitation, or else was so weak and impotent, as it was not able to pass
thither, without the Support and Ministry of Angels. How then can we conceive,
that such a Soul as this, should make its return to God presently upon the
Death of its Person, without mention of any other Assistance to be given it? We
hear nothing of Dives in the Parable, but that being in Hell, he lift up his
Eyes and saw Lazarus in another place, without mention of the means by which he
came there; and if we shall follow the common Conjecture, that as Lazarus was
carried to one place by Angels, so Dives was hurried to the other by Devils; it
will appear very unlikely, that Mr. W.'s sort of Soul, is able to make its way,
and return to God at its Pleasure: And here we Read the Begger's Soul was
carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom without mention of its being carried or
returning to God at all; whence it seems probable, that when Solomon speaks of
the Souls returning to God, he does not intend such a Soul as Mr. W. has
described, but rather such a Spirit as had first been a part o^ parcel of the
spirit of Nature, or of God, sent out for the enlivening and acting of a
particular Person, upon whose Death that Spark or Parcel of the Deity returns
with a strong inclination to God who sent it out from himself, for the
enlivening and acting of that particular Body, and joined it self again to its
Totum, as Water presently incorporates with Water, and the particles of Air,
neither will, nor can be separated from the incorporating one of them with an
other.

Thirdly, I Argue, That if Solomon had intended by the Words, Returns to God
who gave it, a going of the Soul to God, or before God, for receiving the Doom
of his intermediate Judgment, it seems a matter of such great Moment, as
required a more full Discourse upon the same, and giving us more Light in it,
than his very few words there do afford us. And however, it is very probable,
that he would not have immediately subjoyned to his Discourse, which intimates
an intermediate Judgment, a Declaration and Description of the General
Judgment, for that would have been playing Judgment upon Judgment, which must
needs have past for false Heraldry. We find in this Chapter, that as soon as
Solomon had writ the Words, The Spirit returns to God who gave it, he ceases to
speak any further concerning the State of Man after Death, till he come to the
14th, or last verse of the Chapter, where he says as a conclusion of his whole
matter, Fear God and keep his Commandments, for God will bring every work into
Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. I
think it not reasonable to conjecture, that Solomon by his Returning of the
Spirit to God who gave it, did intend such a returning to God, to be a going to
him, or before him, for an intermediate Judgment; for that if he had so
intended, he would not have immediately have mentioned and related the
Certainty and Effect of the General Judgment, as in this we see plainly he has
done: and thus I leave Solomon's Words, and the descant upon them, to the
further Consideration and Judgment of the Intelligent Reader.

Mr. W. goes on to quote Eccl. 3 20. Where he says Solomon affirms, that the
Spirit of a Man goes upward when he dies, adding that Solomon brings it in
with an Intrrogation, Who knows? Not as if he doubted it, for he cannot be
said to doubt it, since he delivered it most positively in the other verse,
intending as I conceive the Text last before quoted out of his 12th Chapter
Hereupon I again declare, I am no way satisfied with the manner used by our
Author in his Quotations of Scripture. The Text which in this place he quotes,
says thus, Who knows the Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the Spirit of
the Beast that goes downward to the Earth? Which to my understanding has the
same signification, as if he had said, Who knows the certain Truth of this
Opinion, That the Spirit of Man goes upward, and the Spirit of the Beast goes
downward to the Earth? Or who knows whether this difference between the Spirits
of Men and Beasts be real and true or not? And further it seems to me, that
this Interrogation is Pregnant with a Negative, and seems to have the same
sense, as if had said, No Man certainly knows whether there be such a
difference between the Spirits of Men and Beasts or not. Also this
Interrogation seems to be the Product of a mature Deliberation, had and made by
Solomon, upon this point: for in the foregoing verses, he had compared the
Natures of Men and Beasts together, and plainly affirms, That Men may see that
they themselves are Beasts, [and as to their Natural State may be compared to
the Beasts that perish.] One thing befalls both Beasts and Men, For as the one
dies, so dies the other; yea they have all one Breath; so that a Man has no
preminence above a Beast, all go to one place; for all are of the dust, and all
turn to dust again. And then concludes his Speculation with the quoted Text,
viz. Who knows the Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the Spirit of the
Beast that goes downwards to the Earth? Mr. W. says, that notwithstanding this
Intrrogation, Solomon affirms, That the Spirit of Man goes upwards when he
Dies; whereas I hold it plain to every Reader, that Solomon does not affirm
so. Our Author replies, He can prove that Solomon does affirm so; for that in
the Text before quoted out of his 12th, Chap. The Spirit [of Man returns to God
who gave it:] Which must be taken in the same Sense* as if he had said, it goes
upwards. And hereunto I Answer, That there are Eight Chapters between his Third
and Twelfth; and Solomon might well enough be in doubt, when he writ his Third
Chapter, and yet be resolved thereupon, before he writ his last Chapter; or
perhaps his Text quoted out of that Chapter, might be Transiently or Cursorily
delivered, without so much deliberation, upon the difficulty of this Point, as
that which he had before used, in his Third Chapter, and the Conclusion now
quoted of that Consideration; and it seems somewhat clear to me, that there is
a great difference between these two Texts of Solomon's: The first after a
deliberate Consideration of the Point, declares plainly, that he doubted
therein; and the last, without any deliberate Consideration (which appears in
the Text) pronounces transiently, and in a very view words; The Spirit returns
to God who gave it. And whether of these two Texts Men will believe; also, in
what manner, and in what sense they think it requisite to believe them, I leave
to be further determined by my Perusers.

P. 22. Mr. W. for further Proof of this Point, quotes 1 Kings 17.17. Which in
our Translation runs thus, The Son of the Woman. the Mistress of the House,
[where Elijah had been well entertained] fell sick, and his sickness was so
sore, that there was no Breath left in him. Verse 21, 22. Elijah cried unto the
Lord, and said, I pray thee let this Child's Soul come into him again; and the
Soul of the Child came into him again, and he revived. Mr. W. Says, the same
Hebrew Word is used in this place, which is used in Genesis 2.7. For the Breath of
Life, and he Observes, That our Translators have rendered it in both those
places, by the term of Breath; and he tells us, that Buxtorf tells him, that
this Hebrew Word signifies the Soul* and always the Soul of a Man, never tha^
of a Beast; and says, that the Hebrews understand thereby, the Rational
Immortal Soul of Man; by which Word, they used in a way of Reverence to Swear.
Hereupon I observe, That if the Jews believed, this Term signified the Soul of
Man did Swear by it, they were in a gross Error, as I doubt Buxtorf was, when
he expressed himself to think there was a Rational Immortal Soul in Man. Then
Mr. W. says, He wonders our Translators should in this Text, and that of Genesis
so obscure this Word, in rendering it by the Word Breath, of so Dark and
Ambiguous a Signification; but in this Censure, I think Mr. W. is mistaken,
because I conceive the signification of the Word Breath, in English, is as
little ambiguous or doubtful, as those of any other ordinary Words, which are
commonly used amongst us. Then he lays blame upon our Translators of the
Scriptures, for not having well performed their Duty, i. e. because they have
not Translated them in such a manner as would better have served his purpose.
He does not pretend from his own Knowledge, or that of Buxtorf, that the Hebrew
Word here quoted, does not sometimes signify Breath, as well as Spirit or
Soul; and if the Word have such a double Signification, as sometimes to
signify Breath, and sometimes Spirit, as the Word (...) has in the Greek
Tongue, then our Translators it seems have acted very impartially, for that in
verse 17. they have rendered this Hebrew Word by the Term Breath, as they have
done Genesis 2.7. And in verse 21.22. of Kings, they have rendered this Hebrew Word
by the Term Soul; and therefore I think they little deserve the blame, which
Mr. W. lays upon them; but that their Translation may and ought, to retain that
Reverence and Authority, which for many Years, and some Ages, it has
maintained amongst us; and which I hope it will not be in the Power of M. W. or
Mr. Buxtorf to diminish* By this Collection, it appears, that if our
Translators had rendered this Hebrew Term by the Word Breath, in verses 21. and
22. as they have done, ver. 17. and Genesis 2. (as it seems they might warrantably
enough have done) the words would have run thus, Lord I pray thee let this
Child's Breath come into him again; and the Breath of the Child came into him
again, and he revived. This reading would have taken all manner of pretense of
Mr. W.'s proving the Souls Separate Subsistence by this Text: And thereupon, I
am ready to profess, that this mode of proving the Souls Separate Subsistence,
from the Modes of speaking, or the Phrasiology, of the Hebrews or any other
Nation, seems to be a weak sort of proceeding to that purpose. The Spirit of
Life in Man (of whatsoever sort it be) is Natural and Substantial; and if its
Substance in a State of Separation be true, the proper and expected Poofs
thereof, might and ought to be drawn from Texts of Scripture, which are
somewhat clearly assertory of the same; such as I agree, St. Matt.'s Words, are
notable to kill the Soul: But withal, I pretend, that there is not in all the
whole Bible, one other Text, which has so much clearness of assertation in
this Point, as this Text of St. Matthew. has, not agreeing, That Solomon's
Return of the Soul to God who gave it, carries alike clearness of Evidence with
it, That St. Matt's does; however it appears, that the Opinion of the Souls
Separate Subsistence, leans mainly upon these two Pillars, although they seem
somewhat unequal, and the one of them much stronger than the other: To the one
of them, I have late before answered, and may do to the other in due time. Mr.
W. proceeding in his Proofs of the Separate Subsistence, quotes, our LORD's
Words, Luke 23.46. (...) I contend that the Word (...), in this Text, may, and
does, indifferently signify, sometimes Breath, and sometimes Spirit, according
as may be required by the Subject matter of that Discourse wherein it is used:
And I do not blame our Translators for rendering it in this place, by the
English Word Spirit. But then I intend, that if it be so well rendered, yet in
this place, it may have, and likely has, a Tropical Signification, by a very
usual Synecdoche, Partis pro toto; by the Word Spirit, intending his, whofe
Person now Dying, he knew very well, that his whole Person, Body and Soul, were
to rise again upon the Sunday Morning, after his Crucifixion, which was
finished upon the Friday in the Evening, after Three of the Clock: according to
which, we Read, he was so raised on Sunday Morning at the very break of Day, in
his whole Person, both Soul and Body; the very same that Died, was then Raised
by Divine Power. Whence I Collect, our Lord recommended to his Father, all that
was after to be Raised, viz. His whole Person, Soul and Body, signified and
intended, by the Word or Term of Spirit. Mr. W. quotes further, Acts 7.57.
(...), which might well enough have been thus Translated, Lord Jesus receive my
Breath spent in the last moment of my life, in maintaining the truth of thy
Gospel. Although I do not deny, that our version, by the Word Spirit, is likewise
a good Translation of the Word (...), but then I pretend, it must be taken in
the like Figurative Signification, as it was intended before, in our Lords
Ejaculation. Mr. W. says, in both these places, he takes the Word Spirit to
signify, that Spirit (fore-kind) which God breathed into Man at first, when he
became a Living Soul [or Person] and so do I take it; but our difference is
about what sort that Spirit was, which God breathed into Adam, whereby he
became a Living Person. I pretend it to be no more than a moderate Portion of
the Ambient Air, which by facing the Blood and Humors, then turgid and fitted
for that Operation, might kindle the Flame of Life amongst them, and should
after by Respiration keep the same in a glowing or flaming Condition or
circulation, so long as the life of the Person should endure; but Mr. W.
pretends, That God breathed into Adam's Nostrils a Newly Created, Entire,
Substantial, Intelligent Spirit, which had a Subsistence of its own, before its
being breathed into Adam's Nostrils; and shall have a like Subsistence of its
own again, at, or after the Dissolution, or Death of the Person. At the
beginning of this Fourth Proposition, he promised (and I believe intended) to
prove the Separate Subsistence of his sort of Soul. He has not yet (to my
understanding) performed it, but how well he has aquitted himself of that
Design or Intention, by his Mediums of proving recited in this Proposition,
shall be left to the Judgment of our indifferent Readers.

P. 23 Mr. W. delivers his Fifth Proposition, which is, That the Souls of Men
separated from their Bodies by Death, are in Joy or Misery: And for the Proof
of this Assertion, he quotes two, and but two Passages out of the Bible; the
first of which, is our Lords Promise to the Thief upon the Cross, That he
should be with him that Day in Paradise: Upon which he says, neither Jesus, nor
the Thief were that Day in Body there, therefore they must be there in Soul
only. Upon which I observe a disagreement in my Mind, from that which he first
affirms; conceiving it probable, That their Bodies and Souls might both be
present in Paradise that Day; but then I do not confine the Term of that Day,
to the signification of an Artificial or Natural Day; the first continuing but
during the Light of one Day, and the other containing the space of Twenty four
Hours only, and no more. Psalm. 95 8. David says, To day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your Hearts. Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day: And there quotes David's To Day, as if it intended the Forty
Years Travel in the Wilderness. Luke 19.42. Christ wept over Jerusalem, and
said, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace. And Peter says, A thousand Years with God, are but
as one Day. And the Prophets often denoted, the space of a Year by one Day.
More like Testimonies might be Collected out of Scripture, to prove, that when
God himself, or by his Prophet, speaks of a Day, they do not tie up the
Signification thereof, to the precise time of an Artificial or Natural Day; but
do intend, that within a competent short time, such things shall come to pass,
and I do not pretend to prolong the Signification of our Lords to Day, in Mr
W.'s quoted Text, beyond Sunday; for they were Crucified upon Friday, in the
Evening, and the one Died, and the other might well enough rise up on Sunday
Morning, and that Morning our Lord appeared first to Mary Magdalene; and John
20.17. In Discourse said unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to
my Father. Verse. 19. The same day at evening, being the first day of the week,
came Jesus and stood in the midst [of his Apostles] and showed them his hands
and his side, Luke 24.38. Says the Disciples, were afraid of our Lord's
appearing, And he said unto them; Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; handle
me, and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. From
these Relations I Collect, That after our Lords appearing to Mary Magdalene, he
did Ascend to his Father, and might then also go to that Paradise intended for
the Thief; and that in the Evening of that Day he appeared in the Assembly of
his Disciples, and said to them, Handle me and see, [or perceive] for a Spirit
has not flesh and bones [as ye may feel me have.] Hence I infer, That our Lord
had been in Heaven or Paradise on the very Day of his Resurrection; and after
his return from thence, offered himself to be handled and felt, by his
Disciples, although before his Ascending thither, he would not suffer Mary
Magdalene to touch him. And this I think proves our Lord to have been in
Paradise, in so short a time after his Promise to the Thief, as might well be
called to Day. Concerning the Thief, I observe, That he Died likewise upon
Friday Evening, and that from thence to Sunday Morning, his Body might remain
apparent, without liklihood of being tainted. We read, Matt. 27.52. The Graves
were opened, and many Bodies of Saints which slept, arose, and came out of the
Graves, after [our Lords Resurrection] and went into the holy City, and
appeared unto many. Arguendo from these Testimonies, I think it likely, that
the Body of our Thief, was one of these Bodies of Saints which came out of
their Graves, after Christ's Resurrection; and his Body so changed, (as at, or
in the Resurrection) might, and probably did, ascend with our Lord into that
Paradise, which before was promised him, and was there with our Lord, both
present with their Souls and Bodies, or their whole Persons, in such manner as
they had before lived in this World. And thus Observing, I have given a
Reasonable, and I think a Sufficient Answer to all those Inferences and
Arguments, which Mr. W. has raised from this Text; which therefore I decline
to examine any further in this place, knowing we shall meet with the same
afterward; and that Mr. W. in the Progress of his Treatise, does repeat over
again this and diverse others of those Arguments, which he has made Parcel of
his Five Propositions. I therefore now proceed to Examine his last Quotation,
for the Proof of Souls being Rewarded or Punished presently after their
departure out of the Bodies. For the further Proof of which Assertion, he
quotes, Luke 16.19. Where the Parable of Dives is at large Related; and
thereupon says little more, but that he concludes from the Contents of this
Parable, That the Souls of Men (separate at Death from their Bodies) enter into
a State of Joy or Misery, before the Resurrection. Observing upon which, I
pretend to give some Reasons, why he ought not so to conclude. First, because
the Relation in this Place, is but of a Parable Similitude; the Nature whereof
is not to prove, but Illustrate the Subject upon which Men are then
Discoursing; and therefore his Practice is not Reasonable in making choice to
prove by a Medium, whose Design is not to teach, but represent things in such a
manner as they may be better received, by those to whom the Discourse is
Prosecuted. Secondly, I say, There appears no Design in this Parable, to teach
or instruct our Lord's Auditors concerning the true State or Nature of Men
after Death; because in the Context to this Parable, there is no Question
raised or Discourse held concerning that Subject: Whence I conceive, the intent
of this Parable was not to confirm or illustrate the Speculation thereof; but
that rather this Parable was offered to illustrate and confirm, an Assertion,
which our Lord in the foregoing verses had delivered, as verse. 15 When the
Pharisees had derided our Lords Doctrine, he Answers them, Ye are they which
justify your selves before Men, but God knows your Hearts; for that which is
chiefly esteemed amongst Men, is an abomination in the sight of God. Soon after
which our Lord delivers this Parable, and therein describes Dives as in a very
high manner enjoying the Glory and Good things of this World, and counted one
of the happiest amongst Men; and then sets out Lazarus in as low and miserable
a Condition, as Men commonly can fall to: Whence the State of Dives, was very
highly esteemed amongst Men, but was in the Sight of God much otherwise, and
placed far below the Condition of Lazarus, in respect of those future
Enjoyments, which God had appointed for him. The Parable therefore I conceive
was a very sufficient illustration of our Lord's Assertion, beforementioned;
and I think was not intended to teach or discover the true State of Men after
Death: and then if we suppose, that Parables confirm or illustrate those
Discourses only, which they are intended so to assert; it seems inferrible,
that this Parable, may not reasonably be made good a Ground or Proof,
concerning the true State of Men after Death, or that they receive rewards
before the Resurrection; because it was not spoken with intent to teatch or
illustrate that Point.

A Third Argument against the alleging this Parable as a Proof, is the
apparent Incongruity which it has, With Solomon's return of the Spirit to God
who gave it. Because the return there spoken of, seems to be delivered as an
effect of the Souls Natural Inclination, as a thing commonly done, and easy to
be performed; and says, It is a return made to God who gave it. From which our
Parable differs in Material Points: For the Parable does not say, That Lazarus,
or his Soul, either returned or went to God, for Judgment or any other purpose.
Next, The Parable does not say, That Lazarus or his Soul went any whither, but
that he was carried by Angels, not before God, or to Judgment, but into
Abraham's Bosom; a place of repose and some measure of happiness: So as we may
say of these two Proofs, though they be the main Pillars of the Souls Separate
Subsistence, yet their Testimonies do not agree together.

We Read that at our Lords Trial before Pilate, diverse false witnesses
appeared, to give their Evidence against our Lord, whose Testimonies yet were
finally rejected, because they agreed not together; Mark 14.56. Many bare false
witness against our Lord, but their Testimonies were rejected, because they
agreed not together. And Moses's Law required two witnesses for the putting any
Man to Death. And for this Reason I think our Parable to be but a weak Proof of
the Souls Separate Subsistence, or immediate Reward after Death.

A Fourth Argument opposing the proving Power of this Parable, rifes from the
difficulty of finding Truth in the Words of it; for that it says, Dives afar
off beheld Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, and between the places of their abode,
there was a great Gulf fixed, so as none can pass from the one of them to the
other. This to my Understanding, seems somewhat incredible. First, that Dives
at such a distance, should be able to discover Lazarus, as to know him: Next
that Dives in his place of Torment, should be able so to Speak and Discourse as
that Abraham could hear what he said, and return Answers to him.

Fifthly, I observe upon this Parable, That Abraham and Dives seem very well
acquainted and nearly Related, one to the other: Dives gives Abraham the Title
of Father, which Abraham accepts, and returns Answer to him by the Name of Son;
whereas (if Mr. W. says true) there could be no such real Relation between
them: For Mr. W. says, There was nothing of Dives in Hell but his Soul,
subsisting there, in a State of Separation from his Body: And this sort of Soul
is in no manner Propagated, by the Parents, but it is a New and Pure Creature,
Created by God, at the first Procreation of every Person; having a Subsistence
of its own, until it be by God injected into the newly procreated Body; where
it presently becomes Tainted and Defiled, with Original Sin. We will leave that
to fall out as it may, but here I say, That this Soul not Generated or
Propagated from Abraham, or any of his Posterity, can by no means be properly
or truly Styled the Son of Abraham: And from all these Arguments and Promises,
I find my self apt to Collect, that there is little Real or Historical truth,
in this Parable; that it very weakly proves the Separate Subsistence of Souls,
or their receiving Rewards or Punishments, before the Second Coming of our Lord
to Judgment, and the Resurrection of the Dead.

P. 24. Mr. W. closes up his Fifth Proposition, with these Words, Having
cleared up the five Propositions from diverss Scriptures, he wonders at the
Confidence of such Men as dare pretend to persuade People, that we have no
clear Scripture to found the Belief of the Souls Immortality on. I Answer, That
his Confident Sayings which prove not, I willingly pass by, and from the woes
Pronounced against his Opposers, and Shield my self by the Words of Solomon,
The Woe's pronounced without good cause, or the Curse cause less shall not come.

Chapter IIII.
PAge 26. Mr. W. says, A Man may be truly said to know God. I Reply, If he
thereby mean, the knowings of God is, or Quod sit Deus, I grant it; but if he
mean it of the Quid sit Deus, or that Man knows what manner of Being God is, I
then deny it. He thinks if he can describe the Properties or Attributes of a
Soul, from which we feel the Operition of Life, spring in us, he shall thereby
give us sufficiently to know what the Soul of Man is. I Reply, That Men ascribe
Attributes and Properties to God, upon the Certainty or Knowledge that they
have, or may have, from diverse clear Topics, that there is such a Being as God
in the World, but the like manner of Proceeding will not serve to prove the
Being of such a Soul in the World, as he describes; and therefore I do require
of him or any other, who undertakes this Province, first to prove that really
and truly there is such a sort of Soul in the Humane Person as he pretends; and
if that be not first done, they can but ascribe what Attributes and Properties
they please, to they know not what, or to such a thing, as they cannot prove to
have any Being at all, which is quire otherwise, in the Case put by him before,
concerning God.

P. 27. Mr. W. says, The Soul is not the Breath of Man. Thereby it seems
intending, That the Word Breath is not Equipollent to the Word Soul [of Man]
and this I grant him, That the Breath of Man is not his Soul, because I
conceive there goes more parts to make up the Soul or Spirit of Man's Life. The
Five Inferences which he pretends to draw from the Soul's being the Breath, I
pass over as not greatly material.

P. 28. Mr. W. says, Secondly, That as the Soul of Man is not the Breath, so it
is not the Blood; and then infers, That if Blood be the Soul of Man, all the
Food it has to live upon is the Bread that Perishes. I Reply, That all the
Food that Man has to live upon Naturaly, is the Bread that Perishes, or is
the nourishment which he duly obtains to that purpose, and thereby is the
Spirit of his Life daily supported, and upon the failure or not obtaining
thereof, the Man must Languish, Consume and Die; and he, and his Spirit of Life
or Soul, go out of the World, and be Extinct together. Further I conceive, The
Man, his Spirit of Life or Soul, has no other Natural Nourishment, but Viands
of the kind beforementioned. His following Expressions seems to be altogether
Figurative. He offers, That if Blood were the Humane Soul, Lectures out of
Galen and Hippocrates would be more proper to Purge away Sin, and bring Souls
to Christ, then Sermons out of the Bible. Here I suppose by Souls he intends
Persons, or begs the Question now in dispute between us. Seeing he well knows,
I give no credit to the Being of such a Soul, as he very positively asserts:
And this being premised, I say, That Purifying and Purging the Blood, may very
much help and better the Humane Understanding; and Sermons out of the Bible,
may be very good helps and directions to the Man, in the government of his
Affections, and the performing of his Duty to God.

P. 29. Mr. W. Argues and Says, If the Soul be the Blood, then that a Man of
Sixty Years of Age, has not the same Soul he had at Fifteen; and then how can
you think this Old Man can be guilty of the Sins of his Youth? I Reply, That a
Man's Soul is always of the same Nature and Kind; and tho the material parts of
it, do not always remain the same, yet the Man remains always the same Person,
from Four to Fourscore, and liable to answer for the Faults which he had long
before Committed. Then he tells me, that which I still profess not to believe,
though he does tell it me; That the Soul is of a different Nature from the Body,
and does neither grow with it in Youth, nor Decay with it in Age, but remains
in one same State and Power, during all the State of our Lives.

P. 30. He pretends to prove this by a Similitude, which I think to be foreign
to our Question, and adds nothing to the Proof of his Assertion; and the like I
think may be said of his letting of Sheeps and Man's Blood into one another,
reciprocally, and therefore I pass them both over.

P. 31. He says further, That as the Soul of Man is neither his Breath nor
Blood, so it is not God, or any part of his Divine Essence: In all which I am
ready to agree with him, having before declared and described, what manner of
thing I think the Spirit of Life in Man to be; and that in its cohabitation
with the Body, it partakes of Growth and Decay, Health and Sickness, Strength
and Weakness, Joy and Sorrow, and receives in the end an Extinguishment at the
Death of the Person, or that Extinguishment it self is Death.

Mr. W. says, The Soul of man is guilty of Inadvertency, Rashness, Folly. I do
not agree with him in this Expression: But if he had said, The Person or the
Man is subject to these Infirmities, I should soon have agreed with him in
that; because I have often said, I have no Conception, of a Man without a Soul,
or of a Soul without a Man; but think, that to act or suffer any thing, they
must be both together: And I Appeal to the Intelligent World, whether by such
Experience as Men can attain therein, they do not find it so.

P. 32. Mr, W. says, The Soul is a Spirit, created of God, and endued with
Sense and Reason, and a Power of actuating an Humane Body, by Vital Union
therewith.

P. 33. For the prooving of a Spirit to be a Substance, and that a Humane Soul
is such a Substance, he refers his Readers to all that he has said; or shall
say, to prove the Soul is a Being, independent on the Body. I Reply, That as
far as I am able to judge, all that he has hitherto said, seems very
insufficient for that Purpose; and what he will, or can show, to persuade the
Belief of that Opinion, Time must show.

P. 34. he says, We feel in our Soul, a Power of Thinking; which being thus
worded, I deny my Assent thereunto: But had he said, That a Man feels, or finds
a Power of Thinking in himself, I should have easily agreed with him in it. He
says, The variety of Thoughts or Acts of Willing, are the Soul's Motion. I say,
They are Motions or Actings in the Mind of Man, effected, by acting the
inflamed Spirits of the Blood, working in the Kepheline Organs; in the which,
the Great Artificer, GOD, framed and placed them, and to that Purpose, gave
them sufficient Power to perform such Actions, when He created the Fabric of
the Humane Body, and breathed into its Nostrils the Breath of Life, whereby the
Spirits of the Blood and Humors became inflamed, for acting in a Body to such
Purposes; and by such an Excellent and Artificial Composition, always to be
continued by Respiration. God's excellent Wisdom and Power, did in the
beginning produce these Workings amongst such Kepheline Organs, and gave them
in this Compositum, Power to produce Perception, Fantasy, Judgment, Will,
Memory, Affections, Local Motions, and all other Powers or Faculties of the
Humane Mind or Person whatsoever. I know that upon reading of this Discourse,
Mr. W. and his Party, will all cry out, How can these things be? That
unintelligent, senseless Materials, working amongst, or together with one
another, should be able to produce Life, Sense, Affections, Perception,
Intellect, Memory, in the Person; demanding of me on Account or Declaration,
how such things can with any Probability, be effected by the working together
of such Materials. And I Answer, That the Quomodo of such an Operation, is a
Speculation too sublime and curious, for the Wit of Man to compass or obtain.
The Artifice of the Humane Machine, cannot be thoroughly penetrated, or
discovered, by the sublimest Wits amongst Men; witness the doubtings, both of
Solomon and Aristotle, discovered in their Discourses, upon the Points now in
Question. That God has Wisdom, and Skill sufficient, to produce Intelligence,
by means of Material Operations, seems true, and something clear to my
Understanding; and but few of our Opposers do deny, somewhat a like Artifice
and Operation in the Brutal Nature. They seem ready to Agree, That God by his
Wisdom, and Skill, used in the Fabrication of the Brutes, has in the
beginning, produced, and does still produce, Life, Motion, Sensations,
Affections, inward Perceptions, Phantafie, Choice, and Memory, by the Medium
before described, viz. The moving and acting of such Spirits of the Blood, in
the Kephaline, and other Organical Parts of their Bodies, without such an
entire, intelligent Spirit, as Mr. W. will needs suppose to be in Man. Daily
Experience convinces us, That the Life, Motions, Sensations, and Affections of
the Brutes, are as true, strong, vigorous, and active, as they are in Men;
although their inward Perceptions, Fantasy, Choice, and Memory, fall short of
the like Faculties in Men, by diverse degrees, or gradations; which I think may
very probably come to pass, by the difference in their Kephaline Organs, which
are framed more aptly for such Purposes, in Men, than in Beasts. Whence we may
suppose, the difference between them in this Point, rises not so much from the
diversity of the Spirits, which move and act them, as from the difference and
degrees of Perfection, amongst their Organs, which are so to be acted. For
Illustration of which Position, we may farther consider the Fabrics of their
Bodies, and thereupon we must find, that Humane Bodies have Advantage above the
Brutal, in two Particular Members, viz. their Hands and Tongue; of which
Members, and their Activity, if Humane Bodies were deprived, they would be much
more like the Beast that perish, than now they are; and yet Men do not use to
Argue, from these Bodily Advantages, that their Flesh, Blood, Bones, or Breath,
have a different Nature, or Constitution, from those of Beasts: But People are
generally content to say with Solomon, That the Corporeal Constitutions of Man
and Beast, are of a Similar Nature and Constitution, one of them with the
other: Whence it seems to me probable, That although the Spirits Act with
greater Perfection, the Heads, and Brains of Men, than they do among Beasts;
yet that hinders not, but that they may all be acted, by Spirits of a Similar
Nature, one of them to another. And thus Arguing, I pretend to have shown, that
the Minds of Men are more likely to be Acted by the Inflamed Spirits of the
Blood and Brain, than by an Intelligent Spirit, created by God for that
Purpose; and yet it is still apparently true, that Men are not able to give an
Account of the Mode or Manner of the Production of such Powers in the Mind of
Man, by the Motions or Actings of those Spirits in his Brain; that I conclude
to be the Arcanum Opificis, and that none other can tell, or find out how the
same is performed. And hereupon, I incline to rebut upon my Opposers, with
their own Argument, and to demand of them, How, or by what means, or after what
manner, their Intelligent Soul can; or does Move and Act the Body, and the
several Organs and Members thereof? having found them all hitherto confessing,
that themselves do not know, and therefore cannot declare to others, the
certain, or likely Mode or Manner of that Performance; and for their Souls
being Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, I pass it for an Aenigma or
Riddle, conceiving there is no apparent Sense in that Expression, nor any clear
Truth to be drawn out of it.

P. 34. Mr. W. says, That his, the Soul, can look upon one thing, and think
upon another of a quite different nature; and that she can be in the noise of
an Army, and yet in a profound and blessed Peace: She can cool the Blood in its
greatest fervor of Lust. P. 35. So that it is evident, she has an absolute
Empire over the Body, and all its Parts, and is not constrained in her Motions
by them, but they are all at her Command, and move by her Direction. Hereunto I
Reply, That so much as is true, of what he says the Soul can do, may be most
properly predicated of the Man, and not of the Soul, which alone, can do no
such things as he speaks of. Next, for the absolute Monarchical Power, which he
ascribes to the Soul over the Person, I think he is in an Error about it. Romans
7.15. That which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that do I not; but what I
hate, that do I. Ver. 17. And that it is not I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me. Ver. 18. To will, is present with me, but how to perform that
which is good, I find not; for the good I would, I do not; but the evil which I
would not, that I do; and it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me. I delight in he Law of God after the inward Man, but I see another Law in
my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into Captivity
to the Law of Sin, in my Members. In this Text, St. Paul (as I conceive)
declares the true State of the Person, and says, That he [in his Mind, or
Rational Faculty,] was convinced, that such Actions were good, and that he
ought to do them, and therefore had a will to do them, but that at the same
time there was a Law of Sin in his Members, which withstood the good
Inclination and Will of his Rational Faculty; and against the Will and Power of
his Rational Faculty, brings him into Captivity to the Law of Sin in his
Members. If I might Paraphrase this Text, I would do it thus: Our Apostle was
convinced in his Understanding, that such Actions were good, and ought by him
to be done; and therefore he had a Will to do them, but his Sensual Affections
and Lusts, strongly opposed the Performance thereof; and had such Power over
the Person, as to prevail against the Dictates of his Reason, and the
Inclination and Bent of his Will, and bring him under such a Submission to the
Law of Sin, as he neither did nor could do that which his Reason told him, was
his Duty to do; but brought him under such a State of Captivity to the Law of
Sin, as to make him do that which in his mind he condemned, and was contrary to
his own Understanding, the Dictates of his Reason, and the Bent of his Will:
And the course of Proceeding delivered by St. Paul in this Text, is undeniably
verified by the daily Experience of Men, and with so much Advantage on the side
of our Sensual Affections, that where we find one Man, guided and governed by
the Dictates of his Rational Mind, we may find perhaps an Hundred, who suffer
themselves to be hurried, by the Bent of their Affections and Lusts, into such
Actions and Practices, as their own Understandings and Reasons disapprove, and
condemn, and sometimes seek to resist, though more often in vain than otherways:
So as we may say of these two Faculties in Man, as Men use to do of Presumption
and Despair; The Reasonable Faculty of Man governs its Thousands, and the
Sensual Affections their Ten Thousands: And I think it is made appear by this
Argument, that the Power of Reason in Man, is neither Absolute, nor
Monarchical, but rather is a Power Coordinate with that of the Affections and
Passions, and generally so unsuccessful in its Contests with them for
Government, that where one Man is truly governed by the Dictates of his Reason,
perhaps an hundred are hurried and let away, by the Attempts and overruling
Power of their Affections and Passions, against the clear Dictates, and often
against the Will, or Rational Desire of the Person. And I think this Proves
what has before been said, that the Regiment of Reason in Man, is not
Monarchical, but Coordinate, and Swasive only. It is able to Persuade
powerfully, but not to Compel Obedience to its Directions; and therefore I
conceive Mr. W. was mistaken, when he said, That the Power or Regiment of
Reason in Man, was both Monarchical and Absolute.

P. 35. He discourses much concerning the Nature and Essence of a Spirit, and
the Life of it; amongst which, there are Sayings which I do not well
understand: Nor does all his Discourse make me understand what is the Nature of
a Spirit, a thing which I am apt to conside himself did not know; and because I
think it gives little light, in our present Question, it shall here be passed
over.

P. 36. He pretends here, That the Soul has Life in her self, as a Spirit;
before he has proved to my Understanding, that there is such a Soul in Man, I
think it needs no proving, that a thing which is not, neither has, nor can
have Accidents, Adjuncts, or Attributes; and the Being of his sort of Soul,
which is neither granted nor proved, cannot be conceived to have Life in it
self.

Mr. W. says Thirdly, That a Spirit has a Power of penetrating, or gliding,
through the hard solid Bodies of Marble, or Iron, without finding, or making
any Cleft, Chink, or Cranny therein. I doubt he delivers in these Words, that
which he does not know to be true, or is otherways able to prove. He delivers
other things in this Place concerning Spirits, which I think other Men are not
resolved of.

P. 37. He says, The Jews could not keep Peter, in such a Prison, as the Angel
which delivered him could not penetrate: Whereas the Text does not declare,
whether the Angel came into the Prison through the Walls, or by opening the
Doors; but I count it certain, that the Doors were opened for Peter to go out,
and therefore likely might so be, at the coming in of the Angel also; and as
the Iron-Gate was that led them into the City. He adds; The Soul of a Man is
truly a Spirit, as an Angel is: How truly, is now in Dispute. He says, The Soul
manifests her Presence more eminently in the Brain, than in any other part of
the Body. And I Answer, That the Rational Faculty, is not only more eminently
in the Head and Brain, than in any other Part of the Body, but that it resides
and acts in the Head only, without being communicated to any other Part of the
Body; because all the Organs of Understanding and Reason, are by God the
Creator, placed only in the Head, without any other Member having a share
therein.

P. 38. He raises a Dispute, Whether Light be a Body; and compares it to the
Penetration of a Spirit: But I pass it over, as little pertinent to our present
Question.

Mr. W. further says, That a Spirit, and his sort of Soul, is indivisible, or
indiscerptible, not subject to Blows or Wounds, nor to be consumed by the
fiercest fire. I think he should here have expressed, how it can be tormented
by fire; and yet have no Parts or Particles of it consumed by the fervent Heat,
or by the violent Pain and Torment which it suffers.

P. 39. He quotes St. Matthew's Are not able to kill the Soul; which is indeed
the strongest Refuge of his Opinion, referred here by me to a future Answer.

P. 40. Mr. W. says, His sort of Soul must either be God, or a Creature. And
thereupon I am apt to deny that it is either the one or the other; and to
pretend [as I have often before done] that there is no such thing, or sort of
Being in the World; and therefore cannot be endued, either with Sense or
Reason, as (by saying) he would persuade us it is. He says, That the Soul is
the proper and immediate Seat of Sense: And I Reply (as I have often before) It
is not the Soul, but the Person that is so.

P. 41. He says, The Soul is endued with Reason and Understanding. I say that
it is not the Soul alone, but the Man that is so. He says, Reason is the most
Noble Faculty of the Humane Nature, by means of which, we [Men] know God, and
hold a Communion with Him, and do diverse other great things here named. And in
these Sayings I am at Agreement with him, without believing these things are
done by the Soul alone, but by the Person in Composito, chiefly acted therein
by the Faculty and Power of its Reason.

Here he quotes an Author, that says, Homo solus est animus, corpus autem
hominis, opus and instrumentum; and animus intelligentiam exercet, sine ullo
corporis instrumento. In English thus: The Soul only is the Man, and the Body
is but the Souls Organ, or Instrument; and the Soul can exercise its Faculty of
Understanding, without any Assistance of the Bodily Organs. But this Quotation
proves no more to me, than that there are other Men who are of Mr. W's Opinion,
and think as he does, which there was no need at all to prove, because I stand
convinced, that the World of Men in general are so: But let Mr. W. prove, that
those Words of his Author are true, and then, Erit mihi magnus Apollo; I will
give up the Cudgels to him, and confess him Victorious in this Dispute: For I
am agreed with Aristotle, in the beginning of his Book, de Anima, That if the
Soul ever was known to do, or can be proved able to do any thing, without
assistance of the Body and its Organs, such Proof will be Evidence enough, to
Convince considering Persons, that she has a Nature, and Subsistence of her
own, wherein she can act in a state of Separation from the Body. But of this
Power I find no more Proof, but the Saying recited in this Quotation.

P. 42. Mr. W. says, If the Soul will, the Feet walk, the Hands work; and so
for the Motion of the Eyes, and other like things. All which I pass (as before)
for a Mistake, mendable by saying, If the Man will, the Feet walk, and the
Hands work, and the like. Further, in his Fifthly, he says, The Soul is
Vitally united with the Body, and by virtue of that Union, enlivens and acts
it. Thereunto I say, That the Spirit of Life in Man, or the Body, make but one
Person; who, whilst he lives, moves, directs, and acts himself, and uses his
Intellective, Voluntary, and Memorative Powers and Faculties, with full
Liberty, according to his own liking and pleasure, naturally. He speaks here of
a Vital Union between the Body and the Soul; which Expression I do not Approve;
because they both together make but one Person; as two Ingredients, which make
but one Compositum; not as two different things that are united, and joined
together, but as Ingredients may be totally mixed; and a new Product arise out
of them all; so as that if any of them be wanting in the Composition; the
Product cannot truly be the same it was before.

P. 43. He says, That to tell you what the Soul is, so as to make it an
Intelligible Notion, is not so impossible a thing as some have conceived it to
be. Thereto I say, that by such Descriptions, as he has before made of the
Soul, and all that he has hitherto spoken thereof, I am not able to
understand, or believe any more coneerning his sort of Soul, than I did before
I began to peruse his Treatise. The Repetition of those things, which he says
he has performed, I pass over, as finding no Proving Force among them. I find
no more Chapters in this Treatise, than those Four which have before been
Examined; but that here Mr. W. begins to alter his Method, and to divide the
rest of his Treatise, by Arguments, to the Number of Eighteen, of which he
Treats distinctly, and severally, in his following Discourse; and I purpose to
follow him therein, and use the same Method in my Observations.

The First Argument.
PAge 44. Mr. W. Says, That upon Gods breathing into Adam, He is in the Text
called a Liveng Soul; a Denomination taken from the more excellent Part of Man,
his Soul. This Expression seems to Agree with what I have formerly spoken, That
here the Words, a Living Soul, signify and intend a Living Person; putting the
more noble Part or Ingredient, to signify the whole Person, so as it passes in
his Judgment, for a Figurative Expression.

P. 46. Mr. W. Says, When God Breathed (which he properly does not) there is
something else meant, which can be nothing else but a special Act of Creation;
by which he made the Spirit or Breath of Life, which he breathed into Man. I
Answer, That in the Text there is no express mention of a Creation, either of
Breath or Spirit.

P. 47. He Says, By the Breath of God, is meant that Act of Divine Power, by
which God made Man, and gave Life to him. I am not willing to differ from Mr.
W. and therefore agree to this Expression. He quotes, Ps. 33.6. By the word of
the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his
mouth. The later of them alluding to God's Power, showed in the Creation of
Adam; but thence he infers, This Breathing into Adam, must be looked upon as
the Creating somewhat: But I find no strength at all in this Inference; nor
that it proves with any strength of Cohersion, the Creation of any thing, save
Adam's Body, at the time when God made Man: And I grant that then, whatsoever
was Created besides his Body, was a Creature. But I do not herein find any
manner of Proof, that God then Created a Soul for Adam. Here Mr. W. Repeats his
former Argument concerning the signification of the Hebrew Word, which our
Translators have rendered by the Term of Breath, and says, That the same Word
does also sometimes signify Spirit. To this I say, That our Translators
thought it not fit to render it by the Term of Spirit in this place; and I
value their Judgment before those of Mr. W. or Mr. Buxtorf, and therefore take
that Word to signify most properly in this place, the Breath of Life.

P. 48. He pretends the words should run thus, God breathed or created in Man
the Breath of Life, or that Spirit or Soul of Life. And in truth, if the words
had run so, they would have run much better for the maintenance of his
Opinion, than now they do; but I do not perceive by what Authority he takes
upon him so to Correct or (as some may take it) Corrupt the Text. The
Breathing, which he says, discovered a New Created Spirit to be there; I say,
detected only a Spirit of Life to be there: which was tinded and kindled in the
Spirits of the Blood and Humors, then fitted and ready for that Operation, by
the moderate fanning of that Breath, which God, or his Agents, then breathed
into Adam's Nostrils; and this was the humane Spirit of Life, tinded and
kindled by that Breath of Life; and from that time to this time it is, and must
be, continually kept Flaming or Glowing by the constant respirations and
fanning of this Breath; by want of which this Flame would be Extinguished in a
short time, or a very few moments of it.

He quotes again, Annotations of the Assembly of Divines, in the
Rump-Parliament time, for his purpose, without telling us what they say upon
it; and for want of their Annotations, I know not what they say of it: And if I
did, I should not be much moved by their Authority, except they give better
Reasons for their Opinion, than Mr. W. has yet done.

P. 49. Mr. W. Arguing, says, The Soul of Man, or the Spirit, or the Breath of
Life in Man, Lives in and with the Body, and yet Dies not with the Body: And
this, he says, needs Proof: And so do I say too: And he offers to prove it, by
saying, That whose Life depends not on the Body, must not Die when the Body
Dies; but the Souls Life depends not on the Body: Therefore it must needs not
Die when the Body Dies: And the Reason why he says the Souls Life depends not
upon the Body, is, because God made it a Spirit of Life, to give Life to the
Body, and not to receive any Life from it.

I Answer, If this Arguing be not that which Men call Petitio Principii, or
begging the Question, I know not what is.

We are now disputing, Whether Adam had an Intelligent Soul Created for him at
first, or not; and whether such a Soul have a Separate Subsistence after the
Death of the Person: And in both these Points he maintains the Affirmative, and
pretends to prove the Separate Subsistence by its being a Created Intelligent
Spirit, made by God for Adam, at the first: And thus proves one Controverted
Point by another, as highly Controverted as it self; and which I conceive, his
offers in this Argument, do very weakly and insufficiently prove.

P. 50. He observes out of Moses's Text, That it says nothing of the Body's
Life, before God breathed into him a Spirit or Soul of Life (as Mr. W. will
have it) though the words of our Bible expressly call it, The Breath of Life: And
I so far agree, That Adam's Body had not Life, till this Breath of Life [or
this Breath causing Life, was breathed into it; but that from thence he began
to Live and became a Living Person.] Thus far we are at Agreement: His next two
or three Pages are spent in Proof of the Souls Immortality, drawn from the two
beforementioned Topics, viz. That the Soul is an Intelligent Spirit, and was
newly Created by God for Adam; and next, that it is such a Spirit as can
subsist in a State of Separation from the Body: And thereupon, I say, That if
he, or any that is of his Opinion, can convince with some clearness, That God
Created such an Intelligent Soul for Adam, as can Subsist, Act, and Suffer, in
a State of Separation from the Body; he shall need to make no further Proof to
me of the Souls Immortality; because, if the former be true, I have no
Inclination or Intention to dispute the later: And therefore I pass over what
he says to that purpose, and shut up my Observations upon this Argument with
the forementioned Conclusion, That Mr. W.'s Arguments therein produced, to
prove the Creation of an intelligent Soul or Spirit for Adam, at the first, are
infirm, invalid, and little convicning to such understanding as I have been
able to employ in the perusal of them.

Second Argument.
PAge 54. Mr. W. quotes, The History of Readiness going to the Witch of Endor,
Relating the words spoken to her by him. I pray thee divine to me by the
familiar Spirit, and bring me him up, whom I shall name unto thee: And she
desiring to know who that Him was, which she should bring up, Saul told her it
was Samuel; Upon this Text, Mr. W. thus Comments, That Saul by this demand must
need intend the bringing up of Samuel's Soul to Discourse with him; and from
thence Collects, That the Jews of that Age held the same Opinion which he now
maintains, concerning the Souls Separate Subsistence after the Death of the
Person. To which I Reply, That this Collection seems in a great part to arise
from his own Inclination to have it so, and his Imagination thence arising that
it is so; for if I were employed to Collect from this History, I should
conceive, That Readiness Head was other ways employed at that time, than to
consider what that was which he desired to be brought up, whether it should be
a Spirit, a Body, or a Person, or an Appear-Dance only, and not a real Being: I
conceive his Head was not troubled about such Speculations; but his whole
Design was by the Witches means to get knowledge what the success of his
Affairs should be in a time when he was greatly distressed. It seems to have
been the Practice of diverse Ages, to foretell Actions past, and future
Successes, by raising up and consulting with the Dead; and from this Practice
they had (amongst other Titles) the Name of Necromancer bestowed upon them.
This Practice of Magicians and Witches, has been long taken notice of in the
World; and it seems by Readiness Demand made to the Woman, he had heard, or
otherwise knew something thereof, and desired by the Witches means thus to
consult the Dead, and particularly Samuel, as the most knowing amongst them;
and from such a Collection, I conceive it does not appear what Saul or the Jews
of his time, thought concerning the Separate Subsistence of Souls. We meet with
diverse Relations of Appearances made and contrived by the Art of Magicians of
later times, but never yet heard of raising an Argument from thence, to prove
the Estate or Condition of departed Souls; nor do I conceive this Argument has
any strength in it to that purpose; and therefore I pass over Mr. W.'s other
Expressions used in this Argument, with this further Observation; that he
raised the Argument out of this History, with intent to reach as high a time as
was possible for producing any sort of Evidence, or raising any manner of
Argument, which might be brought or drawn to touch the Separate Subsistence of
Souls; and this, as the highest pitch of time that he could reach, he chose to
make use of for that purpose; fulfilling therein the Old Proyerb, Willing
Persons will rather play a^ small game then sit out.

The Third Argument.
PAge 57. He says, He is struck with wonder to hear Men assert, That the Soul
and Body of a Man Die together, and are both Buried in one Grave. My Opinion is
somewhat otherwise worded; expressing I think it probable, that when
Respiration fails, and the Person dies, the Flame of Life is Extinguished,
which does not intend a being Buried, or a Going any whither; not finding cause
to agree with Solomon's Expression of going upward or downward; and if Mr. W.
does really wonder at this conception, I make no Argument of it, and shall only
thereunto Answer I cannot help it.

P. 58. The Soul or Breath of Man was Breathed into Adam by an act of Creation.
This I have all along denied, and continue to do so; because I think Mr. W.
has hereto failed in the Proof of it: He hopes his Adversaries will not be
such Blasphemers as to deny the truth of Solomon's Words, The Spirit returns*
to God who gave it. Concerning which Words, I have before fully declared my
Conceptions, and have no design to repeat them again here. Further he quotes
again, Eccl. 3. as if Solomon there said, That when Man dies, his Body goes
one way, and his Spirit another; and whether he quotes this Text truly, shall
be left to Judgment.

Then Mr. W. puts an Objection against himself: Supposing some may say, If all
Souls return to God that gave them, the Souls of the Wicked do so too; and he
grants that so they do; and for solution of this Objection, he says. That though
God be in his highest Heavens, and keep his Sessions there; yet there are some
other parts of the Heaven, where he keeps a particular Sessions, to which Evil
Spirits may approach, as they did in Micaiah's Vision, where God may pass
Sentence upon the Souls of the Wicked, without bringing them into Heaven; and
he thinks God has a glorious Presence in the lower Heavens with his Angels,
and that there he does Transact many Affairs relating to the Government of this
World; and quotes for this the Devils Appearance in the Case of Job; and says,
If Devils may appear before God, so may the Souls of the Wicked do too.

In Answering, I declare to agree with his last Expression, That if there be
Separate Souls of Wicked Men, Subsisting by themselves, they may appear before
God, as his quoted Texts testify Devils have done; but I demand as clear Texts
and Testimonies of Scripture, for the appearing of wicked Souls before God, as
are quoted for the appearing of Devils before him: But he brings not one Text,
to Prove that he says Truth, concerning the appearing of wicked Souls before
God. And I confide, that no one Text of Scripture can be brought, which gives
an Assertory Testimony of that Fact; or says there was ever such a thing done
in the World: And for what he says of God's keeping his Sessions of Judgment,
sometimes in Heaven, and sometimes in other particular Parts of Heaven, I am
apt to demand Proofs thereof, from Texts of Scripture, but he brings not one to
this purpose: And therefore I think it may be concluded, that these several
Sessions of God for Judgment, are but a Device of his own Brain, which has no
real Truth in it. And thus, by Men's Devices, they strive to heal, cover, and
confirm their Erroneous Opinions, which I look upon as a great Fault in a good
Man: But notwithstanding those Humane Inventions, I am apt to conclude, that if
the good Souls go to God for Judgment in Heaven, that bad Souls do also
(somewhat evidently) do the like. Solomon says, The Soul returns to God who
gave it. The Soul returns, are Words that intend indefinitely, and seem
therefore equivalent to an Universal, and signify as much as if it had been
said, All Souls return to God who gave them: And this Sense of the Words, our*
Author has lately granted, Whence I conclude, that as God says, All Souls are
mine [which I think intends Persons]; so all Souls are intended to return to
God who gave them, as well and as much the Bad as the Good, for any thing that
I can perceive, either in the words of the Text, or any thing [that is true] in
our Author's Discourse of it.

P. 60. He puts a Second Objection against this Opinion, which, I think, he
does set up as a Man of Straw, that he may have the battering of it down again.
He pretends, some say, that he has indeed proved, the Soul and Body to be
separated at Death; and that one of them goes to one Place, and the other of
them goes to the other Place; but that he has not yet proved the Soul to live
in that State of Separation. Hereupon I observe, That after he has said, The
Soul and Body are separated at Death, he adds, That they go to two different
Places. Which Saying, I think, the Text does not warrant; for it does not say,
that either of them go to any Place: And first, we may be sure a dead Body
cannot go any whither. The Text says, It returns to the Earth as it was; and of
which before it received Life, it was a Part: So for the Spirit, the Text says,
It returns [not goes] to God who gave it. I have before offered an
Apprehension, That Solomon might intend, this Spirit returned to God, in a
natural and easy manner, as a Part does to its Totum; and the Parcels of Air,
or Water, return to and incorporate with their Elements; and that as the Body
returns to the Earth, as it was, and as a Part does to its Totum; so the Spirit
returns to God from whom it came, and of which I suppose Solomon might think it
to have been a Part: But I grant, That if the Soul, in our Author's Sense, do
go to God after Death, then the Objection which says he did not prove it alive,
in a separate State, is vain and frivolous, and may easily be overthrown,
without putting our Author to the Trouble of Defending his Opinion against it.
In the Close of this Argument, Mr. W. asks, What has the Living God to do with
dead Spirits? And I say so too; and therefore grant, that if the Intelligent
Separate Spirit of a Man be dead, it can with no Propriety or Truth, be said to
Return to God who gave it.

P. 61. Mr. W. says, So I shut up this Third Argument, and with it, my Proofs
from the Old Testament. And concerning these Threee Arguments, I say, the First
is measurably Confuted; the Second is Disregarded, and the Third is otherways
Expounded; and in such a manner, as Opposes Mr. W's Pretensions thereupon.

The Fourth Argument.
Page 61. Mr. W. quotes here that Text of Scripture, whereby the Opinion of the
Souls Separate Subsistence is principally supported; and upon which, it is with
a great measure of Clearness, grounded; and which arises near unto an Assertion
that the thing is so; and I think Mr. W. does from thence rightly Argue, That
if the Soul cannot be killed, by killing the Body or Person, it seems to be a
reasonable Inference, drawn from this Text, to Argue, That the Soul must needs
have a Separate Subsistence of its own, after the Death of the Person. And
further Mr. W. observes well the Reason, why our Lord delivered this Doctrine
to his Disciples, viz. To encourage them against the Fears of such Persecutions
as were likely to fall upon them in the Prosecution of their great Duty, the
Preaching of the Gospel; encouraging them not to sear, what Harm Men could do
unto them, upon that account; because Men could only kill the Body, [intending
the Person] but were not able to kill the Soul, [or lay any other sort of real
Punishment upon Men, after their departure out of this world.]

P. 62. Mr. W. produces an Argument, which I think he rightly terms an Absurd
One; for he pretends there are some that say, That the Soul may die when the
Body dies, though it be not slain when the Body is killed. To this I say, I am
none of those who so Argue, nor did I ever yet meet with a Writing, or Person,
that did so. Next he produces another Objection, of some, who he supposes may
say, That the killing of the Soul here, may intend, that they cannot kill it
for ever. All I can say to this, is, That if any Man, or Men, have so Argued,
they are not at all of my mind, who do not intend to make, or offer any such
Arguments.

P. 63. Mr. W. sets down an Objection offered against the Text of St. Matthew,
in the Words, Are not able to kill the Soul; from Luke 12.4. Be not afraid of
them that kill the Body, and after that, have no more that they can do. He
says, He has kown some very confidently affirm, that there is no Force in St.
Matthew's Text, because that of St. Luke delivers the same Doctrine of our
Lord, in Words, from which no clear Argument can be deduced, for the Soul's
Separate Subsistence: I say, I do not Affirm in that manner, viz. That there is
no proving Force in St. Matthew's Text; because St. Luke differs from him, in
relating the Words of our Lord's Doctrine; But yet I own my self to think, that
from the manner of Wording this Doctrine of our Lord, in these two Texts, a
strong Objection may be raised against the absolute Authority of St. Matthew's
words in this Point. Upon the Consideration, and comparing these two Texts, one
with the other, the only Variance between them, is in the Words of St.
Matthew's Are not able to kill the Soul, compared with those of St. Luke, Have
no more that they can do; for that in the following Words, where Matthew says,
Fear him who is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell; and those which
Luke mentions, Fear him, who after he has killed; has power to east into
Hell. I conceive the Difference to be small, or none at all: They both begin
our Lord's Doctrine in the same Words, Fear not them that kill the Body; where
they both speak figuratively: And I therefore believe our Lord himself did so;
but I say the Body in this place, must needs intend the Person, or the
Compositum of Soul and Body together; for that our Sense and Reason
sufficiently assures us, That what is dead, cannot be killed; but the Body
without the Soul, or Spirit of Life, is dead. And therefore the Body taken
singly, or not acted by the Spirit of Life, is a dead Body, and therefore
cannot be killed. Whence I infer, that when our Evangelists speak of killing
the Body, they must certainly intend the same, as if they had said, Cannot kill
the Person. And hence I Collect, That when St. Matthew speaks of casting the
Soul and Body into Hell; he intends, casting the Compositum of them both, or
the Person, into Hell. St. Luke words it thus, Who after he has killed, has
power to cast into Hell. I think this intends as much as if he had said, Has
Power to cast the Person into Hell; so as it seems, the Sense of both our
Evangelists is the same, both in the Premises, and in the Conclusion of this
Doctrine; and the Variance between them, lies as before has been said, in the
Words, Are not able to kill the Soul, of St. Matthew; and the Words, Have no
more that they can do; of St. Luke. If we shall consider the proper Intent of
both these Texts, we must find it to be as Mr. W. says. The encouraging of our
Lord's Disciples, not to fear the Persecution of Men, for the doing of their
Duty; but rather to fear God, who can punish and reward after Death, as well as
in this Life: And the Texts of both our Evangelists Agree punctually to that
Intent, in delivering Words of the same Importance, and to the same Intent and
Purpose. But then, if Mr. W. or any other Person, will draw out of them Proofs
of any other Collateral thing, which is not properly within the Intent of our
Lord's Doctrine, I conceive they speak, and may intend differently, concerning
that Collateral Point, which Men may design to prove by them. It seems somewhat
clear to my Understanding, St. Matthew's Words prove his Opinion to be, That
Humane Souls have a Life and Subsistence in a state of Separation from the
Body; and I conceive, that in his Text, he worded our Lord's Doctrine,
according to his own Opinion of the thing. We find that St. Luke has worded it
in a different and varient manner, so expressing our Lord's Doctrine, as that
he gives no ground for proving the Souls Separate Subsistence from his Text,
which in the whole Tenor of it, does not name the Soul: And therefore, upon
this difference, I think it needful to enquire, or demand, What were the very
precise Words, wherein our Lord delivered this Doctrine? If St. Matthew has
rightly worded this Doctrine, then it is a strong Proof of the Souls Separate
Subsistence: The most substantial and nearest to an Affirmative, of any that
the Bible affords us; but if St. Luke has rightly worded our Lord's Doctrine,
then was there in that Doctrine, no Proof at all of a Souls Separate
Subsistence, nor any thing said in it, whereby that Opinion can be maintained.
I do not pretend to determine any thing concerning this Point, but am ready to
Argue, that there lies a Probability for St. Luke's Text, against that of St.
Matthew.

The Point in Question, concerning the Separate Subsistence, is (as was said)
collateral to the Intent of our Lord in this Doctrine, who it seems, did not
here mean to teach any thing, which might direct Men's Judgments in that
Collateral Point, which remains utterly unmentioned in the Text of St. Luke.
This moves me to apprehend, That the putting it into St. Matthew's Text, grew
from his own Opinion of the thing, rather than from the Words which our Lord
then delivered. The intent of our Lord, seems plain in both those Texs; and
therein what has been said seems true, they are at a perfect Agreement between
themselves; and we find no intention of meaning in our Lord to speak or teach
any thing about the Souls Separate Subsistence; and therefore I surmise it came
into St. Mathew's Text, by Accident, and Sprung rather from his own Opinion,
than from our Lords Doctrine, or the Words and Expressions thereof.

Secondly, I say, That St. Matthew was by Profession and Practice a Publican; a
Trade which no Man of Quality or Learning amongst the Jews of that time, would
endure to Practice; whence Matthew might more easily fall into the Opinion,
appearing in his Text. That Souls did Live and Subsist after the Departure and
Death of the Person. But of St. Luke, we read, That he was a Learned Man, and a
Physician; and Paul, (from whose Mouth he is said to have Written) was the most
Learned amongst the Apostles, and of a Sublime, Natural, Genius: But there
appears no likelihood that they were of St. Matthew's Opinion, in this matter
of the Souls Separate Subsistence; which if our Lord had mentioned in this
Doctrine, I conceive they would not have failed to take great notice of it,
because it was a Subject of high Speculation, not fit to be let fall to the
Ground without notice, and delivering of the same to the Christians of that
time: If our Lord's Doctrine (worded as it is by St. Matthew) were truly the
same as that Evangelist has reported it: And upon these grounds, I am apt to
conceive, that St. Matthew's Words, Are not able to kill the Soul; are likely
to have sprung from his own Opinion of the thing, and are not otherways the
very true Expressions and Words, wherein our Lord delivered this Doctrine to
his Disciples: And therefore I am apt to Appeal from the Text of St. Matthew,
to that which is reported to us in the Text of St. Luke's Gospel.

Thirdly, I conceive that the Text of St. Luke (wordded at it is) does more
fully express our Lords meaning, as in this Doctrine, than the Text of St.
Matthew's does For Luke says, That after Men have Killed, they have no more
that they can do, or can do no more harm to the Killed Person, or can Bring no
more Sufferings upon him by any thing that they can do. I think St. Matthew's
Words (Are not able to kill the Soul) do not so well or fully express our Lords
meaning, as St. Luke's do: For that those who maintain the Souls Separate
Subsistence, do say all, that it retains the Faculties of Intellect, and
Memory, as the Natural Powers thereunto properly belonging. Whence it seems
Inferrible, that they may, and do, remember such Relations, and Friends, as
they left behind them on Earth; and are likely to be so much concerned for
them, as to rejoice at their Welfare, and be grieved at their Sufferings: For
of this, we are informed from the Parable of Dives (if it have a Power of
Proving or Teaching in such cases) for Dives though Wicked and in Torments, yet
had so much good Nature in him as to remember his Relations upon Earth, and
have care to prevent those Sufferings, which they was otherwise likely to fall
under; and prays Lazarus may be sent out, to obviate by his Instructions the
Calamity which was like to befall them, and make some Addition to those
Sufferings, under which himself now lay; and from hence we may Collect, that
Men who have Killed, can still make some Additions to the Sufferings of the
Dead, by Tormenting or persecuting their Relations or Friends upon Earth; which
possibility is quite taken away by the Words of St. Luke's Text, After Killing
the Person, Men have no more that they can do; they can do no more harm to the
Dead Person, who is now gone quite out of the reach of any but God; and I
doubtingly conceive, there is neither Soul nor Body left of him, for Men or
Devils to prey upon. And from what is before delivered, I am ready to conceive,
That St. Luke's Words do more fully and properly express our Lord's meaning,
than those of St. Matthew do; and consequently that it is probable our Lords
Doctrine was delivered in the Words of St. Luke's Gospel, rather than in those
Words which St. Matthew has Recorded; and if this prove a truth, it will
utterly remove the proving force of St. Matthew's Text; which is otherways the
Principal Foundation, upon which the Opinion of the Souls Separate Subsistence
is Built. Hereupon I do not doubtingly, but fully conceive, That Mr. W. and his
partakers, will openly exclaim against my proceedings, in offering, or
pretending to prove or conceive that any sort of Scripture Words, or
Expressions, can be Erroneous; and yet it seems both clear and common, that
Words, Sayings, and Texts of Scripture, have been often, and are Daily brought,
and alleged for the Proof of Erroneous Opinions and Doctrines. I confess my
self not so much to Idolize the Words and Expressions of Scripture, as to
receive for an Oracle, every Saying or Sentence which I find Written in the
Bible: or to believe every such Saying, or Sentence, to be an irrefragable
truth, and the very Word of God, 1 John 4.1. Believe not every Spirit, but try
the Spirits, whether they are of God. I conceive there is no other way to try
Men's Pretenses to the Spirit of God, but either by the miraculous Works of such
Persons as pretend to it, or by the Fruits of the Spirit, which appears in
their Works and Actions amongst Men; and the Trials by either of these means
proceed upon grounds of Humane Understanding; and the results thereof as a
Parable, and Paraphrase to St. John's Text: I conceive it may be said, Believe
not every Saying and Sentence which ye find Written in Scripture: But try first
whether that Saying or Sentence be the Word of God, or no. And in this Trial it
seems there are but two ways or means to be used. The first is, by comparing it
by other Scriptures, or Texts, or the Analogy, Current, or Stream of Doctrine,
which runs and continues through the whole Scriptures, from the Beginning to
the End thereof: And if any particular Sentence oppose the Analogy, or Stream
of Doctrine, which runs through the whole Scriptures; Men may rest assured,
that Saying, or Sentence, neither is nor can be the Word of God. Next if we
meet with Sayings or Sentences of Scripture, which are opposed by other
Sayings, or Sentences thereof; it seems we may have good Reason to doubt on
which side the truth stands, and by the most fair and easy Constructions that
we can use, bring them to such an Agreement as by workings of Reason they can
be brought unto. And I am apt to infer, That if by Constructions of Reason,
they cannot be made stand together in such manner as both them may be true, I
think it a reasonable Result of such Trial, to think (as it must needs be) that
there is Error or Mistake in one of them. The other means for trying the Truths
of the Scripture Sayings, or Sentences, proceeds from the grounds of Natural
Principles, viz. The common Sensations and Reasons of Men, radicated in their
Natures, and confirmed unto them by certain and often Experiences.

And it seems, that if Men meet with such Sayings, or Sentences in Scripture,
as are opposite to Natural Principles, and the common Sense and Reason of
Mankind; confirmed to them by Practice, and Experience, we may with assurance
enough conclude, that such Sayings, or Sentences, ought not to pass among us
for the Word of God. And yet I am apt to believe, that my Opinion in this
Point, will not find an easy acceptance, amongst those who practice the
Reading and Magnifying of the Scriptures, which is also without doubt, a very
Beneficial and Laudable Practice: And yet I think I may justly apply thereunto
the common Proverb of Omne nimium vertitur in vitium. Upon the supposal that
Men will be apt to controvert and abundance of them to contradict what I have
said before, in reference to the Sayings and Sentences of the Scripture. I
undergo the Pains of annexing to this Discourse, Diverse Instances Collected
out of the Scriptures; which I think will evince, that there are Texts of
Scripture, whose common and ordinary Sense and Intendment, seems so different
and opposite one to another; as that the ordinary Understandings of Men, of
good Intellect and Judgment, cannot make them stand together so well, as that
they may both be true; and I will go no further for making such a Collection
than to the Gospel of St Matthew only, beginning the same with Chap. 21. where
the Evangelist Relates, That our Lord sent two of his Disciples, directing them
to go to the Village over against them; where he said they should find an Ass,
and a Colt tied, and directs, loose them and bring them tome, And the Disciples
went and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the Ass, and the Colt, and
put on them their Clothes, and they set him thereon. And then reports the
Triumphant manner of his entering into Jerusalem so Mounted.

I conceive the Words of this Text, do with some clearness import, That our
Lord was set upon both these Beasts at the same time, and so Triumphantly
entered into Jerusalem; and observing thereupon, I am ready to question the
truth of this Relation, because it thwarts the common Practice, and even the
common Sense of Mankind, and seems such an extravagant sort of Riding, as that
common Reason opposes the credibility of it: And so do the Gospels of the other
three Evangelists; they all mention our Lords entering into Jerusalem in such a
Triumphant Ovatition, upon an Ass; and each of them say, he Rode upon an Ass,
but none of the other three make mention of any more then one Ass in the Case,
viz. That he sent for an Ass-Colt, and such a one was brought to him, and he
Rode thereupon into Jerusalem. And from these Proofs, I am ready to infer, That
what St. Matthew says, in his Text, of sending for, finding, and bringing an
Ass and a Colt to Jesus, the Disciples putting upon them their Clothes, and
setting Jesus thereon. All these Passages seem to have a strong Tincture of
Fallacy and Error, and that in very truth there was all this while but one Ass
sent for, and found, and brought, and covered, and rid upon. And the Error
which I take to be in St. Matthew's Relation, seems to be one of the worst sort
of that kind, not a bare mistake rising from Negligence or Ignorance, but
Affected and Designed by the Writer, who quotes in his Text the Words of the
Prophet Zechariah, Tell ye the Daughter of Zion, behold thy King comes to
thee, meek and sitting upon an Ass, and a Colt the fool of an Ass. I think it
may be with some clearness Collected, That the design of St. Matthew, was to
make Christ entering into Jerusalem, agree in terms with this Prophecy of
Zechariah; which he thought it could not do, if there were not both an Ass and
a Colt in the Case, John 12.15. Upon this occasion quotes the Prophet
Zechariah, thus, Fear not Daughter of Zion, behold thy King comes, sitting
upon an Asses-Colt. St. John we see was not so scrupulous as to repeat the very
Words of the Prophet, but thought them sufficiently fulfilled, in our Lords
Triumphal Ovation into Jerusalem, sitting upon such an Ass, as was a Colt, the
fool of an Ass. The second Text, or Relation, whose verity I intend to
question, is read in Mat. 28. Which comparing with John 20. I find them both
relating Facts done, at the time of our Lords Resurrection, and Appearing to
Mary Magdalene: And in the Circumstances of those Facts, their Relations do so
much differ one from the other, that I do not find it within the compass of my
Understanding, so to reconcile them and make them stand together, as that they
can both be true; whence I infer a great probability, that there is a mistaking
in one of them; and because St. John was present at some part of the Fact, and
was likely to have a Relation of the rest from Mary Magdalene her self, I think
the Report which he makes thereof, is more to be Credited then that of St.
Matthew's; I have compared the Words of them more particularly in a former
Treatise, and thereupon will refer my Readers to the Chapters themselves before
quoted; out of which an intelligent Reader may easily gather the differences
between them, and difficulties that will arise in reconciling of them.

A Third Instance wherein I question the verity of a Scriptural Expression,
arises by comparing the Genealogies of Matthew and Luke together; both of them
deliver the Genealogy of Joseph, the Husband of Mary, and the reputed Father of
our Lord: and both of them agree, that he was Lineally descended from King
David: But Matthew brings this Line down by Solomon and through the whole Race
of the Kings; whereas Luke carries his Line down by Nathan another Son of
David, and his Progeny, without mentioning any of the Kings in that Descent:
And thus they differ quite one from another, until they come down to Salathiel,
who is by Matthew, said to be the Son of Jechonias; and by Luke to be the Son
of Neri: then they both name his Son Zorobabel, and from Zorobabel downwards
their Genealogies differ, as they did before they came to Salathiel; reciting
Names in their Lines of Descent, quite differing the one from the other; and
they do not thus only differ in the Names of Joseph's Ancestors, but also in
the Number of them; for Matthew beginning from David, and counting him for one,
Names but Twenty six. Names of Persons in his Line of Descent from David to
Joseph; whereas Luke beginning from David as one, and descending from him down
to Joseph, names Forty two Persons, as Lineal Ancestors to Joseph, succeeding
to one another in the space of Time; so as they appear to differ from one
another, by the Number of Sixteen Names, or Persons, succeeding one another in
that compass of Time. Matthew counting Twenty six Names, or Generations; and
Luke counting Forty two Generations in the same Space or Compass of Time: And
this makes such a Variance between their two Genealogies, as I am not able to
reconcile: And therefore I am ready to conceive there is likely some mistake in
one of them: And yet further, I find in St. Matthew's Line, That which I think
to be another mistake; for when he comes to King Joram, he says, Joram begat
Ozias; whereas by the Genealogy in Kings and Chronicles, Joram begat Ahaziah,
and he begat Joash, and he begat Amaziah, all Kings of Judah successively, and
Lineal Descendants from David, between Joram and Oziah, and who reigned Kings
in Judah, for the space of above Seventy Years. Why St. Matthew should omit the
Names of those Kings in his Account, I do not understand; and therefore am apt
to conceive it was an Error in him. And yet further I find that he counts
Fourteen and Fourteen Generations between David and Joseph, and yet upon
Examining, the particulars in that Account specified, I find they amount but to
Twenty six Generations, which shows a difference of St. Matthew with himself;
his Sense in one place differing from that in another; and this also I am apt
to pass for a mistake in him.

A Fourth Instance in this kind, arises from comparing Mat. 2. and Luke 2. In
their Relations of things done soon after our Lords birth. Matthew says, That
wise Men came out of the East to Worship Christ, and made their way by
Jerusalem to Bethlehem [which was but five Miles distance from Jerusalem] and
tho Herod had directed them to return to him, yet they went home again another
way: And when they were departed, an Angel directed Joseph to take the Child
and his Mother, and flee with them into Egypt: And when he arose, he took the
young Child and his Mother by Night, and departed into Egypt; and remained
there till an Angel brought him word that Herod was dead, and directed his
Return into Judea again. And this Direction Joseph obeyed, and came thence into
Judea, and so into Galilee, and to Nazareth.

St. Luke's Relation mentions nothing of all this, but says, That eight days
after the Birth of our Lord, he was Circumcised: And when the days of the
Virgins Purification were accomplished, [his Parents] brought him to Jerusalem,
to present him to the Lord, and make such an Offering, as Moses required on
that behalf; and when they had performed this, they returned to Galilee, to
their own City Nazareth. We read, Levit. 12.2. If a Woman have born a
Man-Child, she shall be unclean seven days; and in the eighth day, the Child
shall be Circumcised, and the Mother shall then continue in the Blood of her
Purifying, three and thirty days. All which days, 7 and 1, and 33, make 41
days, or six weeks: And then they went and took Jerusalem in their way to
Nazareth. We celebrate the Wise Men's coming to Christ, 12 days after his Birth;
and soon after their return home, an Angel directed Joseph's Flight into
Egypt, and then Herod finding himself mocked by them, sent forth, and slew all
the Children that were in Bethlehem, and the Coasts of it. We read in Josephus,
That Herod continued under a great and languishing Disease, for many Months
before his Death; and it seems likely, some of them passed, after this
Infant-Massacre, and about a Fortnight of the Virgins Six Weeks Purification,
seems to have been passed, at, or before this Massacre: And I conceive, that
the Month which remained of those days, does not afford time enough for
Joseph's going into Egypt, his Abode there, a^ his Return from thence into
Judea. I am not able to resolve my self about this difficulty, but shall be
glad to receive Instruction thereupon, from Men of greater Knowledge and
Learning, resting doubtful in the mean time, concerning the very Truth of these
Relations; the further Consideration whereof, shall be left to the Judgment of
my Readers.

A Fifth Instance in this kind, I take out of the Two forequoted Chapters of
St. Matthew and Luke. Mat. begins his Relation of our Lord's Birth, from his
Parents being at Bethlehem, without saying from whence, or upon what occasion
they came thither: From thence he carries them down into Egypt, and brings
them up again into Judea; but when he heard that Archilaus did reign there
instead of his Father Herod, he was afraid to go thither; but being warned in a
Dream, he turned aside into the Parts of Galilee, and came, and dwelt in a City
called Nazareth, to fulfill an old Prophecy, which said, He shall be called a
Nazarene. The Words, They came out of Egypt, into the Land of Israel, seem to
intend the Kingdom of Judea, where Archilans reigned, which lay directly in the
way between Egypt and Galilee: And the Words, He was afraid to go thither,
seem to intend, He was afraid to make his Abode or Settlement there, which made
him pass through that Kingdom into the Parts of Galilee, then under the
Government of another Herod, whither he was directed in a Dream to go; and he
came and dwelt in a City called Nazareth. It seems, as to a strange Place, and
before to him unknown.

St. Luke seems to make a very different Relation concerning these Particulars;
for he says our Lord's Parents lived at Nazareth before the Conception; and
thither the Angel Gabriel came, to make his Annuntiation to the Blessed Virgin:
After which he says, Our Lords Parents went up from Nazareth, a City of
Galilee, to Bethlehem, to be taxed with Mary his espoused Wife, because Joseph
her Husband was of the Lineage of David. And that after our Lord's Birth, and
the Days of the Purification ended, they went up to Jerusalem, and presented
the Child before the Lord, and offered such a Sacrifice for him, as Moses had
commanded; and relates some Passages then happening, as those of Simeon and
Anna: And when they had performed all that was required by the Law of Moses,
they returned into Galilee to their own City Nazareth. There seems a kind of
Repugnancy in these Texts, one of them to the other, especially in the
Knowledge, which the Parents might have of the City Nazareth; for Matthew
speaks of that City, as of a place unknown to our Lord's Parents before that
time, and says, They went thither by Gods special direction delivered to them
in a Dream: Without Notice taking, that they had ever any Knowledge of that
Place before; whereas Luke says, They dwelt at Nazareth before the Conception,
and went up from thence to Bethlehem, to be taxed; and passing through
Jerusalem, they returned into Galilee, to their own City Nazareth. Here seems
between these two Texts, such an Opposition concerning the Knowledge which our
Lords Parents had of the City of Nazareth, that I confess it beyond my Ability,
to offer Reasonable Terms, of agreeing these Two Evangelists, one with the
other, upon this Particular. I am unwilling to surmise a Mistake in either of
them, because a great Part of the Verity of each of their Relations seems
concerned in this Point; I therefore pray the Assistance of Men more knowing and
learned than my self, to direct and support me in these Depths, wherein I think
Elephants may swim

A 6th. Instance of this kind, I take from Mat. 8.5. compared with Luke 7.2. In
these Two Texts, our Two Evangelists relate the Circumstances of one lame Fact.
Mat. says, That our Lord being at Capernaum, there came to him a Centurion,
whose servant was sick, and told our Lord, that his sickness was a Palsy. And
Jesus answering, said, I will come and heal him: Nay, replies the Centurion, I
am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, but speak the word only,
and my servant shall be healed. Our Lord rejoins the Captain, and says, Go thy
way, and as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee. St. Luke relates it
thus: This Centurions servant was ready to die, and when he heard of Jesus, he
sent unto him the Elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and
heal his servant. And they came to Jesus, desiring him to do this Kindness for
the Captain, because he was a worthy Person, and a Lover of the Jews; and Jesus
went with them toward the Captain's House, and when he was not far from
thence, the Centurion sent Friends to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not
thy self, for I am not worthy that thou should enter under my Roof;
wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee, but say in a
word, and my Servant shall be healed. And Jesus thereupon turned him about, and
discoursed with those that followed him; and they that were sent, returning to
the House, found the Servant whole, that had been sick. Upon reading these two
Relations, I think it plainly appears, That either this Centurion came
Personally to our Lord, to request his Servant's Cure; or he did not come
Personally to Christ for that purpose, but sent the Elders of the Jews to
request that favor upon his behalf: Without that himself came either to Sight
or Speech of our Lord upon that occasion, I find no ground, or reasonable
guess, which of our Texts, deliver the absolute Truth in this Circumstance of
the Fact, which they relate; but from this Variance, and the other Instances
before recounted, I think it may reasonably be collected, That Men are not
bound to take, and perhaps ought not to take, every Saying, or Sentence, which
they find written in the Scriptures, to be an irrefragable Truth, and the very
Word of God. And I am ready to apply this Tenet to the Sayings now in dispute
with Mr. W. viz. Are not able to kill the Soul, and have no more that they can
do. We find an apparent Variance between these Two Sayings, and that the Words
of St. Luke, are adaequate, and answerable to the Intent of our Lord's Doctrine
in this place; whereas those of St. Matthew, have a double Aspect, and look as
it were two ways: For one way it insinuates, that Persecutors can do no more
harm after they have killed: Another way it seems next to an Assertion, that
Men's Souls live, and subsist in a state of Separation from their Bodies. I do
not by the Context, or any other ways conceive, that our Lord did speak, or had
any Intent to speak of the state of Men after Death, in this Doctrine; whence
the Words, Are not able to kill the Soul, in that Prospect of intending to
teach the state of Men after Death, seems quite besides our Lord's Meaning in
this Doctrine; and if not quite out of it, yet very plainly collateral to it:
And yet from this sidewind, the Maintainers of Separate Subsistence, draw the
strongest Proof which they can find for maintaining their Opinion of the
Separate Subsistence. I think, that upon perusal of this Argument, it will
appear, the strength of this Proof is much weakened and abated, and will be
found to be of much less force, than it seems to have, at the first reading or
hearing thereof; and in this state of debilitation, I leave it, to prosecute my
Observations upon Mr. W's Pages, as I did before.

P. 64 Mr. W. pretends to take the disputed Words, as Comments one upon
another, and says, that by Construction they may be made to intend one thing:
And I am ready to grant, that by Construction, they may both of them be made,
to serve the Meaning of our Lord in this Doctrine; but then, in our Collateral
Point (which St. Luke does not meddle with) there is a very great Variance
between these two Expressions; for that the one proves strongly the Soul's
Separate Subsistence, and the other proves it not, nor meddles with it at all:
Which proves, that our Lord's Doctrine did not intend to speak of that Point in
this place. And therefore our Question thereupon is, In what Words our Lord
delivered this Doctrine? And the Conclusion is, That if he delivered this
Doctrine, in the Words of St. Matthew, then they are a strong Proof of the
Souls Separate Subsistence; but if his Doctrine were delivered in the Words of
St. Luke, then there is no Proof at all in it, of the Souls Separate
Subsistence. And I have before enough Argued on the side of St. Luke, and for
the Probability, that his Text sets forth to us, the very Words wherein our
Lord delivered this Doctrine.

Mr. W. confesses, That Luke expresses less than Matthew; but says, He never
meant less. Which I think, intends, that the Meaning of Luke in his Text, was,
That those who kill the Body, are not able to kill the Soul: Which Meaning does
not at all appear in the Words of Luke's Text, which do not say so: And how
then Mr. W. should come to know that he meant so, I do not understand; and
therefore I reject this Gloss upon that Text, as Mr. W's own Invention, or
Fiction.

The Fifth Argument.
Page 65. Mr. W. raises an Argument, for the Soul's Separate Subsistence, from
the Appearing of Moses and Elias, and discoursing with our Lord upon Mount
Tabor; and says, That Moses could not appear there in his Person, Soul and
Body; because Deuteronomy. 34.6. says, Moses died in the Land of Moab, and He [the
Lord] buried him in a Valley there, over against Beth-Peor; but no man knows
of his Sepulcher unto this day.

P 66. Mr. W. discoursing upon this Text, says, That Moses appearing at Mount
Tabor, must be either alive in Spirit only, or else his Body was raised.
Adding, I know that some conjecture, that his Body was raised; but they cannot
prove that Conjecture, from Texts of Scripture. And therefore he thinks it more
likely, that Moses appeared in Spirit only [intending I suppose in his Soul
subsisting in a state of Separation after Death.] Which I think to be no more
than a Conjecture, which he is not able to prove by Texts of Scripture, any
more, than the former Conjecture can be so Proved. And to these Two
Conjectures, I pretend to add a Third, viz. That Moses may not have died in the
Mount but might be translated, or transported to Heaven in Person, as Enoch and
Elias had before been: Which I offer to Prove, by his Appearing with Elias, at
Mount Taber. It seems, they appeared both after a like manner, and the one as
much in Person as the other. Mr. W. grants, that Elias did appear in Person;
and Arguendo a simili, it appears most likely, that Moses did so too. As to the
Text, which says, Moses died, and was buried; I think fit to consider by whom
this Book of Deuteronomy might be written, and if the Promises thereof might be
written by Moses, or his Direction; yet this closing Passage of it, about his
own Death, and Burial, it seems could not be so. It appears not from whence the
Opinion of his Death and Burial was derived, or how the Jews might come to
know, that he so died, and was buried. Deuteronomy. 3.27. Go, get ye up into the Top
of Pisgah, and take a view of the Land. And Chap. 34. says, Moses went up from
the Plains of Moab, to the Top of Pisgah, and died there. The Words of both
Texts, seem to intend, that Moses went up alone into the Top of this Mountain;
and told the Jews before his going up, that he was to die there, and they never
saw or heard more of him after that time; whence they might (according to the
common course of the World in such Cases) reasonably enough conjecture, that he
died there, and was buried according to the Custom of the World, without
finding any Evidence or Truth of such a Burial. Whence I conceive his being
buried, was but a Conjecture of the Jews, because they could not find what was
become of the Body, although probably they made a great Search for it. Whence I
Collect, that his dying in the Mount, and his being buried thereabouts, was but
a Collection or Conjecture of the Jews, from his own not returning to them, and
their not being able to find his Body by their most diligent Search. And
Collecting from these Premises, I am ready to infer, (as a Probability) that
Moses was translated, and therefore neither dead nor buried, and yet was never
seen, or heard of after, nor could they by search find any place of his Burial,
or what other ways was become of him; and I offer his Appearance at Mount
Tabor, as the best ground I have for this Conjecture; conceiving, that it might
please God the Jews might not know of that Translation; for that if they had
known of his immediate going to Heaven, they might have been apt to direct
Prayers thither to him, to intercede with God for their Nation, as he often
successfully did, whilst he was here upon Earth. I have said before, that Mr.
W's Opinion of Moses's appearing at Mount Tabor in Soul only, cannot be proved
by any Text of Scripture, is but his, or (at the most) a humane Conjecture: And
I grant, that his appearing in Person at Mount Tabor, is also a humane, but I
think a more reasonable Conjecture. And to this whole fifth Argument drawn from
Men's Collections, and Conjectures thereupon, I Answer, That Men expect more
Clear and Assertory Proofs of the Soul's Separate Subsistence, than this, or
such like Arguments, can afford them.

The Sixth Argument.
Page 67. Mr. W. founds his Sixth Argument, upon that which is delivered to us
in the Parable of Dives: And first, he grants that Relation to be a Parable,
and not a real Story; adding, That Parables are shadows of Discourse, by which,
are set forth things that are real and substantial. And I grant they may be
Instructive, concerning those Matters for whose Illustration they were
purposely delivered; and yet even in those things I do not take them to be
proving. Mr W. says further, That Tertullian, Augustine, and the rest of the
Fathers, did much build their Faith (of the Souls Immortality, and of Men's
Happiness, or Misery, immediately after Death, before the Judgment of the Great
Day) upon this Scripture. I observe, he avoids calling it, this Parable. I know
not whether, what he says concerning the Fathers building their Belief of such
things upon this Parable, be true or not; but conceive, that if this Parable
was really the principal Foundation of that Belief, it had but a very soft and
sandy Foundation; so as the building thereupon erected, will not be enough able
to resist the Storms, Rains, and Floods, which may happen to assault it.

He further quotes Ireneus, and relates the gross Errors, which he and
Tertullian fell into, by following this Parable too closely, viz. so far as to
think, That a Separated Soul has a Shape, Eyes, Mouth, and other like Members
of a Humane Body. He repeats his Concession again, That this Similitude of
Dives and Lazarus, is not Historical, but Parabolical.

P. 68. Mr. W. says, By Abraham's Bosom, is meant a Place of great Pleasure
and Happiness, reserved for the Righteous, when they have finished this Life.
And hereupon I observe a Variance between being carried to this Place of
Pleasure, and a going before God, to an intermediate Judgment; and conceive,
that the being carried to this Place, stands in Opposition to the Text of
Solomon, The Spirit returns to God who gave it; for Lazarus in this Parable,
neither went to God for Judgment, nor returned to Him by a natural Bent, or
Power of its own, but was carried to this unknown Place, by the Ministry of
Angels.

P. 70. Mr. W. raises a Question, Whether the Words and Sense of this Parable,
do speak of and import, a State of Persons presently after their Death, or such
a State as shall overtake them at the Resurrection, and the last Judgment. And
he spends diverse Pages and Arguments, in Proving, That the Import of this
Parable, points to a State, presently succeeding the Parties Death, and not to
that State which shall follow low upon the Resurrection; but his Labor to this
Purpose is needlessly bestowed upon me; or others, who may think as I do, That
the Sense of this Parable, intends a State presently succeeding the Parties
Death. Here Mr. W. says, Our Lord, by this Parable, intended to set forth an
immediate state of Happiness for the Godly, and of Misery for the Wicked. I
Reply to this, That there appears no Evidence in the Context of our Lord's
Intent, how to Teach by this Parable: There is no Discourse in any Part of the
Context, which might lead our Lord to speak of the State of Persons after
Death; but the Context immediately foregoing, does plainly intimate and prove
the special Intent of our Lord in this Parable, was to Illustrate and Confirm a
Sentence, which himself had lately before uttered, viz. That there are things
highly esteemed among men, and yet are an Abomination in the sight of God. And
to this Purpose, he describes the state of Dives, with such Circumstances, as
make it highly esteemed and desired amongst Men; and sets Lazarus so low, and
in a Condition so miserable, as one can hardly devise a worse Condition amongst
Men; notwithstanding whereof, the Sequel of the Parable declares, That the
state of Dives, though highly esteemed amongst Men, was in the whole of it,
abominable to the sight of God, and Lazarus's state, though abominated by Men,
was in the whole, more blessed than that of Dives was: And I conceive
thereupon, that our present Parable was delivered by our Lord, with special
Intent to illustrate this Doctrine, without any apparent Intent, to teach
concerning the State of People after Death; and yet I do Agree, this Parable to
set forth, or prove, that the common Opinion of the Jews at that time, was
correspondent to the Descriptions made in this Parable; but I conceive withal,
that diverse Particulars therein specified, prove it to be a Jewish Conception
of that Time, and not an Intent of our Lord, to teach either Jews, or
Christians, what the true state of Men after Death, should be. First, It
declares a great distance of space, to be between Dives and Lazarus; and that
there was a great Gulf fixed, so that none could pass from the one Place to the
other; and yet Abraham and Dives, had a familiar Discourse between them,
without straining their Voices. Secondly, they saw, and knew, and spoke to one
another, without the use of Eyes, or Tongue, or Ears, as Mr. W. will suppose,
although the Text do not declare it to be so; but speaks of Dives, as having
all these Members of a Man: And therefore I Collect, That if this Text prove
(any thing of the state of Men after Death) it proves amongst the rest, that
the Persons suffering, have Eyes, and Ears, and Tongue, and like Bodily
Members, and that the Suffering there, is principally, if not only applied to
the Body, and his Tongue being eminently tormented in that Flame, or Fire.
Thirdly, this Parable imports, That the Tormented (and by the Rule of
Contraries) the Happy Souls have Remembrance and Care, concerning those things
they left upon Earth, and concern themselves about their Friends Happiness or
Misery: Whereas Solomon says, The Dead know not any thing; and David says, That
in Death, all Men's Thoughts perish; and Job agrees, That all Concerns perish
with Death: And Solomon names particularly Men's Love and their Hatred. Isa. 38
18. Hezekiah sings to God, The Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate
thee; they that go down into the Pit, cannot hope, but the Living can only
praise Thee, as I do this day. And thereupon I leave to Consideration, whether
our Parable in this Point, do not oppose the fore-quoted, and diverse other
Texts of Scripture, and even the common Opinion of the Reformed Churches.
Fourthly, I Recite a former Observation, That if our Parable intended Dives to
be in Hell, in his Soul only, then Abraham and Dives, discoursed both
unproperly, and untruly, in calling one another by the Names of Father and Son:
For that Mr. W. and his Partakers, say, That was a Spirit newly created by God,
which true Being and Subsistence, before it was infused, or injected into
Dives, his newly procreated Body, without the Parents having any part in the
Generation of it. Thus the Soul of Dives came not from Abraham, or any of his
Posterity, and how is he then his Son? Mat. 22.42. Our Lord quotes David
calling Christ his Lord, and demands, How is he then his Son? And the Jews were
not able to Answer him a word to that Question. And this I apply to the
Question which I last asked, and from the Premises I conclude, that our Lord,
did not by this Parable, intend to teach the true State of Men after Death, but
to Illustrate that Assertion which he had before delivered by a Similitude,
drawn from that Opinion which the Jews then commonly held, of the State of Men
after Death.

The Seventh Argument.
PAge 74. Mr. W. quotes Luke 23. and recites the History of the Thief upon the
Cross, and the Promise made to him by Christ, of his being with him in
Paradise. I say thereto, Mr. W. has urged this Proof before in this Treatise;
and I have given him thereto such an Answer, as satisfies my own Understanding:
And because it is of some length, I have no mind here to repeat it, but rather
make choice to offer an Argument raised from other Scriptures, in Impeachment
of the Verity and Credit of this Relation; and begin with considering the
Person of our Evangelist St. Luke, who was it seems converted to the Faith, by
the Ministry of Paul, whose Emanuensis he is conceived to have been, in the
writing of this Gospel: And it seems, that this Evangelist was not converted,
till diverse years after our Lord's Crucifixion; and we know that St. Paul was
not only an Infidel, but a Persecuter of the Church, for some years after our
Lord's Death. We no where find that either of them was present, beholding that
Execution; and probable it is, that neither of them were so. In the Proem to
his Gospel, Luke to Theophilus says thus: It seemed good to me, having had
perfect understanding of all things, from the very first, to write unto ye in
order, even as they delivered them to us, who from the beginning were
Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word. Thus he professes to write, from the
Tradition of other Men, who had been Eyewitnesses of them, and Ministers of
the Word: And of those Traditions, I conceive, this Relation of the Crucified
Thief's Conversion, to be one. If we shall consider the other Three
Evangelists, we must find them totally silent concerning this Fact; and that
they do not concur with St. Luke, in their Testimonies concerning it. We have
good Assurance that St. John was present at our Lord's Suffering, and continued
with him till the Time of his Expiration; and yet he takes no Notice, nor makes
any Mention of this Thief's Conversion: And yet I think the Fact was so
Remarkable, as deserved to be Recorded, if he had known it to be done. St.
Matthew was one of the Twelve called by Christ to be of his Apostles, and
continued Faithful to him to the end; whence it seems likely, he might be one
of the Beholders of this Tragedy, and yet he makes no Mention of this Thief's
Conversion.

Men generally suppose, That Mark writ his Gospel from the Mouth of St. Peter;
and very probable it is, that that great Apostle was present at the Suffering
of his Master; and yet St. Mark makes no Mention at all of this Conversion: And
hereupon it seems to deserve our Enquiry, How Luke, who was not present at that
Fact, should come to know the Particulars of it, when the other Three;
Evangelists, either did not know it, or have utterly suppressed their Knowledge
and the Mention of it. The Silence of the other Three Evangelists, seems a
competent Ground to question the Verity of St. Luke's Relation; but that is not
all, for Two other of the Evangelists, Matthew and Mark, give an opposite and
contrarient Testimony, to that which St. Luke delivers concerning it. Mat.
27.44. There were two Thieves crucified with our Lord, and the People which
passed by whilst he was on the Cross, reviled him, saying, Save thy self if
thou be the Son of God, and come down from the Cross: And the Thieves also
which were crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth. Which I conceive to
be a True and Proper Translation of St. Matthew's Greek Words. Mark 15.27. With
Christ they crucified two Thieves, the one on his right hand, and the other on
his left; and they that passed by, railed on him: and they that were crucified
with him, reviled him. Both these Texts in Greek agree in their Expressions.
Mat. 27.44. (...). Mark 15.32. (...). Here our Translators in St. Matthew, have
rendered the Word (...), by, Casting in his Teeth; and in Mark they have
rendered it by the Word Reviling, both which Translations import the same
Actings in these Places: But both these Evangelists agree in Terminis, in their
Plural Expressions, viz. that they who were Crucified with him did this, [they
both did so.] Whence it seems consequent, That the one did not Rebuke the other
for doing so, and became thereupon converted and rewarded, as St. Luke relates
the Matter of this Fact. I have said before, that the Silence of the other
Three Evangelists, may give a reasonable occasion, for Men to doubt the Verity
of St. Luke's Relation; and then, that the Opposition which is thereunto made,
by the concurrent Testimony of Matthew and Mark, evidencing the contrary, seems
to be a firm Ground for Doubting, and even for Opposing the Truth of St. Luke's
Relation, concerning this Conversion, and the Promise of our Lord, upon which
his whole Argument is grounded, and must finally fail with the Verity of that
Relation. I have said before, that my first Answer given to this Argument,
satisfies my own Understanding; and I now thereunto Add, If I had not so good
an Answer to his Argument, as has before been given, I should be very apt to
conceive, that the Causes which I have here produced, of doubting the Verity of
St. Luke's Relation, would be a good and sufficient Answer to that Argument
which M. W. has drawn from so Questionable a Relation, which seems to make the
Ground of his Argument shake under him; convincing, that no firm Argument can
be drawn from so infirm and sandy a Relation.

P. 76. Mr. W. quotes Grotius, and says, That after the Times of Esdras [ who
lived after the Reign of Atta^erxes, a fifth King of the Persians, after Cyrus,
which was many years after the beginning of Cyrus 's Reign] when the State of
Souls after this Life, began first to be spoke of in proper distinct Names, the
Hebrews did usually call that state of ^elicity, wherein pious Souls, separate
from their Bodies did enjoy Happiness before the Resurrection, the Garden of
Eden. Hereupon I Observe, that both Grotius and Mr. W. do Agree, that it was
after the Time of Esdras, when the State of Souls after this Life, began first
to be spoken of in proper distinct Names [or Terms.] I find that Phericides
Syrus is commonly accounted to be the first, who broached this Separate
Opinion; and sought it amongst the Grecians, and it was very much Cultivated by
his Scholar Pythagoras, and came down from him, to Socrates and Plato; and from
them, to the Philosophers of succeeding Ages: And that Phericides, the Broacher
of this Opinion, lived and taught in the Time of Cyrus the Great, wherein the
Foundation of the Second Temple at Jerusalem was laid: And thence I Agree there
is a good Probability, that after the Time of Esdras, the Doctrine of Separate
Subsistence, might be farther Cultivated, and more distinctly Taught and
Affirmed, than at any time before it had been; and that from thence the same
descended among the Jews, and was commonly received by the most Part of that
Nation, in the Time of our Lord's Ministry, and occasioned our Lord's framing
the Parable of Dives, according to the common Conception, which the Jews had of
such things in his Time.

Mr. W. here Adds, That the Thief, by the Word Paradise, might well understand
a Place of Happiness, or the Garden of Eden; that the Words of this Promise,
intended, that he should be there to day; and that Christ said, To day he would
remember him in the thing he asked, and would perform his Petition this day,
and Heavens Joys shall attend thy departing Soul. Which last Saying, are Mr.
W's own Words, and may pass for his Gloss upon the Text: But that which I
principally Oppose in this Place, is the Design which he seems to draw, of
limiting the Time of our Lord's Promise to the precise Time of a Day; that
being a Limitation, which I think ought not to be received in this Place: But
that our Lord's Term of, To Day, is well enough Answered, if the thing were
performed, in some such short time after, as might well enough be called To
Day. The Persons died on Friday Evening, and if they were in Paradise together
upon Sunday after, it seems to me a sufficient fulfilling of our Lord's Saying,
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

P. 79. Mr. W. says, He never heard of any Objection offered against his
Argument drawn from this Text, but One, which was this, That some Men have
offered a different Reading in Part of this Text, pretending it should be read,
that our Lord said, Verily, I say unto you, to day, thou shall be with me in
Paradise. Mr. W. lays great Blame upon this Objection, which I find no
Inclination in my self to defend; but let it stand, or fall, as to other Men's
Reasons shall appear requisite. But I Rely strongly upon the other Answer,
which I have here given to Mr. W's Argument, drawn from our Lord's Words, in
this Text; and have said, that Luke who was not present at this Fact, is the
only Reporter of it to us; the other Three Evangelists passing it over in
silence; and that Two of them say, the Thieves, who were Crucified with him
[the Two Thieves, both of them] reviled him. St. Luke says, They did not both
do so, but one of them only did it, and the other rebuked him for it, and had a
Reward promised him for so doing: Whence it appears, I have two Witnesses
against one, in maintenance of my Objection against my Opposer's Argument.

P. 79. Mr. W. Concludes, That as the Soul of Christ, and the Penitent Thief,
were immortal, so are the Souls of other Men. To this Saying of his, I give an
easy Assent, but think he has by no Means well proved, That either of their
Souls had a Separate Subsistence, or were Immortal.

The Eighth Argument.
PAge 59. Mr. W. Argues Eighthly, from our Lord's words, Father, into thy hands
I commend my Spirit; and St. Steven's words, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit:
Where he will have the word Spirit, to signify and intend the Souls of these
Petitioners, conceived by Mr. W. and his Party, to subsist in a State of
Separation from the Body. This Argument he has before offered in this
Treatise, and there I have given it such an Answer, as satisfies my own
Understanding, and there neither need, nor can give any other Answer thereunto,
without repeating what I have there alleady delivered. I have said there, that
in both these Petitions, the Greek Word or Term of (...), is used; and that our
Translators have rendered it in English by the word Spirit; but that its
Natural Signification intends Breath, or Spirit indifferently, and may be
warrantably Translated by either of these English Terms, according as the
Subject, or Matter of Discourse may require: And therefore I impute no fault
nuto our Translators, for rendering it by the word Spirit, as they have done,
conceiving it was intended, by the word Spirit in this Place, to signify the
Spirit of Life in Man, which is one of the two Constituent Parts of his Person,
and by the ordinary figure of Synecdoche, setting one Part for the Whole; the
word Spirit here, seems to intend the whole Person: So as under this Term of
Spirit, the Petitioners intended to recommend themselves, or their whole
Persons, the one into the hands of his Father, under whose Custody, his Body,
as well as his Soul, viz. his whole Person, remained, and was preserved,
without seeing Corruption, until the Time and Hour of his Resurrection: And I
conceive, St. Stephen's Prayer was made in a like Sense, and to the same
Purpose that our Lord's was.

Mr. W. says further, He does not know of any such Phraesed Petitions as these
are, put up by either of them, or any other Person, in Prayer, but just at the
Moment of dying. I will therefore refresh his Memory, by quoting to him, and
our Readers, Psalm. 31.6. where the very same Words are used: Into thy hands I
commend my Spirit; for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of Truth. (For
any thing that appears) the Psalmist was in Health at the uttering of this
Petition; but withal, in a state of great Trouble, as the foregoing Verses
testify. And it thence seems somewhat Clear to my Understanding, that by these
Words, our Prophet did not intend, to recommend to God's Protection, his Spirit
of Life, or Seperative Soul only, but that rather in those Words, he intended,
to recommend to God's Care and Protection, his whole Compositum of Soul and
Body, his Person, or himself, without having any particular, or singular
Respect to his Spirit of Life, or Soul, whatsoever the same might be: Which
seems may be somewhat mo^e Cleared, by a short Paraphrase, Into thy hands, O
God, I commend my self, for thou have redeemed me. This I take to be the true
Meaning of David's Words; and I take the Prayers of our Lord, and St. Steven,
to be of the same Import, and that they have no such other Emphatical
Signification, as Mr. W. in this place endeavors to put upon them.

P. 80. he says, If his Interpretation of those Words be true, they clearly
express the Souls Immortality. I do not deny this, but withal conceive, that
his Interpretation of these Words, is not true, as my foregoing Answers
testify; and then I think no man can believe, that they are a good Proof, or
any Proof at all, for the Souls Separate Subsistence.

P. 82. he says, The Word Spirit here, intends Separate Soul; and if it does
not mean so, he desires to know what it does mean: And I have said before, that
it intends the whole Person of the Petitioner, as it is a Compositum of Soul
and Body.

Mr. W. farther demands, What the word Spirit here means, and whether it mean
the Life of the Body. Here I am at a loss what he means, by the Life of the
Body; and if he does not mean the Life of the Person, he means that which has
no good Sense in it; for the Body, quatenus tale, or divided from the Person,
has no sort of Life in it; as St. James tells us, A Body without a Spirit, is
dead: And therefore, to mention the Life of the Body, without a Figurative
Intent, inclines to the Nature of a Bull; in such manner, as if one should
speak of the Life of a dead thing. He then demands, What? Is it the dead
Carcass, the whole M^n, Body and Soul? Putting them together, as if the dead
Carcass, was the whole Man, Body and Soul, intending to confound these Terms,
and give to each of them an equipollent Signification; as if the dead Carcass,
and the whole Man, Body and Soul, signified the same thing; whereas I must
divide them, and say, The dead Carcass signifies one thing, and the whole Man,
Body and Soul, or the Person, signifies another thing; and though the Carcass
shall go to the Dust, as it was, yet the Person shall be preserved, the good
sleeping in Christ, and the bad remaining under the Knowledge and Disposal of
God, until the times of refreshing shall come from the Presence of the Lord,
and the Trumpet shall sound, and all Persons who have lived, shall be raised,
and summoned to the Judgment of the Great Day: And therefore, from the Words,
as I have Expounded them, I think the direct contrary to what he says, that no
good Argument can be raised from our first quoted Texts, for proving his
Opinion of the Souls Separate Subsistence.

The Ninth Argument.
PAge 83. Mr. W. quotes Romans 10.11. And if Christ be in you, the Body is dead,
because of sin; but the Spirit is Life, because of Righteosness; and if the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies, by his Spirit
that dwells in you. And he says upon this Text, Methinks this Truth of the
Souls Immortality, does very clearly shine in the Evidence of this Scripture. I
Answer, That what shines so clearly to him, I do not at all discover.

P. 84. Mr. W. proceeds in a long Discourse, which I think rather confounds and
misleads, than opens and declares the Meaning of St. Paul's Words; and yet I
have no Intent to implicate my self with him upon that Subject, especially in
many Words.

P. 85. He raises an Exception out of St. Paul's Doctrine, but I think it is
out of his own Brain and Invention, not perceiving, that Paul thought of such
an Objection; nor that he makes or intends any Answer to it: But Mr. W. himself
both tells the Tale, and gives the Answer. And there he says further, If you
ask, How comes the Soul thus to over-live the Body? He Answers, by a perplexed
Repetition of some other Words in the Chapter, which he pretends to Expound, as
by an Old Rule, Mala Expositio corrumpit Textum; and then he draws out of that
Exposition, what I do not find in the Text, but will not particularize, for
avoiding of Length and Confusion.

P. 86. Here he Propounds another Objection to St. Paul's Doctrine, and says,
The Apostle was well aware of it, and therefore gave it an Answer. But I think
he is mistaken in both, not finding by the Text, that St. Paul ever thought of
it; and therefore did not design to give it an Answer; and specially, such an
Answer as Mr. W. in this Place has done. He proceeds, and raises a Third
Objection against St. Paul's Doctrine, but does not say the Apostle was aware
of this, or made any Answer to it; but Mr. W's Invention and Construction, are
ready to give it a full Answer; but not such an one as I am willing to Consent
unto.

P. 87. Mr. W. says, Having thus cleared up the Text, by giving you its
Meaning, I proceed now to lay down my Argument, to prove, that the Soul of Man
dies not with the Body. I Answer, some other Man may possibly say, Having now
confounded and implicated the Meaning of this Text by my Exposition I am enough
by that means enabled to prove thereby, the Souls Separate Subsistence, which
from the Text it self, without such handling of it, I should not be able to
have done.

P. 88. He pretends to prove, The Soul not subject to Death, because nothing is
so, that is not subject to the Power of Death, and the Soul of the Believer is
not so. I look upon this as a vain sort of Argument, and begging of the
Question, increasing the Bulk of his Treatise, but adding no strength to his
Proof. Here again he speaks of the Soul, by the Term of Her and She, as if he
had proved her a Seperately distinct thing from the Man, or Person, a thing
neither granted to him, nor proved by him.

P. 89. He says again, The Spirit of a Believer, is not subject to the Law of
Death: Which is the very Point in Question, and denied by his Opposers.

P. 90. He pretends, That by what he has said, it appears, that the Law of
Death is executed only on the Body of a Believer. I Answer, that to me appers
no such thing, but that the Law of Death is executed upon the Persons, both of
Believers and Unbelievers, and that Death passed upon all, for that all have
sinned; and do Agree with him, that not only the Body shall be raised at the
Last Day, but that the whole Person shall be so raised to appear in Judgment,
before the Tribunal of Christ: And withal I conceive, that our Author goes far
for Arguments to prove his Tenet, when he catches at, and seems to rely upon
such precarious Constructions, as he has offered in this Argument.

The Tenth Argument.
PAge 90 Mr. W. quotes in proof of his Opinion 2 Cor. 5, 6 Therefore we are
always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord: We are consident, I say, and willing rather, to be absent
from the body, and to be present with the Lord

P. 91. Hereupon Mr. W. with good reason places the difficulty in the meaning
of St. Paul's doubled Expression, of being in the body, and absent from Christ;
and being out of the body, and present with Christ; and then says, That when
Paul says, We are confident, that here by the We, that are always confident, he
intends, the Soul or Spirit of himself, and the Soul and Spirit of the rest of
the Believing Church: And if this be the true meaning of our Apostle in this
Case, viz. That here is intended the Souls of him and his brethren, which at
death will be absent from their bodies, and be present with the Lord; Then,
says he, it proves the Souls of Men Separate, and are Immortal: but the former,
says he, is true, therefore the later Then he offers to prove, that by the We,
who would be absent from the body, the Apostle intends the Souls only of
himself and other Believers; for what else is that of the Saints, that is
absent from the body, and present with the Lord? Name the thing if you can;
for, says he, it cannot mean the body nor the whole person; not the whole
person, for that the whole man cannot be said to be at home in one part of the
man, viz. his body; or absent from it; for the whole of anything cannot be
contained in a part of it. P. 93. Then Mr. W puts a weak Objection against
himself, and answers it. Upon this Argument I Agree with him, that the
Difficulty lies, in finding out what St. Paul intends by the We, that would be
absent from the Body, and present with the Lord: Whether it intends the Souls
only of the Faithful, or their whole Persons? He says, It can only intend Men's
Souls: But I conceive, that it intends their Persons. And first, I Argue from
the Apostles Terms of Expression, and do think, that if by the Term We, he only
intended Men's Souls, he has very improperly expressed such a Meaning; for that
if there be many Persons in an Assembly or Company, and one of them speaking
for the rest, says, We decree, or expect, or desire, such a thing, how can it
possibly be imagined, that the Speaker, intends only the Souls of those Persons
do expect or desire? And therefore, if our Apostle, by his Term We, did intend
only the Souls of Believers, I conceive it would have been hard for Men to have
found out that Meaning, without such an Assistance and Direction as Mr. W. here
offers them. I think the proper Signification of the Word We, in such Cases, is
to denote the Men or the Persons, who are said to do any thing, and not any one
Part or Parcel of such Persons, as it must do in this place, if it intended
only the Souls of Believers. I take it for an old and good Rule amongst
Expositors, that they should cast their Eyes upon the Contexts of those Places
which they mean to Expound, that thereby they may discover the whole Scheme or
Platform of the Writer's Intention; and then to employ their Talent, in
drawing all that the Writer says, to prove his Meaning or fortify his
Assertion: And therefore, I proceed to search what our Apostle says in his next
foregoing Chapter concerning this Matter. Chap. 4.10. We are cast down but not
destroyed, always bearing about in the Body the dying of our Lord Jesus. By
Body I think the whole Person is here intended. The Text adds, That the Life of
Jesus might be made manifest in our Body [or Person.] Ver. 14. We know, that he
which raised up the Lord JESUS, shall raise up us also by JESUS, and shall
present us with you. Ver. 16. Though our outward Man perish, yet the inward Man
is renewed Day by Day: Intending the whole Man, degenerated or regenerated.
Chap. 5.1. We know that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a Building of God; an House, not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our
House which is from Heaven. And we that are in this Tabernacle do groan. being
burdened; not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that
Mortality might be swallowed up of Life: And we are always confident, knowing
that whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. We are
confident I say, and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and present
with the Lord: And we labor, that whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him; for we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or bad. These Quotations have been transcribed,
for making it appear, that the Intent of our Apostle in these Texts, was to
discover to his Readers, Matters concerning the Resurrection, and the Last
judgment. In the beginning of his Discourse, he professes to know, That he who
raised up our Lord Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus: And in the end of
this Discourse, St. Paul says, We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and there receive Recompenses according to our Works. And hence I
Collect, That the Texts which lie intermediate betwixt these Two, do most
directly concern Matters pertaining to the Resurrection, and the manner of
proceeding, which may at that time be expected; and from these Premises, I
gather, that in Mr. W's proving Text, the Words, Absent from the Body, and
present with the Lord, do intend the Presence and Absence of the whol^ Person,
with the Lord, or from the Lord; and do Expound the Apostles Meaning to be,
that Men cannot be present with the Lord, without being absent from their
fleshly Bodies. 1 Cor. 15.50. says, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God; and therefore Paul desires to be absent from this sort of Body, that he
may be present with the Lord in another sort of Body. Ver. 40. There are
Celestial Bodies, and Bodies Terrestrial. Ver. 44. There is a Natural Body, and
there is a Spiritual Body. V. 46. First, that which is Natural and afterward
that which is Spiritual. V. 49. And as we have born the Image of the Earthly,
so shall we bear the Image of the Heavenly. V. 51. St. Paul shows us a Mystery,
we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye (for at the sound of the last Trumpet, the Dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we [such Saints as are then upon Earth] shall be
changed; for this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must
put on Immortality. I say then, That by St. Paul's Absent from the Body, and
present with the Lord, in this Place, he intended the Change beforementioned,
and that his natural fleshly Body, should be changed into a Spiritual Heavenly
Body; and that he might not longer be absent from the Lord in his Fleshly Body,
but might have it changed into a Spiritual Body, in which he might be present
with the Lord. 1 These. 4.15. This we say unto you, by the word of the Lord,
that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not
prevent them that are asleep; for the Lord himself shall descend with a shout,
and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive, and remain,
shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the
Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. Hence I Infer, That after our
Earthly Tabernacle is so dissolved, or as that our Earthly or Fleshly Bodies,
are by this Change, clothed upon with our House that is from Heaven, or those
Spiritual Heavenly Bodies; we shall together with the newly raised Persons,
meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall remain with the Lord for ever. St. Paul
in this Discourse, makes no mention at all of Death, or Dying, or any sort of
Separation of the Soul from the Body, but seems to reject that Intent, when he
says, He does not desire to be uncloathed: Which I think, intends to die; but
desires to be clothed upon, that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life:
Which will clearly be effected, by changing his Fleshly Natural Body, into a
Spiritual, or Heavenly Body, in which Men shall be present with the Lord for
ever. 1 John 3.2. Beloved, it does not yet appear, what we shall be, but me
know that when He [Christ] shall appear, we shall be like him, and our vile
Bodies shall be changed, and made like his Glorious Body. It may also be
observed, what St. Paul intends by his Term We; for in the quoted Text, he says
We desire to be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord: And elsewhere
says, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed. Also, We that are
alive, shall not prevent them that are asleep. Also, We shall be caught up to
the Clouds, to meet the Lord, and remain ever with him. In all these We's, it
seems plain, the Apostle intends, the Persons of Believers, and not their Souls
only. Concerning this Desire of being Absent from the Body, and present with
the Lord, it seems observable, That the Church of that time expected our Lord's
Second Coming, within some indifferent, or short space, or compass of Time,
such as that possibly some of them might live till the Accomplishment of it.
Our Lord speaking of the Signs of his Coming, says, This Generation shall not
pass, until all things be fulfilled: And elsewhere tells his Auditors, the
Signs and Glory of his Second Coming, and says, Then look up, and lift up your
heads, for your Redemption draws nigh; as if some of them might live unto
that Time. In the Apostolic Writings, we often find their Times expressed, by
the Terms of Last Time; and they thought that upon them, the Ends of the World
were come: and we find it written, The time is short, therefore he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still: As
if there were scarce time of a REFORMATION before the Coming of our Lord. Rev.
3.11. Behold I come quickly, hold fast that which thou have. 1 John 1.18.
Little children it is now the last time, and Antichrist is already at work.
Heb. 1.1. God who in former times spoke unto us by his prophets, has in these
last times spoken unto us by his Son. Jam. 5.7. Be patient, brethren, unto the
coming of our Lord and establish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord
draws nigh: Rev. 22 7. Behold, I come quickly, and the time is at hand, and
behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me. Ver. 20. He which testifies
these things, says, surely I come quickly; Amen, even so, come Lord Jesus. The
Spirit and the Bride say come. Our Lord answers, I come quickly, and the Church
replies, even so come Lord Jesus [come quickly.] It seems to have been the
Custom of that Age to pray for the speedy coming of our Lord to Judgment; and
that the days intermediate thereunto might be shortened, and that the expected
Change of their Mortal into Immortal Bodies, might be accomplished with the
most speed that was possible: And upon these grounds St. Paul as well as other
believers, desired heartily to be absent from their fleshly bodies, that they
might be present with the Lord in their spiritual ones. And upon this Canvass,
I am satisfied in my own understanding, that St. Paul's being absent from the
Body, and present with the Lord, ought to be expounded as I have before
declared: And thereupon it will be easily concluded, that Mr. Ws. Tenth
Argument grounded upon the Text of St. Paul before quoted, is not a sufficient,
a sound, or a good Argument, for proving of the Souls Separate Subsistence.

The Eleventh Argument.
PAge 94. Mr. W. quotes 2 Cor. 12.2. I knew a man about fourteen years ago,
whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell: Ver 3. And I knew such
a man, whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell; how that he was
caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, not lawful to be uttered.
Hence Mr. W. says he argues, That what is capable of being separated from the
Body, and in this Separate State to be in Paradise; and in this Paradise, to
hear Words spoken, that must needs be immortal; but the Soul is capable of all
this: Ergo, First, he pretends to prove the Souls Capacity of being separated
from the Body [which all Readers will presently perceive to be the very Point
hitherto disputed between us,] but the best Proof which he brings thereof, is
his own Supposal, that the Apostle knew it to be so seperable; and thereupon he
says, The Apostle thought there was some such part of himself, as might be
seperable from his Body; for no Man can ever doubt the Being of a Thing, which
he knows is incapable to be: And hereupon he thinks the Apostle does evidently
suppose, his Soul was capable of being out of the Body: which amounts to thus
much, that he supposes the Apostle supposes the thing to be as he would have
it; whereas in the Text we find no mention of such things as he supposes; for
in St. Paul's Words, there is no mention made of a Soul, or any other Part of
the Person, that ever did, or can subsist in a State of Separation from the
Body. Next, there is no mention made of a Separation of any thing from the
Body: Nor is it said, that any Part or Parcel of St. Paul's Person, was
separated from himself; or that there was any one Parcel of him divided from
his Person; and much less, that the Divided Part could subsist in a State of
Separation from the Body: Whence I conceive, that what he here says concerning
a Separation of one Part of St Paul, from another, springs from his own
pregnant Invention, without finding any good ground for it in the Text; or that
St. Paul did by his Words, either in the Body, or out of the Body, intend to
teach, or discover to his Proselites, that the Soul could be separated from the
Body; and much less, that it could subsist by its self in such a State of
Separation from the Body: But I conceive with some Clearness, our Apostles
Meaning in those Words, In the Body* or out of the Body, was very different
from Mr. W's Supposals, and intended only to express thus much, That himself
had been caught [or rapt] up, into the Third Heavens, where he heard
unspeakable Words, not lawful to be uttered; and that he was in some doubt,
whether this Rapture was of his whole Person, or of his Mind, or Intellect
only. The things which were revealed to him in this Rapture, he had so clear
and perfect a Perception of, as he thought he could not more clearly and fully
have understood them, if they had been perceived by his Bodily Senses of
Hearing and Seeing; and therefore he apprehended, that this Rapture might be of
his whole Person; and that he did hear and see with his Bodily Organs, those
things which were then revealed to him; and yet, because such Raptures of the
Person had not before been known, he thought there was great Reason to doubt of
that kind of Rapture; and from grounds of Reason and Practice, to conceive,
That this Rapture was more likely to be of his Mind and Intellect only, than of
his whole Person, Body and Soul together: And for the better proving the
Apostles Intent in this Place, to be such as before is said, some other Texts
of Scripture shall be produced, wherein Facts, parallel to this Rapture, are
related: Acts 10.9. says, Another great Apostle, St. Peter, went up upon the
Tanner's House to pray, and there he fell into a Trance, and saw Heaven opened,
and a Vessel descending unto him, like a great Sheet fastened at the four
Corners, and there came a Voice to him, saying, Peter, Kill and Eat: Peter
excused himself; upon which, a second Voice called to him, saying, What God
has cleansed, call not thou common. And it seems, these things were perceived
by St. Peter, as if he had seen and heard them by his Bodily Organs; and they
were as well imprinted upon his Memory: For he told Cornelius, and his Company,
that God had showed him [lately] that he should not call any Man common, or
unclean. This Apostle might be well enough assured, that this was not a Raptu^e
of his whole Person, but a Trance, or Transport of his Mind only; and yet he
perceived things as perfectly, as if he had heard and seen them with his Bodily
Organs. Numb. 24.334. Balaam took up his Parable, and said, the Man whose Eyes
are opened, has said: He has said, which heard the Words of God, which saw
the Vision of the Almighty, falling into a Trance but having his eyes open.
Ver. 15. He repeats the same Words of falling into a Trance, and having his
Eyes open; and then reveals to Balak and his Court, the utter Destruction of
Amalek by Saul; and that Ships shall come from the Coast of Chittim, and
afflict Ashur and Eber: Which seems to intend the Macedonian Invasion of the
East, and possibly the Roman also. Ver. 17. says, I shall see him, but not now;
I shall behold him, but not nigh; there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a
Scepter shall rise out of Israel. By which great things shall be done, commonly
interpreted, to intend Christ and his Kingdom, the space of 1500 years before
the same appeared. It seems, though Balaam in this Trance had his Eyes open,
yet he saw not these Revelations, or Visions, with his Bodily Eyes, but by the
perceptive Power of his Mind, which was all this while intranced; and though
the Body was Partaker of this Trance, yet were the Bodily Senses no Acters in
it, but all was done by the perceptive Powers of his Mind intranced. 1 Kings
22, 19. The Prophet Micaiah, the Son of Imiah, says thus to the Kings of Israel
and Judah, I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host of Heaven
standing by him on his right hand, and on his left: And then he saw also a
Spirit, which came and stood forth before the Lord, and declared how he would
entice Ahab, to go up and fall at Ramoth-Gilead. It seems hereupon, that this
Prophet was rapt into Heaven, as St. Paul was; for that in any other Place he
could not have seen the things here related; and which he says he saw and
perceived as clearly as if he had seen them with his Bodily Eyes and Ears; and
was full of Confidence, that they would prove true as they did: And yet I
conceive, that this Rapture was only of his Mind, and that to him so intranced,
all these things were perfectly revealed. Rev. 4.1. John looked and behold a
door was opened in Heaven, and he heard a Voice as it were of a Trumpet, which
said, Come up hither, and I will show thee things which must be hereafter; and
immediately he was in the Spirit, and behold a Throne was set in Heaven. And
from thence he prosecutes his Revelation of things afterward to be performed.
Our Apostle does not say here, That his Spirit was transported into Heaven, or
that he was there in his Soul only; but says, Immediately I was in the Spirit
[I my self was there my Person was there in the Spirit:] So that, all which was
there revealed, was so revealed to himself, or Person, without Mention of any
Separation of his Soul from his Body, any more than St. Paul has mentioned it
in his proving Text. Whence I conceive, that during the space of this
Revelation, St. John was in a Rapture, or Transport of his Mind, as other
Prophets had been before him; and yet he had so perfect a Perception of the
things revealed, and was so well assured of the Truth of them, and remembered
them so well, as if he had perceived and known them with his Bodily Senses of
Seeing and Hearing, and remembered them as well; and he might possibly be as
uncertain as St. Paul was, whether this was a Rapture of his Person into
Heaven, or that it was only a Rapture of his Mind,, wherein this Revelation was
made to him. I have quoted these Four Parallel Texts of Scripture, to evince,
or persuade, that St. Paul, in our Proving Text, did not doubt whether his Soul
was actually separated from his Body, but whether his Rapture into the Third
Heaven, was a Transport of his Person thither, or whether this Transport was
only a Rapture of his Mind. I am (by what has been said) satisfied in my own
Understanding, that St. Paul did not intend in this Text, to teach concerning
the Separation of the Soul from the Body, or that the Soul could subsist in
such a State of Separation; and therefore I think, that the Argument which Mr.
W. draws from this Text, for Proof the Souls Separate Subsistence, is unsound
and fallacious, and is by no means a good Proof of the Souls Separate
Subsistence.

The Twelfth Argument.
PAge 97. Phil. 1.21, 23. To me to die, is gain; for I am in a straight betwixt
two, having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better.
Hereupon Mr. W. argues, That if St. Paul's Soul was Immortal, then are all Men's
Souls Immortal. But Paul's Soul, he says, was Immortal; Ergo, He proves Paul's
Soul to be Immortal, by saying, If Paul's Soul was in a better Condition at the
Death of his Body, than when it lived therein, then was his Soul Immortal: But
he says, Paul's Soul was in a better Condition after his Death, than when
alive; which he proves, by ^aying, That which gained by the Death of the Body,
was much better out of the Body, than in the Body: But Paul's Soul gained by
the Death of his Body; and therefore was in a much better Condition out of it
than before. This he proves* by Paul's saying, To die was gain. Secondly,
because the Soul at the Death of the Body, he says, would obtain such a Being
with Christ, as it had not in the Body. Hence he Concludes the Souls of good
Men are more happy out of the Body than in it; and they cannot be so except
they subsist in a State of Separation from the Body.

P. 98. Mr. W. Objects thus against his own Argument, That Paul in this Text,
speaks not a Word of his Soul* but only of himself, or his whole Person, and
that it is not fair for Mr. W. to argue a greater happiness of his Soul only at
Death, from St. Paul's speaking of a better condition that himself should enjoy
at Death. To this Objection he answers, That Paul must in this Text, when he
speaks of himself, only be understood, as intending his Soul, because Death
could not possibly be again to his Body, nor could Death bring him to a more
blessed presence with Christ, than he had whilst alive: And against his own
Doctrine he puts another Objection, P. 99. as if some had said, That Paul's
desire to be with Christ after Death, was only in expectation of happiness at
the Resurrection. Then Mr. W. answers this Objection, which is not owned by me,
or any other which I have heard or read of; and therefore it passes with me for
another Man of Straw, set up by himself to be battered down again by the same
hand. Phil. 20. I hope that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that Christ
shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death; for to me to
live is Christ, and to die is gain: but if I live in the flesh, this is the
fruit of my labor: what I should choose I wot not, but am in a strait betwixt
two; having a desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better:
nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

I observe upon this Text, that there is no mention of the Soul made in it,
although there is mention of the Body, that Christ shall be magnified in it;
intending his Person, by the Name of his Body. In all the rest of the Text
there is nothing else denoted, but by the Terms of I and Me; both which do
properly denote and signify the Person and all that which Mr. W. has raised
out of this Text, concerning the Soul or its Subsistence in a Separate State
from the Body, seems to be the proper effect of his own Invention, and not
really founded upon St. Paul's Text before quoted. Mr. W. has said from the
Text, That to die is gain, and that to die is better than to live here. These
two Sayings may I think be very properly applied to the Person; that it may be
gain for some Persons to die, rather than live; and consequently, that it is
better for such Persons to die, than to live here.

Thirdly, he says, St. Paul gives the Reason, why it is better for him to die,
than to live here; because, in departing hence, he shall be with Christ. I
Answer, We do not read in this Text, That Paul chose rather to die, because
then he should be with Christ; but says, That if he did die, he should be with
Christ: He had other Reasons for choosing Death, rather than Life; and took that
for a Comfort and Support, in obtaining this Choice, that after Death, he
should still be with Christ, in a State of Rest and Quietness, which would be
far better for him, than that State which he now endured in this World; Coloss.
1.24. I Paul, do now rejoice in my Sufferings for you, and fill up that which
is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his Bodies sake, which
is the Church. We know, that Christ's Sufferings for his Body sake, the Church,
were great; to which Paul in this place, compares his own Sufferings; and
therefore we have reason to think they were great also. Ephesians. 3.13. I desire
that ye faint not at my Tribulation. Philem. v. 9. This Apostle was then Paul
the Aged, and a Prisoner of Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 4.6. Paul says, I am ready to
be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. Ver. 16. At my first
Answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me; but God stood with me, and
I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. Philip. 4.14. The Philippians had
sent a Present to supply St. Paul's Wants, and in return he says, Ye have well
done, that ye did communicate with my Affliction, and supply my Wants; and
prays God to bless them for their so doing. The several Texts thus collected,
seem to declare to us, the State of St. Paul's Person at that time; He was Paul
the Aged, a Prisoner, under a necessitous and wanting Condition, ready to be
offered up by a dolorous Death, having but lately escaped out of the Mouth of
the Lion; and that he lay continually under great Afflictions for the Church's
sake, and had the Care of all the Churches lying upon him: All which
Particulars considered, our Apostle had great Reason to choose Death, rather
than Life in all such Respects as did only concern himself; for that by Death,
he should be delivered from the manifold Afflictions and Tribulations,
before-named, and thereby attain a state of Rest and Blessedness in the Lord.
Rev. 14.13. John heard a Voice from Heaven, commanding him to write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord; yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest
from their labors, and their works do follow them. Romans 14.8. Whether we live,
we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live
therefore or die, we are the Lord's. Chap. 8.35. Who shall separate us from the
Love of Christ? Ver. 38. I am persuaded, that neither Death nor Life, nor
Angels, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus' our Lord. Here we may observe, Life and Death
are made indifferent things to Believers, such as seem neither to hinder, nor
further the State or Condition of them; or to be either of them greatly desired
by Christians in this World, but rather ought to be referred to the Will and
Appointment of God. Luke 20.38. God calls Himself, The God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and yet the Text says, He is not the God of the dead, but of the
living; for all live unto him. Which to my Apprehension, proves what before is
said, That whether we live or die, we are the Lord's; during Life, we live and
move in Him; and when we die, we rest and sleep in Him, in expectation to be
raised by Him at his Second Coming. And from the Premises I Argue, That all Mr.
W's Suppositions and Surmises, concerning the Soul, and the Separate State of
it, are ill grounded and unsound. We read of many Persons, whose Conditions
were so much distressed, that with Job they have heartily desired Death, and
would be ready with him to dig for it, as other Men would do for hidden
Treasure; the very Aged and Sickly [one of which I am] will easily be
persuaded, to think Death a Gain to them, and to desire it accordingly. The
present Time affords a rare Example, of a young, rich, and otherwise happy
Lord, who by a Pistol Bullet took away his own Life at the Bath, merely to rid
and free himself from such sharp Pains of the Gout and Stone, as then oppressed
him: And daily Experience assures us, that the Consideration and Hope of Death,
is one of the greatest Supports under Men's present Sufferings, and is by such
Persons accordingly desired; and thus they are at apparent Agreement with St.
Paul's Opinion, That for them to die is Gain, although their Expectations of
future Happiness, may be nothing so well grounded as his was. It may be also
observed, I have a desire to depart, and be with Christ, which is far better:
Not saying, He desired to depart, that he might be with Christ; but that though
he did depart, he knew he should still be with Christ, so as his Departure and
being with Christ, do both stand well together; he had a Being with Christ,
whilst he was alive, and he doubted not of having a like Being with Christ,
when he was dead; and that a more peaceable and quiet Being, than he had
whilst he was here; and therefore that Estate was the more desirable, and the
more gainful. If a Person go to his Friends, or his Father's House, he may
truly he said to be with such a Friend or Father, either sleeping or waking;
and we know Death is compared to a Sleep, the Scripture usually calls it so;
and really and truly, it is no other, but a sound and lasting Sleep, to
continue unto the Sound of the last Trumpet, at whose Summons the Dead shall be
raised; and those who are alive upon Earth, shall have their Persons changed.
St. Paul does not say, that he, or any other Person, is more present with the
Lord when dead, than alive; but that in both Estates, Men are alike present
with the Lord: For, If we live, we live unto the Lord; and if we die, we die
unto the Lord; so as whether we live or die, we are the Lord's. Neither Death
nor Life can separate us from the Love of God in Christ Jesus. So it seems,
whether we live or die, we are alike with Christ, and have no more Being with
him dead, than when alive; but that in both these States we have alike Being
with him. This Exposition of St. Paul's present Text, I conceive to be sound
and true; and that Mr. W's is Erroneous: For that, this my Construction applies
St. Paul's Terms of I and Me, to denote and intend his whole Person, as in
their proper Signification they do; whereas Mr. W. applies them, to signify
only one Part of his Person, viz. our Author's sort of Soul, concerning which,
our Dispute is, Whether there is any such thing in the World, or not. Next Mr.
W. takes up the Bulk of his Argument, in a Discourse concerning the Soul, its
Separate Subsistence after Death, and its enjoying Happiness in that Estate;
whereas, in St. Paul's whole Text, there are no words which mention any of
these things, or give us any Information concerning them, or any of them. I
leave therefore his Construction, as a Mistake of the Apostle's Meaning, and
think I have Reason to conclude, That Mr. W's Argument drawn from this Text, is
not a sufficient, nor a good Argument to prove the Subsistence of the Soul, in
a State of Separation from the Body.

The Thirteenth Argument.
PAge 100. Colos. 1.19, 20. It pleased the Father, that in him should all
Fullness dwell, and (having made Peace through the Blood of the Cross) by him to
reconcile all things to himself; by him I say, whether they be things in Earth,
or things in Heaven.

P. 101. Mr. W. says, There were Souls of Men in Heaven, when St. Paul writ
this Epistle; because the Apostle says, there were things in Heaven reconciled
by the Blood of the Cross: But there are no such things in Heaven reconciled by
the Blood of the Cross, except they be the Souls of some Holy Men that went
hence: Then he expresses a Desire to know what Men can say to this Argument.
And therefore I say to it, That by his own Expression it appears, he says he
knows not what; for he says, He knows not that there are any other things in
Heaven, which need Reconciliation to God by Christ, except Men will take these
things to be the Souls of departed Persons. But if Men will not accept of this
Meaning, then he knows not what the Apostle can mean, by things in Heaven
reconciled to God by Christ: Which intends no more, than that he does not
otherways know, what the Things in Heaven reconciled to God by Christ, may
mean: Which I take for a Confession, That he does not know what Paul meant by
these things in Heaven.

Secondly, I conceive he does not know, that there are any Souls in Heaven;
because if he did, he should be able to make such a Demonstration, or
Description of their Being, and of their being there, as other Men, who are
willing, might be able to understand and conceive. He has taken Pains to write
this Treatise, and therein has already produced Thirteen Arguments in Proof of
this Tenet, but very unsuccessfully, as those who peruse these Observations
will easily discover. The Perusers of this Argument, will I think easily find,
That Mr. W. must have Two Things granted him, before he can pretend to prove
any thing by this Argument. First, That there are no things in Heaven, which
need Reconciliation to God, unless Men will admit, that Humane Souls are there.
And therefore, Secondly, he would persuade Men to admit of his Position, That
there are Souls in Heaven. But I think fit to reject both these Proposals, and
say, First, That there may be other Things in Heaven, besides Souls, which may
need a Reconciliation to God by Christ. And Secondly, to conceive, that
possibly, or even probably, there are not, nor ever were, any Humane Souls in
Heaven, nor in any other Place in the World, except in their own proper and
peculiar Bodies. Here Mr. W. puts another slight Objection against his own
Opinion, and answers it.

P. 102. Mr. W. demands, If there be any things else in Heaven, besides the
Souls of Men, which need a Reconciliation to God, What are those things? I
Answer, I do not know what those things are; and alike Confession of his
Ignorance concerning this Subject, would better have become Mr. W. than his
groundless Guesses, at what is meant in this Text, by St. Paul's Expression, of
Things in Heaven; and the supplying his Ignorance therein, by a bold but
Erroneous Guess, That by Things in Heaven, St. Paul intended the Separate Souls
of Men, of which the Text makes no mention at all; and his Supposal, that there
were Separate Souls, has no better Foundation than his own Supposal, which
has very little Power to convince intelligent Persons, That Humane Souls have
any sort of Subsistence in a state of Separation from the Body.

The Fourteenth Argument.
PAge 102. Heb. 12.23. We are come to the Spirits of just Men made perfect. Mr.
W. begins this Argument, with somewhat a long Comparison between the Law and
the Gospel, which makes little to our Point, and therefore I pass it over.

P. 104. Mr. W. says (as he is very apt to do) That the Souls or Spirits of
Men, are Immortal; and therefore it is a very great Truth that they are
Immortal; And adds, Those Souls which the Gospel reveals to be alive out af
their Bodies, are thereby proved to be Immortal; but the Gospel reveals that
the Souls of just Men are alive out of their Bodies; therefore the Souls of Men
are alive out of their Bodies; therefore the Souls of Men are Immortal. Mr. W.
says, The Gospel reveals, that the Spirits of just Men are alive out of their
Bodies: Because the Text says they were made perfect; and there is no
Perfection in Death.

P. 105. He says, We have a Right to the Society of those Spirits of just Men
mude perfect, which we shall have in possession when we depart hence: But I
find neither such Words, nor Things, in his Text, viz. That we shall come to
that Society when we depart hence; so as I must repute it his own Addition to
the Words of the Text, which does not appoint the Time for our coming to that
Society. I find Mr. W. has only quoted so much of this Text, as seems most to
support his own Opinion; and therefore I intend to quote it somewhat more
largely. Heb. 12.22. Ye are come unto Mount Sion, and to the Heavenly
Jerusalem, or City of God, to the Company of Angels, to the general Assembly
and Church of the first Born; and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits
of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant. Ver.
25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, whose Voice (at the giving of the
Law) shook the Earth; but now he has promised, saying, yet once more I shake
not the Earth only, but also Heaven; and this signifies the removal of those
things which are shaken, and that we shall receive a Kingdom which cannot be
removed. The Words of our Text thus fully quoted, do by no means import, That
Men or their Souls, shall come to the enjoyment of those things at their
Deaths, as Mr. W. has erroneously suggested, but the words of the Text run in
the present Tense, Ye are come to the things which I here report to you, viz.
Ye are come to the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, to the
Angels, and to the general Assembly and Church of the First Born, when not only
the Earth shall be shaken, but also Heaven, and the things so shaken shall be
removed. I conceive, that the Description here made, does very properly denote,
the Time of the Resurrection, and the great Day of Judgment; For at that time
we are instructed by the Scripture, to expect the things here mentioned: God
and Christ attended by the Angels, and the Church of the First Born, consisting
of Just Men, made perfect, both in their Spirits, and in their Bodies, to the
City of God, or the New Jerusalem, which St. John tells us, Shall come down
from God out of Heaven, as a Bride adorned for her Husband, at, or after the
time of the Resurrection; after Heaven and Earth have been shaken, and are
removed. This I conceive to be the Time pointed at in this Text; and I think
these Descriptions are not applicable to any other Time, nor has Mr. W.
mentioned any other Time for their Accomplishment, saving that at Men's Death,
and for which he has no Warrant from any words of this Text; and as to the
words in present, Ye are come to these Glories; I think they are most apt to
intend, A coming to them by Faith, whilst we are in this World: Such a Faith,
as is the Evidence of things not seen; but we have direction to hold fast our
Hope and Expectation of them until the End, when we may look for a Crown, or
Crowns of Life, to be then distributed to all who love our Lords Second
Appearing: And then only (I conceive may we hope to be made Partakers of all
that Company and Happiness, which in this Text are particularly recited.

And from this Exposition, the Conclusion will be easily drawn, That Mr. W's
Fourteenth Argument, has very little force to prove the Subsistence of Men's
Souls in a State of Separation from their Bodies.

The Fifteenth Argument.
PAge 108. Heb. 11.39, 40. These having all obtained a good Report through
Faith, received not the Promise; God having provided some better thing for us;
that they without us should not be made perfect. Hereupon Mr. W. says, This
seems a very obscure Text, especially applied as a Proof of the Souls
Immortality. To this I Agree, and Prognosticate, That the Proof which it makes
of the Soul's Immortality, will fall out accordingly, viz. That it will be both
very obscure and weak. Mr. W. further says, It is evident the Apostle here
speaks of some special Promise that the Patriarchs had rec^iv'd; the fulfilling
whereof they never lived to see; and which was made to appear to the Church,
at, or before the writing of this Epistle. So he will have this Promise to
import the Manifestation of the Son of God in the Flesh: And he then puts the
Question, How can it be said, that they who died in the Faith of this Promise,
are made perfect (with the then present Church) by the fulfilling that Promise,
in the Manifestation of the Son of God? And thereto he Answers, That Angels did
desire to look into, and be better informed in this Mystery, until Christ came
in the Flesh, and proved himself by Miracles, to be the Messiah; and then their
Knowledge thereof was perfected. And he says, The Case was the same with the
Spirits of those deceased Patriarchs in Heaven. That there were Spirits of the
deceased Patriarchs in Heaven, he ought first to have proved, as the very Point
which is now disputed between us: that he here offers to suppose it as a Truth,
seems to be a clear begging of the Question, which I must refuse to grant him;
and then this whole Argument becomes Abortive, and can proceed no farther.

P. 112. Mr. W. says, Till you that oppose, can give me a better Interpretation
of this obscure Text, I will Conclude, that the Interpretation [or Opinion] is
false, and mine is true. I Answer, That Mr. W. may conclude what he pleases,
from his unproved, and only supposed Premises; but that can be no Argument to
others, for their Agreement with his Supposals: And therefore I am very apt to
Conclude, That there is neither Truth nor Force in this Argument.

The Sixteenth Argument.
PAge 112 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. By which also he went and preached to the Spirits in
Prison, which sometime were disobedient in the Times of Noah. Hereupon Mr. W.
says, He waves the Interpretation which the Papists make of this Text: And
gives you another of his own, which agrees better with the Reformed Churches;
and then says, These Spirits in Prison which Christ preached to, must be taken
to intend the Souls of wicked Men in Hell: Which I may not suffer to pass for a
Truth, before he have proved Three other Points, First, That there are such
Separate Souls of Men in rerum natura. Secondly, That there is in Being, such a
Local Hell, as he supposes the Devils and wicked Persons now to be in; and that
such a Place there was in the Time of Noah. Thirdly, That our Lord in the Time
of Noah, did go into the Local Hell, and preach to the Spirits there
imprisoned: And when these Preliminaries are well proved by him, I will better
consider his Argument, and give him a further Answer to it. In the mean time, I
quote to him, 2 Pet. 2.4. God cast the Angels that sinned, down to Hell, and
delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved into Judgment. Jude 6.
The wicked Angels God has reserved in Chains of Darkness, unto the Judgment of
the Great Day. I do not know any other Text of Scripture, which speaks of
Spirits in Prison, but these Two; which also tell us what these Spirits were,
and where their Prison was, but takes no notice of any Souls that were there;
nor does any other Text of Scripture make mention of any Separate Souls being
there. The Parable of Dives speaks of his Soul being there, but not in Soul
only; for there he is described as in his Person, having Eyes, Mouth, Tongue
and Hands; for which Reason, it must pass, not for a History, but for a
Parable, as it does: And the force of proving by it, is now, as before
rejected. I do not know, why the Preaching here mentioned, may not be intended
to the lapsed Angels remaining under Chains of Darkness: And however that may
fall out, I conceive it cannot be applied to the Separate Souls of Men; because
I have not yet met with any sound and good Proof, That such Souls ever did, or
can naturally subsist in a State of Separation from their Bodies.

The Seventeenth Argument.
PAge 115. Rev. 6.9, etc. I saw under the Altar, the Souls of them that were
slain for the Word of God; and they cried with a loud Voice, saying, How long,
O Lord, Holy and True, do thou not avenge our Blood on them that dwell on
the Earth? And white Robes were given to every one of them, and it was said
unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until their Fellow
Servants also, and Brethren that should be killed, as they were, should be
fulfilled.

Mr. W. says, Learned Men do differ about this Altar; some take it for the
Altar of Incense, and some for the Altar of Burnt-offerings, which I take to be
a Dispute de Lana Caprina.. And he confesses it makes not much to our Business,
whether the one or the other. He says, It is as clear, That John saw the Souls
of them that were slain: And I think as clear, That John did not see the things
here mentioned, but that they were represented to him in a Trance, or Transport
of his Mind; and it would have made much to the ending of our Dispute, if he
had declared to us what manner of things those Souls were which he saw; what
were their Shapes, their Substances, and their ordinary Clothing, as well as
the Place of their Abode.

P. 116. Mr. W. says, That by the Souls under the Altar, are intended the
Martyrs dead Bodies: And pretends, in Scripture, Souls are diverse times taken
for Dead Bodies, which I see no Cause to agree with.

He himself thinks it very improper to present the slain with white Robes
whilst under the Altar, and therefore he will have the Scheme now changed; for
what should dead Carcasses (says he) do with Robes; and therefore those which
at first sight appeared to be dead Carcasses, he sets now at full Liberty, and
in a Capacity to receive triumphant Robes. And upon this Foundation he builds
his Argument; and says, if the Souls of the Martyrs are triumphing in Joy and
Glory, then are they not Mortal, nor did die with their Bodies, but the Souls
of the Martyrs are triumphing in Heaven; in proof whereof he says, Those which
had white Robes given them, are triumphing in Heaven, but the Souls of the
Slain had white Robes given them, therefore they are triumphing. And thus he
proceeds in this Argument, as he has done in the four or five last before; he
makes Construction of his Text upon Conjectures, then Collects from such
Constructions what he thinks will best serve his Turn, and makes sueh
Inferences thereupon as he pleases: First, he says, The Souls which were seen
under the Altar were dead Bodies, and this I see to be only his own Conjecture.
Next he says, That between the Souls crying out, and their being rewarded with
white Robes, the Souls were drawn from under the Altar and set at Liberty, and
then received their white Robes, and remained triumphing in Glory. I know not
what other Ground he had for these Assertions, save his own Conjectures only;
and I think there is no manner of Ground for either of them, conceiving that
there was no Reality in this Vision; neither Altar, nor Souls, nor dead Bodies,
nor Robes, but that these were all Symbolically represented to St. John, in a
Trance or Transport of his Mind, and therein we may find verified the Old
Proverb; saying, of Nullum simile est Idem; for as these things have some
Similitude with what was intended to be represented, so there are great
Unlikelihoods of and Dissimilitudes between the things which were intended to
be represented by them; the Unlikeness or Dissimilitudes in this representation
are principally three, viz. First, In the Vbi of these Souls, or place where
they were seen. Secondly, In their Habits or manner of Clothing. And Thirdly,
In the subject matter of their Prayers to God. Their Vbi, or place where John
saw them, was under the Altar; we read, Exodus 27.1. The Altar of Burnt
Offerings was to be made five Cubits long and five Cubits broad, which I
conceive to be next our measure of three Yards square, and three Cubits high, a
little more then one Yard and half high. Verse. 8. Hollow with Boards shall thou
make it, and thou shall overlay it with Brass, and thou shall make for it a Net
work of Brass. If we shall but a little consider the Nature and Darkness of
such a little Hole as the hollowness of this Altar could afford; it seems we
cannot but stand convinced, that Thousands of Souls cast or crowded into that
dark Prison, were far from enjoying such a state of Happiness as Men are
commonly accustomed to ascribe to them; and therefore Mr. W. takes upon him to
set at Liberty, without any Warrant from the Text for his so doing. Secondly,
The Habits which the Text says were bestowed on them, seems needless for Souls,
and specially for such Souls as were crowded together in that manner. If they
were loose Robes like Surplesses, the Hole under that Altar could hardly
contain the Thousands of such Robes which might happen to be used upon that
Occasion; and if they were close Robes and fitted to their Shapes, I doubt it
would puzzle all our Tailors; and the large Invention of Mr. W. to find out
Ways and Means of fitting our Souls with such Robes as might rightly be
accommodated to the Shapes of such Spirits. Thirdly, The subject matter of the
Prayers which these Souls offered to God, seems very different from, and
somewhat opposite to the tenor of the Gospel. Matthew. 5. 44. Our Lord in his
large Sermon on the Mount, says, Love your Enemies, Bless them that Curse you,
do Good to them that Hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and
persecute you. 1 Cor. 4.12. Being Reviled we suffer it, being Persecuted we
bless; and we find that what our Lord and his Disciples taught in this Point,
they practiced: Our Lord at his departure prayed for his Persecutors, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do; and St. Stephen in like manner,
at the time of his Death, prayed, Lord lay not this Sin to their Charge. So as
it seems, this crying with loud Voices to God for Vengeance on their
Persecucutors, was contrary both to the Doctrine and Practice of the Gospel;
whence we may reasonably conjecture, that the things related in this Text were
not Real, but Symbolical or Typical, representing or shadowing such things as
should be made known by that Prophecy; for the declaring whereof I think fit
to produce another Exposition which Mr. W. has before given us. He says, That
by Souls in this Text, we must understand dead Carcasses to be meant. I say, We
must understand dead Persons to be meant, it being very usual in Scripture to
intend or signify Persons by the Name or Term of Souls; as when Jacob went
down into Egypt, the Persons of his Family are termed so many Souls, and in St.
Paul 's Voyage to Italy, there were in the Ship that carried him 276 Souls,
which in this place are expressed; 40 by the Terms (...) and in our quoted Text
by the same Term (...). I saw under the Altar the Souls of the Martyrs: And
hence I insist, that the same Term or word of Souls, which intends Persons in
St. Paul's Voyage, may very likely intend Persons in St. John's Vision, and
thence put into proper Terms, it may be read, I say under the Altar, the
Persons of them that were slain for the word of God. And if this Sense may be
accepted, and the whole Vision taken for Typical, the three forenamed
Differences or Difficulties will be easily reconciled and made stand together.
To the first I say, That by these Persons being under the Altar, was intended
to be Typified, the State of those slain Persons, and the Care which God had of
them; they were as safe in their Beings, as if they had been lodged under guard
of the Altar of E^^nt Offerings; and were as near to God, and as much under his
Care and Protection, as if they had lain in the Court of his Sanctuary, and
under the Shadow and Covert of his Holy Altar. Secondly, The white Robes which
were given to each of them, seem to Typifie (as St. John expresses it) the
Righteousness of Saints, and the Innocence of their Lives upon Earth; their
Works having been washed and made clean with the Blood of the Lamb; and as
often as these came in remembrance before God, the Persons might be said to
receive white Robes, every time that such Remembrance of them was renewed, and
the Rewards consequent thereunto Considered, viz. their Acceptance and
Salvation at the General Day of Judgment. Thirdly, Concerning the Prayers or
Cries of these Souls for Vengeance upon their Persecutors: Mr. W. and I, are
hotb agreed, that they made no other Cry in this Text, then the Blood of Abel
made to God for Vengeance on his Murderer; and I conceive there was no real
Prayer or Cry in either of these Cases, but that God himself had taken special
Notice in both these Cases, and that whenever they came before him hy
Remembrance or any sort of Re-presentation, his Intention always continued firm
to take Vengeance for those Facts, upon all those who had therein acted, and
continued in such wicked Practices (without Saving Repentance) until the time
of their Deaths.

I have Inclinations to think that this Exposition of our proving Text, is more
sound and true than that which Mr. W. has before made of it; and hence I think
the Consequence will be very clear, That Mr. W's Argument drawn from this Text,
is not a sufficient nor a good Argument to prove the Separate Subsistence of
Souls.

The Eighteenth Argument.
PAge 118. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors, and
their Works do follow them.

P. 119. Mr. W. says, By Blessedness in this Text, must needs be meant
Happiness, and all Happiness implies Joy, and all Joy implies Life; and when he
has raised Blessedness in this manner, he infers from the Word henceforth, that
it must Commence presently upon the death of the Person; wresting the
signification of the Words, from Henceforth, which do properly signify (from
the time of that Prophecy, to signify) the time of every Man's Death, which I
do not find to be mentioned or intended by the Text: And he adds, The meaning
of the Text being thus opened, he seems to direct his following Discourse, only
to those who will accept the true Sense of the Text to be as he has opened it;
and to them he thus argues: If the Dead in the Lord do from the time of their
being dead, commence a Blessedness, not only in resting from their Labors, but
likewise in being rewarded for their Works, then do they continue to live in
some part of them, which is their Spirits, and consequently their Spirits die
not with their Bodies, but are Immortal.

P. 120. Mr. W. offers to us, That this Blessedness is said by the Spirit to be
given from the time of Men's Deaths, this he collects from the signification of
the Words from Henceforth; as if that intended from the time of their Death's,
whereas it appears in this Text to intend no more, but that from the time of
this Prophecy; the Dead which die in the Lord, shall have a blessed Rest; and
their Works do follow them.

P. 121. Then Mr. W. pretends, That the dead Saints do not only enjoy a blessed
Rest, but that they also enter upon, and enjoy Rewards for their Works, as soon
as they are dead; but I find no Ground for this Opinion in the Text, but
conceive he thought it was there, because he had a great Mind it should be
there, as a thing that would have done him more Service than any thing that he
can find in the Text besides.

Mr. W. says further, If no Rewards of active Happiness and Joy followed
immediately after Death, it would be wonderful the Spirit of God should
pronounce a Blessedness on such as die in the Lord, above those who live on
Earth in the Lord; and this would be contrary to the Sense of all God's People,
and specially to the Sense of such as Administer Comfort to dying Persons from
this Topic, by telling them, that immediately after Death their Souls shall by
Angels be transported into Heaven, or Paradise, or Abraham's Bosom, or some
such Place, where they shall not only be at rest, but have present Joys and
Happiness conferred upon them; and I grant that if such Doctrine prove
otherwise than true, many Persons may have been deceived of their confident
Expectations, and more may still in future happen so to be. And therefore I
think it needful to take further Consideration, and so make a stricter Scrutiny
concerning the Truth of this Doctrine, than in former Times and Ages has been
commonly done amongst Men. Mr. W. says, He thinks there are none of God's
People, who would not rather choose to live upon Earth though under Persecution,
then to die and be buried in the Earth; He says it is evident, That from the
time of dying, the Saints are blessed with Rewards for their Work, as well as
from their Labor. I reply, I am very sorry that I am not able to find in this
Text an Argument, (or any of his former) the thing which he says is so evident;
intending I presume to himself, and some such other Persons as may be strongly
fixed in his Opinion and Belief touching this Point, concerning which; and this
Text, I intend to make a little more large Examination. The Words therefore
are, And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me write, Blessed are the
Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them. I do not find in
this Text any Words which signify or import that Men shall be rewarded for
their Works presently after Death, otherwise than by a Blessed Rest from their
Labors. It is said indeed, That their Works do follow them, but there is no
time mentioned when they shall overtake them: And I desire Mr. W. and his
Party, from henceforth, that they will cease from perverting the Sense of the
Word from Henceforth in this Text, by applying its Energy to the time of Men's
Deaths, whereas in the words of our Text, it stands clearly applied to the time
when this Prophecy was revealed to St. John; and whereas Mr. W. says, That
none of Gods Saints upon Earth would willingly embrace Death, but rather choose
a longer Life upon Earth, (although under a state of great Persecution) if they
did not expect Heavenly Rewards presently upon the death of their Persons; and
he says, You shall never persuade People to a contented departure out of this
World, by telling them they shall presently enjoy a blessed Rest in the Lord,
and therefore they must be told of, and persuaded to expect Glorious Rewards in
Heaven presently after their passing out of this World. I confess thereupon,
that Men's mistakes upon this Account may be very great, and very universal, but
do by no means believe the first part of his Assertion, viz. that there are no
Saints or People upon Earth, who are willing to accept of Death, whenever God
shall appoint it to come upon them, under a great contentment of Mind, and the
Satisfaction which they may receive from this Text, That they shall have a
blessed Rest in the Lord, safe from all the Temptations and Tribulations of
this World, and from the Power and Malice of wicked Men and Spirits; expecting
thereby to be delivered from Pains and Sicknesses, Poverty, Oppression,
Imprisonments, Banishments, and many other Miseries, which during this Life may
be inflicted upon them by outward and inward Maladies and Sufferings; and then
also to be set at Liberty, and made free from all Temptations, Allurements, and
Provocations to Sin; which by the World, and the wicked Men and Spirits of it,
may be offered to them. And Lastly, from the wicked Inclinations of their own
Hearts, and the traitorous and deceitful Dealing which they too often find
therein; subjecting them by strong Inclinations to prosecute that Nimium, or
excess of their Affections and Lusts, to which all Mankind are strongly
inclined by the bent of that Nature which I think God planted in them at the
very Creation of our first Parents; to such Ends and Purposes as are best known
to his Godly Wisdom. That some of the best of God's Servants have desired Death
for the very Avoiding of Worldly Troubles and Sufferings, may thus be proved,
Numb. 11.15. Moses was very highly grieved with the bitter Complaints that the
Jews made against him, for bringing them out of Egypt into a Barren and
Desolate Wilderness, and expostulates thereupon with God, That the Burden of
providing for all this People was too heavy for him, so as he was not able to
bear it; and thereupon says to God, If thou deal thus with me, kill me I pray
thee, out of hand, if I have found favor in thy sight, and let me not see my
Wretchedness. 1 Kings 19.4. The Prophet Elijah received a Message from Jezebel,
that he should the next day be slain; upon which Message he fled for safety of
his Life into the Wilderness of Judah, and there sat him down under a
Juniper-Tree, and requested of God for himself that he might die; and said, it
is enough now, O Lord, take away my Life, for I am not better than my Fathers.
Job 3.11. Job's Sufferings are famous in the World, and need not be specified,
and this Text and Chapter evidences the great desire he had to obtain a speedy
Death, as the great Remedy for all his Sufferings; He wishes to have died from
the Womb, for then says he, should I now have lain still and been at quiet, I
should have slept; then had I been at rest with Lords and Princes, or as a
hidden untimely Birth; for the Great and Small are there: there the wicked
cease from Troubling, there the weary be at rest; wherefore is Life given to
him that is in misery and bitterness of Soul, which long for Death but it
comes not, and dig for it more than for hidden Treasure? which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the Grave. By these and the like
Instances, we may perceive that Death, as a state of Rest, is preferred by the
best among Men, before a state of Life subject to great Sufferings in this
World, and we find it not only to be desired by Men, but to be promised and
given by God, with intent to prevent such worldly sufferings, as would fall
upon his Favorites if they should continue to live longer in the World. Isaiah
57.1. The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to Heart, and merciful Men
are taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil
to come. He shall enter into Peace: They shall rest in their Beds, each one
resting in his Vprightness. According to this Rule we find some Examples. 1
King 14. Abijah the Son of Jeroboam was sick, and God pronounces by his
Prophet that he shall die, and that he only of Jeroboam in Peace shall Die, be
Buried, and Mourned for; because in him there is found some good thing toward
the Lord God of Israel. After which a lamentable Affliction should fall upon
the whole House of Jeroboam, no other Person whereof should come to the Grave
in Peace. 2 Kings 22.20. Josiah received this Message from Huldah the
Prophetess, that God would bring great Miseries and utter Destruction upon the
Jewish Nation of those times; but that because he was in God's Favor, God will
gather thee unto thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered into thy Grave in
Peace, and thy Eyes shall not see all the Evil which I will bring upon this
Place: whence it seems, God by his Death did intend him the Benefit of being
delivered by Death, from the greatest Sufferings and Calamities which were
intended to fall upon his Kingdom, soon after this time; and which accordingly
took Commencement from his Death. Philip. 1.21. Paul says, To me to live is
Christ, and to die is Gain, and I have a desire to depart, and be with Christ
which is far better; yet my living in the Flesh is more needful for you: and
this put him in a strait which to choose, Death he knew was better for him, but
his Life might be more helpful to them: And the reason why Death was better for
him, seems to have risen from the Troubles, Wants, and other Afflictions, which
he suffered in the World, and yet had great assurance of a Blessed Rest in the
Grave, and that there was laid up for him a Crown of Righteousness, which God
the Righteous Judge would give him at that Day, and not to him only, but to all
those that love Christ's appearing, [and wait for his second coming] and so
Paul prays for one Onesiphorus, that he may find Mercy of God in that day: And
so John 6. Our Lord repeats it four times, That those who serve him, shall be
raised up [to a state of Happiness] at the last Day; whence those who die in
such a State or Condition, are freed from the Labor of working out their own
Salvation, with Fear and Trembling; and such as now think they stand from the
Fear and Danger of falling: And for these Reasons, to die and to be with
Christ, in the Sense of resting or sleeping in him, is better and more eligible
than to live in Christ in the World, and specially in an afflicted and
suffering Condition. And, conclude from my Argument before rehearsed, that the
Eighteenth Argument or Mr. W. is not a sufficient nor a good Argument to prove
the Souls Separate Subsistence.

P. 122. Mr. W. farther quotes, Acts 1.25. The Apostles appointed two persons
of their Company, and cast Lots upon, to decide which of them should be put
into the Rank of the other Eleven Apostles; and thereupon they prayed to God
and said, Thou Lord which knows the Hearts of all Men, show whether of these
thou past chosen; That he may take part of this Ministry and Apostleship, from
which Judas by Transgression fell, that he might go to his own place. And they
gave forth thiir Lots, and the Lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with
the Eleven Apostles. Mr. W. applies the Words, that he might go to his own
Place, unto the Person of Judas, which he says, intends into Hell, and not only
into the Grave, because every Man goes thither as well as he. I answer, That if
Mr. W. think truly an infinite number of other Persons go to Hell as well as
Judas, and therefore Hell is no more the proper place of Judas than the Grave
may be. Secondly, I say, That although the Grave be a place of Rest and
Blessedness to those that die in the Lord, yet to those who die in a state of
Enmity with him, the Approaches of Death seem terrible, and the Grave is not a
sufficient shelter for them, from the wrath of God and of the Lamb, when Christ
shall come to give Judgment upon the quick and dead. Thirdly, It seems the very
words of the Text, do naturally require a different Construction from that
which Mr. W. has put upon them, by applying the words, might go to his own
Place, unto the Person then to be chosen, who might with assurance go to his
own Place of a Twelfth Apostle, into which by Lot he should then be chosen; and
Matthias we read did go to his own place, and was numbered with the other Eleven
Apostles. I do not know whether Dr. Hammond apply the words after this manner
or not, but if he do, I think he is in the right of it, and give my Consent
thereunto. And thus it seems to me, no reasonable Argument can hence be drawn
to prove the Souls Separate Subsistence. Mr. W. for further proof of his
Opinion, quotes Jude 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them,
in like manner, giving themselves over to Fornication, are set forth for an
Example, suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire. Hereupon Mr. W. says, This
Text intends the Sufferings of the Sodomites Souls after Death: I answer, that
to those who already believe there are Souls so suffering, Mr. W's. Sense of
the Words may be well enough admitted, but to those who stand unconvinc'd of
Men's Souls suffering soon after their Deaths, this saying seems to have no
strength of Proof in it; for they will expound it otherways, and say, that for
the wickedness of the People, those Cities, and the whole plain of Sodom do
suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire; they did so at the time of that
Destruction, and they do so still, and are likely so to continue to the end of
the World, turned into a Sulphurous and Bitumenous Lake, the matter whereof is
apt to take Fire upon all occasions; and as to the word Eternal, we find it in
Scripture diverse times used, to signify things of a very long Continuance; as
the Priesthood of Aaron, the Royalty of David, the Establishment of Jerusalem,
their being established for ever: And yet we have seen them all destroyed long
ago. And hence I infer, that no good Argument can be taken from his last quoted
Text, for proof of the Souls Separate Subsistence.

With this Quotation Mr. W. closes Eighteen or Twenty Arguments for proof of
the Souls Separate Subsistence, to each of which I have given a distinct
Answer, and such as does very well satisfy my own Understanding, with
submission therein to the judgment of such intelligent Persons as may happen to
peruse both our Endeavors, for the proof and disproving of our Apprehensions
in this Question.

P. 123. Mr. W. here proceeds in his endeavor to main tain the Souls Separate
Subsistence, by inferring absurd Consequences from the other Opinion of the
Souls extinguishment at the Death of the Person.

P. 123. Mr. W. thinks it an absurd Belief, that Men should suffer for their
Sins no more than Temporal Death; but says, If his Soul have not a Separate
Subsistence, he can suffer no more than a Temporal Death, except we had Ground
to believe a Resurrection of the Body, of which the Scripture is silent, and we
likewise deny it. I say to this, that I do not therein apprehend his Meaning: I
cannot believe that he intended to deny the Resurrection of the Dead, which I
offer as a full Answer to his pretended Absurdity; and though in words he denies
it, yet I cannot conceive his meaning to be so.

P. 124. Mr. W. says secondly the same things which he said before in his
first, and must have the same Answer, viz. That the Resurrection of the Person
removes and and alters all this second pretended Absurdities.

P. 125. Thirdly, Mr. W. says, The Beasts are Sick, and Groan and Die for Man's
Sin or Sinfulness; I reply, That I cannot grant him this; conceiving, that if
Man had not sinned, yet the Beasts should have been sick, and groaned and dyed,
as well and as much as they do now; and the Doctrine of the Resurrection is a
full Answer to this pretended Absurdity.

His Fourth pretended Absurdity is to be answered after the same manner.

His pretended Fifth Absurdity is answered by the Resurrection, as before is
said.

P. 126. Mr. W. says, That without a Revelation from God, concerning the
Resurrection of the whole Man, Men could not expect the Rewards or Punishments
after Death, unless their Souls have a Separate Subsistence; and this I am
ready to agree to him, and if there be no Resurrection, I do also agree, that
Men have been very much deceived in their Expectation of Recompenses after this
Life; and that upon the supposal of no Resurrection, they have been Wiser who
indulged themselves in their Pleasures, than those who have restrained their
Appetites, in consideration of Recompenses expected after this Life. 1 Cor.
15.19. If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we Christians are of all
Men most miserable; but the Dead shall rise as certainly as Christ was raised,
and if these Resurrections of Christ and the Dead be not both true, then all
Christian Religion is Vain, and all those who are fallen asleep in Christ are
Perished.

P. 127. He says, If the Heathens had no reason to believe the Immortality of
the Soul, and had no Revelation at all of a Resurrection given them; how then
says Mr. W. Could they be brought to a Reformation in their Manners? I put the
Question concerning the Gospel of Christ; If there be no Name given under
Heaven by which Men can be saved, but that of Jesus Christ, and the vastest
numbers of Men in the World never heard of that Name, and other vast Numbers
who have heard of it, do not yet believe it, nor have the Faith propounded to
them in such manner as they have reason to believe it; I may demand of Mr. W.
what shall become of all these People? as well as he demands of me, How Men
should order themselves, who never had the Resurrection revealed to them? And I
think, that in both these Cases alike, Men must order their Works according to
the best of their Knowledge, and God will make such Allowances to them, as
their Cases may require.

P. 127. Mr. W. pretends to persuade Men, That the World has been kept in Awe,
by pretense of Recompense after this Life; whereas the Scripture tells us, the
Patriarchs as well as the Jews, under the Mosaical Law, were more practically
good, and had fewer great Faults among them, when they had lived under the
Discipline of Earthly Rewards and Punishments, than they had in succeeding and
later Ages, when the Opinion of the Souls Immortality began to be received and
spread amongst them; and therefore it seems there is not that need of his
Opinion concerning the Souls Separate Subsistence as he by this Discourse
pretends to make Men believe.

Mr. W's second Chain of Absurdities.

P. 128. He says, His Opposers pretends the Spirit of Life in Man or his Soul,
to be but a fine Temperament of Moisture, Air and Fire, very near of Kin, and
suitable to the Temperament of the Body: and this he says, is very consistent
with their Principles; and I agree, that what he says is true in this Point.
This Mr. W. opposes; by saying First, If things were so, then Adam's Soul might
have been created of the Dust as well as his Body. I reply, not so, but there
was required Moisture, Air and Fire, to suppie and actuate that Dust of which
his Body was framed, which brought the steems of Life in the Body to such a
ripeness and pullulation, as by the breathing a Breath of Life into him, became
instantly inflamed; and by Respiration must every Moment be fanned by that
Breath which continues in Man's Blood and Humors, and the Spirits thereof that
flame and glowing, whose total Extinguishment is the death of the Person; and
this by want of Respiration become instantly suffocated and extinguished, which
(as has been said) is the death of the Person.

P. 129. He says, He has opened in his first Argument what this breathing into
Man intends, and refers his Readers thither again for the Knowledge of it; and
I refer again unto the Answer thereunto given.

Secondly, He says, That such a Soul as his Opposers believe, is subject in its
parts to Division, Dissipation, and Corruption; which I agree to him. Mr. W.
says, That from thence it will follow, that all God's Threats denounced against
Sinners, is but to keep those inflamed Particles of the Blood in order; but I
say, Those Threats are pronounced to keep Men's Persons and their Actions in
such a regular Order, and that the Reports and Belief of the Day of Judgment
are effectual upon the Persons of Men, whose Bodies will then be as able to
endure the Fire as their Souls.

Another. Secondly, Mr. W. says, That such a Temperament of Soul cannot offend
God, because it is Material and Senseless; and this I agree to him: and say,
That it is neither the Body nor the Soul singly, that does or can offend God,
but it is the Compositum of these made Intelligent, or the Person made
Intelligent, which can and does too often offend God; and by Mr. W's Pretense
in this place, he seems to insinuate, That God cannot produce Intelligence, by
his wise Commixture of Material Agents and Patients, which has before been
disputed; and I have declared my self thereupon, that God can produce
Intelligence by a most Wise and Artificial commixture of Material Agents and
Patients acted by Motion, which must be continually supplied from Nutriment,
which God out of the ambient World and Air has continually produced in
abundance for that purpose; and when by Famine or want of Nutriment it draws no
supplies, the Persons who suffer it die in multitudes.

P. 130. Mr. W. repeats, That our sort of Material Soul cannot love or fear
God, nor understand what it self does: which is a thing which I have all along
granted and asserted, as I do here; agreeing that such things are not
comportant either with the Soul or Body, but with the Person only.

P. 131. He pretends that there is something in Man that is the principal Seat
of Regeneration. This I oppose, by saying as before, That the whole Man or
Person is so, and not only part of his Compositum singly taken: What he says
more, flows out of the abundance of his own Heart, and seems (to me) to be very
groundlesly spoken. Fifthly, Mr. W. says, That the Contentions between the
Flesh and Spirit in Man, cannot be maintained by the Natural difference between
a Material Soul, and the Body wherein it resides; I agree this to him,
Answering, That all these Contests between the Flesh and Spirit, signify no
more than that continual War which Men feel in themselves, between the Power of
Reason in their Minds, and the Lustful Desire of their Affections and Passions.
Aristotle tells us, There is no end of this War but Death, and no certainty
which shall obtain a clear Victory till that time; and when St. Paul says that
these War against the Soul, the word Soul must there be intended to signify
the Person, or the good of the whole Man; and yet I do agree what he after says
to be true, That the Rational and Affective Faculties, spring both from the
same Root or Composition of Mankind, and are both supported by the same Breath
and Nourishment, and yet the Faculties themselves are different, and are
commonly at strife one with another; and as we daily see, Love and Hatred, Joy
and Sorrow, subsisting together in one same Person.

Mr. W's Philosophical Absurdities, which he says flow from the Opinion of the
Souls Materiality.

P. 132. He says, If the Soul be Material, it will follow, that Men's faculties
of Reason, Intellect and Memory, are seated in a Corporeal Elementary
Substance; but it is very evident says he, That none of these faculties can be
immediately seated in any Corporeal Elementary Substance; answering, I deny the
Evidence of what he says, but apply all these Faculties to the Person in which
they all certainly are, produced by the wisdom of God, acted by Motion, and
supported and continued by Nourishment and Breath; and therefore the Spirit of
Life in Man may be Material, notwithstanding Mr. W's asserting the contrary.

P. 133. Mr. W. says, These Faculties cannot be acted by a Material Substance;
but he finds these Faculties in himself, and therefore they must be acted in
Men by a Spiritual Substance. This seems to intend, that when Men cannot attain
to know the reason by which, or the manner how strange things are done, they
are apt to fly to the refuge of Spirits for the doing of them; an erroneous
course which has been very often used in the World: but I refuse to Mr. W. the
use which he pretends to make of it in this Argument, and do assure, that I
receive no manner of conviction from it.

P. 135. Mr. W. says, I find a power in me of Sensation, as Seeing, Hearing,
ctc. but none of these Faculties are seated in a Substance purely Elementary. I
demand then, how come the Brutes by these, which they have in as great
perfection as Men have them?

He thinks no Man will say it is possible to make a Sensible House by all the
Art that Men can use about it; and this I grant: but if Men should say it is
possible for God to make a Sensible House, I should have no Inclinations to
deny it; believing that to be altogether as as feasible, as to make a Camel go
through the eye of a Needle. With Men and to their Understandings, all such
things are impossible, but not with God. I think it impossible for the Art or
Industry of Man to make and give Life to a Mouse, a Fly, a tuft of Grass, or a
Flower. The Art of the whole World has never yet been able to produce such
Creatures, and to put Life into them; and how then dare such weak Writers
compare their Knowledge and Skill with that of the Great Creator, and pretend
to say, That he who made all things out of nothing, cannot make what he will,
out of any Matter which he will make use of: and though I will not be so
humorous, as to think it possible for Men to make a Sensible House, or any
other Sensible or Living Creature whatsoever, yet I am certain, that God has
made an Infinite number of Sensible Creatures, unto whom I think Mr. W. will
not think fit to communicate Souls of the same sort with those which he bestows
upon Mankind.

P. 135. Thirdly, Mr. W. recounts to us diverse particulars concerning the
Memory, and says that Men are not able to give an account of the mode or manner
of its acting; and I agree Men's Inabilities so to do: well but then says he, If
you cannot tell me the manner of such Actions by the spirits of the Blood in
the Brain, I wlll conclude it is done by the Power of an Intelligent Spirit. I
reply, That if he will do so, I cannot help; but I refuse to bear him Company
in that mistake, unless he can give me a better account how his Spirit accounts
Memory in the Brain, and after what manner the same is performed, than I can
give him concerning the Spirits of Blood acting the Brain to that purpose. I am
ready to confess my Ignorance in the later, and I shall think him as Ignorant
in the former, until he shall give us a better account thereof, then hitherto
has appeared in the World.

P. 136. Fourthly, Mr. W. argues; That the Soul must needs be Immortal, because
Men have a Rational Faculty, whereby they can act abundance of things here by
him enumerated, and which seem to be beyond all Capacities in the Nature of
Matter it self, and all the Advantages which Humane Art or Industry can give
it: To this I Answer as before, That although the nature of Matter be not proper
in it self for such Productions, nor can be made to serve such purposes by the
Art or Industry of Men; yet the Wisdom, Skill and Power of God, are able to
produce such Effects out of Matter and Motion, as Men are not able rationally
to conceive, nor it seems by Mr. W's Discourse are willing to believe. That he
ascribes all these Powers to his sort of Soul, which are truly in and proper to
the Person, must pass for his Common Error, and is perhaps incurable in him,
because I find it so lasting, as to reach from the one end to the other; in
refutation whereof, I think there has been enough already spoken, and therefore
I pass over much that he has said in this place to the same Purpose.

Mr. W's Immoralities consequent upon the Doctrine of the Souls Mortality.

P. 139. He says, That it lets Men loose to Immoralities, and gratifies bad Men
and their Actions. I answer, That for the space of Thirteen Years last past, I
have conceived this Opinion to be the more probable of the two, and yet have
not found that it had any effect at all upon my Manners or the other Opinions
which I before held concerning God and his Worship; and therefore I am not apt
to believe that it will have bad effects upon other Persons, who may likewise
conceive this Opinion to be the more probable. Next he says, This Opinion
creates contemptible Thoughts of Men's Souls. I Answer, That the Conception of
the not being of any thing, can breed no contempt of that which Men think has
not a Being, or not such a Being as other Men imagine. I also say, That those
who think their Beings to be composed of no other things but Elemementary
Matter, may yet justly have a great Esteem of themselves; as the Skilful
Workmanship of God after his own Image, and endued with more excellent
Faculties and Powers than any other Animal or Earthly Crateures whatsoever.

P. 140. Secondly, Mr. W. says, Belief of the Souls Mortality, keeps the minds
of wicked Men from fearing the Torments which others expect to succeed the very
time of their Deaths. I Answer, That these Apprehensions do more commonly
terrify the Good and Weak, than the Bold and Wicked, both in the time of their
Lives, and at the day of their Deaths; and whether it do more good or hurt in
these Respects, I pretend to question. Mr. W. says, That the Doctrine of the
Resurrection and the Last Judgment, may be of Consideration sufficient to
terrify wicked Persons; and yet it seems not that he is so well satisfied
therewithal as I am, but would have the Belief of the Souls Separate
Subsistence super-added thereunto; and I should therewith be contented, if the
same could be any thing near so well proved, as the Doctrine of the
Resurrection may be.

Thirdly, Mr. W. says, The Opinion of the Souls Extinguishment is troublesome
to the Souls of good Men; a mode of speaking which I would correct, and say it
is troublesome to good Men themselves, whose Hearts are in Heaven whilst they
are on Earth, to whom it is grievous to think of any delay between Death and
their going to God to live in Union with him. I Answer, that though by Error in
their Belief, they may be disappointed of that expected Happiness; yet it seems
they shall fare never the worse for it, nor know how much they were deceived,
till the time of the Resurrection, and then their Works which follow them will
be sure to overtake them, and they will receive no Detriment by that delay,
which they may find in their going to God; because the distance between Death
and the Resurrection, is of no consideration at all to the dead Person, who
shall rise as if he were then but newly fallen asleep, and be utterly unknowing
and unperceiving what time has passed over him since his Death, and whether
any time has passed over him at all or not.

Mr. W. has used diverse high and some tragical Expresons against his Opposers
and their Opinion, in his Discourse upon this Head, which I pass over, as not
greatly significant in this Dispute.

Ancient Testimonies both of the Jews and Primitive Christians, proving the
Souls Immortality.

P. 142. Thereupon Mr. W. says, That his ancient Testimonies and the Universal
Belief of the Christian Church, is no small Evidence of the Truth of that
Opinion. And I agree this to him, that these are great Evidences of the Truth
thereof, and I think them the strongest Evidences which he has yet produced;
and yet I do not conceive that they have in them a Conviction strong enough to
oblige all People to a Concurrence in that Opinion, because all these Evidences
are resolvable into an Humane Authority, upon which I have no Inclination to
found such a Faith as is the Evidence of things not seen, i.e. such a Belief as
concerning which, there is neither Doubt nor Question.

Mr. W. gives us here a long Testimony out of Josephus, from whence we may
collect, that some Jews held one thing, and some another concerning Souls: Some
thought of them, that one sort lived in perpetual Prison after Death, and
another sort rose very shortly; and Mr. W. says, The generality of the Jews
were of that Mind; and says, The Sadduces denied the Souls Immortality, and
shows that Josephus was no Friend of theirs. Then Mr. W. quotes Joseph a
Speaker; saying, That Men's Souls go to Heaven, and then after a certain
Revolution or Period, are again commanded to live in Bodies. Another Speaker
says, It is Misery to live, and not to die; for Death freeth our Souls from
Prison, into their most pure and proper Place, so as whilst they are in the
Body, they may properly be said to be dead; but this passes with me for a
Platonic Fable, concerning which enough has been spoken. This Jew says, The
Soul comes secretly into Men without being perceived, and so departs from
them again. I reply, De non apparentibus, and non existentibus eadem est ratio.
I say also, That where ever the Blood passes freely in the Body, the Parts and
Members are fresh and lively; but where Obstructions hinders the rivage of
Blood from passing, the Bodily Parts and Members become withered and useless.
Mr. W. concludes, It is clear that the Church of the Jews always held the
Opinion of the Souls Immortality, forgetting the Texts which I have before
quoted, which prove the Patriarchal and Mosaical Opinion to have been, That the
Life of Sensative Creatures lies in their Blood, and other Opinion of the
ancient Jews has he quoted none, till that which he seems to coll^ct out of
the Discourse betwixt Saul and the Witch of Endor; and which I do not agree to
be proving, nor do Job or David make any mention of Spiritual Souls; so that
Solomon's Writings are the first wherein we find mention of this sort of Souls
of Mr. W. In his Third Chapter, he doubts, and in his Twelfth Chapter, he says
in few Words and Transiently, The Spirit returns to God who gave it; and there
he is speaking of the dissolution of the humane Person; and says, The Body
returns to the Dust as it was, what became of the Spirit he did not perceive;
and therefore contented himself to say, The Spirit returned to God who gave it.
These are all the Arguments Mr. W. has collected out of the Old Testament;
whence I am apt to infer, that he found no other Text in that Testament which
made for his purpose; but I think fit to mind him of the History in the second
of Maccabees, concerning the Martyrdom of the Seven Brothers by Antiochus;
there he shall find several of them declaring the Hope they had of being
restored to their mangled Limbs, at and by the Resurrection, without mentioning
their building of any Hope upon the Souls Separate Subsistence; whence I
collect, that Opinion had not yet prevailed amongst the Jews of those times. It
is also true, that a Relation of this Martyrdom is subjoyned to the Works of
Josephus, as if it were of his Writing; but I think the very great Verbosity of
that Writing proves it to be none of his; but it relates diverse Sayings of
these Brothers, showing the dependence of their Comfort upon the Souls Separate
Subsistence, and its immediate going to Heaven; and this Difference proves to
my Understanding, that the Jews had altered their Opinion concerning their
State after Death, between the time of the Maccabees Writing, and that wherein
Josephus writ his Relation* if the same be truly of his Writing.

P. 145. Mr. W. begins his Quotations of the Ancient Fathers, for proof of the
Souls Separate Subsistence. I have not the opportunity of examining his
Quotations with the Originals, and therefore do not find it reasonable to deny
or question the verity of any of them, taking them therefore for veritable, I
agree, they give very strong Testimony, that those Writings of the Fathers by
him quoted, prove the Belief of the Writers to have been much consonant to his
Opinion: and I proffer only this Gloss upon the last of them, viz. that of St.
Ambrose, who remembers our Lord went to prepare a place for his Disciples, unto
which I would add that which follows next after in the Text; When I have
prepared fitting places for you, I will come and receive you to my Self, that
where I am ye may be also. This coming of Christ, I conceive to intend his
second coming to Judgment; and then, and not till th^n, that which our Lord
says in this Text, may be accomplished. It seems his words quoted out of
Iraeneus, do not prove the Souls immediately going to Heaven after Death, but
to a Paradise or place of Pleasure distinct from Heaven; and yet I allow them
to be a good Proof that Iraeneus by them intends a Belief of the Souls Separate
Subsistence.

His second Author which he quotes, he calls the Author of the Responses, Apud
Justin. This I do not think fit to accept as the Opinion of Justin Martyr.

Thirdly, For the saying of Polycarpus, he quotes no Author from whence he took
it; whence it possibly may be taken from Baroneus.

His Fourth Quotation out of Origin seems no strong Proof, because he was a
perfect Platonist, both before and after his Conversion to Christianity.

Fifthly, His Quotation out of Tertullian, speaks of such a place for the
reception of departed Souls, as is far above the Infernal places, and a place
of refreshment of the Souls of the Just, when they are departed out of this
Life, where they shall abide to the Resurrection, yet takes it for a different
place from Heaven; and I agree, it proves his Agreement to the Souls Separate
Subsistence.

His Sixth Quotation out of Cyprian, seems very full to his Purpose, that the
Martyrs Souls went immediately to Heaven.

In his Seventh Quotation concerning the Oration of Constantine, I find no
Expression in it that proves strongly for him, save that Emperor's discoursing
concerning the Souls Immortality; upon which I think he might very well
dispute, without making any certain Conclusion thereupon.

His Eighth Quotation out of Gregory Nyssen, seems to me partly Platonic.

Ninthly, What Prudentius says, seems but to be rendering the Parable of Dives
in Verse.

Tenthly, Gregory Naz. who calls the Body and this Life the Prison of the Soul,
follows therein the Platonic Doctrine.

P. 152. Mr. W. says, He has thus given us the Judgment of the Primitive
Church, for the Four first Centuries of it, which is no small Argument of the
Truth of the Souls Immortality; and of the same Opinion have the Christian
Churches continued throughout the World: and therefore Men must have very
strong Arguments if they hope to prevail in rejecting this Opinion. I answer,
and grant that this Argument is good and strong for the proving of his Opinion;
and seems to be of more Power and Strength than all that he has said before
for the maintaining of it; but yet I do not perceive that Strength in it which
may be able to support his Tenet against those Reasons and those Scriptures
which may be brought against the Rationality and Truth of it; and of which I
intend to make a short detail when I come to his following Head, where he makes
and delivers Objections against his own Doctrine.

P. 152. Mr. W. begins to relate certain Sayings or Speeches of Reformed
Martyrs, who it seems died in the Opinion of the Souls Separate Subsistence;
which may be admitted to add some small Strength to his former Arguments drawn
from the Opinion of the more Ancient Fathers. I do not find it strange that Men
should retain to the end of their Days diverse Opinions which they had before
imbibed in their Youth, and by their Education has been radicated in them;
especially such as do not appear to have an evil effect upon their Practices.
And I think that diverse Learned Men, of most high Esteem, even in the Primitive
and Apostolical Churches, have delivered some Doctrines to their Disciples,
which upon strict examination may be found inconsonant to the stream or current
of Scripture, and the natural reason of Mankind; which Doctrines I conceive the
Writers of them did believe to be true, upon the ground of such Tradition as
they had received, and which by Education and Custom had obtained an absolute
assent of their Minds in such Cases. And though I shall here name only the
Millenary Opinion, yet if I thought fit here to digress, to that purpose, I
could add diverse other particulars thereunto.

P. 153. Mr. W. proceeds to make farther Proof of his Opinion by some
Representations in Dreams, and others in Shades or Shadows of Persons departed,
unto which I have in a former Treatise made Answer, that I do not deny there
may be verity in diverse of those Relations, and yet I do not conceive any thing
of that kind has ever been performed by departed Souls; thinking it probable
that there are no such Beings in the World: but I am willing to ascribe such
Actions to the Powers and Performances of inferior Spirits, without pretending
to determine whether good or bad; and that they jussu aut permissu superiorum,
do represent and act according as the occasions wherein they are employed may
require.

P. 158. Mr. W. produces diverse Objections, which he says, are made against the
Souls Separate Subsistence, amounting to the Number of Fourteen, diverse of
which I a gree not to be very material, and though I intend to mention each of
them, that I may not seem to disregard any thing that he has Written, yet very
little shall be said concerning them; my Design being only to insist upon those
which I think material, and to add unto them such other Objections as Mr. W. in
his Catalogue has omitted.

P. 158. Mr W's first Objection says, That what of the first Adam it was that
sinned, that of Adam died, but both the Soul and Body died, therefore, etc.

To this he Answers, That he must not take Life and Death here in their proper
Sense, but that the word Death here, only intends a miserable Life; which,
however he does not deny to be Life, and I do not conceive how Death and Life
can stand together in the same subject; and therefore I think his Description
of Death by a miserable Life, is not reasonable nor allowable in this Case;
conceiving it agreeable to Reason, that the Curse pronounced against Sin should
extend to the Person that sinned; and accordingly the Persons which sinned did
both die for it, or after it, without any appearance of leaving Souls to
survive after the Death of their Persons.

P. 159. Mr. W. will not agree, that their Souls did die as well as their
Bodies; because God says, That Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return.
Then he assumes the Soul was not made of Dust, which is a thing before disputed
between us: I pretending there was no such Soul made as he says there was; I
say my sort of Soul is material, and may return to the Dust and Air as it was,
which he will deny, and thereupon we must examine all that has been spoken,
which neither of us can design to do in this place, but leave this Objection to
be farther discussed.

Mr. W's second Objection from Eccles. 3. where Solomon compares Men with
Beasts.

P. 161. He pretends that Text says, The Spirit of Man goes upward, and the
Spirit of a Beast downward, which I think it does not say, but makes a doubt
whether the truth of the thing be so or no; it seems Solomon speaks more
deliberately concerning Men's Souls in this Text, than he does in his Twelfth
Chapter, and yet I pass this Objection lightly over, without laying any great
weight upon it.

P. 162. Mr. W. raises a third Objection from Matthew. 26.38. where our Lord
says, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto Death; from whence some Men may
pretend to infer, that his Soul might die; I profess to be none of those who
make this Objection; for I conceive that Christ by the word Soul, intended his
Person or himself, in the same Sense as if he had said, I am sorrowful unto
Death, and therefore I pass this over as a weak Objection against Mr. W's
Opinion.

P. 164. Mr. W. raises a fourth Objection against himself, from Acts 2.27. Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy Holy one to see Corruption.
Here, he says, some will have Christ's Intellectual Soul to be meant, and by
Hell or (...) the Grave to be meant* I profess to be none of those some, who
would have Christ's Intellectual Soul to be here meant, but I do rather
conceive, that by my Soul in this place, is intended my Person, or my Self; and
as if he had said, thou will not leave me in (...) or the Grave, without
intention to speak of an Intellectual Soul, or any other Soul at all; and
therefore I pass this over as a very light Objection against Mr. W's Opinion

P. 169. The fifth Objection which Mr. W. brings against his own Opinion, is
raised from 2 Cor. 5. Where Paul speaks of being clothed upon with his House
from Heaven. I have said before that this Expression respects that Translation
of their Bodies, which the Saints who are alive upon Earth at Christ's coming
shall receive, when they shall be disrobed of their Earthly Bodies, and have
them changed into Heavenly or Spiritual Bodies; and yet I do not find any great
Strength in this Objection against Mr. W's Opinion, but pass it away as a very
weak one, without saying any more to it.

P. 171. Sixthly, He objects against his own Opinion, that the Scriptures make
frequent mention of Rewards and Punishments to be given at the day of Judgment,
but make no mention of such Recompenses to be given soon after Death, or
between that and the Resurrection. This I own to be a very strong Objection
against Mr. W's Opinion, and do intend to make it one of mine, which I mean to
deliver at the end of his Catalogue of Objections, and there further to
consider his Answer to it.

P. 172. Seventhly, Mr. W. objects against himself, If the Souls of Men pass
their Trial as soon as their Bodies are dead, what needs any other Day of
Judgment? will Christ try Men after Sentence? This I think to be a strong
Objection, and therefore I mean to repeat it again, and there to consider his
Answer.

P. 175. Eighthly, He objects against himself, When Christ which is our Life
shall appear, then shall w^ appear with him in Glory. I purpose to add this
Text, to others which I mean to quote against his Opinion afterward, and there
to consider his Answer.

P. 177. A Ninth Objection which he raises against himself, is from 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Glory. This I think to be a
strong Objection, fit to be again repeated, and there his Answer shall be
considered.

P. 179. His Tenth Objection is taken from King Hezekiah's Prayer, in Isaiah.
This I think to be strong, and therefore to be repeated, and his Answer to be
there considered.

P. 181. His Eleventh Objection from Eccles. 9.5. The Dead know not any thing,
seems strong, and therefore again to be repeated, and his Answer there
considered.

P. 182. Twelfthly, Mr. W. objects against himself, the words of David, Psalm
7.1, 2. Save me, least my Enemy tear my Soul like a Lion. Here I think is the
same intent as if David had said, least he tear me in pieces like a Lion,
putting here the word Soul to signify Person. Therefore I think this Objection
to be very weak, and as such I leave it.

P. 183. Mr. W. takes his Thirteenth Objection from 1 Cor. 15.18. If the Dead
rise not, then they also that are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. This
Text and Chapter makes a very strong Objection against Mr. W's Opinion, and
therefore it shall be hereafter repeated, and his Answer there considered.

P. 187. Mr. W's Fourteenth Objection is raised from 1 Timothy 6.16. God only has
Immortality dwelling in Light; I think this to be a very weak Objection against
Mr. W's Opinion, and therefore I pass it over without any further Consideration.

In this Examination of Mr. W's Fourteen Objections, we have found one half, or
seven of them to be of small force for the overthrowing Mr. W's Opinion; and I
observe, that in his propounding diverse of the other seven which are strong
against him, he does it in such manner as their strength seems to be much
impaired by his manner of delivering them; and therefore I design to frame
another series of Objections against his Opinion and to place amongst them: The
Seventh Objection of Mr. W's which I approve, and to consider therein the
Answers which he has given to them, not yet meaning to follow Mr. W's order of
propounding them, but I intend to offer all my Objections taken from Scripture
according to the several times wherein they were delivered.

First, I object against Mr. W's Opinion, from Genesis 9.4. Flesh with the Life
thereof, which is the Blood thereof, shall you not eat; and surely your Blood
of your Lives will I require, at the Hand of every Beast will I require it; and
at the hand of Man, at the Hand of every Man's Brother will I require the Life
of Man; who so sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed; for in the
Image of God made he Man. It seems to appear from the words of this Text, that
the Terms Blood and Life, have a convercibility one with another; so as no
Blood no Life, and the shedding of Man's Blood is the killing of him, and it is
therefore made a Crime of the highest Nature, because the shedding of Man's
Blood destroys the Image of God wherein Man was made. Whence, I conceive Man to
be God's Image in his whole Person, whose Blood may be shed, and not only in a
particular part of him, which Mr. W. maintains must be his Soul. The words of
the Text say, That the Blood of the Creature is the Life thereof; and
Experiences convinces, that all things that have Life have a sort of Spirit for
the maintaining thereof; as Grass, Herbs, Plants, Trees, Insects, Fishes,
Fowls, Brutes, and Men. In Plants or Trees, if we pare off the Skin or Bark,
and thereby stop the ascent of the Sap, which is the Spirit of Life in Plants,
the Plant will die from that place upwards, because this Sap or Spirit of Life
will be obstructed in its ascent to the higher parts of the Plant; and among
Brutes or Men, if the passage of the Blood be obstructed, those parts to which
the Blood cannot come with Freedom, decay, wither, and become of little or no
use to the Creature. The Text says, Flesh with the Life thereof, which is the
Blood thereof; and Experience shows, that the Life exhales with the Blood, so
as no Blood no Life: Whence I collect, the Spirit of Life in Brutes and men
consists and resides in the Blood, and the inflamed and glowing Spirits
thereof; and thence it seems, that as the Spirit of Life in Plants is the Sap
thereof, so the Spirit of Life in Animals is the Blood kindled and glowing, and
the inflamed particles thereof; and so our Text says, Flesh with the Life
thereof, which is the Blood thereof: And from the Premises I argue, that the
Spirit of Life in Man is in his Blood, and the inflamed particles of it; and
Experience evidences, that by like Blood and Spirits, the Brutes are acted both
in their Local and Peristaltick Motions; their Senses of Bearing, Seeing, etc.
Their Affections of Lust, Wrath, and Fear, and those degrees which they have of
Fantasy, Choice and Memory. And I pretend hence to infer, that if in the
Blood there be a Spirit of Life, which can act the Brutes in their Motions,
Sensations and Passions, to as high a Degree as Men are acted in those
performances, and can act them to lower Degrees of Fancy, Choice and Memory; it
seems a like Spirit may probably act humane Persons in all these Faculties, and
to much higher Degrees in those of Judgment, Fantasy and Memory, because in
such Persons these Spirits meet with Organs of greater perfection, and better
fitted for the performance thereof. And hereunto I apply the injecting of
Brutal Blood into a Humane Body, which Experience proves will act that Body in
such manner, as it was acted before by its own Blood, because the Organs in
which it works are better suited to such purposes, than those of the Animal
wherein it acted before; and it seems consequent, that if the Blood and its
particles be the Spirit of Life in Man, and can act all his Faculties as before
has been expressed, then there is no need to imagine the being of an
immaterial intelligent Spirit in Man; quia frustra fit per plura, quod fieri
potest per pautiora, and natura nihil facit frustra: Wherefore I conclude, that
the Blood and its Particles inflamed or glowing, are the Spirit of Life in Man
as well as in Brutes, and that there neither needs, nor probably is in him such
an Immaterial Intelligent Spirit, as Mr. W. and those who maintain his Tenet,
have supposed. In Confirmation of what God said before to Noah, we read, Levit.
7.11. The Life of the Flesh is in the Blood, and I have given it to you upon
the Altar, to make an Atonement for the Souls [intending your selves.] Verse.
13. He that hunts or kills a Beast or Fowl, he shall even pour out the Blood
thereof, and cover it with Dust, for it is the Life of all Flesh; the Blood of
it is for the Life thereof.

Secondly, I object against Mr. W's Opinion from Job 3.11. Why died I not from
the Womb? why did the Knees prevent me? or the Breasts that I should suck? For
now should I have lain, been quiet, and have slept, or as if a hidden untimely
Birth I had not been. Verse. 17. In Death the wicked cease from troubling, and
there the weary are at rest; there the Prisoners rest together, and hear not
the Voice of the Oppressor, and the Servant is free from his Master. This Text
declares to us Job's Opinion, concerning the state of dead Persons, they all
sleep and rest together in Death; Great and Small, Strong and Weak, Prisoners
and Freemen, Servants and Masters; Death reduces them all to a like Estate, of
Freedom, Peace and Rest, without any disturbance amongst them. He makes no
mention here, or in any other place, of Rewards or Punishments until the
Resurrection, and then he professes to expect to see his Redeemer with the Eyes
which he had; but concerning an Intermediate State he is utterly silent, which
it seems likely he would not have been, if he had known of such an Intermediate
State of Souls as Mr. W. and his party pretend to maintain. We see that Job
seems to make Death a rest from all such Sufferings as were known to him; and
had he known or believed such Rewards after Death as Mr. W. pretends, we may
reasonably expect he should have made mention of them: and from his silence
about Rewards, and his Opinion of Rest from Sufferings, I conclude he knew of
no such things to be found of Men soon after their Deaths. And I infer from
this Argument, that the Souls Separate Subsistence, and the great Rewards and
Punishments thereof to be expected immediately after Death, was unknown to Job
and the Men of his time, and is therefore a later Opinion taken up; and yet
generally accepted in the times which came after him, and wants much of that
Authority which its Derivation from the Primitive times of the World might have
given it.

A Third Objection against Mr. W's Doctrine I take from King David, Psalm
146.2. Put not your Trust in Princes, or in any Child of Man; for when the
Breath of Man goes forth, he shall turn again to his Earth, and then all his
Thoughts perish. Psalm. 49.10. Wise Men die and perish together as well as the
Ignorant and Foolish, Verse. 12. Man will not abide in Honor, seeing he may be
compared to the Beasts that perish. Verse. 20. He repeats again, Man being in
Honor has no Understanding, but is compared unto the Beasts that perish. In
the first proving Text David says, When the Breath of Man goes forth, he shall
turn again to his Earth, whence his Son Solomon may have taken his Saying, Then
shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to
God who gave it. Here it seems to me, that David's Breath which at Death goes
forth, intends the same thing with Solomon's Spirit, returning to God who gave
it: but thereunto David adds, That when this Breath is gone forth, and thereby
the Man is returned to his Earth, all his Thoughts perish; whence it seems
there is not one Thought left in him; but we know that the Faculty of thinking
can never continue without some Thoughts arising in it; and therefore, if all a
Man's Thoughts perish with his Death, I infer his Faculty of Thinking must do so
too; which it cannot do, if there be such a Seperately Subsisting Intelligent
Soul in Man as Mr. W. strongly asserts. And if my Opposers should contend that
the Thoughts which are here said to perish, do mean the Intentions and Designs
of the Person when alive. I answer, That there is no need in this place to
alter the plain Sense of the Words; for that the plain Sense of them may very
well stand in this place; conceiving, that in their plain Sense they are as
true, as in that other Sense which my Opposers would put upon them, without any
just occasion so to do. And hence I am apt to conclude upon this Text, that
there is not such a Seperable Intelligent Soul in Man as Mr. W. has all along
pretended. In our second Text, David exhorts not to be afraid of the Riches or
Glory of any Man, for when he dies he shall carry nothing away with him; he
counted himself, and other Men counted him happy whilst he lived, but his
Happiness ends with his Life; for Man being in Honor has no Understanding,
but is compared to the Beasts that perish. Let Men be as Rich, Wise and Happy,
and as much in Honor as this World can afford, yet all these Preheminences
ends with his Life, and it seems so also do his Miseries; and dying or dead he
may be compared to the Beasts that perish: his Breath goes forth, and he turns
again to the Earth from whence he was taken; and so also it is with the Beasts
that perish. Hence it seems, That Solomon should have been the first Person who
started the Question, Whether the Spirits of Men go upward, and the Spirits of
Beasts downward or not? And after not knowing well what became of the Spirit or
Breath which goes forth of a Man at Death, he says Transiently, and without any
Deliberation that appears, this Spirit or Breath returns to God who gave it;
but of such a Spirit or the return thereof, we meet with no mention in
Scripture before his time (that I have yet found out,) and I am therefore ready
to conclude with my quoted Texts out of David, that though Men be had in Honor
during their Lives, yet at, and after Death, they may (as concerning their
Natural Estate) be truly and reasonably compared to the Beasts that perish.

My Fourth Objection against Mr. W's Tenet, I take from Solomon, Eccles. 4.
That Wise King saw great and remediless Oppressions imposed on weak people in
this World, and was thereat so much grieved, that he breaks forth and says, I
praised the dead, which are already dead, more than the living which are yet
alive; yea better is he than both they, which has not yet been: who has not
seen the evil work that is done under the Sun. Chap. 9.3. The heart of the sons
of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart, whilst they live; and
after that they go to the dead: for to him that is joined to the living, there
is hope; for a living dog is better than a dead lion: for the living know that
they shall die, but the dead know not anything, neither have they any more a
reward; for their memory is forgotten: their love, hatred, and envy, are
perished. Ver. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, in the grave, whither thou go.
Thus we find Solomon expresses himself much to the same purpose that Job
before has done; declaring that Death and the Grave put an end to the doings
and sufferings of Men, without taking notice of any rewards or sufferings,
likely to befall men soon after their departures forth of this World; which is
(in my apprehension) a sort of evidence, that his words, The Spirit returns to
God who gave it, did not intend the going of Men's Souls to Judgment before God,
soon after their departures out of this Life. I quote likewise in Corroboration
of Solomon's forecited Text and Opinion, a Concurrent Evidence out of the
Prophet Isaiah 38.18. where Hezekiah praying to god, says, The Grave cannot
praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee; they that go down into the Pit,
cannot hope for thy Truth: The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I
do this day. Mr. W. has quoted these Texts of Solomon and Isaiah, and made out
of each of them an Objection against his Opinion; but I have made one Objection
out of them both, because I find them tend to the same purpose; and do not so
much labor to increase the number of my Objections, as to fortify and
strengthen those which I make against him. Mr. W. has made the Text now quoted
out of Isaiah his Tenth Objection against his Opinion, and thereunto answers,
That Hezekiah 's meaning in these words, is that Men after Death cannot praise
God as they do whilst they are in this World, and in the Congregations of Men,
but that still they can and do praise God after Death in Heaven. Thereunto I
reply, He seems to make Hezekiah mean what himself pleases; but that King's
words seem plainly to declare, That Men after Death, neither do nor can
celebrate or praise the Name of God, without mention of such a meaning as he
pretends, or any need of such a meaning that I can perceive: and therefore I
read and take the plain Sense of his words to be as he has delivered them.

In his Eleventh Objection he quotes the Text of Solomon, The Dead know not any
thing: and thereunto answers, That Solomon's meaning in these words is, That
Dead Men do not know any thing of what is done under the Sun after their
Deaths. I reply, The words of the Text are general words, The Dead know not any
thing [at all;] and therefore I cannot allow of his restraining them to Things
done under the Sun; which he has excogitated on purpose to serve his Design in
this Point: Wherefore I leave this Exposition as a needless and erroneous
Invention, and proceed farther to consider the whole Objection now propounded
against Mr. W's. Opinion. And we find that Solomon in the Texts (of this
Objection) before quoted, speaks of Death as of a Rest from Men's Labors and
Sufferings, and says, There is no device nor knowledge in the grave, whither
thou go; the living know that they shall die, but the dead know not any
thing; not any the most common or knowable thing; not a thing so well known, as
that Men must die, or that they must rise again. These are things the most
commonly known to Men when they are alive, but when they are dead, they know
not any thing [at all;] and to this, King Hezekiah adds, they cannot act any
thing, they cannot so much as Praise and Celebrate the name of God, which Mr.
W's Party will have to be the proper work of their good Souls departed. Our
Text tells us in absolute and plain Terms, the Dead cannot do so, comprehending
under the name of Dead, the Person, and all that belonged to the Composition
thereof. And from these Premises I take leave to conclude, that from these
Texts is raised a strong Objection against the Souls Separate Subsistence.

A Fifth Objection against Mr, W's Tenet, I raise from Eccless. 11.8. If a Man
live many Years and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days of
Darkness, for they shall be many; and then he gives Liberty to the young Man to
rejoice in the days of his Youth, and use his Liberty; but withal bids him
know, that for these things God will bring him into Judgment: so Chap. 12.14.
After he had said the Spirit returns to God who gave it; he adds, Fear God and
keep his Commandments, for God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. Here Solomon exhorts
Men to remember the day and time of their Deaths. The miserable, as well
pleased to rest under that dark Shadow, and the young and joyful he exhorts to
remember those times as days of Darkness, and says that they shall be many;
subjoyning thereunto, that [after those days] God will call Men to Judgment for
all that they have done in this World, though it be never so secretly acted; and
even for every idle word, at the Day of Judgment an Account must be made; and
much more of Men's smallest Actions, whether the same be good or whether they be
evil: by the days of Darkness which Solomon here mentions, seem somewhat
clearly to be intended the days which immediately succeed the death of the
Person; they are days of Darkness, as Darkness it self, covered and made dark
with the shadow of Death; and our Text says those Days shall be many: and
therefore he exhorts Men in their greatest Jollity to remember them; but our
Opposers (contrary to the Tenor of this Text,) endeavor to persuade us that
there are no days of Darkness at all in Death, for that when the Breath of Man
goes forth, or cease in him, his Substantial Intelligent, and then Separated
Soul or Spirit, either returns to God, or goes before him, to Judgment, or is
carried by Angels, or is hurried by Devils, into very different places;
concerning which I do not find they are well agreed among themselves: but
howsoever that may fall out, they are all very well agreed that their Separate
Intelligent Spirit is at greater liberty, and is more active and knowing than
it was during its confinement to the Body; so as instead of those days of
Darkness which Solomon mentions, the Spirit or Principle of Life in Man enjoys
a greater light, activity, and freedom, than it had before the Death of that
Party whom it formerly inliven'd and acted. And this (if it be true) seems
directly contrary to that which Solomon in this Text has affirmed: There are
days of darkness, and many of them, says the Text of Solomon, Mr. W. says, That
at the death of the party, or soon after, good men's souls enjoy much more
light, liberty, and glory, than every they had before: so as they seem to say,
the souls of good men have no dark days at all; and therefore men that are
jovial and merry, need have no regard to such days of Darkness as Solomon in
this Text gives them warning of. And yet such men do not use to deny that a
Solemn and General Judgment shall appear after those many days of Darkness
shall be consummate and finished: and therein they agree with Solomon's Opinion,
although concerning his days of Darkness they seem very much to differ from him:
but if his Opinion may prevail in this Case, it offers a strong Objection
against the Souls Separate Subsistence.

Thus far Objections have been drawn out of the Old Testament, and we now
proceed to draw like Objections from the New.

A Sixth Objection thence to be raised, I take from John 14. 2 In my Fathers
House are many Mansions, I go to prepare a place for you; and if I go to
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you again to my self;
that where I am, there ye may be also. Luke 21.26. The powers of Heaven shall
be shaken, and then shall they see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power
and great glory; and when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh; viz. rewards for the
Saints. Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye
appear with him also in glory. 1 John. 3 2. Beloved, now are we the sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. The Apostle
knew (whilst in this life) that we are the Sons of God, but he did not know
what we shall be [after death] nor was that likely to be known, till Christ's
appearing at his Second Coming; and then he knew that the Saints should be made
like Christ, and appear with him in glory; as Paul has above asserted. 2 Timothy
4.7. Paul says I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth
there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous
Judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to them also that
love his appearing. The Crown it seems was laid up for him, even whilst he was
alive; but was not expected to be given him till the time of Christ's second
appearing, and then it would also be given to all those who love and desire
that appearing. 1 Timothy 1.10. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus,
the Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. He does
not pray that his Friend may find mercy at the time of his Death, or at an
Intermediate Judgment, but at that [great and last] Day. All these Texts have
been quoted to give Evidence of the Time when Rewards and Punishments after
Death, are warrantably to be expected. They all express the time thereof to be
at our Lords Second Coming, and the last Great Day of Judgment thereupon
ensuing; but make no mention of Recompenses warrantably to be expected, soon
after the times of men's Death, or in any Intermediate State between Death and
the Resurrection: Nor has the Scripture (that I find) any mention in other
places, of Recompenses to be distribu^ed in such an In^ermediate State, except
in Parables and Trances only. I have in this Objection repeated two Texts out
of which Mr. W. made Objections singly against his own Opinion; but I have
linked them together, and strengthened them with other Texts of Scripture of
the like import, quia vis unita fortior. Concerning Mr. W's Texts I pretend
here to examine the Answers which he has singly given to each of them. To the
Text of our appearing with Christ in Glory, he answers and grants, That the
appearance here spoken of, intends that of the Last Judgment; for till then the
Saints cannot be said to appear in Glory with Christ; and yet, says he, they
may be in Glory with Christ, though they do not appear in such Glory to Men. I
reply, That tho they do not appear in such Glory to Men, yet if there be truly
such a thing as he maintains, they do appear in Glory before God and the Angels
and Spirits of Just Men made perfect; and therefore may truly be said to appear
in Glory; which St. Paul says, they do not, till Christ's second Coming and
appearing in Glory. Mr. W. says, His sort of Souls may appear in Heaven in
Glory before that time; but it lies upon him to make some proof that they do
so: which he neither offers, nor I think is able to perform: and therefore I
think his Answer to this Text is of small weight. The other Text to which he
makes an Answer, is that of Paul's expecting a Crown to be given him at that
day, or the time of the Last Judgment; and he grants, that the time intended by
the word, That Day, is that of the Last Judgment; and says thereupon, What
then? It follows not thence that therefore there are not Souls in glory before
that time: for Kings may reign before they receive their Crown and Scepter; and
so shall we be Kings and Priests in our Souls unto God in the Heavens. This Mr.
W. pretends to say out of his own fruitful Invention, without offering any
Proof of our being Kings and Priests in Heaven to God in our bare and naked
Souls only: for neither any of our before quoted Texts do mention such things,
nor are they to be found in any other Text of Scripture whatsoever, except the
Vision appearing to St. John when he was intranced: for the Parable of Dives
makes no mention of being in Heaven, or the Preferment of being Kings and
Priests to God, or in his presence; and therefore I am ready to reject this
device or fancy of Mr. W's brain, and to conceive that all our quoted Texts are
true, according to the common sense of their words. Mr. W. father says, There
are no words or syllables in this Text that deny intervening Rewards to the
Saints before that day; which it must have done before it could serve his
Opposers purpose. Thereunto replying, I say, there seems to be no need of such
a Denial: for that if God or Man, promise to give Rewards or Punishments at an
appointed time, there is no need to express, they will not give such things at
other times; nor can there be a warrantable expectation of them at other times,
except such a thing be also expressly declared: which is not done in this or
these Texts, or any other, (...) Texts of Scripture, which I can find; and
therefore I think Mr. W's Answer to this Objection is clearly insufficient: and
as such I leave it, and proceed further to object against Mr. W's Opinion from
all the Texts last before quoted. I say then that all these Texts concur
strongly in their Evidence, That the Resurrection and Last Judgment are the
time when all men may warrantably and certainly expect to be rewarded or
punished according to their Works and Actions in this World: because that is
evidently declared by a strong concurrence of Scripture Testimonies, and
because there is no other time plainly declared in any other Text of Scripture,
when men may warrantably expect such recompenses after their Departures out of
this World: and thence I conceive the Texts before quoted are a strong
Objection against the Expectation of Rewards, or Punishments being given to the
Souls of Dead Persons immediately after their Departures out of this World.

A Seventh Objection I make in the same manner that Mr. W. has put his Seventh
Objection against his own Doctrine; Where he says, If the Souls of Men past
their Trial as soon as they are dead, what needs any other day of Judgment;
Will Christ try Men after Sentence? To this Objection Mr. W. says, I have
proved already, The Souls of Men cannot be killed, and so cannot die; and that
the Souls of Men at death do return to the Lord; and other things relating to
its partial Judgment which it shall receive. To this I reply, His proof of the
Souls not dying, remains sub judice; his Text, that the Soul returns to God,
proves not its going before him for Judgment: and for proof of his partial
Judgment he has produced no Text of Scripture at all, nor do I think a Text
that so proves, can be quoted out of the Bible.

Mr. W. proceeding, asks, Who art thou that reasonest against God? will thou
teach God how he shall govern the World, or what Judgments he shall use upon
Men? It is enough that God has intimated his Will, there shall be such
Judgments, and we are humbly to believe he has reason for his so doing,
although our shallow brains cannot comprehend it. To this I reply, That I am
ready to do as Mr. W. directs, viz. That if God do declare to us his mind and
intnet to have diverse and different Trials and Judgments of Men, I am ready to
submit to the belief thereof, although I am not able to apprehend the congruity or
reason thereof. But Mr. W's Answer sets out no proof at all of Gods design or
meaning to pass such several Trials and Judgments upon Men, as he supposes; nor
does his whole Book give us good proof thereof: and himself does not require
men to believe that God proceeds in ways not congruous to the Reasons of Men,
except God does somewhere declare that he does or will do so. Whereas Mr. W.
has no otherways proved Gods Will so to do, then from his own Expositions,
Collections, Inferences, and Conclusions, which all seem to be the proper
fruits of his own Invention: Upon which the Old Rule must take hold, Posito
quolibet sequitur quidlibet; and so if we suffer him to lay the Cards, he will
always deal them to his own advantage: but I have no inclination to bear with
such dealing, and therefore do reject his Answer to this Objection, as infirm
and insufficient. Well, but then says Mr. W. If this Answer will not satisfy
you, I doubt not but the righteous Judge will satisfy you of the reason of
that Great Day, notwithstanding particular judgments upon Men, and the spirits
of Men before that Day. I find no manner of proving force in these words of Mr.
W's, they seem rather a Threat than a Proof, and a product rather of his own
Will than of his Knowledge, or a reasonable Inference from any Text of
Scripture. Lastly he bids his Opposers be silent, least God reprove them. And
having made this Reply to his Answer, I am content to be silent, and proceed no
father thereupon: but as to the Incongruity charged by the Objection upon Mr.
W's Opinion, I say, that it seems very incongruous to my Reason, that God
should call Men to a Solemn Trial at their Deaths, and there pass Judgment, and
award Execution thereupon; and after they have long continued in this
condition, then to call them to a new Trial, and give another Judgment upon
them, with a like award of Execution on as before; this seems a very unlikely
Proceeding of God toward Men: and yet if Mr. W. or any of his Partakers, have
proved, or can prove, from any plain or clear Text or Texts of Scripture, that
God will use this Course of Proceeding amongst Men, I am ready to submit my own
reason and opinion thereunto; but not to the many words or conjectures which
Mr. W. farther offers in his Answer to this Objection. We read Mat. 25. Our
Lords Sentence at the Last Judgment, runs thus, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world; depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels:
not saying, Return ye blessed unto the happy Mansions of Heaven, from whence ye
came; or, Return ye cursed into those dark and dreadful Regions, where ye were
before; but come ye and go ye to such Places and Regions as it seems probable
they were not acquainted with before; whence it seems inferrable, that those
Intermediate Trials, Judgments and Executions which Mr. W. maintains, have
something of the Chimerical and Imaginary, without having that real truth in
them, which Mr. W. and his Party endeavor to maintain; and the Objection
before made against them seems strong enough to shake and oppose their
Pretensions.

An Eighth Objection I raise from 1. Cor. 15.12. If Christ be Preached, that he
rose from the Dead; how say some among you, that there is no Resurrection of
the Dead, but if there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is Christ not
risen, and if Christ be not risen, then is the Christian Religion both vain and
false. verse. 18. and then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished. verse. 32. If after the manner of Men I have fought with Beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me if the Dead rise not? Let us eat and drink for
too morrow we die. Then the Apostle finds fault with Communications which call
in Question the Belief of the Resurrection of the Dead. verse. 52. At the last
Trump the Dead shall be raised Incorruptible, and we [who are then alive] shall
be changed, and then shall Death be swallowed up in Victory. verse. 58. And
therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, always abounding in the work of
the Lord; forasmuch as ye know, that your Labor is not in Vain in the Lord;
[the Resurrection of the Dead being thus certainly and undoubtedly proved to
you] you must be steadfast and unmovable in your Religion, knowing that your
Labor is not in Vain in the Lord. In Mr. W's Thirteenth Objection against his
own Opinion, he propounds it thus, our Opponents allege, verse. 18. of this
Chapter, inferring, that if there be no Resurrection, Then those who are fallen
asleep in Christ are perished; which they say could not follow, if there were
any state of a Blessed Life for a Separate Soul; for that though there were no
Resurrection of the Dead, yet Souls already in Heaven should still be happy
there, and not be perished for want of a Resurrection of the Person. To this
Mr. W. answers, That in the course of this Text, St Paul intends to prove the
Resurrection of Christ, and to teach, that if his Resurrection was not true,
then all those who are fallen asleep in Christ should be perished. There Mr. W.
says thus, now to prove that Christ was risen, which was the Antecedent of the
Apostles Argument; he argues, either Christ is risen, or we have been preachers
of what is Vain and false, and then those who are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished. Hereunto I reply, That we do not read in this or any other Text, that
there was a Dispute among the Corinthians about the Resurrection of Christ, but
that it was both preached and believed amongst them that he was risen from the
Dead: and from that Established and Undoubted Truth, the Apostle inferrs the
Resurrection of the Dead, and says, the one of them is as true as the other;
but if there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is Christ not risen, and if
these be not both true, then all Christian Religion is vain and false, and
those who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.

This sort of arguing seems to suppose a possibility, that those who are fallen
asleep in Christ may be perished, which were a vain supposal, if their
Separated Souls did still subsist and were Immortal; because that whether there
be a Resurrection or not a Resurrection, and whether Christ were risen or not
risen, yet Separate Souls would still have a Subsistence, and not be perished,
as here our Apostle supposes they would be, if the Resurrections so preached to
the Corinthians were not true. So as our Apostles Expression seems not well to
agree with Mr. W's Opinion of the Souls Separate Subsistence; but it is at full
agreement with the material Opinion, who maintain as St. Paul does, that if
there be no Resurrection, then all hope of Recompenses future to this Life are
Vain, and those who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.

Mr. W. says farther, There is no Way or Means for expiation of your Sins, and
removal of the Curse, besides the Death of Christ. I say, we are taught by this
Text, that his Death would avail us nothing without his Resurrection, [and our
Resurrection also.] Then Mr. W. quotes, if Christ be not risen, the Wrath of
God still abides on you; and says, this is spoken because his Resurrection was
to be the Evidencing Sign among the rest, that his Death was accepted of the
Father, for that end he professes to lay it down which was to expiate our Sins.
I say, he professes to lay it down, that he may take it up again, and he was
convinced that it would be accepted of his Father before he laid it down, and
then he rose again for our Justification, rather than as a Testimony, that his
Death was accepted of the Father, of which there was before no doubt at all.
Mr. W. goes on and says, He denies that the Apostle ^ntends by these Reasonings
to prove immediately the Resurrection of all Men, but only as their
Resurrection comes in upon the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which is the only
thing in these Verses now named, that the Apostle was proving. To this I reply,
That the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Doubt which some Men had thereof, is
the principal and only Question which I conceive to be disputed of in this
Text; for we do not read of doubt made by any Man concerning the Resurrection
of Christ; for Christ was preached to the Corinthians, and that he rose from
the Dead, and this Doctrine was received and believed by the Corinthians, and
yet some of them denied the general Resurrection of the Dead: and to convince
those Unbelievers of their Error; the Apostle tells them, that the general
Resurrection of the Dead, is as true and certain as the Resurrection of Christ
was, and therefore I think the main scope of St. Paul was to convince the
doubting Corinthians, and to prove the general Resurrection of the Dead: and
which of us two have the Right in this Point, shall be referred to the Judgment
of such Readers as will consult St. Paul's Text thereupon. Mr. W. says further
to his Opposers, the manner of the Apostles Argument is not as ye conceive,
That if the Bodies of the Saints do never rise, then ye are in your Sins, and
those that are dead in Christ are perished. Replying thereunto, I say, that I
know none of his Opposers who argue in such a manner as he has imposed upon
them, nor that examine or consider the Resurrection of the Body; because we do
not find in the whole Tenor of the Bible that expression of the Resurrection of
the Body. It is true, that as we now use the Apostles Creed in English, we find
there mentioned the Resurrection of the Body; but clearly, we therein depart
from our Originals of that Creed, both in the Greek and Latin Languages, the
Greek calls it (...), and the Latin calls it Resurrectionem Carnis, the true
English of both which Expressions, is the Resurrection of the Flesh; and after
that manner I think it ought to be mended in our English Translations or Creed.
Whence it seems not to follow that the Body should be first raised, and then
a Substantial Intelligent Spirit ab extra should be put into it; but that such
raising shall be like the first formation of Adam, and the covering of Ezekiels
dry Bones with Flesh and Skin, and the filling them with Blood and Humors, apt
to be kindled and inflamed by such a moderate Wind or Breath as may be breathed
upon them or into them, for kindling the flame of Life in their vital Parts,
thence to be communicated to all the rest of their Bodies. John 5.28. The Hour
is coming, in the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice and
shall come forth; they that have done Good to the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done Evil to the Resurrection of Damnation. The manner after
which Persons so raised shall come forth, seems to be by forming the Flesh,
Bones, Arteries, Veins, Nerves and Sinews, into the shape of a humane Body,
containing therein such Blood, Humors and Organs as are needful for the
production and perfection of Life, and all the Faculties and Powers of a humane
Person, whose Blood and Humors will then be apt for kindling into a Flame, or
glowing of the Blood by such a moderate Breath as Ezekiel was directed to call
for, to come from the four Winds, and breath upon these newly formed Persons
that they may live, which done, the newly formed Persons are thereby made
living, able to hear the Voice of the Son of God, and at his Call to come out
of their Graves, and deliver themselves from the strong Bands of Death; and
such I conceive, the rising of the Dead will be, not a partial, but a total
Resurrection of the Person, not first the Body raised, and then an Intelligent
Soul be injected thereinto, for the Body cannot rise or come out of its Grave
without a Spirit of Life, or such a sort of Soul as is natural, suitable, and
fitted for that Performance. I do therefore reject the expression by him used,
viz. the Resurrection of the Body; because it is no where used in the
Scripture: and because there is no such thing in Nature, as that a Body should
rise and live without a Soul: what rises therefore is not only the Body, but
the Person which was dead, a very like, or his very same Person which before
had died. Mr. W. in the Conclusion of this Objection, says to his Opposers,
that it is a strange Inference ye draw from this Text, That because it is
certain that Christ is risen, that therefore the Souls of Men are mortal. I
reply, This would be a very strange Inference indeed, if his Opposers either
said so or thought so, but they profess to do neither the one nor the other;
but this they do say and believe, that if the Resurrection of Christ, and the
General Resurrection of the Dead, be not both true, then all those who are
fallen asleep (though never so good) are perished; and consequently, that the
Souls of Men have not a Separate Subsistence after the death of the Person: and
thus I finish my Reply to Mr. W's Answer given to this Objection, and proceed
to the giving concurrent Evidences from the Texts before quoted, for
strengthening the force of this my Eighth Objection.

Our Apostle having finished this Text, goes on in the same Chapter to Verse.
32. And there says, If after the manner of Men I have fought with Beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me if the Dead rise not? Let us eat and drink for
too Morrow we die. Which sayings I think may be thus rightly Paraphrased,
Whatsoever Sufferings I undergo for Christ's sake in this World, they will
advantage me nothing, if the Dead rise not, and then we need no more in this
World, but to eat and drink and die, and there is an and of us. And if this
Saying be true, and the very meaning of our Apostle in this Text, I think it
gives a fatal blow to the Separate Subsistence of Souls; and yet our Apostle
proceeds further in this Chapter, to Verse 52. Where he says, The Trumpet shall
sound, and the Dead shall be raised uncorruptible, and we [who are then alive]
shall be changed; and the last Verse of this Chapter he adds, Therefore my
beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, for as much as you know your Labor is not in Vain in the Lord; for I
have given you as certain Proofs as Faith can desire, that there shall be a
General Resurrection of the Dead, at which time all People shall be rewarded or
punished according to their Works. Heb. 11.35. The Saints endured great
Persecutions and Torments, not accepting Deliverance from them, because they
expected a better Resurrection. Luke 14.14. When thou make a Feast, do not
only bid thy Friends and rich Neighbors, who are likely to make thee a
Recompense; but bid also the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame and the Blind, who
cannot Recompense thee, and therefore for thy so doing, thou shall be
Recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just. And now I demand one Text of
Scripture to be produced, where it is said, That Men for their good Works done
in this World, shall be Recompensed at or soon after their Deaths. I know of no
Text that declares this to us, or from which it can with clear Reason be
collected; and therefore I say, that the Reason given us why our Labor shall
not be in Vain in the Lord, is because there shall certainly be a Resurrection
from the Dead, and after that a Judgment, wherein every Person shall be
rewarded according to his Works; and upon these Grounds I am ready to conclude,
that this my Eighth Objection strongly batters and assaults, and even
overthrows the Opinion of the Souls Separate Subsistence.

A Ninth Objection against Mr. W's Opinion, I raise from 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Where
St. Paul says, I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them
that are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope: For if
we believe that Jesus died, and rose again; even so them also that sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him; and so goes on describing the manner and
effects of the Resurrection of the Dead; adding, Comfort one another with these
Words: I offer this for you Comfort, that there shall certainly be a
Resurrection of the Dead, wherein your dead Friends also shall rise again; and
I would have you make this a Comfort to you, concerning both your dead Friends
and your dying Selves, advising you to repose your hopes thereupon, and to
comfort your selves and one another, with your Discourses and Communications
concerning it. Our Apostle appears here, comforting the Hearts of his
Correspondents against the sufferings of Death, either by their Friends, or by
themselves, and takes his ground of Comfort in such Cases, from our assured
Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead; and thereupon I observe that he does
not ground and Hope or Comfort upon the Souls Separate Subsistence, or its
going to Heaven immediately after Death: which gives me a firm ground of
persuasion, that he either did not know of this Opinion, or he did not believe
it; for if he had believed this Doctrine to be true, I think he could not have
forgotten, or forborne to give his Disciples Comfort from that Topic: because
such Comforts would have been much nearer, than those which he derived from the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, and would have been both a more short and sure
way, to that Salvation and future Happiness which Men desire; and therefore if
St. Paul had believed this Doctrine to be true, I think he could have no reason
for his balking it in this place; but in congruity of Reason must have said,
Brethren, comfort your selves against Sorrows, for your Friends Deaths and the
fear of your own, by considering the happy State of those which die in the
Lord, for that their Spirits or Souls immediately upon parting from their
Bodies, either return to God who gave them, and are received into Heaven and
Happiness, or they shall be carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom, and there
enjoy at least, a blessed Rest from their Labors, and all future Sufferings. I
doubt not, but that the Divines of our time would readily have administered such
Comforts as these to the Friends of dead People, or even to the dying Persons
themselves; but in our quoted Text, we find St. Paul did not so proceed with
his Correspondents upon this like Occasion: for the only Comfort which
thereupon he propounds to them, is drawn from the Doctrine of the Resurrection,
which in this Place he somewhat at large delivers, as knowing that to be
sufficient for Men's Comfort in such Cases, without remembering or believing our
late comfortable Doctrine or Opinion, of the Souls going to Heaven immediately
after Death; and hereupon I conclude, that this Doctrine was either not known
to him, or not believed by him, and that therefore it is an Error, and no
certain Truth, or the very Truth of God.

A Tenth Objection against Mr. W's Opinion, I raise from the concurrent
Testimonies of many Scripture Texts, referring the expectation of future
Rewards or Punishments looked for after this Life, unto the time of the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the Last Judgment, without finding and such
Expectation at the time of Men's Deaths referred to, or mentioned in any Text
of Scripture. In the Catalogue of Mr. W's own Objections, he has made this the
Sixth, and propounds it thus, The Scriptures (say my Opposers) do frequently
make mention of the Great and General Day of Judgment, and refer all the
Rewards of the Saints to that Day, and so all the Punishments of the Wicked,
therefore the Souls of Men die with their Bodies, as being incapable of Rewards
or Punishments till then. To this Objection he answers concessively, and says,
I do partly acknowledge the first part of what ye say, that Scriptures do
frequently make mention of that great Day; and again, that the greatest Rewards
and Punishments are reserved to that Day: but I deny the later part of what ye
say, because the Scripture speaks of the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and
of the Soul of the Thief being in Paradise that day he died, and of the Spirit
of every Man returning to God at Death, to be dealt with according to what they
did in the Body; and this he says is enough to blunt the edge of his present
Objection. And hereunto I reply, That what he has said concerning the Spirits
of just Men made perfect, has before been answered, and so has that of the
Thief's Soul being in Paradise that day, and proved to be invalid Testimonies
of the Souls Separate Subsistence. His Third Testimony of the Spirits returning
to God, seems to be mis-recited; for the Text does not say it returns to God to
be dealt with according to what they did in the Body; which Words he adjoins
with as much Confidence to the Text, as if they might be there found written,
and were part of the Text it self; so as unwary and unexamining Readers might
soon be mistaken thereupon. In what manner, and to what purpose Solomon might
intend this return of Souls to God has been before disputed; and I still
confide, that Mr. W. and his Party will not be able to prove, that these words
of Solomon intended the Souls of dead Persons going before God to Judgment, as
here he has without any hesitation delivered it. And therefore I conclude that
his Answer has very little blunted the edge of our present Objection: I
observe it as an Art in Disputing, that it may be advantageous to grant in an
easy and transient fashion, such Objections as Men find themselves utterly
unable to answer; and I think Mr. W. has used this Art in transiently granting
the first part of this Objection, viz. That the Scriptures do frequently refer
the expectation of Rewards or Punishments after this Life, and unto the
Resurrection and the Day of Judgment; and whereas I have said before, that
there is no mention in Scripture of such Expectations, at or soon after the
time of Men's Deaths; he gives us here three of the most pregnant Instances
which he could find in Scripture, for proving that Rewards and Punishments are
bestowed by God at the time of Men's Deaths; but the force of these Instances
has before been obstructed by those Answers which have been severally given
them in their proper places. I am not without some Temptation of drawing out of
the Scripture a Catalogue of such Texts as do with great Evidence and Strength,
set forth and prove, that the time of the Resurrection and the Day of Judgment,
are not alone the principal, but the only times whereat or wherein Recompenses
future to this Life, are warrantably and certainly to be expected by Mankind;
but because I have said much, and quoted diverse Texts of Scripture upon that
Subject before, and am now willing to save my self and my Reader the tedium of
such a long Repetition. I will refer the Examiners of this Objection unto those
Texts which have before been quoted to that purpose, and to such others as
themselves may meet with upon the perusal of the Scripture. And with this round
number of Ten, the Objections which I make against Mr. W's Opinion out of
Scripture, shall be finished.

Yet I farther intend to add thereunto, two or three Objections against Mr. W's
Opinion, derived from Natural Reason and the Experiences of Men. And first, I
begin from the Nature and Composition of the Humane Person, and thereupon I
observe, that there are three things principally and absolutely necessary for
the Subsistence and Life of the Humane Person, viz. Blood, Breath and
Nutriment, and thereupon do agree with Moses, that the Life, the Animals is in
the Blood, or that the Blood is the Life thereof, whose inflamed Particles are
the Spirits which act the Person, and as well the Head as the Members, so long
as Life continues in the Body. Next to which, the Breath has a Principal and
absolutely necessary Faculty and Power of fanning and inflaming such Particles
of the Blood, as are employed in every part of the Body, and for refrigerating
the internal parts of the Body with a perpetual Refreshment, which keeps the
Paristaltick Motion always in action amongst the inward and most vital parts of
the Body; whence daily Experience assures us, that by stopping of the Breath
but for some few Moments, the Spirit of Life in Man, becomes absolutely
suffocated and extinguished, and without Breath no Humane Art or Power can
prolong the Life of the Person, or other Animal whatsoever. Concerning
Nutriment, it is only so far necessary to the Life of the Creature, as the
Blood thereof wastes and is consumed, by the Circular Continual Motion, and the
Inflammation thereof.

In some long continuing and weakening Diseases, the Motion of the Blood has
been so weak, and the Inflammation thereof so faint, as that in such Persons,
there need no Nutriment in a long time, for restoring the waste of Blood in
such Persons: but in ordinary ways of living, our Experience assures us, that
if the daily waste of Blood be not supplied by Nourishment suitable to the
Consumption thereof, the Person must diminish in his Strength and Vigor, and
finally perish and die for want of such sustenance as should restore the stock
of the wasted Blood, and furnish the several parts with such moisture and
refreshment, as thereunto shall be absolutely needful and required. We find an
Instance of this Condition in David's Acts, when he came to Ziklag, his
Servants found an Egyptian in the Field starved, and at the next Door to Death;
for he had neither eaten nor drink in three Days and Nights before, but upon
administering fresh Sustenance to his wasted Spirits, they became restored in
great measure to their former Activity; which I conceive happened to him as it
may do in the case of a Lamp, whose Oil is spent and exhausted: the Light will
first grow dim, and be ready to fail and be extinguished, but being refreshed
by more Oil administered to it, it will soon recover the Flame and Light which
it had before. The Text says, When this Man had eaten, the Spirit came again to
him. In like manner it is related of Sampson, his being ready to die for
thirst, but as soon as he had drank of the Water which issued from his
Jaw Bone, that Text says, his Spirit came again, and he revived. I conceive
those Places to be parallelled with that Text of 1 Kings 17.22. Where in
raising the Widows Son, Elijah prayed, Lord let this Child's Soul come into him
again; and the Spirit of the Child came into him again, and he revived. I
conceive that the coming again of these three Spirits, as they are expressed in
very like words, so they were all of a like nature; the Spirits of the two
former were not quite extinguished, as that of Elijah's Child was, but upon the
revival of them all, it is said their Spirits came to them again, which I think
may signify the rekindling or recontinuing of that Flame of Life in their
Blood, which we call the Vital Flame, and whereby the Humane Machine or
Microcosme is put in motion, and acted so long as it pleases God to continue
Life unto it; in the Case of the Egyptian at Ziklag, we may perceive that
presently upon the coming of his Spirit to him again, the Activity and Use of
all his Sensations returned instantly to him, so as he could not only move,
hear, see, etc. but his Understanding and Memory became apt and ready for
Service as before; whence I think we may reasonably collect, that the Original
of Acting and Understanding may proceed from the Activity and Motion of the
Blood, and the inflamed particles thereof, which together with Life and Motion,
produce the Sensations, Affections, Understandings and Memories of Men. And
having thus propounded, and in some measure proved, that Blood, Breath and
Nutriment, are all absolutely necessary for continuance of the Life of Man, so
as he cannot long abide in Life, without the continual assistance of every one
of them; I pretend to apply them to those different sorts of Spirits about
which we are now disputing; and therein, if we shall proceed, and make
application of them to the Extraneous, telligent and Separate Spirit, which Mr.
W. maintains to be the Spirit of Life in Man; I think we must find, that all
these three Natural Incidents to the life of Man, have no coherence at all with
such a Spirit, but are very incongruous with the Being and Nature of it;
because that forasmuch as we know concerning the nature of such a Spirit,
Nutriment seems not to be necessary for the Subsistence thereof, and much less
do Breath and Blood, or the Spirits of it seem pertinent, or appliable to the
nature of such an Intelligent Spirit; and therefore if such a Spirit were truly
the Spirit of Life in Man, the three materials before mentioned, as natural and
inseparable Incidents to the continuance of Man's Life, should not be so
absolutely necessary for that design, as by daily Experience they are found to
be: but if we shall now turn to the other side, and make Application to that
Superfine, yet Material and Unintelligent Spirit, which before has been
described, we must find that there will be a true and real necessity of the
three before-named Natural Incidents, for the Support, Supply, and Continuance
of its Activity, and of Life its self; so as by this Hypothesis the Phenomenon
of nature in Man are more clearly answered, and may be better solved, than can
be done by applying these Natural Incidents, to a Seperable, Intelligent, and
Extraneous Spirit in Man; and I therefore conclude it more probable, that the
Spirit of Life in Man is rather Material and Unintelligent, than that it is an
Intelligent and Seperable Spirit, such as Mr. W. and his Partakers maintain the
same to be.

A Second Objection from Nature against Mr. W's Opinion, I raise from the
further Consideration of the Humane Person, and more particularly from the
Bodily Organs thereof; and say thereupon, that God or Nature has so framed and
fitted every one of them, as they are wonderfully apt for those Offices, which
they were intended to perform; of which for Example we may name the Eyes and
Tongue, which are admirably framed and fitted for their several Offices, so as
the Spirit of Life is by means of these Instruments able to perform such
Actions as Nature intended them for; and yet the Perfection or Defects in those
performances, seem not so much to depend upon that Spirit which informs and
acts them, as upon the structure, soundness and perfection of the Organs
themselves. Without such Organs, the Man can neither see nor speak, but when
the Organs are sound and perfect, the owner can use them as perfectly as any
other can ordinarily do; but if there be any Obstruction in the Optic Nerves,
or in those which act the Tongue, the Spirit of Life in the Owner can act them
no otherways than they are still capable of, for the Tongue will lisp, stammer,
stop, struggle and blutter, do the Man, and his Spirit of Life, what they can,
for the rectification of such Infirmities; and so will the Eyes be purr-blind,
double or treble sighted, weak, dim and blindish, do the Owner and his Spirit
of Life what they can for the Recovery and rectifying of them; so as the Spirit
of Life can act the Organ to no higher a Degree of perfection, than the
soundness and rectitude of the Organ it self will bear; nor act it in other
manner than it is fit and capable at that time to be acted: and I conceive,
that the principal perfection of the faculties of Secing and Speaking, lies
more in the sound State and activity of the Organ, than in the power and energy
of that Spirit which acts them; and yet I think that the purity and force of
such Spirits, may be very conducing to the perfect performance of the Faculty;
and yet can act no farther than the Bodily Organ is in its own State and Nature
capable of: whence there is a dependence of the Faculty, both upon the Spirit
and upon the Organ. But I think that the Differences which we find amongst Men's
Faculties of this Nature (wherein there are great Degrees of Perfection and
Imperfection) do more depend upon the soundness and fitness of the Organ, than
upon the different Degrees of Activity amongst the Spirits of them. And if we
shall ascend to the consideration of the Humane Intellect, we may find that the
acting and perfection thereof, lies in, and by the Brain, and that the
Fantasy lies principally or only in the forepart of the Head, the Judgment
or Esteemative Faculty in the middle of it, and the Memory in the back part
thereof; whence if there happen any defect or crasiness in any of these
Faculties or Powers of Intellect, Physicians both do, and ought to apply their
Medicines for the recovery of them, to the Organs or parts of the Head, which
are the proper Instruments of such Faculties. If the Fantasy be disordered,
the Remedies thereof must be applied to the forepart of the Head, or the
Forehead: if the Judgment be crazed, such Remedies must be applied to the
middle part of the Head, and if the Memory fail, application for the Recovery
thereof must be made to the back part of the Head; and if Medicines for the
Recovery of the Fantasy be applied to the back part of the Head, they will be
ineffectual to that purpose, and so e contra, if Men will apply Remedies to the
back part of the Head, for recovering the disorders of the Fantasy. Men of
indifferent Skill can make shrewd guesses concerning the largeness and
perfection of those Faculties, by Seeing, Feeling, and perusing the Dimensions
and Fashonings of Men's Heads. If Men's Foreheads be large and high, they may
reasonably be thought to be of large Fantasies and Inventions; and if the back
part of the Head be likewise large, and something protuberant in the lower
parts of it, tending toward the Neck, we may guess the Owner of that Organ to
have a capacious and strong Memory; and concerning the Judgment, we may think
that the largeness of the whole Head (if it be well filled, and without any
empty Spaces in it) is a great sign of a good and sound Judgment, in those
Persons to whom God has given such an Organ; and from these Topics I am ready
to infer, that the perfections of the Intellect, depend more upon the
Soundness and Gapacities of the Organs, than upon the Excellencies and
Perfection of the Spirit which acts them, and yet the Power and Purity of such
Spirits must be still admitted to have a great effect in the Production, and in
the Degrees of Perfection in this Operation. If we shall particularly consider
the Nature of that we call the Spirit of Life in Man, we may perhaps find it
subject to diverse Diseases and Infirmities, as well as we know the Body and the
Organs to be; and of what sort soever we shall imagine this Spirit of Life to
be, daily Experience may assure, us that it oftentimes finds help and remedies
against the Disorders and Diseases thereof, by good Air, wholesome and regular
Diet, good Company, Music or Harmony, freedom from Cares, and other Easements
and Satisfactions to the Minds of Men, as well as by Medicines and Helps
administered by the Physicians in diverse Cases. And thus have we run through and
considered diverse weighty particulars concerning the Bodily Organs, and the
Minds of Men, with intent to apply the same to the two sorts of Souls or
Spirits which are now in dispute between us; and have showed that the
Perfections of Humane Powers, both Sensitive and Rational, do more depend upon
the Aptitude and Capacity of the Bodily Organs, than upon that Spirit which
gives Life and Motion to them: and next, that the Humane Mind or Spirit of Life
in Man, is capable of Melioration and Detriment, by many such Accidental Things
as I have before enumerated and expressed; and from all these Premises, I am
very apt to collect, that if the Spirit of Life in Man, were an Intelligent
Seperable and Extraneous Being; things could not reasonably fall out in the
Nature of Man, as they have before been declared commonly to do; but if this
Spirit, which gives Life to Man, be taken for a Fire, yet Material and
Unintelligent Spirit; all that has before been spoken concerning the Bodily
Organs, and the Spirit or Mind of Man, will fall out to be very agrecable and
homogenious to the Nature of such a Spirit, and to the whole composition of the
Humane Person. And hence I take upon me to infer, that the Spirit of Life in
Man, is more likely to be Material and Unintelligent, than to be such a sort of
Intelligent and Self-subsisting Spirit as Mr. W. and his Party maintain the
same to be.

A Third Objection against Mr. W's Opinion, I take a Simily, and raised from
Men's Experience, and the common Consideration of the Brutal Nature. Our daily
Experience assures us, that by whatsoever Spirits the Brutes are acted, they
fully enjoy the Powers of Life and Sense, and some such measures of Intellect,
as gives them a Sagacity sit to attain and accomplish the ends of their Beings,
although in the Degrees thereof they fall very much below such Perfections of
them, as are found in Men: by Virtue and Power of the Vital Spirits in Brutes,
working in and among the Organs of their Bodies, their Animal Nature attains to
as great a Perfection as the Humane Nature does, as far as concerns the
Vegitation and Sensation of them both. For the Brutes live as well, and as
naturally, and as much as the Men do. And next, their Motions are as strong,
vigorous and active, as those of the Men are, in both the sorts of Motions
which are common to them. First, their I ward Motions of Heart, Lungs, Bowels,
and other their Principal and Vital Entrals, which Sort of Motion we may term
Involuntary, because the Men or Beasts can give no stoppage to them, but waking
or sleeping, in sickness and in health, such Motions are natural, and needful
for maintaining Life in the Creature, in whose power it is not to stop or alter
them. And this sort of Motion is needful for, and as active amongst Beasts as
Men. The other sort of Motion is that which Men call Local or Voluntary, such
as that of the Hands, Feet, Head, and other Members of the Body, which the
Creature can use, or not use, at its own liking and pleasure; and we find that
the Motions of Brutes in this kind, are as vigorous, nimble and strong, as
those of the Men are. Then if we proceed to the power and practice of their
outward Senses, as of Seeing, Hearing, Feeling, etc. Experience will convince
us, that diverse Brutes attain to as great Perfection in the use of such Senses,
as the Generations of Men do, and some Brutes exceed the Humane Powers, in the
Practice and Use of some of these Senses. And if we then consider the Humane
Affections of Lust, Wrath, and Fear, we may find that the Brutal Nature is as
full of these Affections, as the Humane; and that the Beasts have them in as
great vigor, violence and perfection, as Men have them. And lastly, if we rise
to consider the Power of Intellect, we may find that Brutes enjoy the true and
real use of Fantasy, Choice and Memory, so far as is Needful for the well
being of their Natures, though in a weak measure, and very low degree, if we
compare such Faculties of theirs with such as may be found in that kind amongst
the highest ranks of Men, or such of them as have attained to great degrees of
Improvement in their Faculties of that kind. It may be, that if we shall
compare the most Stupid amongst Men, with the most Sensitive amongst Brutes, as
with the Elephant, Ape, Horse, Dog, and Fox; it may be found that some of these
Creatures are more docible, and may be made more knowing, than some of the most
stupid amongst Men: so that by their Teachers Eye, or Continuance, or their
Voices, they have been made to act and perform diverse things which caused
Admiration in the Beholders, and such as it would be hard to teach the
stupidest Persons amongst Men to perform in such manner, as Beasts have been
known to do them. There appears between the Brutal and Humane Nature and
Composition, very great differences, and that the Men have many advantages
above the Beasts, in those Parts and Members which appear outwardly to the Eye.
First, in the Members of their Hands and Tongue, and the genuine and natural
uses of them both: and next, in the natural and upright posture of the Humane
Body, and the placing of the Head thereupon, all which give great advantages to
the Humane, above the Brutal Bodies, and gives them such capacities of acting,
as are denied to all Brutes whatsoever; and it seems we may reasonably suppose,
that there may be the like great advantages, in the inward Organs of Humane,
above those of the Brutal Heads, and whereby the Humane are made more capable
of performing the great Duties of their Intellect, then the Brutal Creatures
have Capacities to do; and yet we find these Differences do not hinder the
persons of Men from being ranked amongst the Animal Kind; the prime Ingredients
into whose Composition, are the same Flesh, Blood, Bones, Breath, Nerves,
Arteries, Veins, Joints, Sinews and Members, which go to the Composition of
them both. And Experience may convince us, that the Lives of them all are in
their Blood, or that Blood is the life of them, and by the particles of such
Blood inflamed, called the Spirits of their Blood, they are all inlivened and
acted alike; although by the Structure of their Bodies, and the Perfection of
their Organs to some purposes, the Humane Nature have very great advantages
above the Brutal: and these are the main Differences which I have yet been able
to find between the two Natures beforementioned; and I am hence so far
convinced, as to conceive that there is no such great and apparent Differences
between that sort of the Spirit of Life which acts the Brutes, and that sort of
Spirit which acts the Men, as heretofore has generally been believed; but the
Spirits which act Life in them both, are of a more similar Nature than Men have
formerly imagined them to be; and from this Argument I am ready to conclude,
that the Humane Spirit of Life has a great agreement with that of the Brutal,
and therefore I think it more probable to be a Material Unintelligent Spirit,
than that it should be an Intelligent created extraneous Spirit, made by God
for each Man at the time of his Procreation, and injected into the Embrion, at
some uncertain or unknown time, which yet remains unperceived or undeclared to
us; and which if it shall be made better known, may deserve to be further
examined amongst us. Upon these three last Arguments drawn from the Animal
Nature and Humane Experience, my first doubtings concerning the Separate
Subsistence of souls were founded; after I had held out in the old Opinion
until my Age of Sixty Three-Years, and my doubting caused me to search the
Scriptures concerning that Point, and there I found no Concurrence of Scripture
Texts which were brought as Evidences thereof, and not so much as one Text that
was clear in the aff^m^nce of it, except that of St. Matthew's saying, Are not
able to kill the Soul.

Next that, neither that Saying, nor any other Text produced for proof of that
Point, had a principal (...) teach or prove the Souls Separate Subsistence,
(...) the Texts produced for the proof of that Opinion (...) livered in a
collateral manner, and are brought ^ by, without Men's being able to make it
appear (...) of the Texts produced to that purpose, did (...) tend to declare
or prove the now questioned (...) the Souls Separate Subsistence. I found also,
that all their Texts from whence the consequential proofs which they make, are
drawn, might receive reasonable, and I think sufficient Answers, which I have
endeavored to apply to them in this Treatise, and have satisfied my own
Understanding in them all; and how far they will appear reasonable to the
Readers thereof, I am willing to leave to such Experimental Trials as may be
made upon the Judgments of such Persons as may happen to peruse the Treatise,
and to the Candor and Indifferent Censure of such Readers, I am willing to
submit my self and all that I have spoken in this Treatise, and concerning this
Subject.

AFter Mr. Wadsworth 's finishing the Treatise before considered, he super-adds
thereunto, and subjoyns to it, a Declamatory Discourse, which he intitles,
Faith's Triumph over the Fears of Death; which is not much less in bulk than
his Treatise before answered.

Upon the Perusal thereof, I find his Triumphal Arch principally founded, the
one end of it upon the Souls Separate Subsistence, and the other end upon the
Souls going to Heaven immediately after Death; both which I conceive to be
Precarious Assumptions, I am sure not granted by his Opposers, and I believe
not sufficiently proved by his Arguments. I find that in this Discourse he
repeats a third time the four Texts of Scripture which he thinks do most
strongly prove his Opinion: viz. Solomon's return of the Spirit to God who gave
it: St. Matthew's Are not able to kill the Soul. St. Luke 's Parable of Dives,
and his Relation of the Thiefs Conversion on the Cross. I acknowledge my self
averse from making often Repetitions of the same things, and therefore do
refuse to follow his Example or Practice in this Point, but rather make choice
to refer my Reader to such Answers as are before given to these Arguments in
those places, where he has twice before propounded them.

I do not find that in this Discourse he has added any new Arguments to those
which are produced in his former Treatise, so as there are no new Proofs
propounded in this Triumph; whence I am apt thereupon to surmise that he does
Triumphum canere ante Victoriam: and because his Triumphal Building seems to be
principally founded upon the two before-named Assertions, I collect that if the
rain descend violently upon it, the winds shake it, the floods happen to beat
upon it, this Triumphal Edifice will be more likely to fall than to stand;
because the ground upon which it is raised, seems over soft and sandy for the
support thereof; and for that the foundations of it are not dug deep enough
by such a Search into the Scriptures, as might make it appear that the Doctrine
is built upon a strong Stream or clear Current of Scripture Testimonies,
somewhat apparently or clearly attesting the Truth thereof in some such places,
where there was a Design of Teaching concerning the Future State of Men after
Death. I do not conceive that there was a Design of speaking of such a Future
State in any of the four Texts last before quoted, of Solomon, St. Matthew, and
St. Luke; and therefore I do not find any great strength of Conviction in them.
I shall therefore pass over these and all the rest of Mr. Wadsworth 's
Discourse of Faith's Triumph, without speaking any farther thereunto; because
it seems not greatly material toward the farther proof of that Question which
is now disputed between us: resolving here to finish my Observations upon this
Author, with a hearty Been valeas, to my Intelligent Reader.

FINIS.
OBSERVATIONS UPON Dr. CHARLTONS TREATISE; ENTITLED, The Immortality of the
Humane Soul, demonstrated by the Light of Nature.
In Two Dialogues, 4to. London, Printed 1657.
HIS first Dialogue, and a good part of the second, are employed and spent in
Introduction and Ceremony, which last and continue till Page 78. of his Book;
and there he says, That the Considerations which he intends to allege for
proving the Souls Immortality, shall be either Natural or Moral: his first
Argument is this; he says, The reasonable Soul of Man is Immaterial, and
therefore it is Immortal.

P. 85. To prove the Souls Immateriality, he says, The Actions of Man, as a
Cogitative and Intellectual Essence, are of so noble and divine a strain, as
that it is impossible they should be performed by a mere Material Agent, or
Corporeal Substance, however disposed, qualified or modified. To this I answer,
it is the common Objection against the Souls Materiality, viz. Men do not
understand the quomodo, how the Abstract Actions of the Mind, and the Reflex
Actions of it upon it self, can be performed by Matter and Motion, never so
fitly Modified and Organized. And therefore our Doctor in this Place, walks in
the common Trod, and pretends to supply the want of Power in such Matter and
Motion by the Introduction of an Intelligent, Self-subsisting Spirit into the
Person, for the effecting of such Operations in Man; not enough considering the
Wisdom and Power of God, the great Architect of the Microcosm, who can by
Matter and Motion, fitly Organized, Modified and Moved, produce such Acts and
Powers as Men are not able to comprehend the quomodo of, and therefore to their
Reason, such things may seem impossible to be done, which by the Wisdom and
Power of God, may be easily effected and performed, without the Agency of such
Intelligent Spirits, as Men have commonly used to imagine.

P. 88. The Doctor says, by Discourse of Reason, we soon come certainly to
know, that the Magnitude of the Sun is at least 160 times greater than that of
the Earth; and here I pretend to doubt the Certainty of the Doctor's knowledge
concerning this Point: from this Page to Page 100, the Doctor argues, Whether
the Intellect can work without the assistance of the Fancy? a Question
propounded by Aristotle, in the beginning of his Book, de Anima; but both there
and here, that Question is left undetermined.

P. 102. The Doctor says, the Intellect does frequently reflect upon it self,
and understand its own Intelligence. This I do not permit to pass for a Truth;
if we take the Intellect for a distinct thing from the Man conceiving that the
Intellect as well as the Fantasy, are Powers and Faculties of the Man, and
that neither of them can do any thing of themselves, but that all which either,
or both of them do, are Acts of the Person in whom they reside, and that they
are both of them submitted to the Guidance and Government of the Person, and
the Totum of that Power of which they are but a part; so as to speak properly
and truly, we must say that the Man can considerately reflect upon the Acts and
Powers of his Intellect, Fantasy, Judgment and Memory, which is a thing which
I shall easily grant; but that which I think lies upon the Doctor, and his
Party to prove, is, the bare Intellect separated from the Person, can reflect
upon it self, or do any other Action whatsoever.

P. 108. The Doctor says, That whatsoever can frame abstracted Notions and form
Universals, must be above Matter, and be Immaterial, but the Soul and Mind of
Man can act in this sort, Ergo, this Soul must be Immaterial. In this Argument
I deny his Major, and say, that the Man himself who is a Material Agent, can
form Abstractive Notions, and from Singulars and Generals, can extract and
frame Universals, and that the Intellect without the Man, can perform no such
Matters, nor be, nor act in any kind whatsoever,

P. 112. Here he quotes a Book, written by Hieronimus Rorarius, a Learned
Prelate, as a Collection of Arguments commonly urged, to prove that many Brute
Animals have the use of Reason, as well as Man himself has.

P. 116. Here it is affirmed, That Men do not know the Intimate Nature of so
much as the smallest Plant which grows upon the Ground; and therefore I say, we
are like to fall much short of the true Nature of the Humane Soul, with such
Certainty as were to be desired.

P. 118. The Doctor says, the Intellect is conversant about Spiritual Beings,
both of good and other Spirits, and therefore is Immaterial. I answer as
before, the Intellect can do nothing, but as it is a Power and Faculty of the
Person, without which I do not agree that it has either Being or Action.

P. 123. The Doctor here says, that the old Philosophers obtained a certain
Knowledge, that there were Spirits by the Regular Motions of the Heavenly
Bodies, which they thought could not be maintained, without the Assistance and
Government of Intelligent Immaterial Spirits; but I think they were as much
deceived in their own Opinion, as our Doctor seems to be in his Opinion of the
Souls Immateriality.

P. 123. It is objected against the Doctor, that when the Fancy is disturbed,
the Intellect cannot act with Strength or Freedom, and the Doctor confesses it
to be true, and that the Soul as Immaterial as he supposes her, cannot act
without Material Assistance of the Fancy, Memory, and other Sensitive Powers
[and apparent it is, neither the Man nor the Soul can act any thing without the
Spirits of the Blood.]

P. 126. The Doctor sets down three Moral Arguments, proving the Souls
Immateriality and Immortality. 1. The Universal consent of Men to this Opinion.
2. Man's Innate and Inseparable Appetite of Immortality. 3. The Justice of God,
in rewarding good Men, and punishing the Evil after Death. Upon the first
Argument he quotes Cicero's saying, Omni in re Consensio, omnium gentium, lex
naturae putanda est; to this Rule I answer, that if it should be admitted for a
Rule, yet there are many Exceptions to be made out of it; and therefore I
cannot admit it to have a binding force in this Case: and to the Doctor's
Assertion of Universal Assent to the Souls Immortality, by which he would prove
it a Conception Natural to the Mind of Man; I answer, that a Conception so
proving, must be as Universal in Time, as in Places or Persons; but we do not
Read, or find that the Opinion of the Souls Immortality had a Being in the
World, or was known amongst Men before the Writings of Solomon; because that in
the Thousands of Years before his time, we meet with no mention of that
Opinion, neither amongst the Patriarchs, nor the Mosaical Writings, nor any of
the Prophets before Solomon's time; nor do Job or David make any mention
thereof. We Read, God laid great Punishments upon Cain for his Murder, which
was of great Importance in that time of the World, and a very atroceous
Fratricide; and yet we do not Read of so much as a Threat against the Soul of
Cain, or any thing there spoken concerning Punishments future to this Life; but
all the Punishments denounced to him for that Fact, were only Temporal, and of
this World; nor do I find any Punishments future to this Life denounced against
Sinners, until the Books of Solomon became extant in the World, save what was
taken from the invention of some Poets; which might be received in the World
somewhat before his time. And hence I infer, That the Notion of the Souls
Immortality is not Natural, because for some Thousands of Years from the Worlds
beginning, that Notion was not received or known amongst Men.

P. 131. The Doctor's Opposer says, the Opinion of the Souls Immortality is
very Useful in Government, for that audacious Malefactors, who are not moved by
the whole Arm of the Civil Magistrate, will yet tremble at the Finger of
Divinity.

P. 133. It is possible (and Experience shows it frequent) that an Opinion may
be Universal, possessiing the Minds of all Men, for many Ages together, without
Dispute, which yet at length may be Discovered to be False and Absurd, as has
been Experienced in the Opinion of the Antipodes, and the Circumvolution of the
Earth; both which till of late Years were held Unreasonable and Fantastical;
and perhaps this of the Souls Eternity may have the same Fate.

P. 134. Our Doctor says, That to prove an Opinion derived from Nature, there
is required an Assent of all Ages from the beginning of the World. To this I
say, The Opinion of the Souls Immortality has not such a Consent, and that
such a Consent neither has been, or can be proved; and that therefore the
Opinion it self, is not proved derivable from Nature, or the Instinct thereof.

The Doctor says further, That from the Antiquity, Universality and Perpetuity
of any Opinion, we may safely conclude upon the Verity of it. Hereunto I
answer, That the Opinion of the Suns Diurnal Motion about the Earth, had a
greater Antiquity, and as great an Universality, and has still as strong a
Perpetuity, as that of the Souls Immortality, either ever had, or yet has,
notwithstanding all which the Learned World begins now to perceive, that it was
always, and is still an Error.

P. 138. Here the Doctor begins to produce and urge, his second Moral Argument
for the Souls Immortality; from the Desires Men have of Perpetuity and Living
after their Deaths, either in their own proper Beings, or in the Memories of
such as survive their Departures. To this I answer, That if they desire a
Perpetuity of their own Being after Death, it seems they desire that which they
cannot attain, as all Men may, and do desire a Perpetual Youth, Health, and
Prosperity. Nature and Reason both assure us, that no Man does or can desire a
perpetual, or a long Life, under great Pains and Sufferings, but a Life with
Happiness is very acceptable to all Men; and therefore they do not desire Life
alone, but as it is joined with expectation or hope of Happiness; and hence I
collect, that the much greater part of Mankind (which the sinful World knownly
are) do not desire a future State of Life after Death, but rather that there
were no Being for them after this Life, and would very much wish to be
forgotten both by God and Men; and therefore a Perpetuity of Being is not
desired, or so much desirable as our Doctor pretends it to be; whence I
conceive the Doctor's Argument drawn from this Topic, has but little Force or
Cohersion in it, and not Strength enough to compel, or even to draw Men to a
Coherence with the Doctor in his Opinion of the Souls Immortality.

P. 145. Here the Doctor propounds his Third Moral Argument, for proving the
Souls Immortality, and raises it from God's Divine Justice, and his Equitable
Dealings with Men; and says, it is commonly observed, wicked Men prosper better
in this World, than the Righteous usually do, and consequently that such Men
are not rewarded according to their Works whilst they live; and therefore God's
just dealing with Men cannot be defended, without allowing and believing a
State of Rewards and Punishments after Death: and from hence says the Doctor,
it must unavoidably follow, that Rewards and Punishments will be distributed to
Men after their departures out of this Life. To this I answer, That I agree to
all that the Doctor has here delivered: the Doctor replies, if you so do, you
must likewise agree to the Doctrine of the Souls Immortality, or the Separate
Subsistence of it; for the Body after Death is not capable of receiving Reward
or Punishment: it must therefore be the Soul alone, unto which such Rewards and
Punishments can be applied: Our Doctor not once mentioning, or appearing at all
to think upon the last Articles of our Creed; I believe the Resurrection of the
Dead, and the Life Everlasting, which seems to my Understanding a sort of
Proof, that he and the greatest part of those who believe and maintain the
Souls Immortality, are very little mindful of our quoted Article, The
Resurrection of the Dead, insomuch as the Conceit of this Immortality seems to
have eaten up and devoured the Article before-named, with the Use and Intent
thereof, and even to have exterminated the same out of the Apprehensions and
Memories of such Men. And hereupon I do again agree, that it is very suitable to
the Justice of God, and his equitable Dealings with Men, that there should be a
distribution of Rewards and Punishments after this Life; and I do with great
Assurance believe that the same will fall out accordingly; not bestowing those
Rewards and Punishments upon Souls Subsisting in a State of Separation from the
Body, but that rather, as our Lord himself tells us, John 6. Those who fear
God, and work Righteousness, shall by Christ be raised up at the last Day in
their full Compositum of Soul and Body, and in their own Persons shall receive
Rewards according to their Works done, and their Faith professed in this World;
and that the like measure shall be dealt to the Wicked at the Resurrection of
the last Day, whose Punishments shall be equally distributed to their Persons,
as is before said to be done in the case of the former Raised and Righteous
Persons.

P. 156. The Doctor says, He cannot but wonder that Plato, having asserted God
to be a Mind Divine and Incorporeal, should contradict himself, in affirming
that Man's Soul was a Particle, taken from the Substance of God himself; he
will not engulph himself in the Bottomless Sea of Difficulties, concerning the
Original and Extraduction of Man's Soul; but he conceives the Soul cannot be
produced from Matter, because it is Immaterial; but however, it is plain that
it has its Beginning and Origin with the Body; and yet being Incorporeal, it
is not capable of perishing with it.

P. 159. He confesses a great decay of Intellect in Men's very old Age; but
says, that Decay grows from the weakness of the Fancy and Imagination and the
Organs thereof, and not from the Decays of the Intellect or Soul it self.
Answering, I say, it seems rather to grow from the Heaviness and Unaptness of
the Blood of old People, to be so vigorously Inflamed and Acted, as it used to
be in their younger Years, and greater strength of their Bodies and Concoction.

P. 173. The Doctor says, It is not necessary that when at Death the Soul is
breathed into the Air, that the Air should be thereby Animated, because then it
should act without the Mediation of any Organs at all; but he asserts, that
neither in the Air, nor any other Body whatever, can the Soul either meet with,
or create those Dispositions, that are requisite to Vital Information.

P. 174. He says, The Soul makes use of the Vital Spirits, as Servants for the
effecting of Life, Sense and Motion. I say, Nature makes use of them for the
effecting Life, Sense, Motion, Understanding, Memory, and all other Powers of
Cogitation whatsoever.

P. 180. The Doctor says, As to the Particular or Manner of the Souls Knowledge
after Death, I remit you to Sir K. Digby's sublime Speculations concerning the
condition of a Separate Soul, in which though you may not meet with such
Satisfaction as you expect, yet you will meet with more than I can now give
you, without repeating his Notions. To this I answer, that I have perused those
Notions, without meeting with any Satisfaction at all in them.

P. 183. The Doctor says, That the Cement which joins the Body and Soul
together, is the Blood, especially the Spiritual and most refined part thereof;
and he quotes a Saying of Critius, Sentire, Maxim Proprinus esse Anima; atque
hoc in esse propter sanguinis Naturam.

P. 184. He says, The Blood is the first pact of the Body that is generated and
moved, and the Soul is excited and kindled first from the Blood; and the Blood
is that in which the Operations Vegitative and Sensitive do first manifest
themselves.

The Doctor says, That he thinks it likely, that the Soul having its first, and
perhaps principal Residence in the Blood, and that Blood by Circulation,
flowing (like a River of living Water) round the Body, penetrating into, and
irrigating the Substance of all the Parts, and at the same time communicating
to them both Heat and Life, so as the Soul having its principal Residence in
the Blood, in respect thereof, may very well be conceived to be, Tota in toto
and tota in qualibet part; so as there is an Intimate presence of the Soul in
the Blood, and by that means, a Conjunction of them together.

169. The Dr. says, That in the Progression toward Death, the Vital Heat or
Flame being either almost suffocated by Putrefaction of the Blood (the only
Fuel by which it is maintained) in Diseases, or exhausted by old Age, goes out
like a Lamp by degrees, ceasing first to enliven or irradiate the parts that
are most remote from the Focus or Heart; and then failing in its conserving
Influence more and more, till at length suffering an Extinction in the very
Heart (as it were in the Socket) it leaves that also Cold and Lifeless, so that
Death is as an Extinction only of the Vital Flame, not of the Soul. I say, That
it is an Extinction of that Vital Flame which I conceive to be the Soul or
Spirit, or the first Principal of Life and Motion in the Person.

I think that by the Doctor's Words in this last Quotation, he seems fully to
agree with what I have often repeated, that the total Extinction of the Vital
Flame in the Blood, is the Death of the Person, and the very thing which turns
that which was the living Body into a dead Carcass; whence he says, That Death
is an Extinction of the Vital Flame, and yet denies this to be an
extinguishment of the Soul; whence it seems to me, that he was resolved to
maintain the Subsistence of the Soul after the death of the Person, although the
Nature and Reason which he pretends to follow, convinced him not so to do, or
that he found any natural need of his so doing; but because he thought it might
be proved by Scripture, and was maintained by the Divines, That the Soul of Man
had a Separate Subsistence after death of the Person, and therefore was
Immortal, and that he stood so persuaded from Scripture Grounds, he testifies.
Page 185. where he says, That the Soul is an Immortal Substance, and that its
Immortality is not only credible by Faith, or upon Authority Divine, but also
demonstrable by Reason, or the Light of Nature. From these Words I collect,
That his Belief of the Souls Immortality, was grounded first upon Faith and
Divine Authority, as he thought; and being thus fully persuaded of the Truth of
that Opinion, he set himself on work to maintain it, by such Deductions as he
was able to make from the Principles of Nature and Reason; his Performances
wherein have before been examined, and shown not be of so great weight as he
perhaps conceived them to be. The Treatise now examined, was published so long
ago, that I doubt before this time his Flame of Life has been extinguished, or
that he may not be in a condition of replying to this Examination; and
therefore I shall not need to express what Amendments or Additions I think
needful to be made to his Treatise, but I will rather content my self generally
to say, That if any Man will pretend to prove the Souls Separate Subsistence
from Grounds of Nature and Reason, and to convince such as doubt thereof, I
think it needful for him to apply to those particulars which have before been
put in Question concerning the same, viz. 1. Quod sit Anima talis? 2. Quid sit,
aut qualis sit? 3. Vnde Oritur? 4. Quando ingeditur? 5. Vbi resedet? 6. Quomodo
Operatur? 7. Quo Avolat post mortem?
Those that maintain the Souls Separate Subsistence, are at difference amongst
themselves concerning diverse of these particulars. In the first of these they
all agree, that there is an Intelligent Self-subsisting Spirit in the Body,
which acts the Person and all his Powers; but in the 2. or the Quid sit, they
differ, some holding it to be Material, and others thinking it to be
Immaterial. 3. Concerning the Vnde Oritur, or from whence it derives its
Original, there are three different Opinions. First, That such Souls praeexists
a mundo condito, from the Creation of the World. Others say, That upon every
Procreation of Mankind, God creates a new Soul for every newly procreated Body;
as partly obliged thereunto, by the Congruity of his Being, requiring such
things to be done for Support of Mankind and the World. Others hold, That the
Soul is generated by the Parents, together with the Body, or that the whole
Humane Person is generated, as much and as perfectly, as one Horse generates
another. 4. For the Quando Ingreditur, or at what precise time the newly
created Soul first enters into the Body; the maintainers of this Opinion are
not yet agreed, whether it enter at the first Commixture of the Seed, or at the
Coagulation of it; or whether during its Firmentation, or during the time of
the Fomentation thereof, or at the first Commencement of its Vegitation, or at
the first Formation of Parts in the Embrion; and some have thought that this
sort of Soul does not enter till the irruption or breaking forth of the Infant
into the World. 5. Concerning the Vbi, or the place where this sort of Soul
resides, during its continuance in the Body, the maintainers of it differ among
themselves. Des Carts, thought it a lucky Invention of his own, when he found
its Residence to be in the Glandula Penialis, placed in a Passage between two
parts of the Brain. Others think the whole Brain to be the proper Residence
thereof. Some say it resides in the Heart, or near about it, and that thereby
the Heart becomes Primum Vivens and Vltimum Moriens. Others with our Doctor (in
his Page before quoted) think this Souls Residence to be in the Blood, and
commixed with the circulating Parts thereof. 6. Concerning the Mode or Manner
of this Souls Operation, all the maintainers thereof confess their Ignorance,
and agree that they know not the manner of its Operation upon, or in the Body.
7. About the Quo avolat, or what becomes of this Soul, at its departure from
the Body; the maintainers of it are not agreed among themselves; some of them
say it returns to God who gave it, but whether as a Part to its whole, or as a
Party going before the Judge for his Trial, is not known. Others say, That such
Souls are carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom, or by Devils into Hell, or by
Papal Officers into Purgatory, or into the Limbo's Patrum, vel Puerorum. Some
think that upon their departure from the Person, good Souls are rapt up into
Paradise, as they think the Thief's Soul was when it departed from the Cross.
Others have pretended, that within, and under the surface of our Earth, there
are pleasant places which they termed the Elysian Fields, or Happy Shades for
Souls that were good, to live and converse in; and places also within, or under
our Earth, for Punishment or Torment of the wicked. Some have invented, as
places of Happiness for good Souls, the Island of Taprobana, and other Islands,
which they termed Fortunate; and where they believed good Souls departed forth
of this Life, obtained a state of Happiness for the future. It seems our later
Divines have not thought any of these Places a sufficient Reward for the Merits
of their Prosylites, or the desire they have to prefer them to places of great
Happiness; and therefore they tell them, that immediately after Death, their
Souls shall be transported into Heaven, and there enjoy the Happiness of
Angelical Mansions, and the ravishing Visions of God and Christ, a Conversation
with Angels and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect; and whatsoever they find
any where mentioned in Scripture, to be bestowed by God upon the Blessed, at
the time of the Resurrection, and the last Judgment, they apply to the state of
good Men's Souls, immediately after the time of their Deaths.

I do heartily desire that they both could and would give such an Account to
the World, concerning the Reasons and Grounds of their so doing, as may give
Satisfaction to such Doubting and Considering Persons, who are willing and
desirous to receive a satisfactory Account thereof, that they might more
heartily join with such predicated Opinions, than at the present they find
themselves able to do. I find it not common to meet with Writers, or Arguers,
who pretend to prove the Souls Separate Subsistence, from Grounds of Nature and
Reason, which it seems was our present Author's Intention to prove; but I think
he has failed in his propounded Success of that Intention, and that it may
justly be said of him, Magnis ecedit ausis; but I should be very glad to see he
had another able Person to succeed him in that Endeavor, being my self very
desirous to receive Instruction concerning this Point. And in Expectation
thereof, I resolve to confine my Observations upon our Doctor's present
Treatise, to what has before been spoken concerning it, without making any
further Addition thereunto, save my hearty Wishes for a clear and true
Determination of this Question, and therewithal I give my Intelligent Reader
the Farewell.

FINIS.

