HONESTY IS THE BEST POLICY.
by Mr Laughton of the Temple.
THO Men are so transported, yet nevertheless I will at this Juncture endeavor
to show every Party what infinite Hazards they have run, what great Losses they
have sustained, by partial Notions, unreasonable Aversions and Bigottries; and
because I would yet heal and compose all our Differences, I shall avoid all
Sarcasm, and Levity of Expression, and likewise because I rather consider the
Dispute between the King and his People, than between Him and the P. of Orange:
For I believe no unbyassed wise Man can, even now in his Conscience, think the
Prince has dealt Honorably or Religiously by his Wives Father, and his own
Uncle, unless the Cameronian Reflector, where he talks of the Difference
betwixt Kingdoms and Families, had proved it more lawful to steal Crowns than
Trifles, or rob so near Relations than other Men The King and Mankind must
forgive me if Justice command infandum renovare dolorem, to look a little into
the Causes of the late Civil Wars. I am the farthest Man alive from justifying
the execrable Murder of King Charles the First, but on the other hand I cannot
say the People began that War without great Provocations from the Ministers of
those days. I believe the Laws of England make the Kings of it unaccountable in
their own Persons: But the Monopolies, the Loans, the Ship Money, and illegal
Imprisonments, ande. were real Grievances: How fatal that War was, both to the
King's and Parliament Party; how horrid in the Issue of it, in relation to the
Royal Blood, may be read in our Histories, and is felt in our Constitution. But
whence originally came all those Misfortunes? If any Man tells me long Stories
of the Religious Contentions, I must confess I blame them, and I allow they had
their weight; but I take the Root of those great Evils to proceed from Defects
in our Civil Constitution: I will point out the Defects; but I neither have
Authority, nor Genius, to propose the Remedies. Ever since King Henry the
Seventh's time, the Nature and Element of the English Government have been
altered, All Regular Governments (call them, and let the Titles of their
Magistracy be what you please) partake of all the three several Sorts, but
there are in all Climates ebbings and flowings of the Monarchical,
Aristocratical, and Democratical Particles of the Composure, and all the
Counsels of State must be proportioned to those Alterations. Take a view of our
Government before Henry the Seventh's time, and you find a Monarch whose Basis
is Aristocracy, but if you will reflect solidly how he has stood since, it is
upon the Foot of the People: Queen Elizabeth understood this, and governed
happily, and her Ministers Cecil, Essex, Rawleigh, Walsingham, etc. were less
her Minions than they were the Favorites of the People. Tho her Title was
disputable, Protestancy but new, Spain powerful and ambitious; by persuing
large Measures, and taking beloved Men into her Counsels, and by suffering them
to Advise honestly, she was too hard for all the Difficulties she met with,
and, after a long Reign, laid down her Head in Peace; I think Princes may
learn Lessons out of her Life, Yet I will not be her Panygerist, for I think
she was sometimes Arbitrary, but herein I think she Excelled, to wit, That when
any thing began to be generally misliked, she soon heard the Voice of the
People, and gave way to the impetuosity of National Discontents, and so was a
greater Mistress of Crown-craft than most of her Predecessors, or those that
succeeded her. K. Charles the I. tho a Prince of many Royal Virtues, was a
little too tenatious of his Purposes, and thought himself a greater Judge of
National Exigencies than a House of Commons think any King ought to be; and
after all the Schemes of the Schools, and the Advices of Flatterers, no King of
these Kingdoms can sit sure, that is not well with Parliaments. There are
Propensities to which all Constitutions of State must be adjusted, and the
Bodies of Men will every where be too hard for all Speculations. A thirst after
Liberty expelled the Kings of Rome, and there were Indications of almost
absolute Monarchical Dispositions in the Factions of Marius, Scylla, and
Catiline, before Cesar's perpetual Dictatorship; The Revolt of the Low
Countries from the Spanish Government, when in all its height and strength,
shows no Armies can be too hard for Universal Resolutions, and is a Memento to
all Crowned Heads, That where a Monarch will strain the bonds of Government in
despite of the People, they will break them. When the Barons were able to make
War upon slight Pretenses, if the Kings kept fair with the Barons they were
safe, but the Crown, the Barons, and the greater Gentry since the Barons, could
sell their Lands, and the Court of Wards has been taken away, and the Crown has
disposed of its Lands; can govern no longer Securely than they have Reputation
with the People. Government must follow in a great measure the Nature of the
Tenures, and there must be an Agrarian Law for Power where the Lands are so
distributed: You see I have started many bold Hints, but I am not willing to
draw them out at length, nor to write over closely where I may endanger the
good Opinion of all Sides: But I will conclude upon this point, That since the
Princes have had an Inclination to greater Power than the People will comply
with; and the People a stronger Lust after Liberty than our Kings were willing
to satisfy; That the one has mistaken Prerogative, and the other as much their
Privileges, it would be well if a New Magna Charta was made to explain, and
assert each; This would be a happy Conclusion of our Troubles; This would turn
our Swords into Plow shares, and has been heretofore the more warrantable
product of those Stirs that Male-administrations occasioned. Thus our
Parliaments could not be corrupted, nor our judicial Proceedings precarious;
Englishmen have now an Opportunity to secure these good Things, For since
Providence has it self been pleased so to order it, that the King has been
defeated in Ireland, and the French have received so great a Loss at Sea, we
have no longer reason to dread a French or an Irish Conquest; and the King
cannot but now know, That he can never come to wear the Crowns of these
Nations, unless he will make such Condesentions as are proper for our
Circumstances, as are necessary to secure both our Religion, and our Property.
I have been with him since his Exile, and the last Words he said to me were,
That he sent me home to make a BARGAIN with his People; But I did not meet with
People whose Minds were prepared to propose just and equitable Expedients. He
knows I would not make ill Conditions for my Country; I have been suspected of
being over nice and zealous for it, I confess I am more concerned for its
Welfare than for all my own nearest and dearest Interests; yet I can very well
comply with the Equal and Hereditary Monarchy of England. I never was an Enemy
to the word Monarchy, nor designed to interrupt the Succession of the Crown;
nor do I think it the Interest of any Man that loves Peace, and these Nations,
to do it: On the contrary, I at this day affirm, tho we ought always to have
expected Terms from King James, or have sent them to him, We ought not (tho I
would have good Ones) even now to make such as would make him justly Uneasy; so
unreasonable Ones, as would be unfit for him to grant, We must deal
impartially, if we would ever compose Things; We ought to show our Claim, or at
least our Necessity, and we ought to couch Things in such Words, as tho they
speak plainly our Sense, may have a due Regard to his Dignity. Forgiveness and
Righteousness have been preached to him, as the certain Establishment of his
Throne: He has been humbled by Afflictions: He has heard of his Mistakes, and
has hearkened to free Advice: He has Reason to have it, and he has Temper, and
perhaps both he and we may be the better for our Tribulations, if we once
accommodate our Disputes. I never flattered the King; I have spoken plainer to
him than I write now, and I believe I am not the less acceptable to him for my
Plainness: And as to any Objection and Scruple that may be raised by a
Declaration that is Published in his Name, I must say, I know no more than he
that Reflects upon it, whether it be King James' Declaration or no: For about
three Years since, there was a Declaration Published in his Name, and for the
Spreading of which several People were Imprisoned, That I was afterward told
by the Author King James knew nothing of. And I must say further, That that
Declaration that has been lately Published does not answer to the Spirit I left
him in many Months ago; for, as I said, he told me he sent me to make a The
Word BARGAIN is a term of condiscending Language.
BARGAIN, to know what it was his People would have. I cannot answer for what
Accounts other People sent him; but I am sure he will so far justify me, as to
say I have been ever against excepting Men's Lives or Fortunes. I have been ever
for being very Explanative about the Liberties of my Country, and if any body
with him, or any here, have led him into Measures that are disgustful to the
People, I think I may boldly aver, It is Misinformation, and not Malice, that
makes him ^vable to Misconstruction. Those that wish for the best Things are
the shyest, have ever been too shy toward him; and it is not impossible that
this Government may bribe Some body to give too plausible Names and Reasons for
those Things that may turn to the King's Prejudice, as some did here before the
Prince of Orange came: But the day that he really refuses from any sort of Men,
that can show a probability of bringing him home, any Proposals that have
tendency to Universal Good, he gives leave to his Subjects to have recourse to
the Laws of Self-preservation; Then, and not till then, he Abdicates his Crown.
This is speaking plain English you see I speak plainly concerning what the King
must do; Therefore let me also speak some plain Truths, and rehearse some
Matters of Fact, to my Countrymen. And here I will begin with asserting, That
if the People would be true to themselves at the Restoration, and careful i^
the Elections of Members to Parliament, we need no other Treaty, but what the
King will be forced to make good in the first Sessions. We need not fear
French, o^ Papists; We are too large and too brave a Country t^ be a
Plantation; France cannot spare from off the Continent Men enough to govern us
contrary to our Inclinations. And tho our Histories talk of our being Conquered
any Man of Sense sees it was by Composition; It was from Parties within, and
not from Force without us. As for the Roman Catholics their Numbers are
inconsiderable, and tho they have good Estates, and some Men of great Natural
Sagacity amongst them; yet their having been out of Business keeps them from
understanding the Knack and Turns of it: And, whatever weak People think a King
of that Persuasion in a Protestant Country is more properly than any other Laws
can make him a de been pla^cito King. Sir Will. Temple's Observations upon the
Netherlands, and his Essay upon Governments, can never be too often read by
Prince, or People: The one may be taught by it how to Govern, and the other
cured of unreasonable Fears. Standing Armies are the justest dread to Civil
Liberties, but they are many ways as dangerous to Kings as they can be to their
People. A beloved General may turn their Competitor, and every Mutiny shakes
their Thrones: And the King that will make his Subjects Slaves by their hands,
must be as much and more a Slave to them. If the Troops are Foreign he must be
the Tributary and Vassal of that Prince who lends them; and if they are
homebred Forces, the Dispositions of the Populace will infect the Army: But
besides all this, no Country, tho they may maintain Forces enough to suppress a
sudden Insurrection, can possibly maintain enough to govern contrary to the
general Genius of the Nation. The People of Turkey hold all their Lands of the
Crown, and like their Government; and as for the Peasante of France, they talk
daily of their grand Monarch. An ill concerted Conspiracy may miscarry.
Hotheaded Men may expect too soon to fire their Countrymen, but general
Dissatisfactions are no more to be withstood than general Conflagrations: When
Necessity and Self-preservation arm Men, let their Weapons be what they will,
they will cur their way through all Opposition. Indeed if a People are divided,
as we are, the Danger must be common, or very notorious, before they make use
of their Intrinsic Power. But if some Laws were enacted to keep Ecclesiastic
Controversies out of the Pulpit, and the People were not taught to believe what
in cases of Extremity humane Nature will never practice. If Divines are not
suffered to dispose of the Kingdoms of this World, Civil Crimes and Rights will
be soon called by their proper Names, and we shall recover our Liberties in a
Parliamentary way before Things grow desperate: It is dangerous, and ought to
be criminal, for them to pretend to set out the Boundaries of Government: They
may preach in general submission to Authority, but they are not to bring Texts
of Scripture, and much less Aristotle's Ideas, or Zenophon's Cyrus, to
overthrow our Statute-books, and depretiate the Laws of England. By an Act of
Parliament in the time of King James the First, no Man that was not Batchellor
in Divinity was to preach about Predestination, or Free Will, because that
Controversy then troubled the Church; and sure I am, That the Clergy of no
Degree ought to preach about the Prerogative, and our Privileges. Their Stake
is not generally great enough to keep them from Flattery and sinister
Interpretations, by which too many of their Predecessors have been raised to
Church-Dignities. They understand not our Laws, nor have they much credit for
these Reasons with the People; and they ought now to have less, since so many
of their Coat have prevaricated. In a word, They ought by their Function to
understand the Mysteries of Religion, and leave the Arcana Imperii to the
Laymen. They ought to be punished if they call Men Idolaters, Schismatics,
Fanatics, Rebels, Traitors, Seditious Persons, with the etc. of their
Billingsgate Rhetoric. Liberty of of Conscience will make one part ill
Manners, and Crimes against the State are proper for the Cognizance of the
Civil Power; nor do I believe it was ever bettered by the Interposition of any
Sort of Priests: Nor indeed is Religion it self the better for the Affectation
of the Gentlemen of that Robe to intermeddle with Matters merely Temporal. But
God knows they are too often buzzing, that this and that Thing is Republican;
and they have needless Apprehensions for their Church. As for the Common wealth
Principles, scarce any body carrys them so far as to be against having a Single
Person at the Head of our Affairs; and as for chopping and changing Kings, or
rebelling when their is Occasion, I do not find the Church of England is so
much behind hand with any other Sect: She can lead the Dance, and tho she may
pretend Weariness before it is at an end, yet she can comply for Company. But
after all this is said, I think her of all the several Churches the best for
this Nation, and so do almost all Englishmen; which leads me, as the Parsons
Phrase it, to show the unreasonableness of her Fears. As much as the Church of
England Men have carressed and writ for an Arbitrary Power, NOTHING ELSE CAN
PULL DOWN THEIR CHURCH; and she might see by what followed the two Tolerations
since the Royal Blood was Restored, That however she has treated the
Dissenters, they will never join to pull down the Church of England, and let in
Popery: Nor will she ever again be worm'd out of her Discipline, if she never
yields to Comprehension, OR IS NOT TOO PLAINLY AN ENEMY TO CIVIL SECURITIES.
But I have made too long a Digression; and perhaps some may uncharitably think
I like too much the subject Matter of it, but I only design the good of the
Clergy, and the general Peace of England. No Man can have a greater value than
my self for all those of that Order that are serious Christians, and Sufferers
for their Principles; but if they will consider how many of those that were in
the late Civil Wars, and in this Revolution, went constantly to the Church of
England, they will not think it very Advisable for Princes to govern themselves
by supposing that that Men will live up to Doctrines that (I shall not say) are
mistaken in Idea; but only assert that they are too Self-denying to be expected
in practice from our profligate Age. I make profession of great Plainness, but
I beg a candid interpretation from the Church of England, for what I have said;
And from the Whigs of all Sorts for what I am about to say to them. I think
they have not made the wisest Use of the Kings they have quarrelled with, and
that they are too frantickly Apprehensive of Slavery. There are great Lengths
that all Mankind will go with them. Many of the Church of England joined with
their Principles at the beginning of the late Civil Wars; and their Consciences
did not misgive them, till they had humbled that unfortunate Prince into such
Concessions as would have effectually secured the Rights of Englishmen. Let any
body look over the Offers that King made, and especially at the Isle of Wight
Treaty, and then tell me, Whether there was any Reason to bring the Reproach of
King Charles's Murder upon these Nations. I am not just if I don't say the
Whigs are too soon displeased, and carry their Points too far, and that they
overrate their Numbers; The Men of the best Quality and Estates have generally
a mind to Peace, and are not so eager for Critical Reformations. Some of the
Whigs therefore start Grievances before others feel them, and are hazarding our
very Fundamentals for the Chimera's of a warm Imagination, and a punctilious
Nicety, which jollier Heads and sweeter Natures can never comprehend; and at
last they weaken themselves by Subdivisions: They spin their Thread too fine,
their Speculations are scare Practical, and end in Vision; Tho they are for
Liberty in Religion, they are for Persecution, for Fire and Faggot, for
Extremity in Politics. The Bulk of Freeholdors will stick by Essentials, but
the Whigs almost Nickname their own Notions, and then it is no wonder if the
Tories take them for Scarecrows and Bulbeggers, and that the Propegaters of
such Doctrines are represented unreasonable Men, rather Beautefeux than
Patriots: Your out word your own Opinions, and you talk Hyperboles and
Catachresses, and the Tories think you Lunaticks because they don't understand
your Language. you ought seriously to consider your Numbers, and you will not
find disproportion enough between you and those Tories to make it reasonable
that they should wholly subscribe your State Creed; and perhaps there will be
less reason if you look back and find that tho some fierce Men of that Party
(and God knows there are such in all Parties) may have been for screwing up
Monarchy too high, yet many that are for supporting the Church of England, and
limited successive Monarchy, have always joined in all honest and moderate
Things. Indeed when King Charles the Second returned, his first Parliament gave
him more Power than they were afterward willing he should keep; but were not
the Whigs as mad at the Inauguration of the Prince of Orange? If the Church of
England, in the Reign of that Prince, did not hunt so hard when the Popish Plot
was on Foot; I suppose many of you are at this d^^ convinced you were too Keen,
and that the Business was a little over Swore. If they opposed the Bill of
Exclusion, without peradventure they were in the Right of it: For it was purely
Personal in its Regards; loving one Man more than Liberty, and Hating another
more than Slavery; and miserable is that People whose Security is more from the
Temper or Religion it self of the Magistrate, than the Constitution of the
Government I cannot but bemoan what we lost by your heat at that Time. If you
say the Church of England Quo Warranto'd Corporations, They did it no more than
the Fanatics Regulated them. I think it unjust to charge Parties with the
Faults of particular Persons. There was but a few of either Party concerned in
either of those evil Steps; and its as unjust to take away the Reputation of
either Party for the Miscarriages of those few, as to take away Charters for
personal Maleadministrations; and I am confident that even all the Non Swearers
of the Church of England would have been willing to have assertained our
Constitution, and secured our Administration when the Prince of Orange came;
they were weary of pretended unlimitted Prerogative, to say no more, and I
think I ought not if I would please them, or you. But pray what harm had it
been if we had not changed the Name of our King, if we had altered the
complexion of Affairs; is it not a shame, that Sir Thomas Clarges, and Sir
Christopher Musgrave, etc. should have consulted Amendment more than those that
have taken the Degree of Doctors at the King's head Club, and at Richard's
Coffee-house? Is it not a shame that you would not make the Embryos of
necessary Insurrections, less liable to prosecution in the last Session, and
that you could in the Convention suspend the Habeas Corpus, tho when you gave
the Crown you declared it a fundamental right? If you have Liberty to elect
Kings, why are you so Angry at those that will Choose their Old one again, and
perhaps upon more honest Limitations than you Created yours? The word
Limitation puts me in mind, that I promised to show that you are too violently
apprehensive of Slavery, and therefore I will once again say you did not make
the best use of your Victories over King Charles the First, because you brought
them to a point wherein the Consciences of most rebuked them, and wherein the
generality were not likely to succumb, and you were as indiscreet in the
management of King Charles the Second's timorous Nature, who would have denied
scarce any thing but the Bill of Exclusion at the time that that was first on
Foot, and indeed would have found no Party to buoy him up in the denial of any
thing else: To obviate your unreasonable fears of Slavery, I beseech you to
consider whether History gives an Account of any People that have been made
Slaves but by their own Inclinations to be so, unless by an entire Conquest;
and I once again affirm, it is not in the Power of France to conquer England,
unless by our own Divisions; and those Divisions would soon cease, if we did
not oppose the bringing home King James upon civil Securities. The Prince of
Orange, hates the Persons of the Whigs, and more their Principles, and makes
all those of them he imploies, change them, or at least act against them; yet
their implacable hate to King James will not let them, tho they have so much
punished him, and themselves, forgive Errors in him, which they commend in this
Man; and if King James is ever Restored it will be easy to misrepresent their
Notions by reason of the Men that profess them: Whereas would they plead for
their Liberties under a Restoration, and not talk in prejudice of the
Established Worship of the Church (to pull down which is neither the Business,
nor the desire even of any wise Dissenter) the Church of England will join to
ask and expect all Things that can make our Constitution happy and Stable, not
only under any Popish but under all Kings. Reflect seriously whether the body
of the Nation, which is mostly composed of the Church of England, has not been
Struggling these last 50 Years for more Liberty; this may instruct the Whigs
that they need not fear the loss of it, and King James that he must give it.
The nature of our Situation, of our Tenures, of our Enclosures, and especially
of our People, is a full Security that we shall never loose our beloved Liberty
and Property, unless the Whig Party are so unreasonable, that they choose to
embroil us in Civil Wars rather than to hearken to any Proposals from King
James, or join with others to send Proposals to him. The Reduction of Ireland,
and the Cessation of the Highlanders, have not ended the Jacobite Quarrel; and
tho this Defeat of the French by Sea, damps the wild and vissionary Jacobite,
yet it will not put an end to our Miseries: Were King James dead, the Prince of
Wales would be thought on; and those that believe successive Monarchy, are very
much (what ere you think) satisfied of his Legitimacy. But were he, and the
Child of which the Queen is lately delivered of, and King James also dead, if
the Princess of Orange should die, the Princess of Denmark must be a most
resigned Woman, if she did not ask for her Right: Whatever others can, I can
yet see nothing but Confusion and Calamity, intolerable and eternal Taxes,
together with the loss of Trade, and Honor on the one hand, and on the other
hand, our ancient Plenty, and our ancient Government; without Sunderland, being
remade Secretary of State, or a general Excise Established, which are the
resolved on Methods of King William: But I must yet give an Account of the most
dreadful Hobgoblin of all, Popery. I believe as little of its Creed, and as ill
of its Practices, as any body; but I would take a new Method to civilize those
wild Men that you think Beasts of prey. I would treat them better; I would
enfranchize them; I blame neither Papist nor Fanatic for being in a Plot, till
they are impartially dealt with: And ^^t I can, and do, and ever did, and I am
confident (...) shall, comply with the Church of England; so (...) not personal
Concern makes me say this, but a (...) Persuasion, that I have had these Twelve
Years, That where a Nation is divided into Sects, Church and State Matters
ought to be distinct. As we manage the point, the Papists will be Vassals for
the Court of Rome; and Spies for every Catholic Monarchy from whence they may
hope a deliverance, as well as Flatterers of Prerogative; but if you would
blend them with all the other Sects, they would not be tasted in the
Composition, nor would they be looking for Succors from abroad. But when I
have said all this, let the Roman Catholics at their peril endeavor to be
invidiously Preferred, or engross the King, we can put a Bear-Skin upon them,
when we please; And if a King of their persuasion will be the King of their
party, the next Revolution will extirpate Papists, and the Royal Line to boot;
and now we can cut off, and abdicate Kings in the face of the World: We shall
learn Massacres, and turn into a perfect Common wealth. I will allow you
Gentlemen to believe Transubstantiation, but I advise you as a Friend not to
trust to Miracles; but to allow that natural weight will be too hard for all
your Superfine projections: So that tho I am for your having utmost Liberty,
and tho I am as much an Enemy to Civil Inquisitions here, as to your Religious,
or rather irreligious one in Spain, yet I would have you remember that I say
you are to have that Liberty only upon your good Behavior. If King James comes
in, if you will not as industriously as any other Party promote the general
Good. If you will not be as Zealous for it as your Predecessors when they got
Magna Charta, you will be a hated Faction still, and find me too true a Prophet
at last. I think the French never were, but I believe every body will allow
that they have now no reason to be so Vissionary as to expect to make us a
Colony; and if any Catholics or mad Tories, still expect Force from abroad,
shall set King James upon the Throne, they are madder than any set of Men but
those Whigs that fear a French Conquest, and from thence Popery and Slavery.

I have treated upon odd Things, and in an unusual Manner, and perhaps shall
have tired the Peruser, but to speak in a very few Words the drift of the
whole. It is to invite all my Countrymen to be ready to receive the King upon
such large and comprehensive Measures, as ought to satisfy all Parties, it is
to incline all Parties, to be reasonable in their demands, and to persuade King
James to give such Terms as the People will thank him for now, and will have,
or eternally be restiffe and uneasy; it is to persuade all English men, to
consider Church and Civil Matters a part; it is to incorporate all our Sects
into one National Interest. It does allow Government from God, but the
Specification from Men. It is not to quarrel with Hereditary Monarchy, but
desires we may be safe in our Lives and Fortunes, and that we should Sacrifice
them for the Public against Enemies abroad, rather than by intestine Jars. In
a word, all this Ramble is to persuade to a new Magna Charta: To Peace and
Justice which God grant may be the Conclusion of all our dismal Appearances. I
wish Men would rather cast about in their thoughts how to draw such a Magna
Charta than to make opposition which can never determine the Controversy, as
long as any one Branch of the Right Line is alive. I wish they would rather
think who should Represent than who should Fight for them.

To conclude, I expect to please no one Party because I appear to be of none
bigotly, but write for the general Good, tho I think what I have set down are
Truths: Yet I fear they are too strong to be digested, they do not close with
the Partialities of any sort of Men; however they are well meant, and I leave
the issue to the great Disposer of all Things, and Men to jumble and cut, and
be unfortunate, till they find by Experience according to the Title of this
Discourse, That

Honesty, after all, is the best Policy.

FINIS.

