Monsieur BOSSV's TREATISE OF THE EPICK POEM: Containing Many Curious
Reflections, very useful and necessary for the Right Understanding and Judging
of the Excellencies OF HOMER and VIRGIL.

Done into English from the French, with a new Original Preface upon the same
Subject, by W. J.

To which are Added, An Essay upon Satyr, by Monsieur D'Acier; AND A Treatise
upon Pastorals, by Monsieur Fontanelle.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1695.

To the Honored RICHARD BLACKMORE, DOCTOR of PHYSIC, AND FELLOW of the
College of Physicians in LONDON.
SIR,
THE ensuing Treatise, since it has learned to speak English, seems, by a
peculiar kind of Title, to lay a more especial Claim to your Patronage, than to
any others. For though the Translator be a perfect Stranger to you, yet the
Author, which he has ventured to translate, is well known by all to be one you
are intimately acquainted with: witness your excellent Prince Arthur, wherein
you have in a great measure confined your self to the Rules and Precepts which
Aristotle and Horace, and even our Bossu, have prescribed to the Epick Poem.

It Is upon this Account, Sir, that I presume to cast this Translation under
your Protection; not questioning but, as the good-natured Critic is always the
Poet's Friend; so now, vice versa, the generous Poet will stand the Critics
Friend, and suffer his impartial Reflections to appear in the English World
under the Patronage of so great a Name.

I might here run out into high and just Encomiums upon your late extraordinary
Performance; but there is no need for it, since the Work loudly speaks forth
its own Praises: and I should rather seem unjust in saying too little, than be
thought guilty of Flattery for saying too much in its Commendation.

I have, Sir, in the Preface, ventured to make some few Reflections on your
Poem, and hope you have Candor enough to excuse the Freedom I have taken
therein. If I have offended, or committed any Mistake, I here declare my self
willing and ready to retract upon due Conviction; and shall be always forward
to submit my self to the Sentence of better Judgments.

All I have more to say, is, to beg Pardon for my Presumption, in desiring to
prefix your Name before my weak Performance; which Favor I hope you will grant
to,

Honored Sir, Your very Obliged and W. J.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR.
IT IS Sir Roger L'Estrange's jocular Remark in his Preface before his English
Tully's Offices, That a Man had as good go to Court without a Cravat, as appear
in Print without a Preface: And therefore, because my Author has none, it may
be expected I should Preface it for him. But since I undertake to personate so
great a Critic as the Learned Bossu; it may to some seem requisite (let me be
never so meanly qualified for such an undertaking) that I should give the World
some Account of Poetry in General, and especially of the Epick Poem in
Particular.

As for Poetry in General, I shall not trouble my head much about it at
present; the World has had enough on that Subject already, and by much abler
Pens. That its Nature is Divine, that it owes its Original to Heaven; how from
small Beginnings it rose at last to that Luster we find it in, in Homer's and
Virgil's days; and withal what strange Effects it always had upon the Minds of
Men: These things, and much to the same purpose have been told over and over,
and need not be repeated here. Not only Aristotle and Horace, but their
Commentators and the Critics, not only of our own but other Nations, have made
it their Business to set forth its Excellence, and to recommend it to Mankind
as the noblest Humane (I had almost said Divine) Art that is. Besides, that its
true Use and End is to instruct and profit the World more than to delight and
please it, has been so fully and clearly made out, by D'acier in his Preface
before his Reflections on Aristotle's Poesy, and lately by our own Countryman
the Learned Dr. Blackmore in his Preface before his Prince Arthur, that I think
my self exempted in a great measure from that task likewise.

But however, it cannot but with a Blush be confessed, that most of our Modern
Poets seem to have diverted the true Design of Poetry to one of a quite
contrary Nature, whilst they study rather to please the debauched World in
their own way, than to give them any wholesome instruction to become Wiser and
Better. To such as these therefore it would be advisable to consult Dr.
Blackmore's Preface, and the third Chapter of the fourth Book in the ensuing
Treatise: And they will there find how much the being a Man of Probity and
Virtue is to be preferred, to the being a debauched, complaisant and
temporizing Poet. They would do well to consider, that all the Reproach and
Scandal which is cast upon Poetry and Themselves, is in a great measure owing
to their own ill conduct. For when the unthoughtful Many see Men of debauched
Principles Usurp to themselves the sacred Name of Poet; when they see base,
servile, mercenary Souls prostitute their Pens to mean, sordid, and unbecoming
Subjects, such as lewd and profane Plays, abusive and scurillous Farces,
Lascivious Odes; and wanton Sonnets; they think they have reason to look upon
Poets with contempt, and to style them the scum of mankind. And it were well if
their Censures went no farther, and only touched those that deserved them; but
they go on, and conclude that Poetry it self is in all the fault, and that it is
This that is the cause of so much extravagancy and debauchery in the World. But
it does not follow, because many, that pretend to Poetry, do by their infamous
practices bring a scandal upon it; and because an ill natured multitude, that
has little or no relish for such sort of things, casts dirt upon it; I say it
does not follow from thence, that Poetry is ever the worse. For at this rate
Religion it self, though the best thing in the World, yet is vilified and
scandalized by too many, and would fall under the same uncharitable Censure. In
spite therefore of Malice, Envy, and Detraction of its Enemies, and
notwithstanding all the Contempt and Scandal cast upon it, by its pretended
Friends and Votaries, it has been, and will still be accounted a Noble thing by
the Wiser and the better part of Mankind.

Now whatever is said in favor of Poetry in General, may in a great measure be
applied to the Epick Poem in Particular; That being the Principal and most
sublime part of all Poesle, and what Rapin with a great deal of Reason affirms
to be the greatest Work Humane Wit is capable of. I might here show at large
how far it does excel the other two parts of Great Poetry, Tragedy and Comedy:
But this every one acknowledges, even those who are the greatest Admirers of,
and pretenders to the Drama; and it is this that my Author sufficiently makes
out in several Passages of his Treatise; so that I think my self excused from
that invidious task. My present business shall be only to consider, how
excellent it is in its own Nature; what a vast, Universal, and Judicious Genius
it requires; what surprising effects it has had in the World when duly
performed; what encouragement it met with among the Ancients; and the Reasons
of its declining state among the Moderns. Nor do I desire, even in this, to
dictate any thing, but with all submission refer what I say to the Verdict of
better Judgments.

The Excellency of the Epick Poem appears, in that, as we hinted before, it is
the Principal, and most sublime part of all Poesy. It Is that on which the most
Commendations, the highest Praises, and the largest, freshest Garlands are, and
have been bestowed. But this only gives us a general notion of its Greatness,
we may see it in its clearest Luster, if we would but take a particular view of
its Nature and Design. And because I cannot express it better and more
concisely in my own, I shall make bold to use my Author's Words. The Epopea, or
Epick Poem (says he) is a Discourse or Story invented by Art to form Men's
Manners by such Instructions as are disguised under the Allegory of some one
Important Action, which is related in Verse after a Probable, Diverting, and
surprising manner.

Here you have a short, but full and clear Idea of the Nature and Design of the
Epick Poem. I shall not here spend time to explain the parts of this
Definition; it is so fully and clearly done in the ensuing Treatise, that it
needs no farther Illustration. Now what, according to this account, can be more
Great and Noble? To regulate Men's manners; to purge and refine them from the
Dregs, and Corruptions of Vice; to keep their Passions within due bounds, and
to make them the Servants, not the Masters of right Reason, has in all Ages
been esteemed a piece of the highest Prudence, and a great perfection of Humane
Nature. Hence the Moralist himself deservedly derives all his Glory. But if he
merits much, the Epick Poet merits much more. The one indeed by his plain,
convincing Instructions can prevail upon those, whose minds are unprejudiced,
and whose Reason is rightly informed: But the other by the Charms and
allurements of his Precepts breaks through all Opposition, conquers all
prejudice, insinuates himself into the inmost recesses of the Soul, and makes a
thorough Convert of the most obstinate Immoralist. The Epick Poet, to back all,
makes use of frequent Examples, the strongest Arguments to persuade Men to be
Virtuous; and his whole piece is an Imitation of such things as may probably
happen. To conclude, he like a skillful Physician mixes Sweet with Bitter, that
which is Pleasant with the Profitable, and gilds over the unsightly Pill, that
so even the Nauseous but wholesome Physic might steal down the better. I know
there may be some, who utterly dislike this way, and cry it is too Trickish, fit
only to cajole Women and delude Children. But may I crave leave to tell such,
that they seem not to have studied Nature sufficiently, else they would have
discerned in the most sage Tempers, some thing of the Child, that loves to be
tempted and allured even to that which is his own Good and Happiness. This is
Conspicuous to all, who are acquainted with the World a little, and have Read
Men as well as Books: So that I need not stand upon proving what is so
notoriously apparent. I am sensible much more might be said to show the
Excellency of the Epick Poem; but that little which has been already alleged
in its favor, may, I presume, be enough to keep up its esteem among the more
judicious part of the World: And as for others, of a more perverse principle,
Though never so much were said, it would never satisfy them.

But to go on; sit is no small Commendation to the Epick Poem, that its nature
is such as requires the largest, most Universal and Judicious Genius to
undertake it. None but Men of the most exalted Souls, warmest Thoughts,
liveliest Fancies, and deepest Judgments, are fit for such a noble Enterprise.
Every Man, we see, who has but an Ordinary Capacity, thinks himself Scholar
enough to be a Physician, a Lawyer, or a Divine: But the poor Pretender is a
little more modest in his pretenses to Epick Poetry. Here he stands off, and
keeps at as awful a distance from Parnassus, as the trembling Israelites of old
did from the burning Mount. Nay the Poetasters themselves, who have ventured at
all the lesser sorts of Poems, yet knowing their own strength, have with all
reverence receeded from so high an Undertaking.

So vast a Genius does this sort of Poetry require, that if we will rely on the
testimony of Rapin, one of the ablest and most impartial Critics this Age or
any other Age since Aristotle and Horace, has produced, we shall find that
there have been but only two, Homer and Virgil, who have wrote in this way with
any tolerable success. This Judicious Critic mentions several of the Greek
Poets, such as Coluthus, who wrote of the Rape of Hellen; Tryphiodorus, who
gives an account of the taking of Troy; Musaeus, who wrote the History of
Leander; Apollonius Rhodius, who relates the Expedition of the Argonauts;
Quintus Calaber, who undertook to write the Supplement to the Iliad and
Odysseis; and Nonnus, who wrote the History of the Birth, Adventures,
Victories, and Apotheosis of Bacchus: He likewise mentions several of the Latin
Poets, such as Lucan, Statius, Silius Italicus, Valerius Faccus, and Claudian;
but withal takes Notice how far short all these fall of the Perfections of the
other two. As for the Moderns, he takes notice of several among the Italians,
namely Dante, Petrarch, Boccace, Boyardo, Oliviero, Ariosto, Tasso, Sannazarius
and Vida; but he thinks the three first deserve not the very name of Heroic
Poets; and as for the rest, he has observed so many imperfections in them, that
they can stand in no manner of Competition with Homer and Virgil, whom at least
they have pretended to Imitate. Among the Spaniards he only mentions Camoens a
Portuguese, and says, He only regarded to express the haughtiness of his Nation
in his Poem of the Conquest of the Indies: And that he is fierce and fastuous
in his Composition, but has little Discernment, and little Conduct. Nor does
this Ingenuous Critic favor his own Countrymen, Dubartas and Ronsard; but
taxes them with such imperfections that one may reasonably dispute with them
the name of Epick Poets. If you would be satisfied more particularly in this
Point, I must refer you to the Reflections, which Rapin has made upon the Epick
Poets in all Ages: And there you will perceive what a vast difference he makes
between Homer and Virgil, and all the rest that wrote after them. Homer (says
he) animates me, Virgil heats me, and all the rest freeze me, so cold and flat
they are.

He has not indeed made any Reflections on our English Poets, and this Rymer
presumes proceeded from his ignorance of our Language, which he did not
understand so well, as to pass a Judgment on what was writ in it. Whereupon
Rymer himself has undertook to Criticize upon them. Chaucer, he will not allow
for an Epick Poet, the Age he lived in not being sufficient for a great design;
being an Age of Tales, Ballads and Roundelays. Spencer, whom he reckons the
first of our Heroic Poets, yet falls under his Censure, and is taxed for his
want of a true Idea, for this rambling after mavelous adventures, for making
no Conscience of Probability, for making his Poem a perfect Fairy-Land, and for
his unlucky Choice of the Stanza, which in no wise is proper for our language.
Sir William D'venant is the next Heroic Poet our English Critic takes notice
of. He acknowledges that his Wit was well known; that in his Preface to his
Gondibert, appear some strokes of an extraordinary Judgment; that he is said to
have a particular Talent for the Manners; that his Thoughts are great; and
lastly that there appears something roughly noble throughout this Fragment. Yet
after all, he blames him, for the ill choice of his Subject; for his bad
Conduct; for a Vicious Economy; and for his unhappy choice of the Tetrastick.
Cowley is the third and last Heroic Poet, our Author mentions, and to him he
gives particular Commendations. He says, That a more happy Genius for Heroic
Poesy appears in Cowley; that he understood the Purity, the Perspicuity, the
Majesty of the Style and the Virtue of Numbers; that he could discern what was
beautiful and pleasant in Nature; and could express his Thoughts without the
least difficulty or constraint; that he understood to dispose of the Matters,
and to manage his Digressions; and lastly that he understood Homer and Virgil,
and as prudently made his advantage of them. Yet after all these high
Commendations, he laments his not carrying on the Work so far as he designed,
and his not living to revise what he did leave behind him: And blames him for
his ill choice of the Subject of his Poem, in that like Lucan he made choice of
History, and a History where he was so strictly tied up to the Truth. He
likewise blames him for inserting the Lyrick measure in the very body of his
Poem. Thus far the Judicious Rymer goes, and it were to be wished he had passed
his judgment on the famous Milton another of our English Poets; but since he
has waved saying any thing about him, till some other time, I shall crave leave
to insert the Opinion of Dryden, a professed Poet, and as a great Judge of
Poetry. He tells us in his Dedication before the Translation of Juvenal, That
Milton had a Genius equal to Spencer's, and greater than that of Cowley; that
his Thoughts are elevated, his Words sounding, and that no Man has so happily
copied the Manner of Homer; or so copiously translated his Grecisms, and the
Latin Elegancies of Virgil. But then he says likewise, That his Subject is not
that of an Heroic Poem, properly so called; it being the losing of our
happiness, where the Event is not prosperous like that of other Epick Works:
That his Heavenly Machines are too many in proportion to the Human Personages,
which are but two: That he runs into a Flat of Thought, sometimes for a hundred
Lines together: That he was transported too far in the use of Obsolete Words:
And lastly that he can, by no means approve of his Choice of Blank Verse. By
this short view of our English Poets, which I have abstracted from Rymer and
Dryden, one may clearly perceive how far short even they as well as their
Neighbors have fell of the Excellencies and Perfections of Homer and Virgil.

But I must not leave Matters thus. For since my translating Bossu, and the
thoughts I had of Publishing it, the World has been honored with an Excellent
Heroic Poem in English, done by our own Countryman the Learned and Ingenious
Dr. Blackmore: Which puts us Now upon thinking that the Poems of the two
Ancients are not wholly unimitable. It may therefore be expected that in a
Preface of this Nature, and in this part of it where we are treating of the
vastness of the Genius that is requisite for Epick Poesy, something should be
said on the Genius of that Author.

It Is far from my design to set up for a Professed Critic, but that I may do
some Justice to the Merits of that great Man, since no one else, as I hear of,
has as yet Criticis'd publicly on the Poem, I shall venture to give the World
a Taste of the thoughts I have conceived of it in general. And a Taste it must
only be, since the Limits of a Preface, and the Sense I have of my own
inability in passing a Judgment upon so great an Author, do sufficiently excuse
me from being more minute and particular, leaving that Task wholly to abler
Judges in Poetry.

This therefore must be owned by all, that he has made a happy Choice of his
Subject and Hero, whereby he signalizes his own Country; which is more than any
of our English Poets have done before him, besides the Romantic Spencer. He
professes in his Preface to have imitated Virgil in his Design, and how well he
has Copied that great Model let us now see. If we will examine things according
to the Rules Bossu has laid down, his Fable will appear to be exactly the same
with that of the Aeneid. His Action is like that of the Latin Poet, One,
Entire, Noble, Great, and Important Action, viz. The Restoration of a decayed
Church and State to its ancient splendour and Glory. The Intrigues he makes use
of to hinder his Hero from accomplishing his great and good designs are of the
very same make with those of Virgil. For as in the One, Juno, who had equal
power both by Sea and Land, raises all the Obstacles, that lay in the way of
the Trojan Hero: So in the other, Lucifer the Prince of the Air, equal in Power
to Juno, raises all the Storms by Sea, and all the Disturbances by Land, that
hindered the settlement of our British Hero. And as the Intrigues, so the
Solution or Vnravelling of these Intrigues are as just, as regular, and as
natural as those in the Aeneid. In his Inscription or Title he has followed
Homer in his Odysseis, and Virgil in his Aeneid, who have both inscribed their
Poems with their Hero's Name. His Proposition is as full, but withal as modest
both with respect to himself and his Hero, as Horace requires, and Virgil has
practiced. His Invocation is much the same with that of the Aeneid, and therein
he has like Virgil Inserted The Generous Briton.
his Hero's Character. The Narration of our English Poet (bating some few
defects, which we shall mention by and by) is as exact as that of the Latin:
And has in a great measure all those Qualifications which Bossu says are
requisite thereto; for it is Pleasant, Probable, Moving, Mavelous, and
Active. The Manners of his human Personages, their Interests, and Designs, are
as regularly ordered, as those in Virgil's Poem. All the Characters are nobly
drawn, and look like the Curious Strokes of a great Master; for they all tend
to, and Centure in the General Character of the Poem and Hero, namely in that
noble Ornament of the Soul, GENEROSITY. His Machines are very Natural, and
adapted to the Genius and Notions of our times, as Virgils were to those of his
Age. His Expression is noble and Majestical; his Verse Sonorous, Masculine, and
Strong; his Thoughts are Sublime; his Similes natural; his Descriptions proper;
and his Sentences few and regular. In a word throughout the whole he seems in a
great Measure to have confined himself to the Which may be one great Argument
to prove that the writing according to the Rules of Aristotle and Horace is no
such Clog to a Poet's Fancy as some pretend.
Rules of Aristotle and Horace, to have copied the best of any Man the
Perfections of Virgil, and to have shown a strength of Genius, an Height of
Fancy, and a correctedness of Judgment, that comes but a little behind that of
the two Ancient Poets.

But after all it must be said (though with some sort of reluctance) that there
are some few things which need polishing, and which after second and more
deliberate thoughts, that great Master would no doubt have corrected. For one
may question whether his Digressions are not too tedious, and sometimes foreign
to the Subject: Especially that of Prince Arthur's Speech to King Hoel, which
takes up two whole Books. For what relation has this Recital of the Creation of
the World; of the Fall of Man; of his Redemption; of the Resurrection; of the
last Judgment, and the like with the main Action of the Poem; which is the
Restoring Religion and Liberty, to the British Nation, and settling both Church
and State on their Ancient Foundations of Truth and Peace? I know it may be
said in favor of it, that it was necessary for the Conversion of Hoel, that
such an account of things should be given him. But would not a bare Recital of
a few Lines, that such a Relation was given him, have been sufficient? And
would not such a Conduct have been more Conformable to the Nature of Epick
Poesy, which excludes every thing that is foreign to the main purpose?

They who think to salve this by saying, that this Speech is in Imitation of
Aeneas's Speech to Dido, will be owned by all that have Read and compared both,
to be egregiously mistaken, and the Author himself has no reason to thank them
for making such a ridiculous Comparison. There is no manner of likeness between
these two Speeches. The one, namely that of Aeneas, is a story of whatever had
happened to him for six Years together since the taking of Troy, and it is from
that time the Action of the Poem begins: But the Narration of Prince Arthur is
a Relation of things, wherein he had no more Interest than any other ordinary
Man and Christian; and were we to reckon the Duration of the Action, from the
time whereby the Poet begins this Speech, as all Critics have done that of the
Aeneid, it would not be the Action of six or seven Years, but of six times as
many Ages. There is no Comparison then to be made between these two Speeches;
but that of our English Poet is wholly a Digression, and the other necessary
and essential to the Aeneid. That which our Author designed to answer the
Speech of Aeneas to Dido, is doubtless the Speech of one of Prince Arthur's
Attendants, Lucius, to King Hoel: As appears if we compare the Beginning of
this Speech to the beginning of that in the Aeneid. Lucius begins thus: How sad
a task do your Commands impose
That must renew unsufferable Woes?
That must our Grief with sad Affliction feed,
And make your generous Heart with pity bleed.
Whilst I the dismal Scenes of ills disclose,
And bleeding Albion's ghastly wounds expose.
The Cruel Foes in telling would relent,
And with their Tears, the Spoils, they caused lament.
Pity would Picts and Saxon Breasts invade,
And make them mourn, over the dire Wounds they made.
But since you're pleased to hear our Countries fate,
I Will pay Obedience, and our Woes relate.


Now all this is an exact Copy of the Beginning of Aeneas's Speech to Dido,
which runs thus: Infandum, Regina, jubes renovare dolorem:
Trojanas ut opes and lamentabite regnum
Eruerint Danai, quaeque ipse miserrima vidi,
Et quorum pars magna fui. Quis talla fando,
Myrmidonum, Dolopumve, aut duri miles Vlyssel,
Temperet a Lacrymis? Et jam nox humida coelo
Praecipitat, suadentque cadentia Sydera somnos.
Sed si tantus amor casus cognoscere nostros,
Et breviter Trojae supremum audire laborem,
Quanquam animus meminisse horret, luctuque refugit: Incipiam.


In this Speech Blackmore, in my opinion, is more lucky in the Choice of his
Speaker than Virgil was; For doubtless it is more for the Honor of the Hero, at
least more agreeable to the Notions and Religion of our times, and greater
advantages might be drawn from another person's telling his Adventures, than if
he himself were the Relater of them. But even in this Speech our English Poet
seems not to be so regular as is requisite. Lucius begins too high in his
Narration. Fracti bello, satisque repulsi Ductores Danaum, tot jam labentibus
annis, Instarmontis equum, etc. Aen. 2.
Aeneas begins his recital at the building of the Wooden Horse, and the taking
of Troy; this is regular, and answers exactly to what Dido had desired of him.
But Lucius, though Hoel only desired him to relate Prince Arthur's Story, and
King Vter's Fate, tells him of the Decay of old Rome; of the Britains shaking
off the Roman Yoke; how they were invaded by the Scots and Picts; that at last
they were forced to send to the Saxons for their Assistance, who instead of
Friends became their Masters; and then he comes to relate what was required.
Now all that is said before the account of King Vter's fighting with the Saxons
and his overthrow, is, preliminary and wholly foreign to the main Action. For if
we will compute the Duration of the Action of Prince Arthur, according to the
Rules by which we compute the Duration of the Action of the Aeneid, we must
reckon, that it lasted from the Death of King Vter, and the overthrow of his
Army, which put Prince Arthur upon traveling into Neustria; until the Death
of Tollo, which wholly made way for the resettlement of Prince Arthur. These
are my thoughts, but perhaps the Author had other designs in his head,
particularly that of preaching Morality and Religion to an Immoral and
Irreligious Age; which seems in a great measure to excuse his long Digressions.

Again one may question whether most of his Descriptions are not too long, and
whether if our English Poet had bestowed as much pains, and spent as much time
about his Poem, as Virgil did about his Aeneid, he would not have shortn'd his
Descriptions, avoided. Repetitions of the same things, and been more correct
throughout the whole.

Lastly it is urged by some, that he has but a few Episodes in Comparison to
Virgil, and it seems probable to me, that this Thinness of Episodes has obliged
him to be so long and tedious in his Descriptions and Digressions; else his
Poem would have taken up but a little Compass. These are all the faults that I
think are worth taking notice of; there are indeed other little slips, which
touch not the Essence and Bottom of the Fable and Poem, therefore I shall not
mention them. Nor are those I have mentioned such as cast any great discredit
upon our English Poet: For notwithstanding all that has been said, spite of
Ill Nature, Envy, and Detraction, he may justly be reckoned the Next to, though
not an Equal with Homer and Virgil.

Having thus taken a short View of the Poets of all Ages, and of almost all the
polite Countries in the World, and having found how far short all of them, even
Blackmore himself, fall of the Perfections and Excellencies of the other Two,
it may seem necessary to decide a Controversy that has arose among the Learned
whether Homer or Virgil had the greater Genius, and which of them deserved the
greater Applause. We find them divided into Parties about it, some declaring in
favor of the One, some in favor of the Other. But without detracting from
either, we may venture to say that each of them had their peculiar
Excellencies, which the other had not. If Homer was the first Model of this
way, yet Virgil was under such Circumstances as gave him not only the Glory of
well copying so great a Pattern, but even of a primary Invention. If the First
had more Flame, the Last had more Phlegm, and tho the Poems of the one had more
Spirit in them, yet the Aeneid of the other was more Correct. On the other
hand, if we do not meet with those perfect Hero's, and those noble Ideas of
Virtue in Homer, as are to be seen in Virgil, it is to be attributed more to the
unhappiness and Imperfections of the times the Greek Poet lived in, than to any
want of Judgment and skill. In a word they are both excellent in their kind,
and if Homer seems better than Virgil, it is because it was his fortune to be
born first: As on the contrary, if any one thinks the Latin Poet to be best,
it is because he had so excellent a Model to imitate. However the case is, yet
it is evident they both had large Genius's, and such as no others, as we know
of, could stand in Competition with.

Now it is not to be wondered at, if by the great performances of such an
extraordinary Genius as animated Homer and Virgil, many great, extraordinary
and almost miraculous Effects were produced. Love, Admiration, and Esteem were
the common Tributes which the Vulgar paid to the Venerable Name of Poet. They
were so charmed with the sweetness of all Poetical Composures, that they looked
upon what the Poet said as Divine, and gave the same credit to it, as to an
Oracle. Hence it came to pass that all the Poets Writings were among the
Heathen reckoned as so many Lessons or Sermons of Morality, which polished the
Manners, smoothed the Temper, and civilized the Disposition of the most
Barbarous Nations. Nor is it unreasonable to Imagine that even the Refinedness
of Athens was owing more to the Poets, than to the Philosophers Instructions.
Of all that has been said in favor of the Poets, Homer may claim a great
share, since if we will believe Horace in the Case, his Before ac melius
Chrysippo aut Crantore dicit. Ep. ad Loll.
Writings were more instructive and useful, for the Conduct of human Life, than
the Precepts of even the best Moral Philosophers. It Is to be confessed, we are
in the dark, as to what Effects his two Poems had in the Age he lived in: But
this we know, that in after Ages they have been had in universal esteem, and
will always be admired as long as Learning and Good-Manners have any repute in
the World. The same may be said of Virgil. For the more any Age increases in
Sound Knowledge, and Ingenious Literature, the more to be sure will his Poem be
had in Admiration. Besides it seems to have had a strange and peculiar Effect
in the Age, and upon the State he lived under. For it is more than Probable that
the publishing of his Aeneid conduced very much to the settling Augustus on the
Imperial Throne. We know what a strange A version the Romans had to the very
name of Monarchy, and it is not likely they would so soon have exchanged their
beloved Democracy for that which they so much hated, had they not been worked
over to it by the Instructions of Virgil: who informs them, That when Heaven
decrees to settle a State upon such or such a Foundation, it is Athoism and
Irreligion to oppose its designs; and such an Affront to the divine Majesty and
Wisdom as should certainly meet with speedy, and condign Punishment.

Let us now see what Encouragement the Epick Poets have met with. As for Homer,
the Times he lived in are so obscure, that we can gather nothing of Certainty
from History about him. But it is by most concluded that he was as Poor as he
was Ingenious: And that though many Cities after his Death claimed him for
their own; yet none of them gave the blind Bard, that encouragement he merited
whilst alive. It Is likely he was admired and esteemed by all, but received no
other reward that we know of, for his Deserts, but what our poor Spencer did,
namely a Courtiers Smile; insignificant Promises, and a few fawning.
Compliments. Virgil had the luck to live in better times, for he met with a
Maecenas, who honored him with his favor, encouraged him with his Gifts, and
introduced him into the Esteem of Augustus himself. This indeed was something
more than the empty Breath of popular Applause; and Parnassus at that time was
not such a starving, barren Soil, as before and afterward it proved. Then
Poets were had in admiration, and every one received that recompense, which was
their due. This was the Poets Golden Age, and all other Polite Learning met
with such ample Encouragement, as made it flourish more under the Reign of
Augustus, than in after Ages, even to the Honor and Admiration of those, and
to the disgrace and reproach of succeeding times. There have been indeed some
intervals since, wherein Poets have met with their due Rewards. Ariosto and
Tasso are said to have met with their Patrons, who accepted of their Pieces,
and recompensed their Labors. And in France, Richlieu was a great and
never-failing Friend to the Muses and their Votaries. But at other times the
poor Bards have been left to feed upon the empty Air of Vulgar Fame. For a
proof of this, we need only have recourse to the Poets of our own Nation, who
whilst living have most of them met with the same fate as their fore-Father
Homer; though when Dead they have like him been even Idolized. But this
Posthumous Fame is but a poor Subsistence for a living Poet: And this gives us
a just occasion to enquire into the Reasons of the declining State of Epick
Poetry among the Moderns, especially in our own Nation.

One would wonder how it comes to pass, that in such an Age as this, wherein
all manner of Polite Learning shines with as great a Luster, as it did in the
Reign of Augustus, Epick Poetry should be the only slighted and neglected
thing. But for all our Wonder, Experience shows us, that it is so far
disregarded by the Learned World, that few or none, though duly qualified, will
venture upon such an Undertaking; and there are but a few likewise that
understand the true nature and design of an Epick Poem.

There have been many Reasons brought to prove it next to impossible for one of
our Modern Poets to write a true Heroic Poem, such a one as Homer and Virgil
have wrote. Some of these Reasons I shall just mention, and prove them to be
only pretenses at the best; and then I shall make bold to propose some other
Reasons of the declining State of Heroic Poetry in our times, which perhaps
may seem to the unprejudiced Reader to be of more weight and consequence, than
any that have as yet been alleged.

First of all it is objected by some, That we want due Matter for an Heroic
Poem: That is, the History of our Nation is not able to furnish us with an
Action or an Hero that is fit for such a Poem. Were we indeed to judge of this
by the Practice of Sir William D'Avenant and Mr. Cowley, who have each of them
made choice of a Subject and Hero, that has nothing to do with the English
Nation, we might then be inclined to suppose it was for want of due and just
Matter in our own Annals. But I think they had no need of searching into
Foreign History for their Actions and Hero's, since they might with more Credit
to themselves and with more Honor to their Country, have met with both nigher
Home. It Is certain our own History could have furnished them with as just a
Subject for Heroic Poetry, as any other. Experience has shown us since, by the
happy Choice Dr. Blackmore has made of Prince Arthur, that our Annals are not
so barren of Great and Noble Actions and Heroes as some would pretend. It argues
then great Ignorance, or at least great Negligence in the search of our Records
to say, That we want due Matter for an Heroic Poem.

Again it is objected by others, That we want a Genius for such an Undertaking.
This indeed is a weightier Reason than the former, and if true, would silence
all our pretenses to Epick Poetry. Sir William Temple in his Essay of Ancient
and Modern Learning, presses this Argument very strongly against the Modern
Poets. But without any offense to that great Man, it may be justly affirmed,
That this last Age has produced as many great and noble Genius's, as any other
Age before it: So that had they been inclined to Epick Poetry, and received any
encouragement that way, they might no question have come off with the same
success as they have in the Drama. Sir William will not allow our Moderns to be
any more than Dwarfs in Learning, when compared to the Ancients; and then, by a
pretty sort of Allegory, he goes about to prove, that they with all the
Advantages of writing after the Ancients, cannot make so great a Progress in
Learning as those did. I shall not trouble my self with refuting his Assertion,
since that is done already by Mr. Wootton in his Reflections upon Ancient and
Modern Learning, wherein he sufficiently proves the Moderns to be as tall in
Learning, if not taller than Sir William's Gaints were; and that it is not want
of Genius, but some Accidental Circumstances, which make the Men of this Age
come behind those of former times in Oratory and Poetry.

Another Objection is, our defect of Numbers, and that our Language is not
proper for Heroic Poetry. This is what Wootton himself urges in his
Reflections, when he will not allow the former Reason to hold good. He tells us
there, That the Greek was so smooth, soft, and ductile, that Homer had great
encouragement even from his Language, to set about an Heroic Poem: That the
Latin was majestical and stately, but withal so rough, that Virgil had much ado
to run it down to Verse: But that our Modern Languages are all so harsh and
unmalleable, that the Poets have no encouragement to form any thing that is
great out of them. This, if I mistake not his sense, is the force of his
Objection. But it may be replied, That tho'our Language is not so smooth and
sonorous as the Greek, yet it comes the next to it of any Language. It Is well
known how it has been refining ever since Waller's and Cowley's time, and it
seems at present to be almost arrived to its Purity and Perfection. Dryd.
Dedic. to the E. of Orrery before the Rival Ladies.
Dryden calls it a Noble Language, and is only sorry we have not a more certain
measure of it, as they have in France, where they have an Academy erected for
that purpose, and endowed with large Privileges by the present King. Rapin
himself acknowledges the Majesty of our Language, which, he says, is proper for
great Expressions: Rymer compares the Spanish, the Italian, the French, and the
German, to our Language, and prefers the English to all the rest; which, he
says, has a weight, fullness, vigor, force, gravity, and fitness for Heroic
Poesy, above all other Languages. How true this is, appears from the daily
Writings of our Poets, and especially from some of Dryden's Poems, and
Blackmore's Prince Arthur, where their Expression is lofty and Majestical, the
Verse smooth and strong, and the Numbers truly harmonious, and befitting their
respective designs. I shall only add the Opinion of Roscommon in the Case, who
speaking in Commendation of the English Language, makes it by much to be
Superior to the French. His words are these: But who did ever in French
Authors see
The Comprehensive English Energy?
The weighty Bullion of one Sterling Line,
Drawn to French Wire, would through whole Pages shint.
I speak my Private, but Impartial Sense,
With Freedom, and (I hope) without offense:
For I Will Recant, when France can show me Wit,
As strong as ours, and as succinctly writ.
[Roscommon' s Essay on Translated Verse.] Lastly, it is Objected, That we want
the Benefit of Machines; which the Heathen Poets made so great use of, and with
which their Poems were full from one end to the other: That the Notions and
Religion of our times exclude all manner of Miracles, and the extraordinary
presence of the Heathen Gods from having any thing to do in the ordinary Course
of humane Affairs, which we believe now to be governed only by one common
Providence; and that upon this account it seems altogether unpracticable for
any of our Modern Poets to write an Heroic Poem like to those of Homer and
Virgil. This Objection is duly stated, and fully answered by Mr. Dryden in his
Dedication before the Translation of Juvenal. There he tells us, That our
Religion does indeed debar the Poet from making use of Jupiter, Juno, Minerva,
Venus, or any others of the Heathen Deities: But that this is made up to the
Poet another way; that it is not contrary to Christianity to believe that there
are good and bad Spirits which have some sort of influence over humane Affairs:
And that the Poet may form as just Machines out of these, as the Ancients did
out of their Divinities. This is what Blackmore has done even to Admiration,
and his Practice and Conduct has put it beyond all dispute, that we may very
safely and regularly make use of Machines, provided they are such as are suited
to the Notions and Religion of our times.

These are the principal Objections I thought fit to mention, which are not
such solid Reasons as some may imagine: I shall now according to my promise
propose some others, which I think to be more substantial; but withal I must
reserve to my self my first Caution, namely, that I design to dictate nothing
herein, but to lay down my Thoughts as plainly and as clearly as possible, and
to refer all to the Verdict of better Judgments.

First then I say, that one great Reason of that genetal Disesteem which Epick
Poetry lies under, and of its declining state among the Moderns, seems to be
the Degeneracy of the present Age. We are fallen at last into such unhappy
times, wherein Men are as averse to the Precepts of Morality, which the Epick
Poet writes, as they are to the Lessons of Divinity, which the Preacher every
Day inculcates. We do indeed read Homer and Virgil, but then it is not with a
design, like the Be, to suck the Honey out of them, but in imitation of more
sordid Creatures, to extract all the Venom we can, in order to corrupt our
Manners, and give a Gust to our Debaucheries. We are glad to find any passage
in them that may seem to favor our Licentiousness, and even those that are
designed to be our Physic, we like Men of a Sick Stomach, turn all into rank
Poison. Now no wonder if when our Palates are thus vitiated we have no Relish
for the wholesome Instructions of Epick Poetry. Poets then, to please the
Humor of the Age, are forced to write in their way, especially such of them as
have not Souls great enough to stem the Torrent of so universal a Vice. Hence
it comes to pass that we have so many vile Plays Acted on the Stage, wherein
Vice is set off with all the Luster, and recommended with all the Endearments
that a corrupted Poet's Wit can invent, or the most loose Debauche could have
desired. Thus both Poets and Audience, by an unheard of Complaisance,
contribute to the Ruin and Corruption of each others Manners.

Another great Reason of the declining State of Epick Poetry, and of the
Degeneracy of all other sorts of Poetry, is the want of due Encouragement. This
is the true Ground of all our Grievances, and till this be provided against,
it is to be feared nothing that is Great, Noble, Virtuous, and truly Good, will
ever be produced by our Modern Poets. Athens and Rome made their Poets the
Pensioners of their State, and maintained them honorably out of the Public
Treasury. Hence it was they never ventured, at least not in the most Primitive
times of Poetry, to write any thing which might reflect upon the Government
they lived under, or upon the Gods they Worshipped. But now with us the Poet
meets with no Encouragement, and only One Lawreat is maintained at the public
Charge. Upon this account it is that Men of Large Souls, who cannot condescend
to humor the Vulgar in their Licentiousness, turn the bent of their Studies
another way, and fly Parnassus as they would the most dangerous Contagion.
Others of a more pliable Temper take up with the Stage, and that they may
receive some Profit themselves, study not to profit, so much as they do to
please their Audience, and that in their lewd way too. But is it not a burning
shame that such a Noble Genius as Dryden and others, that seem to be made for
greater designs, should be forced to a fatal Dilemma, either to truckle to a
Playhouse for the uncertain Profit of a third Day, or to starve for want of
other reasonable Encouragement? But it is hoped on all hands, that under the
Reign of one that may truly be termed another Augustus, and under the Patronage
of one that may as justly be styled a Second Mecoenas, Poetry will regain its
ancient Privileges, and Epick Poets receive that public and due Encouragement
they really deserve.

The third and last Reason I shall mention for the declining State of Epick
Poetry among the Moderns is, their notorious neglect of following the Rules
which Aristotle and Horace have prescribed: This, and not want of Genius, has
been the true Cause why several of our English Epick Poets have succeeded so
ill in their Designs, Rymer urges this very strongly against Spencer himself,
whom at the same time he acknowledges to have had a large Soul, a sharp
Judgment, and a Genius for Heroic Poesy, perhaps above any that ever writ
since Virgil. For no question but his following an unfaithful Guide, his
Rambling after Mavelous Adventures, his making no conscience of Probability,
and almost all his other faults proceeded from one and the same Cause, namely,
his neglect of following the Rules of Poetry. The same may be said of Sir
William D' Avenant, and Mr. Cowley: For all the Defects Rymer charges them
with, are wholly owing to the same Cause. It Is likewise upon this very account
that the Pieces of our Dramatick Poets, which are reckoned to be the best
performances of the present Age, can scarce any of them stand the Test of a
Judicious Eye: And a Man of sense that knows the Art of Poetry, and has read
the Performances of former Ages, cannot but pity the conceited Ignorance and
perverse Pride of our Modern Poets, who scorn to be confined to the Rules of
Art. They have been told of this often and often, but they think their own Wit
is the best Judge in the Case; and as long as it is so there is no hopes of any
Amendment, or of any great Productions in Poetry. I know they bring several
Objections against Writing according to the Rules, but they are so trifling
that I think it not worth while to examine them here: Besides, all their
Objections, at least the weightiest of them, have been stated, examined, and
refuted in the Preface before the last Translation of Terence' s Comedies; so
that I am sufficiently excused from that needless Task.

I shall shut up all that has been said on Epick Poetry, with giving you the
Thoughts of a very eminent Person of Quality of this present Age and Nation;
who seems to have comprehended all that has been said on this Subject in these
few Verses. By Painful Steps we are at last got up
Parnassus Hill, on whose bright Airy Top
The Epick Poets so divinely show,
And with just Pride behold the rest below.
Heroic Poems have a just pretense
To be the utmost reach of Humane Sense,
A Work of such inestimable Worth,
There are but Two the World has yet brought forth,
Homer and Virgil: With what awful sound
Do those mere Words the Ears of Poets wound!
Just as a Changling seems below the rest
Of Men, or rather is a two-leg'd Beast:
So these Gigantick Souls amazed we find
As much above the rest of Humane Kind.
Nature's whole strength united! Endless Fame,
And Universal Shouts attend their Name.
Read Homer once, and you can read no more,
For all things else appear so dull and poor,
Verse will seem Prose, yet often on him look,
And you will hardly need another Book.
[The Earl of Mulgrave's Essay on Poetry.]

After what has been said in favor of Epick Poetry, it may be expected I
should say something in behalf of my Author, and give the World some account of
the Reasons that induced me to Translate it: But before I do either, I must beg
leave to premise a word or two, which to the more Judicious may not seem to be
a Digression.

To Criticize upon any Author, is no such easy matter as some may imagine: But
to pass a true and impartial Judgment upon the Writings of the Poets, may be
justly reckoned one of the hardest parts of Criticism. Every little Pretender
is not fit for such an Undertaking. It requires a large but regulated Fancy, a
sound, solid, and penetrating Judgment, deep, piercing, and steady Thoughts, a
long and obstinate Course of Study, much and certain Experience, a clear and
perfect insight into Poetry and all its parts; but above all, the utmost
stretch of Humanity and good Nature. Every one that reads Homer and Virgil,
cannot be presumed to understand them perfectly: Nor are all that understand
these Authors to be admitted as competent Judges of their Excellencies and
Failures. They must first be Masters of the forementioned Qualities, and then
they may begin to Criticize and Reflect upon what they read and thoroughly
understand. Then they will be able to separate the Dross from the Or, to
discern the false glittering of the Tinsel from the true Luster of the Jewel,
and to know what is praiseworthy and what is not.

How Synonymous soever the words may seem at first hearing, yet unquestionably
there is as much difference between Censuring and Criticizing, as there is
between a corrupted, ill-natured, and a fair impartial Judge. A little Wit,
armed with a great deal of Malice, will go a great way toward the composing a
Censurer: Such a one, I mean, that Carps at every thing he meets with, that
would find faults where there are none, and take some sort of Complacency and
Delight in magnifying the smallest slips of an Author. But now the true Critic
is quite another thing; he brings all he reads and reflects on to the Criterion
of right Reason, and to the Standard of Truth. What is excellent and beautiful,
he not only acquits, but highly applauds and commends: What is weak he does all
he can in justice to conceal or defend; and like a compassionate Judge, it is
with some sort of Reluctance and Regret that he is forced at last to pass a
Black Sentence upon the most Criminal Pieces. Such a Critic as this is of vast
use to the Commonwealth of Learning, not only for encouraging and countenancing
the Good, but likewise for discouraing and deterring the Bad Writers: Since the
Excellencies of the one will be sure to meet with a due esteem; and the Faults
of the other will in spite of the Critics good Nature, fall under a just and
severe Censure. This is that Notion I have of a true and accomplished Critic:
All others may be termed Censurers, Carpers, Momus's, or by what other Name of
ignominy you please to give them, but are by no means to be allowed competent
Judges of any Author's Writings.

This sort of Learning was in no small esteem among the Ancients; as is
manifest from the many Curious Reflections and useful Criticisms, which
Aristotle and Longinus among the Greeks, Horace and Petronius among the Latins
(not to mention any more) have left behind them. Of latter date the Italians
and Spaniards have fet up for great Critics; but those among them that have
proved best, are such as have followed the Rules and Precepts of Aristotle and
Horace, and other great Masters of Antiquity; whilst others that have invented
any thing of their own, have come off with less Judgment and Applause. Among
the English, there have been but few that merit the Name of Critic, in that
Sense I take the Word. Most of them are only Critics in the worst Sense; that
is, such as expose the Faults, but take no notice of the Excellencies of
Authors. The Judicious Rymer, who seems to have a particular Talent for
Criticizing, yet in my Opinion falls short of being a true Critic: And if he
will still dispute that Title with the World, yet he must be contented with
being reckoned one of the meaner sort; since'tis more difficult and honorable
to discern and commend the Excellencies, than'tis to find out and expose the
Failings of Shakespeare, Fletcher, or any other Author. At present the French,
since the great encouragement they at first received from the Learned Richlieu,
seem to be uppermost in this sort of Learning: And how dull and insipid soever
they are said to be in other parts, yet in Criticisms they are full of curious
Thoughts, and refined Reflections. Rapin, in all the Reflections he has made,
comes off with universal Applause; but those on Aristotle's Poesy seem the
most Correct of any. He has reflected on all the parts of Poetry, and descends
to the more minute and lesser pieces of it; which is something more than
Aristotle himself has left us.

As for my Author, whom D'Acier in his Notes upon Aristotle's Poesy calls the
Ingenious and Judicious Bossu; he, I say, has enlarged himself upon only one
part of Poesy, to wit, the Epick. And herein he ties himself strictly to a
Method, which he as strictly pursues. He professes at the very first, to have
followed the Rules and Precepts of Aristotle and Horace, and the Practice of
Homer and Virgil. Upon such sure grounds as these he builds all his Notions;
and having such Masters and Patterns to go by, Who can doubt of his Success?
What he takes from Aristotle and Horace, he explains, improves, and refines:
What is his own, though never so judicious and rational, he lays down not in a
Dogmatical Magisterial way, but by way of Problem: And what he asserts with an
Air of Confidence, though not his Masters Thoughts, yet seem to be natural
Deductions from what they have wrote about it. It Is not to be questioned, but
in many Things he dissents from most Men's Opinions; but it is to be hoped, no
judicious Person will condemn him till he has seriously weighed his Reasons,
and considered the Arguments he uses to maintain his Cause: and then if our
Critic can be convinced of any Error, he is too modest not to submit to the
Suffrage of better Judgments. But if, on the other hand, he has Reason on his
side, it may with Justice be expected, that he will be a means of opening the
Eyes of a great many unprejudiced Persons.

His main Design of writing these Reflections was, as he tells us himself, for
the sake of those that read Virgil; and to such I dare affirm, that this
Treatise will be of more Use than all the Notes and Comments they have hitherto
seen. They are usually stuffed with idle and unprofitable Remarks upon mere
Words; but this full of ingenious Criticisms upon the most weighty and
important Things. How well he has discharged himself, those who carefully read
over this Tract of his, will no doubt discover; and they will without doubt
from thence form a nobler Idea of Virgil, and his Design, than hitherto they
have conceived. If he seems, like his Countrymen, to be too Verbose, it is only
upon the account of his studying to make all things as plain and as
intelligible as may be; and whether that be a real Fault, I leave others to
judge. Beside the useful Reflections he makes upon the Conduct of Virgil in
particular, you will find many others of no less use upon the Practice of
Homer, and upon Epick Poetry in general; and now and then some that will give
you no small Light into the other two Parts of Great Poetry, Tragedy and
Comedy. In a word, he has throughout the whole acquitted himself like a true,
judicious, and impartial Critic. He commends the Excellencies of the Good, and
censures the Failings of the Worst Poets with such a Justness and Moderation,
as deserves a particular Esteem and Admiration. Tho Statius, Claudian, Lucan,
Seneca, and others, fall under his Lash, yet he meddles with their Faults no
farther than his Subject requires, and upon occasion he gives them their full
Commendations: And on the contrary, tho he bestows on Homer and his admired
Virgil very high and large Encomiums, yet they are no more than the most
invidious part of the World have allowed them; and he often blames both when he
cannot in Justice excuse their Failings.

It Is now high time I should give you some Account of the Reasons that induced
me to the Translating this Author. One, and not the least, is the Excellency
and Usefulness of these Reflections, which are too good to be confined to a
Foreign Language. It Is true, French is now become fashionable and common, and
seems to be as universally studied, as Latin was formerly; and every Pretender
to Gallantry and good Breeding, pretends at least to be a perfect Master and
Judge of this Language. But however, I believe the Language is not so familiar,
but by a modest Computation it may be affirmed, That a tenth part of those that
read Homer and Virgil, understand but very little of it. To such as these, this
Translation may be of some Use; and perhaps others who think they already
understand the French Tongue, may be glad to see so beneficial a Treatise in a
more familiar and intelligible Language.

Another Reason that inclined me to this Undertaking is, the Notice I received
that Virgil was now ready to be Translated into English by an eminent hand.
Before therefore that that Translation came out into the World, I could not but
think it proper and useful to usher it in by the Reflections of so able a
Critic. And perhaps it may be of some Use to the Understanding Virgil, when
read in our Mother Tongue. Besides, it has the Fortune to come out just after
Dr. Blackmore's Poem, and may be of great Use to those who have an Inclination
to Poetry; for by it they will be able to judge of this English Poet.

As for the Translation, you must not expect a verbal one; for to that I
neither think my self nor any body else obliged. I have kept as nigh my
Author's Sense as possible; and perhaps some may think I have followed him too
close. However, I did all I could to render him with all the Perspicuity which
a Didactick Style required: and if that be granted me, I have all I aimed at.
Some Terms of Art which Bossu borrowed from the Greek, I was obliged to retain
as I found them: but doubtless, whoever attentively reads what he has said
about them, will soon find them to be no Mystery. The Citations in the Margent
(as many as I thought good to make use of) are all left in their Original
Languages: but such as are in the Text, I thought would appear best in English,
unless when the Subject required the contrary. For this purpose, some I made
bold to borrow from the Translations that were ready done to my hands by
several. Wits of the Age: Of the rest, some I Translated my self; and others
more difficult, I got an ingenious Friend of mine to turn for me.

This is all the Account I think fit to give you of my Reasons for Translating
Bossu, and of the Method I have taken therein. Whatever Pains and Precaution I
have used, I do not expect I shall please every body, and it is a Wonder if I
should. Some will censure the Author, others the Translation, and a third sort
perhaps, stirred up with a generous kind of Envy called Emulation, will either
endeavor to Translate it better themselves, or else vent some new Notions of
their own. However it happen, the World will be the better for it, and my
Author and I shall have this Satisfaction, That the Commonwealth of Learning
will be then engaged to thank us not only for our own mean, but even for their
more elaborate Productions.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I. Of the Nature of the Epick Poem; and of the Fable.
Chap. I. THE Design of the whole Work. Page 1. Chap. II. What is the Nature of
the Epick Poem. p. 2. Chap. III. The Definition of the Epick Poem. p. 6. Chap.
IV. Of the Parts of the Epick Poem. The Division of this Treatise. p. 8. Chap.
V. Of the Poem. p. 9. Chap. VI. Of the Fable. p. 13. Chap. VII. The Method of
Composing a Fable. p. 15. Chap. VIII. Of the Fable of the Iliad. p. 17. Chap.
IX. A Comparison of the Fable of the Iliad with that of Aesop. p. 21. Chap. X.
The Fable of the Odysseis. p. 23. Chap. XI. Of the Fable of the Aeneid. p. 26.
Chap. XII. Horace's Thoughts of the Epick Fable. p. 31. Chap. XIII. Aristotle's
Thoughts of the Epick Fable. p. 34. Chap. XIV. Of Real Actions, the Recitals
whereof are Fables. p. 39. Chap. XV. Of Feigned Actions, the Recitals whereof
are Historical. p. 41. Chap. XVI. Of the Vicious Multiplication of Fables. p.
43. Chap. XVII. Of the Regular Multiplication of Fables. p. 47. Chap. XVIII.
The Conclusion of the First Book. p. 50.
BOOK II. Concerning the Subject Matter of the Epick Poem, or concerning the
Action.
Chap. I. WHat the Subject Matter of the Epick Poem is. p. 53. Chap. II.
Episodes considered in their Original. p. 57. Chap. III. An Explication of the
foregoing Doctrine, by an Instance. p. 59. Chap. IV. Of the several sorts of
Episodes, and what is meant by this Term. p. 61. Chap. V. Concerning the Nature
of Episodes. p. 64. Chap. VI. The Definition of Episodes. p. 67. Chap. VII. Of
the Unity of the Action. p. 69. Chap. VIII. Of the Faults which corrupt the
Unity of the Action. p. 74. Chap. IX. Of the Integrity of the Action. p. 79.
Chap. X. That the Action ought to be a Whole. p. 81. Chap. XI. Of the
Beginning, Middle, and End of the Action. p. 85. Chap. XII. Of the Causes of
the Action. p. 89. Chap. XIII. Of the Intrigue, and the Vnravelling thereof. p.
92. Chap. XIV. The Way of Forming the Plot or Intrigue. p. 95. Chap. XV. How to
dispose or prepare the Vnravelling. p. 98. Chap. XVI. Of the several sorts of
Actions. p. 101. Chap. XVII. Of the Conclusion of the Action. p. 103. Chap.
XVIII. Of the Duration of the Action. p. 107. Chap. XIX. Of the Importance of
the Action. p. 110.
BOOK III. Concerning the Form of the Epick Poem; or, concerning the Narration.
Chap. I. OF the Parts of the Narration. p. 113. Chap. II. Of the Title of the
Epick Poem. p. 116. Chap. III. Of the Proposition. p. 117. Chap. IV. Of the
Invocation. p. 123. Chap. V. Of the Body of the Poem, or the Narration,
properly so called. p. 127. Chap. VI. How the Narration is pleasant. p. 128.
Chap. VII. Of Probability. p. 132. Chap. VIII. Of the Admirable, or the
Mavelous. p. 137. Chap. IX. Of the Passions. p. 140. Chap. X. How the
Narration ought to be Active. p. 145. Chap. XI. Of the Continuity of the
Action, and the Order of the Narration. p. 149. Chap. XII. Of the Duration of
the Narration. p. 154.
BOOK IV. Concerning the Manners of the Epick Poem.
Chap. I. COncerning the Manners in General. p. 159. Chap. II. Of the Causes of
the Manners. p. 161. Chap. III. Concerning the Manners of other Sciences
besides Poetry. p. 166. Chap. IV. Of the Manners of Poetry. p. 169. Chap. V.
Whether the Hero of the Poem ought to be an honest Man, or no? p. 173. Chap.
VI. Of the Poetical Goodness of the Manners. p. 177. Chap. VII. Of the three
other Qualifications of the Manners. p. 180. Chap. VIII. Of the Character of
the Personages. Aristotle's Words about it. p. 186. Chap. IX. Of the Characters
of Achilles, Ulysses, and Aeneas. p. 191. Chap. X. Of the Character of the
other Personages. p. 194. Chap. XI. What the Character is. p. 197. Chap. XII.
Of the Unity of the Character in the Hero. p. 199. Chap. XIII. The Unity of the
Character in the Poem. p. 202. Chap. XIV. Of the Justness of the Character. p.
205. Chap. XV. Of False Characters. p. 211.
BOOK V. Concerning the Machines.
Chap. I. OF the several sorts of Deities. p. 215. Chap. II. Of the Manners of
the Gods. p. 218. Chap. III. How the Gods act in a Poem. p. 222. Chap. IV. When
one must make use of Machines. p. 225. Chap. V. How the Machines are to be
used. p. 228. Chap. VI. Whether the Presence of the Gods is any Disparagement
to the Heroes. p. 230.
BOOK VI. Concerning the Thoughts and the Expression.
Chap. I. THe Foundation of this Doctrine. p. 235. Chap. II. Concerning
Descriptions. p. 239. Chap. III. Of Comparisons or Simile's. p. 244. Chap. IV.
Concerning Sentences. p. 247. Chap. V. Concerning disguised Sentences. p. 251.
Chap. VI. Concerning several other Thoughts. p. 257. Chap. VII. Of the
Expression. p. 260. Chap. VIII. How one ought to judge of the Elocution of a
Poem. p. 263. D'Acier's Essay upon Satyr. p. 267. Monsieur Fontanelle upon
Pastorals. p. 277.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 34. read Of Epick Poesy. p. 9. l. 12. for Morals r. Manners. P.
10. l. 24. r. Regimens. p. 14. l 29. r. Of the Fable. p. 28. l. 18. r. so much
as desiring. p. 29. l. 27. r. Cutting off his Enemies. p. 43. l. 24. for Model
r. Draught. p. 50. l. 11. r. at an end. p. 65. l. 16. for this r. that. p. 72.
l. 40. for the r. this, King of Kings. p. 110. l. 11. r. Obligation. p. 112. l.
10. r. Ilus. p. 121. l. 31. r. Glaring. p. 138. l. 29. for yes r. lies. p. 139.
l. 9. for two r. too. p. 148. l. 33. for he follows his Advice r. whose Advice
he follows. p. 149. l. 15. r. concerning the Continuity. p. 151. l. 14. for two
r. too. p. 168. l. antepenult. r. that these are not vices. p. 171. l. 17. r.
relentless. p. 174. l. 16. r. to distinguish. p. 182. l. 35. for Faces r.
Phases. p. 187. l. 4. r. Valet. p. 197. l. 22. r. dazzling. p. 203. l. 15. for
Print r. Rein. p. 208. l. 11. r. Glaring. p. 213. l. 12. r. Raze: ibid. l. 17.
r. and to break down Bridges. p. 214. l. ult. r. Spaces. p. 217. l. 13. r. to
own. p. 218. l. 34. r. in this sort of Writing. p. 226. l. 1. for learn r.
leave. p. 245. l. 36. r. to an Amazon. p. 250. l. 10. for befell r. be felt. p.
263. l. 26. for Projections r. Proportions.

Monsieur Bossu's Treatise OF THE EPICK POEM.
BOOK I. Of the Nature of the Epick Poem; and of the Fable.
CHAP. I. The Design of the whole Work.
ARTS, as well as Sciences, are founded upon Reason, and in both we are to be
guided by the Light of Nature. But in Sciences, neither the Inventers, nor the
Improvers of them, are to make use of any other Guides but this Light of
Nature: Whereas on the other hand, all Arts depend upon a great many other
things, such as the Choice and Genius of those, who first invented them, or of
those who have labored at them with an Universal Applause.

Poetry is of this Nature: And tho Reason might have first founded it, yet it
cannot be denied but that the Invention of Poets, and the Choice they have been
pleased to make, have added thereto both its Matter and Form. It Is then in the
excellent Pieces of Antiquity we are to look for the Fundamentals of this Art:
And, they are only to be relied on, to whom all others yield the Glory of
having either practiced with the most Success, or collected and prescribed
Rules with the greatest Judgment.

The Greeks and Latins have furnished us with Examples of both kinds. Aristotle
and Horace left behind them such Rules, as make them by all Men of Learning, to
be looked upon as perfect Masters of the Art of Poetry: And the Poems of Homer
and Virgil are, by the Grant of all Ages, the most perfect Models of this way
of Writing, the World ever saw. So that if ever a Just and Supreme Authority
had the Power to prescribe Laws and Rules to any Art, one cannot question but
these four Persons had all Authority on their side, with respect to the Epick
Poem. And this is the only kind we shall treat of at present.

It Is true, the Men of our Times may have as much Spirit as the Ancients had;
and in those things which depend upon Choice and Invention, they may likewise
have as just and as lucky Fancies: But then it would be a Piece of Injustice to
pretend that our new Rules destroy those of our first Masters; and that they
must needs condemn all their Works, who could not foresee our Humors, nor
adapt themselves to the Genius of such Persons as were to be born in
after-Ages, under different Governments, and under a different Religion from
theirs; and with Manners, Customs, and Languages, that have no kind of relation
to them.

Having no Design then by this Treatise to make Poets after the Model of our
Age (with which I am not sufficiently acquainted) but only to furnish my self
with some sort of Foundation in the Design I have of explaining the Aeneid of
Virgil; I need not concern my self with every new Invention of these last
Times. I am not of Opinion, that what our late Authors think is universal
Reason, and such a common Notion as Nature must needs have put into the Head of
Virgil. But leaving Posterity to determine whether these Novelties be well or
ill devised, I shall only acquiesce in what I think may be proved from Homer,
Aristotle, and Horace. I will interpret the one by the Other, and Virgil by all
Three, as having the same Genius and Idea of the Epick Poesy.

CHAP. II. What is the Nature of the Epick Poem.
THE most considerable difference my Subject presents me with between the Style
of the Ancients, and that of the last Ages, is, That our way of Speaking is
plain, proper, and without the Turn: Whereas theirs was full of Mysteries and
Allegories. The Truth was masked under these ingenious Inventions, which for
their Excellence go under the name of Fables, or Sayings; as if there were as
much difference between these fabulous Discourses of the Wise, and the ordinary
Language of the Vulgar, as there is between the Language that is proper to Men,
and the Sounds brute Beasts make use of to express their Passions and
Sensations.

At first the Fables were employed in speaking of the Divine Nature according
to the Notion they then had of it. This sublime Subject made the first Poets to
be styled Divines, and Poetry the Language of the Gods. They divided the Divine
Attributes as it were into so many Persons; because the Infirmity of a Humane
Mind cannot sufficiently conceive, or explain so much Power and Action in a
Simplicity so great and indivisible as is that of God. And perhaps they were
jealous of the Advantages they reaped from such excellent and refined Learning,
and which they thought the vulgar part of Mankind was not worthy of.

They could not tell us of the Operations of this Almighty Cause, without
speaking at the same time of its Effects: So that to Divinity they added
Physiology, and treated thereof, without quitting the Umbrages of their
Allegorical Expressions.

But Man being the chief and the most noble of all the Effects which God
produced, and nothing being so proper, nor more useful to Poets than this
Subject, they have added it to the former, and treated of the Doctrine of
Morality after the same manner as they did that of Divinity and Philosophy: And
from Morality thus discoursed of, has Art formed that kind of Poem and Fable,
which we call the Epick.

What the Divines made their Divinity, that did the Epick Poets make their
Morality. But that infinite Variety of the Actions and Operations of the Divine
Nature (to which our Understanding bears but little proportion) did as it were
force them upon dividing the single Idea of the only one God into several
Persons, under the different Names of Jupiter, Juno, Neptune, and the rest. And
on the other hand, the Nature of Moral Philosophy being such as never lays down
a Rule for any particular thing, the Epick Poets were obliged to unite in one
single Idea, in one and the same Person, and in an Action that appeared
singular, all that looked like it in different Persons, and in various Actions,
which might be thus contained as so many Species under their Genus.

Therefore when Aristotle speaks to this purpose, That Poetry is more serious
than (...). Poet. c. 9.
History, and that Poets are greater Philosophers than Historians are: He does
not only speak this to magnify the Excellence of this Art, but to inform us
also of the Nature of it. (...). Ibid.
Poesy, says he, teaches Morality not by Recital only as an Historian, who
barely tells us what Alcibiades for Instance ('it is Aristotle's own Instance)
did or suffered: But by proposing whatever a Person, let the Poet call him by
what name he pleases, ought either necessarily, or in all probability, to have
said or done upon that or the like occasion? It Is in this Nature that the Poet
lays down the bad Consequences of an ill-grounded Design or a wicked Action; or
else the Reward of good Actions, and the Satisfaction one receives from a
Design formed by Virtue, and managed by Prudence. Thus in the (...). Ibid.
Epopea, according to Aristotle, let the Names be what they will, yet the
Persons and the Actions are Feigned, Allegorical, and Universal; not Historical
and Singular.

Horace is likewise of the same mind, as we shall see hereafter. Only by the
way we cannot but observe, that he not only says Quicquid sit pulchrum, quid
turpe, quid utile, quid non, Before and melius Chrysippo and Crantore dicit.
Epist. Lib. 1. Ep. 2.
that Poets teach Men Morality full as well as Philosophers, but in that he
even gives Homer the Pre-eminence.

The reason Poets are more excellent herein than the plain downright
Philosopher, is this, (...). Arist. Poet. c. 1.
that every sort of Poem is in general an Imitation. Now Imitation is extremely
natural, and pleases every body: By which means this way of proposing things is
more charming, and more proper to take with an Audience. Besides Imitation is
an Instruction by Examples; and Examples are very proper to persuade, since
they prove such or such a thing is feasible. In short, (...). Poet. c. 4.
Imitation is so far the Essence of Poetry, that it is Poetry it self, as
Aristotle the first Founder of this Art tells us: And Respicere exemplar vitae
morumque jubebo Doctum Imitatorem, and veras hinc ducere Voces. Hor. Art. Poet.
Horace recommends it very particularly to the Poet he would create.

But tho Poets play the Moral Philosophers, yet still they are no less Divines.
The Morality they deal withal, does indispensibly oblige them to have a Vein of
Divinity run through all their Works: Because the Knowledge, the Fear, and the
Love of God; in a Word, Piety and Religion, are the chief and solidest
Foundations of other Virtues, and of all Morality.

The Presence of the Deity, and the Care such an August Cause ought to take
about any Action, obliges the Poet to represent this Action as great,
important, and managed by Res gestae regumque Ducumque. Hor. Art. Poet.
Kings and Princes. It obliges him likewise to think and speak in an elevated
way above the Vulgar, and in a Style that may in some sort keep up the
Character of the Divine Persons he introduces. Cui men's divinior atque os Magna
sonaturum des Nominis hujus honorem. Horat.
To this end serves the Poetical and Figurative Expression, and the Majesty of
the Heroic Verse.

But all this, being divine and surprising, may quite ruin all Probability:
Therefore the Poet should take special care as to that Point, since his chief
aim is to instruct, and without Probability any Action is less likely to
persuade.

To all this the Poets are obliged by the substance of the Things they propose
to themselves as the subject Matter of their Poems and Instructions. The manner
of teaching them usefully and methodically, has likewise obliged them to add
several other Rules.

The Epopea's business is with the Morals and Habitudes more than the Passions.
These rise on a sudden, and their Heat is soon over; but the Habitudes are more
calm, and come on, and go off more leisurely. Therefore the Epick Action cannot
be contained in one single day, as the Dramatick can: It must have a longer and
more just space allowed it, than that of Tragedy, which is only allowed for the
Passions.

This Distinction makes the Tragedy and the Epopea differ very much. The
violence of Tragedy requires a great deal more lively and brisk Representation
than that of a Recital: besides it is all Action, and the Poet says never a
Word, as he does in the Epopea, where there are no Actors.

But if in this the Epopea is inferior to the Drama, yet it is superior to
both Philosophy and History: because it is a great deal more active than bare
Philosophy, and the Recitals of History: And tho it does not present Actors to
the Eyes of the Spectators, yet it ought at least more frequently than
Historians, to break off the Thread of its Discourse by the Speeches of its
Personages. This Aristotle orders, when he says, that the Narration of the
Epick ought to be Dramatick, that is to say, very active.

It has likewise its Passions, which give it no small Advantage over Philosophy
and History: But in this it is inferior to Tragedy. For tho it has a mixture
of all the Passions, yet Joy and Admiration are the most essential to it. These
indeed contribute most toward the making us wise Men: Admiration and Curiosity
are the Cause of Sciences; and nothing engages us so forcibly as Pleasure. So
that these two Passions must never be wanting to any invented Piece, if we
would be informed in what we are indispensibly obliged to know.

To conclude, because the Precepts had need be Quicquid praecipies esto brevis,
ut cito dicta Percipiant animi dociles, teneantque fideles. Hor. Poet.
concise, that so they may be more easily conceived, and less burden the
Memory; and because nothing can be more effectual thereto, than proposing one
single Idea, and collecting all things so well together, that so they may be
present to our Minds all at once, the Poets have reduced all to one Denique sit
quodvis simplex duntaxat, and unum. Ibid.
single Action, under one and the same Design, and in a Body whose Members and
Parts should be homogeneous.

CHAP. III. The Definition of the Epick Poem.
THat which we have observed concerning the Nature of the Epick Poem, gives us
a just Idea of it, which we may express thus:

The EPOPEA is a Discourse invented by Art, to form the Manners by such
Instructions as are disguised under the Allegories of some one important
Action, which is related in Verse. after a probable, diverting, and surprising
Manner.

This here is the Definition of the Epopea, and not of Poetry it self. For that
is an Art of making all sorts of Poems, of which the Epick is but a part. The
Epopea then is not an Art, but an artificial thing, as it is expressed in the
Definition, which says it is a Discourse invented by Art.

It is likewise one sort of Poem, as it is intimated in the Definition by its
being called a Discourse in Verse: And the rest distinguishes it from all other
sorts of Poems.

The Action of Comedy is not very important; and besides the (...). Arist.
Poet. c. 3.
Poet says nothing, but only the Persons he introduces, say and act All, just
as in Tragedy. For this reason both This and That is styled a Dramatick Poem.
And thus it is plain the Epopea is neither Tragedy nor Comedy.

Nor is it a piece of Natural Philosophy, as the Poems of Empedocles and
Lucretius: Nor a Treatise of Husbandry, and the like, as the Georgicks of
Virgil: Because these Pieces are not designed to form Men's Manners, and the
Instructions contained in them are naked, simple, and proper, without Disguise
and Allegories.

This second reason, which more especially concerns the Essence and Nature of
Poesy, does likewise exclude from the number of Epick Poems, any Piece of
Morality writ in Verse, and a plain History, such as Lucan's Pharsalia, the
Punick War of Silius Italicus, and such like real Actions of some singular
Persons without a Fable, and in short every thing that is described in Verse
after this manner.

I shall not trouble my head to take notice how the Epopea, differs from the
Satyr, the Eclogue, the Ode, the Elegy, the Epigram, and other lesser Poems:
For this is self-evident.

But it will not be amiss to reflect upon what has been already said, and from
thence to conclude that the Epopea has some relation to Four Things; viz. to
the Poem, to the Fable, to Moral Philosophy, and to History.

It has a relation to History, because as well This as That relates one or more
Actions: But the Actions of History are singular and true, so that the Epopea
is neither a History, nor a Species of History.

It has a necessary relation to Morality, since both one and the other
instructs Men in their Morals; but the Action and the Allegories which are
proper to it, is the cause why properly speaking it is not Moral Philosophy,
although it may be styled a Species of it; and in short, it has a great deal
more relation to this than to History.

But it belongs altogether to the Poem and the Fable, since it is properly and
truly a Poem and a Fable; and is only distinguished from other Poems and
Fables, as several Species, which equally partake of the same Genus, are
distinguished from one another. Besides, the Definition does exactly include
both, since a Poem is a Discourse in Verse, and a Fable is a Discourse invented
to form Men's Morals by Instructions disguised under the Allegories of an
Action. So that one might abridge the Definition we have given of the Epick
Poem, and only say, that it is a Fable gracefully formed upon an important
Action, which is related in Verse after a very probable and surprising manner.

CHAP. IV. Of the Parts of the Epick Poem. The Division of this Treatise.
THE Parts of the Epick Poem contained in the former Definition are its Nature,
its Matter, its Form, and its Manner of proposing Things.

Its Nature is twofold; for the Epopea is both a Fable and a Poem. But these
two several Genus's agree very well together, and compose a Body, that is no
Monster. One may likewise very well separate these two Natures from one
another, and say, that the Fable is that which constitutes the Nature of the
Epopea; and that the Poem tells us how to manage the Fable, and comprehends the
Thoughts, the Expression, and the Verse.

The Matter of it is an Action feigned with probability, and drawn from the
Actions of Kings, Princes, and Gods. This tells us two Things, the Action and
the Persons, and therein it does not at all differ from Tragedy.

The Form of it is, that the Persons are not here introduced to the Spectator's
view, acting by themselves without the Poet, as in Tragedy: But that the Action
is recited by the Poet.

The End of the Epick Poem is to lay down Moral Instructions for all sorts of
People both in general and in particular. This part belongs to the Poem as it
is a Fable. It contains the Moral which serves for the Foundation of the Fable;
and besides that it contains the Manners of those Personages who make some
considerable Figure in the Poem.

Lastly, as the Form includes the Person of the Poet who makes the Rehearsal:
So does the End comprehend the Persons of the Audience for whom the Poet
designs his Instructions.

All these Things will make up the Subject Matter of this Treatise: But it is
not necessary they should be all handled with the same particularity and
exactness.

Some will very naturally fall under others, as that will, for instance, which
we have to say concerning the Poet and his Audience.

To treat of the End and the Moral apart would require too vast a Compass; I
shall content my self to speak thereof in speaking of the Fable, and in other
Places, where the necessary connection of that Part with the rest will afford me
just Occasions of speaking as much of it as is requisite for my purpose.

Aristotle divided the Thoughts and Expressions into two Parts, as was very
requisite: But so many Authors have handled these Things, and so copiously too,
that I think my self excused from repeating and copying those Things, which are
under the Jurisdiction of other Arts. I will leave these Things then to the
Rhetoricians, Grammarians, and to those who have writ so much about them even
in Poetry it self. So that the little I have to say will be comprised in one
part. And my Unwillingness to be copious, is the Reason which obliges me to
speak still less of the Poem and Versification.

But I shall write very fully of the Fable, as being the most essential part of
the Epopea. So likewise I shall concerning it a Form, and its Matter. Nay more,
I shall handle distinctly the Morals of the Persons. And lastly, I shall
distinguish the Gods from the Men. The Gods are usually expressed by the Name
of Machines, because the Poets make use of such to let them down upon the
Theater; from whence the Epopea has likewise borrowed the Name.

According to this Account, this Treatise will be divided into six Parts or
Books.

The First will be concerning the Nature of the Epick Poem, where we shall
treat of the Fable. The Second Book will treat of the Matter, or of the Epick
Action. The Third of the Form, or the Narration. The Fourth of the Manners and
Characters of Humane Personages. The Fifth of Machines, or of the Presence and
Action of the Gods. And the Sixth of the Thoughts and Expressions.
CHAP. V. Of the Poem.
A Poem is a Discourse in Verse; and a Verse is a part of a Discourse measured
by a certain number of long and short Syllables, with a grateful Cadence, that
is constantly repeated. This Repetition is necessary to distinguish the Notion
we have of Verse, from that of Prose. For in Prose as well as Verse, every
Period and Clause are so many parts of a Discourse measured by a certain number
of long and short Syllables; but Prose is ever and anon altering its Cadences
and Measures, which Verse never does.

The Repetition, which the Poets make use of, seems still the same in the way
of Writing: for, when one Verse is finished, they come back again to the
beginning of another Line to write the next Verse. And this coming back again,
is that which gives it the Name of Versus.
Verse; and this Name in Latin is common to Verses, and several other things
that are ranged, as they are, in different Lines; as Trees, for instance, which
are set in Rows.

The Latins call Verses likewise by the Name of Carmina; but this is an
Equivocal Term: for besides its signifying Verses, or Poems, it may be used to
express other things. It Is a Term that is given to the Ramoque sedens
miserabile Carmen Integrat. Virg. Geor. 4.
Singing of Birds, to the Ducite ab urbe domum, mea Carmina, ducite Daphnim.
Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere lunam. Carminibus Circe socios mutavit
Ulyssis. Ecl. 8.
Charms of Magic, to certain Lex horrendi Carminis erat: Duumviri
perduellionem judicent, si a Duumviris provocatione certarit, provocatione
certato, etc. Tit. Live. Hist. l. 1.
Forms of Law, to Rem Carmine signo: Aeneas haec de Danais Victoribus Armis.
Virg. Aeneid. l. 3.
Inscriptions or Devices, to Tumulo superaddite Carmen; Daplinis ego in sylvis
hinc usque ad sidera notus, Formosi pecoris custos, formosior ipse. Virg. Ecl.
5.
Epitaphs, and other such like things.

For the making of Verses, it is not enough to take care of the Measure and
Quantity of the Syllables, and to place six Feet just after one another in the
same Line; there must be likewise some grateful Cadences, of which there are
several Rules laid down in treating about Caesura's, Synalepha's, the Length of
Words, and the like. Besides this, there must be some Tenses of Verbs, some
Moods, some Regiments, some Constructions, and some Words proper only to Verse,
and which Prose knows nothing of.

But above all, there must be in Verse the Turn, and some ways of speaking that
are elevated, bold, and metaphorical; which are so proper to this kind of
Writing, that without them the most exact placing of long and short Syllables
is not so much Verse as Prose in Meter: And, on the contrary, these bold
Expressions, so proper to Verse, when used in a Discourse that has not Feet nor
Poetical Numbers, do give it such an Air of Verse, that it is not so properly
Prose, as a kind of Poesy without Numbers, and as Horace says, Disjecti Membra
Poetae.

As Ego nec studium sine divite vena, nec rude quid prosit video ingenium. Hor.
Poet.
Nature does not inspire into us the Rules of Poetry and Verse; so neither does
Art and Study help us to that Air, that Force, and that Elevation, in which
Horace discovers something that is Divine, and which only makes a Man deserve
the Name of Poet. This is an Accomplishment a Man should be born with, owing
either to the Excellency of his Nature, or to some happy Transports; but
withal so extraordinary, that the Ancients, and (...). Arist. Poet. cap. 17.
Aristotle himself, style them Fits of Enthusiasm or Frenzy: yet still there
is to be supposed an exact and solid Judgment to master this Frenzy and
Imagination of the Poet.

From what has been said, we may conclude that the End of Poetry is to please:
that its Cause is either the Excellency of the Poet's Nature, or the Poetic
Frenzy, and these Transports of Spirit, that are to be governed by Judgment.
Its Matter is the long and short Syllables, the Numbers it is made up of, and
the Words which Grammar furnishes it with, as well as Prose. And its Form is
the ranging of all these Things in such exact and charming Verses, as may best
express the Thoughts of the Author after the manner we have been describing.

But after all, how confined is all this, if we consider the great Name of Poet
in the Honor Homer and Virgil did it, and in all the Extent it is capable of!
What we have said about it has nothing of Praiseworthy in it, but what every
pitiful Translator may pretend to, and what the War of Catiline turned into
Verse might bestow upon him, that would transpose the Prose of Sallust after
this manner. It Is with Reason then that we distinguish these mean Subjects from
great Poetry, by giving them the name of Versification; and that we make, as it
were, two distinct Arts of Versification and Poetry. In a word, there is as
much Difference between the Art of Making Verses, and that of Inventing Poems,
as there is between Grammar and Rhetoric.

This great Art consists chiefly in the Fable, in the manner of Expressing
Things by Allegories and Metaphors, and in the Invention of some probable
Matter; that is, of some Actions, under which the Poet very charmingly
disguises the Truths he would have us learn. This is so proper to the Poet,
that even in the Expression (...). Poet. c. 22.
Aristotle recommends nothing so much as the Metaphor. Which agrees very well
with that which we have already said about the Nature of Poetry. For the Fables
are so many Allegorical Disguises, and an Allegory is nothing else but a Series
and Chain of Metaphors linked together.

We shall speak of the Fable, and these important Matters in the Sequel of this
Treatise. We shall here only make this one Reflection; That the true Poems, and
such as have more of the Essence and Nature of Great Poetry than any other, are
the Epapcit, the Tragedy, and the Comedy; for they are all Allegorical and
Fabulous. Nor has (...). Poet. c. 6.
Aristotle in his Poetry undertaken to treat of any more than these three
sorts. If we compare them together, the Epopea will excel the other two by that
great Liberty it takes of using Metaphors and perpetual Allusions in the
Fables. Allegorical Expressions would be more obscure upon the Stage, and would
have something that is less probable in the Mouth of the Actors we hear speak,
than in the Narration of a Poet, who writes purely to be read. Comedy must
likewise yield to Tragedy, because it has little of Elevation, and the manner
of its Actors Speaking, is too Natural and Familiar.

This very Thing has made some People question whether Idicirco quidam Comoedia
necne Poema esset quaesivere: quod acer spiritus ac vis nec Verbis nec rebus
inest; nisi quod pede certo differt sermoni sermo Merus. Hor. Lib. 1. Sat. 4.
Comedy were a true Poem or no. Which Difficulty is wholly grounded upon this
general Notion, That a Poem is a Discourse in Verse. Now in the Latin Comedy,
the Discourse has nothing in it of Verse, but Feet and Numbers. This indeed is
enough for such a Poetical Subject as Comedy is. And we suppose in this we are
of Horace's Opinion, at least he attributes this Doubt to a very few Persons.

But this measure only, without any Air to distinguish the Discourse from
Prose, makes no Verses: And for this Reason has. Primum ego meillorum dederim
quibus esse Poetas, Excerpam numero; neque enim concludere Versum Dixeris esse
satis; neque si quis scribat uti nos Sermoni propiora, putes hunc esse Poetam.
Ibid.
Horace called his Satyrs by a Prose Name; viz. Sermons. His Epistles are the
same. His Odes are of a different Air, and these he calls by a Poetical Name,
Carmina.

The Case is not the same with Subjects that are not Poetical, but writ in
Verse, and adorned with Fables and Allegories; as, the Georgicks of Virgil,
Lucan's Pharsalia, the Punick War of Silius Italicus, and the like. The truth
on it is, these Fables and Allegories are not sufficient for an Epopea, and its
main Action, that ought to be a Fable; so that we do not take the Georgicks or
the Pharsalia to be an Epopea; but yet this should not hinder us from thinking
them to be true Poems for all that.

But if a Man writes an Epopea in Prose, would it be an Epick Poem? No, I think
not; for a Poem is a Discourse in Verse. But yet this would not hinder its
being an Epopea; just as a Tragedy in Prose is still a Tragedy, though it be
not a Tragic Poem. They who have questioned whether the Latin Comedy were a
Poem or no, never doubted but it was a Comedy.

I should have said less upon such trite Matters, but that I was ashamed to
take no notice at all what a Poem or a Verse was, being to treat so largely
about the Epick Poem.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fable.
(...). Poet. c. 6.
ARistotle says, The Fable is the principal Part of the Poem, and that it is as
it were the very Soul of it. Therefore we must look for the Nature of the
Epopea in that of the Fable, and consider That as the chief Foundation of the
Poem, as the Principle that gives Life and Motion to all its parts, and sets
all its Faculties on work. We have indeed begun to define the Epopea by the
Definition we gave of the Fable; for the Fable is a Discourse invented to form
Men's Manners by Instructions disguised under the Allegories of one single
Action.

There are several sorts of Fables, which one may treat after very different
ways. The Poet forms his from that which is most excellent in each of these
sorts.

There are reckoned three sorts of Fables. The first fall under the Names of
Men and Gods, and are called Rational; the second are only comprised under the
Names of Beasts, and derive their Name of Moratoe from the humane Manners,
which are attributed to them; and the last are a Mixture of these two sorts of
Personages, and are called Mixed.

The Epick Fables are Rational. Nor do I think that the Liberty Homer has taken
of making a Horse speak only once in his Iliad, ought to make this Fable be
counted a mixed one. I should rather reckon this incident among the Machines
and Miracles; as we read in the Roman History it sometimes happened, and as we
know it did in Balaam's Ass.

Besides, 'twas such a common thing in those times to make use of these sorts
of Fables, and to bring in brute Beasts, and even Trees speaking: and this
Custom was so generally looked upon as Mark of Learning, a Genius, and
Eloquence; that had Homer used it oftener, I do not see how any one could blame
this Fable for any Irregularity. But in short, this Custom of making Beasts
speak is so little relished by these last Ages, that even Homer's Example would
not make it excusable in any of our modern Writers.

However it is, this inconsiderable Incident, which does not hinder but the
Epick Fable may be reckoned among the Rational ones, will not hinder it from
being placed among the Probable ones; though this Qualification be not at all
necessary for the Fable in general.

In fine, the Action of a Fable may be serious, great, and important, or
familiar, low, and vulgar. It may be either perfect or defective; writ in Verse
or Prose; swelled to a large Discourse, or expressed in a few Words; recited by
the Author, or represented by the Persons who are the sole Actors in it. And
all these different ways make no Alteration in the Essence, and in the Nature
of the Fable.

Excepting the Representation, which the Epick Poet leaves the Stage to be
Master of, he takes always the most excellent, and the most noble Method. So
that the Epick Action is grave, important, complete, and rehearsed in a long
train of Verses.

One may add to this, that there are some Fables which consist less in Action
than in Speaking; as that Fable, for instance, which ridicules the foolish
Vanity of those Men, who attribute all the Glory of an Event to themselves, for
the producing of which they contributed nothing but their own unprofitable
Presence. The Fable represents them under the Allegory of a Fly, which lighting
upon a Chariot, and seeing her self in the midst of a Cloud of Dust, which the
Chariot-Wheels and the Horse-Feet raised in the Air, cries out; O Gemini! What
a Dust do I make? The Epick is not of this sort of Fables, but of those which
imitate an Action.

These then are the Differences which specify the Epick Fable, and distinguish
it from all others. It is Rational and Probable; it imitates an Action that is
complete and important; it is long and rehearsed in Verse; but neither of these
Properties change its Nature, nor make it less a Fable, than those which are
published in Aesop's Name.

So much for the Sorts and Differences of the Epick Fable, now for its Parts.

(...).
Aristotle says, that the Fable is a Composition of several Things. And in
truth two Things do compose it, which are as it were its two essential Parts.
The one is Truth, which serves as a Foundation to it; and the other is Fiction,
which Allegorically disguises this Truth, and gives it the Form of a Fable.

The Truth lies concealed; and is that piece of Morality the Poet would teach
us. The Romans made use of this very Expression, when they said to Vel qui
Praetextas, vel qui docuere Togatas. Hor. Poet.
Teach Fables and Tragedies, instead of saying to Act and Represent them. The
Fiction is the Action or the Words, whereby these Instruction are veiled. In
the Instance we just now proposed, the Truth is this, that it is ridiculous to
brag of any thing we have no hand in: and the Fiction is that pleasant Thought
of a Fly riding upon a Chariot, and crying, Bless me! what a Dust do I make?

The Truth lies under no Difficulty here, since the Moral Instruction ought
always to be true.

But suppose the imitated Action be taken out of History, would this pass for a
Fiction? The Difficulty is the same, if it be taken from a Fable that is
already known, since after this manner, the Poet would at little invent and
feign it, as if he had found it in History: And yet if the Author feigns
nothing, we may well dispute with him the Name of Poet.

To this we answer, that the Poet ought to feign one General Action; then he
should look for the Names of some Persons (to whom a parallel Action has either
truly or probably happened) in History, or some well-known Fables: And lastly,
he ought to place his Action under these Names. Thus it will be really feigned
and invented by the Author, and yet will seem to be taken out of some very
ancient History and Fable. This we shall explain by what follows: we will begin
to do so by the Instance of a Fable composed after this Method.

CHAP. VII. The Method of Composing a Fable.
THE first thing we are to begin with for Composing a Fable, is to choose the
Instruction, and the point of Morality, which is to serve as its Foundation,
according to the Design and End we propose to our selves.

I would, for Instance, exhort two Brothers, or any other Persons, who hold an
Estate in Common, to agree well together, the better to preserve it: And this
is the End of the Fable, and the first thing I thought on.

For this purpose I endeavor to imprint upon their Minds this Maxim; That a
Misunderstanding between Friends is the ruin of Families, and of all sorts of
Societies. This Maxim which I make choice of, is the Point of Morality, and the
Truth which serves as a Foundation to the Fable I would compose.

In the next place this Moral Truth must be reduced into Action, and a general
Action must be feigned in Imitation of the true and singular Actions of those
who have been ruined by a Misunderstanding that has happened among them. I say
then, that several Persons were engaged together to look after an Estate, which
they hold in Common. They fall out with one another, and this Difference leaves
them defenseless to the Will of an Enemy who ruins them.

This is the first Platform of a Fable. The Action, which this Recital presents
us with, has four Qualifications: it is Universal, it is Imitated, it is
Feigned, and it contains Allegorically, a Moral Truth. This Model then
comprehends the two Essential Parts which compose the Fable, viz. the Truth and
the Fiction. All this is common to all sorts of Fables.

The Names that are given to the Personages do first specify a Fable. Aesop
gives them the Names of Beasts. Once upon a time (says he) two Dogs were set to
keep a Flock of Sheep, they fight with one another, and leave the Sheep without
Defense to the Mercy of the Wolf, that commits what Ravage he pleases among
them. These Names are the meanest of any. The Action is still General, and the
Fiction is altogether apparent.

We may disguise the Fiction, render the Action more singular, and make it a
Rational Fable by the Names of Men invented at Pleasure. Pridamant and Orontes,
two Brothers by a second Marriage, were left very rich by their Father's last
Will and Testament. They could not agree in sharing their Estates, and were so
obstinately bent one against the other, that to provide for their common
Interest against Clitander (their elder Brother by a former Marriage) was the
very least of their care. He very dexterously foments their Quarrel, and keeps
them from minding the Design he has upon them, by pretending he expected
nothing but a small Gratuity by the Accommodations, which he daily proposes,
but never urges home to them. In the mean time he gains upon the Judges, and
all others, who were entrusted with this Affair; he procures the Will to be
cancelled, and becomes Master of all that Estate he pretended he would have
gratified his Brothers with, though to his own prejudice.

This Fable is a Rational and Probable Fable; but because the Names are feigned
as well as the Things, and the Action is only particular, and the Families
ordinary, it is neither an Epick nor Tragic Fable; and can only be managed in
Comedy. For (...). Poet. c. 9.
Aristotle informs us, That Comic Poets invent both the Names and the Things.

In order to make this an Alamode Comic Fable, some Girl or another should
have been promised to Clitander; but the Will should have put the Father upon
altering his Design, and he should have obliged her to have married one of
these two rich Coxcombs, for whom she had not the least Fancy. And here the
Comical Part might have been carried on very regularly even as the Poet
pleased. But to return.

The Fiction might be so disguised under the Truth of History, that those who
are ignorant of the Poet's Art would believe that he had made no Fiction. But
the better to carry on this Disguise, search must be made in History for the
Names of some Persons to whom this feigned Action might either Probably or
Really have happened; and then must the Action be rehearsed under these known
Names, with such Circumstances as alter nothing of the Essence either of the
Fable or the Moral: as in the following Example.

In the War King Philip the Fair had with the Flemings in the Year 1302, he
sent out his Army under the Command of Robert Earl of Artois his General, and
Ralph of Nesle his Constable. When they were in the Plain of Courtray in sight
of the Enemy, the Constable says, 'Twas so easy to starve them, that it would
be advisable not to hazard the Lives of so many brave Men against such vile and
despicable Fellows. The Earl very haughtily rejects this Advice, charging him
with Cowardice and Treachery. We will see, replies the Constable in a rage,
which of us has the most Loyalty and Bravery: and with that away he rides
directly toward the Enemy, drawing all the French Cavalry after him. This
Precipitation, and the Dust they raised, hindered them from discovering a large
and deep River, beyond which the Flemings were posted. The French were
miserably cast away in the Torrent. At this Loss the Infantry were so startled,
that they suffered themselves to be cut in pieces by the Enemy.

It Is by this means that the Fiction may have some Agreement with the Truth it
self, and the Precepts of the Art do not contradict one another, though they
order us to begin by feigning an Action, and then advise us to draw it from
History. As for the Fiction and Fable, it signifies little whether the Persons
are Dogs, or Oronics and Pridamont, or Robert d'Artois and the Earl of Nesle,
or lastly Achilles and Agamemnon.

It Is time we should now propose it in its just Extent under the two last Names
in the Iliad. It is too narrow for an Epopea under the former Names.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Fable of the Iliad.
THE Fable of the Iliad, at the bottom, is nothing else but that which I just
now proposed. I will treat of it here at large, because I cannot give you a
greater light into this Doctrine, than by the Practice of Homer. It Is the most
exact Model of the Epopea, and the most useful Abridgment of all the Precepts
of this Art; since in truth, Aristotle himself has extracted them out of the
Works of this great Poet.

In every thing which a Man undertakes with Design, the End he proposes to
himself is always the first thing which occurs in his Mind, and upon which he
grounds the whole Work, and all its parts. Thus, since the Epick Poem was
invented to form the Manners of Men, it is by this first View the Poet ought to
begin.

The Schoolmen treat of Virtues and Vices in general. The Instructions they
give are proper for all sorts of People, and for all Ages. But the Poet has a
nearer Regard to his own Country, and the Necessities he sees his own Nation
lie under. It Is upon this account that he makes choice of some piece of
Morality, the most proper and fittest he can imagine: and in order to press
this home, he makes less use of Reasoning, than of the force of Insinuation;
accommodating himself to the particular Customs and Inclinations of his
Audience, and to those which in the general ought to be commended in them. Let
us now see how Homer has acquitted himself in all these Respects.

He saw the Grecians, for whom he designed his Poem, were divided into as many
States as they had Capital Cities. Each was a Body Politic, and had its Form
of Government independent from all the rest. And yet these distinct States were
very often obliged to unite together in one Body against their common Enemies.
And here we have two very different sorts of Government, such as cannot be very
well comprehended in one Body of Morality, and in one single Poem.

The Poet then has made two distinct Fables of them. The One is for all Greece
united into one Body, but composed of Parts independent on one another, as they
in truth were: and the Other is for each particular State, considered as they
were in time of Peace, without the former Circumstances, and the necessity of
being united.

As for the first sort of Government observable in the Union or rather in the
Assembling of many Independent States: Experience has always made it appear,
That there is nothing like a due Subordination, and a right Understanding
between Persons to make the Designs that are formed and carried on by several
Generals to prosper. And on the other hand, an universal Misunderstanding, the
Ambition of a General, and the Underofficers refusing to submit, have always
been the infallible and inevitable Bane of these Confederacies. All sorts of
States, and in particular the Grecians, have dearly experienced this Truth. So
that the most useful and the most necessary Instructions that could be given
them, was, to lay before their Eyes the Loss which both the People and the
Princes themselves suffered by the Ambition and Discord of these last.

Homer then has taken for the Foundation of his Fable this great Truth; viz.
That a Misunderstanding between Princes is the Ruin of their own States. I sing
(says he) the Anger of Achilles, so pernicious to the Grecians, and the Cause
of so many Heroes Deaths, occasioned by the Discord and Parting of Agamemnon
and this Prince.

But that this Truth may be completely and fully known, there is need of a
second to back it. For it may be questioned, whether the ill Consequences which
succeed a Quarrel were caused by that Quarrel; and whether a right
Understanding does re-adjust those Affairs which Discord has put out of Order:
that is to say, these Assembled States must be represented first as laboring
under a Misunderstanding, and the ill Consequences thereof; and then as United
and Victorious.

Let us now see how he has disposed of these Things in one General Action.

Several Princes, independent on one another, were united against a Common
Enemy. He, whom they had Elected their General, offers an Affront to the most
Valiant of all the Confederates. This offended Prince was so far provoked, that
he withdrew himself, and obstinately refused to fight for the Common Cause.
This Misunderstanding gives the Enemy so much Advantage, that the Confederates
are very near quitting their Design very dishonourably. He himself who is
withdrawn is not exempt from sharing in the Misfortunes he brought upon his
Allies. For having permitted his intimate Friend to succor them in a great
Necessity, this Friend is killed by the Enemies General. Thus being both made
wiser at their own Cost, are reconciled. And then this Valiant Prince gets the
Victory, and revenges his own Wrongs by killing with his own hands him who had
been the Death of his Friend.

This is the first Platform of the Poem, and the Fiction, which reduces into
one important and universal Action, all the Particulars upon which it turns.

In the next place it must be rendered Probable by the Circumstances of Times,
Places, and Persons; that is to say, If we would come up to the Precepts of our
Masters, we must seek for some Persons already known by History, or other ways,
by whom we may with Probability represent the Personages of this Fable. Homer
has made choice of the Siege of Troy, and feigned that this Action happened
there. He has given the Name of Achilles to a valiant and angry Phantom; that
of Agamemnon to his General, that of Hector to the Enemies Commander, and
others to the rest, as is to be seen in his Poem.

Besides, he was obliged to accommodate himself to the Manners, Customs, and
Genius of the Greeks his Auditors, the better to make them attend to the
Instruction of his Poem, and to gain their Approbation by praising them, as far
as the Faults he must of necessity make his Personages fall into, would admit.
He admirably discharges all the Duties, by making these Brave Princes, and
those Victorious People, to be Grecians, and the Fathers of those he had a Mind
to Commend.

But in that Length and Extent which is given to these Fables, if we would not
stuff up the rest with useless Ornaments and foreign Incidents, we must do
something else besides proposing the principal point of Morality that is made
use of. We must extend this Moral by its necessary Consequences: as for
instance, in the Subject before us, it is not enough to know, that a good
Understanding ought always to be maintained among Confederates: it is likewise
very material to know, that if there happens any Division, great Care is to be
taken, that it be kept from the Enemies Knowledge, that so they being ignorant
of this Advantage, may not venture to make use of it.

In the second place, when this Concord is but counterfeit, and only in
appearance, one should never press the Enemy too closely, nor oblige them to
make use of all their Forces: for this would discover the Weakness that ought
to be concealed from them.

The Episode of Patroclus does even to Admiration furnish us with these two
Instructions. For when he appeared in the Arms of Achilles, the Trojans, who
took him for Achilles himself, now reconciled and reunited to the
Confederates, gave ground, and quitted the Advantages they had over the Greeks.
But Patroclus, who should have been contented with this Success, presses upon
Hector too boldly, and by obliging him to fight, discovers that it was not the
true Achilles that was clad in his Armor, but a much more feeble Hero. So that
Hector kills him, and re-gains the Advantages which the Trojans had lost upon
the Conceit that Achilles was reconciled.

It Is by such sort of Fictions that this great Poet has filled his Poem with
Instructions so excellent for their Design, and whereby he has merited those
Praises which Aristotle, Horace, and all the Ancients have bestowed upon him.

CHAP. IX. A Comparison of the Fable of the Iliad, with that of Aesop.
THE better to make it appear that an Epopea is a true Fable; and that this
Term we give it is not Metaphorical or Figurative, but Proper and Natural; and
that the Sense is the same, as when we give the Name of Fables to the Fictions
of Aesop: I shall here draw a Parallel between the Fable of the Iliad, and that
of Aesop, which I have already mentioned.

First then I say, that the Moral Truth and Instruction is apparently the same
in both. Aesop and Homer would have us learn, that a misunderstanding between
those of the same Party, exposes them to the Insults of their Enemies, and
their own Ruin: and that Concord preserves and renders them Victorious.

The Fiction is likewise the same. Both have feigned a Confederacy of several
Persons together, for the Maintenance and Defense of their Interest against the
Common Enemy. Again, both have feigned some disturbance that happened at first
in this Union; and that those who quarreled met with an equal share of
misfortune. Lastly, both have restored to the Party of these United Persons,
the Concord and Victory which was the consequence of their Reunion.

There Is nothing remains now but to give Names to those feigned Persons. As for
the Nature of the Fable, it matters little whether the Names of Beasts or of
Men be made use of. Homer has made choice of these last; and has given the
Quality of Kings to his Personages. He has called them Achilles, Agamemnon,
Hector, Patroclus, and has expressed by the name of Grecians, that Interest
which the Confederates were obliged to maintain. Aesop in his way, has given
the Names of Beasts to all his Personages: The Dogs are the Confederates, the
Wolf is their Enemy, and he has called the Sheep, what the Poet has termed the
Grecians.

One says, That whilst the Delirant reges plectuntur achivi. Hor. Ep. 2. ad
Loll.
Confederate Kings quarreled, Hector their Enemy makes havoc of the poor
Grecians, who pay dearly for the Folly of their Princes; and when the Allies,
moved with their Loss, were Reunited, they put Hector to flight and kill him.

The other says the very same, That whilst the Dogs did bite and tear one
another, the Wolf broke in upon the Sheep: and when the Dogs, seeing the ravage
of this Enemy, were good Friends again, they made him fly for it, and killed
him.

The Fable of Homer is a Rational one, and that of Aesop is not. But this is no
reason why one is more or less a Fable than the other. Fabula quae Paridis
narratur propter Amorem Graecia Barbariae lento collisa ducllo. Ibid.
Horace calls the Iliad a Fable, though the Names are Human; just as the Stories
of Aesop are called Fables under the Names of Dogs, Lions, Jupiter, The Frogs,
and the like.

Homer has stretched out his Fable by long Harangues, by Descriptions, by
Similitudes, and by particular Actions: In like manner, might one amplify that
of Aesop without spoiling it. One need only relate what provoked these Dogs to
quarrel, and to describe the rise of their Anger with all its Circumstances: To
make fine Descriptions of the Plain where the Sheep were feeding, and of some
neighboring Forest, which served the Wolf for a shelter and Retreat: To give
this Enemy some little Cubs to breed up, to make them follow their Sire in the
Quest of their Prey, and to describe the Booty they take at several times

One should not likewise omit the Genealogy of these Heroes. The Wolf should
boast of his Descent from Lycaon; and one of the Dogs should have issued in a
direct line from the great Celestial Dog, and the Canicula. This should be the
Hero of the Poem, for he would be very hot and Choleric. He would do well to
represent the Personage of Achilles; and the Folly of a certain Ajax his
Kinsman, would be a handsome Proof of this Nobility, and of an Origin so Divine
as that is. There is no need of any thing farther to engage Heaven in this
Quarrel, and to divide the Gods into Parties. For the Gods have as much to do
in the Republic of Aesop, as in the States of Homer; witness Jupiter, who was
so far concerned as to appoint Kings over the Commonwealth of the Frogs.

And here we have matter enough to give this Subject a very large extent,
provided we have Expressions to answer it, and take care to insert as often
Edita ne brevibus pereat mihi charta libellis, Dicatur potius, (...). Martial.
L. 1.
as Homer has: (...).


For this fine Epithet for a Dog, (...), a Fleet-runner, ought by no means to
be omitted.

In short, Homer does likewise resemble Aesop, in that he as well as the other
had a great mind to make the Beasts speak in the person of Xanthus the Horse of
Achilles.

We conclude then, that the Name of Fable which is given to the Fable of the
Iliad, and that of Aesop, is neither Equivocal nor Analogous, but Synonymous
and equally Proper; that all the Qualities which make any difference between
them, do by no means affect either the Foundation, the Nature, or the Essence
of the Fable, but only constitute the different sorts of it; and lastly, that
if a Fable be Rational, Probable, Serious, Important, mixed with Divinities,
Amplified and Rehearsed in Verse, it will be an Epick Poem: If it has not these
Conditions, it will be another kind of Fable.

CHAP. X. The Fable of the Odysseis.
THE Odysseis was not designed as the Iliad, to instruct all the States of
Greece joined and confederated in one Body, but for each State in particular. A
State is composed of two parts; The Head which commands is the first, and the
Members which obey make up the other. There are Instructions requisite for the
Governor, and some likewise necessary for the Subjects: for him to rule well,
and for them to be ruled by him.

There are two Virtues necessary to one in Authority; Prudence to order, and
Care to put in Execution the Orders he has given. The Prudence of a Politician
is not acquired but by a long experience in all sorts of Business, and by an
Acquaintance with all the different Forms of Governments and States. The Care
of the Execution suffers not him that has ordered it, to rely upon others, but
it requires his own Presence; and Kings who are absent from their States are in
danger of losing them, and give way to great disorders.

These two Points might be easily united in one and the same Man. Dic mihi Musa
virum captae post tempora Trojae, Qui Mores hominum multorum vidit and urbes.
Hor. Poet.
A King absent from his Kingdom visits the Courts of several Princes, where he
learns the Customs of different Nations. From hence there naturally arises a
vast number of Incidents, of Dangers, and of Passages, that are very useful for
a Political Instruction: And on the other side, this absence gives way to the
disorders which happen in his own Kingdom, and which end not till his return,
whose sole Presence can re-establish all things. Thus the Absence of a King is
the same, and has the same effect in this Fable, as the Division had in the
former.

The Subjects have scarce any need but of one general Maxim, which is to suffer
themselves to be governed by, and to obey faithfully some Reason or other which
seems to them contrary to the Orders they have received. It were easy to join
this to what we have already said, by bestowing on this Wise and Industrious
Prince such Subjects, as in his absence would obey, not the Orders they
received, but what appeared to them more reasonable: And by demonstrating from
the Misfortunes this Disobedience draws upon them, the Evil Consequences which
almost infallibly attend these particular Conducts, which are distinct from the
general Notion of him who ought to Govern.

But as it is necessary that the Princes in the * Iliad should be Choleric and
Quarrelsome: Ira quidem communiter urit utrumque. Hor.
So it is necessary in the Fable of the Odysseis that the chief Personage should
be. Sage, and Prudent. This raises a difficulty in the Fiction; because this
Personage ought to be absent for the two reasons aforementioned, which are
Essential to the Fable; and which constitute the principal part thereof: But he
cannot be absent from his own home without offending against another Maxim of
equal importance; viz. That a King should never leave his own Country.

It is true, there are sometimes such necessities as sufficiently excuse the
Prudence of a Politician: But such a necessity is a thing important enough to
supply matter for another Poem, and this multiplication of the Action would
have been Vicious. To prevent this, first this necessity and the departure of
the Hero must be disjoined from the Poem: And in the second place, the Hero
having been obliged to absent himself for a Reason antecedent to the Action,
and distinct from the Fable; he ought not to embrace this opportunity of
instructing himself, and so absent himself voluntarily from his own Government.
For at this rate, his absence would have been still voluntary, and one might
with reason lay to his Charge, the disorders which might have happened thereon.

Thus in the constitution of the Fable, the Poet ought not to take for his
Action, and for the Foundation of his Poem, the Departure of a Prince from his
own Country, nor his voluntary stay in any other Place; but his Return, and
this Return hindered against his Will. This is the first Idea the Poet gives us
of it. (...). Calyss. 5.
His Hero appears at first in a desolate Island, sitting upon the side of the
Sea, which with Tears in his Eyes he looks upon as the obstacle, that had
hinder's him so long from returning home, and visiting his own dear Country.

And lastly, since this forced delay has something in it that is most Natural
and usual to such as make Voyages by Sea: Homer has judiciously made choice of
a Prince whose Kingdom was in an Island.

We see then how he has feigned all this Action, allowing his Hero a great many
Years, because he stood in need of so many to instruct himself in Prudence and
Policy.

A Prince had been obliged to forsake his Native Country, and to head an Army
of his Subjects in a Foreign Expedition. Having gloriously performed this
Enterprise, he was for marching home again, and thither would have conducted
his Subjects. But spite of all the attempts, which his eagerness to return home
again put him upon, There are Tempests which stop him by the way for several
Years together, and cast him upon several Countries very different from one
another as to their Manners and Government. In the dangers he was in, his
Companions, not always following his Orders, perished through their own fault.
The Grandees of his Country do very strangely abuse his absence, and raise no
small disorders at home. They consume his Estate, conspire to make away with
his Son, would constrain his Queen to chose one of them for her Husband, and
indulge themselves in all these Violences so much the more, because they were
persuaded he would never return. But at last he returns, and discovering
himself to his Son and some others, who had continued Loyal to him, he is an
Eyewitness of the Insolence of his Enemies, punishes them according to their
deserts, and restores to his Island that Tranquillity and Repose, which they had
been strangers to during his absence.

As the Truth, which serves as a Foundation to this Fiction, and which with it
makes the Fable, is, That the absence of a Person from his own Home, or who has
not an Eye to what is done there, is the cause of great disorders: So the
principal Action, and the most Essential one, is the absence of the Hero. This
fills almost all the Poem: For not only this bodily absence lasted several
Years, but even when the Hero returned, he does not discover himself; and this
prudent disguise, from whence he reaped so much advantage, has the same effect
upon the Authors of the Disorders, and all others who knew him not, as his real
absence had; so that he is absent as to them, till the very moment he punished
them.

After the Poet had thus composed his Fable, and joined the Fiction to the
Truth, he then makes choice of Ulysses, the King of the Isle of Ithaca, to
maintain the Character of his chief Personage, and bestowed the rest upon
Telemachus, Penelope, Antinous, and others, whom he calls by what names he
pleases.

I shall not here insist upon the many excellent Advices, which are as so many
parts, and natural Consequences of the Fundamental Truth; and which the Poet
very dexterously lays down in those Fictions, which are the Episodes and
Members of the entire Action, such for instance are these Advices: Not to
intrude ones self into the Mysteries of Government, which the Prince keeps
secret to himself, This is represented to us by the Winds shut up in a
Bull-hide, which the miserable Companions of Ulysses must needs be so foolish
as to pry into: Not to suffer ones self to be lead away by the seeming Charms
of an idle and lazy life, to which the Improba Siren desidia. Hor.
Sirens Songs invite Men: Not to suffer ones self to be sensualiz'd by
pleasures, like those who were changed into Brutes by Circe: And a great many
other points of Morality necessary for all sorts of People.

This Poem is more useful to the Vulgar, than the Iliad is, where the Subjects
suffer rather by the ill Conduct of their Princes, than through their own
fault. But in the Odysseis, it is not the Fault of Ulysses that is the ruin of
his Subjects. This wise Prince did all he could to make them sharers in the
Benefit of his Return. Thus the Poet in the Iliad says, He sings the Anger of
Achilles, which had caused the Death of so many Grecians; and on the contrary,
in the (...). Odyss. 1.
Odysseis he tells his Readers, That the Subjects perished through their own
fault.

Notwithstanding it is to be confessed, that these great Names of Kings,
Hero's, Achilles, Agamemnon, and Ulysses, do no less denote the meanest
Burghers, than they do the Caesar's, the Pompeys, and the Alexanders of the Age.
The Commonalty are as subject as the Grandees, to lose their Estates, and ruin
their Families by Anger and Divisions, by negligence and want of taking care of
their business. They stand in as much need of Homer's Lessons, as Kings; they
are as capable of profiting thereby; and it is as well for the Small as the
Great, that the Morality of the Schools, that of the Fable, and that of the
Chair deliver those Truths we have been just speaking of.

CHAP. XI. Of the Fable of the Aeneid.
IN the Fable of the Aeneid we are not to expect that simplicity, which
Aristotle esteemed so Divine in Homer. But though the Fortune of the Roman Empire
envied the Poet this Glory, yet the vast extent of the Matter it furnishes him
with, starts up such difficulties as require more Spirit and Conduct, and has
put us upon saying that there is something in the Aeneid more Noble than in the
Iliad These very difficulties we are to solve, and they call upon us for our
utmost care and attention.

There was a great deal of difference between the Greeks and the Romans. These
last were under no obligation, as were the former, either of living in
separated and independent States; or of frequent confederating together against
the common Enemy. If in this respect, we would compare our two Poets together,
Virgil had but one Poem to make, and this ought to be more like the Odysseis
than the Iliad, since the Roman State was governed by only one Prince.

But (without mentioning the Inconveniences the Latin Poet might meet with in
forming a Fable upon the same Foundation, which the Greek had laid before him)
the Roman State furnished him with Matter different enough to help him to avoid
treading in the footsteps of him that went before him, and to preserve to him
the glory of a primary invention. Homer in the Odysseis spoke only for States
already established, and the Roman Empire was but of a new date. It was the
change of a Commonwealth (to which Caesar's Subjects had been always extremely
biggoted) into a Monarchy, which till then they could never endure. Thus, the
Instructions, which the Poet ought to give both to Prince and People, were
quite different from those Homer left his Countrymen.

He ought to instruct Augustus as the Founder of a great Empire, and to inspire
into him as well as his Successors, the same Spirit and Conduct which had
raised this Empire to such a Grandeur. A very expert Roman, and a great
Politician (no less than Eventus bellorum erant aut mites, aut necessarii, etc.
Cic. 2. de offic.
Cicero himself) informs us, That good Humor and Humanity was so far Essential
to this State, that it was predominant even in the very midst of War; and that
nothing but an absolute Necessity could put a stop to its good effects. And he
adds, That when this Conduct was lost, and this Genius, which gave life to the
State, was gone, there was nothing left but bare Walls, and what in propriety
of Speech might be termed a dead Carcass. In short, he shows the Advantages
which a mild and moderate Government has over a cruel and severe Conduct, which
inspires Men with nothing but a slavish fear.

This then is the Instruction Virgil would give the Roman Emperors, who began
in the Person of Augustus to be settled upon the Throne. This Instruction has
two parts, as each of Homer's had. The first comprehends the Misfortunes which
attend a Tyrannical and Violent Reign: And the second the Happiness, which is
the Consequence of a mild Government. Homer has placed both the parts of each
Fable in one and the same Person, Achilles at first is at variance with the
Confederates, and afterward is reconciled to them: Ulysses is absent from
home, and at last returns thither: and in all this there is nothing of
difficulty. But Virgil could not represent in one and the same Person, a Hero,
who by his Violence and Impiety was the Ruin of his Country; and who afterward
by his Piety and Justice, restored it to its former Glory. This inequality of
Manners and Conduct would have been intolerable, and especially in that
Brevity, which the Recital of an Epick Poem requires; besides, such a sudden
change is never to be relied on; Men would think it Hypocritical, and fear a
very quick return of the old Tyranny. The Poet then is obliged to make use of
two different Personages, to maintain the two parts of his exemplary
instruction.

Besides, several weighty Reasons did indispensibly oblige him to put Humanity
and Goodnature in the Manners of his Hero, and to make Piety his predominant
Quality, and the very Soul of all his Virtues. One of these great Reasons is
the desire and necessity he lay under of pleasing his chief Auditor, who alone
was more considerable than all the rest. Augustus Caesar did nothing to settle
himself upon the Throne, but what his Piety put him upon undertaking; or at
least he had a mind the World should think so. This is the Judgment which the
most Prudent past upon him, even after he was dead, when he was no longer the
subject of Men's Flatteries, or their Fear. This Apud prudentes vita ejus vary
extollebatur, arguebaturve. Hi Pietate erga parentem and necessitudine Reip. in
qua nullus tunc legibus locus, ad bella Civilia actum: Pauca admodum
vitractata, quo caeteris quies esset. Dicebatur contra: Pietatem erga Parentem,
and tempora Reipub. obtentui sumpta. Hist. Lib. 1.
Cornelius Tacitus informs us of.

The Reasons why the Poet spoke thus of the new Establishment, were owing to
the Subjects of Augustus, who made up the other part of the Audience; and the
second Object of his Morality. He was obliged to make them lay aside the old
Antipathy they had to Monarchy, to convince them of the Justice, and the legal
Prerogative of Augustus, to divert them from so much desiring to oppose his
designs, and to raise in them a Love and Veneration for this Prince.

Religion has always had a most powerful influence over the minds of the
Vulgar. The first Roman Kings, and the new Emperors, made use thereof, by
joining the Sacerdotal to the Regal Office. The Poet likewise used his utmost
care in searching for all the Advantages he could derive from thence, by making
it the chief Foundation of his whole design. He makes it appear, That the great
Revolutions, which happen in States, are brought about by the appointment and
will of God: That those who oppose them are Impious, and have been punished
according to their Demerits, For Heaven never fails to protect the Heroes it
makes choice of, to carry on and execute its great designs. This Maxim serves
for the Foundation of the Aeneid; and is that first part of the Fable which we
call the Truth.

Besides, the Poet was obliged to represent his Hero free from all manner of
Violence, and elected King by brave and generous People, who thought it an
Honor to obey him, though they might lawfully have been their own Sovereigns,
and have chosen what form of Government they pleased. In short it was requisite
that the Justice of his Cause, like that of Augustus, should have been grounded
upon the Rights of War.

In a word, the Hero should have been like Augustus, a New Monarch, the Founder
of an Empire, a Lawgiver, a Pontifex, and a great Commander.

The necessity of reducing all these things into one Body, and under the
Allegories of a single Action, makes it appear how great a difference there is
between the designs of Homer, and that of Virgil: And that if the Latin Poet
did imitate the Greek, yet the applicaaion of it is so remote and difficult,
that it should never make his Poem pass for a new Copy, nor rob him of the
glory of the invention.

Let us see then the Collection which Virgil has made of all these Matters; and
the general Fiction, which together with the Truths it disguises, makes up the
Fable and Life of the Poem.

The Gods preserve a Prince amidst the Ruin of a mighty State, and make choice
of him to be the maintainer of their Religion, and the Establisher of a more
great and glorious Empire than the first. This very Hero is likewise elected
King by the general consent of those, who had escaped the universal Wrack of
that Kingdom. He conducts them through Territories from whence his Ancestors
came, and by the way instructed himself in all that was necessary for a King, a
Priest, and the Founder of a Monarchy. He arrives and likewise finds in this
new Country, the Gods and Men disposed to entertain him, and to allow him
Subjects and Territories. But a neighboring Prince, blinded by Ambition and
Jealousy, could not see the Justice and the Orders of Heaven, but opposes his
Establishment, and is assisted by the Valor of a King, whose Cruelty and
Impiety had divested him of his States. This opposition, and the War this pious
stranger was Testaturque Deos iterum se ad praelia cogi. Aeneid. lib. 12.
forced to, renders his establishment more just by the Right of Conquest, and
more glorious by the overcoming and cutting off of his Enemies.

The model being thus framed, there was nothing wanting but to look into
History, or into some Authentic Fables, for Hero's whose Names he might
borrow, and whom he might engage to represent his Personages. The obligation he
lay under of accommodating himself to the Manners and Religion of his Country,
invited him to look after them in the Roman History. But what Action could he
take thence, which might furnish him with a Revolution and Establishment of
Government, that was proper to his purpose? Brutus had expelled the Kings, and
placed the People in that which they then called their Liberty: But this Name
was Odious and Prejudicial to Augustus; and this Action was quite opposite to
the Design which the Poet had of confirming the Re-establishment of Monarchy.
Romulus first founded Rome, but he laid the Walls thereof in his Brother's
Blood; and his first Action was the Murder of his Uncle Amulius, for which none
could ever find a satisfactory excuse: And then, it was very difficult to
suppose these Heroes to have taken Voyages.

Besides, these two Establishments were made before the Destruction of the
States which preceded them, and were the cause of their ruin. The Kingdom of
Alba flourished during the Reign of the two first Roman Kings, but was erased
by the Third: And Monarchy was extirpated by Brutus, and his Successors in the
Consul-ship. It was of dangerous Consequence, to instill this Notion into the
Subjects of Augustus, and to put the People upon thinking, that this Prince had
ruined the Commonwealth, and banished their Liberty. The Truth of History
furnished him with a thought more favorable to his design; since in reality
Cicero and Tacitus do both inform us, That before this Prince made the least
show of what he was about to do, there was no Commonwealth in being. All the
vigor of the Empire was spent, the Laws were invalid, the Romans were nothing
else but the Dregs of a State; and in short, there was nothing left of Rome but
bare Walls, which were not able to last much longer. Thus Augustus destroyed
nothing, he only re-established a tottering State. This is what the Iliaci
cineres and Flamma extrema meorum, Testor in occasu vestro, nec tela, nec ullas
Vitavisse vices Danaum, and sifata, suissent, Ut caderem, meruisse manu. Virg.
2. Aeneid.
Poet is to prove, a great Empire ruined, of which his Hero was in no fault;
and this very Empire more gloriously re-established by the Virtue, and the good
Conduct of the Hero.

In the Roman History, Virgil did not meet with a Prince, who could with any
probability keep up the Character of his chief Personage; he was obliged to
look out for one some where else. Homer had this Advantage, that the Heroes of
his Fables were Greeks, and that his own Country was the Theater whereon most
of the Fabulous Actions were transacted: So that he had liberty enough to
accommodate himself to the Manners and Religion of those for whom he wrote.

But the Genius and Skill of the Latin Poet helped him to that which Fortune
denied him. He took Rectius Iliaci Carmen deducis in actus, Quam si praeferres
ignota indictaque primus. Poet.
Horace's Advice, and had recourse to a Hero of the Iliad: And that he might
make this stranger conform to the Religion of the Romans, he has seign'd, that
the Hero came thither to bring into Italy all the Ceremonies, and to settle
these Gods there, which ever since they have observed and adored. He has very
luckily completed this Conformity in the Customs and Manners by making
Sermonem Ausonii patrium moresque tenebunt. Aeneid. 12.
the Trojans and Romans but one People. And he as well as Homer has caused that
his Illustrious Heroes should be the Fathers of his Auditors; but with this
Advantage, that he himself makes the Application of it to his Readers, with an
equal measure of Wit and Applause.

Aeneas is his chief Personage, Turnus is Aeneas's Rival, and in Mezentius one
may observe the Cruelty of a Tyrant, who is at Enmity with both Gods and Men.

To conclude: The Arrival of Aeneas into Italy, was not invented by the Poet,
but handed down by Tradition. Segesta est oppidum pervetus in Sicilia, quod ab
Aenea fugiente a Troja, atque in haec loca veniente, conditum esse demonstrant.
Cicer. in Verrem, iv.
Cicero, who wrote before Virgil, speaks thereof in his Speech against Verres
upon the account of the City of Segesta. Its Inhabitants gave out that 'twas
built by Aeneas, when in his Voyage to Italy, he staid for some time on the
Coast of Sicily.

CHAP. XII. Horace' s Thoughts of the Epick Fable.
IT IS time now to join Aristotle and Horace to Homer and Virgil, and to see
whether the Thoughts and Precepts of our two Masters about the Nature of the
Epick Fable agree with the Practice of our two Poets. We will begin with Horace.

As for the Word Fable there is no difficulty in it; he gives it to the Neve
minor quinto, neu fit productior actu Fabula. Hor. Poet.
Dramatick, he gives it to the Epick Poem, and in plain Terms calls the Fabula
quae Paridis nartatur propter amorem Graecia Barbariae lento collisa ducllo.
Epist. ad Loll.
Ilida a Fable. The business is to know what he means by this Word, and what in
his Opinion the Epick Fable is.

If it be granted that this kind of Fable is of the same Nature with those of
Aesop, as we just now observed: Then we cannot say that an Epopea is the
Panegyric of a Hero; of whom is rehearsed some illustrious Action or other;
nor that the Epick Fable is only the Disposition of the different Parts of that
Action, and of the several Fictions with which it is garnished.

Three Things may clear up this difficulty: The first is the Choice and
Imposition of the Names, which are given to the Personages of the Fable: The
second is the Design which the Poet has of teaching Morality under an Allegory:
And the third is the Virtue and Excellency of the chief Personage.

The First is most decisive: For if the Action be feigned, and the Fable
prepared before the Poet has so much as thought of the Name he is to give to
his chief Personage; without doubt he does not undertake the Elogy of any
particular Man. But we do not find that Horace has concerned himself in the
business of imposing Names: Therefore we refer this to the following Chapter,
where we shall enquire into the Opinion of Aristotle.

The Point about Morality is expressly in Horace. This Critic is entirely for
the way I proposed. He says Qui quid sit pulchrum quid turpe, quid utile, quid
non: Before ac melius Chrysippo, and Cantore dicit. Ibid.
That Homer lays down admirable Instructions for the Conduct of Humane Life,
and herein prefers the Iliad and the Odyssei's to the Writings of the most
excellent Philosophers. This is self-evident, and having said as much already,
we wave saying any more about it: The Reader may consult his Epistle to Lollius.

But what signifies it (may some one say) if Homer had a mind to lay down
Instructions of Morality? This does not himder, but he might have made choice
of a Hero whom he might have praised, and this Elogy rightly managed might be a
Fable. He was willing then to praise Achilles and Ulysses as Xenophon did his
Cyrus. Is not this plainly the Design of Virgil? And if Homer was less
successful, ought we not to pardon the Imperfection of these first Ages, which
did not furnish him with those great Ideas of Virtue, and those perfect Heroes
which after-Ages did produce?

The Hero of Virgil is indeed a true Hero in Morality as well as Poetry; and
represents to Kings a complete Model of all the Virtues which conspire to make
a great Prince. This might have given that Idea of the Epick Fable, which we
are now examining. For the Aeneid is better read and understood than the Iliad.
And Men are easily persuaded, that the Design of these less known Pieces is the
same with that which they are so well acquainted with. Besides, this Judgment
is backed by that noble Idea Men commonly conceive of the Valor of Achilles,
and of the consummated Prudence of Ulysses. These are almost the two only
Things which the generality of the World are acquainted with in the Greek
Poems: Which may have induced them to believe that the Fables of Homer are the
Panegyricks of Achilles and Ulysses.

But if Horace, of whom we now speak, had been of this Mind; and if he had
believed that the Design of an Epick Poem, should be to establish the Merit of
a Hero, and to propose him to others as a Model of Perfection; it necessarily
follows, that either this great Critic was not well acquainted with
considerable Defects in the Heroes of Homer, or else that he did not think
Homer was a good Pattern to imitate.

Yet we see he knew the one, and believed the other. He knew no Virtue in
Achilles, nor any Action that deserved Praise. On the contrary, he says, That
in all the Iliad, both in the Grecians Seditione, dolis, scelere, atque
libidine and ira, Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra. Ibid.
Camp, and in the City of Troy, there was nothing to be seen but Sedition,
Treachery, Villainy, Lust, and Passion: And he never commends Achilles, neither
for his Valor, nor for his killing Hector, nor for any thing else he did
against the Trojans.

Yet it is evident what an esteem he has for Homer; and that he carped at no
Faults of his but Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. Verum opere in longo fas
est obrepere somnum. Hor. Poet.
Peccadilloes. He would have every one, that has a mind to be a Poet, Vos
exemplaria Graeca nocturna versate manu versate diurna. Ibid
have Homer before him night and day: And he proposes the Achilles of Homer
with all the Vices, and all the Defects he imputes to him, as a great Exemplar
for others to follow. Scriptor honoratum si forte reponis Achillem; Impiger,
Iracundus, iners, inexorabilis, acer, etc. Ibid.
He would have him be choleric, inexorable, one who knows nothing of Justice,
but has all his Reason at his Sword's Point.

It Is true, to these Qualities he has joined Vigilance and Zeal to carry on an
Enterprise. But these Qualities being in their own Nature indifferent, have
nothing that is good, but in Persons duly accomplished as was Scipio. In wicked
Persons they are pernicious Vices, as in Catiline, who made no other use of
them but to oppress his Country. It Is then in this last sense that Horace
ascribes them to Achilles, since he would have him be represented, as unjust
and passionate.

In Rursus quid virtus and quid sapientia possit, Utile proposuit nobis
exemplar Ulysses. Ep. ad Loll.
Ulysses he did discover an Example of Virtue: But since, in truth, he does
equally commend Homer, for giving us in his two Poems an Example of Virtue, and
an Example of Vice, should we not conclude, that the good or bad Qualities of
the chief Personages, are not at all necessary nor essential to the Epick
Fable; and that Horace never thought the Epopea was an Elogy of an Hero?

That which the Iliad and the Odyssei's have in common, is, that each of them
is a Moral Instruction disguised under the Allegories of an Action. This is
what Horace discovers in them; and by Consequence each of them, in the Opinion
of this Critic, is a Fable, and such a one as we described it.

CHAP. XIII. Aristotle's Thoughts of the Epick Fable.
WHat we have said concerning the Fable, is still more manifest, in the Method
and Order which Aristotle prescribes for the preparation of the Groundwork of
an Epick Action. He does not bid us to search at first in History for some
great Action, and some Heroical Person: But on the contrary, (...).
he bids us to make a general Action which has nothing in it particular; to
impose Names on the Persons after this first Fiction, and afterward to form
the Episodes.

For the better conceiving of his Mind, we must take notice what he means by a
general, what by a particular Action. (...). Poet. c. 9.
There is this difference (says he) between a Poet and an Historian, that the
One writes barely Matter of Fact, [the Other lays down things just as they
ought to have been. For this Reason, Poetry is more serious and more
philosophical than History; because Poetry tells us of general Things, and
History rehearses singular Things. A general Thing, is that which either
probably or necessarily ought to have been said or done; and is that to which
the Poet ought to have a special regard, when he imposes the Names on his
Personages. A singular thing is that which Alcibiades, for instance, has either
done or suffered.

The Poetical Action then is neither singular nor historical, but general and
allegorical: It Is not what Alcibiades has done, but it is in general what any
one else ought to have done upon the like Occasion.

It Is a material Point to take notice, that a thing must be done after one way
or other, for its being either absolutely good, or for its being only probable,
no matter whether it be good or bad. Xenophon has feigned the Actions of his
Cyrus in the first way; and so have all the Poets, who in imitation of him have
undertaken to describe the Actions of a great Prince panegyrically. On the
other hand, the Hecuba of Seneca should not have made such fine Reflections
upon the Destruction of Troy, and the Death of Priam. Not but these Reflections
in themselves are very just and useful; but only it is not probable, that a
Woman lying under such a weight of Afflictions, should have such Thoughts, as
were only becoming the Tranquillity of a great Philosopher, who had no manner of
Interest in the History of these ancient Times.

It Is in this last sense, that Aristotle orders Poets to feign their Actions
such, as they either probably or necessarily ought to have been. If there still
remains any doubt what he means by this Expression, it is very easy to give an
entire solution of it. One need only consider the Instance of an Action that is
just, and feigned regularly by the greatest of all the Poets: It Is that of the
Iliad. Without doubt he knew that the Action of Achilles, made choice of by
Homer, (...). Iliad. i. Iratus Graiis quantum nocuisset Achilles! Horat.
is the Anger of this Hero, so pernicious to the Greeks, and not to the
Trojans. We will not so much as suppose, that this great Philosopher ever
thought, that the Extravagancies of a Man, who sacrifices his Friends and his
Country to his own Revenge, was an Action any ways commendable, virtuous, or
worthy the imitation of Princes. Certainly it had been more for the Honor of
Homer's Country, if he had sung of the War and the taking of Troy. And yet,
(...), etc. Poet. c 23.
Aristotle does not only not blame him for forgoing such a glorious Subject,
and making choice of a more defective Theme: But he says that herein he has
done something that is divine.

He is then perfectly of the same mind with Horace, who would have Achilles
represented as choleric, passionate, and unjust; just as Homer has made him.
But that wherein Aristotle is more instructive than Horace, is his Method of
giving Names to the Personages, that are introduced in a Poem. For how could
one prepare the Groundwork of a particular Action of some illustrious Hero,
that is not feigned; when one does not so much as know whether the Hero be
Achilles, Aeneas, Ulysses, Diomedes, or any other? And yet this is what
Aristotle orders in the Composition of the Epick Fable, when he says, that one
should not give Names to Personages till after the Action is invented.

One should indeed do that just before the forming of the Episodes: For if
those, whose Names we borrow, have done any known Actions; the best way is to
make use of them, and accommodate these real Circumstances to the Groundwork
of the Fable, and to the Design of the Poet; to fill the Episodes with them;
and to draw from them all the Advantages possible according to the Rules of
Art. This management renders the feigned Action more probable, and may likewise
make it look like true History. Besides, Aristotle had said, that the Poet in
giving particular Names to Persons, which at first he made general, (...). C. 9.
should take special care to make his Fiction probable. This Precept is capable
of another meaning, which does not at all contradict what has been said, but
rather confirms the Doctrine which I proposed: It Is this, viz. That when you
have feigned an Action, if it be mild and moderate, you must not represent the
chief Personage thereof under the Name of Achilles, Tydeus, Medea, or any other
whose passionate Tempers are well known. In this Doctrine, we shall with
Aristotle meet with three sorts of Actions which the Poets make use of. In the
first, the Things and the Names of the Persons are singular and true, and not
feigned or invented by the Poet. The Secuit Lucilius Urbem, Te Lupe, te Muti.
Satyrists make use of this sort. In the second, both the Things and the Names
are feigned and invented by the Poet; and this is the Practice of Comedians. We
have laid down an Instance thereof in the Fable we made use of under the Names
of Orontes, Pridamant, and Clitander. In the third sort, the Things are
invented, but the Names are not. They are noted either by History, or by some
Tradition or other. This is manifest in the Fable we proposed under the Names
of Robert Earl of Artois, and Ralph Count of Nesle. We might say the same of
the Iliad, the Odysseis, and the Aeneid. This sort of Action is proper for
Tragedy, and the Epopea.

Nor need we feign Instances to prove these things, or seek for them in Greece
and old Italy; since we have enough of them nearer home, in the Satyrs, the
Comedies, and the Tragedies, which are daily to be seen in the World.

This Doctrine of Aristotle is so important, that it deserves to be consulted
in the Original. After he had informed us that the Poetical Action is not
singular, but general and universal; and after he had explained what he means
by these Terms, as we observed at the beginning of this Chapter, he then goes
on after this manner:

(...) Po. c. 9.
This in Comedy is very manifest. For after the Poet has prepared his Fable,
upon what is probable, he then gives his Actors what Names he pleases: And he
does not as the Satyrists, who speak only of particular Things. But in Tragedy
they make use of Names ready made to their hands. This makes us more readily
believe the thing to be possible; for Things that have never yet been done, we
are not obliged to think possible: But what has been already done, is without
all Dispute possible; since it would never have been done, had it been
impossible. Yet in some Tragedies, there is but one or two known Names, and all
the rest are feigned. Nay, in some others there is not one known Name, as in
the Tragedy of Agathon, called The FLOWER, where all the Names, as well as
Things, are feigned and invented. And yet it came off with Applause.

In favor of our Subject it is, that we cite what Aristotle says in this
passage, concerning the Tragic Fable. Nor is this a wresting of the Text,
since this great Master lays it down as his first (...). P. c. 32.
Precept in the Epopea, That we ought to prepare the Fable thereof as for
Tragedy.

It Is to be observed, that to make the thing probable, and to persuade Men of
its Possibility, from its having been done already, Aristotle orders us to put
the Fable not under a known Action, but only under known Names. This makes good
what we before alleged, viz. (...). P. c. 9.
That the Poet should think of making his Action probable, when he gives Names
to the Actors. This is the practice of those who make Histories of their own
Inventions. The better to persuade the World of the Truth of what they say,
they name the Places and the Persons; and the more these Names are known, the
more Credit they meet with. Homer has acquitted himself so very handsomely in
this Matter, that the Art he had of feigning the best of any Man in the World,
is one of the Commendations he deserved from the mouth of (...). Poet. c. 24.
Aristotle himself.

We conclude then that Homer in his Practice, and Aristotle in his Precepts,
are exactly of the same mind; that Homer had no other Design but to form the
Manners of his Countrymen, by proposing to them, as Horace says, what was
profitable or unprofitable, what was honorable or dishonorable: But that he
did not undertake to rehearse any particular Action of Achilles or Ulysses. He
made his Fable, and laid the Design of his Poems, without so much as thinking
on these Princes; and afterward, he did them the Honor to bestow their Names
on the Heroes he had feigned.

In other Histories of the Trojan War we do not indeed read of this Quarrel
between Achilles and Agamemnon, which Homer has taken for the Subject Matter of
his Iliad: And what is no less considerable is, that this very Design and
Action which the Poet has formed under the name of Achilles at the Siege of
Troy, might with the same Probability have went under the Name of Tydeus,
Capaneus, or any other at the Siege of Thebes. One might have made Adrastus the
General, and given him some occasion of exasperating the choleric Nature of
Capaneus. He, by withdrawing into his Tent only for a few days, might have
given the Thebans some Advantages over his Party. Afterward one might have
made this furious Person return to his Duty: and then fighting with the rest,
he might have gained the Victory to his own side, and revenged in one single
day, the Affront and Loss they had suffered the three or four days before: And
this is all we contend for in the Iliad.

The same might be said of Ulysses. All the Adventures we read of him in the
Odysseis, might with altogether as much Probability have been rehearsed under
the Name of any other Prince returning from an Expedition. For the better Proof
of which, we need only cast an eye upon the Platform which Aristotle himself
has left us thereof: and it is as follows.

(...) Poet. c. 17.
A Man is absent from his own home for several Years. Neptune persecutes him,
destroys all his Retinue, and only he himself escapes. In the mean time his
Family is in disorder, his Estate is made away with by his Wives Suitors, and
his Son is plotted against. But at last, after many Storms at Sea, he returns
home, discovers himself to his Friends, conceals himself from others, sets all
things to rights again, and puts his Enemies to death. This (concludes
Aristotle) is all that is proper, the Episodes make up the rest. This, in my
mind, gives us absolutely such an Idea of a Fable as I proposed: And in this
Model Ulysses seems to have as little to do as any other.

But after the Model is pitched upon, the Action invented, and the Names given,
then if those whose Names are borrow's have done any known Actions, the Poet
ought to make use of them, and to accommodate these true Circumstances to his
own Design. With these he must fill his Episodes, and from these he should draw
all the Advantages possible, according to the Rules of Art. Thus Aristotle
gives no Orders for making the Episodes till the Names are pitched upon.

He therefore transgresses the Precepts of Aristotle, and the Practice of
Homer, and spoils the Essence of the Epick Fable in particular, as well as of
other Fables in general, who begins by looking for his Hero in some History or
other, and undertakes to rehearse a particular Action this Hero has done, as we
see in Silius Italicus, Lucan, Statius, and in the Authors of the Adventures of
Hercules and Theseus, which Aristotle takes notice of. They did not make any
general or universal Platform without Names, but made it altogether singular.
For how could any one write like Silius, without thinking on the particular
Action and Name of Hannibal? Call him as much as you will, in your Platform, a
Cortain Man, yet still this Certain Man is determinately Hannibal. You are so
far from taking away his Name, that after you have once named him, you
afterward use a Pronoun or some other Word which signifies him, instead of the
Term Hannibal, which you are loath to repeat. Thus Aristotle does not order the
Names to be taken away (which can never be done) but he only orders to feign an
Action without Names, to make it at first universal, as he instances in the
Odysseis and Iphigenia.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Real Actions, the Recitals whereof are Fables.
THere is a great deal of Difference between Fiction and a downright Lie; and
between a Thing's being Probable, and its being no more than Probable. The Poet
is ordered to feign, but no body desires him to tell Lies. He is told, that he
is obliged to Probability, and not to Truth; but no one says, that the
Probability he is obliged to by his Art is incompatible with the Truth. The
Truth of an Action does not give him the Name of Poet, nor does it rob him of
it: and, as Aristotle says, (...). Arist. Poet c. 9.
an Author is as much a Poet, though the Incidents he relates did really
happen: Because whatsoever has been done, is capable of all the Probability,
and all the Possibility, which the Art requires, and of being such as ought to
be feigned.

This makes so little an Alteration in the Nature of Things, that even the
Author of a Fable is not always satisfied with making a bare Narration of the
Action he feigns, but sometimes sets it off with all the Truth it is capable of.
Anciently this was very common; and I might produce the whole History of the
Old Omnia in figura contingebant iis. Paul. Epist. ad Corinth.
Testament, all the Historical Truths whereof were so many Fables, or Parables
divinely invented, which represent Allegorically to us the Doctrine and the
Truths which the Author of them has since discovered to us.

But without concerning our selves with Sacred Things, we know what a Father
did to persuade his Children to Unity. He might have only told them, that a Man
very eager of breaking all the Arrows in his Quiver, strived to snap them all
in pieces at once; but after many fruitless Trials, he was forced to part them,
and then breaks them one after another without the least trouble. He might have
related a thing that was false, and only probable. But he did something more:
he put a bundle of Rods, tied close together, into the hands of each of his
Children, and bid them see if they could break them: They used their utmost
Endeavor, but to little purpose. Then he gave them the Rods one by one, and
the weakest of these young Creatures broke them easily. The Truth of this
Matter of Fact does not at all destroy the Nature of the Fable.

Sertorius made use of the same Artifice to his Soldiers. He ordered the Tails
of a couple of Horses to be pulled off before them. At last came a weak old
Fellow, and did it with ease, pulling off the Hairs one after another; whilst a
lusty Fellow had harassed himself to no purpose, because he took up too many
Hairs at a time. When a Recital is made of this true Action, one tells as exact
a Fable, as when one mentions the Fable of the Iliad, that of Aesop's Dogs, or
any other of that Author, wherein is neither Truth nor Probability.

It Is true this Action of Sertorius was feigned before it was true, and this
General did begin to form his Fable by the Moral, which is, (as I said) the
common way of forming Fables. But here I add, that the True Action may precede
the Fable. The Example of Engravers and Statuaries will make us easily conceive
how this reversed Order, so contrary to the Rules of Art, may notwithstanding
be applied thereto without destroying them.

Art teaches the Engraver to form his Design first, to fancy the Postures, and
the Proportions he would give his Personages; and afterward to look out for
Materials that are proper to receive that which he has imagined. If
notwithstanding he lights upon some choice Material, such as Agat, for
instance, whose Figure, Colors, and Veins, cannot be suited to all that he has
a mind it should; he then regulates his Design and Fancy according to his
Matter. But yet he is not of the Opinion, that these lucky Hits and particular
Accidents condemn the Justness of his Art, or make this a standing Rule for him
to go by, viz. That he must begin to look out for Materials, and then form his
Design according to what the Disposition of his Materials may suggest to his
Fancy.

In this then, as in a great many other things, Ut Pictura Poesis erit. Hor.
Poet.
Poetry is like Painting. The Poet is frequently obliged to suit himself to the
Dispositions of his Matter: which is found to be true, especially in the
Composition of the Episodes, which are made after the General Personages are
singulariz'd by the Imposition of the Names. It may likewise so happen that
some Person in History may furnish an Author with fine Fancies, and as exact a
Moral as that which Homer teaches. And in this Case, the Poet does not at all
transgress his Art, though he should apply all his Moral to the Action. But
notwithstanding this rare and lucky Hit, the common Rules lose nothing of their
Exactness or Authority.

We still maintain, That the Epick Poem is a Fable; that is, not the Rehearsal
of the Action of some one Hero, in order to form Men's Manners by his Example;
but, on the contrary, a Discourse invented to form the Manners by the Recital
of a feigned Action, and described at pleasure under the borrowed Name of some
Illustrious Person or other, that is made choice of, after the Platform of the
Action, that is ascribed to him, is laid.

CHAP. XV. Of the feigned Actions, the Recitals whereof are Historical.
AS there are True Actions, the Recitals whereof are exact and regular Fables;
so on the other hand, there are Feigned Actions, the Recitals whereof are
Historical. Nothing is to be esteemed Fabulous in them, but a downright
Falsehood, and that has as little to do with the Fable, as the Truth of History.
The Reason of this is, that the most essential part of the Fable, and that
which must indispensibly serve for its Foundation, is the Truth signified. It Is
easy to explain our selves by those very Examples we have already made use of;
we need only cut off some necessary Circumstances of them in order to
illustrate the Doctrine we would add here.

If the Dogs that were set to keep the Sheep, and whose Falling out gave the
Wolf an opportunity of seizing upon some of them; if they, I say, follow the
Wolf before they end their Quarrel; and if upon overtaking him, they are as
fierce against one another, as against their Common Enemy: in this case, though
the Wolf quit his Prey, fly for it, or though he die of the Wounds they give
him; yet this Fiction will no longer signify, That Concord re-establishes what
Discord destroys; since the Calamity would have been ended, though the Discord
still continued.

In like manner, if Achilles being provoked at the Death of Patroclus, had set
upon and killed Hector without being reconciled to Agamemnon; the Omission of
this Incident, would have spoiled the Fable.

We add farther, that if Achilles had been less inexorable, and had submitted
to the Offers of Agamemnon before the Death of Patroclus; and if this Quarrel
had not cost him the Life of his Friend, the Fable would have been spoiled: For
since the Quarrel would have been only prejudicial to Agamemnon, this Example
would have showed us, in the Person of Achilles, that one might Quarrel, and be
at Variance, without losing any thing: which is quite contrary to the Moral of
the Poet.

We should deprive the Odysseis of its very Soul, and spoil its Fable; should
we retrench from it the Disorders which the Suitors of Penelope raised in the
Isle of Ithaca, during the Absence of Ulysses: because this Poem would no
longer inform us of the mischievous Effects which the Absence of a Commander, a
King, or a Father of a Family, does produce.

Lastly, Take away from the Aeneid, the Choice which the Gods made of Aeneas
for the re-establishing of the Empire; his Divine Arms; the Care Jupiter took
to engage Mezentius in the Quarrel, where he was to be punished for his
Impieties; and the Terrors with which this God affrights Turnus: and the Aeneid
will no longer inform the Romans in favor of Augustus, That the Founders of
Empires, such as this Prince was, were the Chosen of Heaven, that Divine
Providence protects them from all manner of Violence, and severely punishes the
Impious, who oppose their Designs.

All these Recitals want their Emphasis, and that Instruction, which is the
most essential part of the Fable. When a Poet goes this way to work, he does
not make such Epick Poems as Aristotle and Horace prescribes Rules for, nor
such as Homer and Virgil has left us such exact Patterns of. It is not much
matter whether these Recitals are of true Things, such as those of Lucan, and
Silius Italicus; or whether they are feigned and drawn from Fables, such as
those of Statius in his two Poems. He relates a Fiction, they History: but all
three write more like Historians than Epick Poets.

It Is true, they have all a Mixture of Divinities and Machines, which carry a
Fabulous and Poetical Air in them: but since these very Additions are likewise
in true Fables, they will never make these Recitals to be of the Nature of an
Epopea; because these Fables consist only in the Additions and Decorations of
the Action. Now the Epick Fable is none of all this; it is on the contrary the
Soul of a Poem, and the Groundwork upon which all the rest is built. And this
Groundwork is to be prepared before one so much as think of the Decorations,
which make no part of the Essence of the Fable. The being adorned and loaded
with Animate Things, will never make an Animal, but there must be a Soul added
to it: And though all the Earth were covered and embellished with an infinite
number of Trees, and pierced very deep with their Roots, yet it will never pass
for a Tree it self.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Vicious Multiplication of Fables.
ARistotle bestows large Commendations on Homer for the Simplicity of his
Design, because he has included in one single part all that happened in the
Trojan War. And to him he opposes the Ignorance of certain Poets, who imagined
that the Unity of the Fable, or of the Action, was well enough preserved by the
Unity of the Hero, and who composed their Theseid's, Heraclid's, and such like
Poems, in each of which they heaped up every thing that happened to their
principal Personage. The Instances of these Defects which Aristotle blames, and
would have us avoid, are very instructive. These Poems are lost to us: but
Statius has something very like it.

His Achilleid is a Model of all the Adventures which the Poets have feigned
under the Name of Achilles Magnanimum Aeacidem, formidatamque Tonanti
Progeniem, and patrio vetitam succedere coelo, Diva refer. Quanquam acta Viri
multum inclyta centu Maeonio, sed plura vacant. Nos ire per omnem, sic amor
est, Heroa vetis.
. O Goddess (says this Poet) sing of the magnanimous Son of Aeacus, that has
made Jove himself tremble, and was denied Admittance into Heaven, from whence
he deduced his Origin. Homer has rendered his Actions very famous; but he has
omitted a great many more than he has mentioned: For my part, I will not omit
any thing. It Is this Hero at his full Length which I describe. Here is a noble
Design, and Aristotle falls short of what he proposes.

All this cannot be considered, but as an Historical Recital, and without the
least Glimpse of a Fable. Nor can I represent the Idea I have of this Design
better, than by comparing it with the Fables of Aesop. I have already compared
the Iliad with one of these Fables: and sure I may take the same liberty in a
Poem that is less Regular; and make a Comparison between the Achilleid which
comprehends several Actions under one and the same Name, and several Fables
which likewise go under one Name. Homer and Virgil diverted themselves with
their Poems of the Gnat, and of the Battle between the Frogs and the Mice: nor
shall I stoop lower, when, upon the like occasion, I shall enlarge my self as
far as the Design of Statius, and the Necessity of this Doctrine require me.

Let us suppose then and Author, who is as well versed in the Fables of Aesop,
as Statius was in the Epick Fable; and who has read the Batrachomyomachia, as
well as Statius has the Iliad. He shall have discovered in this Battle between
the Mice and the Frogs, the great Commendations which Homer bestows on the
Valor of one of the Heroes in this Fable, upon Meridarpax for instance; whose
Bravery made Jove and all the Gods wonder no less, than that of Capaneus in the
Thebaid. And as Statius has read of several Actions of Achilles, which are not
in the Iliad; this Author likewise shall have read of many Adventures
attributed to the Mouse, which are not in the Batrachomyomachia of Homer.

He shall know what passed between the City-Mouse and the Country-Mouse; in
order to teach us, That a little Estate enjoyed quietly is better than a
copious one, that exposes us to continual fears.

He shall know that a Lion having spared the Lise of a Mouse, was afterward
saved by this very Mouse, who gnawed assunder the Toils in which he was caught;
whereby he might inform us, That the good Offices we do to the most Infirm and
Ignoble, are not always lost.

He shall know the Story of the Mountains, which after great Groans, and much
ado, were delivered of a Mouse; like those who promise much, but perform little.

He shall have read in the Battle between the Cats and the Mice, that the Mice
being defeated and put to flight, those amongst 'em, who had put Horns upon
their Heads as a distinguishing Note of their being the Commanders, could not
get into their Holes again, and so were all cut off: Because in the like
Disorders, the Chief Leaders, and Men of Note, do commonly pay Sauce for all.

And upon these Discoveries, when he has conceived the Idea of a Piece more
surprising than the Batrachomyomachia, or than any other particular Fable of
Aesop, he shall undertake a Poem of all the Fables of the Mouse: as Statius
undertook one about every thing that Story or the Poets ever said of Achilles.
He might begin after the same manner, as Statius did his Achilleid:

Inspire me, O my Muse, what I ought to say concerning the Magnanimous
Meridarpax, which Jove himself cannot look upon without trembling. Homer indeed
has celebrated some of his Actions in his Poem; but there are a great many
still untouched; and I am resolved to omit nothing that my Hero has done.

He, as well as Achilles, had a Mortal for his Sire, to wit, the Redoubted
Artepibulus, and a Mother far above his Rank and Quality, no less than a lofty
Mountain. His Birth is foretold by the Oracles, and the People Hocking together
from all parts to be Witnesses of this miraculous Labor, beheld Meridarpax
creep out of his Mothers Belly, with so much Surprise and Delight, that their
joyful Shouts and loud Laughter carried the News thereof to the Gods.

In the War his Associates maintained against the Amazonians of the Lakes, he
signalized himself in the Death of Physignathus. He would have utterly
destroyed all his Enemies, had not the Gods put a stop to his Designs.

To refresh himself after the Fatigues of this War, he was for taking the Air
in some Country-Seat or other. But by the way he is surprised by a furious
Lion, who is just ready to tear him to pieces: but Meridarpax was no less
eloquent than stout. The Lion admired his parts, and let him go.

He was welcomed in the Country by an old Friend of his Sire's. This Villager
thought of making him a delicate Repast with his Country-Fare: but these old,
dry, and unsavory Morsels would not down with our nice Stranger. Whereupon
bepitying the sorry Life of his Friend, he invites him to a more pleasant one,
and prevailed upon him to jog along with him.

They were scarce got halfway to their Journey's end, but they heard a most
terrible noise. Meridarpax perceived 'twas the Lion's Roar which before had
spared his Life. He made that way, and in short found him so fettered in the
Noose, that he expected nothing else but Death: the Mouse freed him from that
fear, by gnawing asunder several Knots; and put the Prisoner in a Capacity of
freeing himself from the rest.

Meridarpax re-joyns his Country-Friend, conducts him to Town, and receives him
very splendidly in a Pantry well furnished. This new Citizen was blessing
himself at his happy Change; when on the sudden in steps the Housekeeper, and
at her Heels one of the most formidable Enemies these two Guests had. The
Domestic betook himself presently to his Citadel: but the poor Stranger,
seized with Fear, and every Limb about him in an Ague, sees himself a long time
exposed to the Claws of a merciless Enemy. In short he escaped; and without
minding the good Cheer, as soon as the Danger was over, and he came to himself,
he takes his Conge of his Host, and tells him, That he preferred his quiet
Poverty to all that Plenty which was so attended with frights and fears.

Meridarpax stomachs this Affront, calls together a great many of his Allies,
and prevails so effectually upon them, that they enter into a Confederacy with
him, and offer to serve him in the War. He, the better to maintain his
Grandeur, and make himself more conspicuous than all the rest, claps two great
Horns on his Forehead. At the first opening of the Pantry he had a great deal
of Success against some of the young Rangers, who first came in. But no sooner
had their squeaking called in their Sires and their Dams, and the Wawling of a
great many others at a distance, gave notice of a new Reinforcement, that was
ready to pour in upon the Assailants, but they presently thought of a speedy
Retreat. The rest with ease slunk into their Holes, and none left upon the spot
but Meridarpax embarass'd with the Ensigns of his Grandeur, which made the
Avenues too strait for him to escape at. One of his Party bid him lay aside his
Regalities, but he had scarce time to reply, That he had rather die like a
King, and make his Exit gloriously.

A Poem made up of these Stories joined together, and which we might compare
with one of the Fables of Aesop or the Batrachomyomachia, is very much like the
Idea I have of the Theseid, the Heraclid, the Achilleid, and other such like
Poems, when compared with those of Virgil and Homer.

Aristotle was in the right, when he called a certain little Iliad the whole
Trojan War squeezed into the compass of one single Poem. This Iliad indeed was
very small, since it was all contained in a very narrow Compass. It was not at
all like the Iliad of Homer, a small part of which filled so many Books. We may
say as much of the Achilles of Statius, who is comprehended at his full Length
within the Compass of twelve Books. And the Achilles of Homer is so vast, that
a few days of his Anger and Passion have taken up four and twenty Books
completely.

According to the old Ex ungue Leonem.
Adage it must needs follow, that this Lion of Homer was of a prodigious size,
since so large a Table could contain no more than one single Paw, which had
been the Destruction of so many Heroes. And on the other side, that the Lion of
Statius was but of a very small size, since all his Parts could be comprehended
and included in a Table less by half than that of Homer's.

You see then the ill Effects of Polymythia, or a Vicious Multiplication of
Fables. The Fable of the Dogs and the Wolf demonstrates how beautiful and
regular the Iliad is; and the Narration of the Adventures of the Mouse shows
the contrary in the Achilleid. If my two Parallels are of equal justness, the
Difference that appears to be between the Achilles of Homer and that of Statius
ought to be attributed to nothing else but the different Conduct of these two
Authors.

There is still another way of irregularly multiplying Fables. without making a
Rehearsal of the Hero's whole Life: and that is, by mixing with the main Action
other foreign Actions, which have no manner of Relation thereto. This belongs
to the Unity of the Action, and the Art of making the Episodes: of which we
shall speak in the next Book.

The Poem of Ovid's Metamorphoses is of another kind. If (as I have already
laid down the Idea I conceived of the Achilleid of Statius, of the Heraclid, of
the Theseid, and of other such like Pieces of the Ancient Poets) I had a mind
likewise to present the World with an Example of Aesop's Fables compared with
Ovid's Metamorphoses; I should be forced to put all the Fables of Aesop into
one Body: Because Ovid is not contented to rehearse all that ever happened
either to Achilles, or to Hercules, or to Theseus, or to any other single
Personage; but he makes a Recital of all that ever happened to all the Persons
of the Poetical Fables. This Recital is by no means an Epick Poem, but a
Collection of all the Fables that were ever writ in Verse, with as much
Connection and Union, as the Compiler of so many Incidents could devise.

And yet I do not see how any one can condemn this Design, and tax its Author
with Ignorance: provided none pretend that he designed to make an Epopea, nor
compare it to the Poems of Homer and Virgil, as Statius has done his Achilleid
and Thebaid.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Regular Multiplication of Fables.
Although we have been speaking so much against the Multiplication of Fables, yet
one cannot absolutely condemn it. Our Poets have got several Fables in each of
their Poems, and Horuce commends Homer for it. Nay Aristotle himself forbids it
in such a flight way, as might be easily evaded. (...). etc. Poet. 0. 8.
He finds fault with those Poets who were for reducing the Unity of the Fable
into the Unity of the Hero; because One Man may have performed several
Adventures, which it is impossible to reduce under any One and simple head. This
reducing of all things to Unity and Simplicity is what Denique sit quodvis
simplex duntaxat, and unum. Hor. Poet.
Horace likewise makes his first Rule.

According to these Rules then, it will be allowable to make use of several
Fables; or (to speak more correctly) of several Incidents which may be divided
into several Fables; provided they are so ordered, that the Unity of the Fable
be not spoiled thereby. This Liberty is still greater in the Epick Poem,
because it is of a larger Extent than ordinary Poems, and ought to be Entire and
Complete.

I will explain my self more distinctly by the practice of our Poets.

No doubt but one might make four distinct Fables out of these four following
Instructions.

1. Division between those of the same party exposes them to the fury of their
Enemies. 2. Conceal your weakness, and you will be dreaded as much, as if you
had none of these Imperfections, which they know nothing of. 3. When your
strength is only feigned, and founded only in the Opinion of others; never
venture so far, as if your strength was real. 4. The more you agree together,
the less hurt will your Enemies do you.
It Is plain, I say, that each of these particular Maxims, might serve for the
Groundwork of a Fiction, and one might make four distinct Fables out of them.
May not a Man therefore put all these into one single Epopea? No: Our Masters
forbid that, unless he could make one single Fable out of them all.

But they do not at all forbid it, if the Poet has so much skill as to unite
all into one Body, as Members and Parts, each of which taken asunder would be
imperfect; and if he joins them so, as that this Conjunction shall be no
hinderance at all to the Unity and the Regular simplicity of the Fable. This is
what Homer has done with such success in the Composition of the Iliad.

1. The Division between Achilles and his Allies tended to the ruin of their
Designs. 2. Patroclus comes to their Relief in the Armor of this Hero, and
Hector retreats. 3. But this young man pushing the Advantage, which his
Disguise gave him, too far, ventures to engage with Hector himself; but not
being Master of Achilles' s strength (whom be only represented in outward
appearance) he is killed, and by this means leaves the Grecian Affairs in the
same disorder, which he in that Disguise came to free them from. 4. Achilles
provoked at the Death of his friend, is reconciled, and revenges his loss by
the Death of Hector. These various Incidents being thus United together, do not
make different Actions and Fables, but are only the uncompleat, and unfinished
Parts of one and the same Action and Fable, which alone can only be said to be
Complete and Entire: And all these Maxims of the Moral, are easily reduced into
these two parts, which in my opinion cannot be separated without enervating the
force of both. The two parts are these, Concordia res parvae crescunt:
discordia magnae dilabuntur. Salust. de Bell. Jug.
That a right understanding is the Preservation, and Discord the Destruction of
States.

Though then our Poets have made use of two parts in their Poems, each of which
might have served for a Fable, as we have observed: Yet this Multiplication
cannot be called a vicious and irregular Polymythia, contrary to the necessary
Unity and Simplicity of the Fable; but it gives the Fable another
Qualification, altogether as necessary and as regular, namely its Perfection
and finishing stroke.

There are Fable; which naturally contain in them a great many parts, each of
which might make an exact Fable: And there are likewise Actions of the very
same nature. The subject Matter of the Odysseis is of this kind; for Homer
being willing to instruct a Prince and his Subjects, could not do it without
Multiplying Instructions; and this Prince's Travels into Countries quite
different from each other are likewise different Actions. This Multiplication
of Instructions and Incidents is extremely approved of by Horace. He commends
the Ut speciosa dehine miracula promat, Antiphaten, Scyllamque, and cum Cyclope
Charybdim. Hor. Poet.
Adventures of Antiphates, Polypheme, Charybdis, Circe, the Sirens and others,
stiling them the Miracles of the Odysseis.

One might likewise multiply the Fable another way, by mixing with it some
other Fable which should not be a part of the Principal one, but only a Species
of it. This might be done by applying to some Point that is chiefly specified
the Moral Instruction, which the Action contains in general. Homer has left us
an Example of this in the Fable of Vulcan, at the End of his first Book of the
Iliad.

The General Instruction is, That Discord is a prejudice of the Affairs of them
who quarrel: And this story of Vulcan applies it, to the Injury which the
falling out of Parents do their Children. Jupiter and Juno quarrel, their Son
Vulcan is for persuading his Mother to submit to her Lord and Husband, because
he was most Powerful. You know (says he) what befell me for endeavoring once
to protect you from the rage of Jupiter. He took me by the Heels, and threw me
headlong from his Battlements, and I carry the marks of it still about me.

This Fable is quite distinct from the Body of the main Action; for the Quarrel
between Jupiter and Juno, which cost Vulcan so dear, had nothing to do with the
Grecian Affairs: It Is likewise comprised in five Lines.

CHAP. XVIII. The Conclusion of the First Book.
THE Unity of the Fable, and the Regular or Vicious Multiplication that may be
made thereof, depends in a great measure upon the Unity of the Action, and upon
the Episodes; so we we shall speak more thereof in another place: But in this
and many other Points, the Examen of our Authors, and those particular
Instructions one might descend to for an exact Understanding of this Doctrine,
would never be at end. And tho I should fill several Volumes with what I have
to say about it, yet I should still leave enough to employ the Imagination, the
Genius, and the Judgment of both Critics and Poets, which Art without Nature
never brings to Perfection. Nor are we to fancy that Nature alone, and the
Advantages of a happy Genius, can make us capable of passing a Judgment upon
the Ancient Poets; unless Art and Study acquaint us with the Taste and the
Manners of their Auditors, and of the times they lived in.

The Relish which all Antiquity, both Sacred and Profane, Greek and Barbarian,
had for Fables, Parables, and Allegories (which are one and the same in this
place) gave the Ancient Poets a great deal more Liberty than the Moderns have;
and make things in Homer pass for Beauties, which would look but ill in a Piece
of Modern Poetry. This likewise exposes our Ancient Poet to such Censures, as
bewray our Ignorance oftener than his faults. The Vobis datum est nosse
mysteria, caeteris in Parabolis tantum. Qui potest capere capiat. Sapientiam
omnium antiquorum exquiret sapiens, and in versutias Parabolarum simul
introibit, occulta proverbiorum exquiret, and in absconditis Parabolarum
conversabitur. Eccl. c. 39.
Custom of that time was to conceal their Mysteries from Vulgar View, and not
to explain their Allegories. Men of Learning made it a particular Study to
discover these mysterious Meanings, and this Penetration of thought made a
Considerable part of their Learning. Our Age, which in other things pretends to
so much Light and Curiosity, is very negligent of these sorts of Knowledge,
since they no longer agree with our Customs.

It Is perhaps this very Neglect, which conceals from our Eyes the greatest
Beauties of Homer, and which instead of his Skill, only shows us a very mean
and gross Outside, which hinders us from judging favorably of his Spirit and
Conduct. However he had reason to make use of this way, and to accommodate
himself to the Poetae officium in eo positum ut quae vera sunt in alias species
obliquis figurationibus cum decore aliquo conversa traducat. Lactant. Instit.
l. n.
Mode of his Age. He knew well enough, that those, who did not penetrate him
would admire him as much as others; because every one was persuaded that what
appeared to the Eye of the World, was in effect nothing else but the Shell,
which contained the Profitable and Pleasant parts of his Work.

Virgil was a great deal harder put to it, because the Romans of his time did
not so frequently use Fables and Allegories. Cicero did not treat of Philosophy
as Plato and Socrates did, upon whom they Father Aesop's Fables. And S.
Familiare est Syris and maxim Palaestinis ad omnem sermonem suum Parabolas
jungere. Hieron. in Matthew.
Jerome takes notice that Parables were in greatest vogue in the East. So that
when Virgil was minded to shroud his Instructions and Doctrine under
Allegories, he could not be contented with such a plain outside as Homer's was,
which gravels those who cannot penetrate it, and who are ignorant that he
speaks figuratively. But he has so composed his Outside, and his Fictions,
that those very persons who can go no farther, may, without seeking for any
thing else, be very well satisfied with what they find there.

This Method is wholly conformable to our Way, and very much to our Palates.
But I fancy, the satisfaction we so easily find in these External Fictions
alone, does us some Prejudice. The more we fix there, the less search do we
make into the Bottom and Truth of things. This makes us perhaps Equivocate upon
the Word Fable, which we apply so differently to the Epopea, and to the
Fictions of Aesop.

This Prepossession of Mind does Homer a great deal of Diskindness; for we are
often willing to find such Virtues and good Manners there, which are not there,
and which we suppose ought regularly to have been there: Because we are so
little acquainted with his way of teaching Morality.

From hence it comes to pass that we meet with so great Obscurities in the
Precepts of Aristotle and Horace, who commend Homer so much for that, which we
are so little acquainted with, especially if we examine it according to the
Ideas of Perfection, which we generally form to our Selves. By this means we
shall be subject to great Confusions and many Contradictions. Before ever then
we pass a judgment upon these things and upon Homer, who is the Author and
first Model of them, it is requisite we rightly comprehend his Allegories, and
penetrate into the Moral and Physical Truths of the Fable, with which his Poems
are so full.

As little insight as I have in these Matters; yet I fancy, I have said enough
to explain what a Fable is, and to demonstrate the Idea I have of the Nature of
the Epick Poem.

The End of the first Book
Monsieur Bossu's Treatise OF THE EPICK POEM. BOOK II. Concerning the subject
Matter of the Epick Poem, or concerning the Action.
CHAP. I. What the subject Matter of the Epick Poem is.
THE Matter of a Poem is the subject which the Poet undertakes, proposes and
works upon. So that the Moral, and the Instructions which are the End of the
Epopea, are not the Matter of it. These things are left by Poets in their
Allegorical and Figurative Obscurity. They only give us notice in the Beginning
of their Poems, that they sing some Action or another: The Revenge of Achilles,
the Return of Ulysses, and the Arrival of Aeneas into Italy. Our Masters say
just the same thing. (...). Poet. c. 6. and elsewhere.
Aristotle informs us that the Poet Imitates an Action: And Res gestae Regumque
Ducumque, and tristia bella. Quo scribi possent numero monstravit Homerus. Hor.
Poet.
Horace in more express terms tells us, That the Actions are the subject Matter
of the Epopea.

But this Action is the Action of some Person: And our Authors expressly say as
much. (...). Ar. Poet. c. 2.
Aristotle says that the Poets, who imitate, Imitate the Persons that Act.
Horace says, that the Imitated Actions are the Actions of Kings, and Generals
of an Army. And our Poets do not propose simply, a Revenge, a Return, or an
Establishment: But they say further, that it is (...). Iliad. 1.
Achilles, who is Revenged; (...), etc. Odyss. 1.
Ulysses, who Returns; and Arma Virumque cano, Trojae qui primus ab oris
Italiam fato profugus Lavinaque venit Littora. Aeneid. 1.
Aeneas, that goes to be Established. Therefore, both the Actions and the
Personages are the subject Matter of the Epopea.

But suppose we should consider them apart, and ask whether the Action or the
Persons, is the Chief and Principal Matter of the Poem: It is plain by what has
been said in the former Book, that the Action is not made for the Hero, since
that ought to be feigned and invented independently from him, and before the
Poet thought of using his Name; and, that on the other hand, the Hero is only
designed for the Action: And that the Names of Achilles, Ulysses, and Aeneas
are only borrowed to represent the Personages which the Poet feigned in
general. The Nature of the Fable will not admit us to doubt hereof; since all
the Actions that are there rehearsed under the Names of a Dog, a Wolf, a Lion,
a Man, and the like, are not designed to inform us of the Nature of these
Animals to which they are applied; or to tell us of some Adventure that
happened to them: For the Author of a Fable does not mind any such thing. These
Personages on the contrary are only designed to sustain the Action he has
invented. It is therefore true in this Sense, that the (...). Arist. Poet. c. 6.
Action alone is the subject Matter of the Epopea, or at least, that it is a
great deal more so than the Persons; since that in its own Nature is so, and
the Persons are only so by virtue of the Action.

So likewise have those been condemned, who have taken the Heroes for the
subject Matter of their Poems. Aristotle finds fault with the Poets who under
the name of the Theseid, and the Heraclid, have writ the Lives of Theseus and
Hercules in Verse. Statius is likewise to blame in his Achilleid, because he
does not sing of Achilles who did such or such an Action, as Homer and Virgil
have done; but he sings Achilles himself, and this Achilles at his full length.

It Is true Virgil in his Aeneid, and Homer in his Odysseis call their Poem by
their Hero's Name: But this is no more than what is ordinary in Fables. Thus
the Titles run, the Wolf and the Lamb, the Lion and the Mouse, etc. and yet no
one imagines, that these Fables were written to inform us of the Nature of
these Animals, or to tell us what a certain Wolf has done or said. The same
Judgment ought to be made of the Epick Fables, and the Application thereof is
easy.

This Doctrine may easily render us capable of judging what extent is allowable
to the Matter of a Poem; of what Incidents it is composed; and whether it is
lawful to insert such as belong not to the main Matter.

Since then the Action is the Matter of a Fable, it is plain that whatever
Incidents are necessary to the Fable, and make up a part of it, are likewise
necessary to the Action, and are parts of the Epick Matter, none of which ought
to be omitted: Such, for instance, are the Quarrel of the Dogs; and that of
Agamemnon and Achilles: The havoc which the Wolf made among the Sheep; and the
Slaughter which Hector made in the Confederate Army: The reunion of the Dogs
with each other; and that of the Grecian Princes: And lastly, the Re-settlement
and Victory which was consequent to this Reunion in each of these Fables. Thus
all things being adjusted, you see the Fable, and the whole Action, with which
the Poem ought to conclude. If less had been said about it, it had not been
enough.

But can an Author put nothing into his Poem, but what is purely the Matter of
it? Or has he not the Liberty of inserting what he pleases, and of talking to
it, as Purpureus lare qui Splendeat unus and alter Assuitur pannus. Hor. Poet.
Horace expresses himself, some pieces of rich and gay Stuff, that have nothing
to do with the Groundwork? This is another Vicious Extreme, into which we
shall never fall, if we follow the Dictates of Right Reason, the Practice of
good Poets, and the Rules of the best Masters. They permit us on the one hand
to insert some Incident or another, that is necessary to Clear up a part of the
Action although this Incident make up no part of the Fable nor the Action; and tho
of it self it be not the subject Matter of the Epopea: And on the other hand
they do not approve of the Recital of an Incident that has not one of these two
Conditions, viz. Such a one as is neither the Matter of the Epopea, nor
necessary to illustrate any part of the Action.

Examples and Authority will justify this Doctrine, and make it more
intelligible.

If in the Fable we mentioned, Aesop had related that the Wolf ranging one day
in the Forest pricked his Foot with a Thorn, of which after a great deal of
Pain he was at last cured; doubtless he would have quite spoiled his Fable: And
Homer too had spoiled his, if he had made an ample Narration of some Adventure
that had happened to Hector, which had no manner of dependence on his design.
They would have been more considerably to blame, had they inserted any
Incident, which had not happened to these chief Personages, but which they only
saw or heard. On the other side Aesop had said something to the purpose, if, to
amplify his Fable, he had related that the Woolf was wounded in the Foot, and
being not quite cured, the Pain or the Weakness of that part hindered his
Running, and exposed him a Prey to the Dogs. So Homer has very regularly
related, that Ulysses had formerly been wounded in the Leg, as he was hunting
on the top of Parnassus: For this Wound served to discover this Hero, and this
discovery is part of the Action, and of the Matter of the Poem.

An Historian, that undertakes to write of one single Action, as the War of
Catiline, or the Reign of a King, as Salust has done that of Jugurtha; has not
for his subject Matter the Wars and Actions which went before, or happened
after. Yet he may mention some, which may serve as Instances in the
Deliberations; or for the maintaining of some Interests; or upon any other
Occasion that is necessary to his main Subject. A Poet has the same Privileges,
and the same Reasons on his side: Our two have practiced accordingly, and have
the Approbation of Aristotle himself. For he does not blame Homer for making
the Recital we mentioned; and yet he says that the Wound of Ulysses is not the
Matter of the Poem to which it is applied. His words are these. (...). Arist.
Poet. c. 8.
When Homer composed his Odysseis, he did not make all the Adventures of
Ulysses the Matter of his Poem; such as the Wound be received upon Parnassus,
and the folly he feigned before the Grecians: Because, tho one of these two
things happened, yet it cannot be said that the other ought necessarily, or
probably to have happened as the Consequence of the former.

This Passage of Aristotle teaches us two things. The first is, that every
thing we meet with in an Epick Poem is not the Matter of it; since this Wound
of Ulysses, which Aristotle, says is not the Matter of the Odysseis, is not
withstanding very largely described there. The second is, that the foreign
Incidents, that are inserted in the Poem, should be so United and Joined to
some other Incident, which is really the subject Matter of the Poem, that one
might swear if one happened, the other must necessarily, or in all Probability
have happened as a Consequence of the former.

The (...). Odyss. lib. 19.
Poet has observed this himself in the Wound of Ulysses. The discovery thereof
is a Consequence so probable, that this Hero finding he was forced to let his
Nurse wash his Feet, chose to let her do it in a dark place, that so at least
she might be kept from the sight of it. The Birth and Education of Camilla is
an Incident made use of after the very same way in the Aeneid: It is not the
subject Matter of the Poem, but it is necessary to clear up so surprising a
Miracle as was the Valor of that excellent Virago.

When an Adventure has not this Consequence, nor this necessary or Probable
Connection with some part or another of the Matter proper to the Poem; it is by
no means to be inserted: And upon this account Homer has not said one word of
the Counterfeit folly of Ulysses. Statius with a great deal more Reason should
never have meddled with the story of Hypsipyle.

All the particular Incidents which compose the Action are called Episodes. We
ought then to be well acquainted with the Nature, Union, and Qualities of them,
if we would know what is the Action and the Subject Matter of the Epick Poem.

CHAP. II. Episodes considered in their Original.
THE better to know what an Episode is, and to comprehend what Aristotle has
said about it, we must look back for it in its first beginning, and in the Rise
of Tragedy, whereby it first began. I speak of it here tho Monsieur Hedelin has
formerly writ about it.

Tragedy at first was only a Song in honor of Bacchus, which was performed by
several persons (who made up the Musical Chorus) with dancing and playing upon
Instruments.

Since this was too tedious, and might fatigue the singers, as well as disgust
the Audience; they thought of dividing the Song of the Chorus into several
parts, and of making some kind of Narrations between these Intervals. At first
one single person spoke them: Then they brought in two speakers, because
Dialogues are more diverting: And at last they increased the number to three,
to give way for more Action. Those who made these Narrations upon the Scene or
Stage were called Actors. And what they said being adventitious to the Song of
the Chorus, these Narrations were no more than Ornaments added to a Ceremony,
of which they were not a necessary part: And for this reason were they called
Episodes.

Besides, as they were only added to refresh the Chorus, and their Assistants;
it follows that the Chorus had sung before, and were to sing after them: So
that these Episodes were always to be placed between the two Songs of the
Chorus. Whatever was said before the first, or after the last Song, was not
looked upon as an Episode: But these new Additions were made for Reasons
distinct from those which were urged for introducing that. The design of them
was, either to welcome the Company, and prepare them for what was to be Acted;
and this was called the Prologue: or else to thank and take leave of them;
which was called the Exode or Epilogue.

All this made up the four parts of Quantity, as (...). Arist. Poet. c. 12.
Aristotle terms it: viz. The Prologue, the Episode, the Exode, and the Chorus.
The Prologue is all that precedes the first Enorance of the Chorus; the Episode
is all that is between the Songs of the Chorus; the Exode is that which is said
after the Chorus has done singing; the Chorus was the Company of those who sang
the praises of Bacchus: And at first that was the only Tragedy in being.

As this Narration of the Actors was inserted in several places, and made at
several times: So one might consider it Entire, as one single Episode composed
of several parts; and one might likewise call each part an Episode. In this
last sense a Tragedy had several Episodes; and in the first it had but only
one. These different Episodes of one and the same Tragedy might be deduced from
as many different Subjects: Or be all taken from the same Subject, that was
divided into as many Recitals or Incidents as the Poet had a mind to allow
Intervals for the Chorus to take breath in. If we consider the first
Institution of these foreign Pieces, there was not the least necessity of
deducing all of them from one and the same subject. Three or four Recitals of
different Actions, that had no relation to one another, could refresh the
singers well enough, and keep the Audience from languishing, as much as if they
had all been only different parts of one and the same Action, very closely
connected together.

But these foreign Beauties soon took off from the luster of those others which
so charitably gave them Entertainment: And that which at first was only an
Addition to Tragedy, afterward became the Principal part of it. Then, they
were considered as a Body, whose Members should not be Heterogeneous, and
independent on one another. The best Poets made use of them thus, and they
deduced their Episodes only from one single Action. This was so far established
in Aristotle's time, that he made a standing Rule of it, He says, that the most
defective Tragedies are such, whose Episodes have no manner of Connection. He
calls them Episodical, that is to say, overcharged with Episodes: Because these
lesser Episodes cannot make one single one, but of necessity remain in a
Vicious Multiplicity.

Actions, that were most simple, and had least of Intrigue, were most of all
liable to this Irregularity, because having fewer Incidents, and fewer parts
than others, they afford so much the less Matter. A Poet of no great Conduct,
very often quite spends himself at the first or second coming on of his Actors
between the Songs of the Chorus: And then he finds himself obliged to seek out
for other Actions to fill up the Intervals behind. Our first French Poets did
so. They took to fill up each Act just as many different Actions of a Hero,
which had no manner of Connection, save that they were done by one single
person. These Fables are Episodical, and such as Aristotle has condemned, as we
hinted before. His Censure is in these Words: (...). A. Poet. c. 9.
Of all the Fables and simple Actions that are, the Episodical are the most
Imperfect. The Episodical Fable I call such a one, whose Episodes have no
necessary nor probable Connection.

CHAP. III. An Explication of the foregoing Doctrine by an Instance.
AS for what has been said, you may consult what the Practice of the Poets was,
when they composed the Works we have been speaking of. After the Fable was
invented, and the Names imposed on the Personages, the Author was to consider
all the Circumstances of his Action, and what parts were finest and most
suitable to the Movements of the Theater, and to his own design; and then he
was to make as many parts of his Representation, as there were distinct
Narrations between the Songs of the Chorus.

To give you a famous Instance of this, and such an Instance as is well known
to the whole World, we will make use of Seneca's Oedipus, without minding the
several Absurdities that are therein.

Oedipus begs the Gods to tell him the means of putting a stop to the Plague
that then raged at Thebes: The Oracle returns him this Answer, That the Death
of King Laius his Predecessor must be Revenged. He makes enquiry after the
Murderers, and finds, that he was not only guilty of this Man's Death, but
besides was the very Son of Laius, whom he had Murdered, and of Jocasta his
Widow, whom he had Married. He punishes himself severely for it, and by this
means restores the Health of his Country.

You see then this Famous Fable, and in truth the most just, and the best
invented, as to the Moral, and the Theatral part, of any Antiquity can boast of.

The Reges and exactos Tyrannos Densum humeris bibit sure Vulgus. Hor.
Grecians, for whom it was composed, were extremely pleased to see the Crimes
and the Misfortunes of Kings: And the Moral instruction, that was most in Vogue
at that time, was such a one as did beget in Men an Aversion to Monarchy, and a
love to Democracy, which they called liberty. What the Poets feigned of Oedipus
contained all these things; and was very proper to prevent the Grandees from
Aspiring to Tyranny, and to inspire others with a Resolution never to endure it.

This Fable being thus conceived has very naturally these five parts. The first
comprehends the Misfortunes of the People. The second is the Enquiry into the
Cause and the Remedy of these Misfortunes. The third is the Discovery thereof.
The fourth is the Effect of this Discovery, and the performance of what the
Gods required, namely the punishing those Crimes, that had been the Cause of
the Ills which the People suffered. And the fifth is the Cure and Joy that
ought to be the Consequence of the Repentance and Punishment of Oedipus.

But this last part was very improper for the Theater. The Calm and Languishing
Passions, of which the spectators upon this occasion were hardly capable, would
have enervated and spoiled the Beauty of those violent Passions so proper to
Tragedy, and with which the Audience were to be inspired. The Poet then was not
to make an exact Episode of this last part. On the other hand, he has divided
the second part into two, and has supplied his five Acts in the following
Method.

1. The Plague raged in the City of Thebes, and brought so many Miseries and
dreadful Deaths upon them, that King Oedipus, touched with the Misfortune of
his Subjects, would freely have left the Kingdom: But he hopes for some Relief
from the Oracle he has sent to consult, and attends its Answer.

2. Creon brings him the Answer, and informs him, That the Cause of the Thebans
Misfortunes, is the Murder committed upon the person of his Predecessor King
Laius: And that the Remedy is the punishing of the Murderer. Oedipus sets
himself upon his duty of punishing the Offense: And to discover who this
Murderer was, whom no body as yet knew, he orders Tiresias to be sent for. This
Priest began by a Sacrifice, but that made no discovery of the thing in
question.

3. He then had recourse to more powerful means. He calls up from the shades
below the Ghost of Laius, who discovers to him that King Oedipus is the
Assassin that ought to be punished; and moreover, that this Prince, who thought
himself innocent, was at the same time guilty of Incest and Parricide. But
Oedipus, informed of this only by Creon, and supposing he was born at Corinth,
Son to King Polybus and Queen Meropa, is very confident of his own Innocence,
and gives no Credit to the Report Creon made him. He is persuaded it is a
Falsehood invented to out him of the Kingdom, to which Creon was next Heir.

4. But at last he understands that he did kill Laius, and was his Son, and
Jocasta's, whom he had ignorantly married.

5. He punishes himself severely, plucks out his own eyes, goes into Exile, and
so restores Health and Quietness to his People.

CHAP. IV. Of the several sorts of Episodes, and what is meant by this Term.
THE Word Episode passing from the Theater to the Epopea, did not change its
Nature: all the Difference (...) Poet. cap. 17.
Aristotle makes between them is, that the Episodes of Tragedy are shortest,
and the Episodes in these great Poems are by much the longest. So slight a
Difference should be no hinderance to our speaking of both after the same
manner.

This Word, according to Aristotle, is capable of three distinct Meanings. The
first arises from that Enumeration of all the parts of Tragedy, which we
mentioned. For if there are only four parts, viz. The Prologue, the Chorus, the
Episode, and the Epilogue; it follows, that the Episode in Tragedy is whatever
does not make up the other three; and that if you substract those three, the
Episode necessarily comprehends all that remains. And since in our times they
make Tragedies without either Chorus, Prologue, or Epilogue; this Term Episode
signifies all the Tragedy which is made nowadays. So likewise the Epick
Episode will be the whole Poem. There is nothing to be subtracted thence, but
the Proposition and the Invocation, which are instead of the Prologue. In this
sense the Epopea and Tragedy have each of them but one single Episode, or
rather, are nothing else but an Episode: and if the Parts and Incidents of
which the Poet composes his Work have an ill Connection together, then the Poem
will be Episodical and defective, as we hinted before.

But as all that was sung in Tragedy was, according to Aristotle's Expression,
called the Chorus in the Singular Number; and yet its being in the Singular was
no reason why each part (when it was divided into several) should not be called
the Chorus too; and so several Chorus's be introduced: just so in the Episode,
each Incident, and each part of the Fable and the Action, is not only styled a
part of the Episode, but even an Entire Episode. It Is in this sense that (...):
Poet. cap. 17.
Aristotle said, the Madness of Orestes, and his Cure by Expiatory Sacrifices,
were two Episodes. This Term taken in this sense signifies each part of the
Action expressed in the Model, and first Constitution of the Fable; such as the
Absence and Travels of Ulysses the Disturbance of his Family, and his Presence
which re-adjusted all things.

Aristotle tells us of a third sort of Episodes, when he says, that whatever is
comprehended and expressed in the first Platform of the Fable is Proper, and the
other Things are Episodes. (...) Ibid.
This is what he says just after he had proposed the Model of the Odysseis. We
must then in the Odysseis it self examine what this third sort of Episode is,
the better to know wherein it differs from the second. We shall see how the
Incidents he calls proper, are absolutely necessary: and how those, which he
distinguishes by the Name of Episodes, are in one sense necessary and probable;
and in another sense not at all necessary, but such as the Poet had liberty to
make use of, or not.

After Homer had laid the first Groundwork of the Fable, and prepared the
Model, such as we have observed it to be, it was not then at his Choice to make
or not make Ulysses absent from his Country. This Absence was Essential: (...).
Ibid.
Aristotle styles and places it among those things that are proper to the
Fable. But the Adventure of Antiphates, that of Circe, of the Sirens, of
Scylla, of Charybdis, etc. he does not call such. The Poet was left at his full
liberty to have made choice of any other, as well as these things. So that,
they are only probable, and such Episodes as are distinct from the main Action,
to which in this sense they are neither proper nor necessary.

But now let us see in what sense they are necessary thereto. Since the Absence
of Ulysses was necessary, it follows, that not being at home, he must be
somewhere else. Though then the Poet had his liberty to make use of none of
these particular Adventures we mentioned, and he made choice of; yet had he not
an absolute liberty of making use of none at all: but if he had omitted these,
he had been necessarlly obliged to substitute others in their room; otherwise
he would have left out part of the Matter contained in his Model, and his Poem
would have been defective.

This last sense of the Word Episode is not so different from the second as it
seems at first sight, since it still informs us that an Episode is a necessary
part of the Action. The difference between them lies in this, that an Episode
in the second sense is the Foundation and Groundwork of the Episode in the
third Sense: and that this third Sense adds to the second the probable
Circumstances of Places, Princes, and People, where and among whom he was cast
by Neptune, and abode during his Absence from Ithaca.

We must likewise take notice, that in this third Sense, the Incident which
serves as a Foundation to an Episode, ought to be of some Extent and Compass,
and that without this an Essential part of the Action and Fable is not an
Episode. As in the Example of Oedipus which we proposed; the Cure of the
Thebans is a part proper and essential to the Fable, and would be an Episode in
the second Sense. But because the Poet has not amplified this Incident by any
Circumstance, therefore it is not an Episode in the third Sense: it is only the
Foundation of such an Episode, which the Poet made no use of. This Observation
makes it clear, that in reality the first Platform of the Action contains only
what is proper and necessary to the Fable, and has not any Episode; as
Aristotle says of the Model he has given us of the Odysseis.

It Is therefore in this third Sense we are to understand the Precept of
Aristotle, which orders us not to form the Episodes till after we have made
Choice of the Names we would give our Personages. Homer could not have spoken
of a Fleet and Navy, as he has, if instead of the Names of Achilles, Agamemnon,
and the Iliad, he had made choice of those of Capaneus, Adrastus, and the
Thebaid, as he might have done without spoiling the Essence of the Fable.

If one should form an Episode, whereof not only the Names and Circumstances
were not necessary, but whose very Groundwork and Foundation was not a part of
the Action, that serves for the Subject Matter of a Poem: then this Episode
would have a sorry Connection, and would render the Fable Episodical. This
Irregularity is discernable, when one can so take away a whole Episode, without
substituting any thing in its room, that this Substraction shall make no
Vacuum, nor Defect in the Poem. The Story of Hypsipyle inserted in the Thebaid,
is an Instance of these defective Episodes. If the whole Narration of this
famous Matron were taken away, the Sequel of the main Action would be but so
much the better; one should not perceive that the Poet had forgot any thing, or
wanted the least Member of the Body of his Action.

But suppose any one should say, That if these particular Incidents were
natural and necessary Members, it would thence follow, that they would not be
foreign, extraneous, additional, and inserted Pieces. To this I answer, that
all this is true; but withal, that the Thing has retained its original and
native Name, though it has quite lost its Nature. Aristotle, who as well as
others has retained this dubious Term, prescribes the Rules of Tragedy under
the Name of Episode. Therefore in this Treatise, wherein I only follow his
Precepts, I am obliged to take every thing in his sense, and not spoil the
Nature of the Things, which he explains, by a superstitious adhering to a Word
that has changed its Nature ever since its first Rise.

I will maintain then that the Word Episode in the Epick Poem does not signify
in extraneous foreign Piece, even in Aristotle's opinion: but that it signifies
the whole Narration of the Poet, or a necessary and essential part of the
Action and the proper Subject, extended and amplified by probable Circumstances.

This Conclusion deserves a more particular Examination.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Nature of Episodes.
AN Episode, according to Aristotle, should not be taken from something else
and added to the Action; but should constitute a part of the Action it self.
That this is Aristotle's Mind, we shall find, if we would but reflect, that
this great Master, when he treated of Episodes, never made use of this Word to
Add, although his Interpreters have found it so natural, that they have
commonly made use of it in their Translations and Notes.

When he commends Homer for taking only part of the Siege of Troy for the
Subject Matter of his Iliad; he does not say that he has amplified it by Adding
a great many Episodes to it; this Expression would distinguish the Episodes
from the Matter to which they would have been added: But he says, (...). Poet.
c. 23.
That he made use of a great many Episodes of this Action: and this denotes
that the Episodes of the Iliad were part of the Action which is the
Subject Matter thereof. And a few Lines after he says, (...). Ibid.
That the Poet divided his Poem by Episodes. This is what we observed before in
Oedipus.

If the Episodes were taken elsewhere, and added to the Action, whereof they
were not parts, it would signify little whether they were joined and connected
with one another or no, but they should be joined to the Action, and this
(...). Cap. 9.
Aristotle should have taught us. And yet he does no such thing, but orders us
to connect them with one another.

He does not say, that after one has prepared the Platform of the Fable, and
made Choice of the Names, one should add the Episodes; but he makes use of a
Verb derived from this Word; as if we should say in our Language, (...). Cap.
17.
That the Poet ought to Episodize his Action. And elsewhere he says, That the
Episodes should not be foreign, but (...). Ibid.
proper to the Subject.

In fine, we might likewise allege this very Chapter, wherein Aristotle lays
down the first Draught of the Odysseis, and which he concludes by saying, that
whatever he has proposed is proper to the Subject, and that the Episodes make
up the rest. In this Passage, to give us a reason of the different Extent of
Tragedy and the Epopea; or to inform us how this last becomes longer: He does
not say, that they Add a few Episodes to the Tragic Action, and a great many
to the Epick; but he says more exactly, That the Episodes of Tragedy are short
and concise, and the Epopea is extended and amplified by its Episodes. He
demonstrates this Length of the Epopea amplified by the Extent of its Episodes,
by the Poem of the Odysseis, which he brings as an Example, and says, (...).
Ibid.
The Subject of it is long. Now if the Episodes (take the Word in what sense
you please) be not part of the Subject, it is plain the more room they take up
the less is left for the Subject; and that the longer they are, the more
straightened and short will the Subject be. If then the Epopea be stretched out by
its Episodes, and if for this very reason the Subject of the Odysseis is long,
as Aristotle affirms; it then necessarily follows, that the Subject is nothing
else but the very Episodes.

The better to demonstrate this Length of the Odysseis, Aristotle adds, That
the Subject of this Poem is a Voyage for several Years; That Neptune did all he
could to hinder the chief Personage from returning home; that he does return
thither notwithstanding; where he meets with very great Disorders, the Authors
of which he punishes, and so restores Peace and Quietness to his Kingdom. This
Subject is indeed a great deal longer than that of the Iliad; and it requires a
longer time, and more Actions for all these things, than for the simple Anger
of an enraged and pacified person, where every thing was transacted in one and
the same place.

This Length of the Odysseis, compared to that of the Iliad, would still hold
good, though we should substract from it the several Years which precede the
opening of the Poem; and began the Action only at the time of the first Council
of the Gods. For it would be still longer than that of the Iliad by a fifth
part; the one taking up 58 Days, and the other only 47 or 48.

But one cannot exclude from the Subject that which precedes the opening of the
Poem, and that which Ulysses relates to Alcinous, without contradicting (...).
Cap. 17.
Aristotle, by reducing into the Compass of less than two Months, what he says
took up several Years. This would be to give (...). Odyss. 1.
Homer himself the Lie, who says, That his Subject contains the Voyages and
Travels of a Man, who after the taking of Troy, saw several Cities, and knew
the Customs of a great many States and People: he says, that he suffered much
by Sea, and did all he could to secure the Return of his Attendants as well as
of himself. Now all this did not happen since the first Council of the Gods.
Then, there were seven whole Years, in which he never so much as thought of his
Attendants, for they were all destroyed. And since that, there happened but one
Tempest, and he visited no more than one City. These seven Years then, and all
the Adventures, the Travels, and the Tempests which preceeded, from the Ruin of
Troy down to that time, are not extraneous, foreign, or additional Pieces; but
are with the rest the Subject of the Poem. And yet they are Episodes, as
Aristotle asserts in these Words, The rest are Episodes: for this Rest is all
that he did not name in particular. Now he spoke only in general, of the
Absence of Ulysses, of the Storms he met with, of the Disturbances of Ithaca,
and of the Re-establishment of this Prince.

In short, when we discoursed of the Nature of the Fable, we there took notice
of the absolute Necessity the Poet lay under of keeping Ulysses from his
Country a very long time; of ordering his Absence as caused by the Storms he
met with; of casting this Hero upon several different Countries; of raising
great Disorders in Ithaca; of making an Example of his Enemies by punishing
them; and of re-establishing the Prince himself. This was so far necessary to
the Subject, that the Poet was not left to his Liberty of changing it, without
destroying his Design, spoiling his Fable, and making another Poem of it.

But though it was necessary that Ulysses should be with strange Princes for
several Years; yet it was not necessary that one of these Princes should be
Antiphates, another Alcinous; nor that the Nymph Calypso, and the Enchantress
Circe should be his Hostesses. One might have changed these Persons and States
into others, without changing the Design and the Fable. Thus, though these
Adventures were part of the Subject after the Poet's Choice of them, yet they
were not proper to the Subject.

It is likewise necessary to the Subject, that Ulysses revenge himself, and
punish his Wife's Courtiers; but it is neither proper nor necessary that he
should kill them with Javelins, as they were at Supper in his House, at Night
too, and none to assist him but his Son and two or three of his Domestics. He
might have appeared at the Head of an Army, and without the least Surprise have
killed them with his drawn Sword at their own Houses, or in the open Field. But
yet will any Man say, that his killing them with Javelins is not part of the
Subject?

In a word, the Revenge he takes, and the punishing of these Miscreants,
expressed in short, as we see it in the Model Aristotle has left us, is a simple
Action proper and necessary to the Subject. It is not an Episode, but the
Foundation and Soul of an Episode: and this same Punishment explained and
amplified with all the Circumstances of Times, Places, and Persons, is not a
simple and proper Action, but an Episodiz'd Action, and a true Episode: And
though the Poet is left at his Freedom and Choice therein, yet it does not
follow that the Episode is formed upon a less proper and necessary Foundation.

It Is in this last Sense, and of this only sort of Episodes, we shall generally
speak.

CHAP. VI. The Definition of Episodes.
AFter what has been said, we may very well infer, That Episodes are necessary
Parts of the Action, extended by probable Circumstances.

An Episode is but a part of an Action, and not an entire one; like that of
Hypsipyle in Statius, which renders this Poem defective and Episodical.

That part of the Action which serves for a Foundation to the Episode, ought
not to continue in its Simplicity; such as it is in the General related in the
first Draught of the Fable. Aristotle having recounted the Parts of the
Odysseis, says expressly, that they are proper: and in this Case distinguishes
them from the Episodes. Thus in the Instance of Oedipus which we produced, we
said, that the Cure of the Thebans is not an Episode, but only the Foundation
and Subject of an Episode, which the Poet made no use of. And Aristotle (by
saying that Homer in the Iliad has taken but a few Things for his Subject, but
that he has made use of a great many Episodes) does inform us, that the Subject
contains in it self a great many Episodes, which the Poet may or may not make
use of. That is, it contains the Foundation of them, which one may leave in its
general and simple Brevity, as Seneca has done the Cure of the Thebans; or
which one may enlarge and explain, as the same Author has done the Chastisement
of Oedipus. In this last way it is that the Poet makes use of them, and forms
just Episodes out of them.

The Subject of a Poem may be long after two ways: the first is, when the Poet
makes use of a great many of its Episodes: and the other is, when he gives to
each a considerable Extent. It Is by this Method, that the Epick Poets extend
their Poems a great deal more than the Dramatick.

We must likewise take notice, that there are some parts of an Action which of
themselves do naturally present us but with one single Episode; as, the Death
of Hector, that of Turnus, etc. There are likewise more fertile parts of the
Fable, which oblige the Poet to form several Episodes of each part, though in
the first Model they are expressed in as simple a manner as the rest. Such are,
the Fight between the Trojans and the Grecians; the Absence of Ulysses; the
Travels of Aeneas, etc.

For the Absence of Ulysses from his own Country during so many Years together,
does necessarily require his Presence elsewhere; and the Design of the Fable
obliges him to be cast into several Dangers, and upon several States. Now each
Danger, and each State, furnishes Matter for an Episode, which the Poet may
make use of, if he please.

We conclude then, that Episodes are not Actions, but the parts of an Action:
That they are not added to the Action, and the Matter of the Poem; but that
they constitute this Action and this Matter, as the Members of the Body
constitute the Matter of it: That upon this Account they are not deduced from
any thing else, but the very Foundation of the Action: That they are not united
and connected to the Action, but to one another: That all the parts of an
Action are not so many Episodes; but only such as are amplified and extended by
particular Circumstances, and in the manner whereby the Poet rehearses a Thing:
And lastly, That this Union between each other, is necessary in the Foundation
of the Episode, and probable in the Circumstances.

CHAP. VII. Of the Unity of the Action.
THere are four Qualifications in the Epick Action: the first is its Unity; the
second its Integrity; the third its Importance; and the fourth its Duration. We
will begin with the first.

In this place we shall consider the Unity of the Action, not only in the first
Draught and Model of the Fable, but in the extended and Episodiz'd Action. And
in truth, if the Episodes are not added to the Action, but on the contrary are
the necessary parts thereof; it is plain, that they ought to be comprehended in
it, and its Unity still preserved: And the Fables which Aristotle calls
Episodical are such, wherein some Episodes that are foreign, and not duly
connected, add some Actions to the Action of the Poem, and so spoil the Unity
of it.

The Unity of the Epick Action, as well as the Unity of the Fable, does not
consist either in the Unity of the Hero, or in the Unity of Time: This is what
we have already taken notice of. But it is easier to tell wherein it does not
consist, than it is to discover wherein it does.

From the Idea I have conceived thereof by reading our Authors, these three
things, I suppose, are necessary thereto. The first is, to make use of no
Episode, but what arises from the very Platform and Foundation of the Action,
and is as it were a Natural Member of this Body. The second is, exactly to
unite these Episodes, and these Members, with one another. And the third is,
never to finish any Episode so as it may seem to be an entire Action; but to
let each Episode still appear in its own particular Nature, as the Member of a
Body, and as a Part of it self not complete.

We have already established the first of these three Qualifications, in the
Doctrine we laid down concerning the Episodes; and perhaps enough has been said
about it: but yet we will clear up this Doctrine by some Instances taken from
the principal Episodes of the Aeneid.

In the Scheme we have drawn of the Fable and Action of this Poem, we have
observed, that Aeneas ought of necessity to be a King newly elected, and the
Founder of an Empire raised upon the Ruins of a decayed State: that this Prince
should be opposed by wicked Men: and lastly, that he should be established by
Piety and the Force of Arms.

The first part of this Action is the Alteration of a State, of a King, and of
a Priest. And this is Virgil's first Episode, contained in his second Book,
wherein the Sacra suosque tibi commendat Troja penates: Hos cape fatorum
comites, his moenia quaere, etc. Aeneid. 2.
Poet describes the Subversion of the Trojan Empire in Asia, the Death of King
Priam, and of the Priest Panthus. To all this he adds the Choice which both
Gods and Men make of Aeneas to be the Successor of these two deceased Persons,
and to re-establish the Empire of the Trojans in Italy.

The second part of the Action begins, when Aeneas sets himself upon his Duty,
executes the Orders he receives, and marches for Italy. Virgil has placed
almost all this second Episode in his third Book: the rest lies in the first,
in the fifth, and in the beginning of the seventh.

The third part of the Action is the Establishing Religion and Laws. Religion
consists in Sacrifices, in Funeral Rites, and Festival Sports. Aeneas performed
all these; and the Hac casti maneant in relligione Nepotes. Aeneid. 3.
Poet took care from time to time to advertise his Readers, that these
Ceremonies were not to be considered as so many particular Actions, or as the
simple Effects of the Hero's Piety upon some particular Occasions; but as
sacred Rites, which he was going to Hinc maxima porro Accepit Roma, and patrium
servavit honorem. Aeneid. 5.
transfer into Italy under the Quality of the Founder of the Roman Empire. By
this means, no body can doubt of his meaning, nor take these Acts of Religion,
and these Episodes, for any thing else but the necessary and essential Parts of
his Action and Matter. This Part furnishes the Poet with several Episodes,
which he distributes into several parts of his Work; as in the third Book,
where Aeneas receives from Helenus the Ceremonies which hereafter he was
obliged to institute: in the fifth, where he celebrates the Sports hard by his
Father's Tomb: And elsewhere almost throughout the whole Poem.

Virgil designed his sixth Book for the other part about Laws, viz. for the
Morality, for the Politics, and for the forming such a Genius as was to
animate the Body-Politick of the Roman State.

After these parts of the Action, which contain the performance of the Hero's
Designs, we are to consider likewise the Obstacles he meets with, which make up
the Intrigues of the Action. These Obstacles are the Effects of Juno's Passion.
And we might say, that this Opposition is no less proper to the Aeneid, than
the Opposition of Neptune is to the Odysseis. Now we observed that Aristotle
placed the Anger of this God in the first Draught of the Greek Poem among the
Incidents that are proper to it.

The first of these Intrigues, and the most considerable Obstacle of all, is
that of Dido, which takes up the first and fourth Book. The second is the
Burning of his Fleet in the fifth Book. The third is the Love, the Ambition,
and the Valor of Turnus. This last supplied him with a great many Episodes,
being the Cause of all the War Aeneas met with in Italy. It begins at the
seventh Book, and is not over till the End of the Poem. It Is thus that the
Episodes of the Aeneid are deduced from the Fable and the very Essence of the
Action.

The second Thing we said was necessary for the Unity of the Action, is the
Unity and the Connection of the Episodes with one another. For besides that
Relation and Proportion which all the Members ought to have with one another,
so as to constitute but one Body, which should be homogeneous in all its parts;
it is required farther, that these Members should be, not contiguous as if they
were cut off and clapped together again, but uninterrupted and duly connected.
Without this, the natural Members would not make up that Union, which is
necessary to constitute a Body.

The Continuity and Situation of Episodes is not exact, when they only follow
one another: but they should be placed one after another so as the first shall
either be necessarily or probably the Cause of that which follows. (...) Poet.
cap. 8.
Aristotle finds fault with Incidents that are without any Consequence or
Connection; and he says that the Poems, wherein such sorts of Episodes are,
offend against the Unity of Action. He brings, as an Instance of this Defect,
the Wound which Ulysses received upon Parnassus, and the Folly he counterfeited
before the Grecian Princes: because one of these Incidents could not have
happened as a Consequence of the other; Homer could not have given them a
necessary Connection and Continuity: nor has he spoiled the Unity of the
Odysseis by such a Mixture.

But he gives us a complete Instance of the Continuity we speak of, in the
Method whereby he has connected the two parts of his Iliad; which are the Anger
of Achilles against Agamemnon, and the Anger of the same Hero against Hector.
The Poet would not have duly connected these two Episodes, if before the Death
of Patroclus, Achilles had been less inexorable, and had accepted of the
Satisfaction Agamemnon offered him. This would have made two Angers and two
Revenges quite different from, and independent of one another. And though both
had been necessary and essential to the Fable, to make it appear what Mischiefs
Discord, and what Advantages Concord is the Cause of: Yet the Unity would have
been only in the Fable, but the Action would have been double and Episodical:
because the first Episode would not have been the Cause of the second, nor the
second a Consequence of the first.

These two parts of the Ilaid are joined together very regularly. If Achilles
had never fell out with Agamemnon, he would have fought in person, and not have
exposed his Friend singly against Hector, under those Arms that were the cause
of this Young man's Rashness and Death. And besides, the better to join these
two parts with one another, the second is begun a great while before one sees
what Event the first ought to have. All the Articles of the Reconciliation are
proposed, and one might say, that this Reconciliation, with respect to
Agamemnon, is made before the Death of Patroclus, and even before it was ever
thought of exposing him to a Battle. There was nothing more wanting but
Achilles's Consent: and since that was not given till the Death of Patroclus
had made him resolve upon that of Hector; it may be truly affirmed, that the
Anger and the Revenge of Achilles against Hector, which is nothing else but the
second part of the Poem, is the only cause of the Reconciliation, which
finished the first part.

But for the Unity of a Body, it is not enough that all its Members be natural,
and duly united and compacted together; it is farther requisite, that each
Member should be no more than a Member; an imperfect Part, and not a finished
complete Body. This is the third Qualification we said was necessary to
preserve the Unity of the Epick Action.

For the better understanding of this Doctrine, we must take notice that an
Action may be entire and complete two ways: The first is, by perfectly
completing it, and making it absolutely entire with respect to the principal
Persons that are interested therein, and in the principal Circumstances which
are employed about it. The second way is by completing it only with respect to
some Persons, and in some Circumstances that are less principal. This second
way preserves the Action in its regular Unity, the other destroys it. We will
give you an Instance of each.

The Greeks were assembled together to revenge the Affront offered to Menelaus,
and to force the Trojans to restore him his Wife, whom Paris had stolen away.
There happens a Difference between Agamemnon and Achilles. This last being
highly incensed, abandons the Common Cause, and withdraws himself; so that in
his Absence Agamemnon's Army was worsted by the Trojans. But the Boldness of
the King of Kings puts him upon engaging the Enemy without Achilles. Away he
marches to give them a general Assault with all his Forces.

The Fight began with the Duel between Menelaus and Paris. They sight without
Seconds, upon Condition that Helen should be the Conquerour's; and the War
decided by this Combat. Though the Anger of Achilles was the Cause of this
Combat, and whatever Interest he might have therein; yet it is plain, that
Menelaus, Paris, and Helen are so far the principal Personages concerned, that
if this Action had been finished with respect to them, it would have been quite
finished: it would not have made a part of the Action and of the Revenge of
Achilles, but a complete Action; which would have put an End to the Revenge,
and rendered the Anger of this Hero ineffectual. Therefore Homer has not
finished this Action: Paris being hard put to it escapes, and Menelaus is
wounded with a Dart by Pandarus; by this means Achilles begins to be revenged,
and this Incident becomes an exact Episode.

Virgil has managed the Episode of Dido another way. He has finished it so,
that the Union of his main Action is as Regular as the Art of Poetry requires.
The Address of this great Poet consists in ordering it so, that Dido, in whom
this Incident is complete, was not the chief Personage; and her Marriage was
only a simple Circumstance of an Action, that is not finished, and yet is the
Soul and the only Foundation of this particular Action: in a word, Aeneas is
the Hero of this Episode, which is only invented to retard the Settlement of
this Hero in Italy.

This is manifest, if we would but reflect on what the Skill and Care of the
Poet has left us about it. Juno, who carried on all this Intrigue, was very
little concerned for Dido's Happiness. If she had loved her so well, she should
have diverted the Trojan Fleet from her Coasts; upon which place she her self
did cast them, Foelix, heu! nimium foelix, si littora tantum, Nunquam Dardaniae
tetigissent nostra carinae. Aeneid. 4.
which was the only Cause of this Queens Miseries. When she proposes the Match
to Venus with so much Ardency, 'twas only the top of her Countenance. Sensit
enim simulata mente locutam, Quo regnum Italiae Libycas averteret oras.
Her whole Aim was to keep Aeneas in Africa, and to bestow on Carthage the
Empire of the World, which belonged only to Italy, and depended upon the Stars
of this Hero. You see then the only thing she drives at, the rest is only
counterfeit, and a Means whereby she endeavors to accomplish this End.

Dido her self makes it appear how less considerable her Person is than that of
Aeneas, and that she is only brought in to hinder the Designs of this Prince.
It Is she, that courts him, and would have him for her King, Husband, and
Protector, against the Rage of her Brother and the Incursions of Iarbas. But
she could only obtain a Marriage for a Month or so, as was customary now and
then in those times. Aeneas tells her plainly, that the Name of Husband should
be no Hinderance to his Departure, and his Designs for Italy: and he declares,
that this Condition of not leaving Carthage was not in the Articles of their
Alliance.

The more an Episode may seem to be a complete Action, the more care should the
Poet take to prepare the Reader's mind, before he engages him in it. This is
what Virgil did in the Episode we mentioned. All the beginning of the first
Book does sufficiently inform the Reader, that the Stay of Aeneas at Carthage
was only a hindrance and constraint which he was forced to submit to. The Poet
is likewise obliged to repeat this Advertisement at the beginning of these
Episodes; that so the Reader may know to what the Poet engages him. Thus the
Trojans were scarce got to Carthage, but they give out that their Design is for
Italy. And before Dido made the least show of her Designs upon Aeneas; the Poet
spends the second and third Books to inform us of this Hero's Design, and the
necessity of his going to Italy, according to the Orders he received from the
Oracles and the Gods. All this is declared in his Speech to Dido her self. To
conclude, All this Episode is so full of this main Design, that the Poet is not
willing we should lose the sight of it for a Moment. Therefore Aeneas is
doubtless the Hero of this Episode: and we ought to look upon this Incident
rather as an Obstacle laid to hinder the Settlement of the Trojans in Italy, as
the History of Dido, in whom it is a complete Action.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Faults which corrupt the Unity of the Action.
HOmer and Virgil have furnished us with Instances of an Exact Unity, with the
three Qualifications we required. We must now enquire elsewhere for Instances
of an Unity that is corrupted by Episodes that are irregular all these three
ways: that is, first such as are derived from something else besides the
Action; secondly, such as have no Connection with the rest of the Poem, nor with
the Members and Parts, which are the Matter thereof; and lastly, such as are
complete Actions, independent from the Subject. These vicious and superfluous
Episodes may be met with not only in the Middle of the Poem, but at the
Beginning and the End.

The Thebaid of Statius furnishes us with all these Instances, as his Achilleid
has already afforded us an Instance of that false Unity, which consists only in
the Unity of the Hero.

The unfortunate Oedipus had plucked out his own Eyes; and banishing himself
from Thebes, left the Government of it to Eteocles and Polynices, his two Sons.
They ordered Matters so, that each of them, one after another, should Reign a
whole Year by himself. But the eldest being in possession, when his time was
out, refused to quit the Throne. Polynices, in his Exile, was so happy as to
marry the Daughter of Adrastus King of Argos. This aged Prince takes Prince
takes up the Quarrel, and with the Assistance of his Allies undertakes to
settle Polynices on the Throne, and to out Eteocles. Upon this Thebes is
beleaguered, and after several Skitmishes, this Difference was decided by the
Duel and Death of the two Rival Brothers. This War between the two Theban
Brothers, is the Fraternas acies alternaque regna prophanis Decertata odiis,
sontesque evolvere Thebas, Picrius menti calor incidit. Theb. 1.
Action our Poet would relate, and the Subject Matter of the Thebaid.

But observe another Action, or rather another Story. The Goddess Venus is
offended with the Inhabitants of Lemnos, because in all that Island she had
neither Temple, Altar, nor Sacrifice. At first she puts the Men out of conceit
with their Wives; and then she makes the Women so mad, as to conspire the Death
of all their Husbands. This Barbarous Resolution is most unmercifully put in
Execution. Hypsipyle was the only Woman who had secretly saved her Father King
Troas, and so ingeniously dissembles the having Murdered him, that the rest
confer the Kingdom upon her, as belonging to that Family.

A little after the Argonauts, going in quest of the Golden-Fleece, are forced
by a Storm to call in and recruit themselves at Lemnos. They were very kindly
entertained there, and the badness of the season gave Jason, the chief of these
Hero's, an opportunity of leaving Hypsipyle big with Twins, before he put off
to Sea.

She was scarce brought to bed, but 'twas told her Subjects, that they had been
cheated, and that King Troas was alive, and reigned in the Isle of Chios,
whither Hypsipyle had conveyed him, though she had pretended she had murdered
him. This made the Princess so odious, that fearing the fury of those Women she
fled to the Seashore, where she was seized on and carried off by Pirates. They
bestow her on King Lyeurgus, who makes her the Nurse of his Son Archemorus.

The State of this Prince bordered upon Thebes, and lay in the Road the Army of
Adrastus was to pass thither. The Greeks met with this famous Nurse as she was
alone with her Nursery in a Wood. They were extreme thirsty, all the Wells
being dried up by the scorching Seasons. They entreat her to give them some
relief; she grants their request, and brings them to a Fountain that never was
drained. She was so forward, that to make the more have to this wished for
Stream, she eases her self of her precious burden with which she was entrusted,
and leaves Archemorus all alone upon the Grass. She goes to quench the Grecians
Thirst; and then to satisfy the desire they had of knowing who she was, that
had been the saving of them, she makes a large Recital of her own Life.

After she had made an end, and received the Compliments of Adrastus, she
returns back to her Prince. But a frightful Serpent had killed him by a blow
with his Tail. The Greeks kill the Serpent, and in honor of the Dead Prince
make a splendid Funeral, and institute most magnificent sports, which take up a
whole book of the Thebaid. The Recitals of Hypsipyle, and the Death of
Archemorus fill up another.

These are foreign Episodes, and if they are Regular, I cannot imagine what use
the Rules of Aristotle can be of in this business. But let us see whether these
Incidents have so much as one single Qualification of those which I proposed as
necessary to the Unity of the Action.

The first of these Qualifications is that an Episode be proper and drawn from
the very Essence of the Fable and the Subject. It would be hard to invent an
Adventure more foreign to the War of the Theban Brothers, than all this story
of Lemnos. For what Affinity has the Anger of Venus, the butchering of the
Lemnians, the Designs of the Argonauts, and the Amors of Jason and Hypsipyle,
with the Quarrel between Eteocles and Polynices? To make a mixed medly of such
various Incidents, is just like forming one of Humano capiticervicem pictor
equinam Jungere si velit, and varias inducere plumas, Undique collatis membris,
etc. Hor. Poet.
Horace's Monsters: And never would a Woman's Head clapped on to a Horse's Neck
appear more Monstrous, than does this Hypsipyle tacked to the War of Thebes
appear in this Poem. This is the first and most Essential fault of this Episode.

The second is in the Connection, which is not at all in the Thebaid, things
being clapped together without the least necessity or probability. For pray what
part of the subject of the Thebaid is either the Cause, or the Effect of the
Massacre at Lemnos? Or of any of the Adventures of Jason?

It Is true Hypsipyle makes this Recital to the Argives, as they were going to
infest Thebes; but there is a great deal of difference between connecting the
Recital of an Action to something, and connecting the very Action to it. If for
the Introducing a Narration into the Body of a Poem, and connecting it thereto,
so as to make a just Episode of it, it is enough that this Narration be made in
the Presence of the Hero, by some body that has some Interest therein; there
would be no more need of Rules for the due Uniting of Episodes. For a Poet to
fail of making this Union exactly, it would not be enough that he were Ignorant
and Unskilful, but he should be something more; he should be Malicious, and
declare positively against all Connexions whatever. For without 'twere so, he
would not be easily inclined to stuff a whole book with the impertinent
Description of a Story that was nothing to the purpose.

The sports of the sixth Book of Statius are no less irregular. There is
nothing in the Action to give them the least Countenance. They have no
reference to the War of Thebes, to the designs of the Argonauts, nor to the mad
Practices of Lemnos. Nor is it a Consequence of the Stories of Hypsipyle; but
rather a Consequence of the Recital she made of these Stories. They are tacked
to her Recital at one end, and at the other to the March of the Grecians,
without the least Necessity and Probability. And how could the fiery Tempers of
Tydeus and Capaneus, and the hot Spirits of the other Commanders away with such
languishing and Godly Amusements; and by consequence so opposite to the very
Soul of the Poem, which consists altogether in Violence and Impiety?

It Is true the March of the Argives was the Cause of his Death for whom they
instituted these sports: But that it should not have been; and since this cause
is no way necessary, and offends against all probability, it is rather a fresh
Fault, than any Excuse. Hypsipyle had so little a way to go from the place
where she left her Prince, to that whither she conducted the Grecians; that
from thence Moriens vagitus in auras Excidit, and ruptis immutuit ore querelis,
Qualia non totas peragunt insomnia voces. Audiit Hypsipyle. --
she hears this Infant's shrill cry, when Death had almost stopped his Mouth.
Therefore if she had had any concern for leaving Archemorus, she should not
have staid from him a moment. But could not a Soldier have leave to pass a
Compliment upon her for a few Minutes or so? To conclude, who did ever know a
Nurse so inconsiderate, as to leave her Child alone for several hours in the
midst of a Forest, to the mercy of wild Beasts, exposed to so many other
Dangers; and to leave him in this manner without a Guard, tho so many Thousands
were at hand, to whom she had done such a singular piece of service? How could
so many Redoubted Princes endure this Unworthy and Foolish exposing of a Child
without the least necessity for it? But what signifies it? Virgil had: his
sports, and 'twas but requisite Statius should have his too.

The third fault that may be committed against the Unity of the Main Action, is
to complete an Action entirely, which should serve for an Episode. This is
likewise one of the Conditions of the Story of Hypsipyle: Nothing is more
complete in all its Circumstances. It makes no part of any other Action: It Is
an entire Action, that has no dependence on any of the Theban Worthies, or the
other Grecians of this Poem; of whom not one has the least interest in what
passed at Lemnos. Thus, the Unity of the Action is entirely spoiled in the
Thebaid by this Adventure, the Recital whereof makes the Poem Episodical.

This fault of Statius is in the very middle of his Poem. It has cut the Action
of it into two parts, most monstrously divided by this large Hiatus, which is
so miserably filled up with foreign Members, or rather foreign Bodies. But, as
I before hinted, these superfluities corrupt the Unity as much when they are
placed at the Beginning or End, as when they are in the Middle and Body of the
Poem. Statius affords us instances of this kind of fault likewise.

Had he Limen mihi Carminis esto Oedipodae confusa domus. Theb. 1.
begun the War of Thebes with the Incestuous Birth of Eteocles and Polynices,
he would have imitated those, who began the War of Troy with the Birth of
Helen, tho even that met with Nec gemino bellum Trojanum orditur ab Ovo. Hor.
Poet.
Horace's Censure. But Gentisque canam primordia dirae, Sidonios raptus, and
inexorabile pactum Legis Agenoreae, scrutantemque aequora Cadmum. Stat. Theb. 1.
he carries matters still higher, goes back as far as the first founding of
Thebes, and opens his Poem with the Rape of Europa, which was the first Cause
of building that City.

He ends just as he begun. The Quarrel of the two Brothers was manifestly
decided by their Deaths, there remained no more difficulty, the Siege was
raised, and all over. And when the Reader expects no more, the Poet, who has
quite drained his Matter, gives us notice of his joining another story thereto,
which was the Consequence thereof, just as the Return of Ulysses is the
Consequence of Hector's death, and the taking of Troy; and as the Reign of
Ascanius is the Consequence of the Establishment of Aeneas. Thebes has no
longer the Argives but the Athenians for its Enemies; it is no longer defended
by Eteocles, but by Creon; and not assaulted by Polynices, but by Theseus. The
Dispute is no longer about a Kingdom, but a Tyrant to be punished. It Is no more
a Siege but the taking of a City. And now no longer is Cruelty, Ambition, and
Violence predominant there; but Valor, Generosity, and Piety, which in the
last Book destroy the Character of the whole Poem. So that the Action is quite
Another, in the Cause, in the End, in the Persons, in the Manner, and in all
the other Circumstances. These are the faults which manifestly spoil the Unity
of the Epick Action.

CHAP. IX. Of the Integrity of the Action
ARistotle not only says that the Epick Action should be One, but (...). Poetc.
23.
he adds that it should be Entire, Perfect and Complete: And for this purpose,
it must have a Beginning, a Middle, and an End. Herein these Actions differ
from those of Aesop's Fables; for there is no necessity that these last should
be Entire and Complete. Witness the Forte per augustam tenuis Vulpecula rimam
Repserat in cumeram frumenti: pastaque, rursus Ire for as pleno tendebat corpore
frustra: Cui Mustela procul: si vis ait effugere isthinc, Macra cavum repetes
arctum, quem macra subisti. Hor. Lib. 1. Ep. 7.
Fable of the meager hunger-starved Fox, who conveyed himself through a very small
hole into a Granary full of Corn. When he had crammed his Guts, he was for
marching the same way out again: but he found himself too Corpulent. A Weezel
at a distance seeing him in such a quandary tells him, he came empty in, and
must go as empty out. Now there is no necessity of finishing this Action.
Reynard is very regularly left in this place without telling what happened to
him afterward; and without troubling ones head, whether he was killed upon the
spot; or pinched his Guts to save his Carcass, or whether he escaped at some
other Hole. This Action then is not a Whole, because it has only a Beginning
and Middle, but not an End.

These three parts of a Whole are too Generally and Universally denoted by the
Words, Beginning, Middle, and End: We may interpret them more precisely, and
say, That the Causes and Designs which one takes for doing an Action are the
Beginning of this Action; That the Effects of these Causes, and the
Difficulties that are met with in the Execution of these Designs are the Middle
of it; and that the Unraveling and Resolution of these Difficulties are the End
of the Action.

This End, and this Unravelling may happen after different ways, and so form
several sorts of Actions. For sometimes the Action ends by the discovery of
some person, who was unknown before, as in the Tragedy of Oedipus. This Prince
thought himself the Son of Polybus and Meropa, King and Queen of Corinth: And
he discovers himself to be a Theban, the Son of Laius and Jocasta. Sometimes
without any Discovery, there is a great change of Fortune in some person or
other, who thinking himself happy, all on a sudden falls into a Misery he never
dreamed of; or else on the contrary, becomes from a miserable, a very happy
person beyond all Expectation. The first of these was Agamemnon's Case after
the Ruin of Troy, who thinking himself in quiet Possession of his acquired
Glory was miserably butchered by his Wife. (...). Arist. Poet. c. 11.
These Changes or Alterations from one kind of Fortune to the Contrary are
called by a Greek Name Peripetias.

Sometimes likewise there is neither a Discovery nor a Peripetia; but the
Action ceases, and passes, if I may so say, from Motion to Rest after a simple
Manner, without any Incident, but such as might be expected in the Ordinary
course of Affairs. Thus in the Troad of Seneca, Hecuba and the Trojans appear
at first as in Captivity, and under a long series of Afflictions, which made
them complain with their Tongues, and despair in their Hearts. The Ghost of
Achilles requires Polixena should be Sacrificed to him, and before they part,
Calchas would make them kill Astyanax too. Both are put in Execution, and so
the Tragedy ends.

(...). Poet. c. 17.
These different ways make two sorts of Action or Fable: The One Simple, the
Other Complex. The Simple Actions are such as End without a Discovery and a
Peripetia; The Complex have either a Discovery, or a Perpetia, or Both.

The Integrity of the Action comprehends all these things: Let us now take a
particular View of them.

CHAP. X. That the Action ought to be a Whole.
THis Proposition seems contrary to what Aristotle teaches us, when he says,
(...). Arist. Poet. c. 23.
That the War of Troy is a just and perfect Whole; That Homer has taken but a
part of it. That therein he was very Judicious; and that those who instead of
Imitating him, have taken this Whole for the Subject of their Poems, have taken
too much Matter, and have been very indifferent Artists. Does he pretend by
this Doctrine, and by these Instances to overthrow what we have cited out of
that very treatise of Poetry? Would he teach us that the Subject and Matter of
a Poem ought not to be a Whole, and an Entire and Complete Action, but only a
part of an Action? Sure it is not likely he should contradict himself thus.

We may reconcile this, that appears so contradictory in the Terms, by making
this Reflection: That one and the same Action may be considered as in the
Fable, where the Poet makes use of it; or else as in the History, whence he
took it. When the Poet is upon the search after Matter for his Fable, he lights
upon several sorts of Actions. Some have several parts which may be regularly
connected in one Body; and then he may take one of these Actions, entire as it
is. But there are others whose parts are so independent to one another, that a
Man cannot with any probability join them together so as they shall seem to be
the Causes and the Consequences of each other. And this is what Aristotle
condemns under the Name of Many-limb'd Fables. To which he opposes those which
have but one only part.

He does not absolutely forbid the Multiplicity of Parts; but he commonly takes
such sorts of Words in the worst Sense, which might of themselves be understood
in a more favorable one. Thus we observed, that he condemned the vicious
Plurality of Fables and Episodes, under the Terms of Polymythia, and
Episodical, although a Man may lawfully put several Fables into a Poem, and there
is none but has several Episodes in it.

Therefore it is in this Sense that he condemns the Plurality of the Parts in an
Epick Action. We are not to suppose that he condemns it absolutely, and that
this Action made use of cannot be a Whole. He explains his own meaning
sufficiently in the following Words. (...). Poet. c. 8.
As, says he, in other Imitations, that which a Man Imitates is one single
thing: So likewise, The Fable being the Imitation of an Action, it is requisite
that this Action be One, Entire, and a Whole, and that the parts be so joined
to, and dependent on each other, that one cannot so much as remove any one out
of its Place, either to transpose, or retrench it quite, without making a
Change in the whole. For whatever can be so placed or omitted, that one cannot
perceive the Alteration, can by no means be a part of the Action. So then, it is
only the Plurality of parts in this last Sense which Aristotle condemns. And he
has commended Homer for having taken only a Part of all that passed in the
Trojan War.

But yet we are to take special notice that this Retrenchment of all the other
parts does not hinder the Anger of Achilles, which is only retained, from being
a Whole in the Poem. It Is only a Part with respect to the whole War, and in the
History whence Homer took it: But it is an Entire and Complete Whole in the
Fable and Poem, which Homer has made of it. You see then how these opposite
Expressions of Aristotle are easily reconciled in their meaning. The Poet may
take out of History an Entire Action, or but a Part of one: but still he must
put in his Poem an entire Action, and not a Part only. The Disposition of his
Matter regulates this Point, and makes a regular Whole of whatever he shall
have met with and made choice of. He must make use thereof Variously, according
to the Historical Plurality, or Singularity of the Parts, so as to make thereof
the Subject of his Poem.

When he takes an Entire Action, as Homer has done for his Odysseis, and Virgil
for the Aeneid; there is nothing to be adjusted, nor any measure to be taken to
make this Action appear a Whole, and not the Part of another Action. The Reader
is already instructed by History, and is in little danger of being mistaken
therein. It Is enough that the Poet tell wherein his Action consists, without
saying wherein it does not. Homer proposes the Return of Ulysses, who after the
Destruction of Troy, came back again to his own Country: Virgil proposes the
Change of a State which is ruined at Troy, and re-established in Italy by
Aeneas. Each of these Adventures have the Conditions of a Whole as well in the
History whence they were taken, as in the Fables where they are made use of.

But when the Poet chooses only a Part, and out of this Historical Part makes a
whole in his Fable; he must take care to give his Readers notice of it, for
fear that they, applying the knowledge they have of the History to what they
Read in the Poem, should blame the Author, as if he had said but little on his
Subject, or rather had ill managed his design, having only described an
imperfect Action.

The Poet's not knowing how to change a Part into a Whole, has perhaps
contributed very much to the fault of those Men, whom Aristotle blames for
having loaded themselves with too much matter. But the Knowledge Homer had of
this Secret, and his Skill in practicing it, has made him merit those Praises
which Aristotle gives him. He does not only tell us in his Iliad that the Anger
of Achilles is his Subject; but besides that, in express Words he excludes the
other parts of the Trojan War. To do this after a Poetical and more Artificial
Manner, he makes use of the very Hero's person, whose Action and Design he
Sings. (...), etc. Iliad. 1.
I am not come hither (says Achilles) to wage War against the Trojans; I have
nothing to do with them, they have done me no wrong: my design was to maintain
the Honor of Agamemnon and Menelaus. But since Agamemnon offers an Injury to
my Honor, I renounce that Design, and shall only take care to revenge my self,
etc. You may see by this what is the Design of the Iliad, and what is not.

Besides, the Poet has given neither a Beginning nor an End to the Siege of
Troy: Nay there is scarce a Middle that is proper to it. For though Jupiter sends
Agamemnon to Assault the Town, yet it is not with a Design it should be taken,
as this Abused Prince imagined: But only to be punished by the Trojan Arms for
the Affront he had put upon Achilles, and to satisfy the Anger, and the
Revenge of this Hero.

On the other hand, all the parts of this Anger, that are requisite to make it
a Whole, are very Conspicuous. It has its Beginning, its Causes, its Effects,
and its End. This is what the Poet continues to make out as he had begun; that
is, in the Person of his Hero. Achilles is not reconciled with Agamemnon with a
Design to revenge all Greece upon Troy, or Menelaus upon Paris: As long as
nothing else was on foot he was inexorable. But Hector kills Patroclus; then he
is reconciled, that he may revenge his own particular injury upon Hector alone.
Tho he is the Death of other Trojans, yet it is only because he meets not with
Hector himself: It Is to fight his way through to this particular Enemy; it is
because those he kills are his Relations, or his Soldiers; just as before he
revenged himself on all the Grecians, for the Affront which Agamemnon alone had
put upon him.

As soon as he could meet with Hector, he (...) Iliad.
charges all the other Greeks to stand off, and would not let them interpose
their Quarrel with his. After he had killed him, he never pushes on the
Advantage which Hector's Death had given him over the Trojans, who were
stupefied at this disaster, and dejected at so great a loss. He had nothing
more to say to 'em, called off the Gracians to the Obsequies of Patroclus, and
vents the rest of his fury by insulting over the Dead Corpse of his Enemy.

Lastly, being moved at Priam's tears, he Restores the body to him, and grants
him a Truce for twelve days to perform the Funeral Solemnities. And that we
might not look upon the Death of Hector as the End of the War; the Poet is so
far from making the least show of the Trojans being inclined to a Peace, or a
Surrender, that he makes Priam say expressly, (...). Iliad. 24.
That when the Truce was over, they would be for fighting again upon the
twelfth day. If this twelfth day had come, and a Battle ensued, then the Anger
and the particular Interest of Achilles being at an End, these Battles would
have been really a Part of the Trojan War, and of the Common Cause. (...). Lin.
ult. Poemat.
Homer to prevent this Irregularity has finished his Poem together with the
Truce and the Funeral of Hector, before the Fight or the Skirmishes were
renewed.

Could there be any greater Demonstration, that the Trojan War had nothing to
do with all this, and that the Subject of this Poem is not a Part of this War
in the Iliad: But that it is a Whole, Entire, and Complete Action, that has no
dependence on the taking of this City?

To conclude, we must not confound the Action with the Fable; nor the Design of
the Hero in the Action he does, with the Design of the Poet in the Allegory,
and in the Moral he teaches. It Is well known that a Wolf devouring a Lamb has
no design to give us the Instructions which Aesop has drawn from it.

CHAP. XI. Of the Beginning, Middle and End of the Action.
THE Poet should so begin his Action, that on one hand nothing should be
farther wanting for the understanding of what one reads; and on the other hand,
that what we read require after it a necessary Consequence. He should end after
the same manner, with these two Conditions transposed; the One, that nothing
more be expected; and the Other, that what is put at the End of the Action be
only a necessary Consequence of some thing which ought to have went before.
Lastly, the Beginning must be joined to the End by a Middle that makes no
Interval, but which is in it self neither the Beginning nor the End. This
Middle must be the effect of something that went before, and the Cause of some
other thing that is to come after.

(...). Arist. Poet. c. 7.
This makes three parts, each of which taken singly is imperfect, and always
supposes One or both of the Other. The Beginning supposes nothing before it
self, and requires something after it: On the contrary, the End requires
nothing after it self, but supposes something that goes before: And the Middle
supposes something that went before, and requires something to follow after. We
will explain this Doctrine of Aristotle by the Instances we produced.

Eteocles and Polynices were equally the Sons and Heirs of Oedipus King of
Thebes. They made a Contract to reign a Year by turns. Eteocles began, and his
Year expired, refuses to quit his Throne to his Brother. Polynices meets with
Assistance at Argos, and comes to dispute his Title at the Head of an Army.
This is an exact Beginning. It requires a Consequence, but not any thing
antecedent thereto. Therefore 'twas irregularly done to place before this
Beginning the Recital of whatever happened from the founding of Thebes, and the
Rape of Europa down to that time.

The Quarrel of these two Brothers ended with their Deaths: which is an exact
End? The Reader does not desire one should relate what becomes of Creon the
Successor of Eteocles. Therefore Statius is in the wrong, when he makes That a
Part of his Poem.

He was no less to blame for putting in the Middle of his Poem the Story of
Hypsipyle. For this Narration has no dependence on the Theban Action, and
supposes nothing before it, and requires nothing after it; and by consequence
this Action is neither the Middle, nor any other Part of the Quarrel between
the two Brothers, or of the Subject of the Poem. These are Examples to be
avoided; now we will produce such as are to be imitated.

Homer's Design in the Iliad is to relate the Anger and Revenge of Achilles.
The Beginning of this Action is the change of Achilles from a Calm to a
Passionate Temper. The Middle is the Effects of his Passion, and all the
Illustrious Deaths it is the Cause of. The End of this same Action is the
Return of Achilles to his Calmness of Temper again All was quiet in the
Grecian Camp, when Agamemnon their General provokes Apollo against them, whom
he was willing to appease afterward at the cost and prejudice of Achilles, who
had nothing to do with his Fault. This then is an exact Beginning; it supposes
nothing before, and requires after it the Effects of this Anger. Achilles
revenges himself, and that is an exact Middle; it supposes before the Beginning
of the Anger of Achilles, who is provoked. This Revenge is the Effect of it.
Then this Middle requires after it the Effect of this Revenge, which is the
satisfaction of Achilles; for the Revenge had not been complete, unless
Achilles had been satisfied. By this means, the Poet makes his Hero, after he
was glutted, as I may so say, by the mischief he had done to Agamemnon, by the
Death of Hector, and the Honor he did his Friend, by insulting over his
Murderer; he makes him, I say, to be moved by the Tears and Misfortunes of King
Priam. We see him as calm at the End of the Poem, during the Funeral of Hector,
as he was at the Beginning of the Poem, whilst the Plague raged among the
Graecians. This End is just, since the Calmness of Temper Achilles re-enjoy'd,
is only an Effect of the Revenge which ought to have went before; and after
this no body expects any more of his Anger. Thus has Homer been very exact in
the Beginning, Middle and End of the Action he made choice of for the Subject
of his Iliad.

His Design in the Odysseis was to describe the Return of Ulysses from the Ruin
of Troy, and his Arrival at Ithaea. He opens this Poem with the Complaints of
Minerva against Neptune, who opposed the Return of this Hero, and against
Calypso, who detained him in an Island far from Ithaca. Is this a Beginning?
No; doubtless it is not. The Reader would fain know why Neptune is displeased
with Ulysses, and how this Prince came to be with Calypso. He has a mind to
know how he came from Troy thither. The Poet answers his Demands out of the
Mouth of Ulysses himself, who relates these things, and begins the Action by
the recital of his Travels from the City of Troy. It signifies little whether
the Beginning of the Action be the Beginning of the Poem, as we shall take
notice in the following Book, where we shall treat expressly of the Order our
Poets have observed in their Narrations. The Beginning of this Action then is
that which happens to Ulysses, when upon his leaving of Troy he bends his
Course for Ithaca. The Middle comprehends all the Misfortunes he endured, and
all the Disorders of his own Government. The End is there instanting of this
Hero in the peaceable Possession of his Kingdom, where he discovers himself to
his Son, his Wife, his Father, and several others. The Poet was sensible he
should have ended ill, had he went no farther than the Death of these Princes,
who were the Rivals and Enemies of Ulysses, because the Reader might have
looked for some Revenge which the Subjects of these Princes might have taken on
him, who had killed their Sovereigns: But this Danger over, and these People
vanquished and quieted, there was nothing more to be expected. The Poem and the
Action have all their Parts and no more.

The Order of the Odysseis differs from that of the Iliad, in that the Poem
does not begin with the Beginning of the Action. That of the Aeneid is still
more different, since the very End of the Poem is not the End of the Action of
Aeneis. But we shall say no more of this at present.

The Design of Virgil is to conduct Aeneas into Italy, there to establish his
Gods and Religion, and lay the Foundations of the Roman Empire. There is this
difference between the Return of Ulysses, and the Voyage of Aeneas, that no one
ever questions why a Man returns to his own Country: Though Homer had made no
mention of the natural Affection he bore to his Country, yet the Readers would
never have fell out with him for this Omission. This is a well known Cause;
it is neither an Action, of which one ought to make a Narration, nor a thing
which precedes this Return. But Aeneas acts contrary to this natural Affection;
he abandons his own Country, to go in search after a strange Land. The Reader
then would have the Poet tell him why this Hero leaves Troy. Besides Ulysses
was born a King, but Aeneas was not. So that the embarking of Ulysses is
sufficiently the Beginning of the Odysseis: But the embarking of Aeneas from
Troy, on Board the Admiral of a Fleet of Twenty Sail; cannot be the Beginning
of the Action of Aeneas. Aeneas abandons Troy, because it was taken by the
Greeks: and is King of the Trojans, because Priam was dead, and he elected in
his room.

But if the taking of Troy be the Consequence of a ten Year's Siege, should not
this War have been related as the necessary Cause of the taking and ruin
thereof? This is what the Poet has admirably provided for by bringing it about,
that neither the War, nor the long and tedious Siege, should be the Cause of
the taking of this City. Fracti bello, fatisque repulsi Ductores Danaum tot jam
labentibus annis. Aeneid. l. 2.
Therefore he says at first, that the Greeks were worsted, that they utterly
despaired of being Masters of the City by any of those Measures they had
hitherto taken; and that so many Years spent in the War was but so much time
lost. So that the Taking of Troy depends not upon any thing that went before.
The Greeks form another Design, which is an exact Beginning of an Action; for
it supposes nothing before it. The Poet gives it likewise the other
Qualification of a Beginning, which is the requiring Something after it. Before
ever the Grecians became Masters of the City, and before ever King Priam was
killed, Aeneas is destined to re-establish a more noble Religion, and a more
illustrious Empire elsewhere. Wherefore the Burning of Troy is not an entire
Action, nor the Downfall of an Empire, but the Cause and the first Part of the
Alteration of a State; and it requires a new Establishment to succeed it.

The Shipping off of Aeneas, his Voyages, his Battles, and all the Obstacles he
met with, compose a just Middle; they are a Consequence of the Destruction of
Troy, and of the Choice they made of him to transport them into Italy; and
these same Incidents require an End.

The End comprehends the Death of Amata, that of Turnus, the Change of Juno's
Mind, and the Terms of the Peace, which contained all that Aeneas pretended to
for his Establishment.

But for the better judging of the Unity and Integrity of the Action (of which
we have already spoke) we must add, that there are two sorts of Designs: The
first sort have no manner of Consequence, but end with the Action; the others,
beside the Action, have likewise some necessary Consequences: And in this last
Case these Consequences must be related, if one would have the Poem be as
Entire and as Complete as it ought to be. Our Poets furnish us with Instances
of both these Designs.

The Anger and Revenge of a Man requires necessarily nothing more after it:
when it is satisfied and over, all is at an end. When Achilles was revenged,
when he had received Satisfaction for the Affront put upon him, and when he was
once quiet, a Man never enquires what becomes of him afterward. It Is the same
case with the Return of a Prince into his own Country: when he is come thither,
has put an End to those Disorders which his Absence had caused, and enjoys
Peace again, the Reader is satisfied. Nor has Homer made any Episode that has
transgressed these Bounds.

Virgil's Practice has been otherwise, because he undertook a Design of another
Nature. The Establishment of any State does of necessity draw great
Consequences after it. If the Poet had taken them all for his Action, it would
have been of a monstrous Extent, because the Roman Government was not fully
settled till after the Ruin of Carthage, which had so long disputed with it for
Empire and Liberty: and this very State arrived not to its Grandeur and
Perfection till under Augustus, who was its last, as Aeneas was its first,
Founder. Therefore Virgil has not taken this for the Matter of his Poem; but
Super and Garamantas and Indos Proferet Imperium; jacet ex via Sydera tellus,
etc. Aen. 6.
he relates it by such Recitals as Homer makes use of in his Odysseis, when he
tells us of the Wound Ulysses received on the top of Parnassus. Upon this
Account we observed, that the Poet may relate such Incidents as were necessary
to the Matter of his Poem, but which notwithstanding were not the Matter
thereof. It Is thus that Virgil practices in the Machines, making Jupiter in the
first, and Anchises in the sixth Book, to make these Prophetical Recitals.

There is something still more Noble in the Episode of Dido, where by an
Allegory and a Conduct, which one can never sufficiently admire, he brings into
the Body of his Action all the succeeding History of Carthage; and this so
naturally too, that one would think the Poet should have made Dido say and act,
just as she did, though there had never been any Quarrel between these two
States, and though there had never been such a Man as Hannibal.

CHAP. XII. Of the Causes of the Action.
AN Historian does not make his Subject Matter himself, he speaks nothing but
what he knows; and in the Conduct of a State, we often see Effects, whose
Causes are never known. Those who act in it, keep all things in private; and
the more they do so, the greater Qui nescit dissimulare nescit regnare.
Politicians are they accounted. So that on one side the Historian is obliged
to declare all the Causes he knows, because these Circumstances are very
instructive: but on the other hand, he is justly dispensed from relating
several Causes, because he cannot come to any Knowledge of them.

A Poet has the same Reasons to tell all the Causes of his Action, and he is
likewise more obliged to it than an Historian, since it is more proper and
essential for Poetry to instruct, than it is for History. But the Poet has not
the same Reasons to excuse his Omission of any Cause whatever. He makes his
Matter himself, and if he takes any thing from History, it is but so far as
History suits thereto. He must feign whatever is not there, or else change what
is not suited to his purpose. If it is propose that some Things may lie
concealed from him, because no Man can know every thing; he then is instructed
by the Gods who do know every thing. Virgil is my Warrant in the Case before
us, Musa, mihi causas memora. Aeneid. 1.
he invokes a Deity, that he may come to the Knowledge of the Causes of his
Action: and he relates such things, as he could never know but by Revelation;
since he says they happened to Dido alone, and which she never made any one, no
not so much as her Sister, acquainted with. Thus is the Poet obliged to tell
all the Causes not only that he may instruct, as we hinted before, but likewise
that he may please; for without doubt this is very grateful.

There are three sorts of Causes; some are more general and undetermined, such
as the Humors of any one; for it is upon Humor that every one commonly
regulates his Conduct, and acts upon Occasion. Others are more precise, such as
the Interests of those that Act. And lastly, there are others which are more
immediate, such as the Designs which one takes to promote or hinder any thing.
These different Causes of an Action are likewise frequently the Causes of one
another: every one taking up those Interests, which his Humor engages him in,
and forming such Designs as his Humor and Interest prompt him to.

The Humors and the Inclinations belong to the Doctrine of the Morals, which
we shall treat of particularly in the fourth Book. We only join them here to
the two other Causes we mentioned; and of all three we affirm this in general,
That the Poet ought to inform his Readers of them, and make them conspicuous in
his principal Personages, when he introduces them, or even before he makes them
appear.

Homer has ingeniously begun his Odysseis with the Transactions at Ithaca
during the Absence of Ulysses. If he had begun with the Travels of his Hero, he
would scarce have spoken of any one else, and a Man might have read a great
deal of the Poem without conceiving the least Idea of Telemachus, Penelope, or
her Suitors, who had so great a share in the Action. But in the Beginning he
has pitched upon, besides these Personages, whom he discovers, he represents
Ulysses in his full Length. And from the very first Opening of the Action, one
sees the Interest which the Gods had therein.

The Skill and Care of the same Poet may be seen likewise in introducing his
Personages in the first Book of his Iliad; where he discovers the Humor, the
Interests, and the Designs of Agamemnon, Achilles, Nestor, Ulysses, and several
others, nay, and of the Gods too. And in his second Book he makes a Review of
the Grecian and Trojan Armies; which is full evidence, that all we have here
said is very necessary.

But lastly, Since the Epick Poem is doubtless much longer than the Dramatick;
and since it is easier to manage the Incidents and the Presence of the
Personages in that than in the other: one is not obliged to introduce all of
them at the Beginning of the Epopea with as much Exactness, as in the first Act
of a Theatral Piece, where at least one is obliged to give some Item of all
those who have any considerable part in the Intrigue.

I mention this upon the Account of Virgil's Practice. He has been less exact
than the Greek Poet; for he says nothing of Turnus, Latinus, Amata, and other
Italians, till the middle of his Poem. But it is true likewise, that he has so
disposed his Action as seems to justify this Delay. He has divided the Aeneid
into two parts more sensibly than Homer has his Iliad and Odysseis. He not only
makes this Division at the first, and in his Proposition, by saying that Multum
ille and terris jactatus and alto: Multa quoque and bello passus. Aeneid. 1.
Aeneas suffered much when he was tossed about from this Sea to that, and from
one Province to another; and suffered also a great deal more in the Wars he was
engaged in: but he likewise, when he begins his second Part, advertises his
Reader of it, and Major return mihi nascitur ordo, Majus opus moveo. Aeneid. 8.
proposes the things he is about to mention, as all new, and quite of another
Make from the former. Thus in the first Book he introduces the principal
Personages of his first part; and he only speaks of those, who were to appear
afresh in the second Part, in his sixth, seventh, and eighth Books. And here,
in my mind, he was less fortunate than the Greek Poet.

Besides these more general Causes of the Action and of the main Intrigues;
there are still some Incidents, and some Episodes more particular, of which the
Poet must give an Account. This happens commonly not in the Beginning of the
Action, but only when the Poet is about to make one of his lesser Recitals. The
Reader could not guess, how the Wound of Ulysses came, which discovered him to
his Friends; not why Camilla should be in love with War; nor how it came to
pass that Aeneas met with several Persons in the Shades below, who were to come
into the World many Ages after, etc. Therefore the Poet must tell him the
Causes of all this.

These Causes must be good, and suitable to the Subject. All the Action of the
Iliad is founded upon the Anger of Achilles. The Cause of this Anger is the
Displeasure Apollo conceived against Agamemnon; because Agamemnon likewise in
his Anger had affronted the Priest of this God. All these Passions have
probable Causes, and such as are suitable to the General Subject of the Trojan
War. For as this General Cause is Heten's being ravished from Menelaus; so the
other Causes are of the same Nature. Chryseis is ravished from her Father, and
Briseis from Achilles. In short, all are stamped with the same Character of
Injustice and Violence in these Heroes.

If the Hero be a Man of Probity, the Causes of all his Designs should be just
and commendable, as those in the Odysseis and the Aeneid: And the Causes of the
Persecution he meets with, must not lessen the Esteem which the Poet would
raise of his Probity. Neptune persecutes Ulysses, because Ulysses had blinded
his Son Polypheme. But this Monster had already devoured six of the Comerades
of Ulysses, and was just upon serving Ulysses himself and the rest the same
Trick. Aeneas makes a more particular Profession of his Piety, and accordingly
Virgil uses him more honorably. The Causes Juno had to persecute him, did
either not touch his Person, or else were much to his Glory; since the only one
which concerned him, was the Choice which Fate made of him to lay in Italy the
Foundation of the Empire of the World. Liceat Phrygio servire marito,
Dotalisque tuae Tyrios permittere dextrae. Aen. 4.
Juno is so far from having any scornful or hateful Thoughts for this Hero's
Person, that she was willing to trust him with all that was most dear to her on
Earth, and make him Lord over her own Carthage. She could never have given a
more considerable Token of her Love and Esteem for any Man.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Intrigue, and the Vnravelling thereof.
IN what was said about the Causes of the Action, one might have observed two
opposite Designs. The first and most principal is that of the Hero: The second
comprehends all their Designs, that oppose the Pretensions of the Hero. These
Opposite Causes produce likewise Opposite Effects; viz. the Endeavors of the
Hero for the accomplishing his Design, and the Endeavors of those who are
against it. As these Causes and Designs are the Beginning of the Action; so
these contrary Endeavors are the Middle of it, and form a Difficulty and
Intrigue, which makes up the greatest part of the Poem. It lasts as long as the
Reader's Mind is in suspense about the Event of these contrary Endeavors. The
Solution or the Vnravelling begins, when one begins to see the Difficulty
removed, and the Doubts cleared up.

Our Poets have divided each of their three Poems into two Parts, and have put
a particular Intrigue, and the Solution of it in each Part.

The first Part of the Iliad is the Anger of Achilles, who is for revenging
himself upon Agamemnon by the means of Hector and the Trojans. The Intrigue
comprehends the three Days Fight which happened in the Absence of Achilles: and
it consists on one side in the Resistance of Agamemnon and the Grecians; and on
the other, in the revengeful and inexorable Humor of Achilles, which would not
suffer him to be reconciled. The Loss of the Grecians, and the Despair of
Agamemnon, prepare for a Solution by the Satisfaction which the incensed Hero
received from it. The Death of Patroclus joined to the Offers of Agamemnon,
which alone had proved ineffectual, remove this Difficulty, and make the
Unravelling of the first Part.

This Death is likewise the Beginning of the second Part; since it puts
Achilles upon the Design of revenging himself on Hector. But the Design of
Hector is opposite to that of Achilles: This Trojan Hero is Valiant, and
resolved to stand in his own Defense. This Valor and Resolution of Hector, are
on his Account the Cause of the Intrigue. All the Endeavors Achilles used to
meet with Hector, and be the Death of him; and the contrary Endeavors of the
Trojan to keep out of his Reach and defend himself, are the Intrigue: which
comprehends the Battle of the last Day. The Vnravelling begins at the Death of
Hector; and besides that, it contains the insulting of Achilles over his Body,
the Honors he paid to Patroclus, and the Entreaties of King Priam. The Regrets
of this King, and the other Trojans in the sorrowful Obsequies they paid to
Hector's Body end the Vnravelling; they justify the Satisfaction of Achilles,
and demonstrate his Tranquillity.

The first part of the Odysseis is the Return of Ulysses into Ithaca. Neptune
opposes it by raising Tempests, and this makes the Intrigue. The Vnravelling is
the Arrival of Ulysses upon his own Island, where Neptune could offer him no
farther Injury. The second Part, is the re-instating this Hero in his own
Government. The Princes, that are his Rivals, oppose him, and this is a fresh
Intrigue. The Solution thereof begins at their Deaths, and is completed as
soon as the Ithacans were appeased.

These two parts in the Odysseis have not one common Intrigue, as is to be
observed in the two other Poems. The Anger of Achilles forms both the Intrigues
in the Iliad; and it is so far the Matter of this Epopea, that the very
Beginning and End of this Poem depend on the Beginning and End of this Anger.
But let the Desire Achilles had to revenge himself, and the Desire Ulysses had
to return to his own Country be never so near akin: yet we cannot place them
under one and the same Notion: For the Love of Ulysses is not a Passion that
Begins and Ends in the Poem with the Action; it is a natural Habit, nor does the
Poet propose it for his Subject, as he does the Anger of Achilles.

Virgil has divided his Poem as Homer did his Odysseis. The first Part is the
Voyage and Arrival of Aeneas in Italy; the second is his Establishment there.
But he has connected these two great Episodes better by giving them a Common
Intrigue. He did not take for his first Intrigue a Deity, who could act no
where but by Sea, as Neptune: but Nec Teneris addita Juno Unquam aberit.
Aeneid. 6.
makes Choice of Juno, the Goddess of the Air, who had an equal Power over Sea
and Land. She opposed the Voyage of this Hero, and it is she likewise that
opposes his Settlement. This Opposition then is the General Intrigue of the
whole Action. The Solution is over when Annuit his Juno and mentem laetata
retorsit. Aeneid. 12.
Juno is appeased by Jupiter.

The principal Intrigue of the first Part, is the Design of Dido, and the
Endeavors she used to keep Aeneas still at Carthage. The Complaints of Iarbas,
the Orders Mercury brought Aeneas to be gone, and the re-fitting of the Trojan
Fleet, are Preparations for the Vnravelling, which begins at the Departure of
Aeneas, when he Vaginaque eripit ensem Fulmineum, strictoque ferit retinacula
Ferro. Aen. 4.
cut the Cables which held his Ships at Anchor.

Dido might have done more Mischief to Aeneas, either by pursuing him as an
Enemy to be revenged on him, or by following him as his Wife. And though she
stayed still at Africa, whatever Liberty Men had in those days of putting away
one Wife and marrying another, yet the Poet had made him too honest a Man than
to allow him two Wives living at the same time. Let Cases stand how they would,
yet Aeneas had reason to be afraid of Dido, and to apply the Prophecy of Sibyl
to himself, Causa mali tanti conjux iterum hospita Teucris, Externique iterum
thalami. Aeneid. 6.
which said, that the Cause of the Misfortunes he was to suffer should be
another foreign Wife, that should entertain the Trojans, and be ravished from
another Man's Bed. Upon this Account she must needs die, and Aeneas be
certified of her Death. So that this Vnravelling is not complete till the sixth
Book, Infelix Dido, verus mihi nuncius ergo Venerat extinctam ferroque extrema
sequutam. Aeneid. 6.
where Aeneas meets with the Ghost of this unhappy Queen in the Shades below.

The Intrigue of the second Part is formed out of the Love and Ambition of
Turnus, who was countenanced by the Authority and Passion of the Queen Amata.
The Articles of Peace which are proposed in the Eleventh Book, and which are
sworn to in the Twelfth, prepare for the Vnravelling. The Death of Amata
begins, and the Death of Turnus finishes it.

After what has been said of the principal Intrigues, the rest are easily
discerned: there are almost as many as there are great and small Episodes.

CHAP. XIV. The Way of forming the Plot or Intrigue.
WE have already observed what is meant by the Intrigue, and the Vnravelling
thereof; let us now say something of the manner of forming both: and this we
shall meet with in the Practice of our Poets; which tells us that these two
things should arise naturally out of the very Essence and Subject of the Poem,
and that they are to be deduced thence. Their Conduct is so exact and natural,
that it seems as if their Action had presented them with whatever they inserted
therein, without putting themselves to the Trouble of a farther Enquiry.

What is more Usual and Proper among Warriors, than Anger, Heat, Passion, and
Impatience of bearing the least Affronts and Disrespects? This is what forms
the Intrigue of the Iliad: and every thing we read there, is nothing else but
the Effect of this Humor, and these Passions.

What more Natural and Usual Obstacle do they who take Voyages meet with than
the Sea, the Winds, and the Storms? Homer makes this the Intrigue of the first
part of the Odysseis: and for the second, he makes use of the almost infallible
Effect of the long Absence of a Master, whose Return is quite despaired of;
viz. the Insolence of his Servants and Neighbors; the Danger his Son and Wife
were in; and the Sequestration of his Estate. Besides, an Absence of almost 20
Years, and the insupportable Fatigues joined to the Age Ulysses was then of,
might induce him to believe that he should not be owned by those that thought
him dead, and whose Interest it was to have him be really so. Therefore if he
had presently declared who he was, and had called himself Ulysses, they would
easily have made away with him as an Impostor, before he had had Opportunity to
make himself known to them.

There could be nothing more Natural, nor more Necessary, than this ingenious
Disguise, to which the Advantages which his Enemies had taken of his Absence
had reduced him, and to which his long Misfortunes had inured him. This allowed
him an Opportunity, without hazarding any thing, of taking the best Measures he
could against those Persons who could not so much as mistrust any harm from
him. This Way then was afforded him by the very Nature of his Action, that he
might execute his Designs, and overcome the mighty Obstacles it presented him
with: And it is this Contest between the Prudence and the Dissimulation of a
single Man on one hand, and the ungovernable Insolence of so many Rivals on the
other, which makes up the Intrigue of the second Part of the Odysseis.

The Conduct of the Latin Poet, in the Intrigues he forms, has the same
Simplicity. The Tempests are made use of in the first Part of the Aeneid, just
as in the Odysseis.

In this very part of the Aeneid, Virgil suits himself to the Humor of his
Hero, as Homer does himself to the Humor of Achilles. He (Achilles I mean) was
testy and passionate, Agamemnon provokes him by very sensible Affronts. Aeneas
was of a soft Disposition; the Poet makes use of good Turns, kind Treats, and
the most melting, most endearing Passions, to engage him to stay at Carthage.

In the Second Part, the Oppositions of Turnus and Mezentius are no less exact.
For Love and Respect obliged Aeneas, not to abandon a Queen to whom he owed so
much; and these opposed his Embarking for Italy: and the Impiety of Turnus and
Mezentius was an Obstacle to the Establishment of the Gods and Religion at that
place. In fine, the Love Turnus had for Lavinia, and the Esteem Amata had for
this Italian Hero above Aeneas, are likewise other natural Obstacles, derived
from the very Subject; since Amata was obliged to prefer her Relation to an
unknown Stranger; and such an accomplished Princess as Lavinia, who was sole
Heiress to a Kingdom, could not but have her Suitors.

Besides, we observed that Homer made use of the Anger of Apollo, and that of
Agamemnon, to stir up the same Passion in Achilles; and that the Cause of the
War, and the Cause of these Passions, are the Ravishment of three Women. Virgil
forms his general Intrigue after the same manner: He opposes to the
Establishing of a Kingdom in Italy, the Establishing of another Kingdom in
Africa. This Opposition is suited to Policy in general, and to the Roman
History in particular. Tantum in medio crescentem noctem sibi ac posteris suis
metuebant. Live. lib. 1.
Rome in its Infancy sees all her Neighbors conspiring against her; for new
Governments cast always a Shade upon the old ones.

But in these Intrigues of the Aeneid, there are a great many other
Circumstances, wherein Virgil makes Allegories and Allusions so correspondent
to History and Truth, that without bating any thing of his Quality as Poet, he
seems to merit likewise that of an Historian. A Man may see in the Persons of
Aeneas and Dido the very Spirit and Conduct of two great Empires, of which they
are Founders. There one may observe the greatest Obstacle the Romans ever met
with: and this great Intrigue in the Fable is a Truth in History. Was it only
Fiction, that there was a Design of translating in Africa the Empire of the
World, which was destined for Italy? And the Means used to accomplish that End,
was it not that Treachery with which the Romans have always upbraided the
Carthaginians? Dido casts this Reproach upon her self; and Nullus amor populis
nec foedera sunto. Exoriare aliquis nostris ex ossibus ultor, Qui face
Dardanios ferroque sequare colonos. Aeneid. 4.
makes the Application thereof to Hannibal and the Carthaginians; ordering them
to make use of it always against the Romans, and to violate their most solemn
Treaties, as often as they supposed they could do it to their own Advantage. This
is the Genius and Conduct she inspires her Commonwealth with. Mercury likewise
advises the Founder of Rome not to trust to the Inconstancy of this Woman,
which was like the Inconstancy of her City. And when Juno made the Proposal to
Venus of an Alliance between these two States, Venus saw well enough 'twas only
a Trick of Dissimulation, to which her present Interests compelled her to
condescend. But I am too minute in a General Treatise of the Epick Poem. We end
all with saying, that the Event is the same both in the History and the Poem.
Extincti te meque, soror, populumque patresque Sidonios, urbemque tuam. Aeneid.
4.
It Is Dido's Breach of Faith that had almost ruined Aeneas, and which at last
became the Ruin of this Foundress of Carthage. 'Twas this very same
Perfidiousness in Hannibal that brought Rome into so much Danger, and was at
last the Ruin of Hannibal and his City.

I shall conclude this Chapter with the three Methods of forming the Plot or
Intrigue of the Poem. One is, to deduce it from the Design of the Hero and the
Action, which we have already taken notice of. The second is, to deduce it from
the Fable and the Design of the Poet; and this is what we observed in the
Allegory of two opposite Persons and two opposite Empires. The third is to form
the Intrigue so, as that the Vnravelling may be prepared for it. I have said
nothing as yet of this third Way, and shall explain it by some Instances.

It Is worth taking notice, how the Poet prepares the Departure of Aeneas from
Dido. The Hero does not come designedly into Africa, but is forced thither
against his Will by a Storm. He accepts not the Offer Vultis and his mecum
pariter considere regnis? Urbem quam statuo, vestra est. Aeneid. 1.
Dido made him of her City, if he would stay there: Fugae nec conjugis unquam
Praetendi taedas, aut haec in foedera veni. Aeneid. 4.
And in the Marriage it self he takes care to engage himself to nothing that
might hinder him from making a Voyage into Italy by the first fair Wind. All
these Precautions prepare the Reader, that so without the least Surprise he
sees Aeneas leave Carthage: This is the Vnravelling of that Intrigue.

In the second part the Poet opposes none against his Hero, but such persons as
he could deal well enough with, when a Peace was clapped up. King Latinus was to
be his Father-in-Law, Lavinia his Wife, and the Latins his Subjects. It would
have been hard for all these persons to have become such upon his Account,
after they had been his professed Enemies. The Poet has provided for that too.
In Lavinia there is not to be observed either an Inclination for Turnus, or an
Aversion to Aeneas: Multaque se incusat, qui non acceperit ultro Dardanium
Aeneam, generumque asciverit turbem. Aen. lib. 11.
The King profers this Princess his Daughter to the Hero as an Article of the
Peace, and constantly persists in this Design: The Latins only fight against
Aeneas because they are forced to it. Their Legates give such ample testimonies
of their Love and Esteem for him, Quin and fatales murorum attollere moles;
Saxaque sibvectare humeris Trojana juvabit. Aen. 10.
that they declared, they should think it an Honor to build the City for him
which he demanded in Italy. The Poet then opposes none against him but Amata
and Turnus, who both perished by their own faults.

Juno indeed could not die; but she is well enough disposed of, by insinuating
that all she hopes for, is not absolutely to hinder the Establishment of Aeneas
(for that she confessed she could not do): At trahere, and tantis moras licet
addere rebus, Sanguine Trojano and Rutulo dotabere, Virgo. Aeneid. 7.
But only to put a stop to it a little, and make the Trojans and Italians pay
very dear for it. Thus, having accomplished these two designs, 'twas no hard
matter for Jupiter to cheer up her Spirits, and make her consent to the rest.

CHAP. XV. How to dispose, or prepare the Vnravelling.
IF the Plot or Intrigue must be natural, and such as springs from the very
Subject, as has been already urged: Then the Winding up of the Plot, by a more
sure claim, must have this Qualification, and be a probable Consequence of all
that went before. As the Readers regard this more than the rest, so should the
Poet be so much the more exact therein. This is the End of the Poem, and the
last Impression that is like to be stamped upon them, and which either leaves
them in the satisfaction they fought after, or in such a dissatisfied Temper,
as endangers the Reputation of the Author. Let us now see the Instances Homer
and Virgil have left us of this Practice.

The Vnravelling of the Plots of the Iliad is the Cessation of the Anger of
Achilles, who was incensed at first against Agamemnon, and lastly against
Hector. There is nothing but what is Natural in the Appeasing of this Anger.
The Absence of Achilles is the Reason why the Greeks are worsted by the
Trojans. He absented himself on purpose, and 'twas a pleasure to him to see the
Loss they underwent; that so he might be revenged on Agamemnon, who was the
only person, that had affronted him. Among the wounded he believes he sees one
of his Friends. For his better satisfaction therein, he sends thither his dear
Patroclus. But this Favorite of Achilles had not the same Passions with him.
He could not but be extremely concerned at the miserable condition his Allies
were reduced to by the Common Enemy. These unfortunate Princes, who had done
Achilles no wrong, importune Patroclus to work him into a better Temper; and to
persuade him not to suffer they should be so unworthily used any longer, since
he could defend them from the Disgrace. Patroclus prevails upon Achilles to
lend him his Men and Armor, and under this Appearance beats back the Enemy. It
is likewise Natural that this young Hero, intoxicated with so glorious a
success, should push on his Victory farther than Achilles had ordered him, and
so force Hector to fight with and kill him. But shall Achilles endure, that so
near and dear a Friend should be butchered before his face, and in his Armor
too, without revenging the Deed? That can never be. So then the Death of
Patroclus is the Cause why Achilles, who is otherwise well enough satisfied and
revenged upon Agamemnon, should be now reconciled to him, and accept of his
submission, his presents, and the Oath he made that he had never to do with
Briseis. This first Intrigue then is naturally unravelled.

The second could not be brought about by a Reconciliation with Hector. It was
not in this Trojan Prince's power to restore Patroclus, as Agamemnon had
Briseis. Nothing but Hector's death could be a satisfaction for that of
Patroclus. It Is by this that Achilles begins his Revenge. Besides, the many
Indignities which he offered to the Body of this innocent Homocide, and the
great Honors he paid to that of his Friend, must needs Naturally mollify his
Grief, and assuage his Passion. To conclude, as Agamemnon repented, and wholly
submitted to what he pleased; so likewise we find King Priam prostrate at his
feet in as miserable a Condition as a Father could be, that takes on for the
Death of his Son. So that there is nothing in the pacified Anger of Achilles,
and in the Winding up of the Plots of the Iliad, but what Naturally arises from
the Subject and the very Action.

We shall find the same in the Odysseis. Ulysses by a Tempest is cast upon the
Island of the Phaeacans, to whom he discovers himself, and desires they would
further his Return to his own Country, which was not very far from thence. One
cannot see any Reason why the King of this Island should refuse such a
reasonable request to a Hero whom he seems to have in great esteem. The
Phaeacans had heard him tell the story of his Adventures: In this fabulous
Recital consists all the advantage they could derive from his presence; for the
Art of War which they admired in him, his undauntedness under Dangers, his
indefatigable Patience, and such like Virtues, were such as these Islanders
were not used to. All their talent lay in Singing and Dancing, and whatsoever a
soft and quiet life esteemed Charming. And here we see how dexterously Homer
prepares the Incidents he makes use of. These People could do no less for the
Account Ulysses had given them of his Life, and with which he had ingeniously
entertained them, than conduct him home by furnishing him with Shipping which
would stand them in little or nothing.

When he came home, his long Absence, and the Travels which had disfigured him,
made him altogether unknown; and the danger he would have incurred, had he
discovered himself too soon, forced him to a disguise, as we hinted before.
Lastly, this Disguise gave him an Opportunity of surprising those young
Gallants, who for several years together had been only used to sleep well, and
fare daintily.

In the Latin Poet, all the hinderance Aeneas met with was from Turnus. The
turbulent Spirit of this Rival drew out the Italians to fight the Trojans, and
cost our Hero as many Subjects, as there were Soldiers slain in both parties;
since he was already King of the one, and within a while was to be King of the
other. What is to be done then in this case by a Prince so valiant as Aeneas,
and so affectionate and tender toward his Subjects? Aequius huic Turno fuerat
se opponere morti. Aen. 11.
Is it not the most natural thing in the World, that he should declare he was
ready to put a stop to the Quarrel Turnus had caused, by fighting singly with
him? Turnus ut infractos adverso mart Latinos Defecisse videt, sua nunc
promissa reposci, Se signari oculis. Aen. 12.
Turnus for his part sees the Latins vanquished and dejected; he is sensible of
the Reproaches they cast upon him for having exposed them in his Quarrel, and
not daring to answer the demands of Aeneas. Can he shift off the Challenge
Aeneas had sent him? By this means the Duel and the Vnravelling of all the
Action happens naturally, and is as it were a necessary Consequence of the
Disposition of the Fable.

These are the Examples our Poets have left us of Aristotle's Rules. (...).
Poet. c. 10.
He teaches us that whatever concludes the Poem, should so arise from the
Constitution of the Fable, as if 'twere a Necessary or at least a Probable
Consequence of all that went before.

CHAP. XVI. Of the several sorts of Actions.
THE several Effects which the Vnravelling of the Plot produces, and the
different States to which it reduces the persons, divide the Actions into so
many sorts.

The Vnravelling of the Intrigue may be by changing of any one's fortune from
good to bad, as that of Oedipus; or from bad to good, as that of Cinna. Oedipus
seems to be innocent; and in the very moment he thought himself Master of two
Kingdoms, he finds himself guilty of Incest and Parricide, and becomes
miserable, blind, and an exile. Cinna, on the other hand, is condemned, and
look's for nothing else but a cruel punishment; and contrary to his expectation
he is freed from Death, restablish'd in his preferments, and made Master of
Aemylia.

Sometimes these two Contrary Turns of Fortune happen in one and the same
Action, as in Heraclius. Phocas is dethroned, when he thought himself settled
in a sure Post: And Heraclius steps into the place of the Tyrant who was gone
to visit the other World.

But let this Turn be what it will, double or single, fortunate or unfortunate,
it is still called a Peripetia.

Sometimes it happens by the Discovery of one or more persons, which till then
were unknown, as in Oedipus and Heraclius: Sometimes without any discovery, as
in Cinna.

But let the Matter end which way it will, whether it be a Peripetia without a
Discovery, or a Discovery without a Peripetia, or both together; this makes a
sort of Action which we call Implex or mixed. But if the Vnravelling be without
a Discovery, and without a Peripetia; if it be a simple passing from trouble
and Action, to quiet and Repose, then these Actions and Fables are called
single Ones.

Sometimes likewise by a sub-division of the Fables wherein is a Peripetia,
Aristotle has called those Single, where the Peripetia is single, and only of
one sort, as in Cinna: and those Double, where the Peripetia is double, as in
Heraclius.

According to this last Division, the Fable of the Odysseis is double, because
the Vnravelling of the Intrigue makes Ulysses and his party pass from a
Miserable to an Honorable State; and casts his Rivals from their Merriments to
a shameful Death. (...). Arist. Poet. c. 24.
This Action then is likewise Implex. It Is not only unravelled by this double
Peripetia, but likewise by the Discovery of Ulysses.

There is neither a Discovery nor a Peripetia in the Iliad. Two Generals of the
same party fall out, and then agree, after they had both suffered considerable
losses: Achilles loses his friend Patroclus, and Agamemnon his Glory and
Authority: He is vanquished by the Trojans, and forced to submit to his
Inferior Achilles, to acknowledge his fault, and to give him Satisfaction. In
the second part, too Enemies fight, and he who was the weakest and knew himself
so, is at last vanquished and killed. This Action then is wholly Single.

There is no more Complexedness in the Plots of the Aeneid, than in those of
the Iliad. Dido, who came to so miserable a Death, was not more fortunate
before that Catastrophe. Her Love for Aeneas fills her at first with trouble
and disquiet. Her Marriage increases both, and adds thereto the dismal fear,
whereby she foresaw her Loss, and all the horrors of her Death. Urbem
praeclaram Statui, mea maenia vidi. Ulta rirum poenas inimico a flatre recepi.
Foelix, heu nimium foelix si littora tantum Nunquam Dardaniae tetigissent
nostra catinae! Aen. 4.
If she had any good Fortune when she revenged her first Husband, punished the
Treachery of her Brother, and was established so gloriously, all this happened
before the Trojans arrived at Carthage: And by consequence having nothing to do
with the Action, could not make a Peripetia. Nothing passed between Aeneas and
Turnus, that is more complex'd, than that which happened in the Quarrel between
Achilles and Hector. So that the Action of the Aeneid is altogether Simple,
without a Peripetia or a Discovery.

Not that the Aeneid is absolutely without a Peripetia; there are some in the
lesser Episodes. In the fighting with whirl-bats, Entellus is knocked down at
the feet of his Antagonist; every one looked upon him as vanquished, and Dares
began to triumph. But when Rage had restored this old Combatant the Force which
Age had robbed him of, on a sudden he leaps up, and Dares found himself so
over-match'd, and so confounded, that he could not make the least resistance.
But the Quality of these Episodes make nothing against the Entire Action. The
Fable, properly speaking, is only Complex when the Peripetia or Discovery
happens in the main Vnravelling, which is the End of the Action.

I shall not stay here to enumerate all the sorts of Discoveries Aristotle has
mentioned. There is none in the Aeneid, for the sake of which I chiefly write:
And elsewhere this Subject is commonly handled in the Rules men lay down for
the Dramatic Poem, where is the most occasion for them.

But I cannot omit the Conclusion of the Action; It Is a consequence of the
Vnravelling, and a part or a necessary Qualification of the Integrity of the
Poem.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Conclusion of the Action.
THAT which we call here the Conclusion of the Epick Action is the very last
passage from Agitation and Trouble, to Quiet and Repose: So that there is a
great deal of difference between the Vnravelling and the Conclusion of an
Action. This last is nothing else but a kind of moment without Extent and
Duration: But the first is of some length, since it Comprehends all that
happens after the Plot. Besides, there are a great many Vnravellings in a Poem,
because there are a great many Intrigues: All that are before the last make no
kind of Cessation, but start up new Difficulties, which is quite contrary to
the Conclusion. The Conclusion then is the End of the last Vnravelling, so that
there can be no more than One.

This Doctrine is a Consequence of that which we laid down concerning Episodes.
None of them, as we urged, should be Entire; and only the last can be regularly
finished. A great many Conclusions then is no where to be found but in
Episodical Poems, as in the Thebaid of Statius, where he has finished the Story
of Hypsipyle.

But now for some better Instances in the practice of our two Poets.

The first part of Virgil's Poem is the Voyage of Aeneas from Troy to Italy.
The Plot is the Difficulty of getting thither, and the opposition of Juno who
raises Storms, and other obstaoles against him. The Vnravelling begins at the
last Voyage of the Hero from Sicily (which he leaves in the fifth Book) to
Italy and the Mouth of Tyber, where he arrives in the sixth and Seventh Book.
This Vnravelling Ea vox audits laborum Prima tulit finem. Aen. 7.
puts an End to the Labors and hazards of the Voyage. But does it put an End
to all the Troubles and Dangers of Aeneas? No: O tandem magnis pelagi defuncte
periclis, Sed terra graviora manent. Aen. 6.
On the contrary it casts him upon greater. It leaves him not in Repose, but
puts him upon more Action and more business than ever he had before. And
therefore it is not the Conclusion.

The Conclusion is not always joined to the Solution of that Intrigue which
seems to be most general, as was the Design of Juno in the Aeneid. This Goddess
gives over acting, but Aeneas does not. He has still Turnus to deal withal. In
a word, since the Poet does not sing the Action of Juno, but of Aeneas, the
Poem and the Action remain still unfinished, even when this Divine Enemy has
given over. All the Conclusion then is included in the Death of Turnus, because
that puts an End to the Action of Aeneas.

It Is true that even then Aeneas had not quite executed his designs, he had not
built his City, nor established his Religion, nor Married Lavinia. But it must
be observed that these things are not necessary. It Is enough that all Obstacles
were removed, and that the Reader be no longer in doubt of what follows. And
this is the Case of the Aeneid. In this particular it is very complete, and
needs no supplement. If one Instance is not enough to justify this Doctrine,
we can have recourse to the Theater. Marriage is very commonly the very End of
Dramatick Poems: And yet that is not always performed before the Spectators.
The Actors step in to perform this Ceremony within doors: No body expects they
should come out again upon the Stage; or that they should tell the Audience of
it, as Ne expectetis, spectatores, dum illi hue ad vos excunt. Nemo exibit,
omnes intus conficiunt Negotium. Ubi id erit factum, ornamenta ponent. Postidea
loci, Qui deliquit vapulabit, Qui non deliquit biber. Plaut. Cistell.
Plautus has done in one of his Plays, more to make People laugh, than because
he was forced to it.

Homer has concluded his Odysseis by the league which Pallas makes between
Ulysses and his Neighbors. And yet he does not make it appear by the
Continuation of the Poem, whether the Articles were faithfully kept or no.

He has not used the same Method in the Iliad. The observation of the Truce
depended upon Achilles. The Poet had good reason to presume that all his
Readers were not persuaded of the Moderation of so passionate a Man. It was a
business of the highest Importance for the Conclusion of this Action to
convince them that his Anger was appeased. This Hero in the whole series of the
Poem had appeared so testy, unreasonable and unjust, that tho the Poet's
precaution was very great and exact, yet one might distrust this extravagant
humor, as long as the Body of his Enemy was in a condition of being insulted
over. They were then ready to bestow such Honors upon this Corpse, as one might
fear would put our Hero into a Passion. So that the Poet thought himself
obliged to carry on the Funeral and the Observation of the Truce to the very
End of his Poem: That so he might absolutely convince us of his tranquillity
and repose, whose Action and Anger he had undertook to Sing.

After having observed what the Conclusion of the Action is, and when it ought
to be made, there remains still a third question behind. And that is to know
whether the Conclusion ought to leave the Hero in a happy State, or whether
it is allowable to leave him in a miserable Condition.

Our Poets have not given us any Examples of a Hero, that is left in a
Miserable and forlorn Condition. Sad Conclusions are proper for Tragedy: But in
that they were more in Vogue formerly. than they are now a days: Because in the
Popular States of Greece, where Monarchy was Odious, nothing was heard with
greater pleasure and Ardency than the Misfortunes of Kings. Aristotle has still
another reason for preferring this kind of Catastrophe to a more happy one. The
Tragical Scene is the Throne of the Passions, where Terror and Compassion ought
to rule over all the rest. Now these two Passions arise naturally from sad
Events: And the Spectators going from the Theater with their minds full of the
misfortunes they were Eyewitnesses of, do doubtlesly preserve their tenderness
a great deal longer, and resent more such forcible Effects, than if their tears
were dried up, and their sighs abated by the satisfaction of a more prosperous
Catastrophe.

But these Reasons will not serve for the Epopea, since it is not so much for
refining the Passions, as for making Men put off ill habits, and put on good
ones. It Is likewise as true, that this does not exclude sad Events. Besides the
Nature of the Fable is as capable of Good as Bad persons for its chief Actors.
The sad Adventure of the Lamb unjustly butchered by the Wolf is as just, as
instructive, and as regular a Subject, as the Generosity of the Elephant, who
quitted his Anger upon the Innocence of the same Lamb.

It Is true if the Poets in the person of their Hero proposed an Example of
Perfection for Imitation, the misfortunes into which this Hero falls, and his
unsuccessful Enterprises, would suit very ill with the designs of these
Authors. But the Practice of Homer in his Iliad, and the Approbation given him
by Aristotle and Horace for the same, will not permit us to think that the
design of the Epopea should be to give us these fine Ideas of a perfect Hero.
These three great men did certainly never pretend that Achilles, the Hero of
the Fable, was a Model of Virtue.

We cannot then from any of these Principles determine any thing concerning the
fortunate or unfortunate End of an Epick Action.

But if any heed be to be given to Authority, I do not know any one Instance of
a Poet, who finishes his piece with the misfortune of his Hero. Our three Poems
afford us quite contrary Instances; and Statius himself has quite spoiled the
Unity of his Action, because he would not leave upon the minds of his Readers
that miserable Fratricide, which was the true Conclusion of it. So that all the
Poets seem to conspire for a happy Catastrophe.

In a word, since the Epick Poem's Action is of a larger extent than that of
the Theater; it would perhaps be less satisfactory to the Readers, if, after so
much pains and so long Troubles with which this kind of Poem is always filled,
it should at last bring them to a doleful and unhappy end. Achilles as unjust
and Violent as he was, yet in his Valor showed such an Air of Greatness, which
dazles our sight, and will not let us see his faults so, as to wish him any
greater punishment than what he suffered by the Death of his friend. In
speaking of the Fable, I hinted upon what account the Iliad should end thus,
because it redounded more to the happiness and the Glory of the Grecians.

Virgil had the same reason to please his Audience. The Romans would have been
disgusted and offended, if he had ill used their Founder and Ancestors: And
besides in the Odysseis and the Aeneid the Poets would have been unjust, and
the Readers dissatisfied, if such brave Princes and such noble Souls as Ulysses
and Aeneas had been suffered to sink under any misfortune. Achilles, who fell
far short of their Virtue, was likewise but little less fortunate.

Let the Case be how it will, yet I fancy there needs a great deal of skill to
give the Hero of the Epopea a sad and mournful End, which might be received
with a general Applause.

This is what we had to say concerning the Integrity of the Epick Action. There
remain still two of its Qualifications behind, its Duration, and it is
Importance: Of each of which briefly.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Duration of the Action.
THe time of the Epick Action is not so limited as that of the Theater. (...).
Poet. c. 5.
This last (says Aristotle) should takeup as much time, as the Sun does in
going about the Earth, or thereabouts. But the Epopea has no fixed time, and in
that it differs from the Dramatick Poem. These are all the Rules he has left us
upon this head. They consist in two Things: The First, That the Epick Action is
longer than the Dramatick; and, Secondly, That the Epick Actions may be some
longer than others.

The First is a Comparison between the Epopea and the Drama: Concerning which
we say that an uninterrupted Duration is a great deal more necessary in an
Action, which one sees and are present at; than in one which we read, or only
hear repeated. It is not natural to imagine one can spend Days and Nights
without Sleeping, Eating and Drinking, purely to mind the Event of Things; and
that, without moving out of the place, one can be conveyed to several places:
And hence arises the Unity of Time and Place so necessary to the Drama. But
neither of these two Unities is necessary to the Epick Poem, because we read it
as an History which we may leave off when we please.

Besides, Tragedy being full of Passions, and consequently full of such a
Violence as cannot last long, requires a shorter time; and the Epick Poem
requires a longer time for to give leisure to the Habits, if good, to sink deep
into the Minds and Souls of the Readers; or to be rooted thence, if bad. These
two Reasons constitute the difference between the Epick and the Dramatick
Action, as to their Duration.

But the Difficulty is to know how long these Actions of the Epopea should
last; and, whether, since as Aristotle says they are unlimited, this does not
cause some difference between the Actions of the same kind. All we can do in
the Case, is to lay down the Practice of our Poets, and to make such Reflections
therein, as Aristotle has given us liberty to make.

This Philosopher says, Whatsoever is violent cannot last long; and, in his
Poesy he tells us, That the Manners of the Personages are either (...). C. 15.
violent and strong, or calm, sedate and soft. The first cannot last so long as
the other. A Man can be good humored, peaceable, and prudent all his lifelong,
and no body will find fault with it: But one would wonder to see him keep up
his Anger, and be in a violent agitation of body and mind all that time.

And though this long train of Passions were probable; yet it would not be
necessary in a Poem that is designed to root out, or plant in Habits: Since the
Habits are sooner received and impressed by violent Actions, than by such as
are gentle and moderate. We ought to conclude then, that the more violence any
Action has, the less time it ought to last.

This is what we see in the Practice of our Poets.

The Stultorum regum and populorum continet aestus. Hor. Ep. ad Lollium.
Iliad contains not only the Anger and Passion of Achilles, but likewise of the
Kings and People that are the Personages of it. The Poet allows this Action
seven and forty days only. Nor is this little time designed all for the Anger
of Achilles, though the most principal and the most violent. We must substract
at one End the nine days of the Plague, which were before his Quarrel with
Agamemnon: And at the other, the eleven days of the Truce which he granted to
King Priam.

Besides, these seven and twenty days of Anger are not all spent in the Action.
The eleven first are allowed for the curing and recovery of the Grecians; and
the eleven last for the Funeral-Pomp which Achilles bestowed on the Body of
Patroclus. So that the Fight begins and ends in five days time. Nor does the
Fight last all the time; but on the second day there was a Cessation of Arms
for burning the dead on both sides.

To conclude, Achilles, the chief Hero of the Poem, and the very Life of all
the Violence that reigns there; he, I say, who being transported with it more
than the rest, ought likewise to continue in this Excess less time, fought only
one day. By this means all the Poem founded upon Violence lasts but a little
while: And the Duration of that which was most violent is judiciously
retrenched by the Poet.

The Design of the Odysseis is quite different from that of the Iliad; so
likewise is the management of it, as to its Duration. The Character of the Hero
is Prudence and Wisdom. And this Moderation gives the Poet liberty to extend
his Action to as long a time as he pleases, and his political Instructions
required. Therefore he did not allow this Action some Weeks as he had that of
the Iliad; but he takes up eight years and a half, from the taking of Troy, at
which it begins, to the Peace of Ithaca, where it ends.

The Aeneid is like the Odysseis. The Sum pius Aeneas, Aen. 1.
Character of the Hero is Piety and Meekness: and Politics are likewise
essential thereto. Therefore the Duration of the Action is continued after the
same manner. The Poet makes the recital thereof begin at the building of the
Wooden Horse, just before the taking of Troy. This City was taken a great while
before the beginning of Summer, so that Aeneas had time enough to fit out a
Fleet. Jam prima incooperat aestas, Et pater Anchises dare fatis vela jubebat.
Aen. 3.
He quits Troy at the beginning of the first Summer: Septima post Trojae
excidium jam vertitur aestas. Aen. 5.
arrives at Sicily by the end of the seventh, and immediately after comes to
Italy, where his Action continues one or two Months longer to the Death of
Turnus. All this makes up a little more than six Years and a half, and not
quite seven. This is the Duration of the Action of the Aeneid.

There is still another way of reckoning the Time of the Epick Poem. It Is to
compute only what the Poet himself relates. By this means the Odysseis begins
at the first meeting of the Gods; and the Aeneid, at that time when the Storm
cast the Trojans upon Carthage. As for all that went before, we only reckon so
much time as was requisite for Ulysses and Aeneas to make the Narration of
their Adventures in, viz. a Night. This way of computing the Time, reduces the
Action of several Years into the space of a few Months, and this Computation is
no less necessary than the other. But because this belongs rather to the
Narration than the Action, we reserve it for the ensuing Book.

Here we only regard the Duration of the Action, as being the Matter of the
Poem. For this reason we reckon not the Incidents which are added thereto: Such
as the Wound of Ulysses upon Parnassus, and the sequel of the Italian History
from Aeneas down to Augustus Caesar's Reign.

It Is enough that we have shown the Duration of the Actions of the Iliad, the
Odysseis, and the Aeneid, and the difference between them; which is so great
even in Homer, that one of his Actions contains less than two Months, and the
other more than eight Years.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Importance of the Action.
THE Epick Poet cannot insinuate himself into the mind of his Hearers by the
Diversions of Comedy; nor by the force and vivacity of Tragedy. Let him use
never so much Artifice to seize upon a Passion, yet if one compares his
Recitals with the Action of the Theater, one may apply thereto what Horace
says: That the Soul is less affected Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta sidelibus, and quae Ipse sibi tradit Spectator.
Hor. Poet.
with what it hears, than with what it sees. So that besides the Reasons drawn
from the Nature of these Poems, we may likewise from hence conclude, that the
Epick Poet lies under a greater Obligion than the Dramatick, of surprising the
minds of his Readers by Admiration, and by the Importance of the things he
treats of; and of taking for his Subject a Great, Noble, and Important Action.
Aristotle requires this Grandeur, and this Luster in the Epick Action, (...).
Poet. c. 5.
and says That the Epopea and Tragedy do both imitate whatever is most Noble
and important.

But the Action may be important two ways: Either of its self independently
from him that executes it; or by the Quality of the Persons, the Poet is
pleased to make use of.

Horace excludes mean Personages, and would have them be Crowned Heads: But
neither he nor Aristotle says any thing to show that the Action in its own
Nature ought to be great and important. And in truth they could not require
this Qualification without condemning the Poet, that in their Opinion is the
least to blame of any in the World, and without rejecting the Model they
proposed. If one considers the two Actions of Homer without the Names and their
Episodes, as Aristotle would have them be prepared at first, one shall find
nothing in them but what is common, and which requires no higher Qualities,
than those a Merchant, a burgomaster, or at most a plain Country-Squire is
capable of. You need only reflect upon the two Models we have given of them,
one of which Aristotle himself drew. One shall find nothing there but what
might have happened to ordinary Persons. It Is this, A Man returns to his own
Country, and finds a great many disorders in his Family. Two others fall out
about a Captive Wench, and break the neck of their Affairs. This teaches us
that to make Action important, it is enough that it be the Action of noble and
important Persons.

It Is true, Horace makes mention of Wars: But there is no need for them, it is
only by accident that they are in the Poem. I might urge, that this is only
upon the Account of the Hero who ought to be a Warrior, such as Achilles,
Ulysses, and Aeneas. Homer, who is cited by Horace in this point, shall
testify it. There is so little War in the Odysseis, that there is not the
least color to think Horace meant to affirm that Wars were the subject Matter,
or a considerable part thereof. The Poet mentions but three Rencounters, that
of the Ciconians, that of the Lestrygons, and that of some Ithacans, who were
for revenging of their Masters, whom Ulysses had murdered at his House. The
recitals of these three Battles, if a Man may call these Adventures so, are
made in less than forty Verses in all.

But however it is, yet the Return of a Man to his own home, and the Quarrel of
two others, that have nothing that is great in themselves, become noble and
important Actions; when, in the choice of the Names, the Poet tells us that
it is Ulysses, who returns back into Ithaca; and that it is Achilles and
Agamemnon, who fall out with one another at the famous Siege of Troy. It Is then
these Affairs become Matters of State.

But there are Actions that of themselves are very important, such as the
Establishing, or the Downfall, of a State or a Religion. Such then is the
Action of the Aeneid. There can nothing be imagined more great, noble, and
august, since it comprehends both the Civil State and Religion.

There is yet another way of making an Action great, by the Grandeur of the
Personages under whose Names we represent it.

This way is to give a higher Idea of these Personages than that which the
Readers conceive of all they know to be great. This is performed by comparing
the Men of the Poem, with the Men of the present time in which the Poet writes.

Homer says that two Men of his time could not carry the Stone, which Diomedes
with ease threw at Aeneas; and Virgil says that the Stone Turnus flung at the
same Aeneas, would have been too heavy a burden for twelve Men in the time of
Augustus. In short, according to Homer's Account, who lived one or two Ages
after Aeneas, and who pretends that Men's strength was abated to a Moiety of
what it was before, this same strength may well be reduced to the pitch Virgil
would have it ten Ages after. It Is by this means these two Poets were willing
to render the Subjects of their Poems more great and august by the Strength and
Grandeur of their Personages, and by these great Ideas which they super-added
to those which the Men of their Times conceived.

This very reason obliged them not to represent their Heroes superior to those
of former Ages: But the probable diminution from Age to Age, as they supposed,
ought on the contrary to give the Fathers the preference over their Children.
Homer makes no difficulty of it; and (...). Iliad. 1.
Nestor who had lived two Ages already, says without any Complement to the
Princes of the Iliad, that they fell short of their Forefathers. Hic genus
antiquum, Teucri pulcherrima proles, Magnanimi Heroes nati melioribus annis,
Itusque Assaracusque, etc. Aen. 6.
Virgil also says, that the Times of Itus and Assaracus were better than those
in which his Hero lived.

It seems Statius had the same mind to represent the strength of his Heroes, as
far surpassing that of Homer's and Virgil's Heroes, though in truth the Heroes
of the one were only the Children of the Heroes of the other two; so prodigious
are the Actions he would attribute to some. But it is more likely, that herein
his whole aim was to amplify to a Prodigy whatsoever he handled. For if by
this extraordinary Strength he had a mind to heighten the Grandeur and
Importance of his Action, he forgot himself in several Places, and has done
something worse than sleep, when he debased it so much in his first Book. It Is
there, where to show the Baseness and Poverty of the Kingdom of Thebes, he
compares it to the Power and Riches of the greatest Empires that have
flourished since. Is it not pleasant in him to declaim himself against the
Design he bestows upon his Heroes, and to ridicule the great labor he puts
them upon for a wretched and pitiful Kingdom?

Bellum est de paupere Regno. Thebaid. l. 1.
It Is for a sordid Kingdom that they strive.

How ill an Imitation is this of Virgil's Epiphonema, which gives us so lofty
and so just an Idea of the Importance of his Subject:

Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem. Aen. 1.
So vast a thing it was to found the Roman State!

The End of the Second Book.
Monsieur Bossu's Treatise OF THE EPICK POEM. BOOK III. Concerning the Form of
the Epick Poem, or concerning the Narration.
CHAP. I. Of the Parts of the Narration.
THere are two ways of Relating an Action that is past: The one is Simple and
Historical, when a Man makes the Rehearsal of it to his Audience without
forcing their Imagination, only leaving them under a Sense that they are
reading a Book, or hearing something or other related. The other is more
Artificial, where the Author makes no Appearance, nor says any thing of
himself. But, by a kind of innocent Magic, he raises from the Dead, and brings
upon the Stage, those very Persons who have done the Action he would represent.
He makes them speak and act over again the same Words and Actions they spoke
and did before, and in some sort transports his Auditors to the Times when, and
the Places where the Action was done. By this means he does not declare it to
them after a plain, simple Way, as the Historian, but makes them Witnesses of
it, and the Action becomes its own Discoverer.

The Actions which Poets imitate, are such Things as are in an equal degree
capable of two Forms, each of which constitute a different Species. Such as
fall under the most Artificial and Active Form are called Dramatick Poems,
denoting their Nature by their (...), To Act. (...), Action.
Title; and such as are represented by the Poet only, who speaks therein as an
Historian, are for that very reason called (...), To Speak.
Epick Poems, or Epopea's.

Whatsoever regard the Dramatick Poet has to his Spectators, yet the Persons he
introduces in his Poem, who are the only Actors therein, are not in the least
acquainted with those before whom the Poet makes them speak: nay more, they
don't know what they shall do themselves, nor what the Issue of their Projects
will be; and therefore they cannot either advertise the Spectators thereof, or
beg their Attention, or thank them for it. So that this kind of Poem, properly
speaking, has no parts exempt from the Action that is represented. This alone
makes the Comedy and Tragedy entire and perfect, such I mean as are in use
now-adays; that is, without Prologue, Epilogue, and those other Appendages,
which being lost, or left to the Choice of the Poet, have altered nothing of
the Nature and Integrity of the Poem. When they are made use of, (...).
they have nothing to do with the Tragedy and Action, since they are not made
by the Actors.

But in the Epick Poem, where the Poet speaks, he says nothing but what is a
part of the Poem. So likewise an Orator not only alleges his Reasons, and
refutes those of the adverse Party; but besides that, prepares his Auditors,
begs their Attention, and at last raises the Passions that are proper to his
Cause. Nothing of all this is looked upon as foreign to his Subject: the
Exordium, Proposition, and Peroration, are true parts of it, though less
necessary than the Narration and the Confirmation. It Is just the same in the
Epopea. Before the Poet begins the large Recital of his Action, he proposes it
in general, and invokes the Gods that are to inspire him. This makes up three
parts that have been always looked upon as necessary, viz. the Proposition, the
Invocation, and the Narration. We may add to them a fourth, which is no less
necessary, nor less usual; and that is, the Title or Inscription of the Poem.

There are several others, which signify nothing to the Integrity of the Epick
Poem. There is a Preface before the Aeneid, which they say was made against the
Plagiaries, who might have transcribed this Poem, and have had the Credit of it
to Virgil's prejudice. It is contained in the following Verses, where he speaks
of his other Works. Ille ego, qui quondam gracili modulatus avena
Carmen, and egressus sylvis, vicina coegi,
Vt quamvis avido parerent arva colono;
Gratum opus Agricolis: at nunc horrentia Martis....


I question whether these Verses are proper for a Beginning, where the Reader's
mind, not being as yet in a Heat, requires something more mild and just, than
in the Sequel, where it is easily transported. In my mind, the last of these
four Verses seems unworthy of this great Poet. All that needed be said, was
sufficiently expressed in the three first.

The other parts are a Dedication, to flatter some great Man or other, and an
Epilogue for the Conclusion of the Poem.

Virgil made use of these two parts in his Georgicks. Quid faciat laetas
segetes, quo fidere terram Vertere, Maecenas, etc.
He begins with the Proposition, where he just mentions Maecenas, to whom he
delicates this Piece, but says never a word in his Praise. Vos o clarissima
mundi Lumina labentem coelo quae ducitis annum, etc.
After this he makes an Invocation, wherein he addresses himself to all the
Gods that presided over Agriculture: and then he flatters Tuque adeo, quem mox
quae sint habitura Deorum Incertum est, etc.
Augustus, joining him with the Gods he invokes.

Vere novo gelidus canis cum montibus humor Liquitur, etc.
Afterward he enters upon his Subject, and begins to treat at large of
Agriculture. This part is the Body of the Poem, as the Narration in the Epopea.
Haec super arvorum cultu, pecorumque canebam, etc.
Lastly, after he had finished his Treatise in four Books, he ends with an
Epilogue designed against the Plagiaries, as the Preface of the Aeneid is; but
with an Air so different, that these Verses seem to be produced by another sort
of Genius. This is what he has done in his Georgicks.

But neither He nor Homer, in their Epick Poems, have made use of any of these
unnecessary parts; so that I shall say nothing more about them. I will now
speak particularly to the other four. 1. Of the Inscription or Title of the
Poem. 2. of the Proposition. 3. Of the Invocation. 4. and lastly, Of the Body
of the Poem, and the Narration properly so called.

CHAP. II. Of the Title of the Epick Poem.
WE here examine Things upon the Principles we laid down in speaking concerning
the Nature of the Epick Poem. We observed that it is a Fable; and we see
nothing in the Practice of our Poets that gives us any other Idea of the Title
and Inscription of their Poems, than of the Titles of Aesop's Fables. They have
for their Title the Names of the Persons that act in them. There lies this
Difference, that all the Personages are named in the Title of Aesop's Fables,
because they are but few, and one is as important as another; but in the Epick
Poem there is commonly One who is a great deal more considerable than the rest,
and the others are too many to be all named. Therefore they only affix the Name
of the principal Personage to it. Thus the Odysseis and the Aeneid bear only
the Name of Ulysses and Aeneas.

The Example of Homer in the Inscription of the Iliad informs us, that the
Title of the Poem may be derived from something else besides the Name of the
Personages. Perhaps he did not call it the Achilleid, because Achilles does not
act therein, as Ulysses and Aeneas do in the other two Poems. He has as many
Sharers in his Dignity as there are Princes in his Alliance. He has a General
to whom he should submit, and refusing to do that, he makes but little or no
Figure in the whole Action, of which the Subject of the Poem is but a part. He
is but little better than a Cashiered Officer. He is doubtless the most
Valiant; but the Poet sings his Anger, not his Valor. And even there, the
Anger which the Poet sings is rather that which makes Achilles to absent
himself from fighting, than that which puts him upon killing of Hector. To
conclude, the Fable consists less in this Anger, than in the Quarrel and
Reconciliation, wherein Agamemnon had as great a share as he. So that the Poet
makes no Scruple to mention them both in his Proposition, when he comes as near
the Fable it self as possible: I sing, says he, the Anger of Achilles, that has
done so much mischief to the Grecians, and caused the death of so many Heroes;
(...). Iliad. 1.
since the time that Agamemnon and he fell out and parted. These Considerations
ought not to degrade Achilles from the Honor of being the chief Personage,
which Homer has doubtless made him: but they may serve to prove, that though he
is the chief Hero of this Fable, yet he is not the only Hero, as Ulysses and
Aeneas are in the Fables that go under their Names.

Statius and Lucan have each of them two Heroes; and they have, like Homer,
given their Poems the Names of the Places where the Actions were done, and not
of the Heroes who did them. But the Thebaid, and the Pharsalia, are such
defective Poems, that there is no relying upon their Authority.

In Tragedies, where the Name of the Personage is made use of for the Title,
the Poet adds something else to it, when he makes several pieces under the Name
of the same Hero. Seneca has done this in his two Tragedies of Hercules. The
Hercules Furens.
One he names from the Madness which transported him, and the Hercules Oetus.
Other from the Place, where he was burnt. This is the Reason why more than one
Name is requisite for the Title of Aesop's Fables; for there is scarce an
Animal, but what is a Hero in several Fables. But this signifies little to the
Epick Poem: It Is rare that an Author makes two of these Fables under the Name
of one and the same Person.

Nor do Poets use to denote the Action in the Title of the Poem. Several Things
happened to Medea, Ulysses, Aeneas, and Troy; and one might feign a great many
under the Names of the Wolf and the Lamb, which the Title alone would never
inform us of. This signifies nothing; the Authors are well enough satisfied
with these plain Inscriptions, Medea, the Odysseis, the Aeneid, the Iliad, the
Lamb and the Wolf. And they refer us to the Discourse it self to know what the
Action is that is recited.

CHAP. III. Of the Proposition.
THE Epick Proposition is that first part of the Poem, wherein the Author
proposes briefly, and in the General, what he has to say in the Body of his
Work. And here two Things offer themselves to our Consideration; first, What
the Poet proposes; and secondly, After what manner he does it.

The Proposition should only comprehend the Matter of the Poem; that is, the
Action, and the Persons that Act, whether Divine or Humane. We find all this in
the Iliad, the Odysseis, and the Aeneid.

The Action Homer proposes in the Iliad is the Revenge of Achilles; that of the
Odysseis is the Return of Ulysses; and that of the Aeneid is the Empire of Troy
translated into Italy by Aeneas.

Nor should any one be surpised at Homer's way of expressing himself in his
first Words, where he says, (...). etc.
he sings the deadly Anger of Achilles; nor think he proposes this Anger as the
Subject of his Poem. He would not then have made the Rehearsal of an Action,
but of a Passion. We are not to stop here, since in truth he himself does not.
He says, he sings this Anger which had been the Cause of so much Slaughter
among the Greeks, and of so many brave Men's Deaths. He proposes an Action then,
and not a mere Passion, for the Subject of his Poem; and this Action is, as we
already hinted, the Revenge of Achilles.

So in the two other Poems, a (...). Arma virumque cano.
Man is proposed at first: but the Proposition does not stop here; it adds
either, (...). Odyss. 1.
that he underwent much in returning home to his own Country; or, Trojae qui
primus ab oris Italiam, etc. Aev. 1.
that he went to settle in Italy; and both of them propose an Action.

If Homer's Design had been to propose the two parts of each Poem; his Design
was not to do it very distinctly. Yet we may conceive the first part of the
Iliad by the Misfortunes of the Grecians, and the second by the illustrious
Deaths of so many Heroes. The Grecians are greater Sufferers than the Trojans,
and there are fewer Heroes killed on their side, but almost all are wounded.

The Proposition of the Odysseis speaks plainly enough of the Travels of
Ulysses; but it leaves us rather to infer his Re-establishment in Ithaca, than
discovers it to us. The Poet says, his Hero did all he could to preserve and
conduct back his Companions to Ithaca; (...). Odyss.
but that these miserable Creatures were their own Destruction, and that the
God whom they had offended would not suffer them to see the happy day of their
Return. By which it is plain Ulysses did see the Day, and preserved himself
according to his Wish.

The Latin Poet has clearly distinguished the two parts of his Aeneid. At first
he makes his General Proposition in two Verses; and then he makes a Division of
it, saying in the Multum ille and terris jactatus and alto.
first place, that he had suffered much both by Sea and Land; and then Multa
quoque and bello passus. Aen. 1.
secondly, that he had likewise suffered much by War.

This is the most considerable Difference between Homer and Virgil.

It was enough for Achilles to be revenged; and (...). Odyss. 1.
Ulysses pretended only to save himself. This is the Scope and End of the
Odysseis, as Aristotle, in the Scheme he has drawn, very well observed. But
Aeneas had a Settlement to make, and this Settlement was attended with great
Consequences. Virgil has been so exact, that he has omitted nothing of it. Dum
conderet urbem Inferretque Deos Latio, genus unde Latinum, Albanique Patres,
atque alta moenia Romae.
He advertises us, that his Hero traveled to Italy to build a City, and
establish his Gods and Religion there; and he adds, that from this Settlement
proceeded the Latins, the City of Alba, and the Romans their Progeny.

It will not be amiss to make this one Reflection more, that in the three
Poems, the Proposition takes notice where the Action of each Poem does begin.
(...).
This Beginning of the Iliad is the Beginning of the Quarrel between Agamemnon
and Achilles. Trojae qui primus ab oris.... Profugus.
The Action of the Aeneid begins at Troy, from whence Aeneas was forced to
part. (...).
The Odysseis does not begin at the Ruin of Troy, as the Aeneid, but some time
after.

This is what I had to say concerning the Action proposed, now for the Persons.

The Divine Persons are mentioned in the three Propositions. Homer says, that
whatever happened in the Iliad was by (...).
Jupiter's Appointment; and that (...).
Apollo was the Cause of the Quarrel between Agamemnon and Achilles.

The same Poet says, that it was Apollo likewise who hindered the Return of the
Comerades of Ulysses.

Fato profugus, Vi superum, and saevae memorem Junonis ob iram.
Virgil likewise makes mention of the Fates, the Will of the Gods, and the
Anger of Juno.

But these Poets chiefly insist upon the Person of the Hero. It seems as if he
alone were more properly the Subject Matter of the Poem than all the rest.
Homer names Achilles particularly, and adds Agamemnon to him, as we hinted in
the former Chapter. Ulysses and Aeneas are not named, but only implied; and
that in such general terms, that we should not know them, had we not
Information otherways, that they are the Persons. For what does the Proposition
of the Odysseis say concerning the Return of Ulysses from the Ruin of Troy, but
what might be in the Proposition of a Poem, that treated of the Return of
Diomedes?

This Practice might have perhaps some Respect to the primary Invention of the
Poet, who ought at first to feign his Action without Names, and relates not the
Action of Alcibiades, as Aristotle says; nor consequently the Actions of
Achilles, Ulysses Aeneas, or any other in particular: but of an Universal,
General, and Allegorical person. But since Homer has done otherwise in his
Iliad and has mentioned Achilles by his own name and that of his Father too;
one cannot condemn the practice of naming the Persons in the Proposition.

Besides, the Character which the Poet would give his Hero and all his Work, is
taken notice of likewise by Homer and Virgil. All the Iliad is nothing else but
Heat and Passion, and that is the Character of Achilles, and the (...).
first thing the Poet begins with. The Odysseis in the (...).
first Verse presents us with the Prudence, Dissimulation and Artifice, that
Ulysses made use of to so many different Persons. And in the Beginning of the
Latin Poem, we see the Insignem pietate virum.
Meekness and Piety of Aeneas.

These Characters are kept up by another such like Quality, namely that of a
Warrior. The Proposition of the Iliad says, that the Anger of Achilles cost a
great many Heroes their lives: That of the Odysseis represents Ulysses as
Victor of Troy, from the Destruction of which he came: And that of the Aeneid
begins with Arms: I have already observed that Horace speaks of Wars and
Generals in the Subject Matter of the Epopea.

As for the way of making the Proposition, Horace only prescribes Modesty and
Simplicity. He would not have us promise too much, nor raise in the Reader's
Mind too large Ideas of what we are going to Relate. Nec sic Incipies ut
scriptor Cyclicus olim.
Fortunam Priami cantabo, and nobile bellum.
Quid feret hic tanto dignum promissor hiatu?
Parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus.
Quanto rectius hic qui nil molitur inepte.
Dic mihi, Musa, virum capta post tempora Troja,
Qui mcres hominum multorum vidit and urbes.
Non fumum ex fulgore sed ex sumo dare lucem
Cogitat, ut speciosa dehinc miracula promat.
Antiphaten, Scyllamque, and cum Cyclope Charybdim.
Hor. Poet.
His words are these: Begin not as the old Poetaster did,
(Troy's famous War, and Priam' s Fate, I sing)
In what will all this Ostentation end?
The Mountains labor, and a Mouse is born.
How far is this from the Maeonian Style?
Muse, speak the Man, who since the Siege of Troy,
So many Towns, such change of Manners Saw.
One with a flash begins, and ends in smoke,
The other out of Smoke brings glorious light,
And (without raising expectation high)
Surprises us with Dazzling Miracles:
The bloody Lestrygons in humane Feasts,
With all the Monsters of the Land and Sea;
How Scylla barked, and Polyphemus roared.
[Horace's Art of Poetry englished by Roscommon.]

And in truth what can be more Simple and Modest than the Proposition of the
Odysseis, which does not promise us any great Action of this Hero, but only the
dangers, and the continual Fatigues of his Voyages, and the loss of his
miserable Companions?

We shall find the very same Simplicity and Modesty in the Proposition of the
Aeneid. The Poet does not say his Hero had done much, but only that he had
suffered much. Tho he speaks of Alba and the Roman Empire; yet he proposes
neither as parts of his Matter; but as Consequences which other Heroes had
brought to Perfection a great while after. So Homer in his Odysseis has spoken
of the destruction of Troy; but withal as an Action already done, and which his
Readers were not to expect would be rehearsed in the sequel of the Poem.

The Proposition of the Iliad is something more lofty, in that it mentions the
Deaths of so many Heroes: But this is so far the Matter of this Poem, that it
seems as if it could not have been wholly omitted. And besides, Art might
oblige the Poet to make some kind of Conformity between the Character of the
Proposition and that of the whole Poem, which is nothing else but a long series
of Heat and Violence. But to conclude, the Poet acquitted himself of these
Obligations with so much Simplicity and Modesty, that one cannot charge upon
him the Transgressing of Horace's Rule. For he does not say that these Hero's
Deaths were the Effect of his Hero's Valor and Courage: He only says that he
sings the Anger of Achilles, which had brought so many disasters upon the
Greeks, and had been the Cause of the Death of so many Homes, who were exposed
as a Prey to Birds and Beasts. Certainly if there is any thing of Grandeur
here, it is not so much in any Glory or Splendour, as in that Trouble and smoke,
which will scarce let us see it.

Beside this sort of Bombast, which things, proposed with too much glazing
produce; or which arises from the Dignity of the Personages, that at the very
first are praised unseasonably, and set off with too great Ideas; there is yet
another that respects the Person of the Poet. He should speak as Modestly of
himself, as of his Hero or his Subject. Virgil in plain terms says that he
sings the Action of Aeneas. Homer begs his Muse to inspire the Action into him,
or to sing it for him; this was all. Claudian has not followed these Exemplars.
Audaci promere cantu Men's congesta jubet. Gressus removere profani. Jam furor
humanos nostro de pectore Sensus Expulit, and totum spirant praecordia Phoebum,
etc.
He says, his Song shall be full of Boldness: That the Poetical Fury, and the
whole Divinity of Apollo had so swelled his Mind and possessed his Senses, that
they had not left any thing Human about him: That the rest of mankind were
profane, whose conversation he could no longer endure: With a great deal of
such like stuff.

These Raptures well managed, would look well enough in an Ode, a Pastoral, or
some such Piece, that is short enough to preserve them to the last, and where
we may suppose them to have been uttered all in a Breath.

But a Poem so long as an Epopea, admits not these Rhapsodical Propositions
from a Poet that is well in his Wits. This is Horace's Doctrine, who would have
the Proposition of the Epick Poem be simple and Modest; and yet he sticks not
in one of his Odi Profanum vulgus and arces. Favete linguis, Carmina non prius
audita Musarum sacerdos Virginibus puerisque canto. Hor. l. 3. Od. 1.
Odes to do what Claudian does in the Proposition we cited. This Poem of
Claudian that begins so ill justifies the Rule, which Horace has drawn from the
Practice of Homer. One may even there observe, that those, who are so daring in
what they propose, are so more out of Lightness and Vanity, than out of any
knowledge of their Abilities and Art; and that commonly they are the least able
to keep up to it. Claudian was not able to carry the Terrors which he proposed
as the Subject of his Poem any farther than the middle of his first Book: And
that Internal Darkness, which should have eclipsed the light of the Sun, could
not take off from the luster of the Ivory Walls, and Amber Columns of
Proserpina's fine Palace.

But we will not leave this Chapter without producing some Instances that are
contrary to the Practice of Homer and Virgil. We may reckon six of these sorts
of faults. The first is when any thing is proposed that is foreign to the
Subject: The second is, the giving too large an Idea of the Subject Matter: The
third is, when the Hero appears too dazzling in the Proposition: The fourth,
when the Poet speaks too favorably of himself: The fifth is the omitting the
Presence of the Deity: And the sixth is, when nothing is said that may give a
light into the Character of the Hero.

There is scarce one of these faults but may be met with in the Proposition of
the Achilleid. Magna^nimum Aeacidem formidatumque Tonanti, Progeniem, and
patrio vetitam succedere coelo, Diva refer.
Statius prays his Muse to tell him the Story of the Magnanimous Son of Aeacus,
whose Birth struck the Thunderer himself with Terror, and to whom admittance
into Heaven was denied, tho he had from thence his Origin. If Horace could not
endure that a Poet should propose Priam's Fate, and the famous War of Troy, tho
in truth this War was Noble and Illustrious: What would he have said of him,
who sings a Hero, that strikes Terror into Jupiter himself?

This very Poet gives us likewise too favorable a Character of himself, when
begging Phoebus to bestow upon him new Inspirations, Tu modo si veteres digno
deplevimus haustu, Da fontes mihi, Phoebe, novos... meque inter priscu parentum
Nomina, cumque suo memorant Amphione Thebae.
he tells him that in his first Poem, he had worthily exhausted those he had
received, and brags of his being so excellent a Poet, that Thebes would look
upon him as another Amphion.

He speaks of the Gods in this Proposition, but it is more by Chance, than in
Imitation of Homer or Virgil; since if he had been persuaded that Art required
so much, he would not have failed doing it in the Proposition of the Thebaid.

To conclude, he has given a very sorry Character of his Hero, when he styles
him Magnanimous. Achilles was certainly very Impatient, Choleric, and
Revengeful. Homer made him so, and Statius should have kept up the same
Character, which this first Poet had given him. Scriptor, honoratum si forte
reponis Achillem, Impiger, iracundus, iners, inexorabilis, acer, etc. Hor. Poet.
This is one of Horace's Rules. But we need not seek any farther than Statius
himself for a proof of his error in this point. In the Proposition he
contradicts this Character of Magnanimous which he had bestowed upon Achilles
at first: For immediately after, among the Actions he was to mention of his
Hero, he mentions one, that is far from Magnanimity; namely his cruel Usage of
Hector's body, when after he had killed him, he bound him by the heels to his
Chariot, and dragged him a great many times round the Walls of Troy, and the
Tomb of Patroclus.

CHAP. IV. Of the Invocation.
(...).
HOMER in his two Poems inserts the Invocation in the Proposition. He does not
say that he will relate what Achilles, or Ulysses has done; but entreats his
Muse to make the Recital. Virgil has these two parts distinct: He first Arma
virumque cano.
proposes what he would sing, and then he Musa, mihi causas memora.
begs his Muse to inform him about it. In this second part he Infignem pietate
virum.
inserts the Character of his Hero, which more properly belongs to the first.
And this makes it appear, that it signifies little whether they are distinct
from each other, or joined together.

But let the way be how it will, the Poet cannot omit the Invocation. He speaks
of things which he would know nothing of, unless some God or other had revealed
them to him. He owes his Readers this Example of Piety and Veneration, which is
the very Foundation of all the Moral, and the Instructions he pretends to lay
down from the Fable: And lastly, since the Gods must be concerned in it, it is
unreasonable to dare to bring them upon the Stage, without craving their leave
first. So that with respect to the Gods, the Auditors, and the Poet himself,
the Invocation becomes an indispensible and necessary part.

The Poet likewise addresses himself to the Gods very often in the sequel of
his Work: Nune age qui Reges Erato, quae tempora, rerum, Quis Latio antiquo
fuerit Status, etc.
Sometimes when he enters upon a new matter, as Virgil does, when in his
Seventh Book he enters upon the second part of his design: Quis Deus, o Musae,
tam saeva incendia Teucris Avertit; tantos ratibus quis depulit ignes, Dicite
Prisca fides facti, sed fama perennis. Aen. 9.
Sometimes when he relates some miraculous Action, that is above common
probability; as in the transformation of Aeneas's Ships into Nymphs: Die,
quibus Imperium est animarum umbraeque filentes, Et Chaos and Phlegeton, loca
nocte silentia late: Sit mihi fas audita loqui, fit numine vestro Pandere res
alta terra and caligine mersas. Aen. 6.
Sometimes when he reveals those Mysteries, which God seems to have been
willing to keep secret from the Curiosity of Men, such for instance is that
which happens in the shades below, whither Aeneas is conducted by Sibyl: And
lastly at other times upon other occasions.

But the Principal Invocation is that at the Beginning. And here we are to take
notice of two things. The first is what the Poet desires: And the second, to
what Deity he makes his Application.

That which we demand in the first Question, is whether the Poet should desire
that all his Matter should be inspired into him, or only a part of it. The
different practice of our Authors obliges us to make this Reflection.

Homer has so well connected his Proposition in the Iliad with the Invocation,
that he implores his Muse for all that he proposes without exception.

In the Odysseis he has begun after the same way; but after mentioning several
things which he begs his Muse to assist him in, he at last retrenches some; and
only entreats her to tell him a part of them.

Virgil follows this last method. That which is particular in him is, that he
does not in the general desire one part of his Subject, but precisely
determines what part he would have his Muse inspire into him. It Is that which
was the most secret and hardest to know. After he had very exactly proposed all
his Matter, he then addresses himself to his Muse, and prays her to inform him
of the Causes of all.

There is a very natural reason to be given for this Conduct: For since the
Poet supposes that his Action is true, and writes as if he would have it pass
for such; he must likewise suppose that such an Illustrious and Important
Action could not have been buried in Oblivion. By this means History or Report
might have informed him of one Part. This is the Idea he would have the Readers
conceive, when he does not desire the Muses for all.

Perhaps likewise our Poets did this to divide the business so, that they might
have the Honor of singing a part with the Gods. This is what Haec Damon: vos,
quae responderit Alphesiboeus, Dicite Pierides: Non omnia possumus omnes.
Virgil does in his eighth Eclogue: He sings the one half of his Matter; and
prays the Muses to go on and sing the other part, because he could not do all.

However the case stands, we see by this Practice what the Poet is allowed to
do. Thus much for what he desires; now let us see to whom he makes his
Addresses.

The Invocation is proper to the Poem, when it is either addressed to the God,
who presides over the Subject he treats on; or to the God, who presides over
Poetry in general.

Ovid in his In nova fert ani^mus mutatas dicere formas Corpora. Di coeptis
(nam vos mutastis and illas) Aspirate meis.
Metamorphoses makes use of the first sort of Invocation. He names no God in
particular, but addresses himself to all who had contributed to the Miraculous
Transformations he was about to describe.

The Poet Quae quoniam rerum Naturam sola gubernas, Te sociam studeo scribundis
versibus esse, Quos ego de rerum natura pandere conor.
Lucretius does the same in his Poem concerning the Nature of things. He calls
upon Venus, because she presides over the Productions of Nature.

This is likewise what Virgil has done in his Georgicks. He names in particular
all the Gods who were concerned with Husbandry, and as if he had been afraid
of omitting any one Diique, Deaeque omnes Studium quibus arva tueri.
he calls upon them all in General.

But both he and Homer have left us another kind of an Example in their Epick
Poems. They have called upon the Muses, and so they have distinguished the
Deities which preside over Poesy, from those that preside over the Actions of
the Poems, and are the Personages that act in them.

Besides, we are not to imagine that these Divirities, which they invoked, were
looked upon by the Poets themselves, as Divine Persons, from whom they expected
any real Assistance. Under this Name of Muse, they wished for that Genius of
Poesy, and all those Qualifications and Circumstances, that were necessary for
executing their design. This is nothing else but an Allegorical and Poetical
way of expression: As when they say, the God of Sleep, the Goddess of Fame, and
the like. There are likewise Muses of all Ages, Countries, and Religions. There
are Christian as well as Pagan Muses. There are Greek, Latin, French, and
English Muses. There are New ones too, which begin every day to appear in
behalf of those who disdaining the threadbare Antiquities, are so bold as to
invent things wholly new.

When Virgil wrote his Eclogues, he invoked the Sicelides Musae, paulo majora
canamus. Vir. Ecl. 6. Extremum hunc, Arethusie, mihi concede laborem. Ecl. 10.
Sicilian Muses, because he imitated Theocritus: And this Sicilian Poet coming
off so well put the Latin Poet upon wishing for as lucky a Genius as this
Islander had.

The Muses of the Philosopher Lucretius were Avia Pieridum peragro loca,
nullius ante Trita solo: juvat integros accedere fontes, Atque haurire;
juvatque novos decepere flores; Insignemque meo capiti petere inde coronam.
Unde prius nulli velarint tempora Musae. Lucr. l. 3.
New, and had inspired none before him. None had as yet entered the Gardens
where this Epicurean Poet gathered so many Immortal flowers: And the Waters of
his Poetical Fountains were such, as former Poets had never quenched their
thirst with; he is the first that ever tasted of the sweets of them.

But the Doctrine of this Author leaves no room to doubt what sort of Gods they
were, that he invoked. At the very beginning of this Poem, when he had
addressed himself to Venus, as a Goddess who managed the whole concern of
Natural things, about which he was going to treat: He presently-informs us,
Omnis enim per se Divum natura necesse est. Immortali aevosumma cum pace
fruatur. Semota ab nostris rebus sejunctaque long, etc.
that the Gods never concerned themselves with what was done below. This is the
main Principle of his whole Treatise: and Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.
Religion, in his account, is an Error that imposes upon us. What then are
these Muses, and this Venus to which he addresses himself? Has he invoked the
Deities to inspire him with that, with which it is impossible they should
inspire him? And did he entreat them to teach him, that it is an Error to pray
to them, and a mistake to expect any thing from them? Other Poets are not so
unreasonable, and Parcus Deorum cultor and infrequens, Insanientis dum
sapientiae Consultus erro, nunc retrorsum Vela dare, atque iterare cursus Cogor
relictos. Hor. lib. 1. Od. 34.
Horace, who for some time was of the same opinion, might well call this
Epicurean Wisdom downright Folly.

We will conclude this Chapter by a short recapitulation of all that has been
observed about the Invocation; and from thence it may be said, That the
Invocation may be mixed with the Proposition, or may be separated from it: That
it is always a necessary part of the Epick Poem: And that it is a prayer
addressed to the Allegorical Genius of Poesy, under the name of Muse, or some
one else, by whom the Poet begs to be inspired, either in the whole, or only in
a part of that which he has undertaken to relate.

CHAP. V. Of the Body of the Poem, or the Narration properly so called.
ALL the parts of the Epick Poem, which we have already discoursed of, are
nothing but Introductions into it. Let us now enquire into the Body of the
Poem, and into that which is properly called the Naration. And in short this
Narration is the Recital which the Poet makes of his entire Action, Episodiz'd
with all its Circumstances and all its Decorations. It Is in this part we are to
look for the Beginning, the Middle, and the End of the Action: This is it which
informs us of the Causes of all we read: In this are proposed, in this are
unravelled all the Plots and Intrigues: In this the Personages, whether Divine
or Humane, ought to demonstrate their Interests, their Manners, and their
Quality, by their Actions and Discourses: And all this must be described with
the Beauty, the Majesty, and the Force of Verse, of Style, of Thoughts, of
Similes, and of other Ornaments, that are suitable to the Subject in general,
and to each single thing in particular.

We have spoken already to some of these things, and shall say something more
about them in the remaining parts of this Treatise. But in this we shall
consider, First, the Qualifications of the Narration: Secondly, the Order our
Poets have observed therein: And Thirdly, its Duration; that is, how long time
they have assigned to the Adventures which they themselves have related in each
of their Poems. For we have already observed how much time they assigned to the
Entire Actions.

We will begin with the Qualifications of the Narration. It must be Pleasant,
Probable, Moving, Mavelous, and Active. We proved the necessity of these
Properties, when we treated of the Fable, and of the Nature of the Epopea, from
whence we took them. So that without insisting any longer upon these proofs, we
shall in this place only consider, wherein these Qualifications do consist, and
what we are persuaded Homer and Virgil have done to establish them in the Poem.

Aus prodesse volunt, aut delectare Poetae, Aut simul and jucunda, and idonea
dicere vitae... Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit utile dulci Lectorem delectando
pariterque monendo. Hor. Poet.
Horace speaks of the Profitable and the Pleasant in such a manner, that he
seems to treat of them both alike. But we fancy, if that had been his design,
he had more regard to Poesy in general, than to the Epick Poem in particular.
With respect to the last we say, that the Profitable is a Property Essential to
the Epick Narration, whereas the Pleasant is only a Mode or Qualification of
it. For it must be granted, that the Fable, which is the very Soul of the
Epopea, was only invented to instruct Men: That the Profitable is not made use
of to please People; but that on the other hand the Pleasant is inserted to
procure a more favorable reception of the Instructions which the Fable
contains.

So that the Profitable belongs not to any particular part of the Poem, but to
the very Nature of the Epopea, and of the Fable in general. I am satisfied then
with what I said about it in the first Book, where I think it was more proper
to speak of it, than to join it with the Pleasant here. Besides, it being
Essential, as I have already said, it will be met with in a great many
Passages, since all suppose it.

CHAP. VI. How the Narration is Pleasant.
PLeasantry in the Epick Narration is a necessary Qualification, which engages
us to read the Poem with some sort of Delight, tho excited by the most
Terrible, the most Violent, and the most afflicting Passions. The Effect may
arise, either from the Poem alone; or from that Relation which the Poet makes
between his Auditors and his Personages, and the Interest which he makes the
first to have in the Action he relates. Statius robbed himself of this
Advantage, when not regarding the Romans for whom he wrote, he must needs hunt
for his Subjects in Countries and States, whose Manners and Customs bore no
relation to those of his Readers, and wherein they had not the least Interest.
Homer has made a better choice, and has better disposed of his Actions. And if
Virgil has not been more careful than Homer, yet at least he has had infinitely
more luck than him. But we said enough of this in the first Book.

The Pleasantries which the Poem affords in its own nature independently from
the Auditors, are of three sorts. The first arise from the Beauty of the Verse,
of the Style, and of the Thoughts: Others depend upon the Persons that are
introduced into the Poem, upon their Manners, their Passions, and their
Interests rightly managed: And the third sort consist in the things which are
described, and in the way of proposing them.

We shall speak of the first sort in our last Book, wherein we shall treat of
the Thoughts, and Expressions. In this Book, we shall allow a whole Chapter to
the Passions, and all the next Book will be about the Manners. As for the rest
let us consider them here.

It is not necessary that all the persons introduced into a Poem should have
divided and particular Interests therein: Not only their great Number exempts
them from it, but likewise a multitude of Interests would too much annoy and
subvert the Pleasure we are discoursing of. It confounds the Hearer's mind, it
over charges his Memory; and makes him less capable of those Motions with which
we would have him affected. The greater variety of things we have to take
notice of and remember, the more sedate and attentive ought we to be, for fear
of losing any necessary thing; and when any such thing escapes us, we take but
little pleasure in hearing that, which we have no farther understanding of.

But there must be care likewise taken, that no Action or Adventure of any
length be described without interested persons. Aeneid. l. 3.
The Recital, which Achemenides makes of that which happened to Ulysses in
Polypheme's Den, takes up no more than forty Verses. This wretched Grecian had
a great Interest therein; but since he is but a very inconsiderable Personage
in this Poem, Virgil provides that Aeneas should not be at a Distance from the
Borders of the Cyclops, where he might in safety hear this Adventure: But all
this is told in the Port, and upon the very Coast, where the Trojans were in
danger of suffering the same Fate with the Companions of Ulysses. So that
Achemenides speaks as well in their behalf as his own; and in conclusion says,
Sed fugite, and miseri, fugite atquo ab littors funem Rumpite.
that they should not so much as stay to weigh Anchor, but cut the Cables that
detained them. Supplice sic merito.
Aeneas for his part owns himself obliged to him. Without these Engagements,
these Adventures are languishing, and make those that hear them languish too.

But the Readers are very desirous to know what any person shall say or do in
an Adventure wherein he has some Interest. This is more apparent in the
Theater, from whence the want of Interest has excluded the Narrations of the
Chorus, and of such Actors as were only to tell what passed behind the Scenes.
After Oedipus was come to the knowledge of his Parents and his Crimes, the
Spectators were not very eager to know what the thoughts of the old Corinthian,
and the Theban Phorbas are, nor do they take any delight in hearing them. But
they cannot hear Oedipus and Jocasta without application and attention.

As much might be said concerning the Manners and the Passions, which are the
second sor of Pleasantries. There is nothing more cold and disgustful than to
see Personages of no Character. Good Painters give this to all their Draughts;
and represent them either Passionate, or Attentive upon some thing or other.
Such as are most lively, and have most of the Character upon them, are the most
delightful to the Eye, and get most credit to their Masters. Ut Pictura Poesis
erit.
It Is just with Poetry as with Painting.

The third sort comprehends the Pleasantries which the things themselves
furnish us with. There are some things that in their own Nature are Pleasant,
namely such as are Important and Mavelous, as Wars, and other great
Adventures, provided they are not collected without Choice and Judgment, nor
carried on to an extreme, but judicious and well managed.

Others there are that are cold and insipid; and great skill must be used to
manage them with success. The best way in such cases is to follow Sumite
materiam vestris, qui scribitis, aequam Viribus, and versate diu, quid far
recusent, Quid valiant humeri. Cui lecta potenter erit res; Nec facundia
deseret hunc nec lucidus ordo. Et quae Desperet tractata nite scere posse
Relinquet. Hor. Poet.
Horace's Rule; to examine those Incidents, and ones own strength; and to study
them, and know himself so well, as to undertake nothing but what is
proportionate to his Genius and Strength. If an Author distrusts himself in any
thing, it is best letting it alone.

Dogmatical things are generally dry and insipid. Of this nature is the
Doctrine of Plato, and the Pythagoreans, which Virgil has touched upon in his
sixth Book with so much success. 'Twas necessary that this great Poet, should
give us Instances of all sorts of perfections. Upon this account we might say,
what Aristotle upon another Occasion says of Homer, that had an ordinary Poet
managed this Subject, he would have been insufferable. The Art which I discover
in him is what follows.

First of all, he makes this Doctrine necessary for the better conceiving of
the Wonders which follow. Besides, he goes farther, for he makes it a necessary
part of his Fable, and his Subject; since it is the Foundation of the Religion,
the Laws, and the Morality, which Aeneas went to establish in Italy under the
Character of a Pantifex and a Legislator. In the third place, before ever he
proposes it to the Readers, he puts them upon desiring it as much as Aeneas
did; for without doubt they are moved with the same Curiosity, which the Poet
bestows so naturally on his Hero: They see with the same Amazement, that he
does, persons that were to be born some Ages after: And what this Hero asks
Anchises, that they ask Virgil. [ O Pater, anne aliquos ad coelum hinc ire
putandum est Sublimes animas, iterumque ad tarda reverti Corpora?
Is it possible, that there should be any Souls here so fond of returning again
upon the Earth, and of being imprisoned once more in a body?] And it is with
delight that they hear the Dicam equidem, r^^c tu suspensum, nate, tunebo. Aen.
6.
Poet in the person of Anchises promise to satisfy their Curiosity in that
point. The Author does not dogmatize at all himself: But he brings it about,
that it should be discoursed of by two persons of the greatest importance in
his Poem, and who were both very highly interested therein. Lastly, he is very
short upon this Subject: He does not so much as spend thirty Verses about it.

The most usual and proper way for Poesy, is to lay down these pieces of
Doctrine disguised under the Allegories of some Action or other. Homer does
this often in some Physical points. The Age Virgil lived in obliged him to be
more reserved therein; by which means he has more examples of lessons in
Morality. We have said something already about this in the first Book: And
shall say more of it in the Book about Machines and the Gods: And likewise in
this Book, when we come to show, how the Epick Narration ought to be Active.

The meeting of Councils may be reckoned among those things which make the
Narration languish, and render it unpleasant. Quietness, Moderation, and
arguing of Debates ought naturally to preside there, and all this is opposite
to the Motions, and the Action, which ought to appear throughout the whole
Epick Poem.

Our Poets have carefully avoided all manner of sage and serious Debates, where
each person speaks in his turn, and delivers his sober thoughts. They generally
brought in some hasty or passionate persons, such as are Achilles, and
Agamemnon in the first Book of the Iliad, and almost all the other Grecians and
Trojans of this Fable. Such likewise in the Aeneid are Venus and Juno in the
tenth Book, and Drauces and Turnus in the Eleventh. The Council in the ninth
Book is altogether as Passionate, but the Movements are of another kind. There
are neither Quarrels, nor Heats. All the Personages therein are generous and
manly: And yet of above threescore Verses which the Poet spends about it, there
are scarce five calm ones. Nisus and young Euryalus, that are introduced
therein, make the rest so passionate, that this Passage is not one of the least
tender and moving Beauties, which the Aeneid has of this kind.

If these Assemblies are without passions, there should be little said in them,
and no body contradicting what is proposed, these Incidents are not so much
Debates, as simple Proposals of what is going to be done. There should likewise
such proper Places be chosen for them in the Poem, where they might not
interrupt the Series of the Action. Of this Nature are the two Assemblies of
the Gods in the first and fifth Books of the Odysseis. The first is at the
Beginning of the Poem, where it interrupts nothing: And the second does not
last long, and is only a simple Transition from the Recital of the Transactions
at Ithaca during the Absence of Ulysses, to the Recital of that which more
particularly regards the Person of this Hero.

The Reader is offended likewise, when that is related to him which he knows
already. This was not so great a fault in Homer's time. Virgil is more exact
herein. Venus in the first book, would not make a Recital of her Misfortunes to
Aeneas, she interrupts it to comfort him. And in the third Book, when good
Manners obliged this Hero to relate his story to Andromache, Helenus comes in
very opportunely, and so hinders him from going on with his Discourse.

CHAP. VII. Of Probability.
TRuth and Probability may meet together, since a thing, that is true, may
appear such. This is what is common. But sometimes Truth it self is only
Probability, as in Miraculous, Prodigious, and extraordinary Actions. Sometimes
likewise there is Probability without Truth, as in the ordinary Fictions of the
Poets. In a word, an Action may be either only True, or only Probable, or else
without Truth and Probability, or lastly, it may have both these
Qualifications. These four sorts of Actions or things have been as it were
divided among four sorts of Learning. History has got the first, relying only
on that which is true independently from Probability, which may, or may not be
in it. Such is the Action of the Maid of Orleans. The Epick and Dramatick
Fables are opposite to History, in that they prefer a Probable Falsity before
an Improbable Truth. Such an Action as Samson's would be less proper for the
Subject of an Epick Poem, than the Death of Dido who made away with her self,
when Aeneas left her. Aesop is alike negligent of Truth and Probability in the
Discourses he attributes to the Beasts. Lastly, Moral Philosophy should not
only mind the Truth of the things it teaches, but it is likewise necessary that
this Truth appear such, and convince those, we are willing to convince, that it
is profitable.

But to what we have said concerning the Epopea, we may add that naturally it
makes use of both Truth and Probability, as Morality does; and that in its
Expressions and its Dress, it assumes a liberty very like that of Aesop. It is
Probable that Aeneas, when going for Italy, endured a dreadful storm, which
cast him upon the Coasts of Africa, where he escaped. It Is a Moral Truth, that
God proves, and sometimes seems to abandon good men, and that at last he
rescues them from the Dangers, into which he had permitted them to fall: This
is not only True, but likewise Probable. But the Discourse that passed between
Juno and Aeolus, and what Neptune said to Boreas and Zephyrus, have as little
Truth and Probability in them, as the Intercourse that passed between the
Country and the City-Mouse.

So much may be said in the general. To be more particular, and to speak more
exactly and Methodically concerning the Probability of Epick Narrations, we
shall reduce it to several Heads, and consider it according to Divinity,
according to Morality, according to Nature, according to Reason, according to
Experience, and according to vulgar Opinion.

It may be said, that there is nothing with respect to Divinity, but what is
Probable; because with God nothing is impossible. This is a Means the Poets
often make use of to render every thing Probable, which they have a mind to
feign contrary to the Ordinary Course of Nature. This is an ample Subject, and
requires a particular Treatise: Which we shall bestow upon it, when we come to
treat of the Machines.

We have already observed that Morality requires both Truth and Probability,
and the first is more necessary than the last. A Poet was formerly condemned
and fined for a Default in this upon the Theater: For he made a Personage, whom
he had represented as an honest Man, to say, that when his tongue swore, his
Mind did not. Certainly it is neither True nor Probable that an honest Man
should ever trick another by a false Oath, and call God to witness those
Promises he never intends to keep.

Seneca the Philosopher accuses Virgil of a fault against Natural Truth and
Probability, when he says that the Winds were penned up in Grots: Because Wind
being nothing else but Air, or Vapors in Motion, it destroys its Nature to
suppose it in a Profound Repose. Vossius answers this, and says, that the Poet
has very well described the Natural production of Winds, which arise from Hills
by the Vapors and Exhalations, that are enclosed therein; and that it is
concerning the Causes of Winds which the speaks, by a figure very common among
Poets and Orators, taking the Cause for the Effect. It Is as if we should say,
that the Winds are enclosed in Eolipiles full of Water, since when these
Vessels are warm, the Water comes out of them in puffs of Wind. It would have
been likewise a Fault against Natural Probability to have said that Aeneas met
with Stags in Africa, if it is true that they could not live there. But these
are Venial Slips, because, Aristotle says, they make not against the Poet's
Art, but arise from his ignorance in some things that he has learned from other
Arts. Yet care must be taken that they be not too gross and visible. There are
some Probabilities of this kind from which Aesop himself would not be excused.
We should never pardon him if he had represented the Lion Timorous, the Hare
Daring, the Fox Dull, and the like.

The Probability with respect to Reason is usually destroyed by those, who only
strive to make things look Great. They transgress the Bounds which good sense
prescribes. They think it is creeping unless they soar above the Clouds: And Et
dum vitat humum, nubes and ioania captat. Hor. Poet.
little dream that when they quit the Earth, they part with what is solid to
embrace an Airy Fantom. Statius is very often guilty of this Fault. Who would
believe, for Instance, that a single Man surprised in an Ambuscado by fifty
Bravo's, that lay in wait for him, could kill nine and forty of them, and give
Quarter to the last? Who would believe that this same Romantic Hero would
fight at fifty cuffs with a Young Prince for the Wall? And yet they wore Swords
by their sides, even when they were pulling of hair, and scratching Faces with
their Nails. The Forte and nudassent enses, sic ira ferebat. Theb. l, 4.
Poet himself observes as much, and says their Anger rose so high, that perhaps
they had drawn upon one another, if King Adrastus had not stepped in between.
Here is a strange Illustration of the rage of two Kings. The third person finds
it so reasonable, Haud humiles tanta ira decet.
that he discovers by this noble exploit the greatness of their Extraction. Is
this at all Probable? And is not a Man's Reason strangely shocked at this?

Sometimes the Poets are found fault with for relating things contrary to
Experience. Etiam decimo Iliados Jovem fulgurare facit, ubi ningit. Nunquam hoc
Vidimus. Scaliger. Poet. Book 5.
Scaliger blames Homer for saying that Jupiter Thundered and Snowed at the same
time: Which is a thing, says this Critic, which we never observed. But this
does not contradict Experience; not many years ago it was observable, that in
January the Thunder was so Violent, that it Burnt down the Steeple of a Church
at Chalons, and did as much at the Abbey of Chally near Senlis, and in several
other places. Terrible Claps of Thunder were heard, and several Thunderbolts
fell at Senlis in a very deep and thick Snow. Homer then might likewise have
seen the self same thing.

But the principal sort of Probability, and that which we named last, is the
Probability according to the common-received Opinion; which is of no small
moment in this place. A thing is Probable when it seems to be True. But
sometimes it seems True to Men of Sense, and False to the Vulgar; or the
Contrary. Since the Vulgar and the Learned are thus divided, it may be asked
which side the Poet ought to take. The Subject shall be, for instance, the
Adventure of Dido, or that of Penelope, or the Story of Medea, Helen, or the
like. That which Homer and Virgil have wrote about it shall be Probable to the
Vulgar: But Men of Learning shall have read the contrary in History. Some
Authors shall have written that [Dido was Chaste, and Medea Innocent, that
Penelope was banished and divorced by Ulysses for having abused his Absence,
and that Helen was never at Troy.

It Is no hard matter to decide this Point by the Rules I have laid down. Homer,
Virgil, and the rest have made no scruple to disregard History, that so their
Fables might be more just. Rectius Iliacum carmen deducis in actus. Aut Famam
sequere, aut sibi convenientia finge. Hor. Post.
Horace does not refer Poets to the Truth of History, but either to Fables
already invented as that of the Iliad, or else to vulgar Opinions and Fame.
Aristotle says nothing against, but rather seems to confirm this Doctrine, when
he tells us, that a Poet does not write as an Historian, what sort of Man
Alcibiades was, what he said, or what he did, upon such or such an Occasion;
but only what in all probability he ought to have said or done. He approves of
the Fable of Oedipus upon the Theater, and yet, he says, that that which serves
as a Ground work to all this Action has nothing of reason in it: And that King
Oedipus could not have tarried so many years, before he made inquiry into the
Murder of his Predecessor King Laius. He only excuses the Negligence that is
attributed to Oedipus, upon the account that this Fault against Reason was
foreign to the Tragedy. But this excuse being only designed to justify the
Conduct of the Poet, it expressly supposes that this Action was invented
contrary to the Truth of History: And besides it shows that Aristotle allows of
this, when he goes about to prove that this Falsity hinders not but the Subject
may be Lawful and Regular.

He likewise approves of the Iphigenia in Taurica, and thinks it worth his
while to make the Platform of it, as he did that of the Odysseis. And yet it
does not appear that this Philosopher nor the Learned Men of his times were
persuaded of a thing whose Falsity quite ruins this Action. Certainly they
never thought, that in the very moment Iphigenia was going to be sacrificed to
Diana in Aulis, this Goddess conveyed her away, and substituted a Hind in her
stead. Aristotle was therefore of the Opinion, that a Poet, when his Fable so
required, was not so strictly tied up to the Truths of History, to suit himself
to the Capacity of the Learned, as he was to that which might pass for Probable
in the Eye of the Vulgar.

After all, it may be said, that not only every individual person finds his
story, and meets with his satisfaction in this Practice: But likewise Men of
Learning see more solid Truths therein, than any the Vulgar can meet with; and
more certain than those of History which the Poet disregards. The more learned
they are, the less will they expect these Historical Truths in a Poem, which is
not designed for that, but for things more Mysterious. The Truths, they look
for there, are Moral and Allegorical Truths. The Aeneid was never writ to tell
us the Story of Dido, but to inform us under this Name of the Spirit and
Conduct of that State which she founded, and of the Original and Consequences
of its differences with Rome. A Man takes some delight in seeing this; and
these Truths are more pleasant, more apparent, and better understood, than
those which the Poet might have taken out of an History that was so little
known in his time, and about which the Learned Men of our days, after so many
searches, do still contend.

Beside these sorts of Probabilities, there is still another particular one,
which we may call an Accidental Probability. It consists, not in making use of
several Incidents, each of which in particular is Probable, but in ordering
them so, that they shall happen all together very Probably. A Man, for
instance, may Probably die of an Apoplexy, but that this should happen exactly
when the Poet has occasion to unravel his Plot, is not so easily granted.

The faults against this Probability are of a large Extent: For they comprehend
the Multitude of Mavelous things, each of which might have been regular in
the particular; but which in all Probability cannot be heaped up in so great a
Number and so small a space. It Is likewise a fault against this Probability,
when an Incident not duly prepared (tho it needs it) is brought in all on a
sudden. A desire of surprising the Auditors by the sight of some Beauty which
they never expected, casts Poets of little Judgment into these Errors; but the
effect thereof is of very ill Consequence. When a Man sets himself to seek for
the Causes of these events in what he has already seen, this Application of
thought takes away all the pleasure. It would vex a Man to take too much pains
to find out these Causes, but much more if he could not find them out at all.
And when at last the Poet does discover them, the Passion is weakened or
destroyed by these misplaced Instructions.

The Comedians make use of these surprises more frequently, and can reap some
Advantage from them. But the gravity of the Epopea will not away with these
petty Amusements. All there ought to be managed after a Natural way, so that
the Incidents thereof must be duly prepared, or else be such as need no
Preparation.

Virgil is exact in this. Juno prepares the Tempest which she raises in the
first Book: Venus in the same Book prepares the Amors of the Fourth. The Death
of Dido, which happened at the End of this Fourth Book, is prepared from the
very * first day of her Marriage. Ille dies primus Lethi.
Helenus in the third Book prepares all the matter of the sixth. In the Sixth,
Sibyl foretells all the ensuing Wars, the Outrages of Turnus, the misfortunes
which were to happen upon the Account of Lavinia, and likewise the Voyage of
Aeneas with Evander. We should be too tedious, if we took notice of every thing
of this Nature.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Admirable, or the Mavelous.
ADmiration is opposed to Probability. It Is the business of the last to reduce
every thing into the most simple, and most natural order: Whereas on the other
hand, we never admire any thing, but what appears extraordinary, and out of the
common Road. This is that which deceives some, who, to make their Heroes
admired, raise them to what is impossible. This Practice meets with a quite
contrary effect; for if we would have a thing admired, we should make it so
Probable, that it may be conceived and credited: We never Admire that, which we
think has actually never been; and all extravagant Flights put us upon this
Thought.

And yet for ought I know, I may yield too much to Reason and Probability
contrary to Aristotle's mind, who prefers the Admirable by far before them. Let
us see what he says about it, and let the World agree to it, as they see cause.
(...). Poet. c. 24.
It Is requisite, says he, That the Mavelous should be in Tragedy, but much
more in the Epopea, which in this goes beyond the bounds of Reason: For since
they do not see the Persons act, as they do upon the Stage, that which
transgresses the bounds of Reason is very proper to produce the Mavelous.
That which Homer says of Hector pursued by Achilles, would have been very
ridiculous upon the Stage, where one should have seen so many persons in a
fight, looking on Hector as he was flying without pursuing him, and only one
person following, giving a signal to the rest to stand off. But this is not
discernable in the Epopea. Aristotle says further, (...). Poet. Ibid.
that these Additions, that are made to Reason and Truth for the raising of
Admiration, are likewise Pleasant; and that it is evident how natural this is by
the ordinary practice of most People, who to make their story the more
diverting, and something or another of their own Invention: But that Homer
out-does all Men in teaching us how to tell these sorts of yes with a bon grace.

These Fictions of Homer are, amongst other things, such as Horace commends in
the Odysseis, and which he finds to be equally beautiful and surprising,
joining together these two Qualifications, the Pleasant and the Mavelous,
after the same manner that we have observed Aristotle did.

But though this Philosopher might have said thus much, certainly he never
designed to allow Men a full license of carrying things beyond Probability and
Reason. Besides, without doing him the least injustice, and without abating any
thing of his due Authority, it may be questioned whether the Example of Homer,
which he proposes, would have been exact enough for Virgil's Imitation. For the
custom of speaking by Fables and Allegories, even in Prose, and before the
People, was not in vogue at Rome in the Latin Poet's time. So that beside the
Allegorical sense, he was farther obliged to insert some other, which one might
understand simply without any more ado.

Lastly, that which I infer from the Doctrine of Aristotle is that he
prescribes the Mavelous and the Probable to both the Epick and the Dramatick
Poets: But in such a manner, that the Dramatick have a greater regard to the
Probable than the Mavelous; and that the Epick on the contrary prefer the
Admirable. The reason of this difference is, that we see what is done in
Tragedy; and only hear by Recitals the Adventures of the Epopea. It Is upon this
consideration that Horace orders, Multaque tolles Ex oculis, quae mox narret
facundia praesens. Aut in avem Progne, Cadmus mutetur in anguem. Quodcunque
ostendis mihi sic incredulus odi. Poet.
that in Tragedies themselves the two surprising Incidents (such as the
Transformation of Progne into a Bird, or of Cadmus into a Serpent) should be
kept from the Spectator's view. There needs only simple Narrations to be made
of these things. It Is likewise for this reason that the Epopea has the
privilege of Machines, which are as so many Miracles and exceed natural
Probability. But they are not after the same manner allowed upon the Theater.

We add further, that if for the better pleasing the Auditors by a surprising
Incident, one should transgress the boundaries of Reason and Truth, their minds
ought to be disposed thereto, by something that may set them so far besides
themselves, that they be not in a condition to perceive that they are imposed
upon; or at least that they may thank the Poet for having surprised them so
pleasantly. This is what Monsieur Corneille has observed in his Cid. He knew
well enough that he could not bring Rodrigues into the Earl's House, whom he
had but just then Murdered, without transgressing against Reason and
Probability: But then he knew as well that the curiosity of the Spectators, and
the Attention they gave to what passed between this Young Hero and Chimene,
would not suffer them to take notice of this fault: And that though they should
have been informed of it, they would have taken it ill, if a more strict
Regularity had robbed them of so great a satisfaction.

I believe that the best Rules for knowing how far it is allowable to carry on
the Mavelous, and for discerning what will be taking, what will offend, and
what will be Ridiculous; is first, a sound judgment; and then the reading of
good Authors, and likewise the Examples of those who have come off but sorrily;
and lastly the comparing these two together. But in this Examen of things a Man
must be well acquainted with the Genius's, the Customs, and the Manners of the
several Ages. For that which is a Beauty in Homer, might have met with sorry
Entertainment in the Works of a Poet in the days of Augustus.

It Is not enough (to make an Incident admired) that it should have something
that is Admirable: But beside that, it is requisite there should be nothing in
it that might put a stop to its effect, and destroy the Admiration; such as
would be all contrary Passions Admiration in this point has nothing but what is
common to it self and all the other Passions. Therefore for the better
explaining of this matter we must join that with them.

CHAP. IX. Of the Passions.
THE Epick Narration ought to be Admirable, Non satis est pulchra esse Poemata,
dulcia sunto. Et quocumque volent animum Auditoris agunto. Hor. Poet.
but this Beauty is not enough. It is farther necessary, that it be moving and
Passionate, that it transport the Mind of the Reader, fill him with Inquietude,
give some pleasure, cast him into a Consternation, and make him sensible of the
Violence of all these Motions, even in Subjects, which he himself knows are
feigned and invented at pleasure. Ille per extensum funem mihi posse videtur
Ire Poeta, meum qui pectus inaniter angit, Irritat, mulcet, falsis terroribus
implet Ut magus. L. 1. Ep. 1.
Horace, who prescribes all this to the Poets, cannot forbear admiring them,
when they come off well, and he compares their skill to the Power of Magic.

The Passions then are necessary to great Poems: But all are not equally
necessary or convenient to all Poems. Mirth and Pleasant surprises belong to
Comedy. On the contrary, Horror and Compassion belong to Tragedy. The Epick
Poem keeps as it were in the middle between both, and seizes upon all these
Passions, as is evident from the Grief that reigns in the fourth Book of the
Aeneid, and from the Sports and Diversions of the Eighth. The Passion that
seems most peculiar to this kind of Poem is Admiration. It is the least
contrary to the Passions of the two other kinds of Poems. We admire with Joy
things that surprise us pleasingly, and we admire with Terror and Grief such
things as terrify and make us sad.

Beside this Admiration which in general distinguishes the Epick Poem from the
Dramatick, each Epick Poem has likewise some peculiar passion, which
distinguishes it in particular from other Epick Poems, and constitutes a kind
of singular and individual difference between these Poems of the same Species.
These singular Passions correspond to the Character of the Hero. Anger and
Terror reign throughout the Iliad, because (...). Il. 1.
Achilles is Angry and the most Terrible of all Men. The Aeneid has all soft
and tender Passions, because that is the Character of Aeneas. The Prudence,
Wisdom, and Constancy of Ulysses do not allow him in either of these Extremes,
therefore the Poet does not permit one of them to be predominant in the
Odysseis. He confines himself to Admiration only, which he carries to an higher
pitch than in the Iliad: And it is upon this account that he introduces a great
many more Machines of the Odysseis into the Body of the Action, than is to be
seen in the Actions of the other two Poems. This Doctrine will find a fitter
place in the next Book, where we shall treat concerning the Manners and the
Character.

We have still two things to say concerning the Passions. The One is how to
impress them upon the Auditors: And the Other how to make them sensible of
them. The First is to prepare their minds for them: And the Second is, not to
huddle together several Passions that are Incompatible.

The Necessity of preparing the Auditors is founded upon the Natural and
General necessity of taking things where they are, when we would convey them
elsewhere. It Is easy applying this Maxim to the Subject in hand. A Man is in a
quiet and profound repose, and you have a mind by a discourse made on purpose
to make him angry: You must begin your discourse by a mild way; by this means,
you will Close him, and then going hand in hand together, as the saying is, he
will not fail following you in all the Passions: You have a mind to excite in
him by degrees. But if at the first touch you manifest your Anger, you will
make your self as ridiculous, and meet with as little success as Ajax in Ovid's
Metamorphoses, in whom the witty Ovid has given us a notable Instance of this
Default. He makes him begin his plea by Anger and violent figures before his
Judges who were profoundly calm. Consedere Duces, and vulgi stante corona,
surgit ad hos Clypei dominus septemplicis Ajax. Utque erat impatiens irae,
Sigeia torvo Littora prospexit, classemque in littore vullu. Protendensque
manus, Agimus, pro Juppiter, inquit, Ante rates causam, and mecum confert ur
Ulysses? etc. Metam. Lib. 13.
The Generals were set, the Soldiers standing round about them, Ajax rises,
and being of a furious and impatient Disposition casts a fierce look toward
the Seashore, stretches out his hands toward the Fleet that rode there, and
then cries out: Oh Heavens! This Cause must be tried in view of the Navy, and
Ulysses my Competitor!

These necessary Preparations arise from the discourse that goes before these
Movements, or else from some Action, that already begins to excite them before
one speaks. The Orators themselves sometimes make use of this last way. For
though they generally excite not the Passions till the end of their Harangues,
yet when they find their Audience already moved, it would be ridiculous, if by
an unseasonable Calmness they should begin by making them quit that, with which
they would have them affected. The last time Catiline entered the Senate house,
the Senators were so disturbed at his presence, that those who sat next him
drew farther off, and left him to sit alone. Then the Consul would have
offended against Reason, if he had begun his Speech with that sedateness that
is usual to Exerdiums. He would have abated that Indignation with which he was
willing to affect the Senators against Cariline; and he would have taken away
from the mind of this Parricide, that Dread and Terror he was minded to strike
him with, and which he was already sensible of by this tacit condemnation of
the Senate. Therefore Quousque tandem abutere, Catilins, patientia nostra, etc.
omitting this first part of the Speech, which upon such an occasion would have
been prejudicial to him, he takes his Audience in the Condition he found them,
and continues and beightens their Passions.

That which is so rare among the Orators, is common among the Poets: They
abound with Instances of this nature, where one may see the Passion prepared
and kept up by the Actions. Dido begins a Speech as Ovid's Ajax did. Oh
Jupiter! What? Shall this Stranger go off so? etc. But these Motions were very
well prepared. Illa dolos dirumque ne^as in pectore versat, Cetta mori, etc.
Aen. 4.
Dido entertains thoughts of her Death before Aeneas left her. She spent her
Night in nothing else but disquietude, and such distracting thoughts, as these
her fears possessed her with. Regina e speculis ut primum albescere lucem,
Vidit, and acquatis classem procedere velis, Littoraque, and vacuos sensit sine
remice portus: Terque quaterque manu pectus percussa decorum. Flaventesque
abscisss comas: Proh Jup^ Hic, ait, and nostris illuserit advena regnis! etc.
Ibid.
Soon as the Dawn began to clear the Sky,
Down to the Shore the sad Queen cast her Eye;
Where when she does the empty port survey,
And now the Fleet with mings displayed at Sea,
Her hands held up, her Golden tresses torn,
Must we, says she, of force endure this scorn?
Can we not have recourse to arms? nor meet
This fraud with fraud? not burn this wicked Fleet?
Have, fly, pursue, row, and let every hand
Snatch up with speed some swift revenging brand.
[Englished by Edm. Waller and Sidney Godolphin Esquires.]

This is no surprise to the Hearers: They are so well prepared for it, that
they would have wondered if the Beginning of this Speech had been less
passionate.

The Practice of Seneca is quite contrary. If he has any Recital to make, which
ought to imprint some great Passion or other; he takes away from both his
Personages and his Audience all the inclinations they might have toward it. If
they are possessed with the Sorrow, fear, and expectation of some dreadful
thing? He will begin by some fine and elegant Description of some place or
other, which only serves to show the Copiousness; and the poignant, bloomy Wit
of a Poet without Judgment. In the Troad, Hecuba and Andromache were disposed
to hear of the violent and barbarous death of their Son Astyanax, whom the
Grecians had thrown from the top of an high Tower. It mightily concerned them
indeed to know, that among the crowd that flocked from all parts to that sad
sight, Alta rupes cujus e cacumine erecta summos turba libravit pedes, etc.
Some there were who stood upon the ruins of the old decayed Buildings, others
whose legs trembled under them, because they were mounted a little too high,
etc. People that have the patience to speak or hear such idle stuff, are so
little inclined to weep, that they had need have notice, as the mercenary
Mourners of old had, when it is time to set up their Whine.

The Second thing we think necessary for the well managing the Passions, and to
make the Auditors sensible of them, is to insert them in the Poem pure and
disengaged from every thing, that may hinder them from producing their due
Effect.

It Is necessary then, to avoid the vicious Multiplicity of Fables, where there
are too many Stories, too many Fables, too many Actions, the Adventures too
much divided and hard to be remembered, and such Intrigues as one cannot easily
comprehend. All this distracts the Mind, and requires so much attention, that
there is nothing left for the Passions to work upon. The Soul should be free
and disengaged, to be the more sensible of them. We destroy our true sorrows,
when we divert our thoughts another way: And how contrary will these
troublesome Applications be to the Fictions and Movement of Poems? Of all the
obstacles that destroy the Passions, the Passions themselves are not the least.
They fight with and destroy one another: And if a Man should mix together a
Subject of Joy and a Subject of Sorrow, he would make neither of them sink
deep. Non ut placidia cocant immitia.
Horace informs us, that no Poetical License will allow of this sort of mixture.

The very nature of these Habits impose this Law. The Blood and Animal Spirits
cannot move so smoothly on in their usual way at quiet, if at the same time
they are stopped and retarded by some Violence, such as Admiration causes. Nor
can they be in either of these two Motions, whilst Fear contracts them from the
external parts of the Body to make them rally about the Heart: Or whilst Anger
sends them into the Muscles, and makes them act there with a Violence so
contrary to the operations of Fear. A Poet then should be acquainted with both
the Causes and the Effects of the Passions in our Souls. It Is there we are more
sensible of them, and know them better than in the Blood and the Animal
Spirits. This Knowledge, and the justness of his Genius will make him manage
them with all the force, and the effects they are capable of. And here we will
propose two Examples of that which we have said concerning the Simplicity and
the Disengagement of each Passion.

The Admirable must needs be predominant in the Warlike Virtues of a Maid; and
this is the Passion Virgil makes use of in the Episode of Camilla: And on the
contrary he has made Pity to reign in that of Pallas. This passion agrees very
well with this young Prince who is one of the Hero's Party. But the Poet does
not mix these two Passions together. He only shows in Pallas all that ordinary
Courage that a young Man is capable of. He fights Turnus, but did not go out to
attack him: He does not so much as wound him, nor put him in the least danger;
he only attends his coming, and Aut spoliis ego jam raptis laudabor opimis, Aut
letho insigni. Aen. 10.
speaks to him more like one that feared not death, than one who expected to
kill him. He is killed at the first blow; and there is nothing extraordinary in
it. But there is something more than ordinary in the Lamentation which Aeneas
and the unhappy Evander made upon his Death.

Camilla on the contrary, made her self admired by a Valor becoming a Hero;
but she dies without being pitied. That which Diana says upon the Subject,
deserves not the name of a Lamentation in comparison to that which Aeneas and
Evander made for Pallas. Besides, the Speech of Diana is said before her Death,
and is not in a place where it might have any great effect. In short, Camilla
is killed, she is revenged, and nothing more said about it. How many Poets are
there, that would have bestowed a Lover or two upon her, and endeavored to
make an Episode as moving as that of Clorinda, and Tancred? This Beauty did not
escape Virgil's view. Multae illam frustra Tyrthena per oppida matres Optavere
nurum. Aen. 10.
He says, that several Italian Dames courted her for their Sons. This
Reflection shows us, that his thoughts were upon every thing, and that it was
not without choice and judgment, that he omitted that which would have appeared
so beautiful to other Poets. But he was not willing to spoil the Unity of the
Passion, nor put a stop to its effects.

CHAP. X. How the Narration ought to be Active.
THE Epick Narration ought to be Active. This Qualification is so necessary to
it, that Aristotle's Expression herein seems to confound the Epopea with the
Tragedy. It Is by this he begins to lay down Rules for this first sort of Poem.
(...). Poet. c. 23.
It Is requisite, says he, that the Epick Fables be Dramatick, like those that
are in Tragedy. Now that which makes Tragedy Dramatick, and upon the account of
which it has the Name which signifies to (...).
Act, is, that the Poet never speaks in it; and that every thing is represented
by the Personages that are introduced, and who alone Act and speak therein.
From whence we learn, that since Aristotle requires this Qualification likewise
in the Epopea, he thereby orders, that the Personages speak likewise in this
kind of Poem.

Nor does he hereby exclude the Narration of the Poet. This can never be; since
he himself says that the Epopea is an Imitation carried on by a Narration; and
that in truth the Narration of the Poet is its Form, which distinguishes it the
most Essentially from the Actions of the Theater. But he means, that these two
things ought to be so mixed, that the Personages speak very often. (...). c. 24.
Homer, says he, who merits so much praise in other things, is especially to be
admired for this, that he has been the only Poet, who knew what he ought to do.
For the Poet should speak but little. The Poetical Imitation consists not so
much in what the Poet says, as in what he makes his Personages say: The other
Poets show themselves from the Beginning to the very End of their Poems. They
imitate but seldom, and then they carry not on their Imitation very far. Homer
uses a quite contrary method. After having said a very little himself, he
presently introduces some one or other of his Personages. This is what
Aristotle says, nor needs it any Comment. To this famous Example he has given
us in Homer we might join that of the Latin Poet, who speaks less in his
Aeneid, than he makes his Personages speak.

But the last Words of Aristotle are capable of two Interpretations; the first
is, (...). Ib.
Homer says but little himself, and presently introduces a Man or a Woman, or
something else that has Manners; but without that Qualification he introduces
nothing. So that all the Words which follow the mention of a Man or a Woman,
signify a Deity, or a feigned person, which though in its own nature it has no
Manners, yet has some in the Poem, into which Allegorically one may bring all
manner of things as well as into other Fables.

For this thought is taken from the Nature of Fables in general. When they are
divided into different sorts; by the term Moracae, that is by the Manners that
are attributed to something that has none, we understand those, where for the
Personages we introduce Beasts, Plants, and such like things, which in their
own Nature have no Manners. Thus, for instance, in the Fable of the Olive Tree
and the Reed, the Olive Tree is proud and vaunts it self because it stands so
firm as not to bend to every blast of Wind, as the Reed does. Whatever then is
introduced into Fables ought so necessarily and essentially to have Manners,
that the Author is obliged to bestow them upon things that naturally are not
endued with them.

In short, if the names of Man and Woman which Aristotle makes use of, do not
properly signify Gods and Goddesses, he would without doubt have omitted a
great part of Homer's Personages. He has done well then in adding, [or some
other thing that has Manners.] And this will denote not only Apollo, Thetis,
Jupiter, and such like Deities, who are angry, complain, and laugh as we do,
but likewise the Horse Xanthus, that speaks in the Iliad; the Horse Rhebus,
which Mezentius speaks to in the Aeneid; Ethon who laments the death of Pallas,
and even Fame who knows every thing, and takes such a pleasure in telling
Tales; the Winds that are so Mutinous and Seditious that they would have
overturned the Globe, and dashed Heaven and Earth together by this time, if
Jove had not taken care to set a King over them, who shuts them up close, and
when he lets them out always keeps a strict hand over them. And this according
to the first Interpretation is what Aristotle means, by these other things
which have Manners, which the Poet introduces, and makes to speak in the Fable.

The other way of Interpreting this passage of Aristotle is to say, That he
does not suppose that the Speeches the Personages are made to pronounce are the
only means of making a Narration Active and Dramatick, but that it is so, when
the Manners are Apparent, whether by the Persons speaking or only Acting
therein, or by any other way, supposing you have a mind to give this Precept a
little larger extent. In this sense, not only the Speech of Dido to the
Princess her Sister, to whom she discovers her passion for Aeneas, would be
Dramatical; but this qualification would be likewise in the Verses that go
before, where one may observe the Agitations and the Disquietude of this Queen,
who from the time she first fell in Love, had lost all her Quiet and Repose.

In this sense, the learned Discourse of Anchises to his Son in the sixth Book
may be likewise reckoned among the Dramatical passages. First, because it is not
the Poet that speaks, but one of his Personages. Yet I declare it is my opinion,
that this single Qualification is not a sufficient Reason why that which is
spoken should be Dramatical, if beside that, there are not Manners to be
observed therein. Now there are Manners in this speech of Anchises. That which
he says there, is the Foundation of all the Morality, the Laws, and the
Religion which Aeneas was going to Establish in Italy. So that the subject
Matter of this Speech is a Moral Instruction wherein one may see the
Immortality of the Soul established; and the Causes of the Passions and Manners
both of the Living and the Dead. But that which makes most for our purpose is,
that this Speech contains the Manners, Habits, and Condition of Anchises
himself who spoke it, and of those who were in the same place with him. The
Poet having used no small skill to engage him thereto: Each of us, Quisque suos
patimur manes. Exinde per amplum Mittimur Elysium, and pauci laeta arva
tenemus. Aen. 6.
Says he, feel the torments that are proper to him; then are we sent to the
Elysian Fields, where we, a few in number, spend our time, etc.

But whatever Aristotle's sense is, he does not seem to favor the simple
Explication of Arts or Sciences, which are without Manners, and without Action,
and which have nothing of Morality in them. If a Man would speak like a Poet,
he must Imitate Homer, and conceal these things under the Names and Actions of
some feigned persons. He will not say that Salt is good to preserve dead Bodies
from Corruption and Putrefaction, and that Flies would presently fill them full
of Maggots: But he will say, that Achilles designing to revenge the Death of
Patroclus, before he performed the last Offices to his dead Body, apprehends
that the hotness of the Season would corrupt it, and that the Flies that
lighted upon his Wounds, would engender Maggots there. He will not barely say,
that the Sea offers him a Remedy against the Putrefaction he was afraid of: But
he will make the Sea a Divinity; he will bring it in speaking: In a word he
will say the Goddess Thetis comforts Achilles, and tells him, he might set his
heart at rest, for she would go and perfume his Body with Ambrosia, which
should preserve it a whole Year from Corruption. This is the way by which
Poets, if they would imitate Homer, must speak of Arts and Sciences. One sees
in this instance, that Flies breed Corruption, and fill dead Bodies with
Maggots. One there sees the Nature of Salt, and the Art of preserving dead
Bodies from Corruption. But all this is expressed Poetically, and with all the
Qualifications requisite to that Imitation, which according to Aristotle is
essential to Poetry: All is reduced into Action. The Sea is made a Person that
speaks and acts, and this Prosopopoeia is attended with Passion, Tenderness,
and Interest. In short there is nothing therein but what has Manners.

This Instance may suffice; it is plain, obvious, and easy to be understood.
We may for Diversion sake produce another from a Science a great deal more
mysterious. The Chemists have too good an opinion of their Philosophy, and too
much esteem for Virgil; than to think he was wholly ignorant of their Art.
There are some that observe, that he has expressed as clearly as themselves,
some of their choicest Operations. These Gentlemen are not satisfied with
ordinary Metaphors and Allegories, such as Poets use: But they carry on these
Figures and Disguises to the utmost obscurity of a Riddle. No inconvenience
then would follow, should they suppose the Hero of the Aeneid to be a Man who
makes a discovery of that Gold, which is produced after a miraculous manner,
and which is reproduc'd and increased incessantly from the very first time of
its being discovered. The principle of this happy discovery is Piety, Industry,
a Genius, and the blessing of Heaven; Aeneas was not deficient in any of these.
But it is requisite several things should be Divined; For this reason Helenus
sends Aeneas to Sibyl, he follows his advice, and sees the two birds of Venus.
These are the two Extracts of Vitriol: For that green Mineral, which contains
them, is a sort of Copper, that goes under the name of this Goddess. I omit the
rest, and leave it as I found it in the Books where by chance I did read of it;
at least it will suit well enough with the Justice of that Advice Sibyl gives
Aeneas upon the account of the difficulty of this discovery, and the small
number of those who succeed in it; and that lastly, as she says, this
undertaking is not fit for a wise Man. But to return:

We may likewise reckon among the Subjects that are not Poetical, the
Descriptions of Palaces, Gardens, Groves, Rivulets, Ships, and a hundred other
Natural and Artificial things; when they are too long, and made after a simple,
proper manner, without Allegories. This is what Horace calls purple Shreds,
which Poets sometimes place very ill, thinking that those faults will prove the
finest Ornaments of their Works. Tho this may be good in the lesser Poems.

I believe I have already spoken in some other place concerning the manner of
making the Narration Active, which is proper and essential to the Fable. And
that is to reduce the Precepts and Instructions we would lay down, into Action.
Virgil abounds with Instances of this nature. His Hero is a Legislator, but
it is in a Poem. So that he does not appoint that such a Sacrifice should be
made, or such Ceremonies observed: But he does all this himself. He does not
command one should submit to the Gods, nor does he prescribe a way how to
punish the profane; but he demonstrates at large the dreadful torments that
attend these Miscreants.

CHAP. XI. Of the Continuity of the Action, and the Order of the Narration.
THe Continuity, which the Action ought to have in the Narration is a
Consequence of what has been already said, and will serve as a Principle to
that we are about to observe concerning the Order which the Poet ought to mind
in the Recital of all his Action. It Is upon this Principle we shall judge, when
the Poet is permitted to begin the Narration by the beginning of his Action,
and to relate every thing one after another, just as they happened and in their
natural Order; and when, on the contrary, he is obliged to invert this Order,
and make use of the Artificial one, beginning his Poem by the Incidents of his
Action, which happen last perhaps in order of time.

In the first place we will treat concerning Continuity. From the time the Poet
begins to rehearse his Subject, from the time he opens his Poem, and brings his
Personages, if I may so say, upon the Stage; he ought so to continue his Action
to the very end, that none of the Personages be ever observed to be Idle, and
out of Motion.

This Continuity is sometimes to be met with in the Action it self, and in the
first Model of the Fable. Of this Nature is the Action of the Iliad. Apollo is
provoked, and sends the Pestilence into the Grecian Army. Agamemnon pacifies
his Anger, the Soldiers recover of their distemper, and afterward Fight.
Patroclus and Hector are killed, their Funeral Obsequies are over; and so the
Action Ends in less than fifty Days without any Interruption and Discontinuity.

But when the Action lasts for several Years, as in the Odysseis and the
Aeneid, it cannot be Continued, tho 'twere interrupted by nothing else but the
Winter-season, a very unfit time for Wars and Voyages, which are the usual
Subjects of Poems. Ulysses tarries a whole Year with Circe, and seven with
Calypso: And Aeneas spent several Years in Thrace, where he does nothing worthy
to be recited by an Epick Poet. And perhaps he was more than a Year in Sicily
during his Fathers Sickness, and their Mourning for his Death. So that the
Actions of these two Poems are not Continued. But tho the Actions are not
Continued, yet the Narration ought to be so, as we hinted before.

There is no difficulty in managing the Actions that are Continued. The Poet
has nothing to do but Rehearse them in their Natural Order, and relate the
things one after another, just as they happened: This is what Homer has done in
his Iliad.

When the Action is long and Discontinu'd, the Poet relates it in an Artificial
Order. He takes nothing for the Matter of his Narration, but what toward the
End of the Action has something of Continuity in it; and for his own share he
only relates this part. For this reason Virgil has begun his Recital just after
Aeneas left Sicily, where Anchises died: And Homer at the very first makes his
Hero quit the Isle of Ogyges, after he had staid there seven Years, all which
time the Poet lets pass before the opening of his Poem. In the Sequel of the
Discourse, some probable and natural occasion arises for Repeating the most
considerable and necessary things which went before these beginnings. The love
Dido conceived for Aeneas made her extremely curious to know his adventures.
This Passion made the Recital thereof so Natural, that the Iliacosque iterum
demens audire labores Exposcit, pendetque iterum narrantis ab ore. Aen. 4.
Poet thought himself obliged to make it more than once. The Phaeacans indeed
had no Interest in the fortune of Ulysses; but the Poet supplied that by making
these dull Fellows mightily in love with Romantic Adventures.

This Artificial Order divides the Action into two Parts very different from
each other. The principal Part contains that which the Poet relates. He takes
but a little Matter, but he treats of it amply, and with all the Pomp and
Majesty his Art can furnish him with. The other Part is a great deal larger in
the Number of its Incidents, and in its Duration; but it is of less Compass
should you reckon the Verses it takes up, and consequently in the Circumstances
and Movements which make a great part of the Beauties of the Poem. But yet, if
among the Incidents which the Poet is obliged to insert in that which we here
call the Second and Least part of his Work, there should be any one Important
Incident, he may treat of this more largely than of the rest, as Virgil has
done the Taking of Troy. It Is true one may not treat of many of them after this
manner: The rest should be more concise. Besides one sees a great deal of
Difference between the Death of Priam described in the Recitals of the second
Book, and the Death of Camilla related by the Poet in the Eleventh. For tho
that of Camilla is doubtless less considerable as to the Fable, yet the Poet
extends it more by half than that of Priam.

These two Parts of the Epick Poem may be compared to two of the Dramatick: Aut
agitur res in Scenis aut acta refertur. Hor. Poet.
One of which is Acted upon the Stage before the Spectators; and the Other
comprehends whatsoever is done behind the Scenes, and which we come to know of
purely by the Recitals which the Actors make. Segnius irritant animos demissa
per aurem, Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidellibus. Ibid.
This last is less moving than the other; And let Aeneas's sorrow for his first
Wife Creusa be never so great, yet her Death has nothing in it, whereby it
deserves to be compared to that of Dido.

The Division of the Dramatick Action we are now speaking of, Non tamen intus
Digna geri promise in scenam, multaque tolles Ex oculis, quae mox narret
facundia praesens. Nec pueros coram populo Medea trucidet, etc. Ibid.
Gives the Poet an Advantage of keeping from the Spectators view, whatever
would offend them; either by its being two horrible, as a Mother's butchering
her own Children; or by its being too incredible, as the Metamorphoses of a Man
into a Serpent or a Bird: Whereupon these things should only be related. So
likewise the Division of the Epick Action gives the Poet liberty to retrench
from this Action whatever would cause a Confusion in the Poem. The things that
are improper for the Epopea are not of the same nature with those, which ought
to be excluded the Theater, since that which is good in a Dramatick Recital, is
likewise so in an Epopea, which only discovers things to us by Reciting them.
But on the contrary, the things, that confound the Epick Poem, are such as are
too languishing, and which cannot admit of that Action and Motion, which are
the proper Ornaments of this sort of Poem. And this is what Et quae desperet
tractatu nitescere posse, Relinquit: Poet.
Horace orders to be excluded thence.

And in truth how could Virgil make his Readers endure Aeneas's constant
Attendance at his sick Father's bed, together with the Medicines, and
Fomentations which ought to be made use of to recall the Spirits, and the
Natural Heat into the cold Limbs of this aged Prince? And the sorrow too of
Aeneas, which ought to have been very great, would have been but a sorry
Ornament of a Poem: The Readers would not have been affected with them. Would
they have bestowed one tear upon the Natural death of a person of his Age, who
had so little to do in this Poem? Therefore has the Poet very judiciously drawn
a Veil over all these things.

By this means, the Artificial Order cuts off the languishing and unpleasant
Incidents, and the Intervals of time that are void of Action, which hinders the
Continuity thereof: And Vehemens and liquidus puroque simillimus amni. Hor.
Poet.
by these Retrenchments it gives the Poem that continued force, which makes it
run smoothly on throughout the whole, and bestows on it those Beauties which
the Action in it self has not. Semper ad eventum festinat, and in medias res,
Non secus ac notus auditorem rapit. Hor. Art. Poet.
By this means it hastens toward a Conclusion, and at first transports the
Readers into the Middle of its subject Matter, and always entertains in them a
desire and expectation to see the events as soon as possible.

Our Poets begin their Narration so nigh the End, that the Reader imagines the
Poem would End within a few Verses. In the Odysseis, the Gods order Mercury to
go to the Isle of Ogyges, where Ulysses was detained by Calypso. He was to
charge that Goddess to give him leave to depart, and furnish him with every
thing that was necessary for his journey to Ithaca.

Virgil approaches still nearer to a Conclusion. His Hero has already left
Sicily, and is upon his Journey to Italy. The second Part begins much after the
same Manner: Aeneas arriving at the Country which the Fates had promised him,
finds there the Gods and Men who waited his coming with Impatience; and King
Latinus offers him his Daughter Lavinia, sole Heir to his Crown, in Marriage.
Who would think then but this Hero was very well settled, and the Poem at an
end? But a Storm casts him upon Carthage and furnishes the Poet with what fills
the first Part. The jealousy of Turnus, who pretends Lavinia was promised to
him, and was his due, opposes the Settlement of the Trojans, and affords
subject Matter for the last six Books.

The Beginning of the Action is resumed so pertinently that these large
Recitals of Aeneas and Ulysses make no Interruption. Aeneas relates all that
preceded his arrival at Carthage, and then the Poet undertakes to tell what
happened to him in that City. This series of things is so exact, that the first
Book may pass for a mere Prologue, which informs us of the Action in general,
and which in particular discovers the Humors and Interest of the persons that
were to appear in Play. The Poet's practice is the same in his lesser Episodes.
Venus so resumes the Story of Dido, and Diana that of Camilla, that what in
this Poem follows the Recitals of these two Goddesses, is the natural
Consequence of what they related. We may observe the same Order in the
Odysseis. But the Death of Archemorus, the funeral Sports, and the March of the
Argives toward Thebes, are by no means the Consequences of that which is
contained in the Recital of Hypsipyle.

If our Poets had made the Recitals of Ulysses and Aeneas at several times they
could not have connected them to the Action that would have followed, and the
Order would have been less exact, and more irksome to the Readers.

Let us now in a few Words sum up all that has been said concerning the
Continuity of the Epick Narration, and the Order Homer and Virgil have observed
therein.

They have so begun, that when once their Personages have made their
appearance, they never ceased from Acting till the End of the Poem. For this
purpose, when the Epick Action was Continued and of a few Months duration, as
that of the Iliad; the Poet has related it himself in the Natural Order. But
when it lasted for several Years, as the two Others did, the Poets observed an
Artificial Order, and the last part of their Subject that was only Continued,
was all that they themselves related. They made their Heroes relate all that
went before, and that in one speech, made upon a probable Occasion. They placed
these Recitals so well, that the things related therein, precede immediately,
and without any Interruption those which the Poet at last relates himself. So
that neither the Mind, nor the Memory of the Readers are at a loss to rejoyn
the Consequence of the Incidents, which they read in the Poem.

CHAP. XII. Of the Duration of the Narration.
ACCORDING to the Idea we have been proposing concerning the Continuity and the
Order of the Narration; it is requisite we should say thus much concerning its
Duration, viz. That the space of a Year is to the Epick Narration, what the
space of a Day is to Tragedy; and that the Winter is as improper for this great
Work, as the Night is for the Theater; since both being void of Action, make a
vicious Interval, and an irregular Discontinuity in these Poems. So then, the
Duration of the Epick Narration only lasts one Campaign, as the Duration of the
Dramatick Action lasts an Artificial Day.

But we may carry on this Parallel a little farther, and say, that as the Time
for the Theatral Representation is under debate amongst Learned men, and the
Practice of the Ancients has its obscurities, which every one interprets in
favor of himself, either for the Natural, or the Artificial day: So the
precise time of the Epopea admits of dispute; for the Practice of Virgil in
this matter is not very clear.

First it may be said that the Narration of the Aeneid lasts a Year and some
Months. And thus the account may go. Aeneas parting from Sicily after he had
interred his Father there, returns thither again a Year after, and there
celebrates his Anniversary on the very Day he died on. Annus exactis completur
mensibus orbis, Ex quo relliquias divinique ossa Parentis Condidimus terra,
moestasque sacravimus aras. Jamque dies, ni fallor, adest, etc. Aen. 5.
It Is a full Year, says Aeneas, since we interred my Father, and now we are
returned hither again the same day he died on. So that the Narration beginning
when Aeneas left Sicily, just after his Father's death, that makes a whole Year
to the Sports of the fifth Book. By this means the time that is requisite for
the rest of this Book, for the Sixth, and for the Wars of Italy, will be added
to the Year.

One may reduce this Narration into a precise Year, by saying, that these
Verses cited out of the fifth Book, do indeed inform us, that it was a full
Year since Aeneas had interred his Father in Sicily; but that neither these
Verses nor any others intimate that he left Sicily immediately after this
Action. One may then with freedom suppose that he tarried there as long a time,
as was afterward requisite for his Settlement in Italy. From whence one will
infer that the Narration is comprised within the compass of a Year of twelve
Months, and no more.

Each of these Opinions supposes that the Winter is comprehended in this
Narration, and that Aeneas spent the whole of that with Dido, in Africa, as the
Poet plainly says in this Verse spoken by Fame. Nunc Hyemem inter se luxu quam
longa fovere.


A third Opinion supposes that the word Hyems in this Verse should not be
understood for the Winter-season; but that it signifies, the same thing which
it does in other passages of this very Book, that have a necessary relation to
this. Dum pelago desaevit hyems, and aquosus Orion. Quin etiam hyberno moliris
sidere classem.
Now in those other passages it does not signify the Winter, but a Season which
the Rising of Orion renders tempestuous, and that happens in the Summer; for
this Constellation rises about the Summer Solstice. So that the Poet had only a
mind to tell us, that Aeneas indulged himself in the Amors of Dido, all that
time, wherein the Rising of Orion, for about six Weeks, made him afraid to put
to Sea, and excused him from complying so readily to the Orders of the Gods,
that summoned him to Italy.

By this means all the Narration of the Aeneid will be reduced into the Compass
of one single Campaign, making it to begin in Summer, and to conclude before
the End of Autumn in the same Year. This Opinion is grounded upon several
Expressions of Virgil, which seem more exact than the former, tho less
agreeable to several Interpretations. Aeneas leaves Sicily, and is cast upon
the Coasts of Africa in the Summer; and this Summer is already the seventh
since the taking of Troy. This is what the Poet says in the person of Dido,
when she receives this Hero into Carthage. Nam te jam septima porsat Omnibus
orrantem terris and fluctibus ^^stas. Aen. 1.
This is now the seventh Summer since your Travels over so many Countries, and
so many Seas. He spends in Carthage neither the Winter, nor any part of Autumn;
but he parted thence before the End of Summer. He arrives at Sicily and there
keeps the Anniversary of Anchises at the end of the same Summer he came to
Carthage in; since the Poet says that this likewise was the seventh. Septima
post Trojae excidium jam vertitur aestas. Aen. 5.
This is now the end of the seventh Summer since the Ruin of Troy. Lastly, the
Poem ends before Autumn does, since the day before the Death of Turnus, the
Woods had still their Leaves on, and cast their shadow. The Poet says, that Est
in anfructu vallis accommods fraudi, Armorumque dolis; quam densis frondibus
atrum Urgez utrinque latus. Aen. 11.
Turnus lay in Ambush in a Valley where the thickness of the Leaves and the
Shade favored very much his design. By this means the Narration of the Aeneid
will comprise only one Campaign, and be all included within the two Seasons of
Summer and Autumn: Cum subito assurgens fluctu nimbosus Orion. In vada caeca
tulit. Aen. 1.
Beginning at the Solstice and Rising of Orion, which cast Aeneas into Africa;
and ending before the Frosts of Autumni frigore primo Lapsa cadunt folia. Aen.
6.
Autumn had stripped the Leaves off the Trees.

As there are Reasons for both sides, so there are Difficulties in both. Some
of them are replied to: And for those that seem unanswerable, we say, that the
Aeneid being uncorrect, we should not Wonder if we cannot understand all.

Homer is a great deal clearer. He has made an exact journal of the time he
allows his two Poems.

The Iliad begins with a Plague, which lasts ten Days. The Poet has allowed as
many for the Grecians recovery. The Battles, that follow next, end the fifth
Day. After that eleven Days are spent in the Funeral Rites of Patroclus, and
eleven more likewise in the Funeral of Hector, and then the Poem Ends. The
twice ten at the Beginning, and the twice eleven at the End make just two and
forty Days, to which add the five in the Middle, and the whole Duration of the
Action and the Narration amounts to seven and forty Days.

The Days are not so well ranged in the Odysseis, but the Account is altogether
as exact. The Poem opens with Minerva. She frees Telemachus from the dangers he
was in at Ithaca, and conducts him to Pylos. The fourth Day she goes up to
Heaven again, and brings it about that Calypso be ordered to dismiss Ulysses.
On the morrow he begins a Ship, and in twenty Days finishes it; the twenty
fifth he sets Sail, and after a Voyage of twenty Days is cast upon the Island
of Corfu, There he tarries three Days with Alcinous. All this makes one and
fifty Days from the first opening of the Poem to the Arrival of Ulysses in his
own Country. Eight and twenty of them he spent with Calypso, reckoning the four
that preceded the building of his Ship; three and twenty Days more he is upon
his Journey, part of which he spent at Sea, and part with Alcinous. A night
after he arrives in Ithaca. Four Days he remains incognito at Eumeus's Country
House. On the fifth he went to his own Palace, where he was in disguise two
Days, taking an account of what had happened and squaring his Actions
accordingly. The next night he kills his Rivals, and on the morrow makes an end
of discovering himself, and re-adjusting all his Affairs. Therefore adding
these seven Days to the one and fifty before; the Duration of the Narration in
this Poem amounts to eight and fifty Days.

As for the Seasons of the Year the Poet gives us an occasion to guess
something about it. In the Iliad where there is more Action and Violence, the
Days are longer than the Nights, and the Season very hot. And on the contrary,
Homer has assigned longer and cooler Nights to the Prudence of Ulysses; placing
the Maturity of Autumn in the Odysseis, as he has the Contagious heats of the
Summer in the Iliad.

The Practice of Homer then is without doubt to reduce the Duration of the
Epick Narration into the Compass of a Campaign of a few Months. But the
Difficulty of knowing the design and intention of Virgil, is the reason why
it is questioned, whether one might not advance it to the Compass of a whole
Year or more, and whether the Winter season ought in reason to be excluded
thence.

I found my self insensibly engaged in the Examen of this particular question:
I found it a great deal larger than I imagined, and I have discoursed very
amply upon it, from whence several things may be deduced, that in my mind are
of no small use for the understanding of the Aeneid. I here propose this
Question about the time by way of Problem, and freely leave others to determine
and judge what they please.

But yet I say, that in this Uncertainty, two Reasons rather incline me to a
single Campaign than a whole Year.

The first is, the Practice of Homer, which the Latin Poet commonly proposes as
his Exemplar, and who by wise men has been esteemed the most excellent Model
for Poets to imitate. This Reason makes so much the more for me in this
Treatise of the Epick Poem, because it is founded upon that Relation that is
observable between the Practice of Virgil and that of Homer, the Rules of
Horace, and those of Aristotle.

The other Reason is still more to my purpose; and that is, that this reducing
of it to one single Campaign, is more conformable to that Idea I have proposed
concerning the Fable, and the Design of Virgil in this Poem.

We have already considered Aeneas as a Legislator, and Founder of the Romans
Religion. He is so exact in observing all the Ceremonies which were performed
for the Dead, that there is not the least color he should omit one so
considerable, as is that of Mourning, especially for the Death of his Father,
for which he spares no cost. This high Veneration he has for him, makes one of
the principal Qualities of his Character, and almost throughout the whole
regulates the general Character of the Poem.

Now the Mourning of the Romans consisted in two things: the one is its
Duration, which lasted ten Months: the other is, that the Romans in this
ominous and inauspicious time never undertook any thing of consequence. How
then could Aeneas dare to undertake his Settlement in Italy, which was then a
business of the highest Consequence to him? So then, he was obliged to stay in
Sicily full ten Months after the Death of his Father; and having stayed less
than two Months at Carthage, he returned to Sicily to celebrate the Anniversary
of his Death, on the same day he arrived there.

This agrees very well with the Expressions of the Poet which we have already
cited. For the Anniversary happens at the end of the seventh Summer, a little
more than a Month after the Solstice and rising of Orion. Aeneas then leaving
Sicily in Summer during the Rising of this Constellation, which raised the
Tempest in the first Book, he could not leave it the same Summer Anchises died,
but must needs have left Sicily the Summer following, which is the seventh as
the Poet says, and the same in which he returns to the Anniversary. By this
means, he must needs have passed the Autumn, the Winter, and the Spring in
Sicily, and have tarried there more than nine Months before his parting for
Carthage; but he went out and came back again to it the same Summer.

In the other Opinions I neither find the Conformity of Virgil with Homer, nor
the Observation of the Roman Mourning, to which I really think Aeneas was
obliged as much as he was to the other Ceremonies in which he was so punctual.
But these Reasons which make for me may not perhaps make for others. I only
propose them as I was obliged. It Is for Philosophers and Critics to examine
things, to propose Reasons, and to make them intelligible, and it is for the
Reader to draw his Inferences.

Monsieur Bossu's Treatise OF THE EPICK POEM. BOOK IV. Concerning the Manners
of the Epick Poem.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Manners in General.
UNder the name of Manners we comprehend all the natural or acquired
inclinations, which carry us on to good, bad, or indifferent actions. This
Definition contains three things, The first is the Manners themselves which we
call Inclinations, whether they have their source and origin in our Souls, such
as the Love of Sciences and Virtue; or whether they proceed from the
constitution of the Body, as Anger, and the Rest, which we have in common with
the Brutes. The second thing is the cause of those Manners, which is either
Nature, or our Choice, and Industry, according as they are either natural or
acquired. The third thing, is the effect of the Manners, namely Actions whether
good as that of Aeneas, or bad as that of Achilles or indifferent as that of
Ulysses.

Those Manners are good, which incline us to Virtue, and Virtuous Actions;
those Bad which incline us to Vice and Sin; and those are Indifferent which
incline us to indifferent Qualities and Actions.

A right distinction should be made between Real Virtues, and those that appear
such, and are only mere Qualities. The Real Virtues, such as Piety, Prudence,
and the like, make those who are Masters of them Good, Praiseworthy, and
Honest-men. But Real Vices, such as Impiety, Injustice, Fraud, and the like,
corrupt and vitiate those, who are tainted with them. Mere Qualities in their
own Nature produce neither of these two effects, such as Valor, Art, the
Knowledge of Sciences, and the like. Solomon could still preserve the Knowledge
of the Sciences even when he was become an Idolater. Aencas and Mezentius were
both Valiant, yet one was a Pious and a good Man, the other an Atheistical and
profane fellow.

It Is farther observable that among the Inclinations, there are some which
belong more peculiarly to some particular Adventure, and that are only of Use
upon certain Occasions: Such for instance are Valor, Clemency, and Liberality.
Others are more Universal, and appear in every thing, such as are good Nature
and a passionate Temper. For a Man may be passionate, and violent, not only in
War, but at a Council board, and upon all other occasions, as Achilles was; or
he may be mild and good-natured even in the heat of Battle, as Aeneas. We shall
call this last species of general and Universal Manners the Character of such
or such a Person, and will treat of it more particularly.

The Causes of our Manners are either wholly External, or wholly Internal, or
they may be considered as partly External, partly Internal. The External Causes
are God, the Stars and our Native Country. The mixed Causes are our Parents and
Education. The internal Causes are the Complexion, the Sex, the Passions, and
the Actions whereby we contract these habits.

The effects of our Manners are the Discourses, the Designs, and the Essays we
make to do such or such a thing, and the Good, Bad, or Indifferent Actions.

Poetry is not the only thing, where the Manners are of use. Philosophers,
Historians, Geographers, and Rhetoricians treat of them as well as Poets. Each
of these in his own way. But the Poet has need of all. And beside these, there
are a vast number of things, which he is indispensibly obliged to be acquainted
with, that he may make his Personages speak, and act regularly. Whatsoever has
been said on this Subject, yet I cannot wholly pass it over. I shall only
content my self to apply it to the practice of Virgil. Therefore before I treat
of the Poetical Manners, I will explain at large what I have proposed
concerning the Causes of the Manners, and I shall say something concerning the
Manners that are Foreign to Poetry.

CHAP. II. Of the Causes of the Manners.
GOD is the chief of all the Causes in general, we shall look upon him here in
particular, as the most universal and first cause of the Manners. He is the
Author of Nature, and disposes of all things as he thinks fit. This cause
renders the Manners of Aeneas good even to admiration. It Is superfluous to show
how this Hero is favored by Jupiter, since we see Juno, who prosecuted him,
loves and esteems his person.

The Stars, and principally the Signs and Planets, are the second Cause of the
Manners. The Non obtusa adeo gestam is pectora Teucri: Nec tam aversus equos
Tyria Sol jungit ab urbe. Aen. 1.
Poet takes notice what influence they have upon Men. When in the person of
Dido, He proves from them that the Tyrians are not so dull, but that they know
what esteem ought to be had for Virtue. But is it by chance, think ye, that
this Poet, who elsewhere was so skillful in Astronomy, causes the Planets to
act in favor of his Hero conformable to the Rules of Astrologers? Of the seven
there are three that favor him, Jupiter, Venus, and the Sun: All three act
visibly in the Poem in behalf of Aeneas. There are three others, whose
influences are Malignant, Saturn, Mars, the Moon or Diana. If they act it is
indeed against the Hero. But they appear so obscurely that one may say Virgil
has hid them below the Horizon. Lastly, Mercury, whose Planet is said to be
good with the good, and bad with the bad, acts visibly as the good Planets do,
but he never acts alone, it is Jupiter that always sends him out. And this is
the Horoscope which the Poet makes for the Birth of the Roman Empire.

The third external cause of the Manners is the Country in which one is Born.
Virgil bestows great commendations on the Country of his Hero, and advances it
far above Greece. Fracti bello fatisque repulsi Ductores Danaum: Aen. 2.
As long as Troy was assaulted fairly by Force, it always remained Victorious.
'Twas only the fraud and Treachery of the Grecians, that gained the mastery
over the generosity of the Trojans. So that according to their Countries, the
one Party are brave and generous, the other Knaves and Cheats; the one Civil,
the other Barbarous; the one Hardy, the other Nice, etc.

After these Causes, that are properly external, follow next the Fathers and
Mothers whose blood is derived down to their Children. We cannot say that the
Parents are such Causes as are altogether foreign to the Inclinations of those
who are formed from their substance. Let us apply this to our Subject. Aeneas
sprang from the Royal Blood of Troy. The first Princes of this Family were as
Virtuous, as Powerful. But in process of time these two things were divided
into two different branches. Ilus left the Crown to Laomedon, and his Virtue to
Assaracus. Priam and Paris were Heirs to the first, Anchises and Aeneas to the
second. By this means the Poet bestows upon his Hero the good inclinations of
his Ancestors before ever he restored to him the Regal Power. His Piety
deserved the Scepter of his Fathers, and the perfidiousness of the other branch
was the cause that Priam's Family was extirpated. The Innocent themselves felt
likewise the smart of it, as Postquam res Asiae, Priamique evertere gentem,
Immeritam visum superis, etc. Polydorum obtruncat. Aen. 3.
Virgil observes of Polydore. This is more clearly expressed by the Greek Poet.
(...). Iliad.
He lays down the genealogy of Priam and Aeneas, and adds that Jupiter hated
the Family of Priam, and that notwithstanding Aeneas was to command the Trojans
and transmit the Empire to his Posterity. These are the advantages Aeneas
derived from his Father. His Mother was the Goddess, from whom he derived the
Character of Good Nature, and Meekness which was the finest Ornament of his
Manners.

Parents likewise hand down to their Children, their Nobility, which often
makes a great deal of difference between those, that are Noble, and those that
are not. Now that which happens often, or ordinarily in these things is the
Rule which the Poet ought to go by. It would argue Ignorance, or Childishness
to do otherwise: And one should fall under these Censures, if for instance, one
should cause a Poetical person to be born under an unlucky Constellation, to
whom we would give good inclinations and a happy fortune; whatsoever Instances
may be opposed against the pretended doctrine of Astrologers, yet that which is
admirable, and extraordinary in Poets, does not consist in contradicting the
common received opinion about these things.

Education is another Cause of the Manners which depends upon the two former,
to wit, the Care and Quality of the Parents. Virgil has not forgot this Cause.
Those likewise with whom one converses, contribute very much toward those
various Inclinations that proceed from Education. Whether one suits himself to
their Humor, or whether that conformity of Humors makes these Conjunctions,
and presides over the choice of Friends, the Companions of Aeneas are good,
sage, and pious Persons? Ipse suas arts, sua munera laetus Apollo Augurium
Citharamque dabat celeresque sagittas. Ille ut depositi proferret fata
Parentis, Scire potestatem herbarum usumque medendi Maluit, and mutas agitare
inglorius arts. Aen. 12.
Japis his Physician prefers his Skill in Physic beyond the Glory of Arms,
even in that only design of prolonging the life of his old Father.

Education depends likewise on the Government and the State, under which one is
brought up. One conceives quite different Sentiments under a Monarchy, than one
should do under a Commonwealth. This Point was of some moment to our Poet, who
was willing to change the Inclinations of his Audience. It Is upon this account
that the Inclinations of all the Personages in the Aeneid are unanimously for a
Monarchy. And though the Thuscans who were used cruelly by Mezentius, revolt
from him, and drive him thence; yet this is not as the first Brutus did, to
change the Face of the State, by banishing both the King and his Power
together, but in order to submit themselves to a more just Monarch.

We may take into the number of mixed Causes, the Riches, the Dignities, the
Alliances, and the other Goods of Fortune, which we possess; upon which I will
only make this Reflection: That a King, or General of an Army, do not always
act in that Character.

Achilles was both. But he preserves nothing of his Sovereignty, but that
Independency by which he refuses to obey Agamemnon, as otherwise he ought. The
Fable requires only this, and Homer has said no more of it. His Achilles is
rather a private Man, and a single Voluntier, who only fights in his own
Quarrel, than a King or a General. So that nothing of all the good that is done
any where else, but where he is present, is owing either to his Valor or his
good Conduct.

Virgil's Hero is quite of another make. He never divests himself of his
Dignities; he acts in the full Character of a General. And this advances his
Martial Achievements to a higher pitch of Glory than those of Achilles. The
Absence of both these Heroes gives their Enemies great advantage against them,
and is an Evidence how great and necessary the Valor of both of them is. But
this is peculiar to Aeneas, that whatever good is done in his Absence, is owing
to his Conduct. Two things preserved the Trojans from the rage of Turnus: The
one is the Rampart and Fortifications of the Camp they were entrenched in.
Aeneas himself designed and over-looked these Works. The other is the good
order they observed to defend themselves: And in this they did no more than
what he ordered them at parting. And here is a Glory which the Hero in the
Iliad can make no pretensions to; and if one would compare both together,
Achilles is a valiant Soldier, and Aeneas a complete Commander.

The last Causes of the Manners, which we propounded, are purely internal. The
chief and most general of these is the Complexion. Poets place high Characters
upon Bodies of the largest size, and the finest make. Os humerosque Deo
similis, Aen. 1.
Virgil gives his Hero the Stature and Visage of a God: And he observes * that
Virtue is most charming, when a good Soul is lodged in a Body Gratior and
pulchro veniens in corpore virtus. Aen. 5.
that resembles it.

The Complexion varies according to the difference of Ages and Sexes. Turnus is
younger than Aeneas, because Aeneas ought to be sage and prudent, and Turnus
furious and passionate like another Achilles. I will not transcribe here what
Horace has writ concerning the Manners that are proper to every Age.

As for the Sex, Aristotle says in his Poetry, that there are fewer good Women
than bad; and that they do more mischief than good in the World. Virgil is but
too exact in copying this Thought. Venus is the Mother and Protectress of
Aeneas: She seems to be good-natured through the whole. Sibyl likewise favors
him. Cybele and Andromache are well-wishers to him, and wish him no harm; but
they appear but little. For this small number of good Women, how many bad ones
are there, or at least such as bring a great deal of Mischief upon this Hero?
Juno is his professed Enemy, and employs against him Iris, Juturna, and Alecto.
Dido thought of ruining him at Carthage, and calls in to her aid her Sister, a
Nurse, and an Inchantress. The Harpies drive him out of their Island. Trojae
and Patriae communis Erynnis. Aen. 2.
Helena is a Fury that ruins the Trojans and Graecians themselves. The Trojan
Women, though his own Subjects, set his Fleet on Fire. Amata contemns the Order
of the Gods, and the Will of the King her Husband; and with the Latin Women
first blows the Trumpet to Rebellion. Sylvia prima soror, etc. Aen. 7.
Sylvia puts her upon it. The Women, that were most esteemed by this Hero,
brought insupportable Troubles upon his Head. At the end of the Second Book,
one may see his Sorrow for Creusa. And Quid in eversa vidi crudelius urbe? etc.
Causa mali tanti conjux iterum. Aen. 6.
the innocent Lavinia is the cause of all the Miseries he suffers in the six
last Books.

Camilla bears Arms against him, but she gives us an occasion to make a more
particular Reflection. Virgil, in her, has given us a pretty Example of the
Inconstancy of the Sex. It seems as if this courageous Damosel was brought in
to fight, only to teach other Women, that, War is none of their Business, and
that they can never so far divest themselves of their natural Inclinations.
There still remains something in them which will prove the ruin of themselves,
and which is a great prejudice to those who rely upon them. The Poet does
admirably apply this Point to the Manners of that Sex; and makes use of this
Heroine in the case, who seems to be wholly of another make. In the heat of the
Battle she perceives a Warrior with rich Amor. She was presently for having
the Spoils of this Enemy; and the Motives the Poet gives her are looked upon as
a Woman's greedy Desire. This levity of the Sex makes Camilla forget her
Dignity, and the taking care of her safety, and it is followed with very
mischievous Effects. She is killed, the Cavalry routed, and Aeneas preserved
from an Ambuscado he was just falling into.

The Passions likewise are the internal Causes of the Manners. If we love any
Person, we love all we see in him, even to his Failings. If we hate any one, we
have an Aversion for even his Perfections: So great a Power has Passion over
us. When Dido loves Aeneas, this Hero, in her Eye is nothing less than a Credo
equidem, nec vana fides, genus esse Deorum. Aen. 4.
God. Nec tibi diva parens, generis nec Dardanus author, Perfide! sed ditis
genuit te cautibus horrens Caucasus, Hyrcanaeque admorunt ubera tygres. Ibid.
But is she incensed against him? Then he is no longer one of Humane Race, but
some hard hearted Rock of Mount Caucasus is scarce good enough to be his Father.

But the most excellent of all the Causes of each Man's Manners is his own
Actions. This Cause imprints the strongest Habits. It Is that in which we have
the greatest share. It Is that which creates to us the greatest Honor, if the
Manners it produces be good; and, which on the other hand is our greatest
shame, if they be bad. Virgil has very divinely touched upon this Cause, when
he says that next after God, Good Manners are the chiefest and the best
Recompense of Good Actions. Quae vobis, quae digna, viri, pro talibus ausis
Praemia posse rear solvi? Pulcherrima primum Dii moresque dabunt vestri.
Ye brave young Men, what equal Gifts can we;
What Recompense for such Deserts Decree?
The greatest sure, and best you can receive,
The God's, your Virtue, and your Fame will give.
[Englished thus by Mr. Dryden.]

CHAP. III. Concerning the Manners of other Sciences besides Poetry.
GEography, History, Philosophy, and Rhetoric, teach nothing concerning the
Manners, but what the Poet should be acquainted with. We will only here make a
slight Application of it to our Subject.

The Geographers in the Tracts they write concerning the Situation of the Seas
and Continent, do likewise inform us of the diversity of States and
Governments, of the Employments, the Inclinations, the Customs of the People,
together with the Fashion of their Habits. The Speech of Remulus, in the Ninth
Book of the Aeneid, is all Geographical. It contains the Education of the
Italians, and their Warlike Manners adapted to every Age; and it ends with an
Antithesis, wherein he reproaches the Trojans with the Effeminacy of their
Clothing, as a certain Sign that their Inclinations were opposite to those he
had been describing. There are several other Passages in the Aeneid, where this
Effeminacy of their Apparel is described, and the Reproach of it cast upon
Aeneas himself with some sort of Emphasis. But Virgil very dexterously turns
off from his Audience, who were the Progeny of the Trojans, this small
Reproach, which might else have reflected upon them. He says, that the Romans
did not derive from their Fathers any of that effeminate Fashion: But on the
other hand, that the Trojans accommodated themselves to the more manly and
generous Customs of the Italians.

History, as well as Geography, describes the Manners and the Customs of
States, and People in general. But History adds likewise thereto the
Inclinations and Manners of particular Persons, which it names. Both of them
treat equally of the Manners as indifferent, writing with no other Design than
to demonstrate them as they really are. It Is true the Notices they give, serve
for the Conduct of a Man's Life, and each Man is to look upon the Examples he
meets with as so many Precepts, which teach him his Duty. But this Application
does not so much belong to these two Arts, as to Moral Philosophy.

Poetry takes from History and Geography, what both of them say concerning the
Morals. The Poet describes things in general, as Geography does, and usually it
claps them under particular Names, as in History. Sometimes it joins both these
two things together, and makes the Application of them it self. Accipe nunc
Danaum insidias; and crimine ab uno Disce omnes. Aen. 2.
Virgil being about to describe the particular Manners of Sinon, advertises his
Readers, that in the Villainy of this single Grecian one might discover the
Wickedness of the whole Nation. Moral Philosophy contains in it the simple
knowledge of the Manners, it suffers none that are either bad, or indifferent.
It treats of them only with a design to render them good. The Virtues are
always good. These it proposes that we may embrace them. The Vices are always
evil, and it teaches how to avoid them. The Passions in themselves are
indifferent, it corrects what is ill in them, and puts us in a Method how to
make a right use of them, and bring them over to Virtue's side. There are some
Inclinations that are so indifferent they cannot alter their Property. Such are
those of young Children before they are capable of Good or Evil. Philosophy
looks upon them not to be so much Manners, as the cause of future Manners. We
can produce an Instance of this without quitting our usual Guides. Horace is no
less a Philosopher than he is a Poet. Servius Oppidius Canusi duo praedia dives
Antiquo censu gnatis divisse duobus Fertur. Et haeo moriens pueris dixisse
vocatis Ad lectum: Postquam te talos, Aule, nucesque Far sinu laxo, donare
and ludere vidi: Te, Tiberi, numerare, cavis abscondere tristem. Extimui ne vos
ageret vesania discors. Tu Numentanum, tu ne sequerere Cicutam. Quare per Divos
oratus uterque Penates, Tu cave ne minuas, Tu, ne majus facias id Quod satis
esse putat pater, and natura coercet. Lib. 2. Sat. 3.
It Is worth taking notice what he relates concerning a Man of Canusium, Servius
Oppidius by Name. He had a plentiful Estate left him by his Progenitors. Before
his Death he bequeaths two of his Lordships to his two Sons, and gave them this
Advice: I have observed that you, Aulus, have managed your Play-things after a
careless manner, either gaming, or giving them inconsiderately away: And you,
Tiberius, on the other hand, are always counting your Trifles, seem very
anxious, and look about for holes to hide them in. This makes me afraid you
will both ruin your selves by two contrary Vices; The one, by being as
Prodigal as Numentanus; The other as covetous as Cicuta. Wherefore I charge you
both, and conjure you, by the Guardian-Gods of our Family, that you, Aulus,
diminish nothing of the Estate I leave you, and that you, Tiberius, never
increase it; but live contented with what Nature, and your Father, think
sufficient for you. This is the way Philosophy treats of the Inclinations of
Children. The Conclusion, and all the Commands of this prudent Father, are for
riper Age.

Virgil treats of the Doctrine of the Passions, not only as a Moral, but as a
Natural Philosopher. He renders a Reason of these things from the Matter
whereof Bodies are composed, and from the Manner whereby they are made, and
united to the Souls. But he does it in a Poetical Way, and very suitably to his
Subject.

As Rhetoric proposes a different End to it self, so likewise does it treat of
the Manners after a different way. The Orator's Design is not to render his
Audience better than they are; he is contented if they are but convinced of
that he undertook to convince them of. The better to effect this, he sides with
their Humor, and their Interests, as far as his Cause will bear. He appears
Modest, Prudent, and a Man of Probity, that we may hearken to him with Delight,
that we may rely upon him, and that we may believe that he neither designs to
impose upon us, or is in the wrong himself. He gives us a quite contrary Idea
of those he speaks against. In a word, he never troubles his Head with
considering which are his own true Inclinations, or what the Inclinations of
others are, but studies to represent them all such as they should be, for him
to gain his Cause?

The Poet should know all this, that so he may the better make his Personages
speak. We might say that our Poets might look upon the Ancestors of their
Audience, as Orators do those in whose behalf they speak. Besides Virgil might
have considered Dido as his Enemy. The Treachery of Hannibal, and the
Carthaginians; would have dispensed a Roman Poet from some Civilities, which
else, perhaps, one might think were becoming him. But the Fable does
sufficiently regulate the Manners of all the Personages, and it is to this one
should have the chiefest regard.

The Poet as well as the Orator has his Auditors. All the difference I find is,
that they are not so few in number, nor so fickle, nor so subject to particular
Passions and Inclinations. The Poet writes for his whole Country, he must be
read every hour, at all times, and by sober Persons. He has nothing then to do,
but to study in general the Humor of his own Nation, and the good Inclinations
of his Prince, if he lives in a Monarchy as Virgil did. But if a Prince has bad
Inclinations, and an Author is so complaisant as to spoil his Poem, the better
to accommodate himself to them, he exposes himself to very shameful Censures.

The Poet, as well as the Orator and Philosopher, is obliged to appear a grave,
prudent, and honest Man. For this reason, and because he is obliged to teach us
Virtue, he is engaged to be perfectly acquainted with Morality, and to be truly
virtuous. This is a practical Science; and is not learnt by empty Speculations.
It a good and solid Moral does not correct our Passions, it is almost impossible
but our Passions will make us think the Moral false. We are not apt to condemn
those Faults in which we take delight. We had rather believe that there are not
Vices, than acknowledge that we our selves are vicious. If Horace had reason to
say, that Homer would not have given such Commendations of Wine if he had not
loved it. What can one think of those who take so much Delight and Pleasure in
that which is the most shameful and criminal in our Passions? who make of them
the most moving and tenderest Passages of their Poems? and who turn all
infamous Amors into such Gallantries as an honest man and a generous Cavalier
may reckon among his good Fortunes? One shall never make Vice odious, if one
represent nothing of it but what is amiable and pleasant. Those who represent
it only under a plausible Disguise, give us reason to think, that they only
expose it more to view thereby, and that their Lives are of a piece with their
Moral, and their Writings. If there are any Readers that are of the same mind,
it is not to those a Man should suit himself. This would be on the other hand to
destroy the most essential Rules of Poetry, and the Fable. A pernicious Art is
no Art, or at least one not to be tolerated. If there are no other Readers to
be met with, and if a Poet is obliged out of Complaisance to be debauched, woe
to those who encourage such a Corruption; and who prefer the Glory of being
Poets, to that of being honest Men.

These Reflections are not beside my Subject, since they serve to show what is
the Practice of Homer and Virgil. These Pagans have not sullied the Majesty of
their Episodes by these vicious Delicacies. Ulysses is cold to Circe's Charms.
He is melancholy with Calypso. Bryseis and Chryseis only inflame Agamemnon and
Achilles with Anger. Camilla has no Gallants. There is scarce mention made of
Turnus's Passion for Lavinia. And all the Amor of Dido is treated only as a
vicious Treachery for which this misurable Queen is punished severely.

CHAP. IV. Of the Manners of Poetry.
THat which is peculiar to Poetry in the Doctrine about the Manners, is, to
make the Reader know what are the Inclinations which the Poet bestows upon his
Personages, whether good, bad, or indifferent, no matter which. Aristotle
defines the Manners of Poetry thus: (...)
The Manners, says he, are that which discovers the Inclinations of him that
speaks, and that whereby we know on what he will determine, before one sees
that he is carried that way or actually rejects it. From whence this
Philosopher concludes, (...)
That the Manners are not always in all sorts of Discourses. An Instance will
clear this Definition.

In the first Book of Virgil, Aeneas appears to be very pious, and more forward
to execute the Will of the Gods, than any other thing. In the fourth Book a
very difficult Choice is proposed to him. On one side Gratitude, Love, Natural
Tenderness, and several weighty Considerations, engage him not to part from
Dido: on the other side, an express Order of the Gods commands him to Italy.
Before any one sees what side he will take to, and on what he will resolve,
That which he has said ought to have demonstrated what his Will and what his
Inclinations are, and to what he will determine. His former Speeches which
discover to me his future Resolution, are the Poetical Manners. These make one
foresee that he would leave Dido, and obey the Gods: he does so: The Manners
then are good, and duly ordered. If to stay with Dido, he had disobeyed the
Orders of Jupiter; the Manners would have been bad; bad, because they would
have made one foresee a Choice, and a Resolution quite contrary to that which
he ought to take. But if nothing had foreshewn me the Resolution of Aeneas, nor
what side he had taken to, nor the contrary, in this case there would have been
no Manners.

Therefore, as in Philosophy the Manners are good when they make that Man so in
whom they are; and they are bad when they incline him to Vice and Evil Actions:
and as in Rhetoric they are good when they manifest the Person that speaks to
be honest, prudent, and sincere, and the Person against whom he speaks to be
guilty of the contrary Vices; and evil when he that speaks seems vicious, and
imprudent; and his Adversary sage, and well advised independantly from what
they are in Reality: so likewise in an Epopea the Manners are good when one may
discover the Virtue or Vice, the good or bad Inclinations of those who speak or
act; but bad when a good man appears vicious, or a wicked man seems to have
good Inclinations.

So that the Manners of Aeneas, and those of the Athei st Mezentius considered
Poetically, are both equally good, because they equally demonstrate the Piety
of the one, and the Impiety of the other, which are the Characters the Poet
bestowed upon them, and under which they are always represented by him. But in
the Hippolyte of Seneca the Manners of Phaedra's Nurse are very bad, because
this Woman is very wicked, and speaks very fine things. At first she persuades
this unhappy Queen, passionately in love with her Son-in-law, to the Virtue of
Continence. Deum esse amorem rurpiter vitio favens Finxit libido; quoque
libe^ior foret, Titulum furori numinis falsi dedit.
It Is Passion, says she, which to countenance the Vice, is not ashamed to make
Love a God; and for a greater Licentiousness therein, it has disguised this
infamous Brutality under the Name of a false Deity, etc. When a Body hears a
long Speech full of those chaste Thoughts, would not one think that she who
speaks is Chastity her self come down express from Heaven to banish from the
Earth all unlawful Love? But yet observe what a Part this Nurse acts in the
remaining part of the Poem. It Is she her self that speaks, and explains her
Character. Si tam protervus incubat menti furor, Contemn famam; fama vix vero
favet, Pejus merenti metior, and pejor bono. Tentemus animum tristem and
intractabilem. Meus iste labor est, aggredi juvenem ferum. Mentemque saevam
flectere immitis viri.
If the amorous Flame rages so much within your Breast, never value what the
World says of it. Common Report seldom favors Virtue and Truth: but speaks
favorably of the most profligate, and says worse of good men than of others.
Let us try to bend the mind of this stubborn and untractable Youth. Let it be
my Business for once. Let me take this rough Young Man to task, and for your
sake touch the very heart of this resentless Creature. Here Is good Morality
turned out of doors in an instant. Surely Seneca's Design in making her speak
thus, was only to put her Audience upon admiring her fine Faculty of
discoursing Pro and Con, and what a great many pretty Sentences she had got by
heart. Let the case be how it will, since he had a design to make use of this
Nurse to debauch the chaste Resolution of Hippolytus, he makes her speak well
enough this second Speech, and he re-assumes the Poetical Goodness, when he
quite the Moral Goodness, and when he makes her vent such profligate Maxims.

Since then the Goodness that is proper to the Poetical Manners is to make them
appear such as they are; it is necessary to observe, what are the things that
discover to us the Inclinations of the Personages.

The first thing is the Speeches and Actions. (...). Aristot. Poet. c. 15.
There are Manners in a Poem (says Aristotle) if as we said the Speeches and
the Actions discover to us any Inclination. The Poet makes his Personages speak
and act as he pleases. So that these two things are owing to him, they are
wholly at his disposal. And they are the foundation of all the rest. When the
Manners are well expressed after this way, they are denoted purely and simply by
the term Good; and this (...). Ibid.
Goodness makes their first Qualification. Aristotle places it in the front of
all the rest, that it may be the more exactly observed. Notandi sunt tibi
mores. Poet.
Horace likewise orders the Poet to be exact in demonstrating the Manners.

The second thing is the Knowledge which a Genius, Study, and Experience, gives
us of the Inclinations, that are proper to each Person according to the
Complexion, the Dignity, and all the other Causes whether natural or acquired,
internal or external, all which we mentioned before. As soon as the Poet has
given the Dignity of a King to one of his Personages, without hearing him
speak, or seeing him act, we know that he ought to be grave, majestical,
jealous of his Authority, and the like. The Inclinations should be suitable to
that which the Poet has proposed; and Convenientia singe. Hor. Poet. (...).
Arist. Poet.
this Conformity and Suitableness makes the second Qualification of the Manners.

The third thing is the Knowledge which we deduce from the Fable or the
History. This sort of Discovery is comprehended under the Name of Common
Opinion or Fame, for the Reasons we have already mentioned. So that when a Poet
has named Alexander, we know that the Inclination of this Personage is all for
Greatness and Glory, and that his Ambition is larger than the Extent of the
whole Earth. If he introduces Achilles, we know he is angry, passionate, and
impatient. The Manners of these Heroes in the Poem should be like to that which
Fame has reported of them; and this Resemblance Famam sequere. Hor. Poet.
(...). Arist. Poet.
makes the third Qualification of the Manners.

Lastly, because the Poems may be divided into two parts, as the Aeneid, the
one half whereof requires Piety and Patience, and the other Violence and War, a
Man may fancy, according to these so different States, he may likewise make
the Characters of his Hero different. And then the Manners of each Part will be
good in particular. But because the Speeches and the Actions of the first Part
have discovered the Inclinations which the Poet gives his Hero, and because the
Reader sees it is so in the Fable and History, and has the same Effect as common
Fame; this would be to offend against the first and third Qualification if we
change the Character that is known: from whence it follows, that the Poet is
obliged to make it constant and Even, that is, such at the End of the Poem, as
it appeared to be at the Beginning: and this Servetur ad imum Qualis ab incepto
processerit and sibi constet. Hor. Poet. (...). Ar. Poet.
Evenness of the Character is the fourth Qualification of the Manners. So that
there are four things to be observed in the Manners: first, that they be good;
secondly, suitable; thirdly, likely; and fourthly, even. These four
Qualifications are comprehended in Aristotle's Definition; so that if one
should transgress any one of these, he would transgress this Definition by
making us pass a wrong Judgment upon the Inolinations of a Personage, and the
Resolutions he ought to take.

The most important and hardest thing is to distinguish these two sorts of
Goodness in the Manners: the one, which we may call Moral Goodness, and which
is proper to Virtue; and the other Poetical, to which the most Vicious Men have
as much Right as the Virtuous. It consists only in the Skill of the Poet, to
discover rightly the Inclinations of those he makes to speak and act in his
Poem. That which raises the greatest Scruple, is, that the Poetical Manners
suppose the others; and Aristotle not only speaks of these two sorts in his
Poesy, but farther, he makes use of the same (...).
Term to express these two sorts of Goodness.

To wind our selves out of this Difficulty, 'twill not be amiss to begin here,
by examining, whether according to Aristotle, the Poetical Hero ought
necessarily to be an honest and virtuous Man. For if this be not so, then it is
plain that when Aristotle requires for the first and most principal Quality of
the Manners that they be good, he would not be understood to speak of that
Moral Goodness which makes Men good, and which is inseparable from Virtue. So
that though we do not perhaps penetrate through all the Obscurity of this
Expression, yet we shall at least know the bottom of his Thoughts. And since
this Question is necessary, we shall not stick to add Reason, and the Authority
of others, to that of Aristotle; and that will establish it the better.

CHAP. V. Whether the Hero of the Poem ought to be an Honest Man, or no?
THIS Question will seem unreasonable to those who have but one single Idea of
their Heroes; and who acknowledge none of that Name, but those excellent Men
who are endued with every Virtue, are Masters of their Passions, and all their
Inclinations, and whom an excellent and Divine Nature raises above the rest of
Mankind. But neither the Ancient Poets, nor the Masters of this Art ever
thought of placing their Heroes in so high a Sphere, without thinking it lawful
to put them in a lower form: It Is requisite then to make the same Distinction
between a Hero in Morality, and an Hero in Poetry, as we did between Moral and
Poetical Goodness, and to say that Achilles and Mezentius had as much right to
the Poetical Goodness; as Ulysses and Aeneas: So that these two cruel and
unjust Men are as regular Heroes of Poetry, as these two Princes that are so
Just, so Wise, and so Good.

In the Poem it self this Term admits of two senses. Sometimes it signifies
indifferently all the persons of Note. So that not only Aeneas and Turnus, but
likewise Entellus in the sports of the Fifth Book, and Misenus the Trumpeter of
Aeneas in the Sixth, are styled Heroes by the Poet. But though the Name of Hero
may be also bestowed on other Personages, yet there is so particular an
Application of it made to the first, that when one simply say; the Hero, by
that Name we understand only Achilles in the Iliad, Ulysses in the Odysseis,
Aeneas in the Latin Poem; in a word the principal Personage in any Poem.

There is likewise a particular signification of the Word Heroic when it is
used to denote an Epopea, and so distinguish this sort of Poem from others.
Aristotle and Ovid give this Name not to the Poem, but to the Verses made use
of therein, and which they likewise call Hexameter Verses. This last has been
almost the only Name we have retained. If we should call Epick Poems Heroic
Poems, because of the Heroic Verses that are made use of therein, one might
with as much reason call the French Epopeas Alexandrine Poems, since the Verses
they use in these Poems are called Alexandrines. And if the Name Heroic comes
from the Personages of the Poem, who are styled Heroes; Tragedy would be as
much an Heroic Poem as the Epopea would, since the Action and the Personages
of Tragedy are no less Heroic, than the Action and the Personages of the
Epopea.

But I question whether these Reflections be so useful as to deserve so many
Words. They may only serve to discover to us the different use of the Terms
Hero, and Heroic among the Ancients, and the Moderns; and to prevent
condemning the first for such Notions, which they never followed. When we know
that they did not affix the Idea of Virtue, to these Terms taken in a Poetical
sense, that they never confined the Name of Hero only to the principal
Personage in the Poem, and that they did not call the Epopeas by the Name of
Heroic Poems: We shall not in these Works look for Examples of a real and
excelling Virtue, and no one will wonder that Horace has said on the contrary,
that all the Iliad where so many Hero's lost their lives, contains nothing but
Injustice, Violence, Passion, and Wickedness.

I have omitted one signification of the word Hero, which may be considered as
Moral, and as Poetical. In this sense we call some Men that were born of some
Deity, and a Mortal Person, as Achilles who was the Son of the Goddess Thetis
and Peleus; and Hercules who was the Son of Jupiter and Alomena. But this lays
no obligation upon Poets to make these Heroes good Men: Because there were
likewise wicked Gods. And one may likewise observe that sometimes the Poets do
make these Divine Men very Wicked Persons, witness Polypheme and Cacus.
Monstrum Horrendum. Visceribus miserorum and sanguine vescitur a^^. Aen. 3.
The first of these, though Neptune's Son, was a horrible Monster, and devoured
his Guests and contemned Jupiter himself. At furiis Caci men's offera, nequid
inausum Aut intentatum scelerisve dolive fuisset. Aen. ^.
Cacus was the Son of God Vulcan, and yet Virgil says, there was no Villainy
but this notable Rascal would undertake.

This is said in the general concerning all sorts of Heroes, let us now take a
particular View of the chief personages in each Poem.

Aristotle says, (...). Arist. de Moribus ad Nicomachum lib. 7. c. 1.
That an Heroical and Divine Virtue is some thing more than Humane; and
consequently that Heroes are Divine Persons, and that the excellency of their
Nature raises them above all Men. But he says this in his Book, of Morality.
(...) Ar. Poet. c. 13.
In his Poetry, he teaches a quite contrary lesson, that this chief personage
of a Poem whom we style a Hero, should be neither good nor bad. But he would
have him be between both, neither advanced above the rest of Mankind by his
Virtue, and his Justice, nor sunk below them by his Vices and Wickedness. There
is nothing then of Communication between these two sorts of Heroes, one of
which ought to be advanced by his Virtue above the rest of Mankind, and the
other should not be in the same Class with Men of perfection.

Besides, it must be observed, that he only speaks of that which is the most
complete part in the Poems, and not simply of that which is regular and
allowable: And moreover, that this Mean, which he requires, is for complex
Fables. So that he does not absolutely exclude from the number of these
Poetical Heroes, neither Persons of the greatest Virtue, such as Ulysses, nor
the most Vicious, such as Ixion and Medea. Horace mentions these two last among
the Regular Heroes. Sit Medea ferox invictaque: Perfidus Ixion. Hor. Poet.
He says, that she should be barbarous and inflexible, and Ixion treacherous.
Certainly this Critic never wrote his Rules for Irregular Personages.

But since lastly, both Aristotle and Horace approve of Homer's practice in the
Manners he has given to Achilles, and since they propose this Hero, as a Model
for other Poets to imitate; the Bad Morals of this Personage should convince
us, that according to the Rules of Aristotle and Horace, and according to
Homer's practice, it is by no means necessary that the principal Person of an
Epopea should be an honest Man. For never does an honest Man prefer his own
passion and private Interest to the public Cause, the Glory of his Country,
the Honor and the Life of his Innocent Friends. Never did an honest Man use
such vile Language as this to his General, Go thou Impudent, Drunken, fearful
Fellow; there are none but drones who obey thee. These contumelies are
Seditious, and of very bad consequence, and they are so much the more Criminal,
because he who said them might be the Ringleader of a Faction: A good Man, if
God denies him any thing, will never break out into a passion against him, and
will never tell him that he will be revenged on him if he can. It Is only
profane, and Madmen that speak thus.

Was Aristotle ignorant of these continual Extravagancies of Achilles? Or did
this learned Philosopher take them for real Virtues? There is not the least
color for such a Thought. We should more probably believe that Aristotle
considered this Poetical Hero only as a Savage, directly opposite to the Hero
of his Morality. For in the passage above cited, he opposes this Brutality, to
the Heroic and Divine Virtues. Because a God and a Beast are incapable, the
one of Vice, and the other of Virtue. And in truth the one of these Natures is
of too high, and the other of too low a pitch. Laws are made for neither the
one, nor the other of them. And is not this what Horace says of the Character
of Achilles? He should not acknowledge that he was under the tie of any Laws.
Therefore there is no medium; he belongs to one of the two contraries which
Aristotle proposes, either above or below Mankind; he is Divine or Brutal. And
which to fix upon is no hard matter. Horace says he is a Fool.

Homer, it is true, has some faults, and Non ego paucis Offendar maculis, quas
aut incuria fudit, Aut humana parum cavit natura. Poet.
Horace owns it; but the Character of Achilles cannot be one of these faults,
which are so few, are no offense, and are owing either to humane frailty, or a
pardonable negligence. These are the faults Horace censures, or to speak more
properly, which he excuses in Homer. And can this be applied to the Character
of Achilles?

We conclude this Point by confirming the practice of Homer and the Authority
of Aristotle and Horace with a reason drawn from the Essence of the Poem
according as we proposed it. The Moral does as well teach us how to avoid Vices
as (in conformity to Horace) we said concerning the Iliad and Achilles; as it
does how to imitate Virtue, as Horace observes of the other Poem, and the other
Hero of Homer. And lastly the Fable which is the very Soul of the Poem, and
which is of the same nature in Homer as in Aesop, is as regularly capable of
the most base and Criminal Men, and Animals for its first and only Personages,
as it is of the most generous and the most praiseworthy.

Without dwelling then upon any new proofs which the Inference will afford us,
we may conclude, that Reason and the nature of the Poem, the practice of Homer,
and the precepts of Aristotle and Horace, do all inform us that it is not at all
necessary that the Hero of a Poem should be a good and virtuous Man: And that
there is no Irregularity in making him as treacherous as Ixion, as unnatural as
Medea, and as Brutal as Achilles.

CHAP. VI. Of the Poetical Goodness of the Manners.
WHat we are going to deliver here concerning the Goodness of the Manners, is
only an Explanation of what Aristotle has writ about it in the fifteenth
Chapter of his Poetry. The whole Passage runs thus: (...), etc.
There are four things to be observed in the Manners. The first and principal
is, the Method of making them good. There will be Manners in a Speech or
Action, if, as we before hinted, either one or the other discovers on what the
Person that speaks or acts will resolve. Let these Manners be Vicious and bad,
provided they foreshow Vicious and bad Inclinations; or good and Virtuous,
provided they likewise foreshow good and Virtuous Inclinations. This happens in
all sorts of Conditions; for a Woman and a Footboy will be good in a Poetical
Sense, though commonly Women are rather bad and vicious than good and virtuous,
and Foot-boys are of no account.

This Passage has somewhat of Difficulty in it: perhaps I have changed it too
much, by confining it to my sense; but I had rather interpret it thus, than
otherwise --

After what has been said in the former Chapter, I see not the least Reason to
apply this Goodness which ought so strictly to be observed in the Manners of
the Poetical Persons, to Morality and Virtue. I am of Opinion then, that we are
to understand this of the Poetical Goodness; and this is what Aristotle would
make out, when afterward he says, that there will be Manners in a Speech or
Action if either of them foreshow any Inclination, Choice, and Resolution, as I
have already said upon the occasion of another of Aristotle's Passages, to
which Aristotle refers us.

This will likewise serve to illustrate upon what account I have rendered the
Word (...) by this Phrase, upon what he will resolve. This Greek Word signifies
neither an Inclination, nor a simple Act of the Will, without Deliberation and
Choice; but it signifies the Choice which one makes, and the Desire one has
after some sort of Deliberation. Thus Aristotle himself explains this Term very
largely in his Ethics. The Word Resolution signifies thus much, but being used
alone, is too equivocal.

Aristotle adds, that the Manners are bad, when the Resolutions that are taken
are so; and that the Manners are good, when the Resolutions are good. I did not
think that this Goodness of the Manners was a Poetical Goodness, and that his
Meaning was, that for the well ordering of the Manners in a Poem, it is
requisite that the Persons which are introduced take such Resolutions and
Designs as are just and good, that an Author transgresses this Rule, and makes
the Manners Poetically bad, when the Personages are determined to do a bad
Action. This Interpretation would condemn the Practice of Homer in the Person
of Achilles, in that of Agamemnon, and in almost all the Personages of the
Iliad, and Odysseis. Certainly this was never Aristotle's Design. The Aeneid it
self would be liable to the same Censure. Dido, Turnus, Amata, Mezentius, and
several others, would spoil all the places where they act so viciously; that is
to say, they would spoil the whole Poem, from one end to the other. I have
therefore interpreted this place in a moral sense, and thought that Aristotle
intended to teach us, that the Poctical Manners are equally good, let them be
in a moral sense good or bad, provided that the Poet order Matters so that they
appear before hand to be such as either the good or the bad Persons of his Poem
ought to have.

The rest of the Text confirms me farther in my Opinion, and in the Distinction
I have made between the Moral and the Poetical Goodness of the Manners.
Aristotle says that the goodness of the Manners he speaks of, may be met with
in all sorts of States and conditions even amongst footmen who have no
goodness in them. Without doubt a footman cannot be Master of that goodness,
to which he has no right. He will then be morally bad, because he will be a
dissembling, drunken, cheating Rascal, and he will be Poetically good, because
these bad inclinations will be well exposed.

This Instance of Aristotle, and the application he himself makes of what he
says, of the goodness of the Manners to a footman, does teach us that he does
not speak only in the behalf of Heroes, let the word be taken in what sense
soever, but that this goodness he describes, as well as the other
Qualifications of the Manners, reaches to all sorts of Poetical Persons, from
Kings and Princes down to footmen and waiting Boys. Without excepting any one
in Comedy, Tragedy and the Epopea.

But though we mention the liberty Poets have of putting vicious Persons in a
Poem, yet this liberty has its bounds and Rules, and they are not to suppose
virtue and vice must go hand in hand together. It Is necessity and probability
that regulate these two contraries. And they regulate them so, that when they
give to virtue all that is possible, yet they allow vice only that which cannot
be cut off from the Poem without spoiling the Fable. Thus Aristotle censures
the Vicious Manners, not because they are Vicious, but because they are so
without any necessity for it. But he does not blame the obstinacy of Achilles,
as unjust and unreasonable as it was, because it was necessary to the Fable. If
Achilles had received satisfaction from Agamemnon before the Death of
Patroclus, the action would have been at an End: Or else Achilles would have
fought no more and so the Fable would have been defective and imperfect: Or
else having no particular quarrel against Hector, he would have fought only for
the common cause, and consequently the Siege and War of Troy would have been
the Subject of the Poem, and the Action would have been Episodical and spoiled.
'Twas necessary then that Achilles should be unjust and inexorable. But the
Poet carries the Vices of Achilles no farther than the necessity of the Fable
forced him, as we observed before.

It Is time now to join the Authority of Horace to that of Aristotle. Certainly
if the Poet should take special care to make the manners good in a Moral Sense,
there would have been as little Reason to give the name of Manners to
indifferent Inclinations in Poetry, as in Moral Philosophy, and the Masters in
both Sciences would have been equally ridiculous, if they had laid down Rules
and Precepts for these sorts of Inclinations. Yet Tu, quid ego and populus
mecum desiderat, a^di. Si plausoris eges aeola m^mentis, and usque Sessuri,
donec cantor, vos plaudite, dicat; Aetatis cujusque netandi sunt tibi mores.
Poet.
Horace has done it, and after he has advertised us, that the observing the
Rules about the Manners is a business of the highest Moment. The first things
he presents us with to be observed, and on which he bestows the name of
Manners, are the most indifferent inclinations of any in the World. Reddere qui
roces jam scit paer, and pede certo Signat humam, gestit paribus colludere,
etc. Ibid.
A Child, says he, that just begins to speak and walk, without leading-strings,
is most passionately desirous of being with his play fellows. What follows is
much the same or rather worse. For if it were not altogether an indifferent
thing for the little creatures at this age to fly-out into a passion for
nothing, to be pacified again as easily, and to change their Minds every
quarter of an hour, it would be a wicked thing. After the same manner does he
treat of the Inclinations of Youths. They, says he, delight in Horses, Dogs,
and the Field. They are prone to vice, and cannot endure to be reproved. It Is
only to grown up Men that he bestows honorable and rational Inclinations. He
ends all with the cross-grained Humor of Old-men, that are Covetous, Fearful,
Impotent, Dull, Testy and the like. Now what Moral Goodness is there in all
these Inclinations? And yet in this that Horace recommends to the Poets, we are
to look for that goodness which Aristotle says is the first and principal thing
to be observed in the Manners. And this is likewise what may be observed in the
Idea we have proposed of the Poetical Goodness, which consists only in
representing the Manners and Inclinations just as they are, no matter whether
Morally Good, or Morally Bad.

Horace, never speaking of Virtue as a thing necessary, recommends the
observing of the four Qualities in the Manners, which Aristotle himself
likewise requires. The first is, that they appear: the second, that they be
suitable: The third that they be likely: And the last that they be Even.

With great reason then have we affirmed that the Poetical Goodness consists in
discovering to the Reader by the Speeches and Actions all the future
Inclinations and Resolutions of the Personages, who speak and act in the Poem.

CHAP. VII. Of the three other Qualifications of the Manners.
THere is no such difficulty in the other three Qualities of the Manners in
Poetry as in the Goodness of them. We have already explained in particular what
suitableness they ought to have with the Internal or External Causes, which
either raise or discover them in Men. What Resemblance the Poet ought to give
them to what History the Fable or common report have published of them; and
lastly what that evenness of them is which ought to be observed in each
Personage without permitting him to alter his Character. We shall satisfy our
selves with only making here some general Reflections upon these three
Qualities.

The first Reflection we make is this, that sometimes these Qualities happen so
opposite in one and the same Person, that if we would do justice to the one, we
shall be unjust to the other. An Instance of this may be observed in the
Emperor Maurice: His Inclinations would not have been suitable to the dignity
of an Emperor, if one should make him covetous, and they would not be like to
what we know of him, if one should make him magnificent and liberal. In truth
there is a sort of avarice which Kings are capable of, to wit, the desire of
heaping up vast treasures. Such was the passion of Polymnestor King of Thrace
which gave Virgil an occasion to say, Quid non mortalia pectora cogis Auri
sacra fames? Aen. 3.
That this inordinate thirst after Riches, carried Men on to strange
extravagancies. Portantur avari Pygmalionis opes pelago. Aen. 1.
Such was likewise the passion of Pygmalion King of Tire. The question here
does not lie concerning this sort of Avarice, but concerning the sordid, base
niggardliness which cost so many Roman Soldiers their Lives. They were
Prisoners of War with the King of Persia, who required but a very small ransom
for them. Maurice refuses to pay it, and by this base, unworthy denial of so
small a sum for so weighty a consideration, he cast the conqueror into such a
fit of passion, that he ordered all these miserable Soldiers of so wicked a
Prince to be butchered immediately.

It may be asked then what a Poet shall do that he may neither offend against
the suitableness of an Emperor's Manners, nor against the Resemblance of them
to that which is to be found in History about them? In answer to this I say,
that a Man will not be perplexed with these sorts of Personages, if in the
composition of his Poem he will but observe the Method I proposed in my first
Book. In the first place the Author will make his Fable with universal persons,
and without Names, and consequently without so much as thinking of Maurice. And
when he has a mind to make the Episodes, and shall look out for particular
Names to give to his Personages, if in his platform he meets with a Miser, he
will not think it advisable to give him the title and Dignity, either of a
King or an Emperor: And if in the same platform he meets with a liberal and
magnificent Person, to be sure he will never choose the Emperor Maurice to act
this part. So that to the question propounded it may be answered, that the
Emperor Maurice whether Liberal or Covetous; is not one that can regularly be
brought into any Poem.

But he may be made use of therein, if the Fable admits such a thing as the
dissembling his avarice without changing it into liberality; according to Mr.
Corneille's practice in his Heraclius. Phocas could reap some advantage from
this criminal passion of his Enemy, and so render his cruelty against this
Prince somewhat less odious, Maurice did indeed know that God made use of this
Tyrant to punish the crime, which his avarice put him upon committing: But this
I doubt would have been against the suitableness of the Manners, and the
Spectators would have been offended with this Reflection. The Poet has
judiciously concealed this vicious Inclination of Maurice without attributing
the contrary to him, which would likewise have offended against what was likely.

One cannot then act contrary to the Qualities of the Manners, but we may
sometimes omit them, and this is the second Reflection I would make upon the
Subject.

When a Man omits the first quality, he necessarily omits all the rest; since
that is the only source and foundation of them. If the Manners appear not at
all, they will be neither suitable, nor likely, nor even, nor the contrary.
This may be done in all the Personages that are of no note in a Poem, such as
are the multitude of persons just mentioned in Battles, and several others.
Because if the Poet on one side is obliged to relate no action, nor Incident
without Manners, Interest, and Passion, that the Narration may be active and
pleasant, and the minds of the Readers may attend thereto: So likewise ought he
not to admit of any more Interested and passionate persons, than what he is
precisely obliged to, without augmenting the number of them, that so the Memory
may not be over-burdened, nor the attention distracted to no purpose. So in the
Aeneid, we see but little of the Manners of Mnestheus, Cloantes, Messapus,
Vfenzus, and of so many Valiant Commanders, and other persons that have
considerable Posts in the Poem.

When we make the Manners of a person appear but only once, we may make them
suitable to his Dignity, Age, and Sex, etc. We may make them like to what
common fame has published of them, but it is plain that there can be no equality
of them, no more than there can be an inequality: On the contrary, it sometimes
happens, that one and the same person is of an even and uneven temper at the
same time. Because this Character, which in most Men resembles the Sun, whose
equality consists in appearing always the same; Stultus ut Luna mutatur.
in others is like the Moon, whose equality consists in changing her Faces four
times a Month: Sometimes this inequality proceeds from Age, as Horace has
observed in Puer mutatur in Horas. Juvenis amata relinquere pernix.
Children and Youths. They owe this to the softness and the want of due
consistency of their Brains. Objects are very easily impressed upon them, and
these Images are as easily wiped away by the impression of new Objects, or
merely by the motion of the Animal-spirits. But it happens in some persons,
that their Brainpan is never closed sufficiently. This was the misfortune of
Tigeltius Augustus's Fiddler. It would be ill suiting one's self to his humor,
and it would offend against what is likely, only to represent him always in the
same Vein. He was covetous and prodigal: As proud as a King in his Dress, and
clothed as meanly as a Cobbler. So active and diligent as to spend whole Nights
without a wink of Sleep, and so Lazy as to lie a-bed till the Afternoon for it.
Lastly, if we would take Nil aequale homini fuit illi, etc. Hor. Lib. 1. Sat. 3.
Horace's word for it, there could nothing be added to the inequality of this
Man's humor. There is another inequality that is more common, but comes on
more slowly, and that is the inequality of a Man in the different Ages of his
Life. Juvenis utilium tardus provisor: Prodigus aeris.
In his Youth, he never thinks of heaping up wealth, but idly squanders it
away. Aetas virilis quaerit opes, inservit honori.
In his riper Age he gathers it in, and lays it out as honorably. Sonex,
quaerit and inventis miser abstinet ac timet uti. Hor. Poet.
And when he comes to be Old, he seeks for and heaps up Wealth with greediness,
and is so far afraid of laying it out, that he had rather live miserably than
spend a Farthing upon the ordinary necessaries of Life. This inequality is of
little use in Poem. It seldom happens that a Poet represents one and the same
person at his fifteenth, and at his sixtieth Year, It Is the others that are of
more use in Poems. But when a Poet introduces them, he ought to give his
hearers timely notice, that this inequality is the express character that he
gives to his Personage.

Terence has something upon this Subject in his Brothers worth taking notice
of. His Demea is a testy and rough old Gentleman, one that keeps a strict hand
over his Family, and thrifty to the highest degree. This was the constant
course of his whole life, and he carried on this cross-grained Humor to the
very end of the Play. And then he thinks of being better humored, more
endearing and obliging and is concerned for nothing. Here is a strange
inequality. Yet the Poet makes it very regular. Demea himself gives his
Audience notice of it. Never, says he, did Man cast up the business of his Life
so exactly; but still Experience, Years, and Custom will bring in some new
particulars that he was not aware of; and show his Ignorance of what he thought
he knew, and after trial make him reject his former Opinions. This is plainly
my case at present: For since my glass is almost out, I renounce this rigid
Life I have always led. But why so? Because Experience shows me there is nothing
like gentleness and good nature: And this truth appears plainly to all that
knew me and my Brother. He always spent his time in ease and pleasure; always
courteous, complaisant, spoke ill of no Man, but carress'd all; lived as he
pleased, spent as he thought fit, the World blessed him, and loved him too: But
I that rustic, rigid, morose, pinching, brutish, griping fellow must needs
Marry; And how have I smarted for it? I had Children too, those were new
troubles: And truly in building up their Fortunes, I have worn out my life and
the best of all my days: And now I Am just marching off the Stage, the fruit of
all my labor is, to be hated like a Toad. But my Brother enjoys all the
pleasure of a father without the drudgery: They love him, and fly me like the
Plague. Him they trust with all their secrets, dote upon him, live with him,
but me they slight: They both pray for his Life, but long for my Death: Those I
have brought up with the greatest labor, he has gained with a little cost, so
I take all the pains, and he reaps all the pleasure. Well, well, for once we'll
try what can be done, whether we can speak obligingly, and act the Gentleman
too; since my Brother urges me to it, I Would willingly have my Children love and
respect me too; if Gifts and Compliments will do the feat, I Will not be behind
the best of them: But my Estate must go to wrack: What care I for that? Since I
have one foot in the Grave already.

But I enlarge too far upon a thing so well known as this Comedy. Terence
carries on the Reflection still farther, and ends it not till he ends his Play,
and he is so cautious in it that he leaves his Audience nothing to guess at.

Omnibus nobis ut res dant sese, ita magni atque humiles sumus. Terent. Hecyr.
Act. 3. Scen. 3.
There is another inequality of the Manners, that is occasioned by the change
of a Man's Fortune, and which usually causes Men to be of a low and dejected
Spirit, when they are in misery and distress, and fierce and proud when they
are in power, and think they are Masters of their Fortune. A Poet may range
this suitableness, in the Manners of persons, who are of an ordinary Virtue,
and who are more inclined to be vain and proud, than truly generous; and by
this conduct the Equality will not be altered. But if he makes a person
generous, then he should alter less by the change of his Fortune. These
personages should be as bold in their worst as in their best circumstances; or
as modest after a Victory as after the losing of a Battle; according as the
Poet orders either fierceness or gentleness to be the commanding character he
gives them.

This last Character is that which Virgil bestows upon the Trojans. They appear
very humble before Dido when the storm had used them so scurvily, and brought
them under the mercy of the Carthaginians. Non ea vis animo, nec tanta superbia
victis. Aen. 1.
Never imagine, say they, that we are come, hither with a design to do you any
harm. Vanquished persons, such as we are, have neither power nor boldness
enough to undertake any thing. This would denote a baseness of Spirit, if they
appeared such before their Enemies, or if they treated them with scorn and
cruelty after they had conquered them. But we see it is true Modesty, when we
hear the same Language from them after a Victory. Aeneas overcame the Latins in
a hot Engagement, their Legates fell at his feet beseeching him to give them
leave to burn their Dead; and he was so far from showing the least Arrogance,
Nec veni nisi fata locum sedemque dedissent; Nec bellum cum gente gero, etc.
Aen. 11.
that he even excuses his being forced to conquer them, and declares to them
that his desire was only for peace.

Let us now make a Reflection upon the Resemblance the Manners ought to have
with what common fame has published of them. This quality has this peculiar to
its self that one may observe the rest in all sorts of personages, and one may
likewise commit faults against them always. But there are some persons in whom
there is nothing to be observed either for, or against the Resemblance. These
personages are of two sorts. The one are such as are wholly invented, as are
all those of Comedies, and almost all the personages of the Epick Poem and
Tragedy, since in both there are but a few Names taken from History or the
Fable. The second sort is of such, that are really taken from History, but
whose manners are known by few, and of whom common fame has said nothing: For
in this case it is plain, one cannot give them Inclinations, that are like or
contrary to what common fame has said of them; since she has said nothing about
them. So likewise Aristotle does not oppose Names taken from History to Names
that are invented, but he opposes to them names that are well known. The same
we may affirm of the Manners. Dido of the Aeneid is of this second sort. The
Poet having feigned in his Fable such a personage as we perceive this Queen to
be, the obscurity of History gave him entire license to make use of a name so
little known.

This License is only for such as first make use of these Names: For those who
make use of them afterward, are obliged to keep up the Character that was at
first given them, and which comes to be known this way. They can only change
some circumstances that are less known, and add other new ones, which shall be
compatible with what one knows already of it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Character of the Personages. Aristotle's Words about it.
THE Character of a person is that which is proper and peculiar to him, and
distinguishes him from others. As this is discernable in the lines of a Man's
face; so it is likewise to be met with in the Manners we are now discoursing
of. That which I have met with in Aristotle about it, is in the same Chapter,
from whence we cited that which has been already said about the Manners. (...).
Poet. c. 15.
Since, says he, Tragedy is an imitation of what is best amongst Men, we ought
to do like good Painters, who when they give each person his proper form and
Character, and so make their Figures like them, do likewise represent them much
fairer. In like manner should the Poet form examples of goodness or of
Hard-heartedness, when he imitates a passionate and Choleric or a soft and
mild natured Man, or any other such like Character. It Is after this manner that
Homer himself has attributed goodness to Achilles. Care must be taken of this,
and besides without speaking here of what is necessary, it is requisite to
observe the series and the Consequence that is in Poetry, wherein we are
subject to commit several faults.

Every one knows what affinity there is between Painting and Poetry. Horace
begins his Art with it, and Aristotle likewise compares them both together in
the very first Chapter of his Poetry. He speaks of it in several other places,
and by this which we have here cited it is plain his judgment is, that one
cannot conceive a more perfect Idea of the Poetical Character in the Manners,
than by the practice of Painters in the Character which they give to their
Pictures. If we would understand his Mind exactly, we cannot do it better than
by enquiring in the Art, how one may draw a Portraicture perfectly like its
Original, and which at the same time should be finer? I Will venture to give my
thoughts about it.

Painters in their Personagees have three sorts of Subjects. Either they
represent particular Persons to the Life, such as Augustus, young Marcellus,
Virgil, Seneca, Paulinus, etc. Or they represent Dignities and such like
Characters, as a King, a Philosopher, a Minister of State, a Poet, a Varlet, a
Beggar, etc. Or lastly, they represent a Passion, such as Anger, Joy,
Discontent, Cruelty, etc.

We may add that Painters and Poets, of an elevated Fancy, are more for drawing
Kings, Princes, and things of State and Grandeur: And that the less noble
Genius of others, puts them upon the Choice of Valets, Drunkards, and
despicable Persons. Aristotle attributes the Variety of Dramatick Poems and the
Invention of Tragedy and Comedy to the diversity of Genius's. The first would
doubtless make finer Personages, than the last. But this makes no difference as
to the exact likeness of the Characters. Both the one, and the other may meet
with equal success as well in the baseness and deformity of Irus and Thersites,
as in the Majesty and bon mien of Agamemnon and Paris.

But we cannot here make any use of this difference, and this Interpretation,
since Aristotle speaks only of Poems, and famous Persons: And we can without
quitting Tragedy and the Epopea meet with this difference of more or less
comeliness in an exact likeness.

Two things are considerable in the Persons one would paint. The first are the
Features which we may call Characteristical: Such are the natural Wrinkles of
the Face, the Proportion of each part, the color of the Eyes and Hair, the
shape of the Nose, the thickness of the Lips, the wideness of the Mouth, and
other such like properties. This is what should properly and chiefly fix the
Imagination, and give it the Idea of the person we would represent. It Is
absolutely necessary that these Features be observed in the Copy, to make it
more like the Original; and it is of these that the expression of Aristotle is
to be understood [Giving to each person the Character that is proper to him.]
These Characteristical Features are so far fixed, in comparison to the rest,
that they continue the same even in the change of Ages and Sexes; and they
easily discover the Fathers by the countenance of their Children, and the
Mothers by that of their Sons.

The second thing is a great deal less permanent, and less affixed to its
Subject, and consequently leaves a Painter more to his own liberty. It Is the
color of the Flesh, the plumpness, and several other things, that augment or
diminish the Beauty of a Person without changing the Features, and the
proportion of his Countenance. There are some, whom a pale color would better
become than a fairer Complexion; or who would be much more taking were they
made a little Fatter, or a little Leaner. There needs only a slight distemper,
a disturbance, or a few Days of Diversion to produce these Alterations. So that
a skilful Painter will consider a person under different States, and with those
various Motions which may naturally happen to him. And having observed what
becomes him best, he will paint him in some Action or other, wherein he shall
be a little moved with fear or anger, according as he has a mind to make him
more pale or more lively than the Original: Or else he will give him a smiling
Countenance, if he perceives the Person has some defect which a smile would
conceal, etc. After this manner, without altering the natural Resemblance,
Painters represent Persons more comely than they are.

These two, whereof one makes the Picture like to, and the other makes it more
comely than the Original, which we have applied to particular Persons, may
likewise be applied to whole Orders of Men according to their Dignities, Ages,
Passions, and other Habitudes. The Throne, Diadem, Scepter, and Majesty make up
the Character of a King. But there are some Persons, and Faces that carry a
great deal more Majesty in them than others, and on whom a Crown sits a great
deal better. Nature has made no old Man but what carries in his Countenance the
Character of his Age: But she has made some Venerable and August, and others
Contemptible and Distastful. There are some Persons whom Anger renders more
comely, tho commonly this Passion very much disfigures the Countenance.

A Painter then in the various Countenances he sees, being stocked with so many
different Subjects which may serve him as a ground Work to keep up the
Characters we have been discoursing of; if he is a good Painter, he will not be
contented with a Scepter and a Crown, with Wrinkles and gray Hairs, and with
the Features that in general are proper to an incensed Person: But he will
study upon diverse Complexions, those that under these Characters will be the
most taking, and will make choice of those whom Nature has made Venerable and
August, and in whom even without a Crown, one may discern something of Majesty
and Royalty.

There is another way of embellishing a Character, and that is by deducing the
agreeableness of it from the very Essence and Properties of the Character it
self. Anger makes Men look pale or red; it makes them gnash their Teeth, fall
foul upon every thing they meet with, tear themselves, and express such Motions
and Postures, as are strange, terrible, and extravagant. But it is not always
attended with these effects. It has some more moderate ones: And it is at the
Painters choice to make use of those which he pleases, and to reject the more
violent Ones, if his design requires them not, and to express the most moving,
the most pleasant, and the less irregular Ones.

His liberty is sometimes more, sometimes less. When he represents one single
Personage, and invents the Design as he pleases, then all depends upon him, and
if he succeeds not, he is to blame. But if one should require a story of him,
and determine the persons for him, then he will be often perplexed in a great
many things by the very Essence of his Subject, which permits him not to make
use of certain Beauties, which would be very advantageous to him. A King
preserves his gravity best in a moderate Passion, but Agamemnon is not capable
of this moderation in the Sacrifice of Iphigenia. The Beauty of Helen and that
of Paris would be more conspicuous by Daylight, than by Torch-light, but yet
it is necessary that this Princess should be carried off in the Night. Europa,
smiling amidst the Nymphs and Flowers, would be more comely: But would any one
represent her so when carried into the midst of the Sea upon a Bull. A Painter
might come off with success in the ravishing of Helen, if one would give him
liberty to make choice of a Model; he would likewise succeed in the
portraicture of a person, that he draws to the Life, if he invents the Shadows,
the Posture, and the Action thereof: And he would come off but pitifully, were
he obliged to join these two things together, and to give to Helen, when
ravished, the Countenance of a person, that he had painted with success in a
contrary Action.

The constraint is still greater, if one should represent several Actions of
one and the same Story, and if one should paint the carrying off of Europa in
four Tables. For the same Features of one single person will serve as a
foundation of moderate Joy, a dreadful Fright, a mortal Confusion, and a
Miraculous and pleasant Surprise.

The great Poems are of this last sort. The several Episodes, wherein we see
the same person Act, are as so many Tables, wherein the same Character of one
single Countenance ought to serve as a foundation to the different Characters
of opposite Passions. Achilles is represented at the Council Board, in the
Fight; and at the Funeral Solemnities of his Friend. The Poet has not made his
Hero sage and prudent in This first Table; he has not made him proud in the
Ceremonies and Religion of the last; that so he might be less angry and
passionate than in the Battle. This variety of Characters would have made three
Achilles's, and would have had something of the Ignorance of a Painter, who
willing to paint Achilles in these three different Adventures, would choose for
his model three Countenances that had no relation to each other, and would
represent one of them entire in each Table. But Homer at the Council Board
gives Agamemnon occasion to provoke Achilles, who is presently transported with
anger against him, and who begins to revenge himself by affronting and venting
seditious Reproaches against him. And in the Funeral of Patroclus, the Ceremony
that is most visible is the cruelty which Achilles shows to the body of the
Brave and unhappy Hector, which he ties by the heels to his Chariot, and for
twelve Days together inhumanely drags about the Tomb of his Friend. Thus is
Achilles always the same, and is no less Choleric and Revengeful at the
Council Board, and the Funeral Solemnities, than in War and Battle.

The Poet then, in the Constitution of his Fable, ought to mind what he is
obliged to, and what Character it requires: He will afterward examine all its
Parts, and all the Episodes it presents to him. He will see which of them he
can apply to his Character, or to which he can apply it; Hoc amet, hoc spernat
promissi carminis author. Hor. Poet.
by this means making choice of those that are for his turn, and rejecting the
others, (as Homer has done in the Amors of Achilles and Briseis, with which
the very Essence of his Fable furnished him.) Thus having entirely discovered
all the Lineaments of his Character that are indispensably annexed to the very
Essence of his Fable, and to his Subject, he is obliged to keep to them as
their proper Form, wherein does essentially consist the Resemblance of his
Fable to the probable Action which he would Imitate; let it be in the Persons,
or in the Dignities, or in the Passions, or any other things that are capable
of a Character. This is the first thing a Poet is obliged to. The second is to
examine all the other Circumstances of his Character, which the Essence of his
Fable does not make necessary, and which are as the Colors of a more or less
paleness and redness, the complexion whereof may naturally change. He will
discover those that are most capable of rendering his Character pleasant, and
his Personages good, even in a moral Sense, and he will make use of them, and
not of the others. It Is by this means that without altering the Resemblance,
and the Justness of the Character a good Poet, like a good Painter, will make
his Personages better, and a sorry Poet like a sorry Painter will make them
worse than they are. It Is thus that Homer himself has made his Achilles good as
we have observed.

One may understand and interpret the Text of Aristotle in a sense different
from that which I proposed in the beginning of the Chapter: But it will still
suit with the Doctrine I have drawn from thence. The other Interpretation is
this, When a Poet imitates a passionate Man, or a mild and good humored
Person, or any other Character, he ought rather to propose to himself Models of
Goodness, than of Hard-heartedness, etc.

CHAP. IX. Of the Characters of Achilles, Ulysses, and Aeneas.
ARISTOTLE proposes Homer's Achilles to us, to teach us the way of making the
imitated Personage like the Original which we propose to our selves; in such a
manner that this Resemblance, which may be attended with Deformity and Vice, or
Beauty and Virtue, have that which is the most perfect of these Qualities. We
have already taken notice that the Resemblance consists in this Part of the
Character which is proper and necessary to the Fable, and which the Subject
obliges indispensably to be observed; and that the Beauty or the Goodness
Aristotle speaks of, and which he distinguishes from the Resemblance, consists
in the Circumstances of the Character, which are not necessarily contained in
the Essence of the Fable. This is what we are more fully to discover in the
Practice of Homer and his Iliad, to which Aristotle refers us, that so we may
instruct our selves, where he himself learned his Instructions.

We have sufficiently made it appear, that Achilles ought to be passionate,
unjust, and inexorable. The Fable necessarily requires this; it is that renders
his Manners Bad, and so unworthy a Man of Honor. But they have nothing in them
that is irregular, or contrary to the Precepts of Aristotle, since he requires
Goodness only in the Circumstances, where the Poet is at his liberty, and since
he blames Vice only when it is not necessary. So that this is that, which I call
Part of the Character which renders Achilles like to the Idea, which the Poet
formed of him, when he laid down the first Model of his Fable.

But the Fable leaves the Poet to choose the Circumstances which may either
raise and embellish the Character, or render it more deformed and odious.
Achilles that is passionate, inexorable, and unjust, might be likewise fearful,
and cowardly, and have revenged himself by betraying his party. He might have
given some secret Intelligence to his Enemies, he might have received them into
his Quarters, or have injured his Allies by any other wicked Practices, which
might have occasioned a great deal of mischief to have fallen upon the Greeks,
Agamemnon, and himself, and which might have been no hindrance to his
Reconciliation. For suppose the Greeks without Achilles were stronger than the
Trojans, in this case their disadvantage and losses would only have happened by
the Treachery of this Hero. And the Treachery ending with this Reconciliation
the Valor of the Greeks might have got them the Victory. The Fable would not
have been less just, nor have had less of the Moral and Instructions than that
it at present contains.

Thus the Essence and the Justness of the Fable leaves the Poet at his full
liberty to make choice either of the Valor or the Cowardice of Achilles, for
to degrade or raise his Character; and it is to this choice, that the Precept of
Aristotle refers, when he orders Poets to imitate good Painters, who, always
preserving whatever the Character has that is necessary or proper to the
Subject, raise it by all the Embellishments it is capable of. If Homer had chose
to have made his Hero cowardly, rather than Valiant, he would have offended
against what Aristotle orders here, and elsewhere, viz. Never to represent a
Personage that is wicked without necessity forces one to it. But this great
Poets practice is not thus. As unjust, and as passionate as the Anger of his
Hero was, and tho 'twas so pernicious to his Allies, and to Patroclus himself
yet he has done nothing herein, but what is necessary. He has observed in this
Character what his Fable indispensibly obliged him to. But for as much as it
has left him at his liberty therein, he has made use of it so far to the
Advantage of his Hero, that he has almost concealed his great Vices by the
darling show of a miraculous Valor which has deceived so many Persons.

This Goodness may be likewise added to the difference we put between the Epick
Fable, and those of Aesop, for it is neither necessary nor congruous in these
last. The Heroes there may be entirely vicious.

It Is easier to discover what Goodness there is in the Characters of Ulysses,
and Aeneas, since the very Essence of the Fable requires Goodness and Virtue:
But yet it is still necessary to know the practice of our Poets in the
Characters they have given them.

The Fable of the Odysseis is all for the conduct of a State, and for Policy.
Therefore the Quality it requires is Prudence; but this Virtue is of too large
an extent for the simplicity which a just and precise Character requires; it is
requisite it should be limited. The great Art of Kings is the Mystery of
Dissimulation. It Is well known that Lewis the eleventh for the Instruction of
his Son, reduced all the Latin Language to these words only, viz. Qui nescit
dissimulare nescit regnare. 'Twas likewise by this practice that Saul began his
Reign, when he was elected, and then full of the Spirit of God. The first thing
we read of him in holy Writ is. Ille vero dissimulabat se audire. Reg. lib. 1,
that he made as if he did not hear the words, which seditious People spoke
against him.

This then is the Character which the Greek Poet gives his Ulysses in the
Proposition of his Poem, he calls him (...); to denote this prudent
dissimulation, which disguised him so many ways, and put him upon taking so
many Shapes.

Without mentioning any thing of Circe who stayed him with her a whole Year,
and who was famous for the transformations she knew to make with all sorts of
persons: The Reader finds him at first with Calypso, the Daughter of wise
Atlas, who bore up the vast Pillars that reached (...). Odyss. lib. 1.
from Earth to Heaven, and whose knowledge penetrated into the depths of the
unfathomable Ocean: That is to say, who was ignorant of nothing that was either
in Heaven, Earth or Sea. And as the first product and principal part of so
high, so solid, and so profound a knowledge was to know how to conceal ones
self; This wise Man called his Daughter by a name that signified a (...)
Secret. The Poet makes his Hero, which he designed for a Politician, to stay
seven whole Years with this Nymph. She taught him so well, that afterward he
lost no opportunity of putting her Lessons in practice: For he does nothing
without a disguise. At his parting from Ogyges he is cast upon the Isle of
Phaeaca: As kind as his reception was, yet he stays till the Night before he
went off, ere he would discover himself. From thence he goes to Ithaca. The
first adventure that happens to him there was with Minerva the most prudent
among the Deities, as Ulysses was the most prudent among Men. (...) Od. l. 13.
She her self says thus much in this very passage. Nor did they fail to
disguise themselves. Menerva takes upon her the shape of a Shepherd, and
Ulysses tells her he was obliged to fly from Crete, because he had Murdered the
Son of King Idomeneus. The Goddess discovers her self first, and commends him
for that these Artifices were so easy, and so natural to him, as if they had
been born with him. Afterward the Hero under the form of a Beggar deceives
first of all Eumens, then his Son, and last of all his Wife, and every body
else, till he had found an oppertunity, of punishing his Enemies, to whom he
discovered not himself till he killed them, that is the last Night. After his
discovering himself in his Palace, he goes the next Day to deceive his Father,
appearing at first under a borrowed Name; before he would give him joy of his
Return Thus he takes upon him all Manner of Shapes, and dissembles to the very
last. The Poet joins to this Character a Aspera multa Pertulit adversis rerum
immersabilis undis. Hor, ad Litt.
valor and a constancy which renders him Invincible in the most daring and
desperate Adventures.

The Fable of the Aeneid is quite different from the two Greek ones. The Poets
design was to introduce among the Romans a new sort of Government, and a new
Master. 'Twas requisite then that this new Master should have all the
Qualities, which the Founder of a State ought to have, and all the Virtues
which make a Prince beloved.

Dissimulation is a wrong Method. We bear but little love to a Man we distrust,
and those who love Ulysses, love him only after they had had a long Experience
of his Goodness, and of the good will his Father bore toward them. But the
Hero of Virgil had only new Subjects as Augustus Caesar has, and by the way, I
shall here say, that the Latin Poet was more straightened in this than Homer, and
that he was like to those Painters, who ought to suit their Stories to the
Model of a countenance we have prescribed them. Aeneas then ought only to give
his Subjects signs of sincerity and frankness. He could not have the Character
of Achilles. Then violences of Achilles were entirely opposite to the design of
the Aeneid; and the Poet has judiciously assigned them to Turnus and Mezentius,
which he opposes to his Hero. He was therefore obliged to a Character that is
opposite to that, as we have often and often said.

So that the Character of Achilles is the inexorable Anger of a revengeful,
unjust, and valiant Prince; That of Ulysses is the wise, and prudent
dissimulation of a valiant King, whose Constancy nothing could shock. And that
of Aeneas is a mild, and good natured Piety, upheld as the two others by a
valor and an unshaken Courage.

CHAP. X. The Character of the other Personages.
ALL the persons in a Picture do not appear in an equal Degree. The principal
Personage must always appear above all the rest and be viewed at his full
Length, as far as Art and Perspective will admit. Some others appear almost as
much. There are others that are half hid, or which appear more or less, and
there are some likewise which serve only to represent a great number of
persons, whose extreme Parts are the only things we can distinguish, and which
show that there is some body there. Lastly, some are very near and are seen
distinctly, and others are at such a distance as confounds the Features, and
the very members themselves, and gives them rather the color of the Air than
their own proper Hue. As for those that are near, a considerable part whereof
we see, it is necessary that they should wear either in their Countenance, or
their Posture the Character that is proper to them, and make it appear what
Interest they have in the Action which is represented. As for the rest the less
is seen of them, the less is one likewise obliged to make them known.

The case is just the same in the Epopea. The Poet leaves the greatest part of
his Actors in obscurity, and at a distance, but beside his Hero, to whom he has
a particular regard, there are likewise several others, whose Character must be
set off in a greater or less light, according to the Interest he makes them
have, following in this the Rules which we have applied to the Hero. We will
take notice of the Differences by what follows.

Dido is the chief Personage which the Poet presents us with, and the most
considerable in the first Part of the Aeneid, since it is she that makes the
Intrigue or Plot thereof. She is the Foundress of Carthage, as Aeneas is the
Founder of Rome, and she represents the obstacle which this Republic laid in
the way of the Roman Victories, which were to raise that State to be Mistress
of the World. So then, as Aeneas bore the Character of Rome, so should Dido of
Carthage. Therefore she is Passionate, Bold, Daring, Ambitious, Violent,
Perfidious: And all these Qualities are carried on by a Craftiness which is the
very Soul and Character of her. It Is by her Craftiness that she succeeded so
well in her great Undertakings, in revenging her Husband, punishing her
Brother, and deceiving of King Iarbas. It Is by these very wiles she would stop
Aeneas's Journey, and being not able to compass that, deceives her very Sister
who was her only Confident.

This Character is vicious and odious. Virgil was obliged to it by the very
nature of his Fable. But in the Liberty it has given him, he has taken care
according to Aristotle's Maxim, to give this Character all the softness that is
proper to his Subject; and to raise it by all the Beauties he found it capable
of receiving. Dido does not make use of the wickedness of her temper, but only
to stay Aeneas at Carthage: She is inclined thereto by the violence of a
Passion that renders this Action less odious, and which puts the Readers upon
lamenting and pitying the Torments she endures, and the Quin morere ut merita
cs. Aen. 4.
Death she condemned her self to. Elsewhere he makes her Exercise her
craftiness only upon Noble, Lawful, and glorious Occasions. Sunt hic sua
praemia laudi. Aen. 1.
He gives her Qualities truly Royal. She is Magnificent, Courteous, and has a
great esteem for Virtue. All this is to be observed in that obliging way
whereby she entertained the Trojans before ever she had seen Aeneas.

In the second Part of the Poem there are a great many more interested persons
than in the first. Latinus is a very good and pious Prince, but old and without
Sons. This gives the Queen an occasion of disobeying his orders, and Turnus a
desire of being his Son-in-Law in spite of him, and of forcing the good old Man
to proclaim War against Aeneas, and of making use of his Subjects, his Arms,
and his Authority. This default of Authority is natural and ordinary among
Kings that have no Heirs.

Amata pretends to have a kind of Right of disposing of her Daughter. She is
strangely affected for her Kinsman Turnus. She was so obstinately bent upon
having him for her Son-in-Law, that she had rather die than change her
Resolution. This obstinacy of the Woman put her upon taking all manner of
Shapes, keeps up her Anger and her Violence, and is the principal Character the
Poet gives her.

The Character of Turnus is the same with that of Alius Latio jam partus
Achilles. Aen. 6.
Achilles as far as the alteration of the Design, and the Difference of the
Fable, would admit. It Is a young Man, furious, and passionate for a Damsel that
a Rival would rob him of. Arma amens fremit, arma thoro tectisque requirit;
Saevit amor ferri, and scelerata insania belli. Aeneid. 7.
His mind is all upon Arms and War without troubling his head whether it be
just, or whether the want of Justice, and the contrary order of the Gods make
it criminal and impious. He suffers himself to be transported with Anger, the
most prevailing of all his Passions. This is the first Idea our Poet gives of
him and which he always keeps up very carefully. He is less of a Soldier, and
more of a General than Achilles. But this General in Office sometimes forgot
himself to act the part of a private Soldier. Et si continuo victorem ea cura
subisser, Rumpere claustra manu, sociosque immittere portis: Ultimus ille dies
bello gentique fuisset. Sed furor ardentem caedisque insana cupido Egit in
adversos. Aen. 9.
Had it not been for this, he might have put an end to the War the very second
Day, when breaking into the Entrenchments of Aeneas, which he besieged, his
fury made him forget to keep the passage open for his own Men, as he might
easily have done. So far is it true that Anger is his principal Character. He
was so full of the Idea of Achilles, and so far master of his Spirit, that he
brags of being like him. Hic etiam inventum Priamo narrabis Achillem. Aeneid. 9.
Go, says he to Pandarus, when he killed him, Go tell Priam thou have met with
a second Achilles here. The Poet makes use of these artifices to show the
Readers what sort of humor Turnus was of.

The Character of this Hero has likewise this injustice of Achilles, in that,
from his own particular Quarrel he raises a general War, renders his Anger
pernicious to both Parties, and more to his own than to that of the Enemy, and
exposes so many thousand Innocents for his single Interest. The blackness of
this Character is shaded, as the vices of Achilles, by the Luster of a
wonderful courage.

This may suffice without speaking of the other Personages, one may apply to
them whatever we have said here concerning the Manners and the Character.

CHAP. XI. What the Character is.
FRom what has been said we may infer, that in the Epick Poem the Character is
not properly any particular Virtue or Quality, but a composition of several,
which are mixed together in a different degree with the Ornaments and Beauty
it is capable of observing, the necessity of the Fable, and the unity of the
Action.

All the Qualities that go toward the making this composition cannot be all of
the same class, nor be equal among themselves. Because one carrying the Hero
upon one Encounter, and another upon another Encounter, the Character will seem
varied, and the Poem as well as the Hero will look like a Body animated with
several Souls. It Is requisite then there should be one commanding Quality to
Rule the rest, and be the Soul of them, and that this appear throughout. After
the same manner as a Hero being painted in diverse Fables ought to be discerned
in all, and to have the same Features in his Countenance, let his Postures and
his Passions be never so different. This commanding Quality in Achilles is his
Anger, in Ulysses the Art of Dissimulation, and in Aeneas Meekness. Each of
these may by way of Eminence be styled the Character in these Heroes.

But these Characters cannot be alone. It Is absolutely necessary that some
other should give them a luster and embellish them, as far as they are capable:
Either by hiding the defects that are therein by some noble and shining
Qualities, as the Poet has done the Anger of Achilles, by shading it with an
extraordinary Valor; or making them entirely of the nature of a true and solid
Virtue, as is to be observed in the two others. The Dissimulation of Ulysses is
a part of his prudence, and the Meekness of Aeneas is wholly employed in
submitting the will of this Hero to the Gods. For the making up this Union our
Poets have joined together such Qualities as are by nature the most compatible.
Valor with Anger, Piety with Goodness, and Prudence with Dissimulation. This
last Union was necessary for the Goodness of Ulysses, for without that his
Dissimulation might have degenerated into wickedness and knavery.

Besides, the Fable required Prudence in Ulysses, and Piety in Aeneas, as we
before observed. In this the Poets were not left to their choice. But Homer
might have made Achilles not valiant. The Cowardice of this Hero would have
abated nothing of the justness of his Fable. So that it is the necessity he lay
under of adorning his Character, and of not making Achilles vicious, where
there was no need for it, that obliged him to give him the Title of Valiant.

The Valor then as well as the Prudence, and the Piety in the other two Poems,
which are the secondary Qualities we have been speaking of make up the Goodness
of each Hero, and communicate this same Goodness to the whole Poem. But if on
the one hand, this secondary Quality is an ornament to the first, on the other
it receives such a determination from it, as makes its extent less, but withal
more just; a Hero may be endu'd with a peaceful, generous, and Roman Valor,
which is ready to pardon injuries upon submission. Such is the Valor of
Aeneas. He may likewise be endued with a Choleric, Cruel, Brutish, and
Inexorable Valor which never pardons, and had rather its Vengeance should fall
upon its Friends, than spare one single Enemy, and this is the Valor and
Character of Achilles.

But should we consider these two Qualities apart, for to know which of them
deserves chiefly to be styled the Character, we shall presently exclude Valor,
since it is neither essential to the Fable, nor does Achilles make any show of
it, but keeps it without Action for above half the Poem: Nor lastly does the
Poet sing it. But he sings the Anger, and this Anger is necessary to the Fable,
at least it is predominant as much during the absence of Achilles, as when he
is reunited to the Grecians and fights in Person. So Prudence is not the
principal part of the Character of Ulysses, since the Poet does not sing a
prudent Man, but a Man that changes himself into all sorts of forms. We may
likewise say, that the Meekness of Aeneas is his chief Quality, tho the word
Pius which the Poet makes use of, signifies equally Meekness and Piety.

To these two Qualities must a third be joined to support them, and carry on
the Character with greater force. A Prince will be to no purpose good and
pious, or prudent and dissembling, if he is not Valiant and Brave: He will meet
with many invincible Difficulties. Without Valor Aeneas would have been routed
by Turnus, and Ulysses would have fainted under a hundred hardships. Valor
then is necessary to produce great Designs, and to put them in Execution. But
there is no need to dwell longer on this Subject. The consequences thereof are
very clear.

We conclude then, that the Character of the Hero in the Epick Poem, is
compounded of three sorts of Qualities. Those of the first sort are necessary
and essential to the Fable. That of the second are the Ornaments of it. Valor
which supports both makes the third sort. The first, which is the Principal,
must be some Universal Quality, such as should be met with in all sorts of
Occasions, and Encounters, and such as should make the Hero known throughout.

In the Character of the other Personages there is likewise some Composition,
for one single Quality can never exactly distinguish one Person from others,
unless it be determined by some other that may render it proper and singular.
But it is not necessary that Valor or any other Noble Inclination, should be
admitted into these lesser Characters. I see nothing that is Noble or Good in
Thersites, Amata, or in that number of dull Souls in the Odysseis, and without
mentioning these last, or Drances in whom the Poets have not expressed the
least Valor. The Women that are introduced into Poems, do manifestly exclude
the necessity of this Warlike Quality.

CHAP. XII. Of the Unity of the Character in the Hero.
THe exactness of our Poets presents us with an Unity in the Character, which
we cannot pass by without a Reflection. It is observed in the Conduct of the
Hero in particular, and in that of the whole Poem; and I fansy one might apply
to both the first Rule of Horace, which order that every thing be reduced to a
Simplicity and Unity. It seems indeed, as if the Character were as much the
Life and Soul of the Hero, and the whole Action, as the Fable is of the Poem,
and consequently it seems to require as exact an Unity. We will begin with the
Hero's Character. We have already hinted at this Unity of the Character in the
Personages, when we said that the Manners ought to be even or equal. If we
would suppose the Equality of the Manners, and the Unity of the Character to be
one and the same thing, then in treating of this point under the Title of the
Equality of the Manners, I had forgot what I have here added under this Head of
the Unity of the Character. I said there, that the Equality consisted in giving
no one Person such Sentiments as were contrary to one another. But I add here,
that this is not sufficient for the Unity of the Character, and that it is
moreover necessary, that the same Spirit appear in all sorts of Encounters,
whether similar, contrary, or others.

Thus Aeneas for instance, acting with a great deal of Piety and Mildness in
the first part of his Poem, which requires no other Character, and afterward
making a great show of an Heroical Valor in the Wars of the second part, but
without any appearance either of a hard or a soft Disposition, would doubtless
be far from offending against what we have laid down about the Equality of the
Manners: But yet there would be no Simplicity or Unity in this Character. So
that besides the Qualities, that claim their particular place upon different
occasions, there must be one appearing throughout which Commands over all the
rest. Without this we may affirm it is no Character. And this is what would be
that Poet's Fate, that would give his Hero the Piety of Aeneas, and the Valor
of Achilles, without reflecting on the mild Temper of the one, or the hard
Nature of the other.

Or to speak more properly, this Poet could by no means give his Hero the
Qualities of the two other Hero's. There is a great deal of difference between
a Face in General, and the Face of Aeneas in Particular, between a Forehead, a
Nose, a Mouth, and an Eye in General, and the Fore head, Eyes, Nose, and Mouth
of Achilles. There is likewise a great deal of difference between Valor in
General, and the Valor of Achilles, and between Piety in General, and the
Piety of Aeneas. This is evident from the Thoughts and the Practice of the
Latin Poet. Had he taken Achilles for a Model of Valor, and had he thought
that Homer had carried this Quality to the highest pitch, it could go,
certainly he would have made his Aeneas a great deal more like the Greek Hero,
than he has Tarnus, since he makes him a great deal more Valiant than Turnus,
and he would never have failed giving this Idea to his Readers, and telling
them, that Aeneas is another Achilles. How comes it to pass that he never does
this? And on the contrary, gives this Quality to Turnus several times: It Is
doubtless because he saw well enough, that it is by the Character one Man
resembles another, and that Valor in General is not the Character of Achilles:
That to be more Valiant as Aeneas, or less Valiant as Turnus, it is not required
that one should have more or less of the Character of this Grecian Hero: But
that one shall resemble him the more, the more one is endu'd with a Choleric,
Violent, and unjust Valor, as Turnus was, and that on the contrary, one shall
have a Character opposite to that of Achilles, though one be never so Valiant,
when one is Reasonable, Mild, and Moderate.

One may then make a Hero as Valiant as Achilles, as Pious as Aeneas, and if
one please, as Prudent as Ulysses. But it is a mere Chimaera to imagine a Hero
that has the Valor of Achilles, the Piety of Aeneas, and the Prudence of
Ulysses at one and the same time. This Vision might happen to an Author who
would suit the Character of a Hero to whatever each part of the Action does
naturally require, without regarding the Essence of the Fable, and the Unity of
the Character in the same Person upon all sorts of occasions. This Hero would
be the mildest, best natured Prince in the World, and the most Choleric, hard
Hearted, and Implacable Creature imaginable, contrary to Horace's Prohibition
in the Case. He would be extremely tender as Aeneas, extremely violent as
Achilles, and would have the Indifference of Ulysses that is incapable of the
two extremes; 'twould be in vain for the Poet to call this Personage by the
same Name throughout. The Hero of the Temple, and the Cabinet, would not be the
Hero of the Field.

But can there be no Moderation nor Accommodation made by giving a Hero as much
Valor, Prudence, and Piety, as an honest Man is capable of, and by retrenching
from each of these Qualities, whatever it has defective, and contrary to the
two others? To judge how far this practice is allowable, we need only reflect
on the effects it would produce in several Poems, whose Authors were of the
mind that the chief Character of any Hero, is that of an honest Man. They would
be alike in all these pieces, we should see them all Valiant in Battle, Prudent
in Counsel, Pious in the Acts of Religion, Courteous, Civil, Magnificent, and
lastly, endu'd with all the prodigious Virtues, the best Poet could invent. All
this would be independent from the Action, and the Subject of the Poem. And
upon seeing each Hero separated from the rest of the Work, we should not easily
guess to what Action, and to what Poem the Hero does belong. So that we should
see that none of these would have a Character, since the Character is that
which makes a Person discernable, and which distinguishes it from all others.

Nor would this false Resemblance be only among the Hero's, but likewise among
the other Personages, which one were willing to represent as honest Men. They
would not differ from the Hero himself, but as Plus and Minus. He would be a
more Honest, more Valiant, and more Prudent Man, etc.

Homer and Virgil, furnish us with quite different Examples. Achilles, Ulysses,
and Aeneas have nothing in common, and differ as much among themselves as the
three Poems, and the three Actions, of which they are the Hero's. They have
each of them a Character which admirably distinguishes them from others, and
whose Unity and Simplicity is so exact, and so uniform, as to make them appear
the same upon all occasions. Homer has so prepared his Fables, that 'twas easy
for him to preserve this Unity in the principal parts. Virgil has done the
contrary. His first part is like the Action of the Odysseis, whose Character is
Coolness, Disimulation, and Prudence. The second is like the Iliad, full of the
Horrors of War, which naturally draw along with them Anger and Cruelty, and yet
he has made Mildness and the softest Passions predominant in both parts. Aeneas
is as Meek and Pious when he kills Lausus in the heat of Battle, as he is in
the Sports and the Peaceable and Religious Combats, which he Celebrated in
Honor of his Father Anchiser. He is as Modest when his Vanquished Enemies fell
at his Feet to Implore his Pardon, as when being himself tossed about by a
Storm, and cast upon a strange Country, he was forced to Implore the Favor of
Dido.

CHAP. XIII. The Unity of the Character in the Poem.
IF the Unity of the Character seems hard to be made in the Person of Aeneas,
because this Hero is in so many different Encounters, which naturally require
opposite Characters; this difficulty is still greater in the Series of the
whole Poem, since beside this variety of Actions, the Poet introduces
Personages whose Humors are contrary to that of the Hero. Dido is Violent and
Passionate, Turnus, Amata, and Mezentius, who are the secondary Hero's, and who
do all that is done on their side, are as opposite to Aeneas in their
Characters as in their Interests. And yet to maintain the Unity of the
Character in the Poem, it is requisite, that these opposite Characters should
center in the Character of the Hero, and so submit thereto, that It alone
should be predominant in both the Parties, as the Author of the Iliad makes
Anger to be the Commanding Passion as well in the City of Troy, as in the
Grecian Camp.

All Poets have not been so circumspect. We see Claudian's Genius is not raised
to this Justness and Accurateness, nor has he made so exact proportions. The
furious and terrible Character of Pluto and the Furies, and all the Horror of
Hell it self is presently Metamorphos'd into the Character and the Pleasure of
the Graces, the Goddesses, the gilt Palaces, and the Flowery Meads. All this
Joy does again give way to the Sorrows, and Complaints of a Mother for the loss
of a Daughter. This Author has no Idea of his whole Work. When he Composes one
part of it, he never thinks on any thing else. He has begun with the Infernal
Deities, and in all this beginning, one can see nothing but the Furies they are
capable of. Afterward he speaks of the Visit which Venus, Diana, and Minerva
make to young Proserpine, and this is wholly taken up with Joys and Pleasures.
Lastly, he describes the fear and sorrow of Ceres, and then he thinks on no
other Passion, and he suits himself so well to each thing he Treats on,
independantly from the rest of the Poem, that in his three Books he has as many
different, principal, and reigning Characters as there are in the threescore
Books of our three Poems. There we see Anger, Dissimulation, and Meekness
reigning each of them apart and singly in the Iliad, in the Odysseis, and in
the Aeneid. And in the three Books of the Rape of Proserpine, we meet with
Terror, Joy, and Sadness. This is an instance of an Error that corrupts the
Unity of the Character in the Poem.

The Practice of our Poets is quite otherwise. They alter not the Soul when
they form different Members to the same Body. They know that the Eye, which is
the most delicate part, and the Hand, which is the most laborious and hardy,
have yet the same Spirit in the same Person. So that they mind less the
particular incidents of their Action, and the Humor of each Personage, than
they do the general Character of the Fable.

For this purpose, Virgil lays no constraint upon the Character of the Hero
which ought to be predominant throughout. He gives it a full and entire
Liberty, and on the contrary, he moderates the rest, and claps a Print upon
them to hold them in, either by some Passion or by some dependence, the persons
that have them, are in to some Body else. Aeneas is absolute Master of his
Actions, he has none that he is obliged to accommodate himself to upon what
occasion soever. Nor is this peculiar to the Latin Poet; he imitates therein
the Greek Poet, whose Ulysses is as independent as Aeneas. Achilles has a
General over him, but this General is only as the Chief among equal Princes.
Achilles then is not his Subject, and take him from the Seige of Troy, he has
no Orders to receive from him. Besides, expecting no favor or good will from
him, and being Choleric and Unjust, he has no Obedience to pay him, nor
measures to take to please him, and he thinks he has sufficient grounds to
withdraw his Obedience from him. Nay, when he is reconciled to him, and enters
again upon his Duty, yet he receives no Orders from him; on the contrary,
without consulting with this General, or any other of the Confederate Princes,
he on his own Head makes a Truce with his Enemies in behalf of them all. It Is
therefore a great Artifice in Homer, when he makes Achilles the most Valiant of
the Confederates, but withal Unjust, and without Interest, and on the
contrary, makes Agamemnon the General, very much Interested for the Honor of
his Brother Menelaus and his own. This is what respects the Hero.

As for the other Personages, Homer has made the Unity of the Character easy,
by giving Violence and Anger to the greatest part of the Commanders on both
sides. The Latin Poet is harder put to it, because he has made the Enemies of
his Hero to have humors that are contrary to that of his Hero, but withal, he
has annexed to them such Passions and Dependances that are no small advantage
to his Unity.

Turnus has in truth no dependence on King Latinus, either as his Subject or
his Ally. This old Prince is neither his King, nor his General. He depends upon
him after another way, as the Courtier of Lavinia his Daughter and sole
Heiress. For under this pretention he dares not disoblige a Prince, that owes
him nothing, and from whom he would obtain so much. He is therefore obliged in
many respects to submit to him, and to take such measures as take off much of
his fierceness and passion. Besides this, he sees the Victories of his Rival,
to whom he is obliged to yield the Glory of Arms in the judgment of Latinus and
Amata her self; he sees the ill success of all his designs, the death of those
he put most confidence in, Mezentius, Camilla, etc. he sees the Latins
decrease, and hears the Reproaches they cast upon him. All this must needs
cause strange Impressions on the mind of this Latin Achilles; and hinder him
from carrying on his Character so far as the Grecian did his.

Mezentius has a less part in the Poem than Turnus. But he is too considerable
to admit of his furious and cruel Character in all its force. The Poet makes
this profane person much in love with his Son, as he was a despiser of the
Gods. He so luckily makes use of this natural Passion, that it renders his
tenderness conspicuous, and makes the Character of Aeneas Conqueror over the
fury of this Barbarian. His design in renewing the Battle was only to rejoin
his Son. Nec tecum meus haec pepigit mihi foedera Lausus. Unum hoc per, siqua
est victis venia hostibus, oro; Corpus humo patiare regi. Scio acerba meorum
Circunstare odia: hunc (oro) defend furorem. Et me consortem nati comede
sepulcro. Aen. 10.
The violence of his Paternal Love forces him to beseech Aeneas to favor him
so far, as to let him be buried in the same Grave with his Son, and he dies
full of the tender and sad Idea he had of his dear Lausus.

This same Artifice does likewise change the violences of Dido into a more
moderate Character by these two ways. The first is, the inability wherein the
Queen is placed, Non potui abreptum divellere corpus and undis Spargere? Non
socios, non ipsum absumere ferro Ascanium? patriisque epulandum apponere
mensis. Aen. 4.
What, Cannot I, says she, tear his Body in pieces, and scatter his mangled
Limbs in the Sea? O! that I could but cut the Throats of his Comrades, butcher
his dear Ascanius, and serve him up in a Banquet to his Father, etc. These are
the wildest excesses of a most violent and terrible fury. But she is in such
circumstances, that the Reader is not afraid any ill effects will follow. He is
not concerned for Aeneas, and Ascanius, since they are no longer within her
reach, and he only pities this poor Princess, from whose Mouth her misfortunes
had forced this Language. Improbe amor, quid non mortalia pectora cogis? Ire
iterum in lacrymas, iterum tentare precando Cogitur, and supplex animos
submittere amori. Ibid.
The other Method, is the Love of this same Queen which in the midst of her
Rage and fury tames her, and forces her to melt into tears, and to abandon her
self to the tenderness of her Passions.

Another Method Virgil makes use of, is to interrupt the fights by calm and
tender Episodes, which make the Character of the Hero still predominant. Thus
the assault made upon the Camp of Aeneas, and the fury of Turnus, is moderated
by the Episode of Remulus which is diverting: by that of the Ships changed into
Nymphs which is admirable, and by that of Nisus and Euryalus which is soft and
moving -- We may reduce all that has been said of the Unity of the Character to
these few Heads.

The first and the Foundation of all the rest, is to give the Hero a precise
and sensible Character, which may appear in all sorts of Encounters.

Secondly, This Hero must be independent, and left at full liberty to carry on
his Character and Humor in all the force and extent it is capable of.

Thirdly, The Poet may bestow this very Character on the other Personages that
are most apparent and active, whether they be on the Hero's side, or on the
contrary Party, or whether they be Divine Persons. This is the practice of
Homer in his Iliad.

Fourthly, When there is given to these other Personages some Character or
other that is opposite to that of the Hero, it must not be carried on in all
its force. And as this Moderation cannot proceed naturally from Persons
themselves, it is produced either by some Passion, or by some Dependence, as we
have seen in Dido, Mezentius and Turnus.

The Fifth way, is to interrupt the particular Actions which of themselves
require an opposite Character by such Episodes as are suitable to the general
Character. Thus the Death of Lausus causes pity and tenderness to bear sway
amidst the Furies of War, and has the same Effects which the Episode of Nisus
and Euryalus has. To these five ways we might likewise join the Thoughts,
Figures, and Expressions of which we shall speak in the last Book of this
Treatise.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Justness of the Character.
THis is a Point of the greatest difficulty as well as Importance, as well to
those that Compose, as to those that Read and Criticize. It depends not only on
the Art, but likewise on the Goodness and Justness of the Genius, and on a
profound insight into all Morality. With great reason then does Scribendi recte
sapere est principium and fons. Rem tibi Socraticae poterunt ostendere chartae.
Poet.
Horace carry the necessity of this Doctrine so high, and teach us that the
Principle and Source of all that is good in a Poem, is this Wisdom which
Socrates made profession of, that is the Knowledge, and the Practice of Moral
Philosophy. This teaches us what is Virtue, and what is Vice, and informs us
that there are some Qualities which in their own Nature, being neither Virtues,
nor Vices, may be indifferently joined to either one or the other of them, and
be met with in Bad, as well as Good men.

The first thing we are to Study, is the Nature of each Character and Habit
wherein it precisely consists. What Good or Evil it is capable of, and how far
it may rise or fall without degenerating from its Nature, and without being
confounded with any other Habit that may perhaps bear some relation thereto.
Wherein for Example consists a solid Piety without Preciseness, Grimace, and
Libertinism; and without a certain turbulency of Spirit, that is dangerous and
of an ill consequence: how far one may extend ones Liberality, without being
Prodigal: and how a Man should manage his expenses, without being either too
Liberal or too Sparing.

To this we likewise refer the Knowledge we ought to have of the Habits or
Qualities in general, such as they say are abstracted and separated from the
particular Subjects, as also of the Qualities, that are particularized by the
Subjects wherein they are, for we should rightly distinguish Valor in general
from the Valor of Achilles, and not confound that with the Valor of Aeneas.

What we say here, is not with a design to exclude out of a Poem, whatever
Morality condemns. A Poet should never set bad Examples, but there is a great
deal of difference between a bad Example, and the Example of a bad Action or a
bad Person. The Lacedaemonians never intended to propose bad Examples to their
Children, when, to deter them from Drunkenness, they exposed to their view,
Slaves that they had made downright drunk. It is therefore lawful for the Poet
to make use of Achilles's and Mezentius's, as well as Vlysses's and Aeneas's.
He may represent Prodigality and Avarice, as well as Liberality and the wise
Economy of a good Husband, and an honest Tradesman. But whatever he designs,
whether for Virtue, Vice, or any indifferent Quality, he must at least be
sensible of what he does, not only because 'twould be a disgrace for him to be
Ignorant in the case, but because this Knowledge puts him upon acting with a
great deal more exactness.

It Is so important, that without these notices, he is in danger too often of
setting very bad Examples, and of offending against that which is essential to
every Art, which is to be profitable, and in particular against the nature of
the Fable and the Epopea, whose only design is to lay down Instructions of
Virtue. If then a Poet knows not what a solid and true Piety is, and how far it
may extend without excess, he will introduce a Personage that will pass for a
very good Man, he will give him such Virtues and Qualities as are dazzling and
lovely, he will create for him the good Will and Esteem of all his Auditors,
and after he has Armed him with so dangerous an Authority, he will put him upon
venting gravely and in quaint Expressions, such Maxims as are false, but fair
and plausible in all outward appearance, and with a turn that shall bewitch
Men's Minds. Thus Aeneas would have been a very bad Example, if being
represented so Prudent and Honest a Man, he should prefer the Endearments and
Love of Dido before the Orders of Jupiter: Or if being persecuted by Juno, he
had slighted this Goddess as if 'twere allowable to be less submissive to God
under the Crosses that befall us, than when every thing happens as we would
have it. Or lastly if this same Hero relying on the Credit of the Oracles,
which could not deceive him, had spared himself the Travels and Dangers he
unwent, as if the Favors and Promises of God who loves us, should make us more
lazy and negligent. Virgil commits none of these faults. His Conduct teaches
us, That the Promises of God, though infallible, should yet serve only to put us
upon endeavoring more ardently and faithfully to merit the Effects of them.
And in this Opposition which he sets between Juno and Aeneas, he likewise gives
us this admirable Lesson: That when God seems to declare himself against us, we
should only contend against him with our Prayers, our Vows, our Oblations, our
Submission, and that these are the only Weapons by which he suffers himself to
be Conquered.

But the Poet does not set any bad Example, when he shows in Mezentius
Sentiments, that are contrary to these Maxims. We are neither surpised, nor
offended that this Man, whom we know for an Impious Person, seeing his Affairs
succeed so ill, should contemn the Gods, acknowledge no other but his own Arm
and Javelin, prefer his Son Lausus to all the Gods, which others adored, and
make an Idol of him who is both the Object of his Vows, and the Trophee he
would adorn with the Spoils of the Vanquished Aeneas. No body would live
according to these Maxims, but such as would be deliberately Impious,
Barbarous, and an Odium to the rest of Mankind, to cure this strange Distemper
of the Mind, the Poet presents us with the miserable end of this Atheist, whom
the Death of Lausus disheartens and oppresses with very sensible pains, raising
in him a sense of all the Miseries to which he was reduced, which his Brutality
and the hopes he had of being reestablished, would not let him see till then.

Besides these Vices and Virtues, one is in danger of offending in the wrong
use of some middle Quality, and the danger will be greater, and the Error more
considerable, if this Quality make a great show and noise, such as Valor in
War. That of Achilles is Vicious, and yet it so dazzled the Eyes of Young
Alexander, that that to partake of that false Glory which he admires in this
Hero, he has committed in cold Blood a more unworthy Brutality, than that to
which the Anger and Revenge of Achilles carried him, when he drags the Body of
Hector round Troy, Hector was dead, and Q. Curtius.
Alexander drags the live Governor of a Town he had won.

And likewise, without minding what is Good and Vicious in Valor, one may be
deceived in not rightly distinguishing what is solid in it, from what is only
glazing. The Age in which we begin to judge of these Characters, commonly casts
us into this Error, and into that we mentioned before: Youth always fastens
upon the very first appearances, and never penetrates as far as to the solidity
of a thing, and when we are once preposess'd, it is a hundred to one, that we
ever get perfectly free from our Prejudices. One must be very fortunate, or
have a clear Intellect and exact Judgment, and more than that, a curiosity and
desire to be acquainted with that which perhaps one does not judge important
enough to deserve a long and serious Study. Very often likewise the Customs of
the Country, and Education, produce these bad effects upon the Mind, and
entertain them in this Ignorance, and in such Judgments as are very
disadvantageous to Virtue. If we see Duels fought upon every slight Offense, we
shall imagine that a Man has no Valor, if he puts up an Affront without
fighting, and he will meet with too many of his Friends who will prompt him to
this sort of Revenge as Criminal as it is. This is what a Person would never
do, who, according to the Precepts of Qui didicit patriae quid debeat and quid
amicis.
Horace, had learnt the Duty of a faithful Friend and a good Subject. And a
Poet would never put this Maxim into the Practice, or Mouth of a Personage, he
has a Mind to represent as a Man of Honor.

But to return to what we were saying about the distinction that ought to be
made between the Luster and the Solidity of Valor; we will make this one
Remark, that seems to me very important: it is this, That these two things are
often times opposite in the Essence of the Character. Violent and Transporting
Characters give a great deal more Luster to the Actions they animate, and to
the Persons that have them; and on the contrary, the most Mild and Moderate,
are often without any Luster and Glory, yet these last are a great deal more
proper to Virtue.

Perhaps I insist too much on this Subject, but it is of some moment both in
General, and in the Instance I proposed just now of a Warlike Valor, since
this Quality is most usual in all Epopeas, and the most capable of dazzling both
the Poets and the Readers. I will therefore explain this Instance by the Valor
that is in the Aeneid.

How many are there, that put a higher value on the Warlike Virtues of
Achilles, and I will add even on those of Turnus, than on those of Aeneas? Yet
Achilles is but a Soldier, and Aeneas a Commander. How then comes it to pass
that they judge thus? Unless it is because they take the Noise, the Show, and
the Transports of a furious Man for true Valor.

If after the same manner we compare Turnus with Aeneas, the Pious Hero will
doubtless seem inferior to his Rival. But whoever will sit down here, and will
take the consequences and the ordinary attendance of a Quality for the Quality
it self, he will fall into the same impertinence as Numanus, who in reproach to
the Trojans, says, they deserve not the Name of Soldiers, and that they had no
more courage than Women, because their way of dress is gaudy and delicate. This
is doubtless for want of being well acquainted with the Virtues of War, and
what the exact Character of a Valiant Man is.

Valor is the finest Ornament of the Character of Turnus, and one might add,
that it is all the goodness that is in it; and this quality in Aeneas gives
place to several others and principally to his Piety. Therefore Piety is the
thing that should be conspicuous in Aeneas, his Valor should appear much less,
and on the other Hand Valor should be very illustrious and very shining in the
person of Turnus: So that he should be as much in love with War, as Aeneas is
in love with, and desirous of Peace. Whatever Turnus does in the Battles, or in
preparing for them, is usually done with Design, with Pleasure, and with
Discourses that are Magnificent, very Pompous, and Cogent. Aeneas commonly acts
without Noise and Affectation, he speaks little, and if he falls into a
Passion, it is not so much to fight, as because he is forced to fight and defend
himself; it is not so much to Conquer, as to put an end to the War.

But if the Luster and the dazzling show make the Valor of Turnus more
conspicuous than that of Aeneas, yet the Actions show that in truth and
reality, the Valor of Aeneas is infinitely Superior to that of Turnus. We
need only consider them without this Luster, and without this outward
appearance, which a bold Bragadocio and a rash young Man may have as well as
the truest Bravo.

Turnus, during the absence of Aeneas, assaults his Camp, being designed,
prepared and armed with Malice, and in three or four days he could not force
it. He breaks in by a passage his Bravery had opened for him, he is constrained
to break out again, and at last, after an Engagement of two days, he is Routed
and Vanquished by Aeneas with a bloody Slaughter. Aeneas on the other Hand in
the sight of Turnus, and in view of an Army of Enemies, assaults an ancient
Town well built, and well fortified, and in a few hours becomes Master of its
Rampants and Towers. He is not forced thence by his Enemies, At Pius Aeneas
audito nomine Turni deserit and muros, and summas desetis arcos. Aen. 12.
but he comes down to make an end of the War by the Death of Turnus, whom he
forces to a Battle.

Pallas is conquered and killed by Turnus, and Lausus by Aeneas. These young
Princes were equal in Valor, but there is a great deal of difference between
the Bravery of their Conquerors. Turnus seeks this Battle; Solus ego in
Pallanta feror, soli mihi Pallas Debetur; cuperem ipse parens spectator
adesset. Aeneid. 10.
he makes his Boasts and Brags of it, and insults over this young Enemy, who
never fought a Battle before. He wishes Evander were present, he would butcher
the Son before his Father's Face. This is the Valor of another Achilles. Quo
moriture tuis majoraque viribus audes? Fallit te incautum pietas tua. Nec minus
ille Exultat demens. Saevae jamque altius Irae Dardanio surgunt ductori. Aen.
10.
Aeneas is far from engaging with Lausus after this Manner, who exposes himself
for his Father's sake. He on the contrary would save his Life, he drives him
off, threatens him, and becomes terrible and furious only, because he was
forced to kill him. This is an Anger worthy of Aeneas, and the exact Character
of an Hero more valiant than Turnus, but withal more pious than valiant. The
extreme danger wherein he was, being assaulted not only by Lausus, but by a
great many others at the same time, does not yet hinder him from taking notice
of that Affection which this Enemy (who designed his Death) had for his Father.
Certainly it must needs argue greater Valor and Bravery to spare an Enemy at
such a time, than Turnus ever made appear in any of his Actions.

Aeneas and Turnus do the same Action of Generosity in returning the Bodies of
these two Princes. But Turnus with his usual Noise and Show insults over Pallas
and Evander, and seems as if he sent back the Body of the Son to his
Unfortunate Father, only to increase his sorrow. Qualem meruit Pallanta remitto.
I send him back his Pallas (says he) just such a one as he deserves to see
him. This is a very cruel generosity, and very becoming an Achilles. That of
Aeneas is all virtuous all sincere. Turnus insults over Pallas, sets his foot
upon him, strips him of part of his Armor, and decks himself with it: Ingemuit
miserans dextramque tetendit, and mentem patriae subiit pietatis imago. Quid
tibi nunc, miserande puer, etc.
Aeneas laments the Death of Lausus, makes his Elegy, lifts him from the ground
himself; takes him between his Arms, and reprimands the Tyrrhens for being so
backward in carrying off their Prince.

You may see then how in the distribution of the Valor, Virgil gives Aeneas
and Turnus, he allows the last all that this Quality has of Beauty and splendour
in appearance: and how in giving to Aeneas that which was without all dispute
greater and more real, he is satisfied with the solid part of it, and makes
what is glaring and dazzling in it to give place to the sweet temper and the
Piety of his Hero. Because Piety makes up the goodness of Aeneas's Character,
as valor makes up all that Turnus has of good in his Character.

But whatever we discommend here in the Character of this last Hero, yet it is
only an Evil in Morality, which does not make it the less good in a Poetical
Sense. These Reflections are not designed to banish it out of Poems, but so to
distinguish Virtue from Vice, that a Poet may know what he does, when he gives
his Personage the one or the other; and that a Reader may judge of it without
being mistaken. That he confound not what a Quality (such as Valor for
Instance) has of glaring, with what it has of solidity. That he suffer not
himself to be dazzled with the formalities of Turnus, as if Aeneas were not in
truth a great deal more valiant than he: And that he imagine not that any Man
of Honor is capable of the generosity, and the Warlike Virtues which Virgil
bestows upon Turnus, and Homer upon his Achilles.

Nor is it at all necessary to carry the Character of an exact and Virtuous
Hero, as far as Virgil has done that of Aeneas. The endeavors he uses to avoid
killing Lausus, the sorrow he shows for it, the praises he bestows upon him,
and the rest that we have taken notice of, exceeds the Character of a simple
generosity, and is the Effect of that Piety, which is predominant in Aeneas,
and in the whole Poem. And it may be so contrived that these things, thus
carried on, would not only, not be a perfection in a Man of Honor of another
Poem, but also spoil the justness of the Character. So great a difference is
there between Generosity in general, the Generosity of Aeneas, and the
Generosity of every other Particular Person.

CHAP. XV. Of false Characters.
I Call those true Characters which we truly and really see in Men, or which
may be in them without any difficulty. No one questions but there have been
Men, as generous and as good as Aeneas, as passionate and violent as Achilles,
as prudent and wise as Ulysses, as Impious and Atheistical as Mezentius, as
passionate as Dido and Amata, etc. So that all these Characters are true. Poets
may regularly make use of them. And when they do, these are not simple and
imaginary Fictions, but just imitations of such things as really are or may be.

On the contrary, I affirm that a Character is false, when an Author so feigns
it, that one can see nothing like it in the order of Nature, wherein he designs
it shall stand. These Characters should be wholly excluded from a Poem,
because, transgressing all the bounds both of Reason and Probability, they meet
with no belief from the Readers. They are by so much the more offensive to
them, by how much the Poet seems to slight them, and to take them for silly
persons on whom he may impose what he pleases.

The desire of amplifying, and making every thing that is said, look great, and
mavelous, casts young Poets into this Error, and all others who are not
endued with a justness of Mind, and are not rightly informed. The Enthusiastic
Genius of Statius will afford us some instances of this bad conduct.

He would bestow the Character of Achilles upon Tydeus, and inspire him with
his Passions, and his Anger sustained by his Valor. Atque illum effracti
perfusum tabe cerebri Aspicit and vivo scelerantem sanguine fauces. Nec comites
auferre valent. Stat.
But is such an excessive Anger tolerable which puts him upon eating the Head
of his Enemy? Upon drinking the Blood that gushed from him? Upon devouring his
very Brains? Which represents him with his face horribly besmeared with this
Blood and Brains, so that his friends could neither pluck this Rage from his
Heart, nor this Head from between his Hands and Teeth. He did not think he
should make him valiant enough, if he let him loose to five or six Men only. He
must needs make him kill fifty of them. This excess is so much the more
ridiculous, since we know that it cost the Poet nothing. A water Poet or a raw
Scholar might as easily say, that his Hero killed a thousand Men, as that he
conquered two or three of them. There is neither Art nor Invention in this, but
an ill governed fancy and a perfect Ignorance of the justness of his Character.

This Poet has done the same in the Character he has given to Capaneus, he
makes him Valiant and Impious. And perhaps he had a mind to imitate Mezentius,
as he has imitated other passages, of the Aenied. But instead of making such a
Man as he ought he has made only a Chimera. Indeed he was not obliged to make
the violences of this Personage to change into Mildness and Tenderness, as
Virgil has done that of Mezentius, for the reasons above mentioned: But what
need had he to make him insult over the Gods more like a Madman than an
Atheist?

This Hero dies on the Wall of Thebes, which he was besieging. He was nigh
making the whole Town tremble. Eminuit, trepidamque assurgens desuper Urbem
Vidit, and ingenti Thebas exterruit umbra. Stat.
His shadow only put them all into a constrnation. He was so far from being
touched with Vanity at so surprising a success, that he thinks this Victory
beneath him, and is ashamed of such a pitiful thing. Increpat attonitos:
Humilesne Amphionis arces. Proh pudor! Hi faciles carmenque imbelle secuti, Et
mentita diu Thebarum fabula muri. Et quidnam egregium prosternere moenia molli
Structa Lyra? Simul insultans gressuque manuque Diruit obstantes cuneas
tabulataque saevus Destruit, absiliunt pontes tectique frementis Saxea fraena
labant, disseptoque aggere rursus Utitur, and truncas rupes in tecta domosque
Praecipitat, frangitque suis jam moenibus urbem. Stat.
These Towers which Amphion built are too low, he takes it ill that the
Fictions of Fable should ever dare to publish that those Fortifications were
the Work of a Harper. For where is the difficulty to raise the Ramparts that
were raised by a Harp? In truth there was neither need of Swords nor Machines.
His hands and his Feet are enough to destroy those Walls and those Towers, to
break down Bridges. After he had thus demolished these Fortifications with his
Feet and Hands, he takes the Ruins and hurles them at the City, and beats down
the Houses and Churches with them. This is what he does against Men.

He does not indeed do so much mischief to the Gods, but he frights them almost
as much, and defies them to do him any harm. Nullane pro trepidis, clamabat,
Numina Thebis? Statis? ubi infandae telluris alumni Bacchus and Alcides? Piget
instigare minores. Tu potius venias, (quis enim concurrere nobis Dignior) en
cineres Semeleaque busta tenentur. Nunc age nunc totis in me connitere telis,
Jupiter.
What, says he to them, is there none of the Gods dare defend Thebes against
me? Where art thou Bacchus? Or thou Hercules? The Dastardly offspring of this
infamous City? But I am ashamed, continues he, to defy the lesser Deities:
Jupiter do thou come, for who else is more worthy to cope with me? See the the
Tomb, see the Ashes of thy dear Semele. Come, and defend them, and forget not
to bring any thing that may assist thee. Fulguraque attritis quotics mic^ere
procellis: His, ait, in Thebas, his jam decet ignibus uti. Hinc renovare facem,
lassamque accendere quercum.
Heaven presently is in Arms against this simple Man, and seems to be all on
fire. Capaneus sees all this without being moved, and was so far from abating
any thing of his fierceness, his threats, and the hopes he had of taking the
City, spite of all the Gods, which declared War against him, that he was for
snatching the Weapons from Heaven it self, and casting its Fires to burn the
City. If Statius had not imagined these Extravagancies, one could never have
believed they should enter into the Mind of any Author.

The Gods of this Poet do not take these for extravagancies. Ingemuit dictis
superum dolor, etc.
They are really afraid of them, and dread this Man alone more than all
Mankind together. They betake themselves to Jupiter. Apollo groans, Bacchus
bemoans himself. Hercules much affrighted, with a Bow in his Hand, knows not on
what to resolve. Venus is all in tears. To conclude, the calamity is Universal,
and to the disgrace of Jupiter, (before whom they seem to prefer Capaneus) the
admiration they conceived for this great Hero and struck them dumb, and made
them fear this Sovereign of the Gods had not a shaft sufficient to conquer this
single Man. The Poet himself gives us to understand, that their fear was not
altogether groundless. For after Jupiter had shot his Thunder against him, with
all his force, and had shattered to Dust the Armor Capaneus wore, this Bravo
had still power left him to stand upon his Feet so long, that Jupiter thought
he must shoot another Bolt at him.

One would fancy the fear is now over: But so great a Poet is not contented
with so little. Cataneus during his life made only the Thebans tremble and fly;
and now at his Death, when he was destroyed by Thunder, he fills his own Men
with consternation, and puts both Parties to flight, because they knew not on
which side he would fall, nor whose Troops he would crush into pieces thereby.

This is an Instance of these false Characters, wherein Men fall for want of
Judgment and Knowledge. An Author by these great Amplifications thinks he shall
be a great Poet. But he even degrades himself from the very name of Poet; since
these Fictions being of such things as cannot be in Nature are no Imitations.
And yet all Poesy is essentially an Imitation.

The Remedy for this is to believe Scribendi recte sapere est and principium
and foris. Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines, Quos ultra citraque
nequit consistere rectum.
Horace herein, and to be perfectly instructed in Morality. It Is to know that
all things have their Limitations: It Is to know these Limitations, and to keep
within them: It Is lastly to be convinced, that those that transgress these
bounds, as in the Examples we have been proposing, in propriety of speech make
neither Characters nor Personages but mere Chimeras, which were never any where
but in the Imaginary Species of these Authors Brains.

The End of the Fourth Book.
Monsieur Bossu's Treatise OF THE EPICK POEM. BOOK V. Concerning the Machines.
CHAP. I. Of the several sorts of Deities.
IN the former Book concerning the Manners, we discoursed concerning the
Terrestrial, and Mortal Persons, and in this, under the name of Machines, we
shall treat concerning the Divine and Immortal persons: So that this will be
nothing else but a Consequence of what has been said about the Manners and the
Persons; since the Gods as well as Men are Actors in the Epopea. We showed the
Necessity of this in our first. Chap. 2.
Book, where we likewise took notice that all these Divine Personages are
Allegorical.

We observed that there are three sorts of them. Some are Theological, and were
invented to explain the Nature of God: Others are Physical, and they represent
Natural things: The last are Moral, and they are the Representations of Virtues
and Vices. These three sorts of Divinities or Allegories, are sometimes to be
met with in one and the same person. Now for Instances of each, and first we
will begin with the Theological.

In the Convention of the Gods, by which Virgil opens his tenth Book, Jupiter,
Juno, Venus, and (we might add) Fate, are Personages of the first sort; that
is, such as represent the Divine Nature divided into four Persons, as into so
many Attributes. Hominum Divumque aeterna potestas.
Jupiter is the Power of God, Fate is his absolute Will. to which his very
Power submits; because God never acts contrary to his Will. Fata viam
invenient, Rex Jupiter omnibus idem.
Fate therefore determines Jupiter, who of himself is indifferent, and might as
well act in behalf of Turnus, as in favor of Aeneas and his party. Venus is
the Divine Mercy, and that Love which God bears toward Virtuous Men; by which
he is induced, never to forget them in the miseries they endure upon Earth, but
to help them out of 'em, and finally to Reward them. Lastly, Juno is his
Justice: This punishes even the least offenses; spares not even the very best
of Men, who not being wholly Innocent, are punished severely for their defaults
in this Life, where the Justice and the Temporal Wrath of God is often declared
against them, and so persecutes them, that there might be nothing left in them
but what was Virtuous, Meritorious, and matter of Reward. This Reward is
reserved for them in Heaven, where this Vindictive Justice has nothing to do,
and from whence it cannot exclude them, as Indigetem Aeneam scis ipsa, and
scire fateris Deleri coelo.
Jupiter tells Juno, when he mentioned Aeneas.

The Poet suits himself to our gross way of conceiving Divine things; and to
the Infirmity of our Minds, which makes us look upon these Qualities in God as
opposite to one another. Nulla est regio Teucris quam det tua Conjux Dura.
Mercy upbraids Justice of its severity, that it is never satisfied let Good
Men suffer never so much, and that it never allows them any Repose here on
Earth: whilst Justice on the other hand, accuses Goodness and Mercy of its
being the Cause of all the Sins that are Committed, because it shelters
Criminals, and puts them in hopes of going off unpunished.

The Deities of the second sort, that are purely Physical, are employed in the
first Book in raising the storm against Aeneas. Aeolus is the Power of Nature,
which gathers together about Hills and in their Caverns, the Vapors and
Exhalations, whence Winds are formed: And having digested these Matters to a
certain degree of Heat and Dryness, puts them upon those Motions and Agitations
which we call the Winds. It Is thus that Aeolus is their Master. These Vapors
and Exhalations arise in the Air, which is represented by Juno: It Is therefore
to this Goddess that the God of the Winds is beholden for his heavenly Cheer.
There Is no need of taking Notice what is meant by the persons of Eurus and
Zephyrus, nor that of Neptune, who speaks to them.

We have one instance of the Moral Deities in the Engagement of Turnus with
Aeneas. The Furies which Jupiter sends against Turnus, are nothing else but the
Reproaches of his Conscience, which show him his Crimes and Impiety: King
Latinus foretold him of this at the very beginning of the War, giving him to
understand, that if he was so insolent as to despise the Gods, when 'twas at
his choice not to oppose their Orders, he would at last be obliged, when too
late, to one that he had offended, and they were Powerful. The Roman Orator
plainly confirms the truth of this Interpretation. Nolite putare ut in scena
videtis, homines consceleratos impulsu Deorum terreri, furiarum taedis
ardentibus sua quemque fraus, suum Scelus, sua audacia de sanitate and mente
deturbat. Hae sunt impiorum furiae, hae flammae, hae faces.
Never think (says he in his Speech before the Senate against Piso) never
think, Gentlemen, that the Gods send the Furies with their burning Torches to
frighten Criminals, as Poets upon the Theater represent them. No: The
Injustice, the Villainy, and the Crimes of each Miscreant, are his Tormenters.
These are the Furies, the Fires, and the Flames, that make them faint away, and
fill them with such Horror and Amazement. It Is thus that Turnus is represented
in his last Battle. Dii me terrent, and Jupiter hostis. Nec se cognovit euntem:
Scelerumque in pectore Dirae. Statius.
Statius has likewise in few Words very well expressed the Nature of these
dismal Deities: Which are no where but within our own breasts, there tormenting
us by the view of the Crimes we have committed.

There are two things observable in the Practice of Virgil that confirm this
Doctrine. The first is, that these Furies are never sent but against such as
merit them: They are the only persons that are terrified by them. The second
thing is, that those to whom they are sent, must necessarily own there is such
a Being as a God, that takes Vengeance upon the Criminal: For Atheists, that
acknowledge no God, are not liable to the Checks of Conscience; nor are they
used to be troubled at the Offenses they commit against the Deity; nor can they
be supposed to be daunted with the apprehension of another Life. So that the
Furies have nothing to do with them. This is the Reason why the Poet employs
none against Mezentius, although much more Criminal than Turnus.

CHAP. II. Of the Manners of the Gods.
HOMER and the Ancient Poets have bestowed upon their Gods the Manners, the
Passions, and the Vices of Men; and some are bold to add, that they have given
them such Manners as turn them into mere Swine. But if we would interpret what
they have said about them, according to the Division I have proposed, and by
the Allegories that are necessarily to be understood of them, we shall see that
these Reproaches have often more of show than solidity in them.

It Is true, the Learned men of Antiquity have went upon wrong grounds in a thing
of the highest importance, when their Writings have been such, that ordinary
Capacities or Men of a shallow Reach, that is almost all Men, have not been
able to break the Shell, and look through the Veil, with which they have
covered the Truth; and they have been miserably abused in taking the shadow for
the substance, and deformed and dangerous Figures for necessary and solid
Truths. Whether it proceeded from Pride, Envy, Error, or a bad Conduct, it is
doubtless a great Fault, and such as we can by no means excuse. But in our
design, we may omit, and pass over such Interpretations as a Poet is not
obliged to give in his Verses, and we may only consider the Poems, as Works and
Instructions that should be all Allegorical.

In this sense, it is much easier to defend than accuse Homer; and more just to
praise than blame him. One can find no fault with him for having made mention
of many Gods, nor for his bestowing Passions on them, as we hinted in speaking
of Juno and Venus. He might likewise bring them in fighting against Men. For
have we not examples of these Expressions and Figures in Sacred Writ, and the
true Religion? And if it is sometimes allowable to speak thus of the Gods in
Theology, there is a great deal more Reason for doing so in the Fictions of
Natural and Moral Philosophy.

When in these two sorts of Learning we describe the Nature of things; it is as
easy to describe their Defects, as the contrary. It would argue a Man's being
a Novice in Poetry, and that he understood but little of the way of Expression
is this sort of Writing, did he imagine, when he sees the Name of a God or
Goddess, that he must needs meet with nothing, but what is fine, good, and
commendable in these Personages. As if Virgil could not have said of Fame, that
she is a very foul-mouthed Goddess; nor of Sleep, that this God was
ill-natured, when he deceived good Palinurus, and tumbled him overboard. It Is
no more a Solecism to speak thus in Verse, than it is to say in Prose, that Fame
publishes very shameful things; and that Palinurus was asleep and fell
overboard.

It Is true we meet with more offensive Passages, such as the Adultery of Venus
and Mars in the Odysseis. But beside, the Physical and Moral Allegories, which
may in some sort excuse these too bold Figures, to say no worse of them; and
besides, that we meet with something very like it, written in the simplicity of
these Ancient times by Authors, which we cannot condemn, I add further, that
though there were no Allegory, yet Homer is not less excusable. And to make
this out, it is to be considered, that it is neither the Poet, nor his Hero, nor
any other person of Probity that makes this Recital: but the Phaeacans, a Soft,
Effeminate People, sing it amidst their Festival. Now it is always allowable in
a Poem, and in other grave and Moral writings, to introduce. Vicious persons,
who despise the Gods, profane sacred things, and seek in that which is most
Holy for excuses and examples to countenance their disorders. Homer then by the
example of these idle People, who could do nothing but Sing, Dance, Eat and
Drink, gives us this Lesson, That these soft and lazy Exercises are the source
of all Vicious pleasures; and that the persons, who live thus are usually
pleased to hear these shameful Tales, and to make the Gods themselves partners
in their Goatishness. Horace learned this Maxim by these Words of Homer, as
well as by the disorders of his times; when he says, That a Girl that learns to
Dance betimes, learns betimes likewise to play the Whore. So likewise, we may
suppose that Horace says of this Place of the Odysseis, as much as of any
other, that this Poem is an excellent piece of Philosophy, whereby we may learn
to be Men of Virtue and Probity, and to avoid all that is base and vicious.
From whence we may conclude, that the Recital of Homer we are speaking of, is
not so much a pernicious Example of Adultery and Impiety, as it is a very useful
Lesson, which he gives to those that would live well; namely, That if they
would not be guilty of these Crimes, they must fly the Arts and Methods that
lead thither.

But in short, a Poet had need be very cautious of meddling with such dangerous
Incidents as these are, if he would not do more hurt than good by his Poems. He
should study the Wants, the Interest, the Humor of his Auditors, and the
Effects which such Subjects may have upon their Minds. And to speak truth, we
live no longer in an Age wherein simplicity might render such a subject
tolerable among honest Men: And wherein one might propose it without corrupting
the better part of the Audience, and without countenancing that Corruption and
Vice which the rest are but too much inclined to. So that how Judicious or
excuseable soever Homer has been in this Invention; yet a Poet nowadays would
be neither Judicious nor Excusable, if he should venture to Imitate him
therein. It is good to teach what he taught: But it is very bad teaching it his
way.

However things are, yet this is a particular Case, which should not hinder us
from concluding, That Virtue and Goodness do no more belong to the Manners and
Character of the Poetical Gods, than to the Manners and Character of Men.

If a Poet speaks of the Gods in Natural Philosophy, he will give them such
Manners, Speeches and Actions, as are conformable to the Nature of the things
they would represent under these Divine Persons. He will say, that the God of
Sleep is Good, Bad, True, a Cheat, etc. Because we have pleasant Dreams, and we
have offensive ones, sometimes they instruct us, sometimes deceive us, very
often are vain, etc.

The case is the same in Moral Deities. Minerva is Wise because she represents
Prudence. Venus is both Good and Bad, because the Passion we enjoy under her
Name is capable of these two opposite Qualities.

Theology likewise has its Variety. The most sound part of it should say
nothing of the Gods but what is good: Domine, ne in furore tuo arguas me; neque
in ira tua corripias me. Psalm. 6.
But it may likewise attribute several passions to them, such as Anger,
Revenge, Sorrow, etc. Not that they have any such in reality, but only in
condescension and after the language of Men they are said to have such, as we
hinted before in speaking of Virgil's Juno and Venus. But there are several
Sects, and a Poet should take care who those are that he brings in speaking.
For an Epicurean, for instance, cannot give any Passion to the Gods. His
Theology teaches him that they enjoy a perfect Repose, and do not so much as
concern themselves with any of the Affairs of Mankind.

We might likewise add that the Passions and the Vices of each person form to
him his particular Theology. The debauched Pagans thought the Gods could not be
happy without enjoying the Pleasures of Sense. And they charged upon them their
Lasciviousness, as we before observed in the Example of the Phaeacans. There
are others who think there is no God at all: Or at least would persuade
themselves that he does not regard us. Virgil has given us an Instance of this
deplorable change in the person of Dido. This Princess at first entertains
Aeneas with Vows and Prayers which she puts up to the Gods with a sincere
Piety. Because then she was Innocent and at Quiet. She begins to love Aeneas
contrary to the Vow she had made to the Manes of her first Husband; which to
her was a kind of Deity. She begins at the same time to suppose that these Id
cinerem, aut Manes credis curare sepultos? Scilicet is superis labor est, ea
cura quietos Sollicitat. Aen. 4.
Manes are no longer concerned about her, and lay no Obligation upon her to
keep her Vow. Last of all, being more corrupted, she becomes guilty of Impiety
against the Gods: And seeing that Aeneas was about to leave her by their Order,
she would persuade him, that they are Ignorant of what is done here on Earth.
Not that she was really and absolutely persuaded of so impious a Maxim: The
Poet was too judicious to make so great and so strange an alteration in the
Manners of this Queen, in so short a time. It Is her Passion that makes her
speak thus. But still it is true to affirm that these Words are not absolutely
jargon in her Mouth, but have some foundation in her Heart. This therefore is a
Beginning of Impiety, which naturally happens to those, whose Vices and
Passions are Violent, and which at last leads them into downright Atheism.
Atheists speak neither well nor ill of the Gods. They despise this belief, and
laugh at those who adore and worship them. Such a one is Virgil's Mezentius.

All that we have said here concerning the Manners of the Gods, ought to be
applied to that which we have said concerning the Morals or Manners of Men. The
Manners of the Gods are capable of the four Qualifications which we have given
to the Others. They may be Poetically Good, since they may appear in the
Speeches and Actions of the Divine Persons we introduce. They will be suitable,
if we give to these persons such Manners, as the Nature of the things we
represent require: And if, as we make a King Magnificent and Jealous of his
Authority, so we make Fame to be a lying and malignant Goddess. They will be
Likely, if we speak of Venus, Mercury, etc. Conformable to that which is
reported of them in Fable, and which the first Poets have invented about them.
And they will be Even or Equal, if in a long series we see the same Character
maintained.

CHAP. III. How the Gods act in a Poem.
SINCE among the Gods, there are some Good, some Bad, and some between both;
and since of our very Passions we may make so many Allegorical Deities: To the
Gods one may attribute all the Good or; Ill that is done in a Poem. But these
Deities do not always act, after the same manner. Sometimes they act invisibly,
and by mere Inspirations; and this has nothing in it extraordinary or
miraculous. This is no more than what we say every day, That God has assisted
us upon such or such an Occasion, or that the Devil has inspired a bad Action
into this or that Man. It Is thus that Juno vires animumque ministrat. Aen. 9.
Juno helps Turnus in the Ninth Book of the Aeneid, when he was engaged in the
Trojan Camp; and thus Hic mentem Aeneae genitrix pulcherrima misit, Iret ut ad
muros. Aen. 12.
Venus in the Twelfth Book inspires Aeneas, and puts him upon Assaulting the
Town of the Latins, that so Turnus might be forced to the Combat, which he
industriously avoided. The Poet may make the Gods act thus, even among
Atheists: For though these Impious wretches acknowledge no God, yet they cannot
withdraw themselves from his Power. He disposes of them as he thinks fit, and
without their perceiving it, can turn their thoughts and designs as he pleases.
This is Virgil's practice in the person of Mezentius. At Jovis interea monitis
Mezentius ardens Succedit pugnae. Aen. 10.
It Is Jupiter, who, minded at last to punish him for all his Crimes, engages
him in a fight with Aeneas. To this way of the God's Acting we might likewise
refer, that which they insensibly contributed to an Action, for which they are
thanked. The God Mars does not appear at all in the fight of the Tenth Book of
the Aeneid: Yet Aeneas owns he was obliged to him therein: Tibi magne Trophaeum
Bellipotens. Aen. 11.
And to him dedicates the Trophy which he raised of the Arms of Mezentius.
These Divine Actions are simple and deserve not the Name of Machine. And they
are such as are allowable in the most exact Tragedies and Comedies.

The other way whereby the Gods Act is altogether Miraculous and Extraordinary;
and this, whether they present themselves Visibly, and make themselves known to
Men, as when Ipse Deum manifesto in lumine vidi Intrantera muros, vocemque his
auribus haufi.
Mercury discovered himself to Aeneas in the Fourth Book: Or whether they
disguise themselves under some human Shape, without making themselves known, as
when Inscia Dido, Infideat quantus miserae Deus. Aen. 1.
Cupid under the Form of Ascanius makes Dido sensible of his Power, who
Caresses him without knowing who he is; or whether without any visible
Appearance, they make us only sensible of their Power by some Miraculous
Action, as Venus in the Twelfth Book, when she cures the wound of Aeneas. Neque
te Aenea, mea dextera servat: Major agit Deus. Aen. 12.
The Physician, who had it in hand acknowledges that the Cure is all Divine,
and that he has no share in it. The Machines that are Prohibited in Dramatick
Poems are of this second sort: No body cares for seeing Gods or Miracles upon
the Stage.

There is likewise a third way that has something of both the other; it is
indeed a Miracle, but yet has very frequently been referred to that way whereby
the Gods act, which we mentioned first. This third comprehends the Oracles,
Dreams, and extraordinary Inspirations. Virgil in his Third Book has instances
of all this. Apollo utters an Oracle, the Gods interpret it to Aeneas in a
Dream and the Divine Helenus informs him Poetically of very many things. The
Speech of Sibyl to Aeneas, and all that she discovers to him of the Infernal
Shades, and of his Posterity, is likewise nothing else but one of these
Demi-Machines. We might to these add the Hell of the Odysseis: which consists
in nothing else but the Conjuring up the Ghost of Tiresias, and of several
others that were his Attendants.

All these Ways must be probable: And though the Probability in Machines is of
a very large Extent, since it is founded upon Divine Power, yet it is not
without some Limitations. We may apply to the Epopea those that Horace
prescribed to the Theater. He proposes three sorts of Machines. The first is of
those which we can, not only believe, but also endure the sight of: Such is a
God present and visibly conversing with the Actors. Nec Deus intersit, niss
dignus vindice nodus Inciderit. Hor. Poet.
He does not absolutely forbid this; but he admits it only in a Plot that
requires an Actor of this Importance. Aut in avem Progne vertatur, Cadmus in
anguem.
The second sort comprehends such Machines as are more incredible and
extraordinary: Such as the Metamorphosis of Progne into a Swallow, and of
Cadmus into a Serpent. Non tamen intus Digna geri, promise in stenain, multaque
tolles Ex oculis, quae mox nartet facundia praesns. Ibid.
He does not wholly condemn this Machine, nor exclude it from the Poem; but he
banishes it the Stage, and the sight of the Spectators. Quodcunque ostendis
mihi, sic incredulus odi.
These sights, represented thus, are odious; because a Man can never be
persuaded, that he sees so strange a Metamorphosis. So that, it is only allowed
to make a Recital of it. Nec quodcunque volet poscat sibi fabula credi: Neu
pransae Lamiae vivum puerum extrahat alvo. Ibid.
The third sort of Machines is altogether Absurd. Horace rejects it entirely.
The Instance he proposes is of a Child drawn alive out of the Bowels of a
Monster that had devoured it.

This third sort is likewise to be banished the Epopea, since there is no
Recital that can make the Auditors believe it. The two others are equally
allowable, and without the Distinction which Horace makes, which is only of Use
for the Theater: Because, it is only in Dramatick Poems, that there is any
difference to be made between that which is acted upon the Stage in view of the
Audience, and that which is done behind the Scenes, which afterward is
Recited. Our two Poets have instances of these two sorts of Allowable and
Probable Machines. All sorts of Deities speak often in the Epopea, and are no
less the Personages thereof than Men are, among whom they are often mixed.
Therein are likewise rehearsed several Metamorphoses, as that of Vlysses's
Fleet into a Rock, and that of Aeneas's Fleet into as many Nymphs as there were
Ships.

It Is true these Metamorphoses are very rare, because they are a great deal
less Credible than the rest. This shows that one must suit one's self to the
Gust of the Audience in this sort of Probability. That which was allowable in
the Ages Homer and Virgil lived in may be less regular in other times.

This puts me upon making a Reflection on the Method of making use of those
Machines probably, that are not of themselves Probable enough. The Machines
which only require Divine Probability (as that for instance which we have been
discoursing of) should be so disengaged from the Action of the Poem, that one
may substract them from it, without destroying the Action. But those that are
necessary, and which make the Essential parts of it, should be grounded upon
human Probability, and not on the sole Power of God. Now the Episodes of Circe,
the Sirens, Polypheme, and the like are necessary to the Action of the
Odysseis, and yet they are not humanly Probable. Homer artificially brings them
under the Human Probability, by the simplicity of those before whom he causes
these fabulous Recitals to be made. He says very pleasantly, (...). Odyss. lib.
6.
That the Phaeacans lived in an Island at distance from those Countries where
men of a Genius dwelt. Ulysses knew them before he made himself known to them;
and having observed that they were simple and credulous, and that they had all
the Qualities of those lazy People, that admire nothing so much as to hear of
Romantic Adventures: He pleased them by these Recitals that are suited to
their own humor. But even here the Poet is not unmindful of his more
understanding Readers. He has in these Fables given them all the Pleasure that
can be reaped from Moral Truths, so pleasantly disguised under these Miraculous
Allegories. It Is by this Means that he has reduced these Machines to Truth and
a Poetical Probability.

Virgil likewise relates somes of these Fables. He does not allow himself the
same Pretense; he has others to fly to: One of the principal is, that he is not
the Author of them. He relates them after Homer, whose Authority had already
established them: So that he had less measures to take.

CHAP. IV. When one must make use of Machines.
THIS Question is easily resolved by the Practice of our Poets. We may in short
affirm, that Machines are to be made use of all over, since Homer and Virgil do
nothing without them, They constantly put their Gods upon duty. Non enim res
gestae versibus comprehendendae sunt, quod long melius Historici faciunt: Sed
per, ambages Deorumque ministeria, and fabulosum sententiarum tormentum
precipitandus est liber Spiritus; ut potius furentis animi vaticinatio
appareat, quam religiosae orationis sub testibus fides.
Petronius with his usual Vehemence orders that it should be thus. He would
have his Poet converse less with Men than with the Gods: Leave throughout some
signs of his prophetical Transports, and of the Divine Fury that swells him: He
would have his thoughts be full of Fables, that is of those Allegories and
ingenious Figures, which, like Aenigma's, put the invention of the Readers upon
a pleasing Rack, and leave them to guess in their turns what the Poet himself
has written like a Prophet. Lastly, he would have a Poem be distinguished from
History in all its parts, not only by the Numbers, but by this Poetical fury,
which expresses it self only by Allegories, and does nothing but by the
Assistance of the Gods.

He therefore that would be a Poet, must leave Historians to write, that a
Fleet was shattered by a Storm, and cast upon a strange Coast: And must say
with Virgil, That Juno went to Aeolus, and that this God upon her instance
unkennel'd the Winds against Aeneas. Let him learn an Historian to write, That
a Young Prince behaved himself upon all occasions, with a great deal of Wisdom
and Discretion: And let him say with Homer, that Minerva led him by the hand in
all his Enterprises. Let an Historian relate, that though Agamemnon fell out
with Achilles, yet he could not but acknowledge that he stood in need of his
Assistance for the taking of Troy: And let a Poet say, that Thetis, disgusted
at the affront offered to her Son, goes up to Heaven, demands satisfaction of
Jupiter; and that this God, to satisfy her, sends the God of Sleep to
Agamemnon, who puts the Cheat upon him by making him believe he must take Troy
that very day.

Plutarch, Livy, and other Authors of the Roman History, will tell us, that he
who prescribed Laws to the Romans, shut himself up in a Wood, and feigned that
a Nymph dictated such Laws to him, as afterward he should propose to his
Subjects. A Poet will say, That Aeneas being alone with Sibyl of Cumae in the
Forest of Averna, she makes him go down to the Infernal Shades, and there see
the Rewards of good, and the Punishments of bad Actions; and that the Manes of
Anchises informed him what sort of Genius he should inspire that State with,
which he was going to establish in Italy. And if we would Poetically reduce
this Fiction into the Probability of History; let us not like an Historian say,
that as Numa feigned he had Conferences with Egeria, so Aeneas feigns that
Sibyl made him see in a Dream all that we read of in the Sixth Book: But let us
say that this Hero was let out of Hell by that Gate which was appointed for the
sending out of False Dreams.

It Is thus that our Poets make use of Machines in all the parts of their Works.
We might take a more particular View of them, if we would but examine all the
Parts of the Poem and the Narration. The Proposition in each of our three Poems
makes mention of the Gods; the Invocation is addressed to them, and the
Narration is full of them. The Gods are the Causes of the Actions. They make
the Plots, and dispose the Solution of them too. This is so plain that it needs
no farther proof. I will insist only on the Vnravelling of the Plots, which we
may look upon as that part of the Poem, which is the most Important in this
Point, especially if we consider that Aristotle and Horace have treated of
Machines more expressly in this, than in any other part of the Poem.

(...) Arist. Poet. 2. 15.
Aristotle speaking of Tragedy tells us, That the Solution of the Fable should
proceed from the Fable it self, and not from any Machine, as in the Medea.
Horace seems less severe. He only says, That the Gods should not appear, but
when the Dignity of the Plot requires their Presence. But this is only designed
for the Theater. This is observable by the Consequence of these Quotations. If
Aristotle had intended in this to speak of the Epopea he should have produced
for his Instances the Vnravelling of the Iliad, and that of the Odysseis, in
both of which the Gods are concerned. Minerva fights close to Ulysses against
the Gallants of Penelope; she helps him to kill them, and on the morrow claps
up a Peace between Ulysses and the Ithacans, and so concludes the Odysseis. In
the Iliad, the Gods meet to appease the Anger of Achilles, and Jupiter sends
Iris, Thetis and Mercury on this Errand. Minerva likewise helps Achilles in his
last fight with Hector. She stops Hector that fled from him, and when both had
cast their Javelins at each other without doing the least hurt, the Goddess
takes up the Lance of Achilles, and gives it him, whilst Hector is upon unequal
terms, armed only with his Sword. Virgil has imitated these Examples. Aeneas as
well as Achilles is clad in Divine Armor. Juturna gives Turnus his Sword again,
and Venus helps Aeneas to his Spear: And at last Jupiter sends a Fury, which
drives away Juturna, and frightens Turnus so, that he scarce knew where he was,
nor what he did in this last Battle.

CHAP. V. How the Machines are to be used.
THe Use of the Machines in the Epopea is quite contrary to that which Horace
prescribes for the Theater. This Critic would not have them be made use of in
Tragedy, but when needs must: And on the contrary, it is requisite that an Epick
Poet should not make use of them, but when they might be let alone, and then he
should order them so, that his Action stand in no need of them. How many Gods
and Machines does Virgil make use of to raise the storm, which casts Aeneas
upon Carthage? And yet this does not hinder but that this miraculous Action may
be looked upon as the ordinary Effect of a mere natural Cause. Cum subito
assurgens fluctu nimbosus Orion I^ vada caeca tulit. Aen. 1.
He makes one of his Personages say that the Cause of this Storm, which
surpised the Trojans, is the Rising of the blustering Constellation of Orion.
Upon this the Et sciendum quod Dii nisi data occasion nocere non possunt.
Commentators have very well observed; that the Poetical Gods can do no harm,
unless they have some favorable opportunity of doing it. It Is never to be
supposed that there are any storms during the Halcyonian days. This would be an
affront to the Power of the Gods, by ascribing to them such a force as
contradicts Poetical Probability. So that, tho beside this short season, there
is scarce any part of the Year, but when very probably and without a Miracle
one might be tossed about with a Storm; yet Virgil raises his Storms only in a
season that is more particularly subject to them. The four we read of in the
Aeneid, do all happen during the Rising of Orion. The first casts Aeneas upon
Carthage; The second surprises him a hunting with Dido; The third obliges him
to put into Sicily, where he Celebrates the Anniversary of Anchises; and the
fourth closes the fine Day he had chose for the Sports, and quenches the fire
that burnt his Fleet. The Poet informs us that all these Storms which surpised
Aeneas, were the effects of one and the same Cause. Quin etiam Hyberno moliris
sidere classem Expecta facilemque fugam, ventosque ferentes. Aen. 4.
For Dido chides Aeneas for preparing to leave her, whilst this dangerous
Constellation had still an inuflence over the Sea; and she conjures him (th o
in vain) to stay till this bad season was over.

According to this Practice, a Poet will be very cautious how he makes use of a
Machine to help him out of a difficulty, wherein his own unskilfulness has cast
him. But he will call in the assistance of the Gods to honor his Poem and
Hero, and no one will object against him, that it is for want of Art and
Invention, that he is obliged to implore the Aid of these supernatural Powers.
No one will cast these Reproaches upon Virgil in the Examples we have cited,
nor in his other Machines. It was not for want of Skill or Invention, that he
had recourse to Juno and Neptune, either to raise a Storm upon the Fleet of
Aeneas, or to lay it again. So likewise, a Woman stabbed to the heart with a
Poniard, as Dido was, might very well die of the wound, without Iris's being
sent by Juno to clip a lock of Hair off her Head. A Ship well manned, and near
the Haven, might without any Miracle enter in before another that was farther
off. It Is therefore without any necessity that the Poet makes use of the Gods
therein, and says that Mnestheus would have gained the prize perhaps, had not
Cloanthes put up so many vows, and had not so many Sea-Gods that heard him,
lent him a helping hand.

Virgil makes use of several ways, from whence one may discover there was
necessity for Machines. Sometimes the thing, that is done by a God, is
necessary, but it might as well have been done by a Mortal. Aeneas should be
informed of what had happened to Dido: But there was no need that Venus should
disguise her self under the shape of a Tyrrhenian Damsel, that was hunting in a
Wood. A mere Damsel might have informed him: And it is thus that we ought to
interpret the Changes of the Gods into Men. These are the ways whereby Poets
express themselves. An Historian would say that Beroe excited the other Trojan
Dames to fire their Fleet: And a Poet says, that Iris, sent express by Juno,
takes upon her the shape of Beroe.

Sometimes the Action ascribed to a Deity cannot be done by a mere Man: But
then this Action shall not be at all necessary. A mere Mortal cannot transform
the Ships of Aeneas into Nymphs. But then whether they are thus transformed, or
whether they are destroyed by fire, still they are lost. Nor can any one see
what alteration one of these two Incidents would have caused in the Affairs of
Aeneas more than the other.

I have already mentioned the Infernal Shades of the sixth Book, the Fury that
was sent by Jupiter to Turnus, and several other.

We may therefore conclude that a Machine in the Epick Poem is not an Invention
to wind ones self out of any Difficulty, that is intricate, affected, and
proper to some parts of the Poem: But that it is the Presence of a Deity, and
some supernatural, extraordinary Action, which the Poet inserts into almost all
the Incidents of his Work, to make it look more Majestical and surprising, and
to give his Readers a Lesson of Piety and Virtue. This mixture should be so
made, that one might retrench the Machines without cutting off any thing from
the Action.

CHAP. VI. Whether the Presence of the Gods is any Disparagement to the Heroes.
THE care of our Poets in making the Actions and Designs of their Hero's to
succeed by the assistance of the Gods, puts me upon adding the following
Reflections to what has been already said. One would think there was no
question to be made whether the Love and favor of God were an honor or a
Disparagement to those he thus Loves and Favors. And yet, we suffer our selves
to be so far prepossessed with sensible and ordinary things, that we become
liable to more extravagant thoughts. We judge of the Justice, the Favors, and
(if I may so say) of the Duties of God; just as we do of the Justice, the
Favors, and the Duties of Men. In a fight between Two persons, if a Third
steps in, and assists one of them to kill the other, we blame that third
person, and with him condemn his friend, who was so much a Coward as to stand
in need of Succor, to protect them both from disgrace. These thoughts are
proper, and this Indignation just. But Men treat God after the same Manner.
Jupiter, say they, should not have assisted Aeneas. Was not this Hero brave
enough to fight Turnus alone, and valiant enough to Conquer him? Where is there
any need then of this foreign Assistance? Does it not reflect upon the Hero and
the God too? And would Turnus have done less, had he had the same Advantage?
This is their way of arguing: from whence it must be inferred, that the Love
and Favor of God will serve only to make those, that he would assist, and, and
that venture to make use of that Assistance, appear Weak, Impotent, Cowardly,
and not worthy of being Conquerors: One should thereupon never pray to him nor
thank him for any happy success. And by this means the Character of Mezentius
will be the Character of a perfect Hero, and of a truly valiant Man. This Bravo
is not for having his Glory eclipsed by the Assistance of any Deity: His Sword
and his Arm are the only Gods he acknowledges and invokes. He vows a Trophy to
his Victory; but this vow is only addressed to his Son Lausus, whom he designs
to adorn with the spoils of vanquished Aeneas. These are the Prayers he makes
for his Victory, and these the Thanks givings he designs to make. And these are
likewise the Heroes those Men would make, who find fault with Jupiter and
Minerva for having bestowed the Victory on Aeneas, Achilles, and Ulysses.

It Is true, it would reflect upon an Hero, if himself did nothing; if the Hope
and the Confidence he placed in the Promises and Favor of God rendering him
more negligent, he should wait for the effect with his hands in his bosom; or
else, if exposing his Weakness and his little Valor, and being just upon the
point of yielding, he owed his preservation and his Victory only to Gods and
Miracles. But the Practice of our Poets removes this inconveniency, and we have
fully satisfied the World as to this point, when we observed, that the presence
and the Action of the Gods should be so ordered, that one might retrench every
thing that was extraordinary and Miraculous, without making any alteration in
the Action of the Humane Personages. By this means the Epopea will be neither a
School of Impiety and Atheism, nor of Idleness and Sloth. But Men will there
learn to adore God, and acknowledge him as the Only and Necessary Principle of
all the Good that can be done, and without whom the most puissant Princes, and
she most accomplished Heroes cannot succeed in any of their Designs. It Is he
that inspires Men with good Designs, gives them Courage to undertake them, and
power to execute them. Men will learn to respect, and submit to him; because
this Submission and Humility, which makes even Great Men stoop to their God, is
the Cause and the Occasion of their being elevated above the rest of Mankind.
They will learn to fear him, by considering the Misfortunes those Men bring
upon themselves, who abandon him: And because when our Passions have shut our
Eyes and stopped our Ears to his Orders and Instructions, we are too slow in
apprehending what a dreadful thing it is to make him our Enemy. They will put
an entire confidence in his Words and Promises: But withal knowing that they
suppose one shall merit the effects of them by using ones utmost endeavors, an
Hero will so behave himself in all his Actions, as if he ought to gain the
success alone without the assistance of the Deity: Because, as the Ancients
say, the Gods do not absolutely give us what they seem to give us, but they
sell it at the price of our Labors.

But if on one hand God be the Author of all the good we do; it is true likewise
to say that it is our selves that really do, whatever God does in and by us: And
since these Actions which God inspires into us, procures for us, and for which
he gives us all the Courage and Strength that is necessary, are truly and
properly our own Actions; it follows that the more God helps and favors us,
the more Glory and Honor he does us. And this is the difference that is
between the Assistance of God and that of Men. The Actions of Men belong only
to those that do them: So that their Aid diminishes our Glory, as much as the
Divine Assistance heightens it. Our Poets inform us thus much, and Achilles who
was so jealous of his Honor, knows well enough how to make the Distinction we
have here proposed. He was too high spirited to admit of the least assistance
which might lessen his Glory: He charges the Grecians to keep off from Hector,
whom he pursues. But when Minerva offers to assist him in this pursuit, and to
help to conquer and kill him, he was so far from rejecting this Divine Aid,
that he thinks it an honor to him, and brags of it even to Hector himself.

Monsieur Cornouille will allow me to end this point with what he has said
about it in his Andromeda: Phineus casts the same Reflections upon his Rival
Perseus, as one might upon Aeneas. But he is young, passionate and impious, and
has the Character of Mezentius, J'en jure par ses yeux, and mes uniques Rois,
and mes uniques Dieux.
in that he acknowledges no other Gods but the Eyes of Andromeda; so that he is
very fit to act that part. Queen Cassiopea makes the Answer to him. PHINEUS.
WHAT has he done, that is worthy to be praised,
But what another might, if Jove had pleased?
Let him be armed like us, what Enterprise
Dare he then undertake, all Hero as he is?
Ten thousand might have been than him more Brave
Had Heaven but deigned to help them like this Slave:
They would have been more generous and great,
The Monster slain, the Danger at their feet.
It Is easy vent'ring, when the fear is over,
To fight a Foe, that can offend no more;
To sieze the certain Conquest, when it is won:
And this is all the Exploit that He has done.
Now what Reward, what Praise, I cannot conceive,
So mean a Conquest merits to receive.
CASSIOPEA.
WHAT Merit's praise, you scorn: A blindness this
None can conceive. --
Heaven than our selves knows better what we are;
As men deserve, so they its Favors share.
You might have had as great an Aid Divine,
Had Jove but seen, like his, your Virtues shine.
But these are special Favors, placed on high
Which vulgar Souls can never expect to see.
The Gods, being just, reserve this special grace
Only for noble Souls, and for the Heaven-born Race.


The End of the Fifth Book.
Monsieur Bossu's Treatise OF THE EPICK POEM. BOOK VI. Concerning the Thoughts
and the Expression.
CHAP. I. The Foundation of this Doctrine.
THE Doctrine of the Thoughts and that of the Expression stand upon the same
Foundation. Both This and That is nothing else but the Art of imprinting on our
Auditors such Ideas as we would have them receive. It seems as if this Notion
belonged rather to the Expressions than the Thoughts; since the Thoughts being
nothing else but Ideas, one would imagine that if they were well Expressed,
that would be sufficient to imprint them on the minds of the Hearers. But you
will see that this is not enough, if you reflect, that there is a great deal of
difference between making any one comprehend what we think and have a mind to,
and the inspiring into him the same Inclimations, and the same Thoughts. A good
Expression is enough for the first. But it often happens, that if I would give
another the same Inclinations, which I have my self, I shall succeed better, if
I express quite contrary Thoughts, than if I clearly discovered the Ideas of my
mind, and my real Thoughts. If we pretend an Esteem and Friendship for any one
in the presence of a jealous and envious Rival, we shall not make him conceive
any of those good Thoughts for him; but, on the contrary, we shall render the
person, in whose behalf we speak, odious and contemptible to him. Figurative
speeches may likewise furnish us with Instances of this Nature. We express not
our precise Thought in an Hyperbole, we say a great deal more of a thing, than
we conceive of it, and more than we would have others conceive of it; and the
Irony does the contrary.

Therefore this part of Elocution we are speaking of, does not consist in
Expressing ones Ideas, or in making others apprehend the Ideas we propose; but
in proposing such Ideas as may imprint those that we would have imprinted, let
them be the same with those we propose, or the contrary, or any other. So that
three things are expedient for this purpose. First, to have a right conception
of the Idea we would imprint on the minds of the Auditors: It must be pure and
disengage'd from all those that may prejudice our design. Secondly, to know
what Thoughts are most proper to imprint this Idea, by considering the present
Humor, Interest, and Disposition of our Audience. And thirdly, to make a good
Choice of such Expressions as are most proper and suitable.

That which is most commonly prejudicial to the first of these, namely to the
Purity of the Ideas, is, that beside each particular Idea which we Imagine,
there is likewise a general Idea, which seldom fails mixing with almost all the
rest: It Is that Idea which we conceive of our selves, and which we would fain
represent as great, fine, excellent, and in a word such as we our selves
conceive it. This is evident, especially in that kind of Oration which the
Rhetoricians have styled the Demonstrative. It seems as if an Orator in such an
Harangue speaks more to entertain us with a vast Idea of himself than of his
Hero: And when we go away from hearing the Panegyric of any Saint or person of
Quality; it is seldom that we praise or dispraise either the One or the Other of
them upon the account of what the Orator has said: But we only cry, That this
Orator has an Eloquent Tongue, or that he is but so, so: As if we went to hear
his Speech, only to pass a Judgment upon his, not the Hero's person. The two
other kinds of Oratorical Discourses are not wholly free from this Vice. Some
are so vain, as to attempt it upon all occasions, and at every turn. They are
full of this vast Idea of themselves, that they cannot keep it in, but out it
must come, spread every where, and like a Deluge overflow all the Judgment, and
little Sense they have. We can produce instances enough, even in the Juridical
Kind, though that is more confined than the other two.

Besides, did these Persons understand wherein a true praise does consist, and
were they Masters of the second quality we required, which is, to know what
Thoughts and Sentiments a Man should propose in order to raise a great Idea of
himself in the minds of those that hear him; they would then correct this first
default, they would speak correctly, and say nothing but what was of
Consequence and to the Purpose. But since their first Error proceeds from a
Defect in judgment, it cannot be alone. They imagine that the true esteem of an
Orator or a Poet consists chiefly in fine Thoughts, in strong and lofty
Expressions, in passions carried on to an extreme, or in other such like
things, which in truth belong not to Eloquence, and sometimes produce effects
quite contrary to the design of an unjudicious Author.

A Lawyer, for instance, will Imagine that his Esteem depends upon making a set
Speech, adorned with figures, and full of a great many pretty Antitheses: He
will be sure to heap figure upon figure in his pleading: And choose rather to
enervate a good Argument, and lose his Cause by an unpardonable flight, than
not give his Antitheses all the Embellishments he judges they are capable of.
This is what Pedius did according to Persius's account of him. Fures, ait
Pedio. Pedius quid? Crimina rasae Librat in Antithetis. Doctus posuisse figuras
Laudatur. Pers. Sat. 1.
Theft (says the Accuser) to thy charge I lay,
O Pedius! What does gentle Pedius say?
Studious to please the Genius of the Times,
With Periods, Points, and Tropes, he slurs his Crimes.
[English'd thus by Mr. Dryden.]

Martial's Posthumus was troubled with another kind of whim. He had a vast
esteem for the Knowledge of History, and thought this Science must needs make
him pass for a very Learned Man. He therefore soon quits his Subject to declaim
against Hannibal, and Mithridates, and to plead the Romans Cause: As if the
Matter in debate were concerning their being Conquerors of the World, whereas
in truth the Controversy was only about three kids. It was not sufficient to
inform this Pleader of the Process of his Cause, and of the business on foot;
'twas likewise requisite he should be informed of what he was to have no hand
in. Non devi, neque caede, nec veneno; Sed lis est mihi de tribus Capellis.
(...) has abesse (...). Hoc Judeae sibi postulat probarl. Tu Cannas,
Mithridaticumque bellum, Et perjaria Punici furoris, and Syllas, Mariosque
Muci^sque Magna voce tonas, manuque tota: Jam dic, Posthume, de tribus
Capellis. Mat. Lib. 6. Epig. 19.
With Poisinings, Murders, Rapes we have naught to do;
The Judge impatiently expects that you
Should prove how contrary no Roman Laws
My Neighbor stole my Kids: For that is the Cause.
But you with strech'd-out hands and clamorous Bawl
Thunder the Punick War around the Hall;
Who fought with Mithiri^lates; how much Blood
Was spilt at Cannae; how that Sylla stood
Competitor with Marius, sought his doom;
And how bold Soaevola protected Rome:
Enough of this. -- Now, prithee, Lawyer tell
What sad mishap to my three Kids befell.


The more Vanity any Man has, the more subject he is to these Vices. Therefore
Poet should be more upon their Guards, than Orators. The Composures of the
last are only to be spoken, and to establish for their Authors a present Fame.
But a Poet has Immortality so much in his Thoughts, that he fancies he has
enough and to spare on it; and promises it with so much Confidence to others, as
if his own where indisputable, and as if all his Enemies were destroyed to the
very last Rat and Butter-Wife. These Poets will stuff a Poem with Descriptions
either ill placed, or ill managed, with affected and useless Figures, with
forced and insipid Sentences, with Similes more fine than just, and with other
such like Ornaments: And by this means they destroy the Idea they ought to give
of their Subject, by imprinting on their Readers minds nothing else but the
Idea of their Knowledge, Eloquence, and fine Genius, because they forsooth
fancy that the Politeness of a Genius, and the Honor of an Author consists in
these things. They judge of the Ancients and Moderns according to these Ideas;
and suppose they have excelled Homer and Virgil, and all other Poets, when
(without minding the Character, or any thing else that is peculiar and proper
to each Poem) they have heaped up in that, which they compose, whatever
appeared beautiful in all the rest; and when they have transplanted these
pretended Beauties with as little skill, as if the Nose or the Lips of an
handsome person, had the same Comeliness upon all sorts of Faces, without any
distinction of Age, Sex, or Proportion.

This was not Virgil's Opinion, when he imitated the Greek Poet. He has given
another sort of Character to his Aeneid; and he well observed, that this
obliged him to give the things he borrowed, a quite different Turn. This made
him say. That 'twas harder to steal one Verse from Homer than to rob Hercules
of his Club. This great Man had just and pure Ideas, and perfectly knew how to
inspire his Audience with them, without quitting his design, to run after false
lights, and glittering thoughts, by an indiscreet Vanity, more pardonable in
the Rawness of a Scholar, than in the Maturity of a Master. Let us apply this
to some general Thoughts.

CHAP. II. Concerning Descriptions.
DEscriptions are properly such Speeches as explain the parts and properties of
some thing or other. This Term sometimes extends even to Actions: But that of a
Recital or Narration is more proper to them, especially when these Recitals are
of some Length, such as is that of the Tempest in the first Book of the Aeneid,
the Sports of the Fifth, the Infernal shades of the next Book, the Battles of
the Second part, with several Others which I was willing to comprehend under
what I said concerning the Narration. They are too considerable to be mentioned
here under the Name of Sentiments or simple Thoughts. The Descriptions we now
speak of are only parts of these long Recitals. They therefore must be short;
and moreover, necessary and suited to the general Character of the Poem, and to
the Particular Character of the Subject matter that is described, as far as
possible.

The Description of Carthage, which Virgil makes the Frontispiece of his Aeneid
is contained in six Verses. It tells us that this City is seated over against
Italy, facing the very mouth of Tiber; that it is powerful in War, and that
Juno had a mind to make it the seat of the Universal Monarchy. This is the
Cause of the Anger of this Deity, and that which makes the Plot of the Poem.

The Readers would not have imagined how Aeolus could keep in and let loose the
Winds as he thought fit, if they had not been informed, that they are enclosed
in Caverns. The Poet spends twelve Verses upon it.

The Ships of Aeneas, so roughly handled by a Tempest, and at a Season, when
the Sea was liable to frequent and unforeseen Storms, had need of an Harbor,
that was free from this Danger, and very still; and since it was in a strange
and unknown Country, 'twas requisite this Haven should be in a private and
secret Place. This is what Virgil describes in Eleven Verses.

Venus presents her self to her Son, disguised like a Maid. The Poet is obliged
to tell how this Maid happened to be in a wide Forest. He represents her in a
hunting Habit. He is likewise obliged to reduce to Probability such an
extraordinary thing as that of a Maid in Armor. A Description of seven lines
does it completely.

Descriptions sometimes are mixed with some Passion or another. In this case
not only the Thread of the Discourse should make them very Natural; but they
should likewise be in some measure assisting to the Passions to which they are
joined. That fine Description of a Calm and quiet Night in the Fourth Book,
renders the cruel Disturbances of Dido a great deal more moving, since they rob
her of that Rest which all Nature enjoyed, to the very vilest and most
despicable Creatures. Nox erat, and placidum carpebant fefsa soporem Corpora
per terras: Sylvaeque and saeva quierant Aequora: cum medio volvuntur sydera
lapsu. Cum tacet omnis ager, pecudes pictaeque volucres, Quaeque Iacus late
liquidos, quaeque aspera dumis Rura tenent: Somno positae sub nocte silenti
Lenibant curas and corda oblita laborum. Et non infoelix animi Phaenissa, nec
unquam Solvitur in somnos.
'Twas Night, each weary Creature took its Ease;
Hushed were the Woods, and silent were the Seas:
Poised in their Height the Stars did seem to rest,
Each Field was still, whilst every Bird and Beast,
The Monsters of the Deep, the Savage Bears,
Were laid to sleep, and dos'd away their Cares.
Only unhappy Dido finds no rest,
Poor Queen! So tortured is her Lovesick braest!


If instead of this admirable Turn, At non infoelix.
Only unhappy Dido, the Poet, carrying his Description farther, had said:
Aeneas celsa in puppi, jam certus eundi Carpebat Somnos rebus jam rite paratis.
Whilst the Dardanian does securely rest
In his Tall Ship for sudden flight prepared:
Then the whole would have been cold and insipid.

The Description of the Trojans being hard at work, and eager to leave
Carthage, is likewise extremely well managed. On one hand it shows what good
Effect the presence of a Lord and Master has; for it is the presence of Aeneas
that hastens their Work: Classemque revisit. Tum vero Teucri incumbunt, and
littore celsas Deducunt toto naves, natat uncta carina. Frondentesque ferunt
remos, and robora sylvis Infabricata fugae Studio. Migrantes cernas, totaque ex
urbe ruentes. Aen. 4.
He does his Fleet without delay prepare.
The Trojans ply the work the busy Main
Is filled with noise, the Ships now float again.
"Whole Oaks, the Leaves unstrip'd, for have unwrought,
"Down from the Wood for Oars and Masts they brought.
On every side are seen descending down
Long Troops which bring Provisions from the Town.
[English'd thus by Edm. Waller and Sidney Godolphin Esquires.]

And on the other side the Consequence is such, that the Poet to expose this
their Eagerness not so much to the Readers, as to D. View. She there saw the
preparative of her Death; and every blow the Ax and Hammer struck, went like so
many stabs of a Dagger to her very Heart. Can any thing be more moving than the
Ingenious application Virgil makes? Quis tibi tunc, Dido, cernenti talia
sensus? Quosve dabas gemitus, cum littora ferrere late Prospiceres ex arce
summa? Ibid.
What were thy Thoughts, sad Dido! on that day?
How deep thy sighs? When from thy Tower above
Thou sawst the Phrygians in such order move,
And heardst the tumult of the Clamorous Sea?
[Englished thus by the same persons.]

If in the middle of a great Action, any thing is described, that seems to
interrupt and distract the Reader's mind; it is requisite that the Effect of
these Descriptions declare the reason and necessity of them, and that by this
means they be embodied, if I may so say, in the Action. We have one instance of
this in the Battle of the Eleventh Book of the Aeneid, where the Poet runs out
into so curious a Description of the Arms and Dress of Chloreus. Forte facer
Cybele Chloreus, olimque Sacerdos
Insignis long Phrygiis fulgebat in armis;
Spumantemque agitabat equum, quem pellis ahenis
In plumam squamis auro conserta tegebat.
Ipse peregrina ferrugine clarus and ostro,
Spicula torquebat Lycio Cortynia cornu:
Aureus ex humeris sonat arcus, and aurea vati
Cassida, tum croceam chlamydemque sinusque crepantes
Carbaseos fulvo in nodum collegerat auro.
Pictus acu tunicas, and barbara tegmina crurum.

Chloreus, the Priest of Cybele, did glare
In Phrygian Arms remarkable afar.
A foaming Steed he rode, whose hanches case,
Like Feathers, Scales of mingled Gold and Brass.
He clad in foreign Purple, galled the Foe
With Cretan Arrows from a Lycian Bow.
Gold was that Bow, and Gold his Helmet too:
Gay were his upper Robes which loosly flew.
Each Limb was covered over with something Rare,
And as he fought he Glistred every where.
[Englished thus by Mr. Stafford in Dryden' s Miscellanies. Part II. p. 491.]

The Judicious Readers might perhaps have been disgusted at this Beauty so
carefully described in the very heat of Battle, if the Poet had only made it
for their sakes. But it is not designed so much for them as for Camilla. This
Maid is so charmed at the sight of his Accoutrements, that she is wholly intent
upon the Conquest of them. The desire of having them costs her her Life, gives
the Victory to the Trojans, and breaks all the Measures Turnus had taken
against Aeneas. These are such Descriptions as are just and managed with
discretion. They were not made for their own sakes only, nor are they mere
Ornaments.

Seneca is far from this Method. If he has any Recital to make, tho never so
Melancholy and frightful, he begins it with such Descriptions as are not only
useless, but trifling and foolish. It Is requisite we should produce an Instance
of it. Creon has a Story to tell Oedipus, that was the most melancholy, the
most frightful, and the most ungrateful that ever could be told a King. He is
entreated, he is threatened, and after great signs of Grief for being forced to
tell him such terrible and afflicting things, he begins his Narration with the
Description of a Grove, which Oedipus knew as well as the French King knows the
Forests of Vincennes, Boulogne, and S. Germain. But suppose Oedipus had never
heard of it, was he then at leisure to be told, that it was full of
Cypress-Trees, Oaks, Laurel, Myrtle, Alder, and Pine-Trees? That the
Cypress-Trees are always green, that the Laurel-Trees bear bitter Berries, that
the Alder-Trees were proper to build Ships, which ride on the wide Ocean, etc.
That the Oaks of this Grove had their Branches distorted and eat up with Age;
that Time had gnawn the Bark off this; that the Roots of That could no longer
support it, and that it would tumble down, were it not prop'd up by the Trunk
of another Tree. His Description of all this is in these Words: Est procul ab
urbe lucus ilicibus niger, Dircaea circa, etc. Sen. Oedip. Act. 3.
Far off from Thebes, where Dirce's sacred Well
With silent streams bedews the Neighboring Plain,
There is a Grove with darkest shades over spread.
Here Cypress lifting up its bushy head
Graces the Wood with never fading Green.
Here quite worn out with Age an Oak displays
Its crooked sapless Arms; the Bark of This
Devouring Time has gnawn; The Root of That
Sits loose, and throws it against another Tree.
Here bitter Laurel, limber Osiers grow,
Soft Myrtle to the Paphian Goddess sacred,
Tough Alder fit for Ships and Massy Oars,
The Lofty Pine that dares the strongest Storm,
And turns its knotty side against the Wind.
In The middle stands a Tree of mighty Bulk
Protecting all the lesser Underwood,
And throwing all abroad its spreading Boughs,
Defends at once, and shades the subject Grove.
[English'd thus by J. Hoadley of Cath. Hall.

CHAP. III. Of Comparisons or Similes.
WE very commonly explain our selves by Similes, and make use of them, the
better to make others apprehend what we propose, and to give them a just Idea
thereof. There are two Essential Qualities belonging to them, the First is,
that the thing we make use of be better known, and easier to apprehend, than
that we would make known by its assistance; and the second is, that there be an
exact Relation between them.

As for that which concerns the Knowledge of the thing we make use of in a
Simile, there is no need that we should have seen it with our Eyes. It Is enough
that we have the Testimony of common Opinion only on our side; tho we know at
the same time it is either false or Fabulous. The Phoenix, the Harpyes, and the
Adventures of Hercules, are as proper for this purpose, as a Cock, or a Dog, or
the Actions of Julius Caesar. Nor should we condemn some Excesses that are
commonly to be met with in these Similes, as if they destroyed the justness of
them: but we should consider that in this case there is an Hyperbole added to
the Simile. It Is therefore allowable to liken a Valiant Captain to a Torrent
that bears down all before it; to a Thunderbolt that meets with no resistance,
and to a Lion in the midst of a Flock of Sheep. But we are most liable to be
deceived in this Justness, if we look upon Similes only as Ornaments; for then
we may neglect the justness which is Essential to them, and mind nothing else
but a Luster and Beauty, which has nothing to do with the Essence. That we may
not be deceived therein, we must be acquainted with the Design of the Poet, and
the Nature of the things he makes use of. Without this, one is in danger to be
mistaken, and to imagine that a just and suitable Simile is both false and
vicious. Let us now see some instances of this.

Virgil describing the Beauty of Ascanius, compares him to a precious Stone set
in Gold, and to Ivory enchac'd in Box. It is true, that whoever imagines Virgil
would say this young Prince was as handsome as a piece of Ivory enchac'd in
Box, would find this Simile to be very flat: and would have reason to complain
that the Poet lessens an Idea that he ought to raise. But we shall find that
this Simile is just, if we would discover wherein it consists, and observe,
that the Author has distinguished two things in Ascanius. The one is the
shining of his comely head when bare: And the other is the Color of his
Complexion, and that of his hair. The first is compared to a precious Stone
enchac'd in Gold. Dardanius caput ecce puer detectus honestum Qualis gemma
micat fulvum quae dividit aurum, Aencid. 10.
See how the Trojan Youth, his head all bare,
Does like a Gem enchac'd in Gold appear.


This is both just and noble. But the whiteness of a Face would have been but
pitifully expressed by a precious Stone. It is with a great deal more Justice
compared to the Whiteness of Ivory, and the Color of his Hair to that of Box.
Vel quale per artem, Inclusum buxo aut Oricia terebintho Lucet ebur: fusos
cervix cui lactea crines Accipit. Ibid.
Or like to Ivory enclosed in Box:
So shine the Youth's disshevl'd Yellow Locks
Upon his milky Neck.


In the Sixth Book there is a Comparison very like this last. A Bough of Gold,
which grew upon an Oak, the Poet compares to Misleto. He would have taken off
very much from the Luster of this precious Bough, if his design had been to
express this Luster by that of the Misleto. But this Property of Gold is very
well known, and the bare naming of this Metal raises in us an Idea of it that
is lovely and dazzling enough: It stands in no need of being heightened by a
Comparison. It Is a great deal more Wonderful and Extraordinary to see a Tree
shoot forth a branch of Gold, of so different a Nature from its own. This
therefore calls for a Simile: and is the Subject of that which Virgil made. He
does not fail making mention of the Diversity of Natures that is between Green
and Yellow Misleto, and the Oak which produces it at a time when it has the
least strength, and looks more like a dead Trunk than a living Plant. Quale
solet Sylvis, etc. Aen. 6.
Just as upon some Sapless Oak does grow
In The midst of Winter verdant Misleto:


We may likewise say that this Simile is a Proof that Nature produces some
things extraordinary, and renders the Fiction more probable. For Virgil does
sometimes make this use of the Similes he employs. This is manifest from
Aeneas's accidental meeting with a Carthaginian Damsel, that was in Armor and
a hunting. The Poet compares her to Amazon, and to a Spartan Lass. These two
Quotations prove that the meeting with a Damsel hunting in the Forest of
Carthage is to be allowed as exactly probable. This Simile then is a great deal
better, more just, and more ingenious than if he had compared this Damsel to
Diana; tho this last would have seemed more noble, and have presented it self
sooner to the mind.

If it seems natural to compare a Huntress to Diana, it seems no less so to
compare a Valiant Commander to a Lion. Should not Virgil have done his Hero
rather than Turnus this Honor? Yet he does the contrary. Perhaps it is because
the Character of the Lion is Anger. He is the emblem of it: And Fertur
Prometheus addere principi Limo coactus particulam undique Desectam, and insani
Leonis Vim Stomacho apposuisse nostro. Lib. 1. Od. 16.
Horace informs us that when Prometheus formed Man out of that which was proper
to each Animal, that which he borrowed from the Lion was his Anger. The
similitude then of this Animal is not at all suitable to the Valor of Aeneas,
but a great deal more proper for that of Turnus. So that when the Poet did it
he was not at all ignorant of the Terms, Anger and Fury. He makes use of these
very Expressions, when he likens Turnus to Mars, to whom he never compares
Aeneas.

We should not make Comparisons between Noble and Ignoble, between great and
inconsiderable things. But what is base and ignoble at one time and in one
Country, is not always so in others. We are apt to smile at Homers comparing
Ajax to an Ass in his Iliad. Such a Comparison now adays would be indecent and
ridiculous; because it would be indecent and ridiculous for a person of Quality
to ride upon such a Steed. But heretofore this Animal was in better repute:
Kings and Princes did not disdain the Beast so much as mere Tradesmen do in our
times. It Is just the same with many other Similes, which in Homer's time were
allowable. We should now pity a Poet, that should be so silly and ridiculous as
to compare a Hero to a piece of Fat: Yet Homer does it in a Comparison he makes
of Ulysses. And the H. Ghost himself, which cannot be supposed to have a wrong
sense of things, begins the Encomium of David by this Idea. Eccl. 47. 2.
As is the Fat taken away from the Peace offering, so was David chosen out of
the Children of Israel. The reason of this is, that in these Primitive times,
wherein the Sacrifices of the true Religion as well as of the false, were
living Creatures; the Blood and the Fat were reckoned the most noble, the most
august, and the most holy things.

Comparisons do not lessen the Passion of those that hear them, but in the
persons that speak them they generally denote such Reflections, as do not
usually proceed from a disturbed and unquiet mind. So that it rarely happens
that they seem natural and probable in the mouth of a passionate person. Yet
observe what the enraged Medea says in Seneca. Nunquam meus cessabit in poenas
furor, Crescetque semper, etc. Med. Act. 3.
Not time it self shall cool my glowing Rage,
Which grows in strength still as it grows in age:
Cruel as beasts, or Scylla, it shall be,
Or as Charybdis whose devouring Sea
Sucks up the Ionian and Sicilian Main,
Which meet, and shove each other back again;
So scorching and so hot shall be my Ire,
Titan from Aetna never belched half the Fire.
[Englished thus by J. Hoadly of Cath. Hall.]

Such learned Passions are seldom violent. A Woman who takes notice that
Charybdis swallows up the two Seas of Ionium and Sicily; and that the Flames,
which Aetna throws out, are belched by a Giant that is overwhelmed with the
weight of that Mountain, thinks upon something else beside her Anger.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Sentences.
THis Word Sententia, in Latin is very Ambiguous. It signifies that part of
Poetry, which we now treat of in this Book under the Name of Sentiments or
Thoughts. It likewise signifies a Sentence of few Words, that contains some
profitable Thought or other for the conduct of human Life; such as in these
Instances: Discite Justitiam moniti and non temnere Divos. Aen. 6.
Learn to be just, and don't the Gods contemn. The habits we contract in our
youth are of great Moment, etc.

The Word Sentence in our Language does not fall under the first of these two
Significations. Therefore in this Chapter we shall only take it in the latter
Sense, and understand by it, a Moral Instruction couched in a few Words.

Sentences then render Poems very useful, and besides that, they have I know
not what kind of Luster that pleases us. So that, it seems natural to imagine,
that the more any Work is embellished with them, the more it deserves that
general Approbation, which Horace promises to those, that have the Art to mix
the Profitable with the Pleasant. But there is not any one Virtue, but what is
attended with some dangerous Vice or other.

Too many Sentences make the Poem sink into a Style that is too Philosophical;
and cast it into a Seriousness that is less becoming the Majesty of a Poem,
than the Study of the Learned, and the Gravity of the Dogmatical. These
Thoughts have in their own Nature a certain kind of calm Wisdom, that is
contrary to the Passions, and with which they inspire us: They are such as make
the Passions languish as well in the Auditors, as in the speakers. To conclude,
the Affectation of speaking by Sentences is the cause that many foolish and
triffling ones are spoken, or that they are spoken by such, whose present State
and Condition does not allow them to be so prudent and learned. We have a great
many of these vicious instances in Seneca's Tragedies.

The misfortunes of Hecuba in the loss of her Kingdom, Husband, Children, and
Liberty, rendered her no longer capable of any thing else, but Barking,
Howling, and Biting, to use the Poet's Dialect, who for this reason have
judiciously transformed her into a Bitch. From whence then proceed these grave
and moderate Sentences, and these fine Moral Reflections? Quicunque regno
fidit, and magna potens Dominatur Aula, etc. Troas. Act. 1.
Let those, who sit on Thrones, and bear a sway
In Courts, who think the Gods will always be
Propitious to them, and maintain their State;
Look down on mine, and Troy's unhappy Fate.
From these sad turns of Fortune they may learn
Themselves may die like Slaves, though Monarchs born.


Certainly these are not the Thoughts of this Hecuba, whose name is borrowed
here. They are the Thoughts of Seneca the Philosopher writing at quiet in his
Study, and meditating upon the Misfortunes to which the Height of Fortune
exposes us. The only interest he takes upon him, is to draw from thence useful
Maxims, and this fine Moral, which the glittering Thrones, and the dreadful
fall of the most puissant Monarchies supplied him with.

These are such Sentences as are ill managed: Let us now take notice of others
that are as ill employed, and yet are moreover cold, ridiculous, and absurd.

Oedipus seeking out for a Remedy to succor Thebes, that is reduced to the
very brink of ruin, is forced at last to conjure up the Ghost of King Laius. He
orders Creon to be present at that Ceremony, and afterward to come and give
him an account of it. The Ghost appeared, discovered the remedy according as it
was required, and Creon comes to give the King an account of it. He begins with
declaring, that he cannot tell how to utter his mind; and by Sentences he makes
this foolish Declaration to him: Ubi turpis est medicina sanari piget, etc.
Oedip. Act. 3.
We Are loath to live, when by the nauseous Pill
Our health must be restored. Kings take it ill
They should be told, what they sometimes require.
Let me be silent: That Is a small desire
No King can well refuse. If that is denied,
What can be granted me?


A Man must have a strange fancy to speak Sententiously, that makes his
Personages speak thus upon such an Occasion. When he is upon declaring the only
Remedy that could save a State, which his silence would certainly ruin; is it
not a great piece of Impertinence to say, That the least favor that could be
begged of a King, is to hold ones peace; and that if it be not lawful to
conceal this Remedy, nothing is lawful? Yet Oedipus, who at the first denial
made him by Creon, was so incensed against him, Itane and salutis publicae
indicium obrues.... Mitteris Erebo vile pro cunstis caput, Arcana sacri vote ni
relegis tua. Ibid.
as to threaten him with Death; when he should have been incensed more against
him for his perservering in so unreasonable a denial, and for his alleging
such foolish reasons, as would make one believe he jeered him to his face: Yet,
I say, as if Oedipus were of the Poets own mind, and had a greater Inclination
for Sentences, than for the safety of his Subjects; he seems to be wholly
pacified, since he has the patience to hear Creon say so many fine ones, and is
willing to utter such as well as he. And they too are of the same stamp with
those we have already seen. This is his answer, That Saepe vel lingua magis.
Regi atque regno muta libertas obest.
oftimes silence does more harm to Kings and States than even speaking does;
and that lastly, Imperia solvit, qui t^cet jussus loqui.
he is no obedient Subject, that speaks not when Commanded.

The first Remedy to cure these Indecenies, is to imagine we hear the true
Persons talking naturally together, and to suppose our selves in their places,
and see what we would say upon such an Occasion. By this means a Man will learn
to use Sentences seldomer, and to retrench those, that being not necessary to
raise the Idea of that which he would represent, are only dressed up for a
show. He will likewise learn to strip a great many Thoughts of that Ambitious
Air, which forms a general Precept out of a Trifle. And he will say upon these
occasions; I command you to speak, do you Obey: And not like Seneca, he that
does not speak when commanded, does not do as we Command him. In short he will
know how to manage the Sentences he makes use of better, and how to render them
more just.

The second Remedy is, so to express these Sentences, that they be not too
apparent; and that the Effect of them befell before they are discerned. This is
Curandum est, ne Sententiae emineant extra corpus orationis expressae, sed
intexto vestibus color nireant. Homerus testis and Lyrici, Romanusque
Virgilius, and Horatii curiosa felicitas. Petron.
Petronius's Opinion. He is in the right in referring us to our Virgil: For
this Poet is admirable in the Art of inserting Sentences.

But before we speak of these disguised Sentences, let us make this Reflection
upon the others: That they are generally spoken either by a grave and tragical
person, or else by one of the common People.

Hitherto we have spoken concerning the first of these. And to that which we
have already said about it, we add, that the Poet should make choice either of
such as may excite to Action, and encourage those to whom they are spoken, such
as this for instance; Audentes fortuna juvat. Aen. 10.
Fortune assists the Brave and Daring Souls:


Or such as may augment the Passion, such as these two figurative ones, of the
same style; Quid non mortalia pectora (...) Auri sacra fames? ^ 3.
Vile Avarice! What bold Attempts do thou
Excite poor Mortals too?
Improbe Amor quid non morta^ pectora cogis? Aen. 4.
All conquering Love! Who can resist thy sway?


They are made use of quite another way with respect to the Vulgar, and the
persons of Comedy. They are often brought in speaking Sententiously, or (to
speak more properly) in Proverbs and Punns. The reason of this Difference is,
that the grave Persons invent what they say, according as the present occasion
requires; so that their Sentences are so many nice or judicious Reflections,
which should be inspired into them by Objects that are present. Now it seldom
happens, that Objects, which are present, inspire these sorts of general
Thoughts into passionate and interested persons. It Is this that ought to
regulate the use of them in Poems; and which Art and Nature have taught Virgil
to practice. But the Vulgar never invent, they only say over again by rote what
they have heard others say often, and what one may suppose they themselves have
said an hundred times over. So that their Sentences cost them no Reflection,
nor the least premeditation. Besides, they meet with no passion, which they
interrupt contrary to Art: But they only raise laughter, and that is more
conformable to the Art and Air of Comedy.

CHAP. V. Of Disguised Sentences.
WE are now come to show that the Sentences should be disguised; we shall in
some instances of Virgil propose the Methods whereby he has made these
Disguises. The most general Method is, not to declare the Moral Instruction in
Universal Terms, but to make an Application of it to the Action on foot. This,
for instance, is a pure Sentence, and declared in universal terms: Those who
Hic quibus invisi fratres dum vita manebat, Incinsi poenam expectant. Aen. 6.
hate their brethren in this life, shall be severely punished for it in Hell.
Virgil applys it to his Action by saying, that Aeneas being in Hell, met there
among the damned such as had hated their Brethren here on Earth.

There are several ways of disguising Sentences, and of applying them to the
Action, sometimes the Consequence alone has this effect, when the Poet has
skill enough to manage it well. In the Second Book of the Aeneid, the Trojans
were at a stand what they should do with the Wooden-horse, that the Grecians
had left behind them Aeneas, that tells the story, relates the Opinions of
several considerable persons, of Thymaetes, Capys, Laocoon and others, and
therewith he mixes the Discourses of the People, who in the Contrariety of
their Opinions knew not on what to resolve. We here see nothing but a bare
Recital of that which happened among the Trojans upon this Occasion; This may
be conceived without a Sentence, and without a general and universal
Proposition. But if this Thought be taken from what follows and considered
alone; it is without doubt a Sentence, and a discourse that shows us in general
the Nature and the restless Inclinations of a People, that deliberate in a
hurry, and know not on what to resolve: Scinditur incertum studia in contraria
vulgus.
The Wavering Mob cannot in their Votes agree
Some are for this, some that:


It is no matter by whom, and how many these sentences are uttered: Tu ne cede
malis sed contra audentior ito Quo tua te fortuna sinet. Aen. 6.
Never faint beneath the weight of any Ill:
But boldly go, where're thy Fortune calls.
Quo Fata trahunt retrahuntque, sequamur. Quicquid erit, superanda omnis
fortuna ferendo est. Aen 5.
Let Us follow Fate where-ere it leads the way;
Let what will come, Patience will take away
The Pressure of it.


A Sentence is well expressed any of these ways: And these Thoughts taken from
the places where they are, and considered without the Consequence, as I here
represent them, are true Sentences, and Moral Precepts, which fortify us
against all manner of unlucky Accidents, and against the Oppositions of
Fortune. But in the Series of the Poem, they are, properly speaking, neither
Sentences, nor general Precepts, but advices given to Aeneas upon particular
occasions.

The Latin Tongue has an advantage over ours in this, by means of the Ellipsis.
In Latin it is often as elegant to suppress, as it is to express a word. So that,
suppressing the Word that makes the particular Application, one leaves the
Thought in that kind of ingenious Ambiguity, which we observed in the foregoing
Examples, where there is nothing to be understood. Here you have an Instance of
this Ellipsis. The Trojans reduced to their last shifts by Turnus, see Aeneas
advancing to succor them. The Poet says, Spes addita suscitat iras. This
Expression signifies equally, either in particular, that the Hope They received
rallied and increased their Courage; or in general, that the Hope of
approaching and certain Succor raises men's Courage, and arms them with new
Vigor. If the Poet had added but one Word, and said, Ollis spes addita suscitat
iras; The first sense would have been clearly expressed, and it would not have
been a pure Sentence, but the Application of a Sentence. The leaving out of
this Word makes it a perfect Sentence. But this leaving out the word being so
natural, that we can easily understand it; reduces the Sentence into the body
of the Discourse, and prevents it, as I may so say, from being upon the ramble.
This is one of those fine and delicate Unions which Persius requires.

The second way of disguising the Sentences, is by applying them sensibly to
the Particular Action. This is done by drawing a particular Conclusion from an
Argument founded upon a general Proposition, which we do not express. An
instance thereof is this, Dido complains, because she did not set upon Aeneas,
whilst it was in her power; and she starts this Objection against it: That such
an Assault would have been as dangerous to her as to her Enemy. Verum anceps
pugnae fuerat fortuna. One may answer her in this Argument: He that is resolved
to die, has nothing to fear; I have nothing then to fear, since I am resolved
to die. It would have been ridiculous to have expressed all this in a Poem, and
to make one as passionate as Dido then was, to argue the Case thus. 'Twas
requisite then that one or other of these Propositions should be made choice
of; each of them is intelligible enough. The mind of the Composer does usually
determine this without Reflection, and he takes either that side to which his
over serious Wisdom, or to which his own Imagination judiciously warmed, and
transformed into that of the person who Acts and Speaks, inclines him. Thus the
Sage and Sententious Seneca would not have failed taking the general
proposition. What signifies? He would have said, he fears nothing that is
resolved to die. Virgil has followed his ordinary Flame and Style, and says,
Fuisset! Quem metus moritura.

Seneca very frequently in his Tragedies, where the Moral should be less
apparent than in the Epopea, uttere his Thoughts Morally and Sententiously; and
Virgil on the other hand, in the Epick Poem, and in places that are designed
for Morality, conceals his Sentences under Figures, and particular Applications
This Tragedian in his design of joining what is Profitable to what is Pleasant,
has so managed things, that he quite hides the Pleasant, and stifles the
Passion that should be predominant, that he may foist in a Sentence, the effect
whereof is frequently nothing else but the offending those that make impartial
Reflections thereon; as in that we have already taken notice of in his Oedipus.
Whilst Virgil, retaining in the Sentence, he makes use of, all that is
Profitable and instructive according as he is obliged, mixes therewith the
Luster and the Tenderness of the Passions with a judgment and skill that is
peculiar to him.

If any thing lays us under an obligation of embracing Virtue, and abandoning
Vice, it is doubtless this Maxim, viz. That the chiefest and best Recompense of
a Good Action is Virtue it self, and the good Habits we contract by our good
Actions; as on the contrary, Vicious Actions imprint on us the Love of Vices
and the Habits of committing them, which sometimes lead us into a kind of fatal
Necessity. The Habits take such deep rooting in us, that Death it self does not
make us relinquish them: We preserve to Eternity the Affections and
Inclinations which we have contracted in our lifetime, and with which we die.
So that those who are so unhappy as to leave this World with their Vicious
inclinations about them, are afflicted with unspeakable torments, when they
come to see the deformity of those Vices which they cannot divest themselves
of, and the Beauty of Justice and Virtue, from which they are banished for
ever. Virgil teaches us all this in several Sentences that he disguises after a
most admirable manner.

The first thing is: That the Manners and the Habits are the best reward of
good Actions. He tempers this excellent precept with so much Tenderness, that
it is hard to say, whether in this passage he makes use of the Profitable, or
the Pleasant. A young Nobleman, Eurialus, the most amiable, and the most
beloved of all the Trojans, meets with an important occasion of serving his
Prince, to which nothing but his own Virtue obliges him. He embraces the
opportunity with all earnestness, and is going to expose himself to a Death,
that perhaps might be the heartbreaking of his Mother. She loved this Son so
passionately, that she was the only Woman that followed him into Italy, without
fearing the Dangers and the Fatigues which kept all the rest behind at Sicily.
Eurialus, that loved his Mother as dearly, dares not take his leave of her,
because he could not away with the tenderness of her tears. He therefore
recommends her to young Ascanius. Ascanius receives her into his protection:
And on both sides they express all the Passion, which a great Poet was able to
inspire them with. It Is in the midst of these passions, that a grave old Man
with tears in his Eyes, embraces Eurialus and his dear friend Nisus; prays for
their success, and for a reward of so much Virtue, promises them such a one as
we have been discoursing of. Humeros dextrasque tenebat Amborum, and vultum
lacrymis atque ora rigabat. Quae vobis, etc. Aen. 9.
With this he took the hand of either Boy,
Embraced them closely both, and wept for Joy.
Ye brave young men, what equal gifts can we,
What Recompense for such desert, decree?
The greatest sure, and best you can receive,
The Gods, your Virtue, and your Fame will give.
[English'd thus by Mr. Dryden in his Miscellan. Part II. page 15.]

The second Sentence is this, that when we die, we carry along with us the
habits we have contracted here. The Poet makes mention of the troublesome and
tormenting habits, upon the occasion of those Lovers which Aeneas meets with
laboring under the same Miseries they did before their Death. Curae non ipsa
in morte relinquunt.


And he says as much concerning the pleasant Inclinations, when in the Elysian
Fields Aeneas meets with Heroes that had the same Diversions there, which they
enjoyed whilst here on Earth. -- Quae gratia Currum
Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes
Pascere equos: eadem sequitur tellure repostos.


The Poet makes a particular Application of this last passage by adding the
Words Chariots and Horses. One might entirely retrench them, and that which
remains be a pure and perfect Sentence. Quae gratia fuit vivis, quae cura,
eadem sequitur tellure repostos. The preceding passage is pure and general in
the Terms, and in the Expression. Curae non ipsa in morte relinquunt. It Is the
Consequence alone that renders it singular, and reduces it into the body of the
Action. These two particular Applications do in the general say the same thing,
and teach us; that we eternally preserve the same passions and habits, which we
have contracted whilst living, unless we relinquish them before we die.

This is likewise what our Poet teaches us, when among the Torments of his
Hell, he mentions that which the Damned suffer there at the sight of the
Justice and Virtue they have despised, and of which they have eternally
deprived themselves. Sedet aeternumque sedebit Infoelix Theseus: Phlegiasque
miserrimus omnes Admonet, and magna restatur voce per umbras: Discite Justitiam
moniti, and non temnere Divos. Aen. 6.
The miserable Theseus, says Virgil, is in Hell, and there will for ever be;
and Phlegias more miserable than he, is always calling to those about him; Hark
ye, cries he to the Damned, and learn what it is to be just and pious. This
passage presents us with a Sentence disguised a quite different way from those
we have been discoursing of. For the former are concealed under the Expression
that contains them: But this last, on the other hand, is not contained in the
Expression that presents it to us. Who is there but at first fight will take
this Verse of Virgil for a Sentence, and for an Admonition to be just and
pious? Learn to be just, and don't the Gods Contemn.


In truth a Man would not question but this was the Poet's design; if he only
considers his person, and that of the Readers; and he cannot say but that he
has given it full force: For to cause this Sentence to be spoken in this
frightful place of Torment, where Men are punished severely for neglecting to
practice it, must needs render it very moving and convincing.

But when, without considering the person of the Reader, one Reflects upon the
Consequence, and minds only him that speaks, and the persons to whom he speaks:
It Is no such easy matter to imagine, that Virgil's design was to inspire Piety
and Justice into Souls, that are no longer capable thereof, being condemned to
suffer Eternal Torments in a place from whence they must never depart. The
Poet's meaning then is something else, since he makes these words be said in a
Passage where nothing but Crimes and Punishments are his Theme. The Torments of
Sense, denoted by the Chains, the Whips, the Wheels, and the Flames, are not
the greatest. The Conscience forms such, to which the others are not to be
compared. And as our Author has said, that External things are not even in this
life the highest Recompense of Virtuous Actions; he would have us likewise
understand, that it is the same Case with punishments, and that our Soul has no
greater a Tormenter than its own self.

Magne pater Divum saevos punire Tyrannos Non alia ratione velis, etc. Sat. 3.
Perseus, who has taken many things from Virgil, may as well have taken this
Thought from him too. This Poet could not imagine any dreadfuller torment, than
for a Man to have a view of Virtue, when he lies under such a fatal Necessity,
as to be no longer able to pursue it. Plato says, if Virtue could be seen with
the Eyes of the Body, it would charm all the World. What torment then must
those Men needs suffer, who see it more evidently than with their Bodily Eyes,
and are so far from being able to enjoy its Charms, that they see themselves
tied down inseparably to the contrary Vices, with which they are forced to make
this Comparison, when in the midst of their Torments they are called upon,
Learn to be just, and don't the Gods contemn?


CHAP. VI. Concerning several other Thoughts.
THE Points and the neat Turns are in the Pleasant, what the Sentences are in
the Profitable. Their Luster dazles young Poets, and others too that have more
Fancy than Judgment. The Sentences cool the Action, and retard its Motions by
an unseasonable Gravity: And the Points destroy the Majesty of a Poem by pretty
conceits that are unbecoming it. Sometimes these fine Words produce forced and
ridiculous Thoughts, when a Poet would prepare them, and start up occasions to
make use of them. In the Troad of Seneca, Agamemnon falls out with Pyrrhus, and
hits him in the Teeth, Inclusa fluct.
that the place of his Nativity was surrounded with Water. Nempe cognati maris.
Pyrrhus the Grandson of Thetis replies, that these Waters were his
Grandmothers: From whence it is concluded that they cannot prejudice his Island,
nor set bounds to his Empire; since in some sort they belong to it. This was an
Ingenious Repartee: But upon what account does Agamemnon upbraid Pyrrhus for
being born in an Island? This King of Kings would never have said thus to
Pyrrhus, had not the Poet foresaw, what this youngster would have answered him.

It Is easier redressing this fault, than it is that of the Sentences; because
the Sentences and the Precepts of Morality are necessary to the Epopea, whose
sole design is to instruct Men, which cannot be done without these Sentences.
They therefore cannot be excluded. One must learn how to make use of them, and
this requires a great deal of Art, a great deal of Fancy, and a mature and
solid Judgment. But the Points are so little necessary, that one may quite
exclude them from a Poem. Our Poets have done so: Among so many Sentences,
there are so few Points, and pretty Conceits, that one may suppose that even
those that happen to be there, are such as crept in without the Poets being
aware of them. Virgil was too ingenious not to meet with a great many Points
that lay in his way, but he has made no use of them, and by consequence one may
presume he wholly rejected them.

The Amplification of the things one speaks of belongs likewise to the same
Genius; and those that are in love with glaring and fine Thoughts are subject
to a vicious Amplification. In the Thebaid of S^ Oedipus renounces the
Innocence he had retained even in the midst of the Crimes he had committed, and
he takes them all upon himself, only upon a desire he had of expressing his
great Kindness for his daughter Antigone. He had Murdered his Father, and
married his Mother without knowing it. He was severely punished for it. But
when he saw Antigone did not abandon him in his miseries, he cries out: O my
dear Daughter, I am well enough satisfied with my Commission of Parricide and
Incest, since it is to these that I am beholden for such a Daughter. The Genius
of Statius, and the frantic desire he had of making all things look great, is
such, that he chooses rather to contradict himself, than not have his humor.
When he would amplify the Valor of Capaneus, Jupiter scarce thinks his whole
Godhead to be Match enough for this great Man: And after he had darted one
Thunder bolt at him, he is ready to cast another. And when he comes to speak of
the Great Power of Jupiter, this very God smiles at the Vanity and Weakness of
Capaneus, and disdains him so much, that he could scarce persuade himself to
take his Bolt in his hand to crush him with it in pieces.

The affected Study and Knowledge of all Arts and Sciences, is another
dangerous Rock to the Vanity of Writers. Though a Poet should know every thing;
yet it is not with a design he should vent his Science by retail, and let the
World see the Extent of his mind: But that he may say nothing that should argue
him ignorant, and that he may speak correctly upon several Occasions. It Is
requisite likewise that these Occasions be natural, and such as appear
unavoidable, and unsought for. We have seen one instance of this in the
Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul, which Virgil has so judiciously and
necessarily placed in his Sixth Book.

It Is so easy to make use of all manner of Terms of Art in a Poem, that a Man
must be one of little Thought and a mean Soul, that shall be Ambitious of the
praise of having done it. There needs only reading over a Book of the Art one
would speak of; or conversing with an Artificer: And after that to make some
one or other that understands it see what we have writ about it. An Author will
be a pitiful Creature, if he does not attain his end by this means: But he will
not be much the more learned for having succeeded therein. A great Poet will
never stoop to so low and useless a Vanity in an Epick Poem. Let him indeed
learn, and know every thing; but then let him make use of this his knowledge as
we before advised; and let him do it by using the most Common, and the most
intelligble Terms he can. The minds of his Readers must never be burdened, when
there is no occasion for it: The Passions and the Pleasure of a Poem require an
entire freedom from every thing else.

The desire of appearing Learned, makes a Poem smell of it from one end to the
other. We shall see Women, that in a violent Passion will make Reflections on
things, which in all Probability they are wholly ignorant of; and on which,
though they were acquainted with them, they ought not in the Condition they are
in to spend the least Thought. These Poetical Heroine's are versed in History,
Mythology, Geography, a great many curious Properties of Nature, and very fine
Lessons in Morality: In a word, they are not ignorant, in their very Passions,
of whatever the Poet knows in his Study, amidst his Books and common places. If
they complain of any Cruelty, they name ye all the cruel Tyrants that ever
were, and know without the least mistake, wherein the wicked Inclination of
each Person did consist.

Quis Colchus, aut quis seeds incertae Scytha Commisit? etc. Troas, Act. 5.
It Is not enough for them to mention Busiris and Diomedes; they must needs add
the Altars of the one, and the Horses of the other. They would think it a shame
only to know that the Scythians are cruel; they must likewise know that they
have no six'd Habitation, but are here to Day, and there to Morrow. This is
what Seneca's Andromache knew; and on which she reflected even during the sad
Recital of the Death of her only Son, little Astyanax, who was thrown from the
top of a Tower. If one considers on all this, one can never be affected with
these learned Complaints: And if the Audience never think thereon, to what
purpose are they used.

The Madness of Medea is no less learned than the Sadness of Andromache. This
Mad-Woman threatens to burn the King of Corinth's Palace: The Flame whereof
should be seen off the Promontory of Malea, which lies at the farther end of
the Peloponnesus. But this is not all; this Passion would not have been learned
enough, had not Medea added, that this Promontory is inaccessible, that the
Rocks which surround it with Water-Lilies, oblige the Ships to go a great way
about, and that they are forced to fail at such a distance off it, that their
Voyage by this means is so much the longer. Sometimes likewise, not being able
to express these things by Circumlocutions, so as to be understood, all shall
be included in an Epithet, an Adverb, or some other word, and then let the
Reader guess at the meaning. But Poems are not invented for this.

I shall here make this one Reflection more; that, though we are to avoid
Ostentation, and never to affect appearing Learned: Yet we must not fall into
the contrary fault, and appear ignorant, as Statius has done in the beginning
of his Thebaid. He undertakes the War of Eteocles and Polynices, and before he
enters upon the M^ he relates all that happened at the founding of Thebes, and
from thence down to their Times. He expresses this in a Doubt; and he asks his
Muses, whether he must begin his Recital with the Rape of Europa. This Doubt is
a sign of so gross an Ignorance in the Art, that it betrays a Man's want of
Judgment, when he gives his Readers such a disadvantageous Character of himself.

CHAP. VII. Of the Expression.
THE Expression should be suitable to the Subjects one treats on, and
consequently should be Beautiful, Noble, and August in the Epick Poem, as well
as in Tragedy. But it is very observable that this Beauty, and this Grandeur is
of a very large extent, and like a Genus divides it self into several Species.
This will be easily conceived, if one recollect what we have already said in
the fourth Book concerning the Character of the Hero, and of the whole Poem in
general. The Characters of Achilles, Ulysses, and Aeneas are very great, and
yet differ very much from each other. The Iliad consists altogether in Battles,
in Anger, and in a continual Commotion without Bounds and measure. The Odysseis
on the contrary is full of nothing else but Prudence, Patience, and Wisdom. So
that the Learned observe there is a considerable difference in the Style and
Verses of these two Poems. There is a great deal of Phlegm in the Odysseis: But
the Iliad is all over one continual Flame. The Aeneid should be a great deal
softer than the two Greek Poems.

Beside this first Distinction, each part of which comprehends an entire Poem,
there are likewise inferior Distinctions, which divide each Poem into its
Episodes and lesser parts. For though the same Character should be predominant,
yet it should not take up the Whole of the Poem, there are many Passages very
different from one another. This alters the Style so far, that Interdum vocem
Comoedia tollit, Iratusque Chremes tumido delitigat ore: Et Tragicus plerumque
dolet sermon pedestri. Hor. Poet.
sometimes Anger makes Comedy wear the Buskin, and sometimes Sorrow makes
Tragedy throw it off. This puts me in mind of a Queen I saw once upon the
Stage, who complained of her long Misfortunes in a Style that was quite
opposite thereto. She made a comparison between them, and the Happiness of her
former Years: And she compared these different States to the several Seasons of
the Year; but in such a manner, that she only insisted on the Description of
the Beauty and Pleasantness of the Spring. And when after a long train of these
fine things, which inspired nothing but Pleasure and Joy, she passed on to the
Description of Winter, and when one would have expected to hear at last
something that was conformable to the present Condition of this unfortunate
Princess, she gave us the Reverse of it. She made a Description of Winter, not
by representing the melancholy part of it, but by making an elegant
Amplification on all the Beauties of Spring, which the Winter wanted. All this
was expressed in such choice Phrases, which certainly cost the Poet those
Studies and sleepless Nights, which Nec nocte paratum Plorabit qui me volet
incurvasse querela. Hor. Poet.
Horace condemns in those that make Complaints.

It Is not enough to express the Passion one treats of well; it is moreover
requisite that one prevent it not by any Description that may at first give
quite contrary Sentiments. I will not make Aurora rise with a Smile, to see the
sad Passions which Dido had abandoned her self to, when the first break of Day
presents her with the Flight of Aeneas. This concerns the Doctrine of the
Thoughts as much as that of the Expression; and often times the Turn and the
Expression make all the Beauty of a Thought A Fable, an Allusion, a point of
Doctrine, a Metaphor, or some other Figure shall be wholly contained in one
Word. That which we are now speaking of is more particularly designed for the
Expression.

Poets are obliged to keep up to the Rules of Art: But they are not to discover
them openly. Oftentimes these very Reflections prejudice, and hinder the
Pleasure and the Passion. In this case they have recourse to some Expression
and Phrase, which being of it self indifferent to the matter that is treated
on, and not obliging the Reader to any Reflection that lessens his Attention to
the main thing, does yet give those an occasion of finding out the Rules and
the Artifice, who have a mind to look after them. Here is one instance of this
taken from the supposition of those that suppose that Aeneas did not spend the
Winter in Africa. The Poet represents the have which the Trojans made to equip
their Ships for a sudden Voyage into Italy, and he expresses it thus:
Frondentesque ferunt remos, and robora Sylvis
Infabricata fugae studio.


Virgil's meaning will seem sufficiently explained, if one should say, That the
Trojans prepared for their Departure with so much earnestness and
precipitation, that they brought the Trees almost just as they found them,
without giving themselves the leisure to square them, to take the Bark, or so
much as to strip the Branches off them. And yet the Word Frondentes is not
mentioned, which denotes expressly that these Trees had their Leaves on: From
whence one may conclude, that this time was not the Winter Season; and that
this other Expression, Hyberno Sidere, which Virgil makes use of upon the same
occasion, cannot denote that Season, but only signifies the Tempestuous
Constellation of Orion, which is predominant in the Summer.

The two Remarks I have made in this Chapter, are so much the more necessary,
because that those who never invent any thing of their own, but make it their
only business to translate, do never sufficiently reflect thereon. One of the
best Translators of the Aeneid into French, has in one single Verse given us an
Example of these two things. It Is in that of the fifth Book. Septima post
Trojae excidium, jam vertitur Aestas.


This signifies that 'twas the end of the seventh Summer since the Ruin of
Troy. By this the Poet gives us to understand, that Aeneas did not spend the
Winter in Carthage, since he came thither about the Solstice of the seventh
Summer; and at the end of the same Summer he is upon his return to Sicily. This
likewise makes it appear that Anchises, whose Anniversary they then celebrated,
dyed at the end of the Summer. Lastly, This serves to give an account what the
Time and the Duration of the Epick Action in the Aeneid is. All these proofs
then are enervated, and the quite contrary are brought in in their stead by
this Translation: Le Septieme Printemps peint la terre de fleurs.
The Seventh Spring now paints the Earth with Flowers.


Beside this pleasant Expression, and these Terms of Spring, Flowers, and
painted Earth, are entirely opposite to the design of him that speaks, and to
the occasion upon which it is spoken. The Trojan Matrons did not lament the
Death of Anchises, whose Anniversary they then kept, so much as they did the
Miseries they had already suffered on the Sea, and those they were still to
suffer. They had not their Thoughts then upon the Flowers of the Spring, nor
upon the Beauties of the Earth, but upon the sad and frightful Scenes the Sea
presented to them; which they looked upon with Tears in their Eyes, and with
Sighs and Complaints in their Mouths; Cunctaeque profundum Pontum aspectabant
flentes. Heu! tot vada fessis, and tantunti superesse mari^ Aen. 5.
With weeping Eyes the Deep they all surveyed;
And fetching hideous Sighs, Alas! they said,
Must we poor wearied Souls endure again
The rage and fury of the Savage Main?


CHAP. VIII. How one ought to judge of Elocution.
WHatever Rules we have laid down in this Treatise, and howsoever we have
expressed our thoughts, yet it has been far from our design to form a Poet, and
to teach Men how to make an Epopea: But only to give the World a clearer
insight into the Aeneid. So that we must look upon the whole only as the way
whereby one should judge of that excellent piece. It Is upon this Consideration
that we shall here add some general Reflections to those we have already made.

The justness of the Judgment one passes upon the Thoughts and Elocution of an
Author, depends on the Nature of the Poem one reads, and which one should be
thoroughly qualified with, and beside that, it depends upon the Qualities of the
mind of him that reads it.

Ut Pictura Poesis erit; quae si propius stes, Te capiet magis, and quaedam
falongius abstes. Haec amat obscurum: volet haec sub luce videri. Hor. Poet.
Horace touches upon the first point in the comparison he makes between Poetry
and Painting. Pictures have their Shadows, their Distances, and their Point of
Sight, without which they lose all their Grace and Regularity. The Images that
adorn the Arch of a very high Cupola, are very large where they are, and to
those who view them pretty near, represent only Members that are monstrous in
their Projections. A Man would render himself ridiculous, if he seriously found
fault with those misshapen Postures, which Men of Understanding greatly admire.
Because in truth these irregular Figures are harder to draw well, than all the
ordinary Decorations, where every thing is just and regular.

It Is just so with the Works of the Poets. It is easy after the same manner to
find fault with the most excellent and admirable touches of them. One shall
inveigh against Homer for carrying on the Bravery of Achilles even to
Brutality; and for degrading the Patience of Ulysses, even to the making him a
Beggar. He will laugh at the Meekness and Piety of Aeneas; and prefer the
Valor of Turnus before him. And yet that which appears defective in these
Poetical Hero's, is just in the same manner as certain. Pictures seem
irregular, when one takes them out of their proper place, and considers them
alone, without their Circumstances. These pretended Faults have more justness
and Artifice in them and are a great deal harder to manage, than the pitiful
Beauties, and the cold and languishing Perfections, which the meanest Poets may
steal from Morality, and give to their chief Personages.

Poetry then has its Shadow, and its Point of Sight as well as Painting. And to
discover the Beauty and Artifice of each passage, a Man must not examine it
alone and without its Circumstances; for then he will be liable to mistakes. He
should read it with the same Passions with which it was penned. And he must
entertain these motions in the whole Series of the subject matter, and of the
Body of the Poem. To do otherwise, is to deceive ones self, or upon design to
deceive others. It Is to do as Eschynes, when he upbraids Demosthenes, and says,
the Phrases he made use of were more like Monsters than Words in a Speech. That
they might appear such, he proposes them out of their due place, and without
that Patheticalness with which they were spoken and heard. Cicero says this is
no such hard matter. Nor is there any difficulty to find fault with several
Beauties of Homer and Virgil, and to turn them into Ridicule, either by being
ignorant of the Art, or by the Wit of an Enemy, or by the Spite of an envious
Humor, or lastly by the Buffooneries of a Railer.

We may likewise fall into these false Criticisms for want of Learning, and a
deep reach. We would fain have Homer and Virgil form the Customs and Manners of
their Personages according to the modern Mode. We think their ways of speaking
fantastical, because they would be ridiculous, if turned Verbatim into our
Language. We faney there is an extraordinary meanness in the Words Pots and
Kettles, Blood, Fat, the Intestines and other parts of Animals, because all
this is now nothing else but Butcher's and Kitchen-girls Language, and we are
apt to laugh at it. And we never consider that in Homer and Virgil's time all
this was agreeable to the sense of the Moab is my Washpot. Psalm. 60. v. 8. Now
the Sons of Eli were Sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord. And the Priests
Custom with the People was, etc. 1 Samuel 2. from v. 12. to v. 17.
Holy Ghost himself, which could never be in the wrong, that God had very
carefully enjoined Moses all these things, as the most August and Venerable
that he would have used in the Religion and Worship he required of Men; and
that lastly, Queens, and Princesses, and Persons of the finest Make, observed
them with care, respect, and veneration. It Is therefore according to these
Ideas that our Poets were bound to speak of these things. They would have been
impious had they treated these Subjects with Contempt. And perhaps a Christian
would do little better, should he dare to ridicule them, especially if we
reflect that the Books of Homer and Virgil have used them less than they are
made use of in several Books of the Holy Bible, which a Man by thus doing will
expose to the Buffoonery of Libertines and Atheists.

The Expression in its kind is of no less extent, and requires no less study.
The Greek and Latin are two dead Languages, of which we are no longer Masters.
They have their Turns, their Delicacies, and their Beauties, which we ought to
study in the best Originals. It would be a piece of Vanity, if we pretended to
understand the Languages which we no longer speak, as well as those who have
improved them for so many Ages together, and as well as those that have brought
them to their highest perfection, and have come off with the greatest success.
Shall a French Man, or any Man now a days pretend that he is better qualified
to Criticize upon Homer than Aristotle was? If not, then we should credit him
(...) Poet. c. 24.
, when he assures us, that this Poet has surpassed all others in the Art of
Writing well, whether we consider his Sentiments and Thoughts, or whether we
consider his Expression: And that he has not only excelled all others, but met
with perfect success.

We may therefore shut up all by ending as we began. Languages as well as Poems
are the Inventions of Art and a Genius, which gives them their Form and
Perfection. If we have a mind to know them thoroughly, and to pass a right
Judgment upon the Ancients, we must before every thing rectify our Judgment.
If a Man has a mind to know whether a Line be strait or no, he does not take
the next piece of Wood he can find to clap to it, but this piece of Wood must
in the first place be made perfectly strait, if he would have it serve for a
Rule: Else, if he applys it, and it does not touch all the parts of the Line,
he will not guess whether the fault be in the Line or in the piece of Wood.
Just so likewise, before we judge of a Poem, we should rectify our Judgment,
and prove it by the excellent Works of the best Masters. If they do not please
us, we should rather think the fault is in our own Judgments, than in those
Models; and if they do please us, we may rely upon our selves with the greater
assurance, according to that judicious Thought of Quinctilian: That he whom
Cicero pleases, should by that conclude, that he has benefited himself very
much.

The same thing we say of our four Authors. A Person may rely upon his own
Judgment in that which concerns the Epick Poem, and may assure himself of its
Rectitude and Straightness, when his Thoughts, his Genius, and his Reasonings
are conformable to the Precepts of Aristotle and Horace, and to the Practice of
Homer and Virgil.

The END.
AN ESSAY UPON SATYR, Written by the Famous Monsieur DACIER.
HORACE having Entitled his Books of Satyrs Sermones and Satyrae indifferently,
and these two Titles giving different Idea's; I think it very necessary to
explain what the Latins understood by the Word Satyr. The Learned Casaubon is
the first, and indeed the only Man, that has with Success attempted to show
what the Satirical Poesy of the Greeks, and the Satyr of the Romans, was. His
Book is an inestimable Treasure; and it must be confessed, I have had
considerable Helps from it; which is the Use we ought to make of the Works of
such extraordinary Men, who have gone before us only to be our Guides, and
serve us as Torches in the Darkness of Antiquity. Nevertheless, you must not so
continually fix your Eyes upon them, as not to consider whither you are led:
for they divert sometimes into Paths, where you cannot with Safety follow them.
This Method is what my self have observed in forsaking my Directors, and have
ventured that way which no body before me has gone; of which the following
Discourse will convince you.

Satyr is a kind of Poetry only known amongst the Romans, having no Relation to
the Satirical Poesy of the Greeks, though some Learned Men have pretended to
the contrary. Quinctilian leaves no room to doubt upon this Point, when he
writes in Chap. 10. Satyra quidem tota nostra est. The same Reason makes Horace
call it, in the last Satyr of Book 1. Graecis intactum Carmen. The natural and
true Etymology is this: The Latins called it SATVR, quasi plenum, to which
there was nothing wanting for its Perfection. Thus Satur color, when the Wool
has taken a good Dye, and nothing can be added to the Perfection of it. From
Satur they have made Satura, which they wrote sometimes with an i, Satira: They
used in other Words, the same Variation of the Letter u into i, as in Maxumus,
Maximus; optumus, optimus. Satura is an Adjective, which has reference to a
Substantive understood; for the ancient Romans said Saturam, understanding
Lancem: And Satura Lanx was properly a Basin filled with all sorts of Fruit,
which they offered every Year to Ceres and Bacchus, as the first fruits of all
they had gathered. These Offerings of different Things mixed together, were not
unknown to the Greeks, who called 'em (...), a Sacrifice of all sorts of Fruit,
(...) and (...), an Offering of all sorts of Grain, when they offered
Pot Herbs. The Grammarian Diomedes has perfectly described both the Custom of
the Romans, and the Word Satura, in this Passage, Lanx referta varias multisque
primitiis, sacris Cereris inferebatur, and a copia and Saturitate rei, Satura
vocabatur: cujus generis lancium and Virgilius in Georgicis meminit, cum hoc
modo dicit, Lancibus and pandis fumantia reddimus exta.
And -- lancesque and liba feremus.


From thence the Word Satura was applied to many other Mixtures, as in Festus:
Satyra cibi genus, ex variis rebus conditum. From hence it passed to the Works
of the Mind; for they called some Laws Leges Saturas, which contained many
Heads or Titles; as the Julian, Papian, and Popean Laws, which were called
Miscellas, which is of the same Signification with Satura. From hence arose
this Phrase, Per Saturam legem far, when the Senate made a Law, without
gathering, and counting the Votes, in haste, and confusedly all together, which
was properly called, Per Saturam sententias exquirere, as Salust has it after
Lelius. But they rested not here, but gave this Name to certain Books, as
Pescennius Festus, whose Histories were called Saturas, or per Saturam. From
all these Examples, it is not hard to suppose, that these Works of Horace took
from hence their Name, and that they were called, Saturae quia multis and
variis rebus hoe carmen refertum est, because these Poems are full of a great
many different Things, as Porphyrius says, which is partly true. But it must
not be thought it is immediately from thence; for this Name had been used
before for other Things, which bore a nearer Resemblance to the Satyrs of
Horace; in Explanation of which, a Method is to be followed, which Casaubon
himself never thought of, and which will put Things in so clear a Light, that
there can be no place left for Doubt.

The Romans having been almost four hundred Years without any Scenical Plays,
Chance and Debauchery made them find in one of their Feasts, the Saturnian and
Fescennine Verses, which for six score Years they had instead of Dramatick
Pieces. But these Verses were rude, and almost without any Numbers, as being
made Extempore, and by a People as yet but barbarous, who had little other
skill, than what flowed from their Joy, and the Fumes of Wine. They were filled
with the grossest sort of Raileries, and attended with Gestures and Dances. To
have a livelier Idea of this, you need but reflect upon the honest Peasants,
whose clownish Dances are attended with Extempore Verses; in which, in a
wretched manner, they jeer one another with all they know. To this Horace
refers in the first Epistle of his Second Book; Fescennina per hunc inventa
licentia morem,
Versibus alternis opprobria rustica fudit.


This Licentious and Irregular Verse, was succeeded by a sort more correct,
filled with a pleasant Raillery, without the Mixture of any thing scurrillous;
and these obtained the Name of Satyrs, by reason of their Variety, and had
regulated Forms, that is, regular Dances and Music; but undecent Postures were
banished. Titus Livius has it in his Seventh Book. Vernaculis artificibus, quia
Hister Tusco verbo Ludio vocabatur, nomen Histrionibus inditum, qui non sicut
ante Fescennino versu similem compositum temere, ac rudem alternis faciebant;
sed impletas modis Satyras, descripto jam ad Tibicinem cantu, motuque
congruents peragebant. These Satyrs were properly honest Farces, in which the
Spectators and Actors were rallied without Distinction.

Livius Andronicus found things in this Posture when he first undertook to make
Comedies and Tragedies in Imitation of the Grecians. This Diversion appearing
more noble and perfect, they run to it in Multitudes, neglecting the Satyrs for
some time, tho they received them a little after; and some modeled them into a
purposed Form, to Act at the End of their Comedies, as the French Act their
Farces now. And then they altered their Name of Satyrs for that of Exodia,
which they preserve to this day. This was the first and most ancient kind of
Roman Satyr. There are two other sorts, which though very different from this
first, yet both owe their Birth to this, and are, as it were, Branches of it.
This I shall prove the most succinctly I can.

A Year after Livius Andronicus had caused his first Efforts to be Acted, Italy
gave Birth to Ennius; who being grown up, and having all the Leisure in the
World to observe the eager Satisfaction with which the Romans received the
Satyrs, of which I have already spoke, was of Opinion, that Poems, tho not
adapted to the Theater, yet preserving the Gaul, the Railings, and Pleasantness
which made these Satyrs take with so much Applause, would not fail of being
well received: he therefore ventured at it, and composed several Discourses, to
which he retained the Name of Satyrs. These Discourses were entirely like those
of Horace, both for the Matter and the Variety. The only essential Difference
that is observable, is, that Ennius, in Imitation of some Greeks, and of Homer
himself, took the Liberty of mixing several kinds of Verses together, as,
Hexameters, Iambics, Trimeters, with Tetrimeters, Trochaics or Square Verse; as
it appears from the Fragments which are left us. These following Verses are of
the Square kind, which Aulus Gellius has preserved us, and which very well
merit a Place here for the Beauty they contain: Hoc erit tibi Argumentum semper
in promptu situm,
Ne quid expectes Amicos, quod tute agere possies.


I attribute also to these Satyrs of Ennius these other kinds of Verses, which
are of a Beauty and Elegance much above the Age in which they were made; nor
will the sight of 'em here be unpleasant. Non habeo denique nauci Marsum
Augurem,
Non vicanos aruspices, non de Cicro Astrologos,
Non Isiacos Conjectores, non Interpretes Hominum:
Non enim sunt ii aut Scientia, aut Art Divini;
Sed Superstitiosi vates, Impudentesque harioli,
Aut inertes, aut insani, aut quibus egestas imperat:
Qui sui quaestus causa fictas suscitant sententias,
Qui sibi semitam non sapiunt, alteri monstrant viam,
Quibus devitias pollicentur, ab iis Drachmam petunt,
De divitiis deducant Drachmam, reddant caetera.


Horace has borrowed several Things from these Satyrs. After Ennius, came
Pacuvius; who also writ Satyrs in Imitation of his Uncle Ennius.

Lucilius was born in the time when Pacuvius was in most Reputation. He also
wrote Satyrs. But he gave 'em a new Turn, and endeavored to imitate, as near
as he could, the Character of the old Greek Comedy, of which we had but a very
imperfect Idea in the ancient Roman Satyr, and such, as one might find in a
Poem, which Nature alone had dictated before the Romans had thought of
imitating the Grecians, and enriching themselves with their Spoils. It Is thus
you must understand this Passage of the first Satyr of the second Book of
Horace. -- Quid, cum est Lucilius ausis,
Primus in hunc operis componere carmina morem?


Horace never intended by this to say, That there were no Satyrs before
Lucilius, because Ennius and Pacuvius were before him, whose Example he
followed: He only would have it understood, That Lucilius having given a new
Turn to this Poem, and embellished it, ought by way of Excellence to be
esteemed the first Author. Quinctilian had the same Thought, when he writ, in
the first Chapter of the Tenth Book, Satyra quidem tota nostra est, in qua
primus insignem laudem adeptus est Lucilius. You must not therefore be of the
Opinion of Casaubon, who building on the Judgment of Diomedes, thought that the
Satyr of Ennius, and that of Lucilius, were entirely different: These are the
very Words of this Grammarian, which have deceived this Judicious Critic:
Satyra est Carmen apud Romanos, non quidem apud Graecos maledicum, ad carpenda
hominum vitia, Archaeae Comoediae charactere compositum, quale scripserunt
Lucilius and Horatius, and Persius. Sed olim Carmen quod ex variis Poematibus
constabat, Satyra dicebatur, quale scripserunt Pacuvius and Ennius. You may see
plainly, that Diomedes distinguishes the Satyr of Lucilius from that of Ennius
and Pacuvius; the Reason which he gives for this Distinction, is ridiculous,
and absolutely false. The good Man had not examined the Nature and Origin of
these two Satyrs, which were entirely like one another, both in Matter and
Form; for Lucilius added to it only a little Politeness, and more Salt, almost
without Changing any thing: And if he did not put together several sorts of
Verse in the same piece, as Ennius has done, yet he made several Pieces, of
which some were entirely Hexameters, others entirely Iambics, and others
Trechaics, as is evident from his Fragments. In short, if the Satyrs of
Lucilius differ from these of Ennius, because the former has added much to the
Endeavors of the latter, as Casaubon has pretended, it will follow from
thence, that those of Horace, and those of Lucilius, are also entirely
different; for Horace has no less refined on the Satyrs of Lucilius, than he on
those of Ennius and Pacuvius. This Passage of Diomedes has also deceived Dousa
the Son. I say not this to expose some light Faults of these great Men, but
only to show, with what Exactness, and with what Caution, their Works must be
read, when they treat of any thing so obscure and so ancient.

I have made appear what was the ancient Satyr, that was made for the Theater:
I have shown, that that gave the Idea of the Satyr of Ennius: and, in fine, I
have sufficiently proved, that the Satyrs of Ennius and Pacuvius, of Lucilius
and Horace, are but one kind of Poem, which has received its Perfection from
the last. It Is time now to speak of the second kind of Satyr, which I promised
to explain, and which is also derived from the ancient Satyr: It Is that which
we call Varronian, or the Satyr of Menippus the Cinick Philosopher.

This Satyr was not only composed of several sorts of Verse, but Varro added
Prose to it, and made a Mixture of Greek and Latin. Quinctilian, after he had
spoke of the Satyr of Lucitius, adds, Alterum illud est, and prius Satyrae
genus, quod non sola Carminum varietate mistum condidit Terentius Varro, vir
Romanorum eruditissimus. The only Difficulty of this Passage is, that
Quinctilian assures us, that this Satyr of Varro was the first; for how could
that be, since Varro was a great while after Lucilius? Quinctilian meant not
that the Satyr of Varro was the first in order of Time; for he knew well
enough, that in that respect he was the last: But he would give us to
understand, that this kind of Satyr, so mixed, was more like the Satyr of
Ennius and Pacuvius, who gave themselves a greater Liberty in this Composition
than Lucilius, who was more severe and correct.

We have now only some Fragments left of the Satyr of Varro, and those
generally very imperfect; the Titles, which are most commonly double, show the
great Variety of Subjects, of which Varro treated.

Seneca's Book on the Death of Claudius, Boethius his Consolation of Philosophy,
and that of Petronius Arbiter, are Satyrs entirely like those of Varro.

This is what I have in general to say on Satyr; nor is it necessary I insist
any more on this Subject. This the Reader may observe, that the Name of Satyr
in Latin, is not less proper for Discourses that recommend Virtue, than to
those which are designed against Vice. It had nothing so formidable in it as it
has now, when a bare Mention of Satyr makes them tremble, who would fain seem
what they are not; for Satyr, with us, signifies the same Thing, as exposing or
lashing of some Thing or Person: yet this different Acceptance alters not the
Word, which is always the same; but the Latins, in the Titles of their Books,
have often had regard only to the Word, in the Extent of its Signification,
founded on its Etymology, whereas we have had respect only to the first and
general Use, which has been made of it in the beginning, to mock and deride;
yet this Word ought always to be writ in Latin with an (u) or (i) Satura, or
Satira, and in English by an (i). Those who have wrote it with a (y) thought
with Scaliger, Heinsius, and a great many others, that the Divinities of the
Groves, which the Grecians called Satyrs, the Romans Fauns, gave their Names to
these Pieces; and that of the Word Satyrus they had made Satyra, and that these
Satyrs had a great Affinity with the Satyrick Pieces of the Greeks, which is
absolutely false, as Casaubon has very well proved it, in making it appear,
That of the Word Satyrus they could never make Satyra, but Satyrica: And in
showing the Difference betwixt the Satyrick Poems of the Greeks, and the Roman
Satyrs. Mr. Spanheim, in his fine Preface to the Caesar's, of the Emperor
Julian, has added new Reflections to those which this Judicious Critic had
advanced; and he has established, with a great deal of Judgment, five or six
essential Differences between those two Poems, which you may find in his Book.
The Greeks had never any thing that came near this Roman Satyr, but their Silli
[(...)] which were also biting Poems, as they may easily be perceived to be
yet, by some Fragments of the Silli of Timon. There was however this
Difference, That the Silli of the Greeks were Parodious from one End to the
other, which cannot be said of the Roman Satyrs; where, if sometimes you find
some Parodia's, you may plainly see that the Poet did not design to affect it,
and by consequence the Parodia's do not make the Essence of a Satyr, as they do
the Essence of the Silli.

Having explained the Nature, Origin, and Progress of Satyr, I Will now say a
Word or two of Horace in particular.

There cannot be a more just Idea given of this part of his Works, than in
comparing them to the Statues of the Sileni, to which Alcibiades in the Banquet
compares Socrates. They were Figures, that without had nothing agreeable or
beautiful, but when you took the pains to open them, you found the Figures of
all the Gods. In the manner that Horace presents himself to us in his Satyrs,
we discover nothing of him at first that deserves our Attachment. He seems to
be fitter to amuse Children, than to employ the Thoughts of Men; but when we
remove that which hides him from our Eyes, and view him even to the Bottom, we
find in him all the Gods together; that is to say, all those Virtues which
ought to be the continual Practice of such as seriously endeavor to forsake
their Vices.

Hitherto we have been content to see only his outside; and it is a strange
thing, that Satyrs, which have been read so long, have been so little
understood, or explained: They have made a Halt at the outside, and were
wholly busied in giving the Interpretation of Words. They have commented upon
him like Grammarians, not Philosophers; as if Horace had writ merely to have
his Language understood, and rather to divert, than instruct us. That is not
the End of this Work of his. The End of any Discourse is, the Action for which
that Discourse is composed; when it produces no Action, it is only a vain
Amusement, which idly tickles the Ear, without ever reaching the Heart.

In these two Books of his Satyrs, Horace would teach us, to conquer our Vices,
to rule our Passions, to follow Nature, to limit our Desires, to distinguish
True from False, and Idea's from Things, to forsake Prejudice, to know
thoroughly the Principles and Motives of all our Actions, and to shun that Folly
which is in all Men who are bigoted to the Opinions they have imbibed under
their Teachers, which they keep obstinately, without examining whether they are
well grounded. In a Word, He endeavors to make us happy for our selves,
agreeable, and faithful to our Friends, easy, discreet, and honest to all,
with whom we are obliged to live. To make us understand the Terms he uses, to
explain the Figures he employs, and to conduct the Reader safely through the
Labyrinth of a difficult Expression, or obscure Parenthesis, is no great Matter
to perform: And as Epictetus says, There is nothing in That beautiful, or truly
worthy a wise Man. The principal and most important Business, is, to show the
Rise, the Reason, and the Proof of his Precepts, to demonstrate that those who
do not endeavor to correct themselves by so beautiful a Model, are just like
sick Men, who having a Book full of Receipts, proper to their Distempers,
content themselves to read 'em, without comprehending them, or so much as
knowing the Advantage of them.

I urge not this because I have my self omitted any thing in these Annotations,
which was the incumbent Duty of a Grammarian to observe; this I hope the World
will be sensible of, and that there remains no more Difficulty in the Text. But
that which has been my chief Care, is, to give an Insight into the very Matter
that Horace treats of, to show the Solidity of his Reasons, to discover the
Turns he makes use of to prove what he aims at, and to refute or elude that
which is opposed to him, to confirm the Truth of his Decisions, to make the
Delicacy of his Sentiments perceived, to expose to open Day the Folly he finds
in what he condemns. This is what none have done before me. On the contrary, as
Horace is a true Proteus, that takes a thousand different Forms, they have
often lost him, and not knowing where to find him, have grappled him as well as
they could; they have palm'd upon him in several places, not only Opinions
which he had not, but even those which he directly refutes: I don't say this to
blame those who have taken Pains before me on the Works of this great Poet; I
commend their Endeavors; they have opened me the way; and if it be granted,
that I have some little Advantage over them, I owe it wholly to the great Men
of Antiquity, whom I have read with more Care, and without doubt with more
Leisure. I speak of Homer, of Plato, and Aristotle, and of some other Greek and
Latin Authors, which I study centinually, that I may (...) my Taste on theirs,
and draw out of their Writings, the Justness of Wit, good Sense and Reason.

I know very well, That there are now a days some Authors, who laugh at these
great Names, who disallow the Acclamations which they have received from all
Ages, and who would deprive them of the Crowns which they have so well
deserved, and which they have got before such August Tribunals. But for fear of
falling into Admiration, which they look upon as the Child of Ignorance, they
do not perceive that they go from that Admiration, which Plato calls the Mother
of Wisdom, and which was the first that opened Men's Eyes. I do not wonder that
the Celestial Beauties, which we find in the Writing of these incomparable Men,
lose with them all their Attractives and Charms, because they have not the
Strength to keep their Eyes long enough upon them. Besides, it is much easier
to despise than understand them. As for my self, I declare, that I am full of
Admiration and Veneration for their Divine Geniuses: I have them always before
my Eyes, as venerable and incorruptible Judges; before whom I take pleasure to
fancy, that I ought to give an Account of my Writings. At the same time I have
a great Respect for Posterity, and I always think with more Fear than
Confidence, on the Judgment that will pass on my Works, if they are happy
enough to reach it. All this does not hinder me from esteeming the great Men
that live now. I acknowledge, that there are a great many who are an Honor to
our Age, and who would have adorned the Ages past. But amongst these great Men
I speak of, I do not know one, and there cannot be one, who does not esteem and
honor the Ancients who is not of their taste, and who follows not their Rules.
If you go never so little from them, you go at the same time from Nature and
Truth; and I shall not be afraid to affirm, that it would not be more difficult
to see without Eyes, or Light, than it is impossible to acquire a solid Merit,
and to form the Understanding by other means, than by those that the Greeks and
Romans have traced for us: whether it be that we follow them by the only force
of Natural Happiness, or Instinct, or that Art and Study have conducted us
thither. As for those who thus blame Antiquity, without knowing of it, once for
all I Will undeceive them, and make it appear, that in giving all the Advantage
to our Age, they take the direct Course to dishonor it; for what greater
Proofs can be of the Rudeness, or rather Barbarity of an Age, than in it to
hear Homer called dull and heavy, Plato tiresome and tedious, Aristotle
ignorant, Demosthenes and Cicero vulgar Orators, Virgil a Poet without either
Grace or Beauty, and Horace an Author unpolished, languid, and without force?
The Barbarians who ravaged Greece, and Italy, and who labored with so much
Fury to destroy all things that were fine and noble, have never done any thing
so horrible as this. But I hope that the false Taste of some particular Men
without Authority, will not be imputed to the whole Age, nor give the least
Blemish to the Ancients. 'Twas to no purpose that a certain Emperor declared
himself an Enemy to Homer, Virgil, and Titus Livius. All his Efforts were
ineffectual, and the Opposition he made to Works so perfect, served only to
augment in his History the number of his Follies, and render him more odious to
all Posterity.

OF PASTORALS. By Monsieur De FONTENELLE, Englished by Mr. MOTTEUX.
OF all kinds of Poetry the Pastoral is probably the most Ancient, as the
keeping of Flocks was one of the first Employments which Men took up. It Is very
likely that these primitive Shepherds, amidst the Tranquillity and Leisure which
they enjoyed, bethought themselves of singing their Pleasures and their Loves;
and then their Flocks, the Woods, the Springs, and all those Objects that were
most familiar to them naturally came into the Subject of their Songs. They
lived in great plenty after their way, without any control by Superior Power,
being in a manner the Kings of their own Flocks; and I do not doubt but that a
certain Joy and Openness of Heart that generally attends Plenty and Liberty
induo'd them to sing, and to make Verses.

Society in time was brought to perfection, or rather declined and was
perverted; and Men took up Employments that seemed to them of greater
consequence; more weighty affairs filled their Minds, Towns and Cities were
built every where, and mighty States at last were founded and established. Then
those who lived in the Country became Slaves to those who dwelt in Cities, and
the Pastoral Life being grown the Lot of the most wretched sort of People, no
longer inspired any delightful Thought.

To please others in ingenious Composures, Men ought to be in a condition to
free themselves from pressing want; and their Minds ought to be refined through
a long use of Civil Society: Now a Pastoral Life has always wanted one of these
two Circumstances: The primitive Shepherds, of whom we have spoken, lived
indeed in plenty enough, but in their Times the World had not yet had leisure
to grow polite. The following Ages might have produced something more refined,
but the Shepherds of those Days were too poor and dejected: So that the
Country-way of living, and the Poetry of Shepherds must needs have been always
very homely and artless.

And indeed nothing is more certain, than that no real Shepherds can be
altogether like those of Theocritus. Can any one think that it is natural for
Shepherds to say like his? [ These Lines, and some in the following Pages, are
taken out of English Versions]
Gods! When she viewed, how strong was the Surprise!
Her Soul took Fire, and sparkled through her Eyes!
How did her Passions, how her Fury move!
How soon she plunged into the Abyss of Love!


Let the following Passages be examined: O that, to Crown what e're my Wish can
crave,
I were that Be which flies into your Cave!
There softly through your Garland would I creep,
And steal a Kiss when you are fast asleep!
I know what Love is now, a cruel God,
A Tygress bore, and nursed him in a Wood,
A cruel God, he shoots through every Vein --
The Fair Calistris, as my Goats I drove,
With Apples palts me, and still murmurs Love.
The Pastures flourish, and the Flocks improve,
All smiles, so soon as here resorts my Love;
But Oh! When e're the dear one leaves the place,
At once there fades the Shepherds and the Grass.
Ye Gods, I wish not heaps of Gold refined,
Nor rapid swiftness to outstrip the Wind;
But let me sit and sing by yonder Rock,
Clasp thee, my Dear, and view my feeding Flock.


I am of opinion that there will be found in these Expressions more Beauty and
more Delicacy of Imagination than real Shepherds have.

But I don't know how Theocritus having sometimes raised his Shepherds in so
pleasing a manner above their native Genius, could let them so very often fall
to it again: I wonder he did not perceive 'twas fit that a certain gross
Clownishness, which is always very unbecoming, should be omitted. When Daphnis
in the first Idyllium is ready to die for Love, and a great number of Deities
are come to visit him, in the midst of that honorable Company, he is reproved
for being like the Goat-herds, who envy the pleasure of their Copulating Goats,
and are Jealous of them; and it is most certain that the Terms used by
Theocritus to represent this, are much of the kind of the Idea which they give.
Ah Daphnis, loose and wanton in thy Love!
A Herdsman thought, thou do a Goat-herd prove:
A Goat-herd, when he sees the Kids at Rut,
Sits down, and grieves that he is not born a Goat:
Thus, when you see the Virgins Dance, you grieve,
Because refused, and now disdain to live.


In another Idyllium the Goat-herd Comatas, and the Herdsman Laco contend about
some Theft, which they have committed against each other; Comatas stole Laco's
Pipe, and Laco had stolen the Skin which Comatas used to wear to cover himself
withal, so that he had left him bare. They rail at each other, and vent their
Passion in reviling and abusive Words, which might become a couple of
Graecians, but certainly are not over civil; and then, after a gentle Item
which one of them gives the other of smelling rank, they both sing for a Wager;
the one having challenged the other to that Musical Fight, though it should
rather have been to a Rubbers at Fisticuffs, considering what went before; and
what seems the more odd, is, that whereas they begun with gross Taunts and ill
Language, now that they are going to sing against each other, they affect an
uncommon niceness concerning the Choice of the Place where they are to sing;
each proposing one, of which he makes a florid Description. For my part, I have
much a-do to believe that all this is very well set together. Their Songs are
as odly diversified; for among the things that relate to their Amors, and that
are pretty, Comatas puts Laco in mind of a Beating which he bestowed upon him;
and Laco answers him, that he does not remember it, but that he has not forgot
how Comatas was bound and soundly lashed by his Master Eumaras. I do not fancy
that those who say that Venus, the Graces, and Cupid composed Theocritus's
Idyllia, will pretend that they had a hand in these Passages.

There are some other Places in Theocritus that are not altogether so low,
which yet are not very entertaining, because they barely treat of Country
Matters. His fourth Idyllium is wholly of this kind. The Subject of it is only
a certain Aegon, who, being gone to the Olympic Games, has left his Herds to
one Corydon. Battus tells the Trustee, that the Herds are in a pitiful
condition since Aegon left them. Corydon answers, that he does his best, that
he drives them to the best Pastures he knows, and feeds them at a Rack of Hay.
Battus says that Aegon's Pipe is spoiled and moldy in his absence; Corydon
replys. that it is not so, that Aegon when he went gave it him, and that he is
a notable Piper. Then Battus desires Corydon, to pull a Thorn out of his Foot,
and the other having advised him, never to walk over Mountains without his
Shoes, the Idyllium presently concludes, a thing which those who are not
conversant with Antiquity, would scarce have believed possible.

When in a Pastoral Strife one says, Ho! My Goats go on the Brow of yonder
Hill; and the other answers, Go, my Sheep, feed on to the Eastward.

Or, I hate the brush-tail'd Fox, which comes at Night and devours our Grapes;
and the other, I hate the Beetles that Eat the Figs.

Or, when one says, I have made my self a Bed with Cow's Skins near a cool
Stream, And there I value Summer's burning Heats,
No more than Children do their Fathers Threats,
Their Mothers kind Complaints, etc.


And the other answers, I live in a large shady Cave, where Soft Chitterlings
afford me pleasing Food,
And when the Winter comes I Am stored with wood;
So that I value cold no more, not I,
Than toothless Men do Nuts when Pap is by.


May not these Discourses be thought too Clownish, and fitter to be spoken by
real Country Fellows than by such Shepherds as are introduced in Eclogues?

Virgil, who having had the Example of Theocritus before his Eyes, has had an
opportunity to outdo him, has made his Shepherds more polite and agreeable.
Any one who compares his third Eclogue with that of Laco and Comatas in
Theocritus will easily find how well he could rectify and surpass what he did
imitate: Not but that he still somewhat too much resembles Theocritus, when he
loses some time in making his Pastors say, Beware the Stream, drive not the
Sheep too nigh,
The Bank may fail, the Ram is hardly dry.
And, Kids from the River drive, and sling your Hook,
Anon I Will wash them in the shallow Brook.
And, Boys, drive to Shades, when Milk is drained by heat,
In vain the Milk-Maid strokes an empty Teat.


All this is the less pleasing considering that it comes after some tender
things which are very pretty and genteel, and which have made the Reader the
more unfit to relish such things as altogether relate to the Country.

Calpurnius a Writer of Eclogues, who lived almost three hundred Years after
Virgil, and whose Works however are not wholly destitute of Beauty, seems to
have been sorry that Virgil did express but with the Words, Novimus and qui te,
those Injurious Terms with which Laco and Comatas treat one another in
Theocritus; tho after all, it had yet been better had Virgil wholly suppressed
that short hint. Calpurnius has judged this Passage worthy a larger extent and
therefore wrote an Eclogue which is made up of nothing but those Invectives,
with which two Shepherds ready to sing for a Prize, ply each other with a great
deal of Fury, till the Shepherd who was to be their Judge, is so affrighted
that he runs away and leaves 'em. A very fine Conclusion!

But no Author ever made his Shepherds so clownish as J. Baptista Mantuanus, a
Latin Poet, who lived in the foregoing Age, and who has been compared to
Virgil, tho he has indeed nothing common with him besides his being of Mantua.
The Shepherd Faustus describing his Mistress, says, that she had a good big
bloated red Face, and that, though she was almost blind of an Eye, he thought
her more beautiful than Diana. 'Twere impossible to guess what precaution
another Shepherd takes before he begins a Discourse of considerable length; and
who knows but that our modern Mantuan valued himself mightily upon having
copied Nature most faithfully in those Passages?

I therefore am of Opinion, that Pastoral Poetry cannot be very charming if it
is as low and clownish as Shepherds naturally are; or if it precisely runs upon
nothing but rural Matters. For, to hear one speak of Sheep and Goats, and of
the care that ought to be taken of those Animals, has nothing which in it self
can please us; what is pleasing is the Idea of quietness, which is inseparable
from a Pastoral Life. Let a Shepherd say, My Sheep are in good Case, I conduct
them to the best Pastures, they feed on nothing but the best Grass, and let him
say this in the best Verse in the World, I am sure that your imagination will
not be very much delighted with it. But let him say, How free from anxious
Cares is my Life! In what a quiet state I pass my Days! All my Desires rise no
higher than that I may see my Flocks in a thriving condition, and the Pastures
wholesome and pleasing; I envy no Man's Happiness, etc. You perceive that this
begins to become more agreeable: The reason of it is, that the Idea runs no
longer immediately upon Country Affairs, but upon the little share of Care
which Shepherds undergo, and upon the quietness and leisure which they enjoy;
and what is the chiefest point, upon the cheapness of their Happiness.

For, all Men would be happy, and that too at an easy rate. A quiet Pleasure
is the common object of all their Passions, and we are all controuled by a
certain Laziness: Even those who are most stirring are not precisely such for
Business sake, or because they love to be in action, but because they cannot
easily satisfy themselves.

Ambition, as it is too much an Enemy to this natural Laziness, is neither a
general Passion nor very Delicious. A considerable part of Mankind is not
ambitious; many have begun to be such, but by the means of some undertakings
and ties that have determined them before they seriously reflected on what they
did, and that have made them unfit ever to return to calmer Inclinations; and
even those who have most ambition, do often complain of the Cares which it
exacts and the Pains that attend it. The reason of this is that the Native
Laziness, of which we were speaking, is not wholly suppressed, though it has been
sacrificed to that presumptuous Tyrant of the Mind; it proved the weakest, and
could not over balance its Rival; yet it still subsists and continually opposes
the motions of ambition. Now no Man can be happy while he is divided by two
warring Inclinations.

However, I do not say that Men can relish a state of absolute Laziness and
Idleness; No, they must have some motion, some agitation, but it must be such a
motion and agitation as may be reconciled, if possible, to the kind of Laziness
that possesses 'em; and this is most happily to be found in Love, provided it
be taken in a certain manner. It must neither be a hot, jealous, touchy,
furious, desperate Love, but tender, pure, simple, delicate, faithful, and,
that it may preserve it self in this state, attended with hopes: Then the heart
is taken up, but not disturbed; we have Cares, but no uneasinesses; we are
moved, but not torn, and this soft Motion is just such, as the love of Rest,
and our Native Laziness can bear it.

Besides, it is most certain that Love is the most general and the most agreeable
of all the Passions. So, in the State of Life which we have now described,
there is a concurrence of the two strongest Passions, Laziness and Love; which
thus are both satisfied at once; and, that we may be as happy as it is possible
we should by the Passions, it is necessary that all those by which we are moved,
agree together in us.

This is properly what we conceive of a Pastoral Life. For, it admits of no
ambition, nor of any thing that moves the heart with too much Violence;
Therefore our Laziness has cause to be contented. But this way of living by
reason of its idleness and tranquillity creates Love more easily than any other,
or at least indulges it more: But after all, what Love! A Love more innocent,
because the Mind is not so dangerously refined; more assiduous, because those
who feel it are not diverted by any other Passion; more full of Discretion,
because they hardly have any acquaintance with Vanity; more faithful because
with a Vivacity of Imagination less used, they have also less uneasiness, less
distaste, and less fickleness; that is to say, in short, a Love purged of
whatever the Excesses of human Fancy have sophisticated it with.

This considered, it is not to be admired why the Pictures which are drawn of a
Pastoral Life, have always something so very smiling in them, and indulge our
Fancies more than the Pompous Description of a splendid Court and of all the
Magnificence that can shine there. A Court gives us no Idea but of toilsome and
constrained Pleasures: For, as we have observed, the Idea is all in all: Could
the Scene of this quiet Life, with no other business but Love, be placed any
where but in the Country, so that no Goats nor Sheep should be brought in, I
fancy it would be never the worse; for, the Goats and Sheep add nothing to its
Felicity; but as the scene must lie either in the Country or in Towns, it seems
more reasonable to choose the First.

As the Pastoral Life is the most idle of all others, it is also the most fit to
be the Ground work of those Ingenious Representations of which we are speaking.
So that no Ploughmen, Reapers, Vinedressers or Hunts men, can by any means be
so properly introduced in Eclogues, as Shepherds: Which confirms what I said,
that what makes this kind of Poetry please, is not it is giving an Image of a
Country Life, but rather the Idea which it gives of the tranquillity and
Innocence of that Life.

Yet there is an Idyllium of Battus and Milo, two Reapers in Theocrtius, which
has Beauties. Milo asks Battus why he does not Reap as fast as he used to do?
He answers, that he is in Love, and then sings something that is very pretty
about the Woman that he loves. But Milo laughs at him, and tells him he is a
Fool, for being so idle as to be in Love; that this is not an Employment fit
for one who Works for Food; and that, to divert himself and excite one another
to Work, he should sing some Songs which he denotes to him, and which
altogether relate to the Harvest. I must needs own that I do not so well like
this Conclusion. For I would not be drawn from a pleasing and soft Idea to
another that is low and without Charms.

Sannazarius has introduced none but Fishermen in his Eclogues; and I always
perceive, when I read those Piscatory Poems, that the Idea which I have of the
Fishermen's hard and toilsome way of living, shocks me. I don't know what moved
him to bring in Fishermen instead of Shepherds, who were in possession of the
Eclogue time out of mind, but had the Fishermen been in possession of it, it
had been necessary to put the Shepherds in their place: For, singing, and above
all, an Idle life becomes none but Shepherds: Besides methinks it is prettier
and more genteel to send Flowers or Fruit to one's Mistress, than send her
Oysters as Sannazarius's Lyco does to his.

It Is true that Theocritus has an Idyllium of two Fishermen; but it does not
seem to me so beautiful as to have deserved to tempt any Man to write one of
that kind. The subject of it is this; Two old Fishermen had but sparingly
supped together in a wretched little Thatcht-house, by the Seaside: One of
them wakes his Bedfellow to tell him, he had just dreamt that he was catching a
Golden Fish; and the other answers him, that he might starve though he had
really caught such a one. Was this worth writing an Eclogue!

However, though none but Shepherds were introduced in Eclogues, it is
impossible but that the Life of Shepherds which after all is yet very Clownish
must sessen and debase their Wit, and hinder their being as ingenious, nice,
and full of gallantry as they are commonly represented in Pastorals. The famous
Lord D'urfe's Astraea seems a less fabulous Romance than Amadis de gaul; yet I
fancy that in the main it is as incredible, as to the politeness and graces of
his Shepherds, as Amadis can be as to all its Enchantments, all its Fairies,
and the Extravagance of its adventures. How comes it then that Pastorals please
in spite of the falsity of the Characters, which ought always to shock us?
Could we be pleased with seeing some Courtiers represented as having a
Clownishness which should resemble that of real Shepherds as much as the
Gallantry which Shepherds have in Pastorals resembles that of Courtiers? No,
doubtless; but indeed that Character of the Shepherds is not false after all,
if we look upon it one way: For we do not mind the meanness of the Concerns
that are their real Employment, but the little trouble which those Concerns
bring. This meanness would wholly exclude Ornaments and Gallantry, but on the
other hand the quiet state promotes them; and it is only on that tranquillity
that whatever pleases in a Pastoral Life is grounded.

Our Imagination is not to be pleased without Truth; but it is not very hard to
please it; for, often it is satisfied with a kind of half Truth. Let it see only
the half of a Thing, but let that half be shown in a lively manner, then it
will hardly bethink it self that you hide from it the other half, and you may
thus deceive it as long as you please, since all the while it imagines that
this single moiety, with the Thoughts of which it is taken up, is the whole
Thing. The Illusion and at the same time the pleasingness of Pastorals
therefore consists in exposing to the Eye only the Tranquillity of a Shepherd's
Life, and in dissembling or concealing its meanness, as also in showing only
its Innocence and hiding its Miseries; so that I do not comprehend why
Theocritus dwelt so much upon its Miseries and Clownishness.

If those who are resolved to find no faults in the Ancients, tell us that
Theocritus had a mind to draw Nature just such as it is, I hope that according
to those principles, we shall have some Idyllia of Porters, or Watermen
discoursing together of their particular Concerns: Which will be every whit as
good as some Idyllia of Shepherds speaking of nothing but their Goats or their
Cows.

The Business is not purely to describe, we must describe such Objects as are
delightful: When the quiet that reigns in the Country, and the simplicity and
tenderness which are discovered there in making Love, are represented to me, my
Imagination, moved and affected with these pleasing Ideas, is fond of a
Shepherd's Life; but though the vile and low Employments of Shepherds, were
described to me with all the exactness possible, I should never be taken with
'em, and my Imagination would not in the least be touched. The chief advantage
of Poetry consists in representing to us in a lively manner the things that
concern us, and in striking strongly a Heart which is pleased with being moved.

Here Is enough, and perhaps too much against these Shepherds of Theocritus, and
those who, like 'em, have too much of the Shepherd in 'em. What we have left of
Moschus and Bion in the Pastoral kind, makes me extremely lament what we have
lost of theirs. They have no manner of Rusticity, but rather a great deal of
Delicacy and Grace, and some Ideas wholly new and pleasing. They are accused of
being too florid; and I do not deny but that they may be said to be such in
some few places; yet I don't know why the Critics are more inclined to excuse
Theocritus's Clownishness, than Moschus and Bion's Elegancy; methinks they
should have done the contrary. Is it not that Virgil has prejudiced every one
for Theocritus, having done to no other the honor of imitating and copying
him? Or is it not rather that the Learned have a taste that uses to nauseate
what is Delicate and Genteel? What ever it is, I find that all their Favor is
for Theocritus, and that they have resolved to dubb him Prince of the Bucolick
Poets.

The Moderns have not often been guilty of making their Shepherds thus
Clownish. The Author of Astraea, in that Romance, which otherwise is full of
admirable things, has rather run into the other extreme. Some of his Shepherds
are absolutely drawn such as they ought to have been, but some others, if I am
not mistaken, might better have been placed in Grand Cyrus, or in Cleopatra.
These Shepherds often seem to me Courtiers disguised in a Pastoral Dress, and
ill Mimicks of what they would imitate; sometimes they appear to me most
Cavilling Sophisters; for though none but Sylvander has studied in the School of
the Massilians, there are some others who happen to be as full of Subtility as
himself; though I don't comprehend how they could even but understand him, not
having like him took their Degrees in the Massilian Schools.

It does not belong to Shepherds to speak of all sorts of Matters, and when a
Poet has a mind to raise his Style, he may make use of other Persons. When
Virgil desired to give a pompous Description of the imaginary Return of the
Golden Age, which he promises to the World at the Birth of Pollio's Son, he
should not have excited the Pastoral Muses to leave their natural Strain, and
raise their Voices to a pitch which they can never reach; his Business was to
have left them, and have addressed himself to some others. Yet I do not know
after all if it had not have been better to have kept to the Pastoral Muses;
for, he might have given a pleasing Description of the good which the Return of
Peace was ready to cause in the Country; and this, methinks, had been as
acceptable at least as all those incomprehensible Wonders which he borrows of
the Cumean Sibyl, this new Race of Men which is to descend from Heaven, these
Grapes which are to grow on Briars, and these Lambs whose Native Fleece is to
be of a Scarlet, or Crimson hue, to save Mankind the trouble of dying the Wool.
He might have flattered Pollis more agreeably with things that might have
seemed more consistent with probability, though, after all, even these perhaps
did not wholly seem inconsistent with it, at least to the Party concerned; for
Praise is seldom thought such by those on whom it is lavished.

Shall I dare to say that Calpurnius, an Author much inferior to Virgil seems
to have handled a Subject of the same nature much more to the purpose: Take
notice that I only speak of the Design or Fable, and not at all of the Style.
He brings in two Shepherds, who to be skreen'd from the Sun's sultry heat,
shelter themselves in a Cave where they find some Verses written with the God
Faunus's own hand, which contain a Prophecy about the Happiness which the Roman
Empire is to enjoy under the Emperor Carus. According to the Duty of a
Pastoral Poet, he dwells sufficiently on the Prosperity and Plenty that relates
to the Country, and then proceeds to higher Matters; because, as he makes a God
speak, he has a Right to do so; but he brings in nothing like the Sibyl's
Prophecies. It Is pity that Virgil did not write the Verses of this Piece;
neither had there been need to have had them all written by him.

Virgil makes Phoebus say to him at the beginning of his sixth Eclogue, that a
Shepherd ought not to sing Kings nor Wars, but to stick to his Flocks, and such
Subjects as only require a plain Style. Without doubt Phoebus's Counsel was
very good, but I cannot imagine how Virgil could forget it so much as to fall a
singing immediately after, the original of the World, and the framing of the
Universe, according to Epicurus's System, which was a great deal worse than to
sing Kings and Wars. I must needs own that I cannot in the least tell what to
make of this Piece; I do not understand what is the Design, nor what Coherence
there is between the several parts of it: For after these Philosophical
Notions, we have the Fables of Hylas and Pasiphae, and of Phaeton's Sisters
which have no manner of Relation to them, and in the middle of these Fables,
which are all borrowed from very remote times, we have Cornelius Gallus,
Virgil's Contemporary, and the Honors which he receives on Paruassus; after
which, we presently come to the Fables of Scylla and Philomela. It Is honest
Silenus that gives all this fine Medly; and, as Virgil tells us, that according
to his laudable Custom, he had taken a hearty Carouse the Day before, I am
afraid, the Fumes were hardly yet got out of his Head.

Here let me once more take the freedom to own that I like better the design of
an Eclogue of this kind, by Nemesianus, an Author who was Calpurnius's
Contemporary, and who is not altogether to be despised. Some Shepherds, finding
Pan asleep, try to play on his Pipe, but as a Mortal can make a God's Pipe
yield only a very unpleasing sound, Pan is awaked by it; and tells them, that
if they are for Songs, he will gratify them presently. With this be sings to
them something of the History of Bacebus, and dwells on the first Vintage that
ever was made, of which he gives a Description which seems to me very
agreeable; this Design is more regular than that of Virgil's Silenus, and the
Verses also are pretty good.

The Moderns have been often guilty of handling high Subjects in their
Eclogues. The French Poet Rensard has given us in his the Praises of Princes
and of France, and almost all that looks like Bucolick in them, is his calling
Henry II. Henriot, [or Harry.] Charles IX. Carlin, and Queen Catherine de
Medicis, Catin, [or Kate.] It Is true, he owns that he did not follow the Rules,
but it had been better to have done it, and thus have avoided the Ridicule
which the disproportion that is between the Subject and the Form of the Work
produces. Hence it happens that in his first Eclogue it falls to the Lot of the
Shepherdess Margot [or Peg] to sing the Elogy of Turnebus, Budaeus, and
Vatable, the greatest Men of their Age for Greek and Hebrew, but with whom,
certainly Peg ought not to have been acquainted.

Because Shepherds look well in some kinds of Poetry, many Writers prostitute
them to every Subject. They are often made to sing the Praises of Kings in the
sublimest Style the Poet can write; and provided he has but talked of Oaten
Pipes, Meads and Plains, Fern or Grass, Streams or Valleys, he thinks he has
written an Eclogue. When Shepherds praise a Hero, they should praise him
Shepherd-like, and I do not doubt but that this would be very ingenious and
taking, but it would require some Art, and the shortest cut it seems is to make
the Shepherds speak the common Dialect of praise, which is very big and softy
indeed, but very common and consequently easy enough of Conscience.

Allegorical Eclogues also are not very easy. J. B. Mantuanus, who was a
Carmelite Friar, has one in which two Shepherds dispute, the one representing a
Carmelite Friar, who is of that Party of the Order which they call, The strict
Observance, and the other of that which they call the Mitigated. The famous
Bembus is their Judge; and it is worth observing, that he prudently makes them
lay down their Crooks, lest they fall together by the Ears.

Now, though in the main our Mantuan has pretty well kept the Allegory, it is
too ridiculous to find the Controversy between these two sorts of Carmelitans
handled Ecloguewise.

Yet I had rather see a Shepherd represent one of these, than have him act the
Epicuraean, and say impious things; it is what happens sometimes to some of
Mantuanus's Shepherds, though they are very Clownish, and he himself was of a
Religious Order. Amyntas, one of them, in an angry fit, which makes him rail
against the Laws and Virtue, merely because he is in Love, says, that Men are
great Fools to feed themselves up with a Fancy of being taken up to Heaven
after their Death; and he adds, that the most that is like to happen then, is
that they may chance to transmigrate into some Birds, and so flutter up and
down through the Air. In vain to make this excusable, our Friar says, that
Amyntas had lived a long time in Town; and as much in vain Badius his worthy
Commentator; for as much a Modern as Mantuanus is, he has one, and as bigoted
and hot for his Author as those of the Ancients; in vain, I say, he takes from
thence an opportunity to make this rare Reflection, that Love causes us to
doubt of matters of Faith: It Is certain that these Errors, which ought to be
detested by all those who have heard of them, ought not to be known, much less
mentioned by Shepherds.

To make amends, sometimes our Mantuan makes his Shepherds mighty Godly. In one
of his Eclogues you have a Catalogue of all the Virgin Mary's Holidays; in
another an Apparition of the Virgin, who promises a Shepherd, that, when he
shall have past his Life on Mount Carmel, she will take him to a more pleasant
place, and will make him dwell in Heaven with the Dryades, and Hamadryades, a
sort of new-fashion'd Saints whom we did not yet know in Heaven

Such gross and inexcusable Indecencies may be easily avoided in the Character
of Shepherds, but there are some that are not so observable, of which some
Writers cannot so easily be freed: It Is the making their Shepherds speak too
wittily. Sometimes even those of the Marquess de Racan are guilty of this,
though they generally use to be very reserved in that point. As for the Italian
Authors, they are always so full of false and pointed Thoughts, that we must
resolve right or wrong to give them leave to indulge themselves in that darling
Style of theirs, as natural to them as their Mother Tongue. They never take the
pains to make their Shepherds speak in a Pastoral Style, but make use of as
bold and exaggerated Figures, and are as full of Conceits in that sort of
Poetry, as they are in others.

Father Beuhours in his excellent Treatise of the manner of thinking justly in
ingenious Composures, finds fault with Tasso's Sylvia, who seeing the
Reflection of her Face in a Fountain, and adorning her self with Flowers, tells
them she does not wear them to mend her Beauty, but to lessen them, and
disgrace them by being placed near her brighter Charms. Our Judicious Critic
thinks this Thought too full of Affectation, and not natural enough for a
Shepherdess, and none can refuse their assent to this Criticism which is the
result of a very delicate Taste: But when that is done, let none give
themselves the Trouble of reading Guarini's, Bouarelli's and Marini's Pastoral
Poetry with a design to find any thing in them truly Pastoral, for Sylvia's
Thought is one of the most unaffected and single things in the World, if
compared to most of those of which these Authors are full.

And indeed Tasso's Amynta is the best Thing that Italy has produced in the
Pastoral kind; and has certainly very great Beauties; even the passage of
Sylvia, except what we have observed in it, is one of the most ingenious and
best described Things I ever read, and we ought to own our selves extremely
obliged to an Italian Author, for not having been more prodigal of Pointed
Thoughts.

Monsieur De Segrais, whose Works are the most excellent Pattern we have of
Pastoral Poetry, owns himself, that he did not always keep exactly to the Style
which it requires. He says, That he has sometimes been obliged to humor the
Genius of this Age, which delights in figures and glittering Things: But this
must be said on his behalf, that he only condescended to follow this method
after he had sufficiently proved that he can when he pleases perfectly hit the
true Beauties of Pastoral. After all, none can well tell which is the Taste or
Genius of this Age, it is not determined either to what is good or bad, but
seems wavering sometimes on this and sometimes on that side. So I believe,
that, since there is still a hazard to be run what ever side we take, 'twere
better to follow the Rules and true Ideas of Things.

Between the usual Clownishness of Theocritus's Shepherds, and the too much Wit
of most of our Modern Shepherds, a certain Medium should be kept, but it is so
far from being easily followed in the performance, that it is even difficult to
denote it. The Shepherds ought to have Wit, and it ought to be fine and genteel
too; for they could not please without it, but they ought to have that Wit only
in a certain Degree, otherwise they are no more Shepherds: I Will endeavor to
determine this Degree, and adventure to give my notion of it.

The Men who have the most Wit, and those who have but an indifferent share of
it, do not differ so much in the sense which they have of Things as they do in
their manner of expressing it. The Passions, amidst all the Disturbance which
they cause, are attended by a kind of Light, which they impart almost equally
to all those whom they possess. There is a certain Penetration, certain Ideas,
which, without any regard to the difference of the Minds, are always found in
Men in whatever concerns and affects them. But these Passions, at the same time
that they in a manner inform the Mind of all Men alike, do not enable them to
speak equally well. Those whose Mind is more refined, more capacious and more
improved by Study or Conversation do, while they express their Sentiments, and
something that has the air of a Reflection, and that is not inspired by the
Passion alone; whereas the others speak their Minds more simply, and add, in a
manner, nothing that is foreign: Any ordinary Man will easily say; I so
Passionately desired that my Mistress might be faithful, that I believed her
such; but it only belongs to a refined Wit, as the Duke de la Rochefoucaut to
say, My understanding was fooled by my Will, or, My Reason was cully'd by my
Desire; [^ Esprita ete en moy la Dupe du Coeur:] The Sense is the same, the
penetration equal, but the Expression is so different, that one would almost
think it is no more the same thing.

We take no less Pleasure in finding a Sentiment expressed simply, than in a more
thought-like and elaborate Manner, provided it be always equally fine: Nay the
simple way of expressing it ought to please more, because it occasions a kind
of a gentle surprise, and a small admiration. We are amazed to find something
that is fine and delicate in common and unaffected Terms; and on that account
the more the thing is fine, without ceasing to be Natural; and the Expression
common, without being low, the deeper we ought to be struck.

Admiration and surprise are so powerful that they can even raise the value of
Things beyond their Intrinsic worth. All Paris has lavished Exclamations of
Admiration on the Siamese Ambassadors for their Ingenious sayings; Now had some
Spanish or English Ambassadors spoken the same Things, no body would have
minded it. This happened because we wrongfully supposed that some Men who came
from the remotest Part of the World, of a tawny Complexion, dressed otherwise
than we are, and till then esteemed Barbarians by those of Europe, were not to
be endowed with common Sense; and we were very much surprised to find they had
it; So that the least thing they said filled us with admiration, an Admiration
which after all was Injurious enough to those Gentlemen.

The same happens of our Shepherds; for, we are the more pleasingly struck with
finding them thinking finely in their simple Style, because we the least
expected it.

Another Thing that suits with the Pastoral Style is to run only on Actions,
and never almost on Reflections. Those who have a middling share of Wit, or a
Wit but little improved by a Converse with polite Books or Persons, use to
discourse only of those particular Things of which they have had a Sense; while
others raising themselves higher, reduce all things into general Ideas: The
Minds of the latter have worked and reflected upon their Sentiments and
experiments, it happens that what they have seen has led them to what they
have not seen; whereas those of an inferior Order, not pursuing their Ideas
beyond what they have a Sense of, it may happen that what resembles it most may
still be new to them. Hence proceeds the insatiable Desire of the Multitude to
see the same Objects, and their admiring always almost the same Things.

A Consequence of this Disposition of Mind is the adding to the Things that are
related any Circumstances whether useful or not. This happens because the Mind
has been extremely struck with the particular Action, and with all that
attended it. Contrary to this a great Genius, despising all these petty
Circumstances, fixes on what is most essential in Things, which commonly may be
related without the Circumstances.

It Is truer than it seems, that in such Composures where in Passion is to be
described, it is better to imitate the way of speaking used by Men of
indifferent Capacity, than the Style of more refined Wits. I must own that thus
there is little related besides Actions and we do not rise to Reflections; but
nothing is more graceful than Actions, so displayed as to bring their
Reflection along with them. Such is this admirable Touch in Virgil; Galataea
throws an Apple at me, then runs to hide her self behind the Willows, and first
would be perceived. The Shepherd does not tell you what is Galataea's Design,
though he is fully sensible of it; but the Action has made a deep pleasing
Impression on his Mind, and, according as he represents it, it is impossible but
you must guess its meaning. Now the Mind is delighted with sensible Ideas,
because it easily admits of them, and it loves to penetrate, provided it be
without Effort; whether it be that it loves to Act but to a certain Degree, or
that a little Penetration indulges its vanity. So the Mind has the double
Pleasure, first of getting an easy Idea, then of penetrating, whenever such
Cases as that of Galataea are laid before it. The Action, and, in a manner, the
Soul of the Action all at once strike the Eyes of the Mind; it can see nothing
more in the matter, nor more quickly, neither can it ever be put to less
expense.

In Virgil's second Eclogue, Corydon, to commend his Pipe, tells us that
Damaetas gave it him when he died, and said to him, Thou art the second Master
it has had, and Amyntas was jealous, because it was not bequeathed him: All
these Circumstances are altogether Pastoral: It might not perhaps be
disagreable to bring in a Shepherd who is puzzled in the midst of his Story,
and who finds some difficulty in recovering himself; but this would require
some Art in the management.

There are no persons whom it becomes better to lengthen a little their
Narrations with Circumstances than Lovers. They ought not indeed to be
absolutely needless or too far-fetched; for, this would be tedious, though it
may be natural enough; but those that have but a half relation to the Action
which is talked of, and that show more passion than they, are considerable, can
never fail to please. So when, in one of Monsieur de Segrais's Eclogues, a
Shepherdess says, The Songs which Lysis and Menalcas sing
Please every Swain, and make the Valleys ring;
But I like better those which near This Tree,
Mr Jealous Shepherd lately made for me.


The Circumstance of the Tree is pretty, only as it had been needless for any
other but a Lover. According to our Idea of Shepherds, Tales and Narrations
become them very well; but for them to make Speeches, such as those in Astraea,
full of general Reflections, and Chains of Arguments, is a thing which I do not
think their Character allows.

It is not amiss to make them give descriptions, provided they be not very
long. That of the Cup which the Goat-herd promises to Thyrsis, in Theocritus's
first Idyllium somewhat exceeds the Bounds: Yet, according to that Example,
Ronsard, and Belleau his Contemporary, have made some that are yet longer. When
their Shepherds are about describing a Basket, a Goat or a Blackbird, which
they make the Prize of a Pastoral Combat, they never have done: Not that their
Descriptions are sometimes without great Beauties, and are writ without
admirable Art; far from this, they have too much of it for Shepherds.

Vida a Latin Poet of the last Age, and of great Reputation, in his Eclogue of
Nice, whom I take to be Victoria Colonna, the Marquess of Pescario's Widow,
brings in the Shepherd Damon giving a Description of a Rush Basket which he is
to make for her. He says, that he will represent in it Davalos, that is the
Marquess, dying, and grieved that he does not die in Battle; some Kings,
Captains, and Nymphs in Tears about him, Nice praying the Gods in vain, Nice
fainting away at the News of Davalos's Death, and with difficulty recovering
her Senses by the means of the Water which her Women throw on her Face; and he
adds that he would have expressed many Complaints and Moans, if they could be
expressed on Rush. Here are a great many Things to be showed on a Basket! Neither
do I relate them all; but I cannot tell how all this can be expressed on Rush,
nor how Damon, who owns he cannot express on it the Complaints of Nice, is not
at a Loss to display on it the Marquess's Grief for dying in his Bed. I
shrewdly suspect that Achilles's Shield is the Original from which this Basket
has been imitated.

I find that Virgil has used similitudes very often in his Pastoral Discourses:
These similitudes are very properly brought in, to supply the place of those
trivial Comparisons, and principally of those clownish proverbial sayings,
which real Shepherds use almost continually: But as there is nothing more
easily to be imitated than this way of using similitudes, it is what Virgil has
been most copied in. We find in all your Writers of Eclogues, nothing more
common than Shepherdesses who exceed all others as much as lofty Pines ever top
the lowly Reed, or highest Oaks the humblest Shrubs exceed; we see nothing but
the cruelty of ungrateful Shepherdesses who are to a Shepherd, What Frosts or
Storms are to the tenderest Flowers, like Hale to ripening Corn, etc. I think
all this old and worn threadbare at this Time of Day, and to say the Truth
on it, it is no great Pity. Similitudes naturally are not very proper for
Passion, and Shepherds should only use them when they find it difficult to
express themselves otherwise; then they would have a very great Beauty, but I
know but very few of that kind.

Thus we have pretty near discovered the Pitch of Wit which Shepherds ought to
have, and the Style they should use. It Is methinks with Eclogues, as with those
Dresses which are worn at Masks or Balls; they are of much finer stuff than
those which real Shepherds usually wear; nay they are even adorned with
Ribbands and Points, and are only made after the Country cut. In the same
manner the Thoughts which are the Subject matter of Eclogues, ought to be finer
and more delicate than those of real Shepherds; but they must have the most
simple and most rural Dress possible.

Not but that we ought to use both simplicity and a Country-like plainness even
in the Thoughts, but we ought to take notice that this simplicity and
Country-like plainness only exclude your excessive delicacy in the Thoughts,
like that of the refined Wits in Courts and Cities, and not the Light which
Nature and the Passions bestow of themselves; otherwise the Poet would
degenerate and run into Childish Talk that would beget Laughter rather than
admiration. Something of this kind is pleasant enough in one of Remi Belleau's
Eclogues; where a young Shepherd, having stolen a kiss from a pretty
Shepherdess, says to her, I Have kissed some new fawned Kids, like other Swains,
I Have kissed the sucking Calf, which in our Plains
Young Colin gave me; but this Liss I swear,
Is sweeter much than all those Kisses were.


Yet such a Childishness seems more pardonable in this young Shepherd than in
the Cyclops Polyphemus. In Theocritus's Idyllium that bears his Name and which
is fine, he is thinking how to be revenged on his Mother, a Sea Nymph, because
she never took care to make Galataea, another Sea Nymph, have a kindness for
his Giantship; so he says to his Mistress, that He Will tell his Mother, to make
her mad, that he has a pain in his Head and in his Thighs.

It Is hard to imagine that, ugly as he was, his Mother could dote on him so
much as to be very much concerned to hear the poor little Urchin had those
petty ills, or that the Clownish Giant could invent so gentle a Revenge, his
Character is better kept when he promises his Mistress to make her a present of
a Litter of Cubs, or young Bears, which he breeds for her in his Cave. And now
that I speak of Bears, I would gladly know why Daphnis when he is going to die
bids adieu to the Bears, the Lions and the Wolves, as well as to the fair
Fountain Arethuse, and to the Silver Streams of Sicily: Methinks a Man does not
often use to regret the Loss of such Company.

I have but one Remark more to make which has no manner of Connection with
those that go before: It Is concerning those Eclogues which have a Burden much
like those in Ballads, that is, a Verse or two repeated several times. I need
not say that we ought to place those repeated. Verses in such Parts of the
Eclogue as may require, or at least bear such a Verse to interlard them; but it
may not be amiss to observe that all the Art that Theocritus has used in an
Idyllium of this kind, was only to take this Burden and scatter it up and down
through his Idyllium right or wrong, without the least regard to the Sense of
the places where he inserted it, nay without even so much as respecting some of
the Phrases which he made no difficulty to split in two.

I have here spoken with a great deal of Freedom of Theocritus and Virgil,
notwithstanding they are Ancients; and I do not doubt but that I shall be
esteemed one of the Profane, by those Pedants who profess a kind of Religion
which consists in worshipping the Ancients. It Is true, however, that I have
often commended Virgil and Theocritus; but yet I have not always praised them;
much less have I said, like the Superstitious, that even their Faults (if they
had any) were beautiful; neither have I strained all the Natural Light of
Reason to justify them; I have partly approved, and partly consur'd them, as
if they had been some living Authors, whom I saw every day; and there lies the
Sacrilege!

FINIS.

