SOME BREATHINGS OF THE Father's Love, Flowing forth unto the Young-Convinced
of the Holy WAY and Blessed TRUTH of the LORD.
Unto whom be Multiplied and Daily Increased Divine Love, Grace and Everlasting
Peace from GOD the Father, and our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
DEar Tenderhearted Ones, who have felt the Divine Call of the Father's Love,
and have now turned your Faces Sion-ward, does my Love flow forth unto you from
the Fontain and Ocean of Endless Life and Love, which at this time constrains
me thus to write unto you, knowing right well, that the Exercises and Trials
you are passing through, and the Besettings of the Enemy, that ye may meet
withal, are many, since your Faces have been turned Zion-ward, and since you
have Abandoned and Forsaken Egypts Glory, and are now come down from the
Mountains of Prey, having seen the Excellency and Beauty that is in him alone,
who has called you with a Holy Call unto Meekness and Lowliness of Mind,
saying, Learn of me, for I am meek and Lowly in Heart, and you shall find Rest
unto your Souls: Which in measure you will come to witness, as through
Obedience you have learned of him, and with Faithfulness, have obeyed his Voice.
For no otherwise can you ever come to witness Peace with him, but through
Hearkening unto his Voice, and faithfully Obeying the same. And thus you will
come to be Children of Faithful Abraham, who was ready to offer up his only Son
Isaac at Gods Call, not staggering at the Promise, but firmly believing him
that had promised, whose Faith was accounted unto him for Righteousness.

Let none therefore have an Heart of Unbelief, and distrust the Lord, and say,
Can the Lord furnish a Table in the Wilderness? Can he prepare Bread there? Nor
let any think the Time Long, or the Way Tedious, wherein the Lord leads you;
For he that believes makes not Haste. But let your Eye be unto him alone, who
turns the Rock into a Standing Water, and the Flint into a Fountain of
Waters; who will give Bread to the Hungry, and Water to the Thirsty Souls in
his due Time. For there was a time, when the Lord Proved and Tried Israel of
Old; who will also Prove and Try you. Therefore take heed, that you Murmur not
under the same, lest, like Israel, you Grieve the Lord, and he cause you to
fall short of the Promised Land. For you must not expect, because you are come
out of Egypt, and have seen the Wonders of the Lord in the Deep, and have sung
the Song of Moses, that all is over: For there is a Wilderness yet to pass
through, and a Swelling Jordan to pass over, before you will come to the
Promised Land. I write not this to discourage any, but that none might take up
a false Rest, or sit down by the way, and so fall short of that Rest which many
are entered into, and made Possessors off. But that all might be of that
Excellent Spirit, as Caleb and Joshua were of, who inherited the Promised Land
by following the Lord faithfully, and with full Purpose of Heart;
notwithstanding they saw many Thousands fall, and Perish in the Wilderness by
reason of their Disobedience toward God.

And be sure, that no Singularity be embraced or walked in by you; for that
will lead to make Rents and Divisions in the Camp of the Lord, as some of that
Spirit in days past did, who said, Has the Lord only spoke by Moses? You
Moses and Aaron, you take too much upon you; for the Congregation is all Holy,
and the Lord is among them. Wherefore then lift you up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? But what befell these Opposers of Moses and Aaron? The
Earth opened, and swallowed them up in the sight of the People: And the Earthly
Part has swallowed and will swallow up all such Opposers. Wherefore let all be
Warned of these things, and Watch against them in the Light, which discovers
the Wiles of the Enemy: and take heed, lest any of you also should come to be
led away with the Error of the Wicked, and so fall from your own Stedfastness,
and there by come to lose that Simplicity in the Truth which you once enjoyed.
But let Others Harms make you to be the more Vigilant, and Beware. For all
these things were written for your Learning, and your Instruction, that ye
might not Tempt and Provoke the Lord, as they did, with whom the Lord was
grieved Forty Years long, so that he swear in his Wrath, That they should not
enter into his Rest.

And let none look at the swelling Jordan, or the Mighty Sons of Anak, nor at
the Fenced and Walled Cities; For the Willing and the Obedient shall inherit,
and dwell in, and eat the Good of the Land. Wherefore let all be encouraged to
Travel on; for they that Endure to the End, shall reap the End of their Faith,
the Salvation of their Souls. Therefore let none faint, nor look at their own
Weakness, but let them keep their Eye unto the Lord, who is faithful to
perform, what he has promised and spoken by the Mouth of his Prophet, who said,
To you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with Healing in
his Wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow up as Calves in the Stall; and ye
shall tread down the Wicked, for they shall be Ashes under the Soals of your
Feet. So as you dwell and patiently wait in God's Fear, ye will come to witness
the fulfilling of these things in your Measures: For it is the Fear of God that
keeps the Heart clean, and is the Beginning of true Wisdom. And as you dwell
in that, you will be made able steadfastly to resist the Enemy of your Souls,
whenever he appears to draw you into Evil, saying unto him, How shall I do
this Evil, and sin against the Lord? So, the Lord being always thus set before
you, ye need not fear: for the Wicked One can never touch you, while ye stand
thus in an holy Awe of Offending the Lord. But if you are not Vigilant, and
always Watching in the Light, the Enemy will soon prevail, and take you
Captive again: For he goes about like a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour: Whose Snares and subtle Devices are so many, that none can escape them,
but those who thus wait and watch against them in the Light.

Wherefore, Dear Hearts, Put on the whole Armor of Light, and in that Light
which convinced you all, walk and dwell, and it will bring you unto the perfect
Day, in which is no Darkness; and thus you will be Witnesses of the Just Man's
Path, which is as a shining Light, which shines more and more unto the perfect
Day. So all that come to walk in this Light, will see more Light, as one did
who said, In thy Light shall I see more Light. And so as this Light increases,
Darkness will decrease: for when the Perfect Day is come, then Darkness is fled
away.

And hither must all the Nations come, that are saved to walk in the Light,
which the Lord will send forth more and more, that those who are yet under the
Region and Shadow of Death, may come to behold it, and the Glory and Excellency
that is in it, which is the Glory, as of the Only Begotten of the Father, full
of Grace and Truth, which a Remnant are come to behold, Glory to God on high
for evermore! For Light shines in Darkness, though the Darkness cannot
comprehend it, which we have believed in, and from whom we have received Power
to become the Sons and Daughters of God, who is Light, and in whom is no
Darkness. neither any Variableness or Shadow of Turning, but the same
Yester-day, to day and for ever.

And so, Dear Tenderhearted Ones, Keep low in the Holy Truth of God, and that
will be your Crown; for true and deep Humility is Real Christianity. For while
ye are Meek and Lowly in Heart, ye will bear in your Bodies the Marks of the
Lord Jesus, and then will it be seen, whose Disciples ye are. And while the
meek Spirit of Jesus bears Rule in you, that will keep down all Hastiness, and
Rash and Unadvised Words, which you are to dye daily unto, who would live with
Christ for ever. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, but when buffeted,
said, Father, forgive them. Thus we are to have Christ for our Example; who
dyed, that we should no more live unto our selves, but unto him that dyed for
us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his Steps, in whom was no Sin,
neither was Guile found in his Mouth. For we are but as other People, except we
live unto Christ, who dyed for us, the Benefit of whose Death none will reap,
but such as live unto him, in whom we have believed; in whom is Life, and his
Life is the Light of Men. And though to the Carnal Professors he is a
Stumbling Block, and to the Learned (so accounted) Fo lishness, yet unto us
that have believed, the Power and Wisdom of God.

So let all be content with, and faithful unto the Measure of Gods Grace, that
unto you has appeared. And let the tender Mercies of God toward you be o^^en
in your Remembrance, that none, like Jesurun, wax fat, and kick against their
Maker, and so through Disobedience loose the Enjoyment of his Presence, and
then come to say, as Saul once did, The Lord is departed from me, and answers
me no more. But that you all, like faithful Joshua, may always feel that Noble
Resolution dwelling and abiding in your Hearts, I and my House will serve the
Lord. For his Service is perfect Freedom unto those that abide therein, and
desire to live in his Courts, esteeming one day there above a Thousand
elsewhere.

And let Truth grow, and flourish in you, that you may be as Trees planted by
the Water-Brook, whose Leaves are always green bringing forth Fruit in due
Season unto God, which must be Holiness, the End whereof will be Everlasting
Life. For the Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of God, which you have
believed in, is Eternal Life unto all that abide in the same. For you know
right well that when you were Servants unto Sin, you were free from
Righteousness; and what Fruit had you then in those things, whereof you are now
ashamed? Therefore let not Sin reign in your Mortal Bodies, neither obey any,
but resist and abstain from every Appearance thereof, and yield yourselves unto
God, as those that are alive from the Dead, and your Members as Instruments of
Righteousness unto him; and obey the Form of Doctrine, which has been often
delivered unto you by many of the Lord's Faithful Servants, who have not loved
their Lives unto Death for the Truth and your Sakes, for whom they have
traveled in Birth, that Christ might be formed in you; whom you ought to
Honor and Esteem with double Honor in the Lord, whose Message they have with
Faithfulness delivered unto you, Woing and Beseeching you in Christ's stead to
be reconciled unto God, whose Will is your Sanctification.

Wherefore as you all have received Christ Jesus, so walk in him, not Adorning
nor F^shioning your selves according to the World, which lies in Wickedness;
but let your Adorning be the Meek Spirit and Self-denying Life of Jesus,
bearing the Image of the Heavenly Man, as you have born the Image of the
Earthly, which must be put off with his Deeds, before you can witn^ss to be
clothed with Zeal as a Cloak, and Righteousness as a Garment. And as your
Lights thus shine before Men, your Heavenly Father will come to be Glorified;
For herein is, and will he be Glorified, by your bringing forth much frui^. So
be fr^it^ul, and always abounding in the Work o^ the Lord, and your Labor will
not be in vain in him, whose Mercies are over all his Works, and withholds no
Good Thing from those that w^lk Uprightly.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord jesus Christ
through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Sanctify you throughout, and
preserve you Blameless, that you may be made Perfect in every Good Work to do
his Will, working in you that which is Well-pleasing in his Sight through
Christ Jesus, in whom we have believed, is the Hearty Desire and Travel of

Your dear Brother in the Everlasting Truth and Gospel, which is revealed unto
us through the Son of the Father's Love, Francis Lea.
Southwark, 25th 4th Mon. 1673.
THE END.

