OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING Money and Coin, And especially those of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed, for Peter Buck at the Sign of the Temple, near the
Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, MDCXCVII.

THE PREFACE.
COmmon Experience convinces, That when People are fallen into Swounds, or
under the torpor of a Lethargick Drowsiness, a sudden sharp cry or piercing
Noise made about them will recover them out of their Swounds, or waken or stir
them up from such Lethargick Drowsiness, imparting to them as great a
proportion of Life and Vigor as the strength of their Natures and
Constitutions are able to act or endure.

The Writer of this Pamphlet has for some Years lain under the stupor of Age
and diverse Maladies; and though during the last Winter he heard diverse
Discourses and Complaints concerning Money Matters, and read diverse Pamphlets
concerning that Subject, which by several Friends were communicated to him; yet
he was little moved therewithal, but let them pass without much Scruple or
careful Search into the Merits of them, but now lately, viz. in the latter end
of May, Anno 1696. he became alarmed by the sharp Cries of his Country, and
the Neighboring Towns, and those of his own Family upon such Complaints; this
roused him from the Stupor of his Age, and suffering under diverse Diseases; he
remembered a Prophets Directions, Let the Weak say I am Strong, and that in
Cases of necessity, there is no exception of Old or Young: But all must draw to
Arms for the Defense and Preservation of their Native Country, and thereupon he
furbish'd up his disused Weapons, and Instruments, his Pen and Paper;
requesting of his Friends a review of such Pamphlets as he had before returned
them. And because he apprehended that the lightening of our present Coin might
be very beneficial to the Kingdom, he desired most a review of those Papers,
which maintained the contrary; upon this request, a Friend sent him the
Merchant of Amsterdam's Letter, also Mr. Lock's Book and his two Letters about
Gold and Silver, and thereupon he sat down Armed to take a review and a fuller
Examination of them, and that Examination and the Endeavor of a Refutation of
their Arguments, is the principal Subject of this Treatise; he thinks not fit
to delay the Publication of it till a next sitting of the Parliament; but
chooses rather to Print it with the most early convenience, that a large time
before sitting of the Parliament, may be given for the Perusal and Trial of
matters therein proposed; that all Men, and especially the Members of both
Houses may have leisure and opportunity to execute the Direction given by the
Levite in the Book of Judges, viz. Consider of it, take advice and speak your
minds, consider of it by your selves, ponder it well, and ruminate upon it, the
Matter being of great Importance and Concern; next take advice by Discourse and
Conference with others, and the Ventilation of Arguments on both sides; that
lastly, when they meet together in Parliament, they may be able and ready to
speak their Minds, knowingly, freely, and with such degrees of assurance as may
be reasonable; whence there may be hoped a Reformation may speedily follow of
our present Grievances, the greatest which have fallen upon the Nation since
the long Rump Parliament was Disolved. There will (no doubt) be many Errors and
Escapes found in this Pamphlet, both in the Matter and in the Manner, and in
Printing of it; all which the Judicious Perusers are prayed to amend, or pass
by with gentleness, considering themselves, lest they also be tempted to come
under the Censure of others, upon this same Subject, or any other the like
occasions.

OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING MONEY and COIN And especially those OF ENGLAND.
THE Practice of our Times directs to fabricate the Knowledge of Arts, Things,
and Science, upon Experience, and the Relations or Histories of former
Experiments, and such as later and our Times have found, tried, and superadded
to them; and hence Men may be induced reasonably to reflect upon the Practices
of former Ages concerning Money, and that will enforce shortly to deliver a
sort of History relating to our present Subject.

The Bible seems reasonably accounted an History the most Ancient in the World,
or at least of any that is yet known to our parts of it, with acceptance;

There we read, Genesis 11. That Abraham was born 292 years after the Flood; and
Cap. 23. That he was 137 years old at the death of Sarah: And that upon her
death, he bought a Burying place for her of Ephron, and paid for it 400 Shekels
of Silver, Current Money with the Merchant, measured as well by weight, as
number of the pieces; Cap. 24. Abraham's Servant adorned Rebekah with a Golden
Ear-Ring of half a Shekel weight, and two Golden Bracelets of ten Shekels
weight; Cap. 13. says, that Abraham went up out of Egypt, and was then very
Rich in Silver, and in Gold; these Texts prove that Metles of Silver and Gold
were in those Times the measures of other Commodities and their Values: also
that they were somewhat plentiful, and were then used amongst Merchants, and
Traders, Coined into known pieces of Money, and measurable as well by weight as
by tale and number of the pieces: Cap. 23, Jacob bought a parcel of a Field for
an 100 pieces of Money, and Cap. 37. Joseph's Brethen sold him to the
Ishmalitish Merchants for twenty pieces of Silver. Cap. 42. Jacob's Sons went
to buy Corn, Joseph commands to fill their Sacks and to restore every Man's
Money into his Sack. Cap. 43. The same again; Cap. 45 Joseph sent to Benjamin
five Changes of Raiment, and 300 pieces of Silver; and Cap. 47. Joseph gathered
all the Money that was found in the Land of Egypt for Corn. These Texts prove
abundantly the common use of Gold and Silver, and the Cutting and Coining them
into Money for the more Commodious Trading and Trafficking in the World, from
the first Times and Ages of it. And the same Usage and Custom may be so easily
carried on and brought down to our own time by a constant Tenor and Course of
Histories, that it would appear but a loss of time in writing, and an abuse of
patience in reading, if any farther progress should be made to that purpose:
Therefore let us proceed to more particular History concerning the usages of
Gold Silver and Money in our own Native Country of England.

And in the research of it, it seems we must submit to a supersedeas for all
former Times and Ages before those wherein Julius Caesar made our Country
known to the Roman World; and since that time we find by Mr. Speed in his
Chronicle (in which we may perceive he has used much search and diligence)
that some British Princes did Coin some pieces both of Gold and Silver, of
which he there exhibits to us the Specimina, viz of Cassibelan, who principally
opposed the Conquest then intended by Julius Caesar; next, a Coin of Cunobelin
or Kymbeline Son of Thomantius and Grandchild of Cassibelan, in the time of
Augustus: And that Kymbelines own Image was stamped upon the Coin, after the
manner of the Romans; concerning which our Lord demands whose Image and
Superscription is this? Then he exhibits to us the Coyns of Arviragus, and
Galgacus, British Kings in the time of the Emperor Domitian before which time,
viz. in the time of Nero: Agricola Lieutenant of Nero in Britain had Conquered
our whole Island, and reduced England into the form of a Roman Province, which
the Romans held under their Yoke and Dominion from that time, viz. about Anno
Christi 60, until the Reign of the Emperor Honorius about Anno Christi 400.
which is the space of 340 years, during all which time it appears with
clearness, our Predecessors the Britains used the Roman Coyns and Money, and
before the Roman times, both Speed and Camden do agree with some Roman Authors,
that the Britains used no other Money in their Payments, but Rings of Iron, and
some Plates or pieces of Brass. If we enquire concerning the Nature of the
Roman Money of those Times, we may be informed by Pliny in his Natural History,
Lib. 33. Cap. 3. There he tells us that he could never learn who was the first,
that by setting a Stamp upon Gold, ordained it to pass for Money, but he is
sure that the People of Rome had neither Gold nor Silver Money stamped before
the Victories, which they had over Pyrrhus King of Epirus; and he knows that in
old time of their Government, their manner was to weigh out Brass by the As,
which was a pound weight, and thence was called As libralis; and the Soldiers
Wages were so paid, viz. by weight, and thence called Stipendia; and at this
day (about Anuo Christi 120) he says, in all buyings and sellings, which pass
with warranty, the payment passes usually by interposition of the Balance; and
that serves to testify the reallity of the Contract on both parts; for the
Roman Brass Money, it was first stamped by Servius Tullius, one of their first
Kings; before which time it was used at Rome in the Mass or Lump, by weight,
his Stamp upon such Brass Money was the Figure or Form of a Sheep, in Latin
termed Pecus, and thence proceeded the word pecunia; and during that King's
Reign, the richest Man in Rome was valued not to be worth more in Goods than an
110000 Asses of Brass.

Five years before the first Punick War, the Romans began to stamp Silver
Money; and then it was ordained, that the Silver Denarius should go for ten
Asses or pounds of Brass; the half Denarius or Quinarius for five such Asses,
and the Sexterce for two and an half: But that Punick War put the Roman
Commonwealth so much behind hand, that it was Agreed, and Ordained to raise the
value of the Brazen Money, by diminishing the weight of it; so that whereas
before, the Ass weighed a pound of 12 ounces now they brought down the Ass to
the weight of 2 ounces; by which device, says he, the Commonwealth gained five
parts in six; and the public Treasury was, by this means, soon acquitted of
all Debts: And when in the second Punick War, Rome was greatly distressed by
Hanibal, and sorely put to it for Money to maintain that War, they brought down
their later Ass from the weight of 2 ounces to 1 ounce; and the value of their
Silver Denarius they raised from 10 Asses to 16 Asses; the Quinaaius to 8, and
the Sexterce to 4, and by this means, he says, the State gained very near the
half, but excepts Soldiers Wages, wherein the Denarius was to pass but for 10
Asses as before; he says, There was no Gold Coined till 62 years after the
Coining of Silver, and the Proportion of their Gold pieces was, at first, of 50
pieces to a pound weight; and that Proportion was diminished in weight by
little and little, till by Nero it was brought to be Coined at 55 pieces to the
pound weight; This of Roman Coyns.

From the Romans departure out of Britain in the Reign of the Emperor Honorius,
until the Subversion of the British Nation by the Saxons, the British Money and
Coin seems to have continued in the same State wherein the Romans lest it.

These Britains, and first King Vortimer, called in the Saxons to his Aid
against the Northern Men, who stood out against the Romans, and now pillaged
and subdued their deserted Provinces: To Vortigern succeeded Vortimer, Anno
454. and then Aurelius, Other, Arthur, etc. unto Cadwolloder, who b^gan to
Reign Anno 685. but his Power at that time only reached to the Country of
Wales, the Saxons having driven the Britains into those Mountains long before
that time. The Reign of Arthur is by Speed placed to begin Anno 516. and that
it extended to 542. at which time, he says, the Saxons had spread themselves as
far as to Tine in the North, Anno 578. Vortiporus succeeded King of the
Britains, called by Gildas, Tyrant of South Wales, which Observations have
been used, for the Collecting a likely Commencement for the establishing the
Saxon Government in the Kingdom of England; which seems to be soon after
Arthur's Death, and may be most probably placed about Anno-Christi 550. betwixt
which year of Commencement and our own time, two Periods seem requisite to be
observed; the first of them from Anno 550. until the Reign of King Hen. the 3d,
whose Reign began anno 1216. which is a space of about 660 years; and the 2d
from 1260. to 1696, the space of 436 years.

In the first of these Periods we have no such certain Rule to Calculate the
value of our Money by, as we may find under the second Period; but must be
forced to Collect upon Inferences, the likeliest approaches to the Truth of
such values.

Speed in his Chronicle fol. 225. and 288. says, That Cherdeck was the first
West Saxon King, succeeded by his Son Kenrick, and he by his Son Ceoline, who
began to Reign Anno 561. to him our Author ascribes a Silver Coin here
exemplified; that Edward King of the East. Angles Coined Money Anno 616. and
Aldolph King of Northumberland Anno 664, and then also Ethelbert King of Kent;
then Offa of Mercia Anno 758. then Kenwolf of Mercia 794. Egbert the Saxon
Monarch Anno 800. Berwulf of Mercia Anno 821. but no more till 872. and then of
Great King Alfred 872. then Edward the Elder, Anno 901. and thence each King
have their Coyns and Stamps annexed with their Effigies, the most early notice
we meet with of Riches amongst them, is cited by Speed from Beda, viz. That
Oswald King of Northumberland, about Anno 634. at a Solemn Feast, sent to the
Poor at his Gates, not only the Meat provided for himself, but commanded the
Charger of Silver wherein it was, to be broken, and divided amongst them; Speed
fol. 303. cites Beda again, That Oswy King of Northumberland in Anno 643. sued
to Penda King of Mercia for Peace, and offered him infinite Treasure and
precious Jewels, which Penda rejected; and Anno 655. Oswy overthrew and killed
Penda in Battle: Holinshead fol. 113. says, That about anno 650. Osunus Brother
of Oswald King of Northumberland, obtained Peace of Cadwallo by great Gifts of
Gold and Silver. Fol. 119. says, Egbert King of Kent, and Oswy King of
Northumberland, sent Wighart, a Priest of good Reputation to the Pope, about
anno 666. with great Gifts and rich Vessels of Gold and Silver, desiring that
Wighart might be Ordained Archbishop of Canterbury. Speed fol. 227. The
Kentish-Men in anno 690. bought their Peace of Ina the West Saxon King, for
30000 Marks of Silver; this Ina in anno 727. new-built and garnished the Abbey
of Glassenbury, and especially the Chapel with Gold, Silver and rich
Ornaments, as Altar, Chalice, Censer, Candlesticks, Basin for Holy Water,
Bucket, Images, and all for the Altar; so as the Gold therein bestowed,
amounted to 333 pound weight of that Mettle, and the Silver to 2835 pound
weight, besides precious Gems Embroach'd upon the Celebrating Vestments, fol.
313. So Offa King of Mercia, anno 775. gave Pope Adrian rich Gifts to make
Alban a Saint, built him an Abbey anno 795. with Revenues to maintain 100 Monks.
Holinshed fol. 132. he caused his Saints Bones to be put in a rich Shrine
adorned with Gold and rich Stones; both these Kings went to Rome and gave the
Pope Peter Pence of their several Kingdoms, which Baker fol. 6. calls the
King's Alms; enjoining every one of those Kings Subjects, who had in their
Houses the value of 20 pence in one sort of Goods, to pay a Penny to the Pope.

There lies before me a Paper of Collections concerning Specimens of the Wealth
of England in Silver and Gold, in all the times of our present period; viz.
till the Reign of King Hen 3. but I forbear (for brevity-sake) to insert them
here; but will proceed to examining and collect the value and weight of rich
Mettles, and the Money of those Times.

The Kings might acquire some Riches and Money, but the People paid their Taxes
and Fines for their Offenses in Cattle or Corn; and that there might be more
dispatch and less dispute in such Cases, a Book of Rates was established
amongst them, as by the Annals of Dr. Brady, fol. 64. they knew the name of
skilling, and had two sorts of them, one sort of two Thrimsas, as another of
three. And this their Book of Rates ordained, that a Steer of twelve months old
shall be a valuable payment or satisfaction for a lesser Skilling of 2
Thrimsas; and a Stter of 16 month's old for a greater skilling of 3 Thrimsas;
and so a Cow and her Calf for two such Skilling and an half, two Plough-Oxen
for five Skillings, one good Ox for three skillings, a Steer of four years old
at 2 s. a sound Horse for 6 s. a Mare of Coition 3 s, This I take to be some
Evidence that the Saxon Money at their first Conquest was counted a pound Troy
of twelve Ounces in weight to every pound of their Money, so counted in the
Expenses of Glassenbury, and that is somewhat more than three times the weight
of our last Money, of the heaviest; and that the Silver of that time was seven
times the value of that Mettle in our time: Whence three times seven being
Twenty one, it seems their Money or Skilling was at least the value of twenty
times our present Money; and let us examine our quoted Prices by this Rule;
viz. a Steer of a year old at a Skilling of our twenty or twenty one, one
sixteen months old at a like rate of the greater Skillings, a Cow and her Calf
for 2 s. 6 d. comes to 2 l. 13 s. at increase of 21. two Plow-Oxen 5 s. makes 5
l. 5 s. at our proportion; a good one 3 s. makes 3 l. 3 s. a sound [work] Horse
at 6 s. makes 6 l. 6 s. a Mare at 3 s. makes 3 l. 3 s. these Rates show that I
am rather short of the value of those times than beyond it. And for Corn, their
Book of Rates set 30 Schessils of Rye, 40 of Barley, and 60 of Oats, each at a
like rate, viz. each to pass at the value of a Skilling of 3 Thrimsas; if we
take these Schessils for Pecks, here would be 30 Pecks of Rye for 21 s. and
Barley at little more than 6 d. a-peck, and Oats at a little more than a Groat
a-peck; whence the proportion of 1 to 21. seems rather too little than too
much: I could go on, and show, that in succeeding times, to that of King
Alfred, who reigned from Anno 872. to 901, the Plenty of Silver increased, and
its value and esteem fell from 7 times our value, to 5 times our value; their
weight held still the same, to be 3 times as heavy as ours, but the value was
then but 5 times more than ours: Whence values of Alfred's Time, were to Ours
but as 15 to 1; so as a Jurors 40 s. a year then, was equal to 30 l. a year
now: The Value of Silver went on decreasing, as the Metal grew more plentiful;
and King Athelstan, Grandchild to Alfred, who reigned till 940. made a Law,
that if any one above the Age of 12 years stole above the value of 12 d. he
should be attached for Felony: This 12 d. was the value of 15 s. in Alfred's
time; not so at the making of this Law, but of about 14 s. and yet still it
stands in terminis, as a Snare to Jurors, who will not hang a small Thief; and
therefore though it appear clearly that the stolen Goods are worth 5 s. or
more, they do ordinarily say upon their Oaths that they are worth but 10 d. or
12 d. which stands need of a redress by restoring the old value, as other
things also do: Evidences may be collected of Silvers decreasing in value till
the end of our present Period, and by what degrees; but, for brevity, we are
contented, at present, to say it did so: The pound of Silver in Money still
continued the same, viz. every pound in Money weighed a full pound Troy, or 12
ounces in weight, and every ounce of Silver was in the End of King Henry III.
's Reign valued at 20 d. We have taken his Reign for the beginning of our last
Period, during which we may hope to find more certain Assistances from our Acts
of Parliament, than we had in the former Period.

In our way, we may take notice, that when the Saxons came first into England,
and prevailed over the Roman Province there, the Goths and Vandals settled
themselves in Spain, the Lombards in Italy, the Allemans in Germany, the Franks
in France; and that all those Nations were Nortmans, and had one Fountain or
Original, who brought out of their Common Country much the same, or the like
Customs one of them to the other, also the like weights and usages about their
Money; a pound Troy of Silver being counted and called a pound of their Money
amongst their several Nations; and when any of them lightened their Money, and
made it current at an higher rate than the usual, the bordering Nations were
forced to do the like, for keeping their own Coin in their own Countries, which
otherwise was likely to be transported into those Parts or Places, where the
Money was lightened or past at an higher Account, and consequently was of a less
intrinsic worth and power, than the heavier or lower rated Money continued to
be; and that made the Foreign Merchants desire it, as the most profitable
Commodity that they could obtain. Cambden's Remains, 40. Printed, London, 1614.
p. 200. tells us the Saxon English Money was pence, each weighing our
penny-weigh Troy, of which 20 go to an ounce, and 12 ounces to the pound of
their Money, which is somewhat above 3 times the weight of our present Money;
and this is both declared and confirmed to us by Acts of Parliament made in the
beginning of this Period; viz. that of Assisa panis and cervitiae, 21 Hen. 3.
in Anno 1266. which says, that by the Consent of the whole Realm of England,
the measure of that King was made; that is to say, that an English penny called
a Sterling, round and without any clipping, shall weigh 32 Wheatcorns out of
the midst of the Ear, and 20 pence do make an ounce, and 12 ounces one pound.
and this Statute says, the King did so ordain upon sight and perusal of former
Ordinances made by his Progenitors concerning money and measures: This Statute
gives evidence of the value Money then bore, by the Prices of Corn therein
mentioned; saying, that when a Quarter of Wheat is sold for 12 d. Bakers shall
make their Bread of such a weight; and so for the Prices of Wheat at several
Rates, up as high as 12 s. aquarter; if we compute at a Medium, we may probably
collect that what was then sold communibus annis, for 6 s. the quarter: It
mentions also the selling a quarter of Barley for 20 d. or 2 s. and a quarter
of Oats for 16 d. which proves not only that their Money was of much greater
weight than ours, but that Silver was then less plentiful, and more valuably
esteemed than of later times it has been.

Edward the I. Son of King Henry, An. 31. of his Reign, Dom. 1302. says the
same over again in Parliament, by Consent of the whole Realm of England, the
King's Measure was made; so that an English Penny, which is called the Sterling
round, without clipping, shall weigh 32 Grains of Wheat well dried, and
gathered out of the midst of the Ear, and 20 pence make an ounce, and 12
ounces make a pound: And thus it appears, that Money of that time continued of
the same weight, which it had held from the beginning of the Saxon Government.

We find that the 32 Grains of Wheat are now changed into 24 Grains by Custom,
for any thing that I can find, and it seems with relation to Grains of Barley;
upon which Apprehension I tried in Gold weights 32 fair Grains of Wheat against
24 large Barley-Corns, and found them of so near weight to one another, as they
may very well pass for Equals.

And for farther declaring the value of Silver at that time, Coke 2 d. Instit.
Fol. 506. says, the value of Silver in the time of King Henry III. and his Son
King Edward I. was rated or esteemed at 20 d. the ounce; and now, says he, it
is risen to 3 times that value; viz. to 5 s. per ounce: And, since Coke's time,
we find it still advancing in value; viz. 5 s. per ounce is advanced to 5 s, 2
d, 5 s, 4 d, and 5 s, 6 d, and daily rising and growing upon us: By what
degrees, and in what particular times the weights of our Money have diminished,
and the values of Silver have been exalted, may be best found out by Indentures
made at the Mint, in the times of our several Princes; but what our Acts of
Parliament mention concerning them, are intended here to be collected. The
value of Silver in the time of King Edward I. was 20 d. the ounce, or 20 s. the
pound, after which per Statute, 37 Edward 3. no Goldsmith shall take for the
price of a Silver Vessel more than the price of 2 Marks, Paris weight, for a
pound of Silver, and for this, he shall take but 18 d. for the fashion, as they
do at Paris. Here in the space of 57 years, from the Death of Edward I. till 37
of Edward III. the value of Silver is risen from 20 s. to 2 Marks, being one
full fourth, which our Statute-Book mentions an Act, 2 Hen. 6. Cap. 13. and
calls it the price of a pound of Silver in Plate-price, or Mass; and this
(amongst a multitude of other Statutes) was repealed by Act of 21 Jacobi 1.
Cap. 28. and there it is said, that by the Satute of Hen. VI. it was enacted
that no Silver be bought for more than 30 s. the pound Troy; so as by the
beginning of Hen. VI. Silver was risen from the 20 s. per lib. of Ed. I. to 30
s. per lib. in the space of 116 Years.

Between this Statute of Hen. VI. and the middle of the Reign of King Hen.
VIII. the other 30 s. was raised in the value of Silver, for bringing it from
30 s. to 3 l. in the pound of Silver; for the King Harry Groats do not much
exceed our Money in weight or value; and we have his Son Edward's Shillings and
Six pences, the Philip and Mary's, and Elizabeth's, of equal poize and value to
our own: So as the 30 s. increase in the value of the Silver, must arise as
aforesaid.

For the alterations in the weight of our Money, the particular Evidences of
the Times I cannot discover: but it has been made plain and evident, that
between the Reigns of King Edw. I. and the end of King Hen. VIII. our Money
lost 2 parts in 3 of its weight, which it had in the Reign of King Edw. I. and
this I think must pass as an indisputable Truth.

Our Acts of Parliament do often relate to the usages of our Neighbors, and
especially those of France and Paris, Stat. 28 Edw. I. 20. Gold shall be of the
fineness of the Touch of Paris: And Stat. Edw. III. before, there shall be but
18 d. per lib. allowed for the Fashion of Silver Vessels as they do at Paris,
Stat. 5 Rich. II. 2. complains of the great mischief which the Kingdom then
suffered by carrying Gold and Silver, in Money and Plate, into foreign Parts
out of the Realm; so that in effect there is none thereof left: Such
Transportation is by this Act severely forbidden. So 8 Hen. VI. 24. complains
that Merchants, Aliens, of late, have taken up a Custom, that when they sell
Goods within the Realm, they will not demand nor receive Payment in Silver, but
will be paid in Gold Nobles, half Nobles, and Farthing of Gold, which they
carry into foreign Countries; and by that means gain 20 d. in the value of
every Noble, to the great prejudice of the whole Realm. Now there shall be no
such Covenant to pay in Gold, nor Bond, nor payment on forfeiture of the double
values; and many other Statutes have been made to forbid the Transportation of
Money, or other Gold, or Silver, but very much in vain, when a certain and
clear Profit may be reasonably expected, by hazarding the successful
accomplishment of it; and with this shall be determined our Historical
Narrative concerning Money.

We now come to consider our present Condition, and the great Calamity we lie
under by the Male Administration and bad Estate of our Money; concerning which,
there have been principally 2 Opinions debated among us, both in Word and
Writing: Both Parties seem to agree, that the Fineness of our Silver in Coin
ought to be continued according to the Statute of Queen Elizabeth, which by 18
Eliz. 15. is to be mixed, so as 11 ounces, two penny weight, shall be fine or
clean Silver, adding thereto 18 penny weight of Allay to make a complete pound
of Sterling Silver. Chamberlain in his State of England, p. 11. repeats this,
as applied to Money; and says this Allay is to be of Copper out of the Fire:
And p. 13. he says, that this is a less Portion of Allay, than either the
French or Dutch do allow; and I say, it is a less Portion of Allay than had
been formerly used in England. For Stat. 28 Edw. I. 20. says, all Silver shall
be of the Fineness of Sterling. Coke commenting upon this Statute, tells us,
the Fineness of Sterling was of 11 ounces fine Silver, and 1 ounce of Allay.
And Stat. 4 Hen. VII. 2. says, Silver shall be made so fine as to allow but
twelve-penny-weight of Allay in a pound of Silver.

The course of Allay settled by the Statute of Eliz. I have not yet met with
any who plead for the alteration of it; but all are desirous, or contented,
that the same Standard of Fineness of our Money and Silver may still be
continued. But there is a great difference and dispute amongst us, whether our
Money shall still be continued at the weight which it held ever since the time
of K. Edw. VI. or that it shall now be altered and diminished, for supplying or
want of Money upon account at the present, and for the keeping our Money in our
own Country, and from being Transported for the great gain expected to be made
of it, as being both more fine and heavy than the common Coin of our
Neighbour-Nations.

This Dispute has been managed by diverse Persons, who have Published their
Opinions and Reasons in Print upon this occasion: of which some maintain that
the weightiness of our Money ought to be diminished, for the Reasons aforesaid;
the Principal of which are Mr. Lownds and Mr. Hodges; with whom it seems, a
great many others do concur in their Writings: And on the other part there have
come to my view 2 Pamphlets, the one of an Hamborough Merchant, and the other
of an Amsterdam Merchant: also a Book of Mr. Lock's under his own Name; and 2
Printed Letters, without Date or Name: But which vulgar Opinions, do by Conceit
or Tradition, impute to the Genius of the said Mr. Lock, and count them also to
have been of his Writing.

The 2 Merchant Pamphlets insist mainly upon convenience of Trade, which way
being both evident and true, viz. that if for their Foreign Commodities they
can be paid in our Money at the due weight, they make a certain and very
considerable gain by the only Transporting it, and the laying out of it again
in Countries where it bears a greater Value and Esteem, and passes at a higher
Rate and Account than it bears, or is esteemed at in our own Country.

They do tell us, That other Nations will not submit to any Regulations which
we can make of our Money, or the Names, or Values which we can put upon it;
which must be granted for an undoubted Truth, viz. That they are not bound to
receive or accept our Money at such Rates or Values as it shall be appointed to
go for in this Kingdom: Then say they, English Merchants cannot buy Foregin
Commodities at so low Rates of their New light Money, as they used to do for
their Old heavy Money; and this also is an apparent Truth, but very easy to be
answered, by adding to the number of pieces as many as will make their weight
suitable to that of the Old Money.

The Amsterdam Merchant p. 5. of his Pamphlet, puts 4 Objections against his
Opinion for continuing our Money to be of the old weight; three of which are
not primely material, but one of the four, viz. the third seems to be of most
moment: They object, says he, If our Money be continued at its old weight and
fineness, it will be all carried out of the Land, and we shall then be deprived
of all our Money. He answers, That this is a very certain truth: I reply, if
that be so true, it is better to lighten our Money, than to fall under this
dismal consequence; yea, but says he, if you owe, you must pay your Debts in
good Money, and so say I; we may do and will in our light Money, supplying
still the defect in weight by increase by the number of pieces, which will set
the Balance of Foreign Trade equal upon all occasions. Mr. Lock's Book upon
this Subject, was Printed anno 1695. in it p. 4. he asserts, That Silver is
such a measure of Commerce, as cannot be varied by putting more or fewer grains
of Silver into pieces of a known Denomination: That it has been actually, and
often done, appears plainly in our History and Practice.

Next, he seems to make it quasi a natural, unalterable measure of Commodities;
whereas Silver it self is but a Commodity, and may be, and diverse times has
been altered and limited in its Value and Power, by the possitive Laws of
Princes and Countries, as they thought might serve their occasion; or as the
plenty or scarceness of that Commodity may have required. Page 8. he says, That
the use of Coining Money is to assure Men what quanity of Silver they give to,
or receive from one another; I s^y, this seems a mistake; for though one may, by
thinking, draw this use out of it, yet it is at least another main use of it to
assure Men, that they receive in Barter such a Commodity as will pass from them
at the same price and value as they received it at; which will serve Men's turns
in their own Country, although the matter Stamped or Coined, be Copper, Tin, or
Leather, as has been tried with good effect upon diverse exigencies and
occasions; and may be proved by the first Roman and British Money before
specified. More he says, That any one may refuse Money any way robbed of its
due weight of Silver: if it be so by Men's ill practices, I grant it; but if it
be so by common wearing of the Coined Pieces, I deny it; and we have seen old
Groats worn to less weight than of a Twopence, that yet went currantly, and
without refusal, as long as they would hold together: So Stat. 9 H. 7.5. all
Gold shall be current for that which the pieces were Coined for, and so for all
manner of Groats [afore the time of Shillings] they shall be current for 4 d.
so as they be Silver not clipped or diminished otherwise than by ordinary
wearing; and although they be cracked, yet they shall go at the value which
they were Coined for; whence it is not that bare diminution of the weight of
Silver which hinders Money from going (as he supposes) but that criminous
diminution of it.

Page 9. He says, Men do not Bargain or Contract for Denomination or Sounds,
but the quantity of Silver made current by Public Authority, not quantity of
Silver (which he calls intrinsic value) only, but current by Public
Authority: and if Public Authority be stamped upon a less quantity of Silver or
Copper, or any other matter not easy to be Counterfeited, it will pass as
readily in the Trade and Commerce of the Country, as need be required, and far
more readily than our Clipped Coin now forbidden, whatsoever intrinsic value
such Clipped Silver may have in it; and our present necessities make us wish we
had but enough Authentic Copper Money amongst us, to stop the Mouths and fill
the Bellies of our Craving and Starving Neighbors; that it is not the quantity
of Silver only that makes Men rich, witness the hundreds of Clipped Money which
lie upon some Men's hands, and they know not what to do with, except they will
send it a very great way to the Mint, and there at great loss, take Papers or
Notes for it, to be paid, they will then be told when: Thus, While the Grass
grows the Horse starves; it is not therefore the intrinsic weight or value of
Silver only which makes Men rich (as he says) but it is rather the store of
current Coin and Money of the Nation, although it lay in Brass, as amongst the
Romans; especially when their Neighbors were no better provided, he asks, What
is the difference of paying in Clipped Money, and paying in Authorized light
Money? I answer, The one is a Payment in lawful and good Money, and the other
is the contrary; and therefore one sort will be accepted and the other
rejected, not only or principally for their difference of weight, but for that
the Public Authority allows the one, and condemns the other, although the New
Coined Money should be made as light or lighter than the Clipped Money.

Well, but says he, What Justice or Reason can there be, that he who has
borrowed an 100 l. in heavier Money, should pay it again in lighter; or
Covenant to pay such Rent when Money was heavier, and after pay it with
lighter? I answer, Here seems very good Reason that the State should Judge and
Determine what shall pass for a pound in Money, amongst their own Subjects, and
that amongst our selves the Stamp of Authority has far more Power to make
Money passable amongst our own People, than the weight of the Silver, except it
fall amongst Men of Skill, who know how to order it by way of Merchandise; so
as whether the State Order a pound in Money to be made lighter or heavier, it
is a pound of lawful Money of England; and it both ought to pass, has passed,
and will pass amongst Subjects without much considering the difference of
weight in the alterations made by such Authority: farther, I say our Author,
extends his Care to Creditors and Landlords, not regarding the Cases of Tenants
or Debtors; Men for this four or five years last past, have borrowed many
Thousand Pounds in Clipped Money, but he notes no unreasonableness or injustice
in compelling them to pay such Debts again in heavy Money, perhaps of twice the
weight; and so for Tenants who have taken Leases within the last five years, at
which time, and during which, they might pay their Rents all in Clipped Money,
and now he is desirous they should be put to pay the same Rents in heavy Money;
and thus he takes Care of Landlords and Creditors, but the poor Tenants and
Debtors are quite neglected by him: But having now offered their Cases to his
consideration, I think it reasonable e'n to set the Hares Head against the
Goose Giblets, and will suffer and entreat the Subjects of England to be
content with such pounds in Money as our State shall appoint for them, without
very much thinking upon the weight of them: The Learned do tell us, That our
Day and Night grows from the rotation of the Earth in the time or space of 24
hours: Men ask how that can be possible, without the Sense or Perception by
Men, of such an alteration? The Dr's Reply, That because all Earthly Things and
Prospects move together with us unaltered in their Aspects. Men cannot by Sense
of Earthly things perceive any motion at all; and so I doubt not but that after
our Money shall arrive to the strength of a Circulation, none, but some such
thinking Men, will trouble themselves to consider how much lighter or heavier
our Money is now become; but a brisk Circulation will make such alteration very
little sensible and scarcely to be perceived in our own Home Trading or
Commerce; but will appear only in our Trade with other Nations, and the Earths
motion is plainly discovered by the Aspects which it bears to the rest of the
Heavenly Bodies which are foreign to it, and without the natural Sphere of its
Activity.

Page 11. For his failure of Justice, or fear of it, it seems groundless, as
long as the State deals to all Men alike and impartially, without favoring one
more than another, in things which the Law has put into their Power and
Practice to dispose of: He says, The States Authority in raising the esteem of
Money, adds no real Value or Power to it; he may mean in the acceptance of
Foreign Nations, and then he says true: But if he mean in the acceptance of the
Subjects of this Kingdom in their Home. Trade or Domestic Affairs, it shall be
passed here for a very clear mistake, proved before; and by our daily Practice
in Clipped Money, and Brass Money, and all other like occasions: He says, It is
only the quantity of Silver that is, and eternally will be the measure of its
value; if he mean one sort of measure of its value, I grant it: But if he
intends the only measure of its value, I deny it: And say there are two other
measures of its value besides the quantity. The first is, the scarcity or
plenty of the Commodity or Mettle, and that reaches to the Foreign, as well as
the Domestic use of it; The other is the Authority of the State, and the price
or value set upon it by the Government; but this is more restrained, and
extends no farther than to the compass of their own Dominions; and he Appeals
to the next Market or Shop for Trial, so do I, believing it will be found, that
Traders will rather choose to receive Brass Money that is current, than Silver
Clipped Money which is not current; although the intrinsic value of the Silver
do far exceed that of the Brass.

Page 12. He compares dividing a foot into 15 parts, with raising a Shilling
from 12 to 15 d. as if he should pretend, that the Government had no more power
in Politics than they have in Naturals: They cannot alter the Constituent
parts of Natural things; therefore they cannot alter the Constitutions of
State, or Values of Money in it; non valet consequentia: We find both the
Romans and the Britains had Money before they had Silver, and it was not of
Nature that Silver was made a measure for the ordinary value of other
Commodities, but by Authority, and Custom, as it was found a Commodious Mettle
for that purpose; and if any Government will at this day Constitute any other
Mettle, or Matter to be measure for the value of other Commodities, they have
Power and Lawful Authority so to do, within the compass of their own Dominions.
Again, He says, That by raising the value of our Money, there will not be one
ounce of Silver more brought to be Coined at the Mint, than there was before: A
vast mistake, for at the higher value Silver passes out of the Mint, at the
proportionable higher price they may afford to receive in Bullion: If three
ounces of Silver pass out of the Mint at the value of one pound of Lawful
English Money, the Mint may very well afford to take in Bullion at 6 s. 4 d.
and upon that foot, the Mint may be furnished with more Silver, not only at
home, but from abroad than they can work; but even then they know what to do
withal, and not only one ounce more, but Millions of ounces would flow in upon
them; and as fast as Guineas were lately sent over to us, because we took them
at somewhat a higher rate than ordinary. He says farther, That raising the
Money, will destroy the Public Faith: He must mean at home, or abroad; to
which I have said, That at home it will neither be unjust nor harmful, and
abroad, what is wanting in weight, may easily be made up in number; and none
need be defrauded of any thing that is justly and legally due to him. Page 14.
He will have Clipped Money go only for its weight. I expect he shall show us the
Reasonableness and Justice of his desires in this point: He said it was not
just, that Rents or Debts should be paid in lighter Money. I now desire him to
show his present desire to be reasonable or just, that Men who have for diverse
years been forced to receive Clipped Money, if not by Compliance, yet at least by
Connivance of the Government; should now, without any offense charged upon
them, be compelled by an Act of State to lose very near half in half of their
Money. The Pharisees (we know) were condemned by our Savor, because they
strained at Gnats, and swallowed Comels; therefore I hope he will show some
Reason hereafter, that may better justify his Severity against the unfortunate
Receivers and Possessors of Clipped Money.

Page 14. He requires Clipped Money may go by weight till new Money may be
provided; and that I agree, would have been a very good way, but we differ very
much in the price it should go at; he is for little above 5 s. per ounce, and I
wish it might pass at 6 s. 2 d. or a Noble.

Page 17. Says, Exchange is the paying of Money in one Country, to receive it
in another; true, but we call the Money given for returning Money to another by
the Name of the Exchange; as Money given for the return of a sum from York or
London, may be called the Exchange of it.

Page 18. Says, The reason of high Exchange [or the due price of returning
Money from one place to another] is the buying much Commodities in any Foreign
Country, beyond the value of what that Country takes of ours: I say this his
description is too narrow; and that the true reason of such high Exchange rises
from the great need which one Nation has to use or expend Money in another
Nation, whether the same need rise from Balance of Trade, or upon any other
occasion: He will derive the highprice which Holland and Flanders now set upon
the return of Money from England thither, from an Overbalance of Trade which
they have upon us; but I derive it from the great need we have of Money to pay
our Armies in those Countries, and supply the Expenses of our Court and Gentry
there; and if the Hollanders had a like occasion for Money to be expended in
England, it would not be their Balance of Trade which could keep such Exchange
from rising, from our side upon them.

Page 22. He presses again, that it is the weight of Silver or quantity of it,
that sets value upon it, only or chiefly. I say, that if our Money were Coined,
viz. a Shilling at the weight of 9 d. and I had about me such a Shilling, and a
Clipped Shilling of the weight of 10 d. all People and Traders will desire the
current Shilling of the weight of 9 d. before the Clipped Shilling, though they
know it to be of the weight of 10 d. and this proves the Stamp of Authority
upon Money at home, more valuable than the weight or quantity of it. He says,
Money differs from uncoined Silver only in this, that the quantity of Silver in
each piece of Money, is ascertained by the Stamp it bears, as if such Stamp of
Authority signified no more but to certify the People that such a piece of
Money has so much Silver in it: But I say it is that Stamp which gives it
Energy and Power to be undeniably current in England, and to be reputed and
taken for Lawful Money of this Kingdom, by all the Subjects and Traders in it.

Page 23. Says, The only way to bring Silver and Gold into the Mint [or Nation]
is an overbalance of our Trade. I say, the setting of an higher Esteem and
Power upon them by English Authority than other Nations do, will be (at least)
as great a means of bringing them in, as the other, witness the Flood of
Guineas lately power'd in amongst us by passing them at an higher esteem and
value than ordinary, and sudden damp and ebb of them, upon their violent and
impolitick debasement.

Page 24. says, these things premised, he will now come to argue the Case with
Mr. Lownds; viz. these Premises passing for Principles, or Grounds in the
Disputation, he was likely to prevail against Mr. Lownds; but these Premises or
Principles being denied and refuted sufficiently, will it seems cast the
Scales, and over-balance on the other side. He says, Silver cannot rise in
respect of it self. I say, it may both rise and fall in respect to the plenty
or scarceness of the Commodity or Mettle: And have shown in the time of our
Saxon Ancestors, Silver was of 7 times the value of what it now bears; and in
King Alfred's time of 5 times our value; and in King Edw. I. time of at least 3
times our value; viz. the same weight of Silver in the first time, would have
bought 7 times as much Corn or Cattle; and in Alfred's time 5 times as much;
and Edw. I. time above 3 times as much as the same weight of Silver can buy in
our time. And Silver (though used also for a measure) is it self but a
Commodity, and (like all other Commodities) must rise and fall according to the
plenty and scarceness of it.

Page 25. He says, that an ounce of our late Milled former Money, weighs an
ounce and a quarter near. The Case stands thus: An ounce Troy consists of 480
grains, a quarter of which is 120 grains; and these put together make 600
grains, whereas the said Milled Crownpiece weighs but 440 grains, the Shilling
but 88 grains, and 5 d. weighs but 37 grains: These 3 Sums together make 565
grains, which falls short of the weight of an ounce and a quarter by 35 grains:
This seems a clear mistake in Facto, which his Particle now seems hardly large
enough to cover.

Page 26. He says, that by putting Money into a Melting pot one may for a penny
charge make it Bullion, as if that were all; but I can cite him diverse
Statutes, which make the melting down of coined Money a great and punishable
Crime: He holds it still clear, that Silver considered as Money, has no other
esteem but for its quantity, as if Caesar's Image and Superscription were
nothing but a mark and token what weight of Silver is in such a piece: but, I
think that has been sufficiently refuted; granting, that when by clipping the
Coin is spoiled, it is not then Money or current, and must have ordinarily no
other estimation but by its weight; and as a common Comodity, he desires to be
told what Men mean, when they say Silver or Gold is risen or fallen; and I
referr him for Information to the Case and Practice of Guineas. We said they
were risen when they came to go at the rate and esteem of 30 s. And we now find
them cast down to so low a rate, as Men cannot afford to sell it at the rate,
but choose rather to let it lie upon their hands: Who pulled down the value of
them but the Government; and surely they who pull down the value can raise the
value of Mettle or Money, with or without altering the quantity or weight of it.

Page 29. He puts a Case of coining a Crown-piece into 6 s. 3 d. but (intending
to save that labor) I say, let the Government ordain such a Crown-piece shall
go at the rate or value of 6 s. 3 d. and then it may buy such an ounce of
Bullion, which it could not do when it went but at the rate of 5 s. here: But
then those who transported it to foreign places make 6 s. 3 d. of it, when they
get it out of England, where ignorant or interested men are pleased to set a
lower rate upon their own money, than all the Nations round about them do: And
it is that pernicious Fallacy which I desire to manifest, and to my small power
to rectify and reform.

He calls a change of value by the Government a change of the denomination; but
we see the thing to be more than so: We call Guineys by the same name still;
and yet, by Act of State, their value has received a very important change and
diminution; and if in Nov. or sooner, the State will ordain that their value
shall rise, immediate Execution will follow, to the benefit of the Kingdom,
Court, and Army, for whose gain and benefits (by a mistake in Politics) the
great alteration was made, at a time when clipped money was forbidden to go,
and very little new or current money can be met withal in the Kingdom.

P. 30. He stands upon his own ground, viz. that the value and quantity of
Silver [ viz. money] are the same thing utterly denied and refuted.

Page 31. He would infer, that clipp't money does not go like unclipp't only
for its defect in weight. I say it is because that one is lawful, and the other
not,; and if by wearing, money lose as much as by clipping, it must still go as
well as new money, though the last be much heavier.

Page 37. Laws made against Exportation of Money or Bullion will be all in vain
[if there be clear profit to be gotten by it.] He denies Mr. Lownds his
Assertion, viz. that whilst we continue the present weight and value of our
money, it will cause the melting or exportation of it till we shall have little
or none left. I think Lownds said truest in this; and Experience confirms it,
we have very little left at this day.

Page 38. Our Author insists, making our money lighter will not hinder the
Exportation of one ounce of our Silver. I say it will hinder many ounces of it;
but we must distinguish in tht places of our Exportation: It would not hinder
the Exportation of it into Flanders, for the payment of our Army, and support
of the King and Court, because that is of necessity, and will require money of
one sort or other, be the same heavier or lighter; but the lightning our money
will hinder the Exportation of it to other places, by making it rather a loss
than profit to those who shall so transport it. He speaks of having more money
in Flanders or Holland, than we have occasion to use there: This seems an
absurd surmise, whilst we have such Tugs to maintain in those Countries.

Page 39. He will needs attribute that charge and loss to our Trade, which
truly belongs to the charge of our Court and Army.

Page 47. He speaks of those who have great sums of weighty money horded up by
them, parturiunt Montes, nascitur Mus, the product has hitherto proved very
small, which makes the consequence of no great hope, but is like to pass
amongst other mistakes in Politics amongst us. He says, such men would upon
lightning our money, pay that for 5 s. which they received for 4 s. I say if
their old 4 s. weigh as much as the new 5 s. there is no wrong done at all, by
our Author's own Rules; for here the 4 s. have the same intrinsic value; viz.
weight, with the new 5 s. which he will have to be the only Rule in money; and
so there can be no gain by him, who gives 4 heavy shillings for 5 light ones;
nor a real loss to him who so receives them, but an equal Market between them
both.

Page 48. He asks, who shall get by the coining of our new money lighter? I
answer; the intent of lightning our money, is not to make a profit or gain to
any body, but primely or only to keep English money in the Kingdom, as far as
our warlike Expenses will give us leave. He says, the Debtor or Tenant can have
no benefit by it; and I say, the Creditor or Landlord can have no Loss by it,
for that each shall pay and be paid so many pounds of lawful money of England,
without partiality or fraud whatsoever.

Page 50, Speaks much of a difference of buying and paying with old or new
money: All which (if I may advise) shall be put out of doors, and all the heavy
money in England, both old and new, shall be brought into the King's hands for
payment of his Army in foreign parts; he providing new and light money, and
paying the Owner of the heavy money a weight for weight in his new and light
money, and of an equal fineness, viz, the finess of Sterling. His Pages to 54
are before answered.

Page 56. He says, it is impossible that Bullion should sell for a fifth part
above the price of coined Silver. I say, it is no more impossible, than that a
State which must be destroyed, should be very imprudent or corrupt. We read,
Quos perdere vult Jupiter, dementat; a State may be so foollish, or pursue an
interest so far, as to set their Coined Money at so a lower rate, than they can
buy Bullion for again, to keep their Mint in going.

Page 58. He speaks of a natural value between Bullion and Coin, and that it is
every where equal, bating the charge of Coinage: I wish he had proved it,
particularly, to be so in England.

Page 61. He is again at the Authority of the State, That it gives no effective
value to Coin, but only a bare denomination, enough confuted.

Page 64. His Discourses here upon Trade, must be applied to Foreign Trade.

Page 65. Says sounds cannot give weight to Silver, true; but the Authority of
a State may give value and Power to their Coins, as beforesaid, and in their
own Countries.

Page 69. Goes all along upon his own rate, that nothing is really considerable
in Money, but the weight; and that the Authority of the Government is really no
more but to give it a denomination, which must be a mistake, unless it be only
intended for Foreign Trade.

Page 70. Says, If the State may raise the value of Money to so much, than why
not to ten times so much; and where must they stop? I say, The supreme Power of
a State can have no stop, ab extra; but their stop, as well as their
proceeding, lies in their own Discretion, and Divine Influence.

Page 71. The Power that a State has to make what Money they please current in
their own Countries, and at what value and esteem they please, has been
sufficiently argued against him.

Page 73. He denies that the Market price of Standard Bullion ever was, or ever
can be 5 s. 7 d. of lawful weighty Money the ounce; his term of weighty, seems
to be of little weight in this place, and his assertion that Bullion never can
be at that rate, seems a little exorbitant; and if it be not beyond that rate
at the present, the generallity of People, and my self among them, are much
misinformed, and do desire to be better instructed, and somewhat more at large,
and in a more particular manner.

Page 74. But I do not accept of a Paper published in 1692. as a convincing
proof of the present price of Bullion in anno 1696.

Page 76. He seems to affect mistake; he knows that the King may transport
Money for his occasions, and those carry our Money over Sea, and yet he says,
as if he would be believed, that Bullion must bear a greater price than a like
weight in Money, because Men are punishable for the Transport of Money, but not
of Bullion; I had almost said, teneatis amici: here he takes no notice that
melting down our Coin is prohibited, and punishable by Acts of Parliament.

Page 79. He shows from Mr. Lownds, the constant practice of our Ancestors, in
making our Money lighter, from time to time by Royal and Public Authority,
without denying or scrupling the Truth of it, and this Table shows the degrees
by which our Money was lightened till it came to our present Standard; and
thence I gather that what has been done in so many Kings times, viz. in six or
seven Kings Reigns, and diverse times in some Reigns, to the number of 14 times
in all from King E. 2. a thing so often practiced as a remedy upon Exigencies,
may still be practiced and followed upon the like occasions, as warranted by an
undoubted series of Examples in this Kingdom.

Page 80. He wishes that Mr. Lownds had showed the occasions and effects of
such lightening of our Coins. I desire he will take pains to show us that ever
it had an ill effect; we find it always continued and proceeded, without once
going back to make it heavier; which proves it was always found good for the
Nation: He says King H. 8. raised the value of Coin four times, yet the Nation
was not enriched thereby, and the like, I say, may happen in our times; it will
do fair if it save us from ruin, as it might help to do in his time: He had
often costly Wars in Foreign parts, as we now have; but never so long and
constant as ours, yet enough to hinder the Nation from growing rich by all the
possible Industry or Caution that could be used; and yet I think, our Charge is
greater at present, than ever his was; and the lightening of our Money not to
be expected to enrich us, but if it help to support us, that will make it
enough desirable.

Page 81. If our Coin was made heavier in time of King Edw. 6. and this is the
only time, rara avis in terris; and proves alterations of value by the State,
are Powerful and Effectual, far exceeding a denomination, or being only a Mark
or Token what such a piece of Money must weigh; This being done but once in
1000 years, and the lightening done 14 times in the space of about 300 years,
proves it very rarely profitable to increase the weight of our Money, but
often, and commonly beneficial to lighten it; which has not now been done
since Queen Elizabeth's time, the space of about 90 years, during which time our
Neighbors have made great alterations both in the weight and fineness of their
Moneys.

Page 82. Supposes, or surmises a corrupt practice in the Officers of the Mint,
but offers no Proofs of it; so I pass it, as his suspicion, and of little
moment in the present Dispute.

Page 83. Mr. Lownds had said, That the improvement of value in Money in Edw.
6. time, rose by making their Silver finer, which was grown very course in the
time of King H. 8. Our Author says, Let me add, or by the quantity lessened in
Silver. which is the same thing; I say they are not the same thing; for the
fineness of Silver, and the weight of Silver, are very different things, and
different grounds for the alteration and reformation of Money, when the Silver
is course and Men will lessen the Allay, and fill the want of its weight up
with fine Silver; they had need raise the value and esteem of the piece
accordingly; and this was the case in time of Edw. 6. without increasing the
weight of the old Money at all, but making it finer; and this Mr. Lownds says
plainly: And therefore we will not let our Author add, or by the quantity of
Silver lessened; we refuse to accept of the addition, but reject it, as mala
expositio quae corrumpit textum.

Page 84. He says true, Money was often raised in value, temp. H. 8. by reason
of Expense in Foreign Wars; and I add, it was then also made much courser by
the quantity of Allay. I wish our new Coined Money have no part of that
imperfection; the longer the Standard has continued the same for the weight
and fineness of our Money, the more need there is now to alter it, that it may
suit with our Neighbors, who have altered theirs more than once in this time.

Page 85. He sees no reason to think that a little bigger or less size in
pieces Coined, is of any moment one way or other; nor I neither, Sed plus
vident oculi quam oculus; the Governments imposition of value upon Silver, or
Gold, or Brass, is of very great moment; and so upon every parcel, or Coined
piece of them, to make them current at a lesser or greater rate and value, as
to their Discretions shall seem convenient, and the Benefit and Government of
their People may require; and he thinks the keeping of our Money to its old
weight and fineness can do us no harm: I have quoted him Acts of Parliament,
testifying that by reason of the weight of our current pieces of Gold,
Merchants truck by special Bargain to be paid in Gold, and by Transporting it
gained 20 d. in every Gold Noble, or a full 4th of the value. And another Stat.
complaining that our Money was so transported, that little of it is left in the
Land; and our own sad Experience does assure the generality, and may convince
all, who are not in an Interest, that all King Charles's Milled Money that went
in Trading, or could be compassed by Trading, or would be sold at 5 per Cent
profit, is gathered up, where it could be gotten, or would be sold and
transported into Foreign parts for profit, made out of its over weight, as the
Stat. of H. 6. says, there is little of it left in the Land, and none but what
was preserved in the hands of Hoarders, and in theirs, hardly a twentieth part
of that which our mistaking Politicians have computed upon; and perhaps not a
fortieth part of it. This shows and proves the destructive effects of having
our Money heavier or finer, than our Neighbors; and he that will not see, or
feel, or hear, cannot be persuaded by any suasive Arguments, however concluding
they may appear to other Men.

His pages from 85. to 91. concerning counting by a New Coin, are not of much
concern in our Argument, and may be solved after upon a new account.

From 91. to 97. Concerns only Gold, which may be considered after.

Page 97. He says, Whilst the Chequer receives Clipped Money, he sees not how it
can be stopped from passing; I say the Parliament have done more than he thought
could be done, by making it pass to the Chequer when it could pass no where
else.

Page 100. He will not have Clipped Money current one moment longer, agreed; but
he will have it have it pass for no more than its weight in Bullion; I think
this hard and unjust: He has bemoaned the losses which Creditors and Landlords
may be supposed to suffer by raising the value of our Coin, or deminishing the
weight of it; but then he took no care of Debtors, who had borrowed Clipped
Money, and were to pay again in heavy Money; he had no sense for them, but only
for Creditors and Landlords; the Tenants and Debtors do not need or deserve his
consideration less than Creditors and Landlords; but they are not so fortunate,
or so much in his favor: And now it seems he thinks fit as his Lord, the Men
of State, and the Parliament do, that the King should be recompensed for his
losses sustained by receiving our Clipped Money; but the poor Subjects who are so
unfortunate as to have received Sums of Clipped Money (how great soever) by
permission, or at least connivance of the State, without any offense or fault
of their own: These men he dooms to have no part of their losses born by the
rest of their Fellow Subjects; but he thinks fit that all these Unfortunate
should bear every one his own loss, to the quantity of near half in half, to
the ruin, as it may fall out, of their Fortunes, and bitter grief of their
minds, and openining of their mouths in complaints against his hard
heartedness, and the small consideration and equity of the Government.

Page 101. His third Query, Whether our Coin can ever have any value above
Standard Bullion of a like weight. I say, That in times past, it ever had so,
and may have so, to what difference the State please to appoint; that it is
convenient it should have an higher value set upon it, than Bullion can reach
to; and that therefore it should always bear an higher value than Bullion of
like weight and fineness to it.

Page 102. We must stay, he says, for executing of his Proposals, till our
overbalance of Trade shall bring us in more Silver than we have occasion to
use, for the maintenance of our Armies in Foreign parts, and then farewell to
the effects of all his Queries and Propositions.

Page 103. He agrees with Mr. Lownds, except only where he builds any thing
upon raising the value of our Coin: It seems there was a noli me tangere in
that; the agreeing in other things, but that, and whatsoever was built upon it.

Page 104. He will agree to recoin the Clipped Money, and that in the mean time
it go for its weight, as Bullion; I say, let it go in the mean time by weight,
but at the same rate per ounce, that our new Coined lighter Money shall be
valued at, viz. at the rate of 6 s. 8 d. per ounce and so shall great ease be
given to the suffering People, and equal Justice be done to all the King's
Subjects; and he conceives that stopping the currency of Clipped Money will bring
out the old heavy Money immediately; here you may friendly conclude, that
either the store of heavy Money is very small, and far below his Calculation;
or that he is mistaken in his Politics, in concluding that the stopping the
currency of the Clipped Money, would bring the old heavy Money out immediately.

Page 105. he maintains, That stopping the Clipt-Money will bring the heavy
Money out immediately, and without more ado: And I pass it again for a gross
and palpable Mistake. Mr. Lownds advises Charitably, that the Subjects
generally should share in the Losses of those who suffer by Clipt-Money lying
upon their hands: No says our Author, but let every particular bear his own
loss singly; why so? Because says he, they have profited by having it in their
hands; which is a very wild and random Assertion, intending none but gaining
Tradesmen had such: Whereas Creditors for their Debts, and Landlords for their
Rents, have a great, or the greatest share of that sort of Money upon their
hands.

Page 106. But he is for stopping Clipped Money speedily, and come of it what
will. Well, let it be so, and then let it go by Weight, at the rate and value
of a Noble per Ounce, that is of due fineness.

Page 108. Whatsoever his Premises have been, he is of full Opinion, That King
Charles's Milled Money should still be the Standard, which shall not be at all
altered in Fineness, Weight, or Value. I doubt not but that he was to be of
that Opinion. at his beginning to Write, and before it, if he have well
maintained and proved it (upon what is here said in answer to him) shall be
left to the Judgment and Sentence of those who will be at the trouble of
Reading and Examining our Accounts.

I proceed to consider and examine one of the Letters beforementioned, written
in maintenance of our Author's former Opinion; and generally supposed to be
written by the same Hand.

The flourish of his Preface, I pass as bare words, of no proof or real Import
at all. In his Progress or Dialogue, he says, You have now Forty or Fifty
Thousand Pounds of Mill'd-Money in your hands, kept in hope to make an
advantage, by passing 5 s. for 6 s. it seems this is but a bare and very
fallacious Insinuation, not able to persuade me to a Belief, that any Man in
England ever had such a Sum of that sort of Money by him; and I strongly
suspect, that if he were put to name a Man who has, or then had 5000 l. of
that sort of Money by him, and prove the truth of his Assertion (to use his own
words) he would be baffled in it, and not be able to make out the truth of it:
Men could not receive any Money of that sort in the last four, or perhaps five
Years, his Sum of 50000 l. at 6 per Cent. Interest, comes to 3000 l. per Annum;
whence the Hoarder of so much Money was like to be a loser of 3000 l. per
Annum, so many Years that any Man would or did so, Credat judaeus Apella. Those
who do lay up Money do probably lay up of the best sort that they have; and
diverse have laid up Money in prospect of a Purchase, a Daughter's Portion, or
the like occasions, Sums competent; but that Men laid by them such great Sums
at loss of Interest for diverse Years, I do not believe; but demand of him some
Instance or proof of it. And that ever any Man in England yet did lay up that
Money with intent to gain by the raising our Values of Money, I assure my self
he never can prove; because I believe it to be utterly untrue; and yet what
Money Men may now have by them of that sort, they may, and likely do, reserve
it still by them, in expectation of Gain to be made, by giving Weight for
Weight of the heavy Money, in exchange for the new and lighter Money; and such
exchange our Author will have to be no Robbery; for he constantly places all
the Value of Money in the Weight of it, and if 80 l. of the old Money weigh as
much, or more, than an 100 l. of the new, he that gives such 100 for such 80
will (by our Author's Rules) be the gainer by the exchange; and both by his
Rules and my Rules, he who gives the 100 l. for the 80 l. intending to vend or
use the Money in Foreign Parts will be a considerable gainer by this exchange;
and he who takes 100 l. for 80. if he use the Money at home, will be a
considerable gainer also; yea, and a greater gainer than the other Party,
although he have an over-weight of Silver in his exchange. And as for his
Debtor of a 1000 l. he shall pay it as he took it, in lawful Money of England:
If he borrow it to pay with he cannot gain or save a Penny, but will find the
new Money as hard to get as the old was: Nor can he gain or save any other way,
than by carrying Silver into the Mint and Coining it, which Debtors are not
like to be in a condition to do.

He says, Foreigners do not carry away our Money by Stealth or Witchcraft,
true; but he says, they take it for their Debt and Money that we owe them;
perhaps some may be taken so, but they take it mostly in exchange for their
Commodities, or buy it up for Profit, and yet give five, or sometimes ten in
the Hundred more than the ordinary price, to put it off still at greater Profit
in those Countries to which they carry it.

He says, we must pay our Foreign Debts, not in our accounts of Money, but
theirs; and that is true; and therefore If we make our Money lighter, we must
make our Payment out by the more Pieces: I have always allowed, that raising
our Values does not help us amongst Foreigners, but only in our home Trades,
and to keep Men from carrying our Money away; for the Profit which they make by
the overweightiness of it, in comparison with other Countries. And I say, that
by raising our Money, neither our selves, nor any others, need be, or will be
Cheated: To Foreigners it will be no hindrance, but to our Kingdom very
beneficial.

Page 2. He discovers himself by reciting his former Rules, viz. that the
King's Image and Superscription adds nothing, no Power to our Money, but is
only a testimony of the Weight and Fineness of it, and it is only those which
give the Value to Money, not the King's Image or Authority. This I have past,
and must here pass for a very gross mistake. And I say, by King James's
Authority in Ireland, his Brass stamped to go for 2 s. 6 d. made it go there at
that value during that Authority: And if our King and Government shall stamp a
piece of Silver, and appoint it to bear the value of a Guinea, and be current
at that rate, it must and ought to pass as currently as now the Gold Pieces do,
without refusal; and no Man does or can see the contrary of this, but is grossly
Ignorant and unknowing in the Laws and Customs of our Nation.

Next, he says, The best way for using Money would be by Grains (which he calls
Drams) Penny-weights, Ounces, and Pounds, without any Image or Superscription
at all: As if he desired to cut off the Power of the King and Supreme
Authority, in the raising and falling of our Money: See how far Men may be
drawn out of the right way, by the infatuating Affection which they may bear to
a Diana, whose Cause they have undertaken to promote. Our stamped Money has
its Weight and Fineness appointed, as well as its Value, and may be weighed and
tried as the old Talents and denarii might, but then also Caesar's Image and
Superscription made their current Coin; he says, we value Foreign Money only by
its Weight and Fineness; and that is true: And we know and find that they do so
by ours, and therefore desire it. But our own Money in our own Country has
always been, and I hope shall ever continue under the disposal of our
Government, and the Authority and Stamp thereof, notwithstanding his innovating
and fluctuating Inventions, for serving of a present turn.

Next, he puts Cases of Foreign Trade, whose Countries will not submit to
Changes in the Values of our Money. I say, If our Money be the old heavy they
covet it, and will sell for fewer Pieces of it, or will buy it to carry away;
the newer lighter Money they cannot reasonably desire to carry away, being
intended to be made rather at a losing Truck and Value: This will make them
choose to carry away their Truck rather in Commodities than Money. Whereas for
many Years last past, their Practice has been quite contrary. And there is no
doubt, but that if we raise the Value of our Money, or diminish its Weight,
Foreigners will suit us with their Prices accordingly, and from such Trading no
Man can expect benefit by the raising the Value of our Money, nor ever
pretended to do it, so as he might well have spared his Argnment thereupon; and
what he says, after, of cheating the King, the Debtors, (he should have said
Creditors, Landlords, and Seamen) to the best of my Understanding has much
boldness, and very little Truth in it.

But next he comes to particular Instances, and there indeed he touches our
Sore at the Quick, and seems to reach the very bottom of it. He says, If the
King should receive six millions in Revenue, I say, If he should receive so
much, it will make our case much the harder. And I had rather have it put, If
the King should receive five millions in Yearly Revenue; and I surmise the
latter to be the more likely Computation; and before this can be rightly
determined, it seems necessary, that as near a computation of it should be made
known as can be procured: If our Coin be required to be lightened by a fifth
part or more, it must fall under men's Consideration, that the King's whole
Revenue must fall in reality to four parts of five; so as if before the Change,
it was five millions, now it will be reduced to four, whence the King should
become loser of a whole Million of Money every Year. This the Court, and the
Men of State had great reason to obviate and prevent, by all the means which
lay in their Power; and not to suffer the King to be trickt of so great a
Revenue by the unlucky blast of such a side Wind; by a Trick, which whether we
shall call it Country and Ignorant, or Subtle and Dangerous, does not yet
clearly appear, but a dangerous effect must needs have followed upon so great a
failure, if the same had crudely proceeded, without raising the King some
certain and hnown, or apparently likely recompense or compensation in another
way, we should never have undergone our present Pressures and Payments with the
little murmur that we do, if we were not convinced, that the War with France is
absolutely necessary for our Preservation and Peace. Nor would our Parliament,
we hope, have consented to such heavy Taxes, if they had not found all that
Money absolutely necessary for the support of our present War, and rebus sic
stantibus, Men cannot pull off such a Sum as a Million from the maintenance of
this War, without cutting off as it were a limb or quarter from the main Body
of it, to the great endangering of the very Vitals, and hazard of its whole
Success. We will not therefore desire or suffer so great a Sum to be cut off
from the maintenance of our present War; nor can we suffer the impolitick and
very evil management of our Money, and the grievous Groans and Afflictions of
all sorts of People thereupon, bardly any longer; the reducing Guineas to a
Price that even puts them down, and causes them to be Exported faster than ever
they were Imported, and at the same time forbidding Clip'd-Money without
providing new in the room of it. I desire to know, what could be worse
contrived, or more unlucky, than these Junctures concerning Money, which appear
more and more grievous every day, we hope God will provide: For amongst Men the
Case looks very dangerous, and we cannot yet see to the end of it.

Our Author says, Creditors, Servants, Soldiers, Seamen, all must lose by the
lightning of our Money, Sed non ego credulus illi: for I think none of them
will lose a Penny by it.

Page 3. He puts a Question, to which I answer, That the more Commodities we
sell to Strangers for this Money, although measured at a less weight of Silver,
the more Money is brought into the Kingdom, instead of carrying it out, which
has been too long used amongst us.

Next, another case of a Dutch sending to London 5000 l. in Silver, and getting
it Coined there into 6000 l. I say this would bring so much Dutch Silver into
the Kingdom; and their most gainful Trade with us, will be made by sending us
still more Silver, which will then go at an higher rate here than perhaps it
may in Holland, as was lately the case of our Guineas.

Next, he says, that no Nation ever raised their Money, but it was to their
prejudice: And that the Dutch never did, nor ever will raise their Money; both
no more than bold Assertions, neither proved nor provable: It would not have
been often and usually practiced in our Nation, if our Ancestors had not found
it both beneficial and necessary. And the Romans found great benefit, both by
lightning the Weights of their Brass Money, and by increasing the value of
Silver Deniers. And as to the Dutch, they have no fine Silver Money of their
own Coining, but only course adulterate Money, which none can carry into other
Countries, but to their own very great loss and damage: But their great Trades
are driven all in Foreign Coin, and vast quantities of our English Money has
been used there to that purpose gainfully, both by Trading and by Clipping,
vitiis and modis, not regarding the manner, so as the suavis odor lucri came
amongst them.

To his Secondly, I say, He proceeds upon his own devised, but a very
fallacious Rule, viz. That the Stamp and Authority of State neither does, nor
can work any real change in the value or currency of Money amongst us; the
contrary of which is true, and proved by the two Cases of Guineas and Clipped
Money at this time, and by the Law and Customs of our Nation, and the frequent
practice of our Ancestors. And upon this Rule, That the State can make as real
change in the value and currency of Money, there will, by the lightning of our
present Money, be no Confusion or Injustice at all wrought in Buying, Selling,
or any other other ways of Contract or Bargain whatsoever.

He says again, That by former Alterations of Money never was there a Penny
gotten, which he never had a certain means to know; whence his Sentence seems
Bold and Ignorant, and so we say, Who more Bold than the Blind and Brave: But
he should have said, not only that they did not get by it, but that they never
avoided any great Inconveniences by it; but that they often did, and that we
now seek and endeavor to do; the rest of this Paragraph is but Threats and
Prophecies, without Ground or Proof.

Next, He denies the rising of the Values of Gold or Silver in any other parts
of Europe, excepting in England only, and there he does not deny that it is
risen: What are his Reasons for that? Why, it is because our Trade is lost:
Witness the vast Foreign Trade driven in London, at the time when he wrote,
extremely now abated by the ill management of our Money. His second Reason, Why
the Value of Silver is raised in England, is our Pride and Luxury; He should
have showed, how much, and wherein the Pride and Luxury of England, exceeds
that of France, Spain, Italy, Germany, or that of his admired Country of
Holland, or else I cannot allow of this Reason any more than of the former. His
third Assertion is true, viz. That our Expenses abroad have been great, and
that has occasioned a great transport and draining of our Money, but how or
why that makes Silver dearer in England than it is in other Countries, I do not
understand, true it is, we cannot afford to give so much of our Money for an
Ounce of Silver, as other People whose Money is lighter or courser, can afford
to do: But let us lighten our Money, or set a greater Rate or Value upon it,
then may it give more Money for an Ounce of Silver, and that (saving our
Author's Opinion) will make it much more plentiful amongst us. He says, I
return now to tell you, That if we raise our Money, the Prices of Commodities
will rise with it, true; and then it will be the occasion of great Justice: I
have said, and do say, of no Injustice at all.

Next, he says, The raising of Guineas to 30 s. raised the Price of all the
Goods in England, and I say of the Lands also; and what harm was there in that?
Why, they bought and sold our Goods in Holland to great Profit by that means; I
say, it does not much concern us what Profit the Hollanders made of them, so as
they bought them of us at a more than ordinary rate; and we cannot help the
inconvenience of an high Exchange, or Price for the return of Money, so long as
we have great need of Money there for the pay of our Army, and maintenance of
our Court in those Countries.

Next, he agrees, That Guineas are worth 27 s. in Holland, and that whosoever
obtains them in England at 22 s. may, by carrying them into Holland, make 5 s.
clear gain by them, and each of them, and he thanks the Parliament for giving
the Hollanders an opportunity so to do; but I believe it will be long enough
before they have the public Thanks of the Nation for their so doing.

Secondly, He says, The Exchange, viz. the Price of returning Money from hence
to Holland, is 20 per Cent. I say, that should not be so, if we could help it;
but the great need we have of Money in those Parts, for the support of our
Court and Army, compels us to suffer the great Inconvenience of it, and the
Losses which we sustain by it; and he should do wonderful well, if he would
show us any way to help it; but it seems his business is to find Faults, and
raise Complaints; in the mean time endeavoring only to obstruct such Proposals
as are studied and intended for the remedying of them.

Next, he says, Guineas can be Coined at Amsterdam as well as London, true; but
would they Coin Gold, which goes at 27 s. there, and send it over to England to
go for 26 s. there, if they did so, their discretion would be admirable, but
they are no such Fools, but he sometimes admires them, and sometimes imposes
upon them, as his occasions may require.

Page 4. He speaks of allowing two sorts of Money, the one light, and the other
heavy; I agree that would be very inconvenient.

Second, He is again at his old Principle, That the State has no real Power to
raise or depress the Value of our Money, always by me denied, and often
refuted. Still he insists, It is the Weight and Fineness of the Money that
gives the Value, not the Authority of the Government; he adds, observe that, I
say, that has been often enough observed to be a false and fallacious
Principle, directly opposite to the Law of the Land, and constant practice of
our Kingdom.

The foregoing Paragraph grew from casting my Eye upon Page 2. instead of Page
4.

Page 4. He confesses, That some Swedes and Danes did contract to be paid in
our Milled Money seven or eight Years ago; and that proves they found a benefit
in the weightiness of it, and yet he would not have it lighter: Why? even
because he would not have occasion given Men to say, That English Men are like
French Men, and given to change.

Next, He puts a case upon a point of Foreign Trade and Dealing, wherein I
grant our States Authority cannot prevail; for that Authority can only reach to
their own Subjects, so his Case being granted, there is non sequitur in it.

Next, he says, Men pretend, that by lightning our Money, it will keep it in
the Nation. Secondly, That Gold and Silver are risen in other places of Europe.
Thirdly, Bullion is now near 6 s. an Ounce. These Pretenses, he says, are the
chief Arguments for lightning of our Coin, and if one can soundly confute them,
the causes of lightning of our Money will be quite removed and taken away;
true, they will be so, well then, says he, I will answer and destroy them all
in a few words, viz. By saying, that all those Pretenses and Assertions are
absolutely false. He says, Bullion never was worth more of our good and unclipt
Money, than 5 s. 2 d. per Ounce; I say, that he has confessed, the Voice of
common Fame opposes him in this point, and therefore he ought to have been
somewhat particular, and wherein the proof of this his positive Assertion; and
for want of such proof, I cannot but take leave to suspend my belief of it.

Well, says his poor Spokesman Rogers, if lightning our Money will not be a
great means to keep it in the Kingdom, what other course can be taken which is
likely to be effectual to that purpose? Then he answers, It must be done by a
due care of Trade; but yet, says he, If we be never so busy in Trade, if still
we spend more abroad than we save at home, we shall soon become broken
Tradesmen; and being so Indebted, we cannot by all possible means keep our
Money in the Kingdom; ergo, if it can go to Profit, abroad it must go, and much
the faster for that, if it cannot go but with some loss to the Receiver, it
must go too, but not so fast; nor to all places of our Trade, but to those
places where our Court and Army must be maintained; if, as he truly says, our
spending more abroad than we can save at home, will bring us (as no doubt it
does) to a great scarcity of Money, which way soever we turn our selves for a
Remedy: And that, during this War, we are driven by necessity to spend for
maintaining of our Army, and support of our Court in Foreign Countries, how
shall we confide in the Candor or clear Dealing of our Author, who mentions not
once in all his Writings, that I remember, these true, and most apparent Causes
of our spending more abroad, than we can save at home; but lays the whole load
upon the ill management of our Trade, as if the Traders of our Nation were but
Milksops and silly Fellows in comparison with his Dutch Favorites, and know
not how to manage their Trades. I hope, now he is Authorized (amongst other
Persons of the noblest Quality) to inspect and direct the management of it, we
shall hear no more from him of the ill success, or the defects of it; but in
his next Writings the Saddle may possibly come to be set upon the right Horse,
and where now I leave it, and therewith close the present Examination of our
Author's Writing concerning our Silver Money.

But whereas my search into them, did before bring me to speak concerning an
apparent and great loss which the King's Revenue must needs receive by the
lightening of our present Coin, and which I did not thoroughly there prosecute,
because I would not so much interrupt my intended Examination; now, that being
finished, I return to fasten a new Thread to the end of that Discourse; ex
professo, and with design to deliver my Conceptions fully concerning the same.

That of right and necesity he ought, and must be recompensed for that loss, I
have before concluded; and my present Discourse will be de modo of it; I have
all along distinguished between the diverse occasions for the use of Money, viz.
between our Home occasions, and those which we may have for expending it in
Foreign Countries; and that our lessening the weight of our Money, or raising
the value and esteem of it, will serve such occasions as lie in our own
Country or Kingdom; but will not extend to the use of it in Countries whieh
are Foreign to us: And therefore in proportioning a supply suitable to the loss
which his Majesty may really sustain by the lightening of our Money, it seems
needful to enquire, what proportion of his Majesty's Treasure wust be spent,
and is spent upon Foreign occasions, and in in such Countries.

I have before expressed a desire to compute the King's real Revenue at the sum
of five Millions per annum. and if I shall pretend to guess how much of this is
spent in Foreign Countries; every one must needs apprehend that I have no known
or certain grounds to proceed upon in it; but it must pass only for a very
random guess; I could wish that such Expenses would fall within the compass of
two Millions per annum. and I hope, if I shall divide the Revenue into halves,
and allow one moity to be spent in Foreign Parts, that therein I shall not be
found to make a sparing allowance.

The proportion of the King's loss upon this account, must be suitable to the
quantity by which our Money is lightened; which yet no Man has propounded to
be, so much as to a 4th part of its weight, and yet the better to adjust the
computation. I do venture to propound an advancement of the King's Revenue to a
full 4th part of the sum mentioned, viz. of two Millions and an half; which
4th part will amount unto the sum of 625000 l. per annum: This great yearly
Revenue to be raised by new Taxes upon the Kingdom, will (no doubt) seem very
much to a little, in the Eyes of our examined Author and his Associates: He
computing the King's losses by this means, at a larger proportion than that of
an whole Million; but that grows from his not granting that the State has the
Power of really advancing the value of Money in our own Kingdom; an Error
maintained by him in both his Writings: But I have drawn the account down in as
thirsty and frugal a manner on behalf of the Kingdom, as I could find ground,
and reason to do, and do humbly sue to his Majesty to be contented with it,
which Grace, if I should obtain, yet should I but half have compassed my
design; for that, on the other hand, our People groaning under the heavy yoke
of many former Taxes, may reasonably demand, by what Authority I make such
burdensome Propositions, and who gave it me. My answer must be, that I act
under no other Authority, but that of equity and reason, employed in support of
the Public Necessities and Charges of the Kingdom, and for the safety and
preservation of it; well, but they may reply, Can you be ignorant of the vast
Charges which we already lie under for the maintenance of this grievous and
lasting War? And will you now go about to over-charge us again with new
Impositions and Taxes on that behalf? I confess that I do go about to do so;
but to the great grief and affliction of my Mind; as when a tender Parent or
kind Friend orders or procures a Joint or Limb to be cut off from his
Correlative, for the support and preservation of the Body Natural. Such actions
must be done, or the Bodies, whether Natural or Politic, must fall under
apparent danger of an utter ruin. It passes for an unquestioned Axiom, that of
diverse evils of suffering, Men may, and ought in reason, to choose the least, as
David did, when he chose three days Pestilence in the Land; our present State
seems somewhat suitable, we have now the choice of three such great Sufferings,
i. e. to suffer the weight and fineness of our Old Money still to continue
without alteration; and upon that account, to be coveted by other Nations, and
so all drained from us, as in truth it is, in tanto, if not altogether: Or,
2dly, To suffer the maintenance of our present War to fail, for want of Money
absolutely necessary for the support of it; Or, 3dly, To supply the King's
Foreign Occasions for Money, with the yearly sum of 625000 l. as has been
propounded, or such other large sum as to Parliamentary Wisdom shall seem
convenient; and I am apt to affirm, that this last sort of suffering by
supplying the King with such a large advance of his Revenue, is the least evil
of the three, by some degrees; and if I may speak my Judgment freely (as I
confess I am very apt to do) I would sooner choose to advance the King's Revenue
by a whole Million given in new Taxes to him, than to continue longer under the
raking Consumption of our Money, occasioned by the extraordinary weight, and
fineness of it; and because I think it better for the Kingdom, I cannot but
recommend it to my Contrymen, to be obtained at any supportable charge
whatsoever.

Having thus argued and asserted, I might well enough leave the manner of
raising this Supply, to Parliamentary Wisdom and Practice, and so I entirely
do, naming only two or three Mediums, which to me seem proper for the same.

First, It seems, the doubling our Tax upon Windows, so as every 20 pay 20 s.
instead of 10 s. every 10 pay 12 s. instead of 6 s. and the rest pay 4 s.
instead of 2 s. and by this means about 200000 l. per annum may probably be
raised. Secondly, One Shilling per libr. may be added to the Land Tax. and it
be made 5 s. instead of 4, and that will certainly raise 425000 l. per annum
more, and that will complete our 625000 l. per annum, or if this be strongly
opposed by reason of the inequality of it; recourse may be had to the subsidy
of Chimney-Money, though it may reasonably seem hard, that after doubling the
Tax upon Windows, Chimney-Money should be clapped upon the Houses also; it is
apparent that all ways of raising Money by way of Tax, not only seem, but are
hard upon the Subject; and the more is raised, the harder still is the case
upon them, so as no payment of Taxes is for the present time joyous, but
grievous; though if God send us a good Success of the War, the Product and
Fruit of such Taxes, we hope, may be a State of Peace and assurance in our Land
to us and our Posterity after us, and even to future Generations: And at the
present, we are enough convinced, that the ill condition of our Money, and the
Maladministration of it, is a greater affliction, and grief to the whole
Nation, than all the Taxes which have been laid upon the Nation during this War.

For remedy of which, and the future Reformation of our Money, there shall
farther be said, That whereas our Ancestors have, since the Reign of King Edw.
1. lightened their Money thirteen times, and brought their weight of a lib. in
Money from 12 ounces down to 3 ounces and 320 grains, apparently to the intent
to make it agree with the Weights and value of those of their Neighbor
Nations: Now we may follow that Course and Practice of our Ancestors, and
lighten our present Money to such a proportion, as may make it a loss, rather
than a gain, to whomsoever shall transport it unto any of our Neighbor
Nations: To this intent and purpose, it is here humbly propounded, that for the
future, in the weight of our lib. in Money, we may leave out and reject the 320
grains, and establish our lib. in Money to weigh three ounces complete of
Sterling Silver, that as our lib. was formerly divided into 4 Crown pieces, in
future, it may be divided into three Noble pieces, each weighing a complete
ounce of Sterling Silver, and current at the value of 6 s. 8 d. and the half
ounce pieces be Coined, each the full weight of half an ounce, and current at 3
s. 4 d. then quarter ounce pieces just current for five groats; then Shillings
of the full weight of 72 grains, then Sixpences at the weight of 36 grains,
then Groats at the weight of 24 grains, or a Penny weight just; and by this
computation, every grain of Silver will value justly two parts in three of a
Farthing; whence three grains are worth an halfpenny, six grains a penny,
twelve grains two pence, eighteen grains three pence, etc. and by this means
our Money will be known and plain, and as easy to be counted as the former;
considering, that three Nobles do as easily count to a lib. as four Crowns; and
so for all the rest of our pieces, which though they are all of fine Silver,
yet being sufficiently diminished in their weight, Men who take them in England
for Debts or Commodities, can hardly transport them into other Countries, but
with some small loss, which will (I think) work strongly enough to hinder the
desired, or willing transportation of them.

But hereupon it may reasonably be demanded, What shall the Nation do for Money
in the mean time, to continue our Traffic one with another? I answer, That
till new Money enough of this new sort can be Coined, all sorts of the good
Silver Money of England, Clipped or unclipt, may be permitted to go by weight,
according to the rate and value of our intended New Money, viz. at an Noble an
ounce; the half ounce at 3 s. 4 d. the quarter at 20 d. the Penny weight 4 d.
and the weight by grains, as has been before expressed; and so, he who has
weighty Money, and he who has Clipped Money, by the measure of weight, shall be
all brought to an equality, as the case was by the Israelitish Manna, when it
was measured by an Homer: And thus, for a time, Silver may pass, not as Money,
but as a Commodity by its weight; and that Silver which has been Honored with
the Royal Stamp, seems warranted in its fineness, and may pass by weight as
before is declared; yet with liberty to try any suspected pieces of it, by
Fire, or by the Sheers, or in any other indifferent, and and common manner, the
cutting of a piece will in our case, be little prejudice, because it will
little or nothing diminish the weight of it.

Farther, in this case, it seems requisite, that when the Clipped Money that is
fine, comes to be recoined, it should be received into the Mint at our stated
rate of a Noble per ounce, and delivered at the same rate out again; but the
Silver in Bullion may be taken in at a lower rate, viz. 6 s. 2 d. 4. d. 5 d. 6
d. as the same can be obtained, or procured; but to be always issued out of the
Mint at the rate of 6 s. 8 d. per ounce, and so to be Coined at that rate,
throughout the Kingdom; the rate of 6 s. 2 d. or above for taking Silver into
the Mint, will (I think) bring Silver plentifully into it, and in greater
Proportion than to those of our Neighbors, because by such pieces, Silver will
be set at somewhat an higher rate here, than it bears in other places; and thus
by raising the value of Silver in the Kingdom, it is likely both to be drawn
hither, and kept here, except always what the necessities of our War in Foreign
parts will drain from us; under which Wars, no Policies, or Advantages of
Trade can make us rich; and it will be very well for us, if our best Industry
and Frugality can, and do, by God's Blessing, enable us to subsist under such
burdens, as neither we norour Fathers have known, and we are now very
unwilling, and somewhat unable to bear; and would certainly be intolerable,
were it not for the visible and inavoidable need of this vast Expense, and the
Transportation of our Treasure and Money, into Foreign Countries: We have an
old saying, viz. Need makes the old Wife trot, even when her self, and those
who see her, think she is scarce able to go: Durum telum necessitas; and those
who see us, and consider what we do, and what we suffer, may fairly conclude,
that we do willingly and of choice, prefer our Religion, Liberty and Laws,
before our Peace, or Money; and all other our Plenty, and Happiness of our
being in this World; and that our late King James was given over by God, to
make a very ill and disadvantageous choice, when he set himself to attack the
Nation and oppress them in these three most sensible and vital Principles of
their Affection and Government; for which (if he heartily repent, as I verily
believe he has had, and still has very good cause to do) I pray God forgive
him, and forgive the Nation those hard usages which have been put upon him,
though they seem not greater than the Merit of his Provocations did deserve;
for the maintenance of our said beloved Principles, he was cast out; and for
the maintenance of them we do, and we suffer all that has hitherto been
demanded of us: But such demands are to be made as little burthensom as the
urgent necessities of Affairs will permit, and that appearing to be done, with
as little Prouling and Corruption of Officers and Instruments as is possible;
it seems, the Nation will be yet willing to bear such an increase of their
Charge, as for defense of their beloved Principles shall upon apparent
necessity, be put upon them: And thus exhorted, I leave them to the guidance
and direction of the Divine Insluence. Our before examined Author lays a great
stress upon the diminution of Wages to Soldiers and Mariners, but that may be
easily taken off, by a moderate and equitable care, in making some such
addition to their weekly or monthly Wages as the true state of their cases may
require, considering them not as hoarders, but contented with such Money as
will reddily go from them, at the same rate which they have received it. Thus
much for our Money of Silver, whence I proceed to our Author's Letter
concerning Gold; and there page 1. he says, That Silver was then come to 6 s. 2
d. per ounce, and then terms the design of lessening the weight of our Money, a
silly Project.

He says, That in 30 years past, there had been Coined in England six Millions
of Milled Money, and yet there is hardly a piece of it now passing amongst us;
and if we go on to Coin at that weight, fineness and value, we put our Money
into a fit condition for Exportation: He and I have before often differed, but
in this point and period, we are fully agreed, viz. that the weight and
sineness of our Money was the prime cause of the Exportation of it, whereby it
was quite drained out of our own Country.

He says, The Parliament must take care of Trade, and provide that the Balance
of it may be in favor of our selves, a thing easy to be set down in words,
but not one word of direction how this may be done; but which (had he any
knowledge of) he ought to have discovered it to them: I do not think that by
this exhortation, he meant, make me one of the Commissioners for the regulation
of Trade, and then by my extraordinary, and yet unrevealed Knowledge in Trade,
you may expect a wonderful improvement in that Mystery: But yet says he, after
all care that can be taken of Trade [or any thing else] if you do not suppress
the price of Guineas, all the endeavor will be to no purpose; you must needs
suppress their value, for if you do not, there will be no Silver Money in the
Nation.

He sets down, p. 2d proportionable values between Gold and Silver, that in the
Roman times the proportion was as of one to ten, one ounce of Gold was equal in
value to ten of Silver: That in King Edw. the Thirds time, it was as of one to
eleven; he might have added, that down to the times of King James I. and his
Son King Charles; the proportion was as of one to twelve: He says, That in King
Charles the 2d's time the proportion was of little more than of one to
fourteen, and that now it is grown to be as of one to sixteen. Now says he, If
we Coin our Silver at the old weight and fineness, which he says we certainly
ought to do; but which I say plainly, we ought not to do, if we respect the
benefit or safety of the Kingdom: And I say, it will be impossible to adjust
the Accounts between him and me concerning the rate of Guineas in our Silver
Money, until we can come to a consent and resolution concerning the very Weight
of our Silver Money: His Silver Money is computed at the Weight of 3 Ounces,
and 320 Grains to the lib. of Money, and mine to the weight of three Ounces
only: And this must needs make a very great difference in our Computations
concerning the proportion of Value between Gold and Silver. He repeats again,
that 6 s. 2 d. per Ounce was (when he wrote) the current price for Silver
(denied in his other Writings.)

He puts a case of Guineas and Silver, compared in very great Sums, Sed dolus
versatur universalibus; and therefore I will propound a more particular
Computation; I say then, That the weight of a Guinea is 128 Grains, in other
terms, a quarter of an Ounce and 8 odd Grains; the quarter Ounce holding 120
Grains; to compare these Grains of Gold to the Value of so many of my Grains of
Silver, I compute, that my quarter Ounce, or 120 Grains of Silver, values 20 s.
and the odd 8 Grains value 1 s. ob. fere; and together they make 21 s. ob. then
multiply this by 16 (which he says, is the proportion between Gold and Silver)
16 times 21 s. ob. make 344 s. and these put into our ordinary count of Money,
make 1 l. 8 s. 8 d. of which we will strike off 2 d. to adjust my fere, and
then there will remain 1 l. 8 s. 6 d. as the true value of a Guinea, according
to the Weight and Value of our Silver, which I have propounded to be accepted.

He says after, If we Coin our Silver of the ancient Weight and Fineness, and
cut it out into 3 l. 2 s. still the more of it will be Exported, and the
greater loss, he says true, and therefore let us no more Coin Money of the
ancient weight.

Page 3. he says, If the price of Gold be not brought down, we cannot keep our
Silver; I say, let us bring down the weight of our Silver Money, and then we
shall keep it against all the efforts which the Gold can make upon us.

He makes a long Objection against his Opinion, but it is like those which Men
commonly produce in like cases, viz. a very weak one, That Men cannot transport
Silver because it was forbidden by an Act of Parliament: If that, accompanied
with most rigorous Punishments, could have served the turn, the Kingdom could
never have swarmed with Clippers and Coiners as it did.

Next he say, Others pretend, That the value or price of Gold and Silver is
risen over all Europe; this he denies, and says, It is absolutely false, and
argues the Case from many Topics, of which he gives no more assurance than his
own Assertions, in which we have found diverse mistakes before; nor seems the
Objection greatly material against his Opinion, nor deserving of any longer
Examination, as being rather amusing than instructive.

Page 4. He says again, Silver is now at 6 s. 2 d. the Ounce, and if we Coin
new Money to be current at 5 s. 2 d. the Ounce, it will sink into the
Melting-Pot as soon as it is Coined, and then pass to the other side of the
Water, and with less Ceremony than he mentions; and so we can never hope to
have any Plenty of this sort of new Money: And I say the truth of this
Assertion is so evident in it self, that it must needs pass for undeniable. He
propounds an Opinion, that giving 3 d. an Ounce for bringing Silver into the
Mint will remedy this, but he rejects it as a frivolous Opinion, to think, that
to gain 3 d. any Man will lose 9 d. for who (says he) will give 6 s. 2 d. an
Ounce for Silver, and then bring it to the Mint to be debased by the Coinage,
to the rate and value of 5 s. 2 d. though 3 d. be allowed for the bringing to the
Mint. I say, That herein we are perfectly agreed, and that all this is clearly
true; and that the only remedy to avoid these apparent Mischiefs is to be
expected by lightning the weight of our Money to the setting it at somewhat an
higher rate than Bullion, as before has been proved, and will both bring
Silver into the Kingdom, and keep it there, when it is Coined into Money, as
much as the King's Foreign Necessities will permit.

Next he says, There is no way to sink the Price of Silver, and keep our Money
when Coined, but by sinking the Price of Gold: I answer, that nothing that
England can do is able to alter the price of Silver in other places of Europe,
from whence we must acquire and obtain it; and therefore our seeking to sink it
will be a vain endeavor; but we can raise the Value of it and Money in our own
Country, and by that means draw it into the Kingdom as we did the Guineas, and
keep it, by making it pass at somewhat an higher Value here than it does in the
Neighbor Nations; and this, I conceive, is the only way to bring Silver and
Money into England, where it has been for a long time too much sunk by a low
value at home, which has been the general reason of transporting it to our
Neighbors, who set an higher value and esteem upon it.

Well, but still he says, sinking of Gold at home will sink the Silver, without
mentioning his reason of the consequence, or the manner how it should work,
which I confess passes my understanding; and besides, we find by dear
experience, that he was very much mistaken in this assertion, for now the price
of Gold has been sunk very low amongst us for the space of two Months or more,
and what effect have we found of it? Is the price of Bullion sunk by it? Not at
all, but rather increased; what then? Why, it has driven the greatest part of
the Gold to seek a new Settlement in other Countries, where they set a greater
Price and Value upon it; a Guinea he has told us goes at the rate of 1 l. 7 s.
in Holland; and is it so hard to get Guineas over thither in Specie; that those
who have them will rather choose to vent them here at 22 s. than to send over,
and make the rate of 27 s. of them, or pass them in Ireland at 26 s. no Man can
doubt but the setting this low rate upon them has made them fly into Foreign
parts again; and will in time utterly banish them from this Kingdom, as it has
done our Silver, and the Money of it; and then we may become such Animals as
his Sophistry pretends to make us, without Money, either of Gold or Silver
amongst us; of which condition we have at present a very bitter taste, and a
deep sense upon all our Apprehensions; and this (in a great measure has been
the true and sensible effect of our States following his Advice for the sinking
of Guineas so low as to drive the use of them from amongst us, at a time when
Clipped Money might not pass, and New Money was not Coined to any degree that can
be serviceable to the Kingdom, proving what may be expected in future from our
Reliance, and the Conduct of such state Politics.

In his Postscript he says, It is asserted by some (and I have quoted him for
one of those Assertors) that a Guinea now in Holland is worth 27 s. English. It
seems strange he does not tell us, that this must be meant of our Clipped
Shillings, but he finds another evasion upon that point, and says, you must
conceive, that when I say a Guinea there, is worth 27 s. the Exchange or Price
of Return of Money from England to Holland is put into the Account: This Price
of return at 20 per Cent. is 4 s. per lib. but says he, this 4 s. to our 22 s.
both make 26 s. but neither so does the witness of his Computation agree
together, for 26 is not 27, but the truth is, I dare not trust him any longer
upon his bare Word or Assertion, but desire it may be enquired, per pages, how
far he is to be believed in this particular, in which we may be soon certainly
resolved upon their daily experience; and to which, in this point, I am willing
to refer my self. Thus have I examined our Author's Book, and two Letters (all
of this sort that came to my hands of his Writing) without omitting any thing
material, even to his very Postscript; and upon the whole, I find a great
Inclination in my self to conceive, that his whole Progress tends rather to the
promoting of a Design, viis and modis, than to a sincere delivery of the truth
in this Matter. I have before observed, that he abominates the Injustice (as he
calls it) in making Creditors and Landlords take Silver Money of less Weight
than Money of the same Denomination bore when the Money was Lent, or the Leases
were made; and taking care about the Mariners and Soldiers Wages; by which he
made show of a tender and scrupulous Conscience in such cases: But then I
observed, That he had no consideration of Debtors or Tenants in the like cases,
no tenderness for the Possessors of Clipped Money when it became stopped; he
charges them not with any demerit, and yet is contented and forward to have
them exposed to the Rigor and Injustice of losing near half in half of their
Money, without any Offense or Fault of theirs in the point; nor is he more
Charitable to unfortunate Possessors of Guineas; for he not only consults, but
advises, that they also shall lose very near a third part of their Money (how
rigorous and unjust soever the same may be) now whence can we derive a reason
of the difference or diversity of tenderness and rigor in the same Person and
Judgment; not from the Merits of the Persons or Cases which have been
specified; but because he perceived, that his Pleading in the first cases might
help to fortify and maintain the design which he intended to prosecute,
whereas the later cases had little Influence toward the promoting of that
design; and this made him have little or no consideration for such Sufferers.
This proceeding proves (to my Understanding) that these Writings of his were
not intended for a clear and impartial Disquisition of truth in the cases
propounded, but rather were studied for the promotion and maintenance of that
design, which he had undertaken to support: And thus we part from our Author's
Writing upon this Subject, without intending any farther proceeding in this
Argument, than by adding a few short Observations pertinent to the whole case,
which has been before disputed.

1. I shall observe, concerning the bringing down the Price and Value of
Guineas amongst us, the manner of proceeding for the procurement of that
Debasement, viz. when the time approached of His Majesty's going into the
Field; Guineas were by former Experience known to be the most commodious and
proper Treasure and Money which he or his Followers could carry with them, but
to take them in at the value of 30 s. or above, they thought would prove a
means of some certain loss to them, to avoid which, a design was formed to
bring down the Value of them, which was promoted in the Honorable House of
Commons, and was there first offered with Intention of bringing them down to
the value of 28 s. and was argued in that House upon that proposal; and it were
then found, that there were Votes enough inclining, and that if a greater
Debasement of them were demanded, an Act might likely pass in that House to
that purpose; upon which, motions arose in that House to lessen their Value,
and bring them down to 26 s. and there it was rested, and that value was set
upon them and authorized by an Act of Parliament; and thus they who intended to
make a Champaign, might obtain Guineas here at the rate of 26 s. and pass them
in Flanders at 27 s. and by this means gain 1 s. per Guinea, besides the saving
of 20 per Cent. which the return of that Money, which they carried with them,
would otherwise cost them, so as they might save and gain considerably by this
establishment of the rate of Guineas. But we find, that the itch and desire of
Gain is very incident to Man's frail Nature; and it is very hard effectually to
determine, thus far shall thou come and no farther, and here shall the raging
of thy Waves be stayed; of which truth, the success of this case may be a good
testimony, for the Parties concerned did not rest satisfied with what they had
obtained, but began again and pressed their desires of a greater Gain upon their
Friends in the House of Commons, with so much prevalency as that they shortly
after obtained another Act of Parliament for bringing the rate of Guineas yet
lower, and even to the present stint of 22 s. with Imposition of Penalties upon
those who should Pay or Receive them at an higher Value; and having thus firmly
fixed their Stakes, they weakly conceive that Men who had taken their Guineas at
30 s. vendible again in Holland at 27 s. and in Ireland at 26 s. would come to
them, and sell their Guineas at 22 d. whereby our Court and Camp should gain
four more Shillings by every Guinea which they should carry with them into
Flanders; and was not this like to be a fair Perquisite and a great Gain to our
Men of Action in those Parts? It seems, the Prosecutors of that design made
their Accounts in this manner, but the effect proved, that they reckoned
without their Hosts; for whereas at the rate of 30 s. they might have had
Guineas enough to have fully served all their turns, or at 28 s. might have had
a great quantity of them, and at 26 s a considerable proportion of them; now by
bringing them down to 22 s. they were fore'd to go over empty-handed, and to
draw our new Coined Silver over after them to supply that want. Aesop tells us
of a Dog, which catching at the Shadow of a Shoulder of Mutton in the Water as
he was Swimming, dropped and lost that he had really in his Mouth before; and
this effect was foretold upon the first passing of the 22 s. Act, and was
easily foreseen by many considerate Persons, viz. that our old Proverb of, All
covet all lose, would probably be verified upon them; but I say farther, that
if they might have obtained a Success in this enterprise suitable to their
Expectations and Desires, and by that means a great present Advantage and
Profit, they ought to consider it but as of a very short continuance, of 1
Years standing only, obtained to the prejudice and Grief of their Fellow
Subjects, whose Purses and Families bear their burdens, and the heat of the
Day, honest and true Consideration and Policy will direct them, that moderation
in Gain (as well as in other things) will make them more lasting and durable,
if Men take them so one Year, as they may be likely to hold out another Year,
and so for a longer continuance. Thus all the parts of a Politic Society may
subsist and hold long together; but if they bite, and (by extorting) devour one
another, they may reasonably expect to be consumed one by another. Ordinary
Capacities have (in times past) received much Instruction by Similitudes, and
therefore we will compare our Native Kingdom to Nebuchadnezzar's great Tree,
whose Leaves were fair, and the Fruit thereof much, and in it was Meat for all
that depended upon it; and that Tree also was strong, but not beyond the
possibility of being cut down, and prostrated, whereby its Leaves should be
shaken off, and its Fruit scattered; the Tree or Bole of our Kingdom is not so
strong as that was, but it bears, and perhaps may be able to bear) but how long
no Man knows) the necessary burdens of our Court, our Men of State and Law,
the charges of a very numerous Army, and other Foreign Expenses; the Matter of
this Tree is not Iron, but Wood, and though called a Kingdom, is a Body that
has Life, and must have Nourishment and Cultivation, without which it cannot
subsist, it is penetrable, and may be coroded most dangerously by the strong
Saws of public and authorized Extortion of any one part upon another, and
every strong Draught of a Saw in that kind is made with great danger to the
Body of the Tree, tending to its Prostration and Ruin, which, whenever it
shall happen, must carry with it all that belongs to it; Court, State, Army,
must stand and fall together with it, and therefore must every sort of Men
(that are considerate) make it their special care so to live out of this Tree,
as to preserve the Bole and Body of it strong and entire, that their own just
and moderate Subsistence and Gain may have a longer and more likely duration,
and it must certainly be very noxious and dangerous for any, and especially any
one sort or parcel of Men in it, so to prosecute their own Gain out of it as to
use Force or Fraud for obtaining of extraordinary Gain to themselves by
impoverishing, and so grieving and wounding the rest of their Fellow Subjects,
especially in a time of public Distress and Calamity, and wherein Peoples
Minds are more touchy and exasperated than they are at other times; thus they
may probably arrive at disturbing the public Peace, a near way to the
prostration of that Tree which supports them all, and the whole loss of that
Entertainment, Maintenance, and Gain which they receive from it.

To this another short Simile may be added, viz. of a Company passing over the
Stage of this World, who stand in need of much Provision, and many
Accommodations, and have Beasts of Carriage for the Portage of them, be they
Horses, Camels, or Asses, as long as these Cattle are well used and
indifferently Laden, they will continue to bear Weeks, Months, or Years; but if
their Food and Provender be withdrawn by surreption, or forcibly taken away, or
if they be much over-laden, or but over-driven they will be apt to fail, and
sall under their Burdens, as Jacob said to his Brother Esau of his Flocks and
Herds, that if Men should overdrive them one day, all the Flock will dye; and
so if the People be over-driven one Year, great Losses and Disturbances are
likely to ensue, and then the Court, Men of State and Arms are like to be left
every one to bear his own burden, and to shift for themselves, as other
opportunities shall be offered them.

These Similies are intended to teach and demonstrate to every ordinary
Capacity, the danger which a greedy gaping after Gain (the very root of evil)
may be expected to produce in a Nation so full of division, and so nicely
sensible of unjust or unkind usage as our People (especially in distress) are
now, and have always used to be. My Supplication is, that Men may consider one
another, and provoke not to Anger and Clamor (now very rise amongst us) but to
love and to good Works, so as Men may not look every one on his own things
only, but also upon the things of others, a course which I doubt was not
sincerely followed in our last quoted Act for putting down the Price of Guineas
to the rate of 22 s. and thus shall the extent of my first Observation be
bounded and finished.

My second Observation will concern the present state of our Silver Money. We
have, besides our quantities of Clipped Money, two sorts of heavy Money, the one
old, and the other new; and we have in prospect a third sort, viz. a lighter
sort that may hereafter be Coined, which leaner or lighter sort of Money shall
(if my design fail not) swallow up all the other sorts of Silver Money in the
Kingdom, where it were to be wished, that one sort of Weights, Measures, and
Money, might be in common use and practice throughout the whole Kingdom.

In prosecution of my present design, the first proposal in it will be the
hardest, viz the obtaining a great Sum to be ready Coined of my new and lighter
sort of Money of the old and established Fineness, to the Value of some Hundred
Thousand Pounds, but that once done and ready to be paid out, it may be
ordained and proclaimed, that whosoever brings heavy Money into the Exchequer or
Tower, shall forthwith, and without payment of Fees, receive new and light
Money in lieu or exchange for it, to an equal Weight of that which he has
brought in by this exchange (Mr. Lock often asserts and maintains) the King can
have no loss, receiving an equal Weight in fine Silver to that which he pays
out; and I have agreed with Mr. Lock, that concerning the King's Expenses in
Foreign Parts, his Rule and Computation is true, but I have denied it to be so
for Money spent in the Kingdom; and thence I argue, that the King receiving the
heavy Money, and sending it in Specie out of the Kingdom suffers no loss at all
by this Exchange, but saves 20 per Cent. by sending this Money beyond the Seas
in Specie, without paying 20 per Cent. for the return of it, and which he must
pay and lose as often as he returns Money into those griping Low Countries for
the pay of his Army and supply of his other Occasions there; but though the
King, as I have said, shall not lose a Penny by this Exchange, but shall save
the 20 per Cent. which the Return otherwise might have cost him, yet the
Subject with whom he deals upon this occasion, may happen to prove a very
considerable Gainer by this sort of Exchange, but for that he must thank the
Government, which by its public Stamp and Authority, has raised the value of
Silver within its Dominions, and made a less Weight of it current at a greater
Price and estimation than it was sormerly wont to bear; I say, the Gains which
Subjects may make by such exchanges with the King, will soon bring all our
heavy Money into the King's hands, whose occasions will speedily call for the
transportion of it; also the Clipped Money being received into the Mint at 6 s. 8
d per Ounce, will speedily come in to be Coined into the lighter Money, which
will (by these means) soon become the only Silver Money current in the Kingdom.

Yet this Proposal may be put into other Terms, and be thereby made a very
little more beneficial for the Crown; the increase of whose Revenue in an
equitable manner, I think, all ought to promote: Let it then be Proclaimed,
that what Subject soever brings in to the King 80 l. in the heavy Money, shall
receive 100 l. of our new light Money in lieu of it; by this Exchange the King
will gain 4 s. 6 d. per Cent fere, which will rise to 45 s. per Thousand, and
to 225 l. in the 1000000 and to 2250 l. in the Million of Money; if his Majesty
may make this profit (which will rise from the over-weight which is in the 80
l. above the 100 l) I pray the Exchange may pass upon that foot, but if his
Officers or Ministers must lick this petty profit of their Fingers, and put it
into their own Purses (as the case is very likely to fall out) then I wish the
Exchange may pass upon the other foot of Exchanging weight for weight of the
one sort, as of the other, so as the Subject may have that small profit, rather
than the Ministers enrich themselves by it.

But upon the whole matter of this Proposal, there must be provided a great
Bank of our New Money in the King's Hand, and disposal that his Officers may be
able to pay with the one hand, as they receive with the other; or the Traffic
and Trade of this Exchange will prove very slack and inconsiderable, for Men
will not part with the good and heavy Money in their own present possession,
for Tickets and Tallies; nor perhaps upon any Credit that can be propounded to
them, and therefore this Trade must needs be driven by the present Money on
both sides, or else the design will prove abortive; and in like manner for the
Clipped Money, if it may pass at 6 s. 8 d. per ounce by weight, it will not
readily come into the Mint, except there be New Money ready to pay for it at
that rate; but this provision being made, all the Money, and even Silver in the
Kingdom will be ready to flow into our Mint, and from Foreign parts, to be
Coined, and remain amongst us, because we shall set a little higher rate and
value upon it, than that which it yet bears amongst our Neighbor Nations. Also
by this means, all will be soon converted into one Sort and Species of Money,
which was the thing propounded to be performed in this 2d Observation. My 3d
and last Observation will concern the dangerous and corroding Canker, which
eats out the very Bowels of our English Treasure and Money, (viz.) the griping
Extortion laid upon us by our next Neighbors and Confederates in the Low
Countries of Holland and Flanders; they know we have pressing need of Money in
their parts, for the Payment of our Army, and support of our Court there, and
their Merchants make the uttermost advantage which they can of such necessity;
and therefore though our Money lie ready in England for such purposes, or the
Credit which we offer for that purpose, be never so good and unquestionable,
they will not return this Money for us into their Low Countries, nor pay our
Bills charged upon them for those purposes, at a less rate or price than 20 per
Cent allowance for supplying the necessities which grow upon us from the
occasions before expressed: This 20 per Cent in the return of every Million
amounts to the sum of 200000 l. whence if the King expend two Millions and an
half in those parts yearly (according to our former computation) and this be
paid by returns through those Countries, our King and Nation must perfectly
lose and cast away the sum 500000 l. per annum, for which (according to our
proverbial expression) the English Nation or People must Neither Eat nor Drink.
This is a vast yearly Charge and even unsupportable to the State of the
Kingdom, the very apprehension and remembrance of it, is a grievous and
afflictive burden to those who will concern themselves for the support and
welfare of their Native Country; and my intent is to offer this great
Suffering to the consideration and feeling of such Persons, that so they may
all lay it to Heart, and thence be stimulated, provoked, and stirred up by all
the stretch of their Wits, and Industry of their Hands, to prevent and cure
this miserable Loss, and Consumption of our Money; or at least in some measure
to diminish or aleviate the same. I will therefore recommend this matter to the
Men of State, and especially to the Commissioners of the Treasury, and next to
the Commissioners for the regulation of Trade, and by Name to my Examined
Author, Mr. Lock, and to all other Persons of Skill and Activity in the
Kingdom, exhorting every one of them, according to their several Stations and
Abilities, to Study and Endeavor the removal of this miserable Loss and
Calamity from us, or to make it more tolerable than at present we find it; and
that I may begin with casting my Mite into this Treasury of Merit, I pretend to
offer two Proposals, each of which may possibly prove in some measure Remedial
of this our forenam'd Malady and Consumption.

The first is, That a considerable part of the Kingdoms Treasure may be
employed in Traffic, and for that purpose his Majesty may have Factors and
Factories, Storehouses and Magazines in his Cities of London, Portsmouth,
Plymouth, Bristol, Chester, Dublin, and two more good Ports of Ireland, for the
West; and Yarmouth, Hull, Newcastle, Edenborough, and some more Northern Port
of Scotland, for the East; and that the King's Factors buy with his Money, or
such Credit as they can fairly and freely obtain, such sort of Commodities in
the adjacent Countries, as are most likely to be of ready Vent in the Low
Countries, viz. all sorts of Necessaries for Eating, Drinking and Wearing, and
Tin, Lead, Timber, Saltpeter or Nitre, Iron, Canvas, Cordage, Coals, and other
like Commodities; and that he have in the Low Countries, other Factories at
Antwerp, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Middleburgh, Dort, or other places for the
reception and vending all the said Commodities which shall come from his own
Dominions, or may be procured by Truck and Tade from the Elb. the Baltic, or
other Northern Countries, these vended in the Low Countries for ready Money or
good Credit, may stop a great part of our Leak, and by degrees may make our
Vessel more stanch and steady than heretofore it has been, private Men have
often grown rich by the gains of such Traffic, but if the King make but his
own of it, he will be satisfied by saving 20 per Cent for the return of so much
Money; nay, and if he lose 5 per Cent in his Trade, he will save 15 per Cent in
his Returns, and if he lose 10 per Cent or 15 per Cent in the Trade, he will
still save 10 or 5 per Cent in his Returns; it is true, nihil simul inventum
and perfectum, and therefore Men ought to begin with lesser trials, which if
prosperous, will grow to more perfection by degrees; and if this or a like
Proposal do hit, diverse benefits may arise from it; our Country Commodities
may thereby rise in their value; it may give Employments to many Subjects, and
to Seamen and their Vessels; it may cause our Coasts to be better guarded, for
Protection of the King's Goods, not suffering our Men of War to fleep out their
time in Torbay, as they have been too much accustomed to do, but putting them
in active Guard, at least upon our Coasts, so long as the season of the Summer
and Temperate weather will permit.

My second Proposal for a measure of Remedy in our beforementioned case, may be
made, by the most beneficial Management of Gold and Guineas amongst us. I have
before Calculated the exact value of a Guinea in our new and light Money, to be
28 s. 6 d. this Guinea I take to go in Holland at the rate of 27 old Shillings,
(which are an eighth part better than the new) whence those 27 Shillings are 5
Shillings at least better than our 28 s. 6 d. if then we obtain Guineas here at
the rate of 28 s. 6 d. and put them off in Holland at such 27 s. we may save
the whole 20 per Cent Return and Gain, besides 2 s. or 3 s. in every Guinea,
but if I shall count with Mr. Lock the 20 per Cent out of the 27 s. it will
reduce the 27 s. to the value of our light Money, and then we shall buy at the
value of 28 s. 6 d. and sell ht 27 s. by this Mart we shall lose but 5 per
Cent, and that will save us 15 per Cent of our 20. and if we should buy at 30
s. and sell at 27 s. it is a loss but of 10 per Cent, and would save us other
10. if we buy at 31 s. 6 d. and for 27. we shall lose but 15 per Cent, and be
still savers of 5 per Cent.

These Mediums I leave as Proposals to be well considered and farther improved,
or set aside by putting better Proposals in their stead, and not by letting the
matter fall, without procuring some redress in it, and herewith shall be cut
off the Thread of this Discourse, in which I have not shunned or forborne to
declare to my Country, the true and whole state of the matters now in
agitation, as far as my Knowledge can extend; and I pray God to give it a
success suitable to the Integrity, good Affection and Intention of the Writer,
who hopes he had in it a Superior Assistance, and desires there may be rendered
to the only great Fountain of Being and Goodness, the whole Honor and Glory,
and all the Thanks, Praises, and Acclamations of the Universe, for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

