Advertisement: BY THE TRANSLATOR, TO THE READER.
FOR the better understanding of these five Letters, it seems necessary in a
few words to explain the Occasion and Subject of them. They are not, in French,
one distinct Volume, as they are here made in English; but a part of two larger
Volumes written in an Epistolary Form. The First entitled, Sentiments de
quelques Theologiens de Hollande sur l' History Critique du vieux Testament,
Composee par le P. Richard Simon.
The Thoughts or Reflections of some Divines in Holland, upon Father Simon's
Critical History of the Old Testament. The Second, Defense des Sentimens, etc.
contre la Response du Prieur de Bolleville.
A Defense of those Thoughts, in Answer to the Prior of Bolleville; who is
supposed to be also the same Mr. Simon, disguised under a borrowed Name.

The general Design that Mr. Simon drives at in the Critical History of the Old
Testament, as well as in that of the New (which are now both of them published
in English) is to represent the many Difficulties that are amongst the Learned
concerning the Text of the Scriptures, and thereby to infer the necessity of
receiving the Roman Doctrine of Oral Tradition.

This Design raised him many Antagonists amongst the Protestants beyond the
Seas* who have opposed him in their Writings, each according to his different
Genius or Principles. The Book first above mentioned was one of the earliest of
that kind; and it is Anonymous Author appears second to none, either in Critical
Learning, or Solid Judgment. But it is not necessary to my purpose in this
place to insist upon his particular differences with Mr. Simon in Points of
Criticism. This only in general, is needful to be observed; That though on the
one side he sufficiently overthrows the pretended necessity of Oral Tradition;
and on the other side, ingenuously acknowledges all the Difficulties that are
amongst the Learned about the Text of the Scriptures; yet he does not thereupon
leave the Judgment of his Reader in suspense about so weighty a matter; but
propounds a middle way, which he conceives proper to settle in Men's Minds a
just esteem of the Scriptures, upon a solid Foundation.

The Scheme or System of this middle way, he says, he received from his Friend
Mr. N. and therefore he gives it not in his own, but in his Friend's words. It
is comprised in the Eleventh and Twelfth Letters of his foresaid Book. And
because That is a distinct Subject of it self, and of more consequence to the
generality of Christians, than those nice Disputes of Criticism, with which he
is obliged, in following Mr. Simon, to fill up the rest of that Volume, I have
therefore thought fit to translate those two Letters into English. They are the
two First of these Five; and are the Ground and Occasion of the rest.

The publishing of that Volume of Letters produced an Answer from Mr. Simon, or
the Prior of Bolleville, as he calls himself; and further gave opportunity to
the Author to learn from several hands, whatsoever was objected most materially
by others against the forementioned Scheme, which he had published in his
Friend's words. This afforded him occasion, in replying to the Prior of
Bolleville, to insert a further explanation and defense of that Scheme, from
the hand of the Author; as also to justify himself for having published it;
and in the last place to remove the great Popular Objection arising from a
Iealousy, lest that System of Mr. N's should prejudice the Foundation of the
Christian Religion. I say, it prompted him to answer that Objection, by giving
a solid Demonstration of the Truth of our Religion, without interessing it in
this Controversy. This is done in the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Letters of his
Second Book, Entitled, A Defense, etc. And they are the three last of these
following Five.

I have translated them all, that the Reader may at once have a full view, both
of Mr. N's Opinions concerning the Holy Scriptures, in the forementioned
System; of the Objections that have been made against it; of the Answers he
gives to those Objections; and of the Use that may be made of all, in settling
the Christian Religion upon a Basis not to be shaken by the Difficulties about
the Scripture, which the Learned are forced to acknowledge to be insuperable.

This is all that I think needful to premonish the Reader upon this Subject.
Only if in the perusal of the two first of these Letters, any one should be apt
to condemn me for publishing things of this nice concernment in our Language, I
entreat him to suspend his Censare, till he have read the rest; and as he goes
along, to apply unto me the Author's Apology. Our Case is the same, and I
think, he has said all that is needful upon it. In a word, We live in an Age of
so much Light, that it is not only now (as at all times) unbecoming the Dignity
of such Sacred Truths, as the Christian Religion teaches us, to build them upon
unsound Principles, or defend them by Sophistical Arguments; but it is also
vain to attempt it, because impossible to execute. The Doctrine of Implicit
Faith has lost its Vogue. Every Man will judge for himself, in matters that
concern himself so nearly as these do. And nothing is now admitted for Truth,
that is not built upon the Foundation of Solid Reason. Let not therefore any
simple-hearted pious Persons be scandalized at these Disquisitions. They are
not calculated for their Use. But they are absolutely needful for many others,
who are more Curious, and less Religious. And that they may be in some measure
useful to the Propagation and Advancement of True Religion amongst such, is the
strong Hope, and hearty Desire of the Translator.

THE FIRST LETTER.
YOU are desirous, Sir, that I should inform you more particularly about the
thoughts of Mr. N. concerning the Inspiration of the Sacred Writers; and you
ask me if our Friends do not suspect him to be tainted with Deism? He that gave
me the Essay, which I send you, told me nothing of his other Opinions, nor of
his Manner of Life: And for his Thoughts concerning that Divine Inspiration,
which the Sacred Penmen received from God, it is conceived that from thence he
cannot be concluded to be a Deist. It is presumed on the contrary, without
entering into the Examination of what he says, that he believes by this Method
he better answers the Objections, which the Deists and Atheists have used to
make against the Style of Holy Scriptures: And it appears by this Essay, that
he is far from being of their Opinions.

We ought not always to measure, or judge of the extent of any Man's Thoughts,
in reference to Religion, by the manner of his explaining or defending them; as
if all those who do not defend well their Religion, were Men of ill Design,
that only seemingly defend, in order to destroy it. It Is said that the impious
Vannini designed to show there is no God, in making as if he would prove there
is one. But it does not follow from thence, that all others do the same, who
defend, or oppose, weakly any Opinion. Otherwise we must believe many Writers
both Catholics and Protestants, who injudiciously oppose the Opinions of their
Adversaries, and as ill defend their own, to be guilty of ill Design. If a Man
would make an exact Catalogue of all the Catholic Authors, who have made
impertinent Answers to the Protestants, and have used as impertinent Objections
against them, it would amount to several Volumes in Folio; and the number of
Protestant Authors, who have succeeded no better, would be little less.
Nevertheless, I do not believe there is any Body so unjust, as to pretend, That
the generality of those Authors, on both sides, have been Cheats, who
maintained what they did not Believe, or opposed what they did.

You Sir, have too much knowledge of the Frame and Constitution of Man's Mind,
to be ignorant, that it is capable of believing in good earnest the most
ridiculous things in the World; and, which is yet more astonishing, of giving
its Assent at the same time to two things directly opposite. If you should, on
purpose, invent the most ridiculous Religion imaginable, there would be People
found in Asia, whose Opinions would not appear more rational. You have read Mr.
Bernier's Travels, and the History of the Bramins. What do you think of the
Heathens of the great Mogul's Country, and of those famous Indian Philosophers?
Do you think there is none among them, that believes the monstrous Principles
of their Theology? For my part I am persuaded there are very few that see the
absurdity of it. You will say perhaps, That those Nations are under a
blindness, which is next to downright. Foolishness; and that the Europeans are
not to be judged of by Indians. But are there not, in your Opinion, some even
among the Christians, who believe things absurd, and against all sort of
appearance? The Protestants at least do pass that censure upon many of the
Roman Catholic Doctrines, as Transubstantiation, the Infallibility of the Pope,
or Council, etc. And the Catholics are not wanting to make like reproaches to
Protestants.

The Catholics believe, That many Units make more than a single one; and do so
much believe it, that he would pass for a Fool amongst them, as well as amongst
other Christians, that would undertake to deny it; and nevertheless they
believe that a Million of Humane Bodies, separate from one another, make but
One. This is a visible Contradiction: Yet you know this is their Opinion
concerning the Body of Christ. There are some that assuredly believe, That God
is not the Author of Sin, etc. Who at the same time assert, That he created Man
with a Design to let him fall into Sin; as a means to make his Justice Eminent,
in punishing the greatest part; and his Mercy, in pardoning some few. It is
evident, that to say God ordered Sin should be, on purpose to accomplish
thereby his Ends, is to make him the Author of it. But this is the frailty of
Man's Mind; he sees not these Contradictions, because he has been so long
accustomed to shut his Eyes, when they are presented to him.

A Man may then not only defend an ill Opinion that he believes, but also
believe things absurd, and even contrary to one another, without being aware.
And that is the Reason our Friends suspect not Mr. N. to be a Deist, though some
may think his Opinions favor those that are so called. But that you may be
able to judge, I send you here an abridgment of what he says; which one of my
Friends imparted to me a while ago.

There are, says Mr. N. three sorts of things in Holy Writ, Prophecies,
Histories, and Doctrines, which are not ascribed to particular Revelation.

To begin with the First; God made himself known to the Prophets after several
manners; but it seems as if they might be reduced to these three. They had
Visions by Day or by Night; they heard Voices; or they were inwardly Inspired.
It is not our business here to examine these things in themselves. We only
enquire after what manner they have written that which they learnt by these
Visions, bythese Voices, or by these Inspirations.

Prophecies 1. Of Prophecies.
have been written by God's express Command; by the Prophets themselves, or by
others. For we cannot tell whether the Prophets themselves have always Written,
or Dictated them; or whether their Disciples have Collected and Written them as
exactly as their memory would serve. However it be, we cannot doubt but God
made known to the Prophets that which we find in their Books, and that we ought
to believe St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 21.
when he says, Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man, but holy Men
of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

To tell us that which appeared to them in Visions, whether it be they
themselves that writ it, or others that heard them tell it; there needed
nothing but a good memory. A Man has no need of inspiration to relate
faithfully what he has seen, especially when the impression it made upon him
was strong; as commonly happened to those to whom God sent any Vision. Hence it
is observed, that every Prophet has his particular Style; by which it appears
that they related what they had seen, as they used to relate other things.
Their Style was the same when they spoke by the Order of God, with that which
they used in their ordinary Discourse.

The same Judgment is to be made concerning the recital of the words they
heard. There needed no more but a good Memory to retain them. But we cannot be
Assured that they have always recited exactly the very words they heard, and
not sometimes thought it sufficient only to tell us the sense. When God told
them the Name of some Person, it was necessary they should retain the Syllables
of that Name; as when God ordered Isaiah to foretell that Cyrus should give the
Jews liberty to return into Palestine, it behoved Isaiah to remember those two
Syllables, Co-res. But there is no likelihood, that in the rest of his
Discourse Isaiah has related word for word what he heard. The diversity of
Style does moreover prove, that the Prophets expressed after their own manner
the sense of what they heard. There is, for example, much difference between
the Styles of Isaiah and Amos. Isaiah's manner of writing is high and lofty. On
the contrary, that of Amos is low and vulgar; and we find in it diverse popular
Expressions, and many Proverbs, which sufficiently testify that this Prophet,
who was a Shepherd, expressed after his own way what God had said to him. This
is the Opinion of St. Ierom, in the Preface of his Commentary on this Prophet.
Amos Propheta fuit imperitus Sermon, sed non Scientia: Idem enim qui per omnes
Prophetas in eo Spiritus Sanctus loquebatur.
The Prophet Amos, says he, was skilled in Knowledge, not in Language; for the
same Holy Spirit spoke in him that spoke by all the Prophets. This Doctrine
attributes clearly the expression to the Prophets, and the thing it self to the
Holy Spirit; which appears also by the Remark he makes on Chap. III. saying,
Diximus illum artis suae usum Sermonibus: and quia Pastor gregum nibil
terribilius Leone cognoverat, iram Domini Leonibus comparat.
We told you that he uses the Terms of his own Profession; and because a
Shepherd knows nothing more terrible than a Lion; he compares the Anger of God
to Lions. St. Ierom should have said, according to the common Opinion, that God
made use, in speaking to Amos, of popular terms, and suitable to his
Profession, whereas he attributes plainly to the Prophet the choice of the
Terms in which the Prophecy is expressed. Vt verba ae Deo Prophetis dictata
sint, sicuti interum evenisse non est negandum, ita non videtur perpetuum.
Atque hinc factum est ut pro temporum atque loquentium varietate etiam Sermo
Prophetarum differret.
That words were dictated by God to the Prophets, (says a late Learned Critic)
as it cannot be denied to have been done sometimes, so it does not seem to have
been done always: And hence it is, that according to the variety of the Times,
and the Speakers, the Phrase of the Prophets is also different.

But it is commonly alleged, that the Prophets recite the same words they
heard; Because they introduce God himself, speaking, Thus says the Lord, etc.
That is no Proof. For it is the custom, both of the Hebrews and Greeks, to
bring in always those, whose Sense they relate, as speaking in their own
Persons; though in doing so, they tie not themselves to their words. I will
give you a plain Example thereof. It is the different manner in which the
Decalogue is set down in Exodus and in Deuteronomy; although God is said to
speak personally in both places. God says in Exodus, Remember the Sabbath day,
etc. In Deuteronomy, Keep the Sabbath Day, etc. It is in Exodus, To keep it
holy. Six days shall thou labor, etc. In Deuteronomy, To keep it holy, as the
Lord thy God commanded thee. Six days shall thou labor, etc. It is in Exodus,
Nor thy Cattle etc. In Deuteronomy, Nor thine Ox, nor thine Ass, nor any of thy
Cattle, etc. And this Commandment ends thus, That thy Manservant, and thy
Maidservant, may rest as well as thou; And remember that thou wast a Servant
in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, through a
mighty Hand, and a stretched-out-Arm; therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee
to keep the Sabbath Day. In Exodus, the reason of keeping the Sabbath, is taken
from the Creation of the World in Six Days, without any mention of Slaves, or
of the slavery of Egypt. There are some other Differences in that which
follows, but not considerable. However it appears by this, that either Moses in
Deuteronomy, or the Author of the Book of Exodus, did not tie themselves
scrupulously to exact words, as the Jews now adays do; although both these
Authors bring in God speaking personally. Grotius has hereupon made this
judicious Remark. Sciendum est autem quae in Exodo hoc loco habentur verba per
Angelum Dei nomine prolata, quae vero sunt Deuter. V. esse Mosis eadem
memoriter referentis, and quidem ea liberate, ut voces transponat interdum,
quasdam cum idem significantibus commutet, omittat quaedam satis nota ex
prioribus, addat alia interpretamenti vice. Par mutandi verba libertas and
aliis in locis Sacrae Scripturae non indiligentiejus lectori apparet. Ut Genesis
XVII. 4. collato 7. Genesis XXIV. 17. collato 43. Exodus XI. 4. collato XII. 28.
Exodus XXXII. 11. and seq. collato Deuteronomy. IX. 27. and seq. Pertinet autem haec
observatio eo ne in Sacris Literis simus VOCULARUM AUCUPES, ut Judaei quidam,
qui and illa quae in Exodo and quae in Deuteronomio sunt verba pariter, uno
eodemque puncto temporis prolata, simulque ubi transpositio est inverso ordine,
quae prius fuerant dicta and posterius, posteriora eundem sensum continentia
prius etiam dicta somniant. Satis multa sunt in sacris Historiis miracula, ut
nova extra necessitatem, nulloque usui comminisci nihil sit opus.
It is to be observed, says he, that the Words set down in this place in
Exodus, were pronounced by an Angel in the Name of God; but those which are in
Deuteronomy, are the words of Moses repeating the same things; and that with so
great liberty, that sometimes he transposes words; changes some for others of
the same signification; omits some as sufficiently known by those gone before;
and adds others by way of Interpretation. The like liberty of changing words is
obvious to a careful Reader in other places of Sacred Writ, as Genesis XVII. 4.
compared with 7. Genesis XXIV. 17. compared with 43 Exodus XI. 4. compared with
XII. 28. Exodus XXXII. 11, etc. compared with Deuteronomy. IX. 27, etc. Now this shows,
That we should not catch at words in Holy Writ, as some of the Jews do, who
fancy that those words in Exodus, and those in Deuteronomy were pronounced in
one and the same moment of time. They fancy also that where there is
transposition, and changing the order of what was said first, what last; that
the last importing the same sense were also said first. There are in the Holy
Histories so many Miracles, that we ought not to invent new ones without
necessity, and such as are of no use.

If you require yet another convincing Proof, that this manner of speaking
personally, does not denote that they are the proper Words of him that is
introduced speaking after this manner, you have no more to do but to look into
the Gospels, where the Evangelists always make our Savior to speak personally,
and yet recite not the same words that he made use of. For, beside that Christ
spoke Syriac or Chaldee, there is often great difference between their Recitals.
The Holy Spirit never tied it self up to words, as many of our Divines do now
adays. He only prompted the Holy Penmen to give us the true sense of the
Words that God made use of to make the Prophets understand his Will; and it is
only in respect to the sense, and to the things, that the Apostles assure us
that they were inspired from God.

The third sort of Prophecy, or manner by which God made known his Will, was by
inward Inspiration, without Vision, and without Voice. Hereof two different
sorts may be conceived. For either God might inspire Prophecies or Predictions
word for word, as the Prophets should pronounce them: As when there was
occasion to tell some Name, unknown before to the Prophet: Or he might inspire
only the sense, which they might express afterward in their own way: As most
commonly it happened: the first Occasion being very rare. It seems to me, that
when any one does apprehend a sense distinctly, it is not difficult for him to
express it faithfully. And we ought to suppose, that the Prophets full of the
thoughts wherewith God inspired them, had a very clear and distinct Idea
thereof: Which will be easily understood, if we consider, that the things
wherewith God inspired them were easy to be conceived, and proportioned to the
understanding of all the World; at least as to the literal sense. It happened
also sometimes, that without inspiring either Words or Sense, God drew from the
Mouth of some Persons, Prophecies which those who spoke them understood
otherwise, and did not think them to be Prophecies. He cast them into certain
Circumstances, and involved them in certain Events, which made them say things
that were true Predictions, without their knowing them to be so. Such was
Caiaphas's Prediction, when he says, That it was better that one Man should die
for the People, than that the whole Nation should perish. Now he said not that
of himself, says St. John, but being High Priest that Year, he prophesied. To
speak properly, God inspired him not those words, but the Nature of the
Business they were about in the Sanhedrim drew them from him. They were afraid
that Jesus would draw all the People to him, and enterprise something against
the Roman Authority, which would not then fail to send a puissant Army into
Palestine, and totally waste it. Caiaphas thereupon urges a very common Politic
Maxim, That is were better to destroy one Man, though he were innocent, than to
expose the whole State to utter Desolation. In Caiaphas's sense there is
nothing of Prophetic or Inspired. But in the Gospel-sense, that which Caiaphas
said, signified more than he intended, and contained a true Prophecy. It Is very
likely that more Predictions of this nature may be found in the Old Testament.

For Example: David says of himself and of his Enemies diverse things, without
thinking of prophesying, which contain nevertheless Predictions of that which
ought to happen to Christ and his Enemies. He says Psalm. XLI. 10. He that ate
of my Bread has lift up his Heel against me: He meant surely some of those who
were risen against him in Asolom's Conspiracy, as Achitophel or some other, and
he speaks plainly of a thing happened to himself. It is this very thing that
inspires him, if one may so say, these words; which betoken what should befall
Jesus Christ by the Treachery of one of his Disciples, as appears by John XIII.
18. The Author of the LXIX th, and CIX th Psalms, whether it were David, or
some other, did not probably think of foretelling what should one day befall a
Disciple of the Messiah, when he cursed his Enemies: And yet St. Peter in the
Acts Acts i. 20.
applies some words of these Psalms to Judas. There needs no great
sharpsightedness to see that the Author pretended not to speak of Judas, and
that he was not immediately inspired by the good and merciful Spirit of God,
when he said, Set thou a wicked Man over him, and let Satan stand at his
Right Hand: When he shall be judged let him be condemned, and let his Prayer
become Sin: Let his days be few, and let another take his Office: Let his
Children be Fatherless, and his Wife a Widow: Let his Children continually be
Vagabonds and beg; let them seek their Bread also out of their desolate places:
Let the Extortioner catch all that he has, and let the Stranger spoil his
Labor: Let there be none to extend Mercy unto him; neither let there be any to
favor his Fatherless Children: Let his Posterity be cut off, and in the
Generation following let their Name be blotted out: Let the Iniquity of his
Fathers be remembered with the Lord; and let not the Sin of his Mother be
blotted out, etc. It is plain that these are the words of a Man full of
excessive Choler, and of an extreme desire to be revenged. Now the Law of Moses
permitted not, any more than the Gospel, to with ill, or do it, to Children, in
revenge of the Injury received from their Parents. Yet some famous Divines have
put in the Title of this Psalm, That David, AS A TYPE OF JESUS CHRIST, being
driven on by a singular Zeal, prays that Vengeance may be executed on his
Enemies. And where do they find that Jesus Christ does curse his Enemies at
that rate? Have they forgotten the words that proceeded from his dying Mouth,
in favor of the wickedest Race that ever was? Those that crucified him, were
they not the greatest Enemies he had, and the most obstinate Adversaries of the
Gospel? And, far from making the Imprecations against them that they deserved,
did not he pray to his Father to forgive them? Has he not ordered us to imitate
him, and to pray for those that persecute us? I cannot understand how it can be
said, that David, as a Type of Jesus Christ, made such horrible Imprecations
against his Enemies.

I confess, I understand not Christian Religion, if it permit the pronouncing
such Curses, and the wishing to be revenged after so cruel a manner, as does
the Author of this Psalm, and those of diverse others, in which we find such
like Imprecations; As that of Psalm. cxxxvii. O Daughter of Babylon, who art to
be destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us:
Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little Ones against the Stones!
God forbid that we should desire to dash out the Brains of Infidel's Children!
Yet nevertheless we see that all these Psalms are indifferently sung in
Protestant Churches, without taking notice that they are not all equally
inspired. And I remember that asking a Divine, how we could sing Psalms full of
such Imprecations? He answered me slightly, that it was lawful to use them
against the Enemies of the Church, and that for his part he made that
Application to them, when he sung these Psalms. Thus you see what the Jewish
Opinion of the Inspiration of words, and of the Divinity of each Verse of the
Scripture produces.

We may conceive another sort of Prophecies, which consisted not in foretelling
things to come, but in explaining the Scripture, and in composing readily Hymns
to the Honor of God. There are some Examples of these Hymns in the New
Testament, as that of the blessed Virgin Mary, and some others. It seems as if
there went only Piety and Zeal to the composing them. At least it is very
conceivable, that a pious, zealous Man may easily now a days praise God in that
manner, without any Preparation. A good part of the Psalms seems to have been
thus composed, as also diverse other Songs which are in the Old Testament. The
Psalms where the Verses, or the Pauses, begin with the Letters of the Hebrew
Alphabet, seem to have been composed at more leisure. For this Regularity shows
that there was Meditation and Pains used, as is in Acrosticks. See Psalm. cxix.
and the Lamentations of Jeremy. So we see too, that in this sort of Works, the
Holy Writers do not speak in the Name of God, nor begin their Discourse with,
Thus says the Lord. Yet we may say that the Authors of these pious Songs were
full of the Holy Spirit, when they composed them; that is to say, it was a
Spirit of Piety that carried them to take pains in those Compositions; and in
that sense we may say that they were inspired by God, though not so immediately
as Predictions. The Spirit of God is often taken for the Spirit of Holiness,
that is to say, for a disposition of Spirit conformable to the Commandments of
God; as many Learned Men have observed.

I will now remark briefly in what manner the Sacred Histories have been
written: And then, in treating of Doctrines, I will speak of that sort of
Prophecy that consists in explaining the Holy Scripture. II. Of the Histories
in the holy Scripture.


It is certain that those who took pains in the Histories of the Old and New
Testament, were pious Persons; who had not writ those Histories, but out of a
Principle of Piety. It was not to satisfy our Curiosity that they undertook
those Works; but to show us the Care that the Providence of God has always
taken of good People, and the Punishments it inflicts upon the wicked; to give
us Examples of Piety and Virtue; and lastly, to inform us of certain matters of
Fact, upon which our Faith is founded, and of the Precepts which God had given
to Jews and Christians, by the Ministry of his Prophets, Apostles, Angels
themselves, and even of his own Son. We ought also to believe that they have
given us the Truth of the History to the best of their knowledge, without adding
or substracting any thing out of design to deceive us. And as they were very
well informed of the principal matters of Fact which they relate, having
themselves seen them, or taken them out of good Records, we may be consident
that for the main of the History they tell us nothing that is not exactly true.
These Qualifications alone are sufficient to oblige us to give Credit to them.
An Historian that is honest, and well informed of that which he relates, is
worthy of Credit: And if you add thereto, that he has also suffered Death in
maintaining the Truth of his History, as the Apostles did, who were put to
death for maintaining that they had seen and heard, that which the Gospel tells
us of Jesus Christ; then not only that History will be worthy of Credit, but
they who shall refuse to believe it, can pass for no other than Fools or
obstinate Persons. In this manner we may be fully assured of the Truth of the
History of the New Testament; that is to say, That there was a Jesus who did
diverse Miracles, who was raised from the Dead, and ascended up into Heaven, and
who taught the Doctrine which we find in the Gospels. And this Jesus having
born witness to the History of the Jews, we cannot doubt its truth, at least as
to the principal Matters.

This can not be called in question, without absolutely renouncing
Christianity. But People believe commonly two things which seem to me
groundless; unless they ground them upon Jewish Tradition, a Principle, as is
well known, extremely uncertain. They believe, first, that the sacred
Historians were inspired with the Things themselves: And next, that they were
inspired also with the Terms in which they have expressed them. In a word, that
the holy History was dictated word for word by the holy Spirit, and that the
Authors, whose Names it bears, were no other than Secretaries of that Spirit,
who writ exactly as it dictated.

As to what concerns the Inspiration of Historical Matters of Fact, I observe,
First, That they suppose it without bringing any positive Proof, and that
consequently a Man may with good reason reject their Supposition. They say only
that if it were not so, we could not be perfectly certain of the truth of the
History. But, beside that a Consequence cannot undeniably prove a Fact; and
that it may happen that one cannot disprove a Consequence, although that which
is pretended to be proved thereby be not true; I affirm that it is false, that
we cannot be perfectly certain of the main substance of a History unless we
suppose it inspired. We are, for Example, perfectly certain that Julius Caesar
was killed in the Senate by a Conspiracy, whereof Brutus and Cassius were the
Chiefs; without believing that they who have informed us hereof were inspired.
There are such like matters in the Histories of all Nations, which we cannot
doubt of, without being guilty of Folly and Opiniatrety; and yet without
supposing that these Histories were writ by Divine Inspiration.

In the second place, this Opinion supposes without necessity a Miracle, of
which the Scripture it self says nothing. To relate faithfully a matter of
Fact, which a Man has seen and well observed, requires no Inspiration. The
Apostles had no need of Inspiration to tell what they had seen, and what they
had heard Christ say. There needs nothing for that but Memory and Honesty.
Neither had those Authors who writ only the things that came to pass before
their time, as the Author of the Books of Chronicles, any more need of
Inspiration for copying of good Records. And as for those who made the Records,
there was no more requisite, than that they should be well informed of what
they set down, either by their Eyes, or by their Ears, or by faithful
Witnesses. It will be said, perhaps, that according to this Opinion, the Faith
which we build upon the Scripture will be no other than a Faith purely human,
because it will be grounded only upon Human Testimonies. To this I answer, That
neither do we know, any more than by a Human Faith, that the Book which we call
the Gospel of St. Matthew is truly his. It is nothing but the uniform Consent
of Christians, since the beginning of Christianity to this day, that makes us
believe it; which in truth is no more than a Testimony purely Human. We do not
believe it because we are assured of it by an Oracle from Heaven, which has
told us that this Book is truly that Apostle's; but on the same account that we
believe that the Eneid is truly Virgil's, and the Iliad Homer's. But that which
they here call Human Faith is of as great certainty, as the Demonstrations of
Geometry. And even Divine Faith it self, as they call it, is built upon this
Certainty. For, in truth, we do not believe in Jesus Christ, but because we are
persuaded that the History we have of him is true. And how do we know that this
History is true? Because Eyewitnesses have written it, and have suffered Death
to maintain the truth of their Testimonies. And how are we certain that these
were Eyewitnesses, and that they suffered Death rather than deny what they
said? By History; that is to say, by the Testimony of Men, who affirm it to us
constantly from the time of the Establishment of the Christian Religion to the
Age we live in. So that Human Faith is found to be the ground of Divine Faith.
But we need not fear that this Foundation is not solid enough. For without
ceasing to be a Man, and reasoning no more than a Brute, it cannot be disputed;
as has been made appear by many Learned Men, who have written of the Truth of
Christian Religion.

In the third place; The common Opinion is contrary to the Testimony even of
the Sacred Writers. St. Luke begins his Gospel after this manner. For as much as
many have taken in hand to set forth in Order a Declaration of those things,
which are most surely believed among us, even as they delivered them unto us,
who from the beginning were Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word: It seemed
good to me also, having had perfect Understanding of all things from the very
first, to write unto thee in order* most excellent Theophilus, that thou
might know the certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed.
You may observe in these words a Confirmation of what I have been saying, and a
full Proof that St. Luke learned not that which he told us by Inspiration, but
by Information from those who knew it exactly. Now if you allow St. Luke to
have so faithfully related to us the Life and Discourses of Jesus (without
having been particularly inspired) that we ought to receive what he tells us
with an entire belief in his Fidelity; you ought not to make any difficulty to
grant the same concerning the other Historians of the Scripture. If any of them
ought to be inspired, certainly they were the Evangelists. And if you will have
another Example of a Histoory written without Inspiration, you have but to read
the Books of Kings, and of the Chronicles, being Extracts out of public
Registers, and out of particular Writings of diverse Prophets, to whom the
Authors at every turn refer the Reader.

Lastly, It is very plain that the Historians of the Scripture were not
inspired; by the Contradictions that are found in several Circumstances of
their Histories. The Evangelists agree perfectly among themselves in what
concerns the main of the History of Jesus Christ, but there are some
Circumstances wherein they disagree; a clear proof that every Particular was
not inspired. For although the Circumstances wherein they differ are things of
small Consequence, yet if the holy Spirit had dictated all to them, as is
pretended, they would perfectly agree in every thing; these Circumstances being
as well known to God as the main of the History. For Example; St. Matthew says,
That Judas, repenting that he had delivered our Lord to the Jews, threw the
Money into the Temple; that going away he hanged himself; and that the Priests,
having gathered up the Money, bought therewith a Field. St. Luke in the Acts
brings in Peter saying, That Judas, after having purchased a Field with the
Reward of Iniquity, falling headlong, burst asunder in the midst, insomuch that
his Bowels gushed out. Here is a manifest Contradiction, which the Learned in
vain endeavor to reconcile. And there are many other such like

But this, you will say, lessens very much the Authority of the Evangelists.
For if they could be deceived in any thing, who will secure us that they were
not deceived in every thing? I answer to that in the words of Grotius; Imo hoc
ipsum Scriptores illos ab omni doli suspicione Liberare debet; com soleant illi
qui falsa testantur, de compacto omnia ita narrare, ut ne in spciem quidem
quicquam diversum, appareat: Quod siex levi aliqua discrepantia, etiam quae
conciliari nequiret, totis libris fides decederct, jam nulli libro, praesertim
Historiarum, credendum esset; cum tamen Polybio and Halicarnassensi, and Livio
and Plutarcho, in quibus talia deprehenduntur, sua apud nos de rerum summa
constet autoritas.
Even this it self ought to free these Writers from all Suspicion of Deceit,
For those who testify Falsehoods, use so to agree their Stories, that there may
not so much as seem to be any difference. But if because of any small
Disagreement, although it could not be reconciled, whole Books should lose
their Credit, then no Book, especially of History, would deserve to be
believed; whereas the Authority of Polibius, and Halicarnassensis, and Livy,
and Plutarch, in whom such things are found, as to the main stands firm among
us. St. Chrysostom also in his first Homily on St. Matthew, very plainly
assures us, that God permitted the Apostles to fall into these little
Contrarieties; that we might see that they were not agreed to feign a History
at Pleasure; and that we might more readily believe them in the main of the
History. When a Man has seen most of the Things which he relates, in those he
can hardly be deceived. But he may be easily deceived in some Circumstances of
Things which he has not seen

We might yet add a fifth Proof, which Grotius affords us, in his Notes on that
part of his Treatise of the Verity of the Christian Religion, which I lately
cited. It is, that the Evangelists, in setting down a certain time, do not
determine it exactly; because they did not know it so precisely that they could
set down the number of Days or Months. See Luke I. 56. III. 23. John II. 6. VI.
10, 19. XIX. 14. You find in those places, About a certain Time; or, About a
certain Number: Which shows evidently, that the History was not dictated
immediately by the Holy Spirit, who knew exactly the Number and the Time that
was in question.

It is clear then, in my Judgment, that the Things were not Inspired; nor by
consequence the Words; which are less considerable than the Things. It is not
certain Terms that are the Rule of our Faith; but a certain Sense. And it is
little matter what words we make use of, provided we go not astray from the
Doctrine which God has revealed. Those who read the Originals, are in no better
way of being saved, than those that can read only the Translations. For there
is no Translation so false, but that taken in gross, it expresses clearly
enough that which is necessary to Salvation. Otherwise it would be necessary
that all Christians had learned Hebrew and Greek, which is altogether
impossible; and we should exclude from Salvation, almost all those who have
made profession of the Christian Religion in our Western Parts, from the Time
of the Apostles, to the Age we live in

That providence also which has preserved us these Holy Books, to lead us in
the way to Salvation, so many Ages after the death of those that writ them, has
preserved inviolably nothing but the Sense. It has suffered Men to put in
Synonimous Words one for another; and not hindered the slipping in of a great
many Varieties, little considerable as to the Sense, but remarkable as to the
Words and Order. There is in St. Matthew, for Example, more than a thousand
diverse Readings in less than eleven hundred Verses; but whereof there is not
perhaps fifty, that can make any change in the Sense; and that change too is
but in things of little importance to piety. If God had thought it necessary,
for the Good of his Church, to inspire into the Sacred Historians the terms
which they ought to use, he would undoubtedly have taken more care to preserve
them. It is plain therefore that he designed principally to preserve the Sense.

Thus then neither the Words, nor the things, have been inspired into those who
have given us the Sacred History; although in the main that History is very true
in the principal Facts. It may be, that in certain Circumstances, little
considerable, there may be some Fault; as appears sufficiently by the
contradictory Passages. It is ture, that some have strained themselves to
reconcile those Passages, as I have already observed; but it is after so
violent and constrained a fashion; and there are such diverse Opinions about
these Reconciliations; that if we examine the thing never so little, without
prejudice, we shall find that the Learned trouble themselves to no purpose; and
that they would do much better to confess ingenuously, that there are some
Contradictions in things of small importance.

Nay further, I know some that believe we ought not to receive all the Jewish
Histories, without distinction, for true Histories. They Pertend we ought to
except the Book of Esther. And it is true, that if Assuerus, of whom the Book
of Esther speaks, be Ochus that reigned after Artaxerxes Mnemon, this Book
would have been written at such a time as there was no Prophet in Israel. But
although Mr. Cappel pretend that Achasueros is the same with (...), his conjecture
is not unquestionable. They pretend also, that this History has all the
Characters of a History made at pleasure. I shall not examine that at present.
But however it be, it is no Heresy to reject a Book of the Jewish Canon; as
neither is it to reject one of our own. At least, the Protestants have not
called a Lutheran an Heretic, for having said that the Epistle of St. James is
an Straminea Epistola.
Epistle of Straw; no more than they have many of the Learned, for not
receiving the Second Epistle of St. Peter, which a famous Critic styles,
Commentum Veteris Christiani otio suo abutentis. Ios. Scaliger.
A Fiction of some ancient Christian misimploying his leasure-Time. The Jewish
Sanhedrim may easily have received into their Canon Books that had no Divine
Authority.

To come now to the Doctrines which are in the Holy Scriptures, III. Of the
Doct. of the Scriptures, and Inspiration of the Apostles.
and not there attributed to a partcular Revelation; I will begin with
examining those which are in the Writings of the Apostles, after which I will
pass to those of the Old Testament.

It is commonly believed, that the Apostles, as well as the Prophets, were
inspired both as to Words and Things. Yet with this difference, that the
Prophets were not always inspired, but only when God gave them order to speak
to the People in his Name. Whereas the Apostles were always inspired, without
being ravished into Ecstasies, as the Prophets were before their prophesying.
This Opinion is founded upon the Promise that Christ made his Apostles to send
them the holy Spirit, which he performed on the Day of Pentecost. The words of
Christ are, John XVI. 13. When he, the Spirit of Truth, shall come, he will
guide you into all Truth. He says also elsewhere to his Apostles; When they
bring you into the Synagogues, and unto Magistrates, and Powers, take ye no
thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say, for the Holy
Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say, Luke XII. 11.
These are two the most formal Passages that can be quoted in this Matter. It is
requisite that we examine them with some attention, to see if they prove that
which they are produced for; viz. That the Apostles were honored with a
continual presence of the Holy Ghost, who dictated to them all that they said
in matter of Religion; insomuch that all their words ought to be considered as
Oracles.

To begin with the latter; I observe first, That he does not promise a
perpetual Inspiration, but only upon certain Occasions; viz. when the Apostles
should be brought before the Tribunals of Judges. So that if there were nothing
else in it, this Passage would not at all favor the common Opinion. But there
is more in it: for it wholly destroys it. If Jesus Christ had resolved to give
his Apostles the Holy Spirit to inspire them perpetually, he would not have
told them singly, that they should not troble themselves for what they had to
say before the Judges, because then the Spirit should speak in them. But he
would have said that they need not fear that at any time they should want
words, because the holy Spirit should accompany them without ceasing, as well
before the Powers of the World, as when they should speak to the People. If a
Man had a Design to supply another with Money for all his Expenses; Would he say
to him, Do not trouble your self to get Money for the Journies you are to take,
for you shall then be supplied? He would rather say to him, doubtless, that he
should not fear to want Money, because he should be supplied constantly for all
his Occasions. A Man promises not for a particular Occasion, that which he
intends to give alike at all Times. And when a Man makes a particular Promise,
it is a plain sign that he intends to perform it but upon certain Occasions.

In the second place; As I acknowledge that the Apostles may have had Prophetic
Inspirations on certain Occasions, and that in effect they have had them; so I
confess that I find my self tempted to believe, that by these words, The Holy
Ghost shall teach you in that hour what ye ought to say: Or as St. Matthew has
expressed it, It is not ye that speak, it is the Spirit of your Heavenly Father
that speaks in you; I am, I say, tempted to believe, that by these words Christ
meant only to say this; viz. The Spirit of Courage and Holiness, which the
Gospel produces in your Hearts, will teach ye what ye ought to say. That is to
say, That the Apostles had no more to do, but to believe in the Gospel, to be
assured that the Disposition of Spirit which that Heavenly Doctrine would give
them, would never let them want words; not even when they were to defend
themselves before the Tribunals of the greatest Powers. That which inclines me
to this Explication of Christ's words, is, that in comparing this Promise with
the Event, it seems not to have been performed in any other sense than that
which I have now observed; and that neither ought it to be interpreted so
strictly, as if on these Occasions a Word might not slip from the Apostles,
that were not conformable to the Spirit of the Gospel.

St. Luke tell us, Acts XXIII. that St. Paul having been brought before the
Sanhedrim, began to speak after this manner; Men and Brethren, I have lived in
all good Conscience before God until this day. Here is nothing yet that one
might not say without Inspiration; as neither is there any thing but what is
conformable to the Gospel. But what follows is a sign of Passion, wherewith
neither the Spirit of Prophecy, nor the Patient Spirit of the Gospel inspired
St. Paul. At that words, says St. Luke, Ananias the High Priest commanded them
that stood by, to smite him on the Mouth. The Apostle, provoked by this
Unjustice, answers him angrily, God shall smite thee, thou whited Wall. For
sit thou to judge me according to the Law, and command thou me to be
smitten contrary to the Law? And they that stood by, says St. Luke, said to
Paul, Revilest thou God's High Priest? Then said Paul, I wist not Brethren that
he was the High Priest: For it is written, Thou shall not speak Evil of the
Ruler of thy People. It is plain, methinks, that if the Spirit of Prophecy had
inspired St. Paul with the beginning of this Discourse; it did not so neither
with the Answer he made the High Priest; nor with the Excuse he made use of
afterward when they told him he was the High Priest that he spoke to. He gave
Sentence against himself by his Answer, supposing that he had known him who
ordered him to be smitten. And as for the Excuse, it is plain it is not very
good; because the Gospel allows not to revile any Man; whether he be a
Magistrate, or a private Man. Jesus Christ, says St. Peter, has suffered for
us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps; who when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously.

Neither do I believe that the Spirit of Prophecy inspired St. Paul with what
he said afterward: At least there is no Body but could have said as much,
without Inspiration. Now St. Paul knowing, says the Historian, that the one
part were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees, cried out in the Council, Men and
Brethren, I am a Pharisee, the Son of a Pharisee: of the Hope and Resurrection
of the Dead, I am called in question. This expression also of St. Luke, (Paul
knowing) makes it evident that his Speech was an Effect of his Prudence, rather
than of Prophetic Inspiration.

I am not the first that has made suchlike Observations. St. Ierom in his
Dialogue against the Pelagians, Lib. 3. brings in Atticus, who bears the part
of an Orthodox Doctor, speaking of St. Paul; Putasne Apostolum eo tempore quo
scribebat; Lacernam sive penulam, quam reliqui Troade veniens affer, ac libros
and maxim membranas; de coelestibus cogitasse misteriis and non de his quae in
usu communis vitae vel corpori necessaria sunt, etc? Caeditur Apostolus a
Ministro, and contra Pontificem qui caedere imperaverat sententiam dirigit:
Percutiet te Deus Paries dealbate. Ubi est illa patientia Salvatoris qui quasi
agnus ductus ad victimam non aperuit os suum, sed clementer loquitur
verberanti? Si male loquutus sum argue de malo, sin autem been quid me caedis?
Non Apostolo detrahimus, sed gloriam domini praedicamus, qui in carne passus
carnis injuriam superat and fragilitatem. Ut taceam illud quod commemorat;
Alexander Aerarius multa mihi mala ostendit: reddet illi Dominus in die illa
Justus Judex.
Do you think St. Paul, at that time when he writ, (The Cloak which I left at
Troas, when thou come bring with thee, and the Books, but especially the
Parchments) did think of the Heavenly Mysteries, and not of those things which
are useful to Humane Life, and necessary to the Body, etc? The Apostle is
struck by an Officer, and he falls foul upon the High Priest that commanded him
to be smitten: God shall smite thee thou whited Wall. Where is that patience of
our Savior, who as a Lamb led to the Slaughter opened not his Mouth, but
answered mildly to him that struck him? If I have spoken Ill, convince me of
the ill; but if Well, why do you strike me? We do not detract from the Apostle,
but we declare the Glory of our Lord; who suffering in the Flesh, overcame the
difficulties and weaknesses of the Flesh. Not to mention what he says in
another place. Alexander the Copper-smith did me much Evil; the Lord, the
Righteous Judge, will reward him in that day. It is true, St. Ierom elsewhere
disapproves a part of that which here he makes his Orthodox Doctor speak; but
it is plain, at least, that one might speak it without being guilty of Heresy.

Lastly; When we examine the Discourses which we have of Christ's Disciples
before diverse Judges, we may easily perceive that they speak with much Piety
and Courage; but it seems not that they say any thing which one might not as
well say without Inspiration. If we read the Histories of those that have been
put to death for Religion in the last Ages, we shall find many that were not
Prophets, making excellent. Discourses at their Trials, without being prepared
beforehand. St. Stephen was full of the Gospel Spirit, when he made the
Harangue we read Acts VII. It seems nevertheless, that he therein mixed diverse
Circumstances of History, which were nothing to the purpose of the matter he
spoke about; and which neither can tolerably be reconciled with the History of
the Old Testament. And indeed very learned Men have been of Opinion, that St.
Stephen's Memory failed him. Mr. Cappel in his Spicilegium on Verse. 16. says:
Certum est hoc loco legendu^ esse (...), sub audiendumque (...), ut hic dicatur
non ipse Abraham, sed ejus nepos Jacob emisse monumentum illud; vel dicendum
est Stephanum lapsu (...) duo similia facta confudisse, emtionem nempe ab
Abrahamo factam de qua Genesis c. XXIII. cum ea quae a Jacobo facta est, de qua
Genesis XXXIII. 19.
It is certain that in this place we should read (...), and understand (...),
that it might not be said Abraham, but his Grandchild Jacob bought this
Monument. Or we may say, that Stephen, by the fault of his Memory, confounded
two Facts that were somewhat alike, to wit, the Purchase made by Abraham,
whereof Genesis XXIII. with that made by Jacob, Genesis XXXIII. 19.

However, it is no ways incongruous, that by the Holy Spirit, or the Spirit of
God, we should understand the Spirit of Holiness and Constancy, which the
Gospel gives; or such a disposition of Mind, as is an Effect of our Faith. We
know it is a manner of speaking common in the Old and New Testament; and that
the Hebrews call the Spirit of Iealousy, the Spirit of Stupidity, the Spirit of
Fear, the Spirit of Courage, the Spirit of Meekness, etc. the different
dispositions of Mind, that render a Man Jealous, Stupid, Fearful, Courageous,
Meek, etc. The Critics have observed this long ago.

But I must needs desire you once again to take notice, that when I say the
Disciples of Christ had not Prophetic Inspirations, for answering before the
Tribunal of Judges, to the Accusations brought against them; I do not mean
thereby that it never so fell out; but only that ordinarily they spoke without
particular Inspiration. I conceive indeed, that if one of them had appeared
before a Judge, whose Language he naturally understood not, it would have been
necessary that God should have dictated to him the proper words he was to make
use of. And I doubt not but God has often done even that, in favor of such of
the Apostles as have preached the Gospel to barbarous Nations beyond the Limits
of the Roman Empire, and perhaps too sometimes amongst the Romans and Greeks.

However it be, it seems to me that if what I have been saying be considered,
it must be granted that the Passages of St. Luke and St. Matthew, where Christ
promises his Spirit to his Disciples, are not strong enough to render the
common Opinion indisputable.

This, Sir, is about half the Writing which was given me concerning the
thoughts of Mr. N. on this Subject. It is too long to make an end of
transcribing it at present. But you shall have the rest by the next Post: upon
condition you will promise me to peruse it carefully, and give me your sense of
it. It were extremely to be wished, that some able and judicious Person would
undertake to handle this Matter thoroughly, in opposition to our Author, but
without Heat and Passion. This Opinion is maintained by so many Proofs, and
Arguments that seem so strong; that tho I know it may be rendered very odious,
and that very malicious Consequences may be drawn from it; yet I must confess I
do not know by what Principles it can be overthrown. And that which gives this
Author yet more advantage, is, That this Matter has been so little handled,
that all the Writings upon the Scripture to this day afford us scarce any light
therein. A Man must fetch all out of his own Stock, to answer him. And it is no
small trouble to have one's Mind continually exercised in clearing up the
Difficulties of a Subject so little known, and giving clear Principles in so
obscure a Matter.

I would be glad, Sir, that there were any in your Province, or elsewhere, that
would undertake to clear it: for I know none of my Friends here that will
engage in it. If you could prevail with some learned and moderate Divine to
take that task in hand, without railing as Divines too often do, when they know
not how to answer their Antagonist, you would infinitely oblige those who have
read this little Writing. I am, etc.

THE SECOND LETTER.
I Am not surpised, Sir, at your desire to see the latter part of that
Writing, whereof I sent you the former by last Post, before your are willing to
give me your Judgment on it. A matter so important and so delicate requires to
be considered with much Attentiveness. We must lay aside then once again the
Examination of the critical History, to resume it next Post. For I cannot
transcribe the rest of the Writing of Mr. N. and entertain you at the same time
upon any other Subject. Mr. -- whom you mention, is well qualified to instruct
his Flock in matters of Piety, but has not, I doubt, Learning sufficient, nor
Parts strong enough to master the Difficulties that attend the answering
directly, and by positive Arguments, a Writing which some other very able
Divines dare not meddle with. It were better, in my Judgment, not to answer at
all than to answer ill; and to seek only to defame an Author whom one cannot
confute. I should be the more troubled to see that done, by how much I
understand that the Author is a very pious Man, and one who assuredly believes
not the evil Consequences, which some Men, (too ready to judge of their
Neighbors) may draw from his Notions. I fear that he you speak of would
content himself in gathering together a great number of those odious
Consequences, and would think that he had thereby sufficiently refuted the
Opinion, without considering, that tho a Man cannot disingage a Doctrine from
the absurd Consequences that by some may be linked to it, it does not therefore
follow that the Doctrine is false. It should first be made appear that the
Arguments brought for an Opinion are not solid; and after that one may come to
the Consequences. Otherwise while the Arguments that prove an Opinion subsist
in full force, all the Consequences that may be derived from it cannot
overthrow it. Nevertheless if you believe him capable to acquit himself of this
undertaking, you may persuade him to it when you think fit. But put him in Mind
at the same time, that it is the part of an honest Man, and of one that would
bestow his Pains to some good purpose, to do it with all the Moderation and
Meekness imaginable. St. Ierom commends Nepotien, Quod soleret libenter audire,
respondere verecunde, recta suscipere, prava non acriter confutare, disputantem
contra se magis docere quam vincere.
That he used to hear willingly, answer modestly, allow Truth, not sharply
confute Error, and teach rather than conquer whom he disputed with. And it were
to be wished that our Divines now adays would make it their business to deserve
so good an Elogy; whereas it seems that they strive only to attain to the Name
of great Railers, and value not Peoples having an ill Opinion of their Manners,
provided that they pass for Men of Parts. I speak not this as if I suspected
that Mr. -- resembles one of those Divines I find fault with; but because I
believe a Man cannot be too much cautioned against so general a Defect.

But these Moralities would carry me too far, if I should give my self the
liberty to pursue them. It is better that I keep my word with you, and give you
the following part of that Writing. And here it is.

Let us now examine that Passage of St. John, When the Spirit of Truth shall
come, he will lead you into all Truth. Interpreters observe that we must not
understand by All Truths, any others than those which the Apostles Continuation
of the Writing of Mr. N. concerning the Inspiration of the Apostles.
were ignorant of, and which it was needful for them to know, that they might
be able to acquit themselves as they ought to do of their Charge. They received
not the holy Spirit to learn, for Example, that there was a God; nor to be
instructed in the Mathematics. They knew already this first Truth, and of the
other they had no need.

The generality of Interpreters believe that these words denote a perpetual
Assistance of the holy Spirit, that made the Apostles absolutely infallible. To
know whether they are in the right or no, we must examine the Accomplishment of
the Promise; and if it appear that it agrees not with this Explanation of our
Savior's words, we must seek another sense, and try to discover wherein the
Infallibility of the Apostles consists.

We find a Story Acts xv. whereby it appears manifestly that the Apostles did
not pass in their own time for persons, whose every word was an Oracle, as they
are now reputed to have done. Some Jews converted to the Christian Religion,
not being able to shake off their ancient Opinion concerning Ceremonies, would
have had the Gentiles circumcised. St. Paul, and St. Barnabas were against
this: but their Authority was not sufficient to put to silence the Judaizing
Christians. Although St. Paul was as much an Apostle, as those whom our Lord had
chosen while he was on Earth, yet they would not believe him. The Church at
Jerusalem must be consulted.

Further also, the Apostles and Elders of the Church, being assembled to
examine and determine this Affair, dispute a great while before they agree upon
it; and it was not till after they had heard St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Barnahas,
and St. James, that the Assembly came to a Resolution. If they had been filled
with the Spirit of Infallibility, such as is conceived now adays, they would
have been all at first of one Mind; and there would have needed no more to be
done, but to charge one of them to give out the Oracle in the Name of the whole
Assembly.

There happened likewise, before that, another thing related by St. Luke, Acts
x. which makes it also very evident, that the Holy Ghost which the Apostles
received the day of Pentecost, had not taught them all they ought to know, (so
far was it from rendering them at first dash infallible) and that they were not
then considered as Persons out of danger of falling into Error, as they have
been since accounted. St. Peter needed a Vision, as appears by the Story of
Cornelius the Centurion, to learn that he ought not to scruple preaching the
Gospel to the Gentiles; although Christ had ordered his Apostles before his
ascending into Heaven, to preach the Gospel unto all Creatures; whereby he
clearly enough denoted the Gentiles as well as the Jews.

St. Peter after having obeyed the express Order which he received from God, to
preach the Gospel to Cornelius, was no sooner returned to Jerusalem, but the
faithful Ones of the Circumcision, not dreaming that his Apostleship rendered
him infallible, dispute with him; and tell him, after a manner that shows that
the Infallibility which we now attribute to him, was to them unknown, Thou
wentest unto Men uncircumsised, and did eat with them.

Many Years, as it seems after that, Peter being at Antioch, had not the
Courage to maintain openly that the Jews might eat with the Gentiles without
scruple. For before that certain Persons came from James, he did eat with the
Gentiles: but when they were come he withdrew, and separated himself, fearing
them which were of the Circumcision: And the other Jews dissembled likewise
with him, insomuch that St. Paul observing, that they walked not uprightly, was
obliged to tell Peter before them all, If thou being a Jew live after the
manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to
live as do the Jews? It is said that St. Peter. was guilty of a fault only in
his Conduct, and not in his Doctrine; that he believed and maintained the same
with St. Paul, but that on this occasion he dissembled his Opinion; and that he
did not otherways constrain the Gentiles to live as the Jews, but in abstaining
to eat with them. The Gentiles, say they, seeing that St. Peter did not eat
with them because they were uncircumsised, did, by reason of this his Conduct,
believe themselves obliged to be circumcised, and consequently to observe the
other Ceremonies of the Law. They believed that it was a Sin to continue
uncircumsised, because St. Peter forbore to live familiarly with them on that
account; and on the contrary that it was a Duty to observe the Circumcision. So
that it was by his Conduct only that St. Peter forced them to live as Jews. And
indeed it is true that by efficaciously engaging one to do a thing, after what
manner soever it be, we are said to force one to do it. See Genesis xix. 3. Luke
xxiv. 19.

I believe really that this is the best Explanation. But it proves clearly that
the Metaphysical Infallibility which is attributed to the Apostles is not of
Apostolic Tradition. For, in truth, to dissemble a true Doctrine when they
ought to preach it, and to engage People in an Error by their Conduct, is
visibly a human Weakness, and which becomes not those who are looked upon as
the simple Instruments of the holy Spirit speaking by their Mouths. St. Peter's
Conduct gave the Gentiles to understand, as well as if he had told it them,
that they must observe the Circumcision; and to give them to understand it by
forbearing to eat with them, was almost the same thing as to tell it them by
word of Mouth. Nay more, it is not unlikely that St. Peter believed that this
Dissimulation was lawful, as well as St. Barnabas, and the other Jews who had
followed his Example; otherwise it is not credible that so pious Men, who were
the first Ministers of the Gospel, would have done it. And so we must confess
that they were guilty of some weakness even in Doctrine, although they recanted
it soon, nor was it of great importance.

There is also a great difference observable in the manner of Christ's speaking
(He that had received the Spirit without measure) and that in which the
Apostles express themselves; whereas according to the common Opinion it ought
to be the same. If the same Spirit had rendered them infallible, they had right
to declare to the World the Doctrine of Salvation with the same Power, and to
speak as authoritatively as Jesus Christ. But we see the contrary in their
Writings. Christ spoke as one having Authority. You have heard it was said of
old, etc. But I say unto you, etc. The Apostles, on the contrary, declare that
they say nothing of themselves, and refer all to the Prophets, and to Jesus
Christ: Acts xxvi. 22. 1 Cor. xi. 23.

And that which is yet more considerable is, that they distinguish manifestly
that which they say themselves from that which Christ had said. And unto the
Married, I command, yet not I, but the Lord, etc. But to the rest speak I, not
the Lord, etc. So St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. vii. 10, 12. which he would not have
done, had he been aware that his Auditors had believed his words as infallible
as the words of Christ.

Methinks these are convincing Proofs that the Apostles had not a perpetual
Inspiration, which might give their words an indisputable Authority. I do not
deny but they had many immediate Inspirations, and diverse Heavenly Visions; as
appears by the Acts, by the Revelations, and by diverse other places of
Scripture; Nay, I am so fully persuaded they had, that I think him no good
Christian who doubts of it. But the Question here is concerning an uniform,
constant and ordinary Inspiration, as it is commonly explained in the
Divinity-Schools.

It may be you will say there are diverse Arguments for this sort of Inspiration
as strong as those I have brought to show the contrary. The Apostles began
their Letter Acts xv. after this manner, It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost
and to us. By which it appears, say some, that they were filled with the Spirit
of Infallibility, which dictated to them what they ought to say, I desire
first, that those who say so, reconcile this Supposition with the Dispute that
was among the Apostles, before they came to this Conclusion. In the second
place: It is not likely that if the Holy Ghost had possessed them in such a
manner, that they had been only simple Instruments by which He expressed his
Will they should not have placed themselves in equal Rank with the Him; but
should have said simply, It has appeared good to the Holy Ghost, who speaks by
us. What Prophet ever said, it seemed good to God and to me? In the third
place: Suppose there be here, as the Critics say, a Figure by which is
expressed one and the same thing by two words; and that this manner of speaking
amounts to no more but this, It has seemed good to us who are full of the Holy
Ghost; The perpetual Inspiration about which I am now arguing cannot be hence
concluded. The Apostles and all the Church of Jerusalem were animated by the
Spirit of the Gospel, without being continually full of the Spirit of Prophecy.
If it were otherwise, we should be forced to say that the whole Church of
Jerusalem, not only the Apostles, but also the Elders of the Church, and all
those who were assembled, were perpetually accompanied with a Spirit of
Infallibility; which no body ever yet said, nor is it at all likely. In the
fourth place; The Conclusion of the Letter they write, seems extremely weak for
the Conclusion of a positive Law. FROM WHICH YOU SHALL DO WELL TO KEEP YOUR
SELVES. A Prophet under the Old Testament would have said, From which keep your
selves; for so says the Lord, whose Commandments you cannot slight without
your own Destruction, etc.

Some may also here object the Spirit of Miracles and Tongues, which the
Apostles received the day of Pentecost. But the Effusion of that miraculous
Spirit did not necessarily render all those that received it infallible in
Doctrine. Otherwise all the Christians of that time had been infallible. The
Church of Corinth had received the Holy Ghost, as appears by the Epistles St.
Paul directs to it; and so should not have needed that Apostle's Instructions,
because it had a great number of infallible Persons within it self: But it
appears, on the contrary, that it needed his Instructions, not only to correct
its Vices, but also to resolve its Doubts, and even to rectify its Errors.

Thus then the Spirit of Miracles not being accompanied with Infallibility* it
connot be concluded, because the Apostles received that Spirit the day of
Pentecost, that they became as Gods, and that they were out of all danger of
ever falling into the least Error. But what signify then these words; When the
Spirit of Truth shall come, he will lead you into all Truth? This Spirit of
Truth is it not the miraculous Spirit which the Apostles received.

I have already observed that these words cannot be understood rigorously, as
if the Apostles had known all Sciences. I must add further, that there is
something extremely figurative in them; as appears by the following words; For
he shall not speak of himself, but what soever he shall hear, that he shall
speak; and he shall show ye things to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. All things that the Father has
are mine; therefore said I that he shall take of mine, and show it unto you.
What Opinion soever a Man may be of concerning the Holy Spirit, it is plain
that these words cannot be taken properly, as if the Holy Spirit had heard from
God, or Jesus Christ, that with which he ought to inspire the Apostles.

The most simple sense, and most conformable to the accomplishment of this
Promise, which can be given to these words, is, to my thinking, this. I should
explain many things to you more clearly than I have done, but you are not yet
in condition to receive them as you should. When you shall have received the
Spirit of Miracles, he will teach you the rest that you ought to know; either
by Visions, or by making you call to mind that which I have told you; so that
he will make you apprehend the sense, and will teach you what you ought to do
afterward. To speak properly, he will tell you nothing new; he will but recall
into your memory, to make you better understand it, the Doctrine of my Father;
which is the same that I have taught you; and which I may also call my
Doctrine, because my Father has charged me to preach it, as the only Doctor of
his Church.

The Holy Spirit led the Apostles into all Truths; and took that which was
Christ's, without ever speaking of himself; in making them call to mind that
which they had forgotten; and in making them understand on diverse occasions, or
even by extraordinary Revelations, that which Christ had said to them, but
which they then understood not. This is plainly that which Christ teaches us in
these words; These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you.
But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
Name, he shall teach you ALL THINGS, AND BRING ALL THINGS TO YOUR REMEMBRANCE,
WHATSOEVER I HAVE SAID UNTO YOU, John XIV. 25 These last words apparently
explain the foregoing, He shall teach you all Things.

In effect, there is nothing in the Doctrine of the Apostles, which Christ had
not told them; and in leaving them, he gave them no other order for the
preaching of the Gospel, but to teach all People to observe all those things
which he had commanded them. And the Apostles observe in several places, that
it was not till after they had received the Holy Spirit, that they remembered,
and understood diverse things which Christ had told them when he was here below.
These things understood not the Disciples at the first, says St. Ioh. XII. 16.
but when Jesus was entered into his Glory, then remembered they that these
things were written of him. See the same Evangelist, II. 22. and Acts XI. 16.

This is, in my Opinion, the sense of Christ's words; at least I find nothing
among the Interpreters, that answers so well to the Event; which thoroughly
convinces me that. Christ must have meant some such thing. For when all is done,
whatsoever may be said, the Promise ought to be understood by its
correspondency with the Accomplishment, and there is no better Interpreter of
Prophecies than their execution.

This being so, the Infallibility of the Apostles, according to my judgment,
consisted in this. They knew clearly the general Principles of the Jewish
Religion, which had been taught them from their Cradle; they had heard Christ
often tell what the Gospel added to Judaism; or if you will, Christ had
explained to them more clearly the Will of God, and had shown them the Errors
of the Pharisees; He had instructed them concerning the Messiah, and had made
appear to them by many Proofs, that himself was HE; God had raised him from the
Dead, and they had conversed with him after his Resurrection; and in the last
place, they had seen him ascend into Heaven, from whence he assured them he
would come one Day to judge the Quick and the Dead. They preached faithfully
that which they had heard, that which they had seen with their Eyes, that which
they had observed with attention, and that which they had touched with their
Hands. They could declare, without any mistake, what they had seen; they could
preach what they had heard. For the Doctrine of Jesus Christ was comprised in a
few Articles, plain enough to be understood, and consequently easy to be
remembered. Thus they related infallibly what they had seen and heard; and
therein it is that their Infallibility consisted. Perhaps also the Spirit of
Miracles which Christ sent them, strengthened their Memories, and opened their
Minds after a manner we comprehend not. But it is certain, as I have made it
appear, that this Spirit directed them not in so miraculous a manner, as to
make it necessary for us to regard all they said or writ with the same respect
as the words of Jesus Christ, the only Master, and the only infallible Doctor
that ever was amongst Men. He was the only Mystical Ark, in which the Godhead
dwelt bodily, from whence proceeded nothing but Oracles.

Some may ask, perhaps* Whether it might not so happen that the Apostles might
abandon the Truth of the Gospel, and preach a false Doctrine; and if it might
be so, how we can be assured that they were not Deceivers? I confess, that
though it was very unlikely, that after having received so many Illuminations
and Graces, they should fall into Apostasy; yet it was not absolutely
impossible. But in that case God would not have approved by Miracles the
Doctrine they taught; and thereby it is that we may know they were no Seducers.
There crept in, during their Time, many false Prophets among the Christians;
but they were presently discovered because they could not maintain by Miracles,
a Doctrine contrary to that of the Apostles, which was confirmed by an infinity
of Wonders. God made appear, by those Prodigies, that the Apostles declared
nothing but what was conformable to his Will, nor any thing that could be
hurtful to Piety; for it is impossible that God would favor a Doctrine which
should turn Men from Holiness. But we must not believe neither, as I have
already observed, that because God wrought Miracles in favor of any Person, it
therefore follows that all things pronounced by that Person, were immediately
inspired, and ought to be received as the infallible Decisions of him that
never errs. Provided that Person maintained the Substance of the Gospel, and
said nothing but what conduced to Piety, God would not cease to bear Witness to
his Doctrine, although all his Reasonings were not Demonstrations. God would
not that this Mark of his Approbation should be interpreted, as if he had
thereby declared that he would have all the Words of those that had miraculous
Gifts received as Oracles. To be fully convinced hereof we need but read the
first Epistle to the Corinthians.

I must nevertheless ingenuously confess, that there is mention made in this
Epistle of some miraculous Gifts, which seem to have been pure Inspirations;
and which ought to make the Speakers attended unto, as if they were the simple
Interpreters of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. VII. 8.
gives to one the word of Wisdom, to another the word of Knowledge. It seems as
if he meant thereby the Gift of prophesying; that is to say, of instructing
others in Piety; of which he says many things in the XIVth Chapter of the same
Epistle. This seems contrary to what I have been saying concerning the
Inspiration of the Apostles, and I confess I cannot see how, according to my
Notion, this difficulty can be clearly solved. I might say that this Gift of
Prophecy was perhaps no other than a Disposition of Mind, which God infused
sometimes into those on whom he bestowed it, by which they became fit to
instruct; although he inspired them not extraordinarily with that which they
were to say; which is so much the more likely, by how much this Gift was
preserved and increased by Study and Reading; as appears by those words of St.
Paul to Timothy. First Epist. Chap. IV. 13, etc. Until I come, give thy self to
Reading, to Exhortation, to Instruction: Neglect not the Grace which is in
thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, through the Imposition of the
Presbytery: Meditate on these things, be always employed, to the end they
Improvement may be known of all Men. Now it is plain that the Gifts which are
owing to an actual and immediate Inspiration of the holy Spirit, such as curing
Diseases, etc. could not be increased by Application of Mind, as not depending
upon Man in any sort. The most assiduous Study cannot contribute any thing to
prophetic, or immediate Revelations.

This Conjecture seems probable enough. And indeed I see no other way of
explaining what St. Paul says to Timothy. But without determining any thing
concerning the Gift of Prophecy, it appears plainly by what St. Paul says, 1
Cor. XIV. that it consisted not in an immediate Revelation of the holy Spirit,
that forced the Prophets to speak. He there gives them this Advice; Let the
Prophets speak two or three, and let another judge; but if any thing be revealed
to one of those that sits by, let the first hold his Peace: for ye may all
prophesy one by one, to the end that all may learn, and all may be comforted:
And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. The Prophets whom
the holy Spirit had inspired immediately with what they ought to say, had no
need of this Advice. Nay it had even been ridiculous. Because the holy Spirit
inspiring them with what they had to say, would have inspired them likewise as
to the occasion and the place, and would not have put many Persons on speaking
at one time in the same place, nor so as to interrupt others who spoke by his
Inspiration. Moreover St. Paul would have the Prophets judge one another, and
that the Spirits of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets; which cannot be
understood of Prophets immediately inspired, who are subject to none but God,
and who are to give account to none but him. The Prophets of the Old Testament
spoke as long as God inspired them; after which they held their Peace, without
needing any Advertisement; because they easily perceived when the Inspiration
ceased.

It seems to me that we may now conclude, that there never was any body but our
Savior, who had a constant and perpetual Inspiration, and all whose words we
ought to receive as Oracles. As he alone amongst Men was incapable of sinning,
so it was he alone whom God endowed with an absolute Infallibility. The same
Light which perpetually inlighten'd his Mind, regulated also the Motions of his
Affections: otherwise it would be difficult to conceive how he could choose but
be subject to Error, if he had been subject to Sin. There is so great a
Correspondence between the Mind and the Affections, that it is not almost
possible there should be any Irregularity in the one, without a disorder in the
other.

But that you may not believe I am the first Author of this Opinion, and that
it is a desire to appear singular, or an Affectation of Novelty that has
engaged me in this Notion, I must also let you see that some great Men have
been of the same Mind before me. St. Ierom makes this Observation upon the
fifth Chapter of the Prophet Micah, in speaking of this Passage; And thou
Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, etc.
which St. Matthew cites otherwise than it is either in the Hebrew or
Septuagint. Sunt qui asserunt in omnibus poene testimoniis, quae de veteri
Testamento sumuntur, istiusmodi esse errorem; ut aut ordo mutetur, aut verba,
and interdum sensus quoque ipse diversus sit; vel Apostolis vel Evangelistis
non ex libro carpentibus Testimonia, sed memoriae credentibus, quae nonnunquam
fallitur.
There are, says he, that affirm there is the like Error in almost all the
Testimonies that are taken out of the Old Testament; that either the Order is
changed, or the Words, and that sometimes the Sense it self differs; the
Apostles or Evangelists not transcribing the Testimonies out of the Book, but
trusting to their Memory which sometimes failed them. It is true, St. Ierom
says not that he approves this Opinion, but he makes it appear elsewhere that
he is not very far from it. In his Letter to Pammachius (de optimo genere
interpretandi) of the best way of interpreting; He gathers together many
Examples of the New Testament, by which he shows that the Apostles tie
themselves more to the Sense than to the Words; and maintains, with good
reason, that we should not play the Critics on them for it, nor even for the
places where they have mistaken Names. After having compared the Quotation
Matthew. XXVII. 9. with the Original, he adds; Accusent Apostolum falsitatis quod
nec cum Hebraico, nec cum Septuaginta congrauat Translatoribus, and quod his
majus est, ERRET IN NOMINE, pro Zacharia quippe Jeremiam posuit.
One may accuse the Apostle of falsity in that he agrees neither with the
Hebrew nor with the Septuagint; and which is more, that he is mistaken in the
Name, putting Jeremy for Zachary. He seems indeed elsewhere to disapprove that
Opinion; but it is usual with him to accommodate himself to the common Opinion,
and yet not omit to give his own; without being concerned whether he
contradicted himself or no. When he speaks as others do, you must not conclude
presently that he is of the same Opinion with them, because it may be he speaks
so by way of Condescension; whereas when he says the contrary, it seems rather
that he speaks his own Thoughts. You need but read what he says of the
Dissimulation which he attributes to St. Peter and St. Paul (in his Commentary
upon the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians, and in his Answer to
St. Austin) to see that he believed that St. Paul by a Prudence purely human
(which he calls a Dispensation) made show of believing that St. Peter was in
the wrong; insomuch that when St. Paul says that St. Peter was to be reproved,
because he walked not uprightly according to the Truth of the Gospel; It was
not that he believed so, but only to hinder the converted Gentiles from
imitating that Apostle. I say not that St. Ierom was herein in the right; but
at least it hereby appears that he believed not that the Apostles were moved by
a perpetual Inspiration to write what they did. We may join with St. Ierom,
Origin, (from whom he had this Opinion concerning the Dispensation that he
attributes to these two Apostles) and diverse Greek Fathers, who also followed
Origin; as St. Ierom writing to St. Austin observes, in the Apology he makes
for this part of his Commentary.

Thus you see that the most able Interpreters of Scripture, that Christian
Antiquity has had, have been of the same Opinion with me. I may also say that
the most Learned Critics of these last Ages have believed the same thing,
since Erasmus and Grotius have publicly maintained it; those two great Men,
who are beyond dispute in the first Rank amongst the Moderns that have
concerned themselves in writing on the Bible. ( -- Quorum se pectore tota
Vetustas Condidit, and major collestis viribus exit.)

Erasmus upon the second Chapter of St. Matthew says thus, Falsitaris crimen
abominatur Hieronimus in Evangelistis, (...), memoriae lapsum non item. Neque
enim continuo forte vacillet totius Scripturae autoritas, sicubi varient vel in
verbis vel in sensu, modo summa constet earum rerum de quib. agitur, and unde
cardo pendet nostrae salutis. Ut enim Spiritus ille Divinus, mentium
Apostolicaru^ moderator, passus est suos ignorare quaedam, and labi, errareque
alicubi, judicio sive affectu, non solum nullo incommodo Evangelii sed hunc
etiam ipsum errorem vertit in adjumentum nostrae Fider; ita fieri potuit ut sic
temperarit organum Apostolicae memoriae ut etiamsi quid humano more fugisset,
id non solum non deroget fidei Divinae Scripturae, verum etiam fidem arroget
apud eos, qui alicqui de composito scriptum calumniari poterant. Quod genus
sit, si nomen pro nomine sit positum, id quod alicubi factum fatetur
Hieronimus, aut si quid non suo narretur ordine, etc. Solus Christus dictus est
veritas, unus ille caruit omni errore.
St. Jerome abhors the Imputation of Falsehood to the Apostles, not that of slips
of Memory. Nor is the Authority of the Scripture forthwith questionable because
they differ in Words or Sense, as long as the main of the Matter treated of,
and that whereon our Salvation depends, is clear. For as that Divine Spirit,
that governed the Mind of the Apostles, suffered them to be ignorant of some
things, to make Mistakes, and to err (either in Judgment or Affection) without
any damage to the Gospel; nay it improves that failing to the help of our
Faith; so it is not unlikely that it so influenced the Faculty of their Memory
that though something after the manner of Men might escape them, yet that should
not only not derogate from the Credit of the Holy Scripture, but might even
gain Credit to it, with those who otherwise might be apt to slander it as
written by Confederacy. Of this sort is that of putting one Name for another,
which Jerome confesses to be somewhere done; or of relating things out of order,
etc. Christ only is styled the Truth, He alone was free from all Error. He says
also upon Acts X. Neque vero necesse est, opinor, quicquid fuit in Apostolis
protinus tribuere miraculo. Homines erant, quaedam ignorabant, in nonnullis
errabant.
Neither do I think it necessary to attribute every thing that was in the
Apostles to a Miracle. They were Men, some things they were ignorant of, in
some they were mistaken. He maintains likewise the same Opinion at large in his
Epistles, (lib. 2. Ep. 6.) against Eckius, who had blamed him in a Letter he
had written to him; and he thus concludes all that matter, Passus est errare
suos Christus etiam post acceptum Paracletum; at non usque ad fidei periculum:
Quemadmodum and hodie fatemur Ecclesiam labi posse citra discrimen tamen
Pietatis ac Fidei. Denique qui scis an hanc laudem omnib. modis absolutam sibi
servari voluit Christus, qui se unum Veritatem dixit? Ut unus ille absque naevo
Innocens, juxta veterum opinionem, ita fortassis unus citra omnem exceptionem
verax.
Christ suffered his own to err, even after they had received the Comforter;
but without danger of Apostatizing from the Fundamentals of the Christian
Faith; even as at this day we confess the Church may err witthout that danger.
And to conclude; how do you know, whether Christ would not that this complete
Praise should be kept only for himself, who styles himself alone the Truth? As
he alone was without Spot or Blemish of Sin, according to the Opinion of the
Ancients, so perhaps he only was beyond all exception true.

Nothing could be said more formally upon this Subject. But Grotius who speaks
not so plainly, is not wanting for all that to explain himself sufficiently;
giving us to understand that all that the Apostles said was not, in his
Opinion, immediately inspired. Paulus duobus in locis 1 Thessalonians. IV. 14. and 2
Cor. XV. 22. de Resurrectione agens, resurrecturos in duo dividit genera, in
eos qui praemortui erant, and in eos qui vivent eo tempore; his autem se
accenset, utens pronomine (...), and in illa ad Corinthios, (...) nimirum quod
existimaret ad id usque tempus fieri posse ut resurrectio accideret intra illud
spatium quo ipse erat victurus; loquens hac in re non (...), sed (...), ut de
itinere per Hispaniam: Romans XV. 28. and alibi saepe. Sicut Prophetae, ita and
Apostoli non de omnib. habuere Revelationem: In quib. Revelationem non habent,
aut nondum accepere, de iis loquuntur (...) quomodo homines caeteri. Exempla
habemus, 1 Samuel XVI. 6. 2 Samuel VII. 3.
Paul, says he in his Appendix to his Commentary concerning Antichrist, in two
places, 1 Thessalonians. IV. 14. and 2 Cor. XV. 22. speaking of the Resurection,
divides those that are to rise again into two kinds; Those who are already
dead, and those who shall be alive at that time: But of this last number he
makes himself one, using this Pronoun We: And in that to the Corinthians, We
that shall be alive; as much as to say, he made account that the Resurrection
would happen within the time of his Life; speaking herein not dogmatically, but
conjecturally; as he does also concerning his Journey into Spain, Romans XV. 28.
and frequently in other places. As not the Prophets, so neither had the
Apostles constant Revelations in all things. And the things in which they had
not received Revelation, of those they speak conjecturally as other Men. We
have Examples thereof 1 Samuel XVI. 6. 2 Samuel VII. 3.

The ablest Divine among the Arminians was also of this Opinion, Episc. Instit.
Theol. lib. 4. Sect. 1.. 4. p. 232.
as you may see by consulting the place in the Margent; but to ease you of
seeking it, if you are not at leisure, or want convenience, I will transcribe
some of the words. Nihil vetat ut concedamus Spiritum Dei sanctum reliquisse
Scriptores sacrorum librorum humanae conditioni, and fragilitati suae, in
narrandis istis quae ad circumstantiam facti pertinebant, ad quae sufficiebat
sensata notitia and memoria, quanquam ea lapsui erat obnoxia.
It is not absurd to grant (says he) that the holy Spirit may have left the
Writers of the sacred Books to the common Condition of Mankind, and to their
own Frailty, in relating those things that belonged to the Circumstance of a
Fact, for which a due knowledge, and Memory was sufficient; even although that was
subject to failing. He says also a little lower; Satius enim potiusque est, and
calumnia minus obnoxium forte effet liberaliter lubenterque levem lapsum
memoriae agnoscere, ne manifest absurdis and contortis favere videamur, quam
absurda nimis interpretatione uti ad lapsuum leviorum excusationem; alioquin
suspicio lapsus non niodo non tollitur, sed augetur; and quia culpa non
agnoscitur, non bona fide veritas a nobis quaeri sed pertinacia pro qualibet
causa indui videtur; quod non potest, ac non debet videri Christianae
Religionis Professorib. esse quam probrosissimum.
It is better, and would perhaps cause less Scandal, to acknowledge freely and
willingly a light failing of Memory (that so we may not seem to favor things
wrested and absurd) rather than to make use of absurd Interpretations in excuse
of lighter failings. Otherwise the suspicion of a failing is not only not
avoided, but it is increased; and because the Fault is not acknowledged, it
seems as if Truth were not in good earnest sought by us, but that Obstinacy
were for some reason or other made use of; which ought to be looked upon as the
greatest Reproach imaginable to Professors of the Christian Religion. He shows
afterward, That it follows not, because the Apostles might be deceived in
things of small importance, that therefore they could fall into any
considerable Error for want of Memory. And the principal Reason he gives is,
For that the Fundamental Doctrines depend not on a Circumstance, which they
could forget; nor have they any thing in them obscure, or hard to be retained;
Which is so true, says he, that I make no difficulty to affirm, That if any one
says there is a Sense in the Scripture necessary to Salvation, which appears at
first contrary to Reason, we ought thereby to judge he attributes to the
Scripture a Sense it has not. And this is what I believe, and am convinced of
by reading the sacred Books.

I confess that the most part of Divines now a days are of a contrary Opinion.
But as I pretend not to oblige any body to approve my Judgment by the Authority
of those I have quoted, so neither do I hold my self obliged to submit to the
Authority of a crowd of Learned Men, who do but say the same thing one after
another, without ever examining or bringing Reasons for it.

We must however observe here two things of very great importance, which are
not ordinarily reflected on: The first is, That in one Controversy which we
have with the Roman Church, our Divines do all agree, that we ought not to have
so much regard to Words as Things; for, upon supposition that in the Apocryphal
Books there is nothing contrary to Piety, they say that the Controversy about
them is not considerable. Now if there be no danger in believing Expressions to
be divine that have nothing in them but human, when the Doctrines therein
contained are not contrary to the revealed Truth; What danger can there be in
believing that any Truths which we acknowledge to be Divine, are expressed in
Terms not divinely inspired? The same reason that makes us believe there is no
danger in the one, persuades us also there is none in the other. It is because
we are not saved by the Words, but by the Things.

The other thing observable is, that we receive amongst the Canonical Books of
the New Testament, Writings whose Authors are not well known; which we could
not do, if we thought it necessary, in receiving a Book as Canonical, to be
assured that every Word was inspired; since to be assured thereof we sought to
have evident Proofs that it was a Man inspired by God who was the Author of
that Book. For Example, it is not known who writ the Epistle to the Hebrews,
whether it were an Apostle, or some Disciple of the Apostles; so that we cannot
know whether the words of that Epistle were inspired or not. But for all that,
it is received; because it is certain it was written in the Apostles time, and
because it contains nothing that is not perfectly conformable to their
Doctrine. Thus it is generally thought of little importance, whether the words
be divinely inspired or no, provided the things they express be true. So that
one may say, that in truth Divines are generally very favorable to the Opinion
I maintain, although themselves are not aware of it.

I do not think it necessary to insist much in proving that God has not always
dictated to the Apostles the very words that they used; since it is evident
that he did not always dictate to them the things. Not that I make any doubt
but he has often revealed to them the things, and even inspired them with the
very words, as in the Prophecies where there was need to remember diverse Names,
and when they spoke strange Languages. Tho it may nevertheless be supposed,
that (as to what concerns the Gift of Tongues) God disposed at once the Brains
of them that received it, in such a manner that they could without trouble join
certain Sounds to certain Ideas; just as they would have done if they had been
used to it from their Infancy; and that afterward he left them at liberty to
make use of those new Languages according as they should think fit. And thus
those that learned, by Inspiration the Language of the Medes, for Example, had
their Brains disposed in the same manner as they would have had if they had
learned that Language from their Infancy, and could make use of it as easily as
their Mother Tongue. At least it is evident that some who had received this
miraculous Gift did sometimes abuse it; which they would not have done, if they
never had spoken those Languages but by present immediate Inspiration. See 1
Cor. XIV.

But without determining that Point, I believe, with Erasmus, that the Apostles
learned not the Greek they used by Inspiration; because if it were so, they
would have spoke it like the Native Grecians; whereas they mixed with it a
world of Hebraisms, as the French that speak Latin do Gallicisms. See Erasmus
upon Acts X.

Not that I believe, neither, that they had learned the Greek Language by the
Commerce they had with the Greeks during the Functions of their Charge, as
Erasmus thought probable: it is more likely they had learned it from their
Infancy. For St. Paul who was born in Cilicia, where they spoke nothing but
Greek, undoubtedly had learned it young; but he corrupted it afterward by his
long dwelling in Iudaea; where besides the Greek, they spoke a broken Chaldee,
whose Dialect mixing with the Greek rendered it obscure and difficult, such as
is the Style of that Apostle.

The others that were born in Iudaea had learned it also from their Infancy, as
it was commonly there spoken; that is to say, extremely corrupted by the
ancient Language of the Country, which was still spoken there, as appears by
diverse places of the New Testament. This the same Erasmus has well observed in
the places already cited: Dum excuso Apostolos, qui Graecitatem suam non ex
orationib. Demosthenis, sed ex vulgi colloquio didicerint, non nego donum
linguarum; neque tamen inde sequitur eos non potuisse Graece discere ex vulgi
colloquio: Certe Syriace didicerant ex vulgi colloquio; quidni potuerunt and
Graece? quandoquidem ob Alexandru^ Victorem, and Romanum Imperium, Aegyptus ac
Syriae maxima pars, totaque minor Asia, imo totus fere Oriens, ut loquitur
Hieronimus, Graece loqueretur. Neque enim arbitror Spiritum illum oblivione
obliterasse quod antea didicerunt.
When I excuse the Apostles, says he in his Letter to Eckius, who learned their
Greek not out of Demosthenes his Orations, but out of the Discourse of the
common People, I deny not their Gift of Tongues; nor does it thence follow that
they might not learn Greek by common Converse. Assuredly they learned the
Syriac by common Converse. Why might they not in like manner learn the Greek?
For ( by means of Alexander, the Great, and the Roman Empire) Egypt, and the
greater part of Syria, and all the lesser Asia, nay almost all the East, as
Jerome says, spoke Greek. And I cannot think that the holy Spirit made them to
forget what they had formerly learned. The Greek Language then was spoken in
Iudaea, together with the ancient Language which the Jews brought from Babylon,
that is to say the Chaldean; but corrupted in process of time, as the French
and Flemish are spoke together now adays in Flanders. And as the French they
now speak in Flanders is full of the Flemish Dialect, and of Terms unknown in
France, so the Greek of Iudaea was heretofore full of Chaldaisms, and of
barbarous ways of speaking, which undoubtedly grated the Grecian's Ears.

The History of the Acts of the Apostles, that tells us in several places that
Hebrew or Chaldean was spoken in Iudaea, tells us also that they used another
Language, which could be no other than Greek. St. Luke observes Acts XXII. that
St. Paul haranguing the Jews, began to speak to them in Hebrew, and that when
they understood him speak to them in the Hebrew Language, they hearkened to him
with the greater silence; which gives us to understand that he might have spoke
to the People in another Language; for otherwise there had been no ground to
observe that they listn'd more attentively, when they perceived he spoke
Hebrew; seeing that in speaking any other Language but Hebrew they could not
have understood him. It appears then that Greek was spoken in Iudaea, and it is
likely Pilat spoke Greek to our Lord, and that our Lord answered him in the
same. The People only preferred the Language of the Country before the Greek;
which was not so ancient, and which they had not learned but by force, because
of the Kings of Syria that tyrannized over them; and so they spoke it not
exactly.

It is true, there were Jews that spoke Greek very purely; but they were such
as were born in Countries where only Greek was spoken, as Philo; or they had
acquired a habit of speaking good Greek by reading or studying, as Josephus. So
at this day there are Walloons that speak French very well, (although the
generality of that People speak it extremely ill) because they have taken much
pains to correct in themselves the Faults which others commit, they have
applied themselves to reading, or they have traveled in France. These Jews
born in the Countries where nothing but Greek was spoken, understood not the
ancient Hebrew, nor the Hebrew then spoken in Iudaea. They made use in their
Synagogues of the Version of the Septuagint, and because they spoke nothing but
Greek, they were called the Hellenist Jews. Salmasius in his Book of the
Hellenist Tongue, against Heinsius, shows that these Jews spoke very good
Greek; and that it is very absurd in some Learned Men to imagine there was an
Hellenish Tongue; as if the Hebrews that knew not their own Language, had a
particular one different from that of the places where they dwelt; and that
this Language was that of the Septuagint and of the New Testament. If a Name
were to be given to this corrupted Greek, it should rather be called
Hebraistic; because it is full of Hebraisms, or Chaldaisms. But as the Language
of the Walloons, or of some of the Provinces of France, cannot pass for a
particular Language, being nothing but a corrupted French, so neither ought the
barbarous Greek of Iudaea to pass for a Language by it self, different from the
Greek Language.

It is no wonder then if the Apostles, who had lived a good part of their Lives
in Iudaea, or who were born there, and had not applied themselves to learn
perfectly the Greek Tongue, nor to speak it in purity, use it so improperly in
their Writings. St. Paul himself, born in a Town that spoke nothing but Greek,
had so corrupted his Speech by his long dwelling in Iudaea, that he confesses,
he was ignorant in the Language, 2 Cor. XI. 6. as sufficiently appears by all
his Epistles, the Greek whereof is very different from that of Josephus. And
therefore the Greek Fathers have complained of the obscurity of his Style, of
the barbarous Phrases that are therein, and of apparent Confusion in the order
of his Discourses; and those who very readily understood Plato and Demosthenes,
were obliged, as Erasums judiciously observes, to take great pains to
understand St. Paul. We need but compare his Style with that of some Greek
Author, to find that this Apostle applied himself not much to the Greek
Eloquence.

It is plain then that the holy Spirit inspired not the Apostles with the
Expressions they were to use. If it had been so, St. Paul could not have said,
he was ignorant in the Language. He should have said, that the holy Spirit
inspired him with a Language such as was that of the People. And all the Greek
Fathers would have blasphemed against the holy Spirit, when they observed the
little Eloquence of St. Paul: for according to this Supposition, that would not
have proceeded from St. Paul, but from the holy Spirit. If any one doubt of
this, he need but read Erasmus, in the places I have cited. It is true, that a
famous Protestant Divine has undertaken to confute him, in his Annotations upon
the 10 th Chapter of the Acts; but he does nothing but declame, as he is used
to do, against an Author more learned and more judicious than himself, without
bringing any solid Reason.

We must now speak a word of some Books of the Old Testament, that contain
neither History nor Prophecy; such are the Books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the
Song of Solomon, and Job; which last is apparently a Dramatic Piece, whereof
nothing but the Subject is true; as are the Tragedies of the Greek Poets.

There is no Proof that what is contained in the Proverbs was inspired to
Solomon by God, after a Prophetic manner. They are Moral Sentences, which a
good Man might well pronounce, without Inspiration; as are those contained in
Ecclesiastious. There are very many of them that are but vulgar Proverbs, which
carry indeed a good Sense, but have nothing in them of Divine. There are a
great many Directions about Economy, which Women and Country People
everywhere know without Revelation. See Chap. XXIV. 27. and XXVII. 23. and the
Description of a virtuous Woman at the latter end of the Book. The Name of
Prophet is very liberally bestowed on Agur the Son of Iakeh, for some
Moralities that are found under his Name: Prove. XXX. Whereas I dare be bold to
say better things might have been said without the Spirit of Prophecy. Three
things, says he, for Example, are too marvellouss for me, and even four which I
know not; The way of an Eagle in the Air, The way of a Serpent on a Rock, The
way of a Ship in the midst of the Sea, and the way of a Man with a Maid. One
must have a mean Opinion of the Spirit of Prophecy, to believe that it dictated
such things as these. And indeed neither does the Author pretend to that
Eminency; but says modestly concerning himself, That he is more brutish than
any Man, and has not the Understanding of a Man.

But there is particularly one Precept of good Husbandry, that is often
repeated, which our Merchants now adays know, as well as the Israelites that
lived in Solomon's time. It is that which expressly forbids them to be Surety
for any body, Chap. VI. 1. XVII. 18. XX. 16. XXII. 26. XXVII. 13. It is true by
the Rules of good Husbandry a Man should never be Surety, but there happens
oftentimes Cases wherein Charity ought to be preferred before good Husbandry;
as appears by the Parable of the Samaritan, who became Surety for the Expense
of the Jew, that was found hurt on the Road. There is, methinks, no great need
that God should send Prophets to teach Men good Husbandry; on the contrary it
was very necessary that Christ should preach Liberality.

Some Learned Men have believed that Ecclesiastes is a Dialogue; where a pious
Man disputes with an impious one who is of the Opinion of the Sadduces. And in
effect there are things directly opposed one to another, which it cannot be
supposed the same Person speaks. The Epicurean Conclusion ( To eat, drink and
be merry, because a Man has nothing else) which is up and down in many places
of this Book, is altogether contrary to that Conclusion at the end of the Work;
Fear God, and keep his Commandments, etc. But it is extremely difficult to
distinguish the Persons, or to find out exactly in the Name of what Person the
Author speaks in every Passage. However it be, there appears in it nothing of
Prophetic; and there is little likelihood that the Spirit of God would set out,
with so great strength, the Arguments of Sadduces, or perhaps of worse Men, to
answer them but in two or three words. Read the beginning of the ninth Chapter,
and make Reflection on these words: The living know that they shall die; but
the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a Reward; for the
Memory of them is forgotten. Also their Love and their Hatred, and their Envy
is now perished; neither have they any more a Portion for ever in any thing
that is done under the Sun. Go thy way, eat thy Bread with Joy, and drink thy
Wine with a merry Heart; for God now accepts thy Works.

Grotius is of Opinion that this Book was not writ by Solomon himself, but that
it is a Work composed under his Name, by one that had been in Caldea; because
there are diverse Caldean words in it. If this Conjecture be true, as is not
impossible, then this Book will be nothing but a Piece of Wit and Fancy,
composed by some of those that had been in the Captivity. And I know one who
has studied much the Critics of the holy Scripture, that suspects the Author
of this Book to have been of the Opinion that the Sadduces were of afterward,
about the Immortality of the Soul and the World to come. It seems to him that
this Author says nothing which a true Sadduce might not say. But for my part, I
think it best to determine nothing herein.

It is commonly believed that the Song of Solomon is a Mysterious Book,
describing the mutual Love between Christ and his Church. But there is no proof
of it neither in the Old nor New Testament, nor in the Book it self. All that
can be said is, that the Jews explain this Book allegorically of God, of Moses,
and of the Jewish Church. But a Man need but read their Allegories, to see that
they are the Visions of Rabbis, having no Foundation but in the fanciful
Extravagance of their Brains; which frame of Mind our Divines have so much
inherited from them, that they give themselves wholly up to find Mysteries in
every thing. Nay it must be confessed that some of them have in that outdone
the Rabbis; and that there is nothing so Chimerical in the Chaldee Paraphrast,
as in the Commentaries of those who pretend this Book ought to be explained by
Revelations; and that in it are to be found all the Wars about Religion of this
past Age, in Germany, the Interim, the League of Smalcald, the Peace of Passau,
etc.

There being then no Proof of the Mysteries that are pretended to be in this
Book; if we judge by the Book it self, we shall find it to be an Idyle, or
Eglogue, where Solomon brings himself in as a Shepherd, and one of his Wives
(perhaps Pharaoh's Daughter, as the Learned think) as a Shepherdess; That the
Style is the same with that of the Pastoral Poems of the Greeks and Latins,
saving that it is more rough and dithyrambic, acccording to the Genius of the
Hebrew Poetry. You may compare the Similitudes Solomon makes use of in the
fourth Chapter with those Ovid uses in the Pastoral Song he makes Polyphemus
sing, in the XIIIth Book of his Metamorphosis.

The Book of Job is also a piece that has nothing in it of Prophetic. The
Critics, who have any thing of a nice Judgment, agree that it is a sort of
Tragi-Comedy. It is likely there was such an one as Job (since the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks of him) and that he met with great Afflictions, which afforded
Subject to some Jew of the Captivity to exercise his Wit upon. There are in
this Book, as well as in Ecclesiastes, many Chaldean words, which show that it
was composed either in Chaldea, or after the return from the Captivity. Divines
agree that God inspired not Job's Friends with what the Author makes them say;
and this Book being written in Verse, seems to be a Work of Meditation, wherein
the Author would make his Parts appear. Neither Job, nor his Friends could talk
in that manner, extempore. The design of the work is to show, that Providence
ofttimes afflicts good People, not to punish them for any particular Sin, as if
they had deserved those Afflictions more than others, but simply to try them,
and give them occasion to exercise their Virtue. This is without doubt a Truth,
but there is no need of being a Prophet to know it. And on the other side there
is one very remarkable Fault in this Book. The Author brings in Job complaining
Chap. III. with Bitterness, and extreme Impatience, unworthy, not only of a
pious Man, who had the knowledge of the true God, but even of a Pagan that had
any Wisdom. Let the day perish in which I was born, and the night wherein it
was said, a Man-Child in born, etc. This manner of cursing the day of his Birth
with so much Passion becomes not a pious Man, such as Job, to what extremity
soever he might be reduced. It is to be guilty of great Indecorum, to put into
a good Man's Mouth so passionate words; as well as those that are in Chap. X. I
will say unto God, Do not condemn me; show me wherefore thou contendest with
me. Becomes it thee to oppress? etc. After such Expressions as these, which are
very like Blasphemies, God finds, says the Author, that his Servant Job has
spoke the thing that is right before him, and is angry with his Friends for
believing that Job was afflicted for his Sins.

It appears, methinks, hereby clearly enough, that there was no Inspiration in
this Book, no more than in the three foregoing. Not but that these Books are
useful, and may be read with Profit and Edification, as well as Antiquity read
those which we at present call Apochrypha. Nay it may be allowed that they
which composed them had the Spirit of God; that is to say, were full of Piety;
and that they writ them with a prospect of leading those that should read them
into the ways of Piety.

But it may be objected, that these Books being in the Jews Canon ought to be
acknowledged for divinely inspired, rather than the Apocryphas that never were
in it. I answer to that; First, That no clear Reason is brought to convince us,
that those who made the Canon, or Catalogue of their Books, were infallible, or
had any Inspiration, whereby to distinguish inspired Books from those which
were not. This Collection is commonly attributed to Esdras and the great
Sanhedrim of his Time, amongst whom they say were Zacchary, Haggai and Malachy.
But many learned Men believe not this Story, because no proof is brought for
it, except a very uncertain Jewish Tradition. There is much more likelihood
that this Collection which we have is the remainder of the ancient Books of the
Jews, which diverse particular Men at first gathered together, and of which
afterward public use was made in the Synagogues; whereas in the time of
Nehemiah (as appears by the Book that bears his Name) they read publicly only
the Book of the Law.

In the second place, if you will stand to the Jews Canon, it is plainly on my
side. They divide the Scripture into three parts; of which the first contains
the Books of the Law; the second the Books they call the Prophets; and the
third contain others which they call Chetoubim, or simply Writings; that is to
say, the Psalms, the Proverbs, Job, Daniel, Esdras, Nehemiah, the Chronicles,
and those which they call the five little Books, the Song of Solomon, Ruth, the
Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther. They believed that these Books (which
they called Chetoubim) were not inspired as the other; and therefore they made
them a separate part of Scripture, distinct from the two former which they
believed to be inspired. This Division is very ancient, having been in use in
the time of our Lord, Luke XXIV. 44. and Josephus owns it in his first Book
against Appion; which makes me believe that this Opinion of the Jews is
grounded upon the Judgment, that those who collected the Books of their Canon
made of them. It is certain Daniel is truly a Prophet, as well as Isaiah; but
it is likely they have ranked his Book among the Chetoubim, only because it was
brought out of Caldea after the Collection was made; and perhaps because, being
written in Chaldean, it was in part translated into Hebrew by some others, as
some of the Learned have conjectured. For the other Writings which make up this
Division of the Scripture, being but Histories, or Books of Morality, or Songs,
they had reason to determine that there was nothing of Prophetic in them; at
least not of the same kind of Prophecy with that of Isaiah, and others who are
properly called Prophets. It is true indeed there are some Predictions in the
Book of Psalms, but they are not of that sort of Predictions that proceed from
Inspiration or Revelation, as were those of Isaiah. David never says, Thus
says the Lord; nor is it said in his History that in his time he passed for a
Prophet. It only happened that in speaking of his own Person, he spoke things
that agreed not so much to himself as to the Messiah, of whom he was (unknown
to himself) the Type. But I have already handled this sort of Prophecy.

It may be said perhaps, that Christ has acknowledged for divinely inspired all
the Books of the Old Testament, and that for that reason alone, all Christians
ought to be of that belief. But there is not any Passage in the Gospel, where
Christ tells us that all the Books of the Old Testament were inspired by God,
both as to the Words and Things. He approves them only in gross, without
descending to particulars, and examining every Book by it self. It was
sufficient that there were diverse Prophecies in the Old Testament, the
Authority whereof was received among the Jews, that pointed at him. Our Savior
never undertook to make a Critical Treatise upon the sacred Books, nor to clear
the Historical Differences in them. His design was not to make us able Critics,
but good Men; and to bring us to render to God the Obedience due to him. He
omitted nothing that might instruct us in our Duty, but he never trouble
himself to correct certain Errors of small importance, which might be among the
Jews.

And if we must take all the words of Christ, when he speaks of the Scripture,
in a strict sense; as if he acknowledged the Books he cites to be all inspired
even to the least syllable, and the others on the contrary to be excluded out
of the number of the sacred Books; we must reject many of those that are
commonly reputed inspired. Neither he nor his Apostles ever cite the Works of
Solomon, or the Book of Job; except that St. James praises the Patience of Job,
which, to speak properly, is not to cite the Book but the History. And if we
must conclude from thence that all these Books have been wrongfully put into
the Jews Canon, the common Opinion would be found contrary to the Authority of
Christ and of his Apostles.

These Books then that we have spoken of are not necessarily to be accounted
Divine for being in the Canon, or Catalogue of the Books of the Jews; which
Jesus Christ never called in question: And there is no reason to interpret the
word Canonical as if it signified inspired of God. The Jews put in their
Collection all the Fragments they had remaining of their ancient Books; they
left out none, because they had no others. It was all their Library, the rest
having been lost in the Captivity, or before, or after; for the Story sets not
down the time of that fatal loss. They pretended not at first that this
Collection consisted of no other but what was divinely inspired. But in process
of time as there were therein many Writings that were truly Prophetic, and as
these were the only Books that had escaped the general Loss which had involved
the rest, they began to be looked on with more respect than they had been at
first; and at length it came to be believed that all these Books, that were in
the ancient Catalogue, were truly divine. And whereas before that time* Men
applied themselves to the Observation of what was most considerable in the Law,
without making many Commentaries; from thence forwards they grew nice about the
words; would take every thing in a strict-sense; and by seeking for Mysteries
where there were none, they abandoned the most essential part of the Jewish
Religion. They made the knowledge of Religion to consist in the study of a
thousand vain Subtilties, and Piety to consist in the scrupulous Observations
of Ceremonial Laws, according as the Doctors interpreted them. This the
Pharisees did in our Lord's Time, and it is also that which the Divines among
the Christians, both Ancient and Modern, have imitated since the Death of the
Apostles. In their time Men applied themselves to learn their Doctrine, without
subtilizing about their Expressions; and this they did upon the assurance they
had that those holy Men taught faithfully what they had learned from Christ.
Since then, it has been the practice to dispute about their Words, and to
strain to the utmost diverse of their Expressions, which were not over exact;
from whence many Factions have been begot amongst Christians, who have fallen
foul one upon another about the meaning of some such particular Expressions of
the Apostles, and have neglected at the same time to obey the Precepts of Jesus
Christ; that is to say, they have abandoned the inward Substance of Religion,
to busy themselves about the Outside. Men have thought it an Honor to be
styled that which they call zealous Orthodox, to be firmly linked to a certain
Party, to load others with Calumnies, and to damn by an absolute Authority the
rest of Mankind; but have taken no care to demonstrate the sincertity and
fervor of their Piety, by an exact Observation of the Gospel Morals; which has
come to pass by reason that Orthodoxy agrees very well with our Passions,
whereas the severe Morals of the Gospel are incompatible with our way of living.

Thus much by the by, to let you see that this great Zeal which Men have for
the Letter of the Scripture, is but a Cloak they make use of, to hide the
little esteem they have for the Religion it self of Jesus Christ; which
consists not in Criticisms, or Controversies, but in keeping God's Commandments.

But it will be asked then, What Authority we allow the Holy Scripture, and
what use is to be made of it according to these Principles? To answer hereto, I
begin with the New Testament, which is the principal Foundation of our Faith.
In the first place then, Jesus Christ in whom were hidden all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge, and whom God had expressly commanded us To hear, was
absolutely infallible. We must believe without questioning it whatever he says;
because he says it, and because God has testified that he speaks nothing but
Truth.

In the second place, since we have nothing writ by Christ himself, we ought to
believe what his Apostles have said concerning his Life and Doctrine; because
God has given Testimony to them by the Miracles he inabl'd them to do; and
because they sealed the Truth of their Deposition with their Blood. They tell
us what they had seen and heard, so that it was impossible they should be
deceived in the substance of the History and Doctrine. It may be that in some
Circumstance of small importance they do not relate things exactly as they
happened, and that therein they do not agree together. But they all agree in
the Historical Facts whereon the Faith we have in Jesus Christ, is grounded;
his Birth of a Virgin, his Miracles, his Death, his Resurrection, and his
Ascension into Heaven; though there may be some difference among them in some
Circumstance, which is nothing to the substance of the History. It is not
necessary for the Foundation of our Faith, as I have already observed, that
they should agree exactly in all things to the least tittle; and the trouble
the Learned have given themselves to reconcile these sort of Contradictions is
of no use. It were better to own ingenuously that there are some, than to
strain the sense of their Writings, to make them agree one with another; which
instead of converting Libertins, does but excite their Railery and confirms
them in their Impiety. As to what concerns the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, there
is not the least Contradiction among the Evangelists; although it be expressed
in different Terms, and they relate it on diverse occasions. We must observe
therefore that they relate only the Sense, and keep not exactly the same order
that Christ kept in preaching it; so neither ought we to insist rigorously upon
their Expressions, as if they made use of some words rather than others, to
insinuate certain Niceties which are ordinarily attributed to them, without any
probable ground; nor ought we to lay such stress upon the order they make use
of in their Writings, as to color thereby certain Inferences, which are not
otherwise obvious in the Sense of our Savior's words. If a Man observe never
so little, he will find that they use every where popular Expressions; that
they have not aimed at any Elegancy in their Style; and that they have been
very far from speaking with such Exactness, as Philosophers or Geometricians
use in their Writings. We ought not then to insist too much, as commonly Men
do, upon the manner of their expressing the Doctrine of Christ. We should only
endeavor to understand the Genius of the Language they use, and to stick to
the substance of things essential; which are expressed in so many places, and
after so many ways, that it is not difficult to frame to our selves an Idea
thereof, clear enough to instruct us perfectly in our Duty.

In the third place, as for the Epistles of the New Testament, they do not only
afford us the same Considerations with those we have last mentioned, in respect
of their Style, but there are also two things further to be observed and
distinguished in them. We find there the same Doctrines we have in the
Evangelists, and those the Apostles assure us often they learned from Christ.
But there are others things, which the Apostles speak of their own heads, or
which they draw by diverse Consequences from the Old. Testament. The first of
these are to be believed on the same account as the Gospels; that is to say,
because of the Authority of Jesus Christ, who preached them to the Jews. The
second are to be received, because they contain nothing but what is very
conformable to the Doctrine of Christ, or what is founded upon right Reason.
The Apostles will not have us believe them upon their own word. They
distinguish in that their Authority from the Authority of Christ. See 1 Cor.
VII. 10, 12, 25. But as they applied themselves cerefully to mind Doctrines
tending to Edification (which are few in number) and never engaged in too nice
inquiries; they have told us nothing that is not conformable to the Spirit of
the Gospel (with which they were filled) and which right Reason will not easily
admit. It is to be observed, that having no extraordinary Inspiration for
writing their Epistles, they insert in them diverse things that concern their
Designs, or their particular Affairs; where we ought by no means to seek for or
expect any thing mysterious. Such are the Salutations found at the end of their
Epistles; the Order St. Paul gives Timothy to take Mark along with him in his
return, to bring the Cloak he had left at Troas with Carpus, the Books, and
above all the Parchments; the Counsel he gives him to drink a little Wine for
his Stomachs sake, and because of his Weaknesses; and other such like things.
See St. Ierom's Preface to his Commentary upon the Epistle to Philemon.

In the fourth place, there are diverse Prophecies scattered in these Epistles;
and the Apocalipse is wholly Prophetic. Now we ought to give Credit to these
Revelations; because it is God that imparted them immediately to the Apostles.
And it is easy to distinguish them from other things, which the Apostles give
out only as their own Conjectures; of which you have some Examples in the words
of Grotius, which I cited concerning the Inspiration of the Penmen of the New
Testament.

Thus then, according to my Hypothesis, the Authority of the Scripture
continues in full force. For you see I maintain that we are obliged to believe
the substance of the History of the New Testament; and generally all the
Doctrines of Jesus Christ; all that was inspired to the Apostles; and also
whatsoever they have said of themselves, so far as it is conformable to our
Savior's Doctrine, and to right Reason. It is plain that nothing farther is
necessarily to be believed, in order to our Salvation. And it seems also
evident to me that those new Opinions, brought into the Christian Religion
since the Death of the Apostles, which I have here refuted, being altogether
imaginary and ungrounded, instead of bringing any advantage to the Christian
Religion, are really very prejudicial to it. An Inspiration is attributed to
the Apostles to which they never pretended, and whereof there is not the least
mark left in their Writings. Hereupon it happens that very many Persons who
have strength enough of Understanding to deny Assent to a thing for which there
is no good proof brought (though preached with never so much Gravity); It
happens, I say, that these Persons reject all the Christian Religion; because
they do not distinguish true Christianity from those Dreams of fanciful Divines.

It is easy to guess, after this, what we ought to think of the Authority of
the Books of the Old Testament. The Prophecies that are in it ought to be
believed, because Christ has authorized them. The substance of the History
ought also to be believed for the same reason; notwithstanding any uncertainty
there may be in some inconsiderable Circumstances; as it appears there is still
some uncertainty, by diverse Contradictions which the Divines with all their
Subtilty have not been able to reconcile, after puzling about it above three
thousand Years. The Doctrines that are in it ought also to be received, so far
as they are conformable to those of the Gospel; or, if you will, let us say
that the true meaning of the Law is to be learned from Christ. No Conclusion is
to be drawn from those Books that appear to be only pieces of Wit and Fancy, or
wherein nothing but Human is to be found, such as the Song of Solomon,
Ecclesiastes, etc. Lastly, we ought not to strain too far the Sense of
particular Expressions, as do the Jews; Because, if we except a very few
places, the Expressions are the same with those which the sacred Writers were
wont to make use of in explaining their other Thoughts; that is to say, they
have worded both the Jewish History, and the Revelations they had from Heaven,
after their own ordinary manner of expressing themselves.

These, Sir, are the Thoughts of Mr. N. concerning the Inspiration of the
sacred Penmen. I am told he draws from these Principles three Consequences.
The first is, That by admitting this Hypothesis we may terminate many great
Disputes among Christians, which have risen from the false Subtilty of Divines
interpreting too mysteriously the Expressions of the holy Scripture, as if
every syllable had been dictated by God. The second is, that whereas by
sticking too close to the Letter of the Scripture, the Essence of Religion
comes to be neglected; as if God required no more of us at present but to
believe that the holy Scripture is divinely inspired; instead, I say, of this
Practice, it will be found necessary to apply our selves wholly to the obeying
Christ's Precepts, which is the only thing God indispensably requires from us.
The third Consequence is, that hereby at one blow will be solved an infinite
number of Difficulties, which Libertines are wont to alledg against the holy
Scripture, and which it is not possible to solve by the ordinary Principles.
Their Mouths will be stopped, says Mr. N. and it will no longer avail them to
object against Christians the Contradictions which are found in the Scriptures;
the lowness of the Style of the sacred Writers; the little Order observed to be
in many of their Discourses; and whatsoever else they have been used to say
against our Divines, who have in vain puzzled themselves to answer them. By
imposing nothing upon these Men as necessary to be believed, but the Truth of
what is most essential in the Histories of the Old and New Testament, and the
Divinity of our Savior's Doctrine, (in which there is nothing that is not
conformable to right Reason) they will be brought (says he) to acknowledge that
Christian Religion is really descended from Heaven; and will be easily inclined
to embrace that which hitherto they have obstinately rejected, because it was
grounded on Suppositions repugnant to that Light of Reason by which they are
guided.

I shall not undertake, Sir, to examine these Consequences, nor the Principles
from whence they are drawn. I promised you only a bare account of the Thoughts
of Mr. N. And I hope you will use means that some Divine, verss'd in these
matters, may satisfy us both upon this Subject, better than I my self am able
to do. I am, etc.

THE THIRD LETTER.
YOU have seen, Sir, to how little purpose it is that Mr. Simon endeavors to
defend his particular Opinions, as well as those which are common to him with
all other Roman-Catholic Doctors. You shall see now that he is no happier in
going about to play the Critic on two Letters, in which he was not concerned.
It appears evidently that nothing but the itch he has of carping at other Men's
Writings has made him undertake to examine those Letters. For he embraces the
greatest part of the Opinions which the Author there maintains. And I doubt not
but those who have judged the Opinions of Mr. N. too bold, will be as much
scandalized at those of the pious Prior of Bolleville.

That incomparable Critic maintains at first dash, as boldly as if he were
assured of it by Revelation, that he that is called Mr. N. is Noel Aubert de
Verse; which I have told you already is nothing but a Dream of Mr. Simon;'s who
thinks he may lawfully say any thing that comes in his Head, and believes that
by boldly affirming it he shall make his Reader be of his Mind. That is a
Secret of his Rhetoric, which he puts in practice as soon as ever he finds
himself puzl'd, or when he imagines he may thereby worst his Antagonist. But by
ill fortune he has used it so long, that his Art being plainly discovered, can
no more deceive any body. By saying whatever came in his Mind, although in
truth he did not believe it, he has so grossly contradicted himself, that he has
now lost all Credit with Men of Worth. I need therefore return no other answer
to the beginning of our Author's XIIth Chap. than by saying, that I am sorry
his Choler does so much blind him, as to make him affirm a Falsehood as boldly
as the clearest Truth. I pray God, as I have often done, to cure him of a
Passion that discomposes him in so deplorable a manner; and which may in time
render him incapable of serving the Public, as he might do, if he considered a
little more on what he thinks fit to publish.

I will not spend my Labor singly upon his Remarks; for I write not this to
satisfy him. In the ill Humor he is, nothing is so fit to settle his Mind as
Time. I will therefore but touch on them as I go along, when the nature of what
I have to say leads me to it.

Neither is it my design to defend the Opinions of Mr. N. concerning the
Inspiration of the sacred Writers. Tho I said it was hard to answer his Proofs
fully, I said not that I was convinced. On the contrary, I proposed them to the
Learned, that I might provoke them to examine the matter carefully, and might
draw from their Observations some further Light than my own Meditations could
furnish me with.

But as Men's Intentions are not interpreted always so favorably as they ought
to be, I find my self obliged (that I may satisfy the Scruples of some pious
Persons, and repel the Calumnies of some Divines who have more Zeal than
Knowledge) to answer four sorts of Reflections that are made upon the Treatise
concerning Inspiration.

I. Some Learned Men, who approve the Opinions of Mr. N. conceive nevertheless
that they ought not to have been published; because in their Judgments it is
not fit that all Truths should indifferently be communicated to all People.
There are, say they, certain things, which though good in themselves, may
easily be applied to ill uses; and it is better that the Public should be
deprived of the advantage it might draw from the knowledge of such Truths, than
be visibly exposed to the danger of abusing them so lamentably as it would be
apt to do.

II. Others, who are of the same Mind, in approving the Opinions of Mr. N.
believe that since he was willing those his Thoughts should be published, he
ought to have expressed them more distinctly; and above all to have proposed in
the first place, the State of the Question between him and the generality of
Divines. These Gentlemen think that if he had done as they say, he had
prevented a great many Calumnies which are grounded upon nothing but the
Obscurity that is observed to be in some places of his Writing.

III. Some of those who look upon the Opinion of Mr. N. as false Doctrine,
cannot endure that I should have said, It appears not by what Principle it can
be overthrown. They say that nothing is more easy. And to let you see they are
in the right, they make diverse Answers to the Arguments of Mr. N. and propose
some Objections, which they believe sufficient to refute all he has said.

IV. Lastly, the most hot, and the least reasonable of these Objectors affirm,
that the Opinions of our Friend lead directly to Deism; and stick not to accuse
him of favoring that abominable Opinion.

You see, Sir, to what Heads I am obliged to make Answer, being of Opinion (as
I am) that it was convenient to publish that Writing concerning Inspiration. To
begin with the first: I acknowledge, Sir, that what they say is true. I grant
that all sorts of Truths are not fit to be spoken at all times, and on all
occasions. It is undoubtedly a very ill thing to publish any Truth not
necessary to be known, how certain soever it may be, when we are assured, that
those who shall read or understand it will infallibly be so scandalized at it,
that the knowledge thereof will produce more hurt than good. On such occasions,
Christian Prudence indispensably obliges us to the contrary. The Question is
not then, Whether the Maxim of these Gentlemen be true or not. In that we are
agreed. But my Opinion was, that this Writing of Mr. N. would do infinitely
more good than hurt; and I dare yet maintain, that in the Times wherein we live,
it is very fit that such Matters as these be thoroughly examined, without
concealing from the Public any of the Difficulties that attend them.

You know, Sir, that most of the Sciences being arrived in this our Age to a
greater degree of Perfection than formerly; though from thence it might be
expected, that such Improvements should have rendered Christians so much the
more wise and more judicious; yet on the contrary, Libertinism and Impiety have
prevailed more scandalously than ever. The Libertines of former Ages professed
their Opinions only in some extravagant Sallies of Wit, or Debauchery; and
opposed the Christian Religion only by some insipid Railleries, which could
have no weight with any Persons of sound Judgment and unbiased Affections. But
the Libertines of our Times make use of their Philosophy and Criticism, to
overthrow the most sacred and most solid Doctrines of our Religion. Diverse
impious Books have been published not only in Latin, but also in French, in
English, and in Dutch; which many unlearned Persons read with much greediness.
Abundance of People are fond of Spinoza's Opinions; because they have read his
Books in French, in English, and in Dutch, though they never studied Philosophy
nor Criticism. We are in Times wherein every body pretends to depth of
Learning, freedom of Thought, and strength of Judgment; and this Reputation is
easily acquired by reading those Books. But that which renders this yet more
deplorable, is that it is not a Disease of Youth, that Men grow out of as they
advance in Years. They whose Minds are once tainted with these unhappy Opinions
do very seldom get quit of them.

This is undoubtedly a great Mischief, and to which those who are any ways able
to bring Remedy are obliged to do it. It has been endeavored to overthrow the
Authority of the holy Scriptures, by making appear that the Style of the sacred
Writers was not inspired, and that they did not receive every thing they said
from immediate Inspiration. And in effect it has happened that many People have
hereupon believed, that the Authority of the Scripture was entirely ruined; And
imagining that the Reasons brought by Spinoza to prove this Opinion were
unanswerable, they have fallen into Deism or into Atheism.

What Remedy, Sir, for this? For my part, I confess, I see but one of these
three. Either a way must be found to burn all the Copies of these impious
Books, that have corrupted so many Men, and to blot out of Men's Memory the
Arguments of these Libertines; or else there must solid Demonstration be made
of the Falsity of the Arguments they make use of to maintain their Opinions;
Or, lastly, in granting to them that the sacred Penmen were not inspired,
neither as to the Style, nor as to those things which they might know otherwise
than by Revelation, it must be yet demonstrated that the Authority of the
Scriptures ought not for all that to be esteemed less considerable.

It is plain that the first of these three is absolutely impossible; and that,
tho an Inquisition should now be settled in France, in England, and in Holland,
it would already be too late. There is then no other means left to cure this
Libertinism that is spread so wide, but one of the two last proposed Remedies.
For my part I could wish with all my Heart that some body would try the second;
and would make it evident that God has inspired the sacred Authors, not only
with the matter they have spoken about, but also with the very Expressions. But
since no body has yet done, nor that I know undertaken to do it, why should it
be ill taken that Mr. N. has made use of the third method, or that I have
published his Writing?

It is true, there are some who believe that it were better to hold ones peace
in a matter so delicate, than to run the hazard of giving scandal to others, by
contradicting the Opinions which they think most reasonable. This indeed would
be very well, if Libertines also forbore writing, or if no body read their
Books. But since it is otherwise, such silence is not at all seasonable. If any
weak Minds take Offense without Reason at what is offered, there are an hundred
others that may be brought off from their Inclination to Libertinism, by the
same Reasons which those are offended at. If indeed we ought always to be
afraid of saying any thing that is not generally approved, we should quickly be
obliged not only to keep silence, but also to suppress many things which are
both useful and necessary to Salvation. There is no Doctrine in the Gospel, how
holy soever, which some Sect of Christians has not perverted and misused. Nay
the same is yet done daily.

All the difficulty then lies in knowing, whether the treating concerning this
Question of the Inspiration of the Authors of the Bible will occasion more Good
or Hurt? In it self the Thing is good, even by the Concession of those that
argue against it; and there is nothing but the weakness of some Men's Minds that
can render it dangerous. Thus then the Good or Evil of this Disquisition
depends wholly upon the Event; which therefore these Gentlemen ought to suffer
us to expect, before we acknowledge that we have done ill in publishing this
Writing of Mr. N.

We must add to this, that Mr. N. is not the first that has spoken, as he does,
of the Inspiration of the sacred Writers. We see many Proofs of it in his
Dissertation. And besides the places which he has cited out of some Books of
Grotius, there are others infinitely more strong and more express in those
against Rivet.

Now after having thus answered those that would have had this Writing
suppressed; it is necessary to give some satisfaction to those also who
complain that the Author has not expressed his Opinion with sufficient
clearness. I have therefore desired Mr. N. to explain it to me himself, if it
were possible in few words, and more distinctly; in order to remove those
injurious Suspicions that may have risen from any Obscurity in his Writing,
concerning his Faith and his Piety. And these are the Heads to which he has
reduced his Opinion, and wherein he agrees with us.

In the first place, says he, I believe that no Prophet, either of the Old or
New Testament, has said any thing in the Name of God, or as by his order, which
God had not effectually ordered him to say; nor has undertaken to foretell any
thing, which God had not indeed truly revealed to him; and that this cannot be
doubted of without great Impiety. I have said it expressly in many places of my
Treatise.

In the second place, I believe, that there is no matter of Fact, of an
importance, related in the History of the Old or New Testament, which in effect
is not true. And that tho there may be some slight Circumstances, wherein some
of the Historians were mistaken; yet we ought nevertheless to look upon that
History in general as the truest and most holy History that ever was published
amongst Men. I am persuaded that those who writ it were very well informed of
all they relate, and that they had not the least intention to deceive us;
insomuch that it was impossible they should fall into any considerable Error;
as neither can we do, in believing what they have said. And, that there may be
no Equivocation; By a matter of importance I mean all the Commandments that the
sacred Historians assure us were given to the Jews by God; all the Miracles
that are found in the History of the Scripture; all the principal Events in
that History; and generally all the matters of Fact on which our Faith is
grounded.

In the third place, I believe, with all Christians, that all the Doctrines
proposed by the Authors of the Scriptures to Jews and Christians to be
believed, are really and truly Divine Doctrines, although it may be supposed
that they did not immediately learn them from Heaven; I am as much persuaded as
any Man, that there is no sort of reasoning made use of in the dogmatical
places of the holy Scripture (where the Prophets and Apostles instruct us
concerning the Promises or the Will of God) that can lead us into Error, or
into the belief of any thing that is false, or contrary to Piety.

I believe in the fourth place, That Jesus Christ was absolutely infallible, as
well as free from all Sin, because of the Godhead that was always united to
him, and which perpetually inspired him: insomuch that all that he taught is as
certain as if God himself had pronounced it. I have explained this clearly in
my Writing.

In the last place, I believe that God has often dictated to the Prophets and
to the Apostles the very words which they should use. Of this I have also given
some Examples.

In these things I agree with all Christian Divines. And I believe further, as
well as they, that these five Heads of our Belief may be undeniably proved
against Libertines and Atheists, by the Authority of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles; to whom God has born Testimony by an infinite number of Miracles,
which are more clearly demonstrable to have been really done, than any Fact
whatsoever of all ancient History. For Example, it may be proved by positive
Testimonies of Matters of Fact, that Jesus Christ did really rise again from
the Dead, and that the Apostles had the Gift of Miracles, more clearly than it
can be proved that ever there was a Roman Emperor called Trajan.

If any one conceive that this kind of Evidence is not sufficient to convince
us of the Truth of these Facts, or that the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and
the Miracles of his Apostles, do not sufficiently prove (without any thing
further) that they were not Deceivers; I confess I understand not what further
Proofs can be given of these things; unless God should raise in our days a
Prophet that should do the same Miracles over again before our Eyes. It may be
there are some who believe that the holy Spirit gives them inward assurance of
the Truth of the Gospel, and who imagine that this inward Testimony is a more
convincing Proof than all those I have spoken of. But as there are not many
that have this Belief, and as those that have it cannot make use of that
pretended inward Testimony to convince another, who does not himself feel it;
we may, without troubling our selves further with them, leave them to enjoy
that Chimerical Satisfaction which their mere Imagination affords them.

The Authority of the holy Scriptures being thus settled, I will now show you
wherein it seems to me that the generality of Divines are deceived, and in what
I am not of their Opinion.

They affirm that all that is in the sacred Books, Histories, Prophecies, etc.
has been immediately inspired both as to the Matter and Words: That all the
Books in the Jews Catalogue ought to be reckoned amongst the inspired Books:
That when the Apostles preached the Gospel, they were so inspired that they
could not be deceived, not even in a thing of no consequence at all; and that
they knew at the very first, without any exercise either of Reason or Memory,
what they were to say.

On the contrary my Opinion is, That it is only in Prophecies, and some other
places, as in the Sermons of Jesus Christ, and where God himself is introduced
speaking, that the Matter or Things have been immediately revealed to those who
spoke them: That the Style, for the most part, was left to the liberty of those
who spoke or writ: That there are some Books that are not inspired, neither as
to the Matter nor Words, as Job, Ecclesiastes, etc. That there are some
Passages which Passion dictated to those that writ them, as many Curses in the
Psalms: That the sacred Historians might commit, and have actually committed
some light Faults, which are of no moment: That the Apostles in preaching the
Gospel, or in writing their Works, were not ordinarily inspired, neither as to
the Matter, nor the Words; but that they had recourse to their Memory and
Judgment, in declaring what Jesus Christ had taught them, or framing Arguments,
or drawing Consequences from thence: That the Apostles while they lived were
only looked upon as faithful Witnesses of what they had seen and heard, and as
Persons well instructed in the Christian Religion, whereof no part was unknown
to them, or concealed by them from their Disciples; but not as Men that
preached and taught by perpetual Inspiration. I believe indeed that they were
not deceived in any Point of Doctrine, and that it was very unlikely they
should be so; because Christian Religion is easy, and comprised in a few
Articles: That they pretended not to enter into deep Argumentations, and to
draw Conseqrences remote from their Principles: and that they never undertook
to treat of nice and controversial Matters, as is plain by reading of their
Writings: Or, if it happened sometimes that they were mistaken in any thing, as
it seems to have happened to St. Peter and to St. Barnabas, it has been in
things of small consequence, and they soon perceived their Error, as did these
two Apostles. This sort of Infallibility is easy to be conceived; if it be
considered that a Man of Sense and Integrity, who is well instructed in his
Religion, and who does not much enter into Argumentations and drawing of
Inferences, can hardly err, so long as he continues in that Temper, and
observes that Conduct.

This is the Sum of what I have said in my Writing concerning the Inspiration
of the sacred Penmen; and it is herein precisely that I differ from the common
Opinion of Divines. You see how much these Principles are contrary to those of
the Deists, who reject all sort of Inspiration, and who look upon the holy
Scripture as a Work full of Falsities, and wherein there is nothing but what is
purely human. The Divines that have accused me of Deism on account of this
Writing, certainly either never took the pains to read it, or did not
understand it; for I cannot believe that they would accuse me of so detestable
an Opinion out of pure Malice, and against their own Consciences. They were
undoubtedly in some measure misled by a false Zeal, that rendered them little
attentive to what they read, or made them suspect that the Author had not
discovered all that he had in his Mind. It is an ill Custom that some peevish
and ill-natured Persons have, to judge of other Men's Opinions rather by the
Suspicions which their own depraved Imaginations suggest to them, than by those
Men's Expressions and Actions; which are the only Evidence that ought to be
regarded on these occasions. A Man ought to be judged by what he says, and not
by what he says not, nor by what is injuriously imputed to him without any
Proof. And if this ought always to be the Rule of our Carriage one toward
another, there is more particular Reason that it should be so when a Man
protests (as I do at present) that he is not of any other Opinion than what he
expressly sets down; and that he disowns the ill Consequences which are
pretended to be drawn from his Discourses, and which to him seem not to be
deducible from them.

By this Explanation of Mr. N's Principles, which I received from himself, you
may see, Sir, that he is very far from those impious Opinions which some too
hotheaded Divines have charged him with. Candid and equitable Readers had no
need of this Explanation, in which I see nothing but what is plainly enough set
down in his first Writing. But as Equity is a Virtue seldom practiced in
Theological Controversies, he thought it necessary to give these further
Explications, to those who persisted still in suspecting him to believe things
which he abhors. We shall see hereafter if any ill Consequence can be drawn
from his Opinion.

But before I come to that, I will transcribe here what he further adds to that
which you have already seen. In reading, says he, the Prior of Bolleville's
Answer to the Thoughts of some Holland Divines, I observed that Mr. Simon
accuses me of having taken part of what I have said out Grotius his Book,
called Votum pro Pace Ecclesiastica. I should be well pleased that my Reader
believed it. I could not then be accused, as I am by some, of Innovation. It is
true, I have read that Book; but it being long ago, that Passage of Grotius was
not in my Mind; otherwise I should not have failed to have cited it, as I have
cited others of the same Author that are less express. I think it therefore not
amiss to take advantage of this Advertisement, and now to set down that
Passage, together with another taken out of his Defense of the Vow for Peace,
titl'd, Discussio Apologetici Rivetiani.

Grotius had said in a Work wherein he defends his Observations upon the
Consultation of Cassander against Rivet, Animadv. in Animadv. Rivet. p. 647.
that this last Divine was very much deceived in believing that all the Books
of the Old Testament, that are in the Hebrew Canon, were dictated by the Holy
Ghost; that Esdras in the Opinion of all the Jews was not a Prophet, nor had
the holy Spirit; that his Books, and the Collection he made of the more ancient
Books, had been approved by the great Synagogue, in which indeed there were
some Prophets; although the Jews hold that there was a doubt concerning the
Book of Ecclesiastes, etc. Rivet liked not this Opinion of Grotius, and
endeavored to prove the contrary, by Scripture, and by some Jewish Authors.
Grotius replied to him in these terms, Pdg. 672.
in his Vow for Peace. Vere dixi non omnes libros qui sunt in Hebraeo Canone
dictatos a Spiritu Sancto; Scriptos esse cum pio animi motu non nego; and hoc
est quod judicavit Synagoga magna, cujus judicio in hac re stant Hebraei. Sed a
Spiritu Sancto dictari historias nihil fuit opus: satis fuit scriptorem memoria
valere circa res spectatas, aut diligentia in describendis veterum
Commentariis. Vox quoque Spiritus Sanctiambigua est; nam aut significat,
quomodo ego accepi, afflatum divinum qualem habuere tum Prophetae ordinarii,
tum interdum David and Daniel; aut significat pium motum, sive facultatem
impellentem ad loquendum salutaria vivendi praecepta, vel res politicas and
civiles, quomodo vocem Spiritus Sancti interpretatur Maimonides, ubi de
Scriptis illis aut Historicis aut Moralib. agit. Si Lucas divino afflatu
dictante sua scripsisset, inde potius sibi sumpsisset autoritatem, ut Prophetae
faciunt, quam a testibus quorum fidem est sectus, etc.
I said indeed that the Books in the Hebrew Canon were not all dictated by the
holy Spirit; But I do not deny that they were written with a pious intention of
Mind. And this was the Determination of the great Synagogue, whose Judgment in
this matter the Jews submit to. For there was no need that the Histories should
be dictated by the holy Spirit. It was sufficient that the Writer had a good
Memory, for the things he had seen; or that he were careful in transcribing the
ancient Records. The word Holy Spirit is also ambiguous; for either it
signifies, as I have taken it, a certain divine Inspiration which both the
ordinary Prophets had, and sometimes David and Daniel; or it signifies a pious
Motion or Faculty stirring a Man up to utter useful Precepts relating to Human
Life, or Political or Civil Matters. Thus Maimonides interprets the word Holy
Spirit, where he treats of those Historical and Moral Writings. If Luke had
written by the dictating of the Holy Spirit, he would have fetched his
Authority from thence, as the Prophets do, rather than from Witnesses, whose
Credit he follows, etc.

Apologet.. 118, and 119.
Rivet was mightily scandalized, or at least seemed to be so, at an answer so
contradictory to the common Opinions. But p. 722.
Grotius explained himself yet more clearly and strongly in his Refutation of
Rivet 's Apology. Afflatu Dei locutos quae locuti sunt, scripsisse quae
scribere jussi sunt Prophetus toto animo ag^^^^ Grotius: idem (...) de
Apocalypsi and Apostolorum praedictionibus. Christi dicta omnia quin sint Dei
dicta dubitari nefas. De Secriptis Historicis and Moralibus Hebraeorum
sententiis aliud putat. Satis est quod pi^^animo scripta sint, and optima fide,
and de rebus summis, etc. Neque Esdras, Neque Lucas Prophetae sucre, sed viri
graves, prudentes, qui nec fallere vellent, nec ^alli se sinerent. Dixitne
Lucas, Factum est ad Lucam verbum Domini, and dixit ei Dominus scribe, ut
solent Prophetae? Nihil tale. Quid ergo? Quoniam quidem multi conati sunt
ordinare narrationem, quae nobis completae sunt, rerum. Dicit se non praecepto
sed aliorum exemplo adductum ut scriberet. Sicut tradiderunt nobis qui ab
initio ipsi viderunt, and ministri fuere Sermonis, nempe Maria Matter: Domini,
cognati ejus alii, Apostoli, Discipuli Septuagina, Sancti and resuscitati a
Jesu, testes Resurrectionis complures. Visum est mihi assecuto omnia a
principio, etc. Quomodo assecuto? ex ipsis testibus non ex Revelatione.
Scribere non dictata sed diligenter ex ordine. Long ergo aliter acti
Prophetae, aliter Lucas: cujus tamen pium con^lium Spiritui Sancto potest
adscribi.
Grotius, says he, himself, willingly acknowledges, that the Prophets, who were
commanded by God to write or speak, did write and spoke by Inspiration from
him: His Opinion is also the same as to the Apocalyse, and the Predictions made
by the Apostles: He esteems it the highest Impiety to make any doubt that all
that was said by Jesus Christ was said by God himself. Concerning the
Historical Writings, and the Moral Sentences of the Hebrews, he is of another
Opinion: He thinks it sufficient to believe that they were written out of a
pious Intention, and with great Ingenuity, and concerning matters of highest
importance, etc. Neither Esdras nor Luke were Prophets; but grave and prudent
Men, who neither were minded to deceive, nor would suffer themselves to be
deceived. Did Luke say, The Word of the Lord came to Luke, and the Lord said to
him, write, as the Prophets used to say? Nothing like it. What then? For as
much as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a Declaration of those
things which are most surely believed among us: (He says not that by Command,
but by the Example of others, he was induced to write): Even as they delivered
them to us, who from the beginning were Eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the
Word; (viz. Mary the Mother of our Lord, other of his Kinsmen, the Apostles,
the seventy Disciples, and the Saints that had been raised again by Jesus, many
Witnesses of his Resurrection:) It seemed good to me also, having had perfect
understanding of all things from the very first, etc. Understanding, how
acquired? From Eyewitnesses, not by Revelation. To write, not things dictated,
but in order. The Prophets then had another sort of Impulse than Luke; whose
good Design nevertheless may be ascribed to the Holy Spirit.

After the Death of Grotius there came out a third Answer of Rivert's,
Grotianae discuss. (...), Sect. 14.. 3, 4.
wherein he strives to defend the common Opinion against his famous Antagonist.
It appears plainly by the manner of his answering, that he believed that the
Holy Spirit had dictated the Scripture word for word; and this Opinion is known
to be the common Opinion of Protestants; who on all occasions call the sacred
Writers, Amanuenses of the holy Spirit. Nay even Catholic Authors, Gregory de
Valence, Bellarmin, Tolet, and Estius, cited by Rivet, seem to have been of the
same Opinion. Cornelius a Lapide, whom Mr. Simon cites, holds the same
concerning the Law and the Prophets; though he confesses it was not necessary
that God should dictate the words, when it was only matter of History, or of
Moral Precepts, which might be known otherways. So that it may be reasonably
supposed that the greatest part of Christian Divines now adays are of the
Opinion of verbal Inspiration, if we may so call it; since there are very few
that say the contrary; and those who do, say it only of some Books, as
Cornelius a Lapide.

Every body knows that not only in Sermons, but also in Divinity-Lectures, upon
any part of Scripture, some Men strangely wire-draw the Words of the Scripture;
and seek after Reasons why the holy Spirit, as they speak, makes use of one
Expression rather than another. The same thing they do also in Commentaries:
Which would be altogether absurd if my Supposition were admitted, that the
Style of the Scriptures is for the most part human and even careless enough.
But this is because they commonly take the Opinion of the Jews for granted; who
have a Proverb or general Maxim concerning the Books of the Law (in which they
believe all to be inspired, even to a single Letter) that there is not a Letter
in the Law, whereon there depends not great Mountains.

I am very glad, however, that Mr. Simon declares himself openly of the same
Opinion with me, concerning the Style of the sacred Writers. I wish all
Protestants would do the same. We should then soon be free from many Disputes
that are grounded upon nothing but Grammatical Subtilties. We should then
perceive, that we ought not rigorously to insist upon a great many Expressions
in the utmost extent of their Signification, as if the sacred Penmen had
spoken with the same Exactness, as do Geometricians. We should then understand
that no Doctrines, which we esteem important, ought to be grounded barely upon
certain manners of speaking; which we cannot be sure were exact; because the
sacred Writers, not affecting exactness of Style, may have used that manner of
Expression without any design. Such is the Doctrine of the antecedent
Imputation of the Sin of Adam, which is founded upon the Comparison St. Paul
makes (Chap. V. of the Epistle to the Romans) between the Grace that came by
Jesus Christ, and the Sin that entered into the World by Adam. Men stretch this
Comparison with too much Rigor, not considering that St. Paul's Style is the
Style of one that observes little Exactness in his Expressions, although in the
main his Arguments are admirable; and that the laying too great stress upon the
turn of his Phrases may expose us to the hazard of falling into gross Error.
The general Design that he proposes to himself ought only to be stuck to;
without insisting particularly upon every term, and every distinct Period;
which taken separately and strictly, may oft-times prove contrary to what he
drives at. Those who are a little conversant in the Disputes amongst
Protestants, will easily see the importance of this Remark.

The ingenuous Acknowledgment of what there is of Human in the sacred Writings,
would render the Truth of our Religion more conspicuous to the Eyes of the
incredulous; whereas it is hid from them, by clothing it in certain Notions
which common Sense makes them reject, and from among which they are not able to
pick out the Heavenly Truths. Men fancy that for the Establishment of Religion
it is requisite to maintain every thing, or any thing, that (if true) would be
an invincible Proof of it. they cast therefore about in their own Minds for
such Foundations as they conceive would make it most stable. With this their
Brain becomes so heated, that in the end they rashly assert that these are the
real Foundations of Religion; and that if these be taken away, Religion will
fall to the ground and be destroyed. Thus some Romish Doctors have fancied that
Men, for the most part, not being capable to examine Religion themselves, it
was necessary that God should settle a way whereby they might find it, without
Examination; viz. by the way of Authority. And from thence they have concluded,
That to deny there is an Authority in the World to which People ought entirely
to submit, is to overthrow Religion. But to these Gentlemen it is answered,
That it is absurd in them to fancy that God will not preserve the true Religion
amongst Men, unless it be in the way that they have imagined. The same may be
answered to our Protestant Divines, who believe the Inspiration of every word;
viz. that they are deceived in believing that the Truth of Christian Religion
is founded upon that Opinion. We ought not to reckon every thing among the
Principles of our Religion, that unto us seems proper to strengthen it; nor to
trouble our selves in examining after what manner we would have established it,
had the thing depended upon us; or in asserting how God ought to have done it.
But we ought to consider things in themselves as they really are, and learn
what has been the Will of God, by what he has done; not conclude that he has
done this or the other thing, because we fancy he ought to have willed it.
Libertines who see that to uphold the Truth of Christian Religion, Men bring
long Metaphysical Arguments (which often prove nothing, but that, according to
the Suppositions they have thought fit to make, it ought to be so) believe
presently that Christian Religion has no better Foundation, and so reject it;
as much perhaps through the fault of those Divines who argue in that manner, as
their own. But if things were represented to them as they are in themselves,
without going about to force them to allow that which is not proved, they would
submit to our Reasons; and we should not need to teach them any thing but what
Religion injoins them, after having convinced them of its Truth.

This is, Sir, what Mr. N. has writ to me, upon the desire that was intimated
of his giving some further Explication of his Thoughts. I hope it will be found
sufficient to convince those who may have mistaken his Sense, and who on that
account have charged him with Opinions which he never had, that he is very far
from being guilty of what he is so uncharitably accused of. I will send you, by
the next, the Answers which he makes to diverse Objections that have been
proposed to him.

THE FOURTH LETTER.
I Believe, Sir, there is no Condition in the World more deplorable, than
theirs that publish any thing in Print; if it be so that they are bound to
satisfy all those that censure them. Some Persons have taken it ill that it
should be said, It was hard to confute the Opinions of Mr. N. They hold it very
easy, and that there needs no great Ability to do it. But they either undertake
it not; Or if they make any Objection, they show that they understand nothing
of the matter; as the Prior of Bolleville, who seems to understand neither what
Mr. N. has said, nor what himself objects. Others confess that it is a very
difficult matter; and pretend that therefore a Man ought not to trouble himself
with it; nor raise Scruples in weak Heads which the strongest would find it a
difficulty to remove. To satisfy the first, it would be requisite to show, that
the Objections proposed are not strong enough to refute Mr. N's Opinions: And
that is the very thing that will infallibly offend the others, who would have
nothing said on that Subject. If the Advice of these last be taken, the first
will undoubtedly say that we were much in the wrong, to say that it was very
hard to confute an Opinion, which they have easily overthrown. They will be apt
even to say that it is not without design that we have made use of weak
Arguments, and their crazy Fancies will set no bounds to their Suspicions;
according to the Custom of too many Divines, who glory in a show of diving into
other Men's Thoughts. What is to be done in this case? One of the two must
unavoidably be displeased.

I will not then be afraid, Sir, to communicate to you the Answers of Mr. N. to
some Objections. Such as have not read the Explanations which I sent you a
while ago, with sufficient Attention, may perhaps by our Friend's Answers
better apprehend his true meaning.

Objection 1.

To say that the Prophets have often expressed themselves in their Prophecies,
Page 15.
after the same manner that they were wont to do on other occasions, and that
they were not constantly inspired by God with all their Expressions, is to
lessen the Authority of the Prophecies.

Answer.

They that make this Objection could not say any thing that can give more
advantage to the Profane. For it is as clear as day, that the Style of the
Prophets varies according to the diversity of their Genius; as has been
observed, and as is agreed by the most able Interpreters. Mr. Simon proves it
himself, Page 123. of his Answer, and makes appear that what the Prophets said
was not the less God's Word. But I cannot forbear to observe that our Divines
are even more scrupulous than the Jews. For these believe the Inspiration of
Words only in the Pentateuch; whereas they believe it throughout all the Old
Testament. Prophetia Mofis per omnia tanto dignior prastantiorque fuit
caeterorum omnium Prophetarum Prophetia; quod his quo tempore Prophetiam
accipiebant, tantummodo sensus, sive res Prophetia comprehensa revelabatur:
istam autem rem seu sensum propriis suis verbis populo enarrabant. Atque ea de
causa usurpabant hanc loquendi formulam: Et loquutus Dominus mihi: quasi
dicerent, ea quae dicimus, licet verbis nostris exprimamus, sensum tamen habent
quem a Deo ipso accepimus.
The Prophecy of Moses, says Manasseth Ben. Israel, after many other Rabbis,
was in every respect more honorable, and more excellent, than the Prophecies
of all the other Prophets. For to them, whenever they received the Prophecy,
the Sense only, or the Substance of the matter to be foretold was revealed; but
they declared to the People this Thing or Matter in their own words. And for
that Reason they made use of this form of speaking; And the Lord said unto me;
As if they would say, these things which we say to you, although we express
them in our words, contain the Sense which we have received from God, etc. Many
Christian Divines have said the same things of all the Prophets in general; as
Mr. Huet in his Demonstration; who plainly affirms, that the things are to be
attributed to the holy Spirit, but the Words and the Language to the Prophets.
He says also elsewhere, that Prophetic Ecstasy does ordinarily produce a Scabrum
salebrorum ac dissipatum.
hard, rough and broken Style. Many others have held the same thing, without
being thought guilty of Heterodoxy.

Objection 2.

It has been said, that David says many things of himself, Page 23.
and of his Enemies, not thinking to prophesy; which contain notwithstanding
Predictions of what was to happen to Jesus Christ and his Enemies; as what he
says Psalm. XLI. 10. LXIX. 26. CIX. 8. places which Christ and his Apostles
apply to Judas. Nevertheless St. Peter, after citing some words of Psalm. XVI.
where David speaks of himself in the first Person, Thou will not leave my Soul
in Hell, nor suffer thy Holy One to see Corruption, etc. adds, that this cannot
be understood of David, since he was dead and rotten many Years ago; but that
as he was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworn with an Oath to him, that of
the Fruit of his Loins he would raise up Christ to sit upon his Throne; he
seeing this beforehand, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, when he said,
that his Soul, etc. by which it appears that David, speaking in the first
Person, knew nevertheless that he spoke not concerning himself.

Answer.

I did not say, that David never prophesied, in speaking of himself as of a
Type of the Messiah; or that he understood not that in the properest and
highest sense of his Words he spoke concerning the Messiah, though what he said
had also some relation to himself. I make no question but there are in the
Psalms diverse Prophecies of this nature. It is plain, David could not say of
himself, unless in a very Metaphorical Sense, that God would not leave his Soul
in Hell, nor suffer his Holy One to see Corruption, although the rest of the
Psalm may be suitable enough to him.

Objection 3.

The Curses in the CIXth Psalm are imputed to a human Passion; yet St. Peter
teaches us, Acts I. 20. that it is a Prophecy. It seems the better way
therefore to take all those Curses for simple Predictions, and not for
Imprecations, and so to translate in the Future Tense; Thou shall set a wicked
Man over him, and his Adversary shall, etc.

Answer.

This might be a Prophecy, of that sort which we said were sometimes pronounced
without their being aware who pronounced it; of which we brought some Examples:
which sort of Prophecy is not inconsistent with a violent Passion; as appears
by the Example of Caiaphas. But indeed these Expressions cannot be translated
in the future Tense, without extreme violence to the Text; and accordingly the
ancient Interpreters, as well as modern, have made use of the Imperative or
Optative Mood: Nor ought it to seem strange that we think there was in this an
Excess of Passion, since it is impossible to explain any other way those words
of Psalm CXXXVII. Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones
against the Stones, etc. Let any one compare the words of Psalm. CIX. with those
which a Heathen Poet puts into the Mouth of a desperate Woman. Vivat, per urbes
erret ignotas egens,
Exul, pavens, invisus, incerti laris,
-- quoque non aliud queam
Pejus precari, liberos similes Patri,
Similesque Matri.
In fine, if it were necessary to render all these words in the future Tense,
to avoid making the Psalmist pronounce such Curses, there are a great many
other places where the Version would need to be reformed, and where we should
be obliged to strain the Text; as may easily be perceived in turning over the
Book of Psalms.

Objection 4.

It has been said, Page 26.
that Inspiration seems not absolutely necessary to the composing of pious
Hymns; and concluded from thence that it ought not to be said that all such
Hymns were immediately inspired. The same sort of Argument has been applied
also afterward to diverse other places of Scripture. But it no ways follows,
because Inspiration was not absolutely necessary, that therefore there was none.

Answer.

My Argument proves not directly that there was no Inspiration on these
occasions, but only that there was nothing in the thing it self to induce us to
believe that there was any; and consequently, that such Inspiration is supposed
without any necessity. When a thing may be done by the ordinary course of
Nature, we ought not to have recourse to Miracles. Hence I conclude, that there
ought to be no recourse to Inspiration, when there is nothing in a Book to make
us believe it was inspired; and when all that is in it might have been said
without Inspiration; unless we have some positive Proof that he who composed it
was inspired. Now I maintain that there is no Proof of this nature, sufficient
to persuade us that all the Books of the Scripture were inspired in the same
manner that they are commonly said to have been.

Objection 5.

It has been inferred from the evident marks of Meditation, Page 27.
and Pains taking, which appear in several places of the Scripture (as those
where the Verses begin with all the Letters of the Alphabet in order) that
those places have not been inspired. But it does not appear that Inspiration
excludes all sort of Meditation and Pains-taking, as Mr. Simon has observed,
etc. Resp. p. 125, etc.

Answer.

I acknowledge that it cannot from thence be concluded that the matter was not
inspired; nor was this Argument made use of, but only against those who hold
the Inspiration of the very words; that is to say, principally, against the
generality of Protestant Divines. There is certainly little likelihood that the
Spirit of God would inspire such things as those. But the Consequence I have
drawn from thence is only this, that the Style not being inspired, we cannot be
sure that the things are; unless the Characters of Inspiration appear in those
things themselves, or that we have otherwise some positive Proof of it.

Objection 6.

What has been said concerning the Inspiration of the sacred Historians is not
enough: Page 28, etc.
There ought to have been added also, as Mr. Simon has it, That God directed
the Pen of the sacred Historians in such a manner, that they could not fall
into Error. They were Men that wrote; and the Spirit that directed them
deprived them not of their Reason, nor their Memory, to inspire them with
matters of Fact, which they themselves knew perfectly: but it determined them
in general to write of some matters, rather than others, though they knew both
alike well. Resp. p. 128.

Answer.

This may be granted; provided that by directing the Pen of the sacred
Historians be only understood the determining them in general to write of some
matters rather than others, though they knew both alike well. Mr. Simon fights
here with his own Shadow: for no body denied that. On the contrary, it was said
that the sacred Historians have writ of no matter, whereof they were not well
instructed: And this in opposition to those who pretend that the Historians of
the Bible were inspired with the matters, in the same manner as if they could
not have known them any other way. But these People would condemn Mr. Simon as
well as me.

Objection 7.

It is supposed, Page 35.
without any Reason, that there are sometimes real Contradictions amongst the
sacred Historians, whereas they are but seeming ones. The Learned have
reconciled them all, not excepting that about the Death of Judas, which is
cited as an Example of a manifest Contradiction.

Answer.

To answer this Objection fully, it would be requisite not only to quote the
places, where it is believed there is some little Contradiction; but also all
the Explications which many learned Men have given of those places, whereby to
show that there is not any of those Explications that clears the Difficulty.
But to do this would require a Book for every place; for there is so great
variety of Opinions upon these Passages, that there may be reckoned up ten or
twelve Interpretations of one single place. One Learned Man has made a Volume
in Quarto, J. Gronovius de pernicie and casu Judae.
of an hundred and ninety two Pages, upon that single place concerning the
Death of Judas. But if the most of these Interpretations be considered without
prepossession, they will be found to be very much strained. Words are never
wanting. And it is no easy matter to silence a Man of an indifferent Capacity,
who undertakes to defend an Opinion that cannot be demonstratively disproved.
Let me therefore, on this occasion, entreat the Reader to examine some of those
places, that have given the Learned the most trouble; and then let him ask
himself whether he would admit of those Reconcilements that he finds in the
Commentators, if the Question concerned other Authors than those of the Bible.
Assuredly he would reject them; and would say that it were better to confess
that there is some Contrariety in small things, than to render the whole
History doubtful, by persisting obstinately in defense of things of no
consequence. If this were done in what concerns the Death of Judas, which is
brought for an Example, I am well assured there is no Opinion would appear more
reasonable than that of Salmasius, in his third Letter to Bartholin concerning
the Cross. Constat Evangelistis hunc morem fuisse ut minutias (...)
neglexerint, cum de principali Historia sibi rationem veritatis scirent
constare. Nec video quomodo aliter id in quo dissident de morte Judae,
Matthaeus and Lucas, componi queat. p. 618.
It is manifest, says he, that it was usual with the Evangelists not to take
much heed of minute Circumstances, when they were in the right, as to the
principal History: Nor do I see how otherwise that wherein Matthew and Luke
differ, concerning the Death of Judas, can be reconciled.

Objection 8.

Whereas it is doubted, Page 40.
whether it were well done to admit the History of Esther in the Hebrew Canon,
because there are some Circumstances in it which seem to be pure Invention;
Ought not those Circumstances to have been cited? And supposing they were such;
may it not be said, with Mr. Simon (Page 129. of his Answer) that the Book
might be a Parable, and not the less Canonical for that?

Answer.

I might save my self the labor of answering this objection, because I have
affirmed nothing in this matter. On the contrary, I said that I would not
examine the Opinion of those who believe the History of Esther to be a feigned
History. Neither will I make my self at present a Party in the Dispute. But
since it is desired, I will barely recite the Reasons for which some reject
this Book.

In the, first place; Mordecai and Esther, Whom the Author represents as pious
Persons, and particulaly favored by Heaven, agree to do a thing forbidden by
the Law. It is where Mordecai counsels Esther to endeavor to please Ahasuerus,
which she consents to; though Moses had expressly forbidden them to make
Alliance with the Heathens.

In the second place; All the Circumstances of this Story are very observable.
Esther pleases the King, who proclaims her Queen of the Medes and Persians, but
does not oblige her to tell him from what Extraction she is sprung. Mordecai
discovers a Conspiracy against Ahasuerus, and advertises him of it by the means
of the Queen, without receiving nevertheless any Recompense; only the
Conspirators were hanged, and the whole matter recorded. Haman grows in great
favor at Court, insomuch that all the World bowed and reverenced him. Mordecai
thinks not fit to do it. Haman cannot bear his Neglect; and having learned that
he is a Jew, resolves to make the whole Jewish Nation perish for his sake. He
offers King Ahasuerus ten thousand Talents, if he will consent to that Nation's
Destruction. The King presently consents (without taking the Money) and gives
Haman his Ring; who makes use of it in sealing the Letters, wherein it is
ordered to lay violent Hands on all the Jews, not sparing Women nor little
Children. Messengers are dispatched to carry theses Letters all over the
Kingdom, and the Edict is published at Shushan. Esther, who had not yet told
what Extraction she was of, is informed that Mordecai was at the King's Gate
all in Sackcloath. She sends him Raiment; which he refuses, and expects a
second Message before he tells what makes him so sad. Esther having learned the
matter, is afraid to appear before the King; because it was fobidden by the
Laws of the Kingdom, unless the King by reaching out his Scepter of Gold
dispensed with it; but being blamed by Mordecai, she resolves to run the
hazerd, after a Fast of three days observed by her self, her Ladies of Honor,
and all the Jews in Shushan. Esther appears before the King. He sees her, and
reaches out his Scepter of Gold that she might come near him. She invites the
King and Haman to a Banquet in her Apartment. They go, and the King at the
Banquet asks the Queen what she would have him grant her. She invites Ahasuerus
and Haman again the next day. Haman puffed up with his good Fortune, boasts of
his Happiness to his Wife and all his Friends; but complains at the same time
extremely of Mordecai the Jew for not doing him Reverence. His Wife advises him
to cause a Gibbet to be made fifty Foot high, and to speak unto the King on the
Morrow that Mordecai might be hanged thereon. Haman goes to Bed thereupon,
secure that the next day he should be revenged of the Insolence of the Jew. But
the King, who could not sleep that Night, causes the Records of State to be
read to him, where he finds the good Office that Jew had done him; for which,
on Inquiry he was told that no Reward had been given him. Haman comes to Court
early in the Morning, to speak to the King that Mordecai might be hanged. But
he is no sooner in the Presence, than the King calls to him, and asks him what
should be done to the Man whom the King would extremely honor. Haman, who
fancied it was himself that the King was minded so to honor, answers in a way
that tended to the advantage of the Person that was to be honored. Immediately
the King commands him (what a Thunderbolt for an ambitious and revengeful
Person!) to go do it to Mordecai the Jew. He retires home in Confusion, to
bewail his Misfortune with his Friends; who tell him plainly that the Jew will
be too hard for him. Presently the King's Chamberlains come to call him to the
Banquet in the Queen's Apartment. At the Banquet Esther tells the King there
was a Design to destroy her and her People. The King in a Passion asks who it
was designed it; and being told it was Haman, he goes out in Wrath into the
Garden. Haman, on the other side, stays with the Queen, and throws himself upon
her Bed, endeavoring to pacify, her Wrath. The King returns while he was in
that Rosture, and believes Haman was about to force the Queen. Haman is seized
upon to be put to Death, and the Gibbet being found ready sitted for Mordecai,
Haman by the king's order is hanged upon it. Mordecai succeeds in the place of
Haman; and by Esther's means obtains another Edict, whereby the Jews are
permitted to take Arms, and defend themselves against those that should fall
upon them. The day mentioned in the Edict being come, the Jews kill all those
that went about to destroy them. They slay five hundred in Shushan. And the
like leave being given them the next day, they kill three hundred more, besides
Haman's ten Sons who were hanged by the King's order. Now upon the
consideration of all these Circumstances, it is observed by some, that if Unity
of Time and Place had been observed in this Story, there would have been
nothing wanting to have made it a good Tragi-Comedy. For my part I determine
nothing upon the Point.

But this I can say, that in all likelihood Mr. Simon had not read of a long
time this Book, when he writ the 129th Page of his Answer; where he says, That
though it should be supposed that the Books of Esther, Judith, and Tobit are
not true Histories, yet it does not follow therefore that they ought to be left
out of the Catalogue of Canonical Books: And that he has observed in his
Critical History, after St. Jerome, that the Parabolical Style has always been
in esteem amongst the Eastern People, and that a Book whether it contain a true
History, or a plain Parable, or a History mixed with Parables, is not therefore
the less true or less Canonical. If the Histories contained in these Books are
not true, they are certainly not Parables, but Romances. The bare reading them
is sufficient to show that those who writ them published them not for Books of
Morality, but only as surprising and wonderful Stories. To say nothing of
Judith and Tobit, it is plain by the Original which the Author of the Book of
Esther gives to the Feast of Purim, that he composed that Book with design to
make it look like a true History. See the IXth Chap. v. 27. to the end. The
Original of a Feast uses not to be founded upon a Parable; and such a History
as that of Esther is not wont to be mixed with Parables. Mr. Simon says well,
that there are Parables in the New Testament so well circumstantiated, that one
would take them for true Histories. But we must not have read either the Book
of Esther, or the New Testament, to be persuaded that there is any resemblance
betwixt the History of that Book, and the Parables of our Savior. The Parable
most like to a History is that of Dives and Lazarus, but there is nothing in it
like the History of Esther. See Joseph. Antiq. lib. 11. cap. 6.

Objection 9.

The Prudence and Reason of the Apostles is often spoken of, Page 46.
as if the use they made thereof were inconsistent with the Inspiration
attributed to them; but these things may well agree together, as Mr. Simon
observes.

Answer.

If Mr. Simon understood what he would say, when he speaks of reconciling Human
Prudence with Inspiration, he believes undoubtedly the same thing that I do,
concerning the Inspiration of the Apostles. We agree that the Terms were not
inspired. The question is only about the Things. The Inspiration of the things
consists, either in presenting to the Mind general Principles, from whence they
that are inspired, according as they have occasion afterward, draw
Consequences; or in furnishing it with Arguments ready framed. If God furnished
the Minds of the Apostles with Arguments ready framed, they made no use of
their Reason, having nothing to do but to declare what the holy Spirit had
inspired them with; as the Prophets were only to express the Sense of what God
had said to them. And this is that which every body calls properly Inspiration.
But if it be supposed that God presented to the Minds of the Apostles only
general Principles, of which by their own reasoning they made necessary and fit
Application, upon emergent occasions; they were in that case no more inspired
than those, who having carefully read the holy Scripture, have the Ideas
thereof so present in their Minds, that they never fail to make use of it when
it is necessary. In this last Supposition Reason indeed is made use of; but in
the other it is not. Now it appears that Mr. Simon is not of the Opinion that
excludes the use of Reason. And therefore I say it is probable that he is of
the same Opinion with me, though he know it not. For I deny not but God might
have presented to the Minds of the Apostles, either by supernatural or natural
ways, the general Ideas of which they should stand in need, to defend
themselves at their Trials. I only deny that God always inspired them with all
the Arguments they made use of on those occasions. Mr. Simon adds, That to say
that the Spirit of Courage and Holiness, which the Gospel produces in our
Hearts, dictated to the Apostles what they should say, is to destroy entirely
the inward Grace which God did spread abroad in the Hearts of his Apostles, and
which he yet daily spreads abroad in the Hearts of the Faithful. But what does
he mean by this inward Grace, which is common to the Apostles and the Faithful?
Is it not the Spirit of the Gospel? At least the Faithful have nothing else in
common with the Apostles. Now if the Apostles by virtue of this Promise, It is
not you that speak, it is the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you, have
received (as Mr. Simon gives us to understand) only the inward Grace which God
spreads abroad daily in the Hearts of the Faithful, the Inspirations of the
Apostles were not different from those of the Faithful now a days.

Objection 10.

Whereas it is said, Page 45, 48.
That the Apostles spoke many things at their Trials which might have been
spoken without Inspiration, and from thence is inferred that it is not
necessary to believe that they were inspired with those things; This way of
arguing may be applied to the Prophets, whom nevertheless we acknowledge to have
been truly inspired. Mr. Simon Resp. 131.

Answer.

Mr. Simon, who sees nothing in Books but what his Passion shows him, might
have taken notice that I said, that the Prophets teach us they are inspired,
when they say Thus says the Lord, etc. There are two ways to know if a thing
be inspired. The first consists in observing if those who say this or that
thing, maintain that they had it from God by an extraordinary Revelation,
whereof they give undeniable Proofs, as did the Prophets. The second is when
the thing it self declared shows it to be so. When the first way fails, we must
have recourse to the second; and where they both fail, we have no reason to
believe there is any Inspiration. Now this is that which appears in many
Discourses of the Apostles, where they do not say that God has taught them by
extraordinary Revelation that which they publish; And where the matter it self
shows that there was no need of his doing it.

It does not therefore follow, that those who acknowledge the Inspiration of
the Prophets are obliged to acknowledge the like of all other sacred Writers;
because there are convincing Reasons which oblige us to believe that the
Prophets speak Truth, when they say Thus says the Lord; etc. and no reason to
believe that the Apostles were extraordinarily inspired, when they say it not;
and when their Discourses have in them no mark of such like Inspiration.

If we reflect upon this difference between Prophecies, and Discourses which
have nothing of Prophetic in them, we shall take heed of applying to this
Subject a loose Maxim, and which is good for nothing; viz. That is happens most
frequently that those who distinguish and divide Matters, with design to make
use of part and reject the other, do give great advantage to their Adversaries.
On the contrary, it scarce ever happens, that in handling a compounded Subject
there can be made such general Rules as may be equally applied to all the parts
of it. Parts of different nature must of necessity be differently handled.

Objection 11.

It has been said, Page 49.
that by the holy Spirit, or the Spirit of God, may be understood the Spirit of
Holiness and of Constancy, which the Gospel inspires; or such a Disposition of
Mind as is an Effect of our Faith. But the general Reasons there made use of,
which are grounded only upon equivocal words, can prove nothing but Generals:
They must be applied, and particular Enquiry made, whether the holy Spirit has
any other Signification in Scripture or no. Mr. Simon Resp. Page 131.

Answer.

When a Passage is to be answered wherein there is an equivocal word, upon
which an Objection is founded, it is sufficient to show that such a word may be
understood in another Sense, than that in which it has been taken. There is no
need of examining all the other Significations that it may have. It suffices to
show that the Signification then given it is agreeable to the ordinary use of
the Language, and suitable to the Subject there treated of. It was Mr. Simon's
part therefore to show that where it is said of St. Stephen, (on occasion of
whom the Observation was made) That they could not resist the Wisdom and Spirit
by which he spoke; I say it was his part to show that by the word Sprit any
thing ought to be understood but the Spirit of the Gospel; that is to say, a
Disposition of Mind conformable to the Precepts of Jesus Christ. He ought to
have shown that this word in this place ought necessarily to be understood in
another Sense. But Mr. Simon seldom gives himself the trouble to read the
places of Scripture that are cited; as appears in the same Page, where he says
that St. Paul told the High Priest with a just Indignation, God shall smite
thee thou whited Wall; and where he compares the words of St. Paul to those of
Jesus Christ, when he calls Herod Fox; and to the Reproaches that the Prophets
make to the Kings of Israel. But he should have shown us in what place Jesus
Christ and the Prophets confessed they were to blame in doing so, as St. Paul
confesses he was. God has Power to censure Princes: But it belongs not to
Subjects to do it, when they think sit. So St. Paul had no right to abuse the
High Priest, on his own Head: though those who had received express Order from
God to make such like Reproaches to Princes, cannot be blamed for it. But Mr.
Simon, who probably never thought of all this, is not aware of this difference;
and argues always on, without understanding what he finds fault with.

Objection 12.

The Promise which Jesus Christ made his Apostles, Page 42, etc.
that the holy Spirit should teach them what they should say when they came
before the Judges, seems to have been explained as a general Promise for all
that they should say; whereas it only relates to what they should say for the
defense of the Gospel. Luc. Chap. 12. ver. 11.

Answer.

The promise is expressed in general terms, and must relate to that which the
Apostles should be obliged to say as well for the defense of their own Persons,
as for that of the Gospel. For it was of the greatest importance that these
first Ministers of Jesus Christ should then say nothing unworthy of the
Doctrine of which they were the Heralds. But if this Promise must not be taken
in so large a Sense, in relation to the Discourses which the Apostles should
make before Judges; neither ought it to be so taken in relation to their
preaching of the Gospel. My Design was only to show, that since the words could
not be taken in the whole extent of their Signification, it could not from
thence be necessarily inferred that the Apostles had then a Prophetic
Inspiration,

Objection 13.

The Promise ( John 16.) Page 58.
that when the Spirit of Truth shall come, it shall lead you into all Truth,
ought not to be understood so, as if it were entirely accomplished the day of
Pentecost; but as a thing that should be accomplished according to the
occasions and necessities that the Apostles should be in, of knowing some
further Truths. But it seems as if Mr. N. supposed that this promise is
ordinarily understood, as if it ought to have been accomplished all at once.

Answer.

The reason of my insisting upon that was to make appear that this Promise,
though conceived in so general terms, ought necessarily to receive some
Qualification; and consequently that it ought not to be understood, like an
Axiom of Geometry, in the utmost Signification of its Terms. Now that being
once granted, it cannot be made appear that this Promise relates to a Prophetic
Inspiration. There is a Passage very like this in the first Epistle of St.
John, Chap. 2. ver. 27. But the anointing which ye have received of him,
abides in you: and ye need not that any Man teach you: but, as the same
anointing teaches you of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie: and even as
it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. It is apparent that this cannot be
understood strictly, since St. John speaks to all the Christians to whom he
writ.

Objection 14.

Whereas it has been affirmed that the Apostles did not agree ( Acts 15.) Page
57.
till after they had disputed a great while; it is not said in that Chapter,
That the Apostles disputed; but only that When there had been much disputing,
Peter rose up, etc.

Answer.

Two things were considered in this History. The first is, The Opinion that Men
had of the Apostles, viz. That they were not looked upon as Persons infallible,
whenever they began to speak of the Gospel; since they were not believed just
at their first speaking. The second is, The Conduct of the Apostles on this
occasion, which is expressed in these terms: The Apostles and Elders came
together for to consider of this matter. And when there had been much
disputing, Peter rose up, and said, etc. The common Opinion is, that when the
Debate was about Doctrinal Matters, the Truth was immediately presented to the
Minds of the Apostles, without any need of Meditation. This is undoubtedly true
as to the things that Jesus Christ had taught them clearly: And they needed no
extraordinary Inspiration to call them to mind. But this Principle is extended
by some to all the Functions of their Charge. Now ask if that were so, what
need was there that the Apostles should not only meet, but also talk a long
while together? The first that had spoke would have sound all the rest of the
same mind, and there would have been no more to do but for him to pronounce
upon the Question, according to their general, though tacit, Agreement. It
cannot be said there was no Conference amongst the Apostles and Elders
concerning this doctrine; since St. Luke, after having said that the Apostles
and Elders came together, immediately adds, that there was much disputing, and
that Peter rose up and said, etc. Neither can the Principle of Mr. Simon be
here made use of, who says that the Apostles might not determine any thing by
their own Authority, but by the common Consent of all the Church, and that
therefore it was that they assembled, and exposed in public their Reasons for
not imposing Jewish Ceremonies upon the Gentiles. If the Apostles were as much
inspired as the Jewish Prophets of the Old Testament, it is ridiculous to say
that they ought to determine nothing by their own Authority, but by the Consent
of all the Church. They had no more to do but to declare what the holy Spirit
had revealed to them, as did the Prophets; who met not together to confer about
their prophecies before the pronouncing of them; but pronounced them as soon as
God had commanded them, without staying for any body's Consent. And herein they
acted not by their private Authority, but by the Authority that God gave them,
in commanding them to speak to the People. No more would the Apostles have
acted by their own private Authority, in following the Motions of the holy
Spirit.

But Mr. Simon has fancied a very particular sort of Inspiration in the
Apostles. Ibid.
He says it was necessary they should declare that they determined nothing,
which was not conformable to the holy Scriptures, and to the Doctrine which
they had received from their Master, and that for that Reason it was necessary
to deliberate thereupon in Assemblies; in which their Opinions happened to be
sometimes divided. A Man must be very acute, that can comprehend how Men
inspired after a Prophetic manner could be of different Opinions. But Mr. Simon
clears this Difficulty wonderfully in the following words. We ought not (says
he) to be surpised at this Diversity of Opinions, since every one grounded his
particular one upon Inspiration. Now this is that which should have hindered
them from being of different Opinions; since assuredly God inspires not several
Opinions about one and the same thing. It is all one as if one should say that
we ought not to be surpised, that of two Prophets, one should say a thing
shall happen, and the other that it shall not happen, because they both ground
their Predictions upon Inspiration. And indeed Mr. Simon corrects himself,
after a fashion, by adding; Or rather upon the Authority of the Scriptures, and
the Light which they had received from Religion. If he understands by the
Inspiration of the Apostles, nothing but the Light which they had received from
Religion, why does he make all this ado; since herein we agree with him? He
ought to tell us whether or no, when the Apostles spoke by Inspiration, they
did any thing, but express, in their own way, the Reasonings which God had put
ready framed into their Minds. If that be so, how can we conceive that their
Opinions should not be one and the same? And if he inspired them not with the
Reasonings they used, then we cannot attribute Prophetic Inspiration to them;
since it is therein that Prophetic Inspiration consists. It is very absurd
therefore to believe, that all the Reasonings the Apostles used in preaching
the Gospel, and all those we read in their Books, were inspired. For it is
therein that the Inspiration of the Apostles is ordinarily conceived to
consist. This is that uniform, constant, and ordinary Inspiration which Mr.
Simon comprehends not, because he never thought well upon it. Nor indeed does
he know what Opinion he is of Sometimes he speaks like the generality of
Divines, sometimes again he openly contradicts them, as may be seen by the
words I have cited. He must study a little better this matter, if he will have
us answer him: For it is very likely that for the most part he understands not
himself. I will give but one Example more of it. (It is that which he says
concerning the Author of Ecclesiastes* p. 138.) For we need but read his words,
to find that the Prior of Bolleville minds not what he says. The Author, says
he, of this Work did not design ONLY to persuade Men to pass their Time in
Pleasure. -- To which may be added, that Declamation being the proper Character
of a Preacher, it is no wonder to see him despise all the ordinary Business and
Employments of the World, and to prefer an easy commodious Life before all the
Troubles that attend a contrary Practice: For which he is not to be censured as
if he were an Epicure, after the manner that Mr. N. here understands the
Opinions of the Epicureans. He would have done well to have told us of what
sort of Epicurism the Author of the Ecclesiastes may be accused.

Objection 15.

It is a great piece of Boldness to judge four Books of the Old Testament (three
that bear the Name of Solomon, and that of Job) as unworthy to be in the Hebrew
Canon. That Liberty of censuring would weaken the Principles of our Religion.
For every one by the same Rule may say that such or such a Book is not
Canonical, according to his own fancy.

Answer.

Although we may reject some Books of the Old Testament, it does not follow
that we may do the same by all of them. Neither does it follow, because many
Ancient and Modern Divines have thought it would have been better not to have
joined, with the Writings of the Apostles, certain Books that are now in the
Canon of the New Testament, that therefore we may reject all the Books of the
Apostles. There are Books that are indisputably of those Authors whose Name
they bear; and there are others which have been questionable, and are so still
amongst the Learned; as the Epistle to the Hebrews, that of St. James, the
second of St. Peter, the two last of St. John, and that of St. Jude. These
Doubts hinder us not from agreeing about the Gospels, and St. Paul's Epistles;
nor from proving clearly that they are the Books of those whose Name they bear.
I know not why we may not doubt of some of the Books of the Old Testament, as
well as of some of those of the New; and why ill Consequences should be drawn
from their Opinions who doubt of some of the former, when none is drawn from
theirs that reject the latter. The Canon of the Books of the New Testament
ought to be of much greater importance with us than that of the Old. It is a
mistake that we ought to receive all or reject all. It is not true that we
ought to receive all. It is less true that we ought to reject all. But there is
a mean betwixt these two Extremes.

Objection 16.

But what will be said to these words of St. Paul, 2 Timothy III. 16. All
Scripture is of Divine Inspiration? For they ought to be read in the vulgar
Translation, according to the Greek, and also according to the ancient vulgar,
Omnis Scriptura divinitus inspirata and utilis; whereas Mr. N. reads them,
Omnis Scriptura divinitus inspirata utilis est. The Verb est is not in the
Greek, but (...), which signifies Et, is before utilis. If this Verb be to be
supplied (because it is often wanting in the Hebrew and the Syriac, and
consequently in the Greek of the New Testament) it ought to be done in this
manner, Omnis Scriptura divinitus inspirata est and utilis.

Answer.

Mr. Simon's Decrees are not without Appeal. We maintain, against him, that
this Passage may very well be thus translated; All Scripture that is divinely
inspired is also profitable for Instruction, for Reproof, etc. (...), etc. So
the vulgar translates it; which Mr. Simon improperly corrects, and which the
Gentlemen of Port Royal have judiciously followed. St. Paul's Design favors
this Version. He tells Timothy, that the holy Scriptures are able to make him
wise unto Salvation: to which he adds, That all Scripture given by Inspiration
of God is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Instruction in
Righteousness; that the Man of God may be perfect, etc. These words are a sort
of Explanation of those foregoing, where St. Paul sets down after what manner
the holy Scriptures may instruct to Salvation. There is a tacit opposition here
between Holy Writ and certain profane Studies; As will easily appear, if we go
back a little higher to find the Thread of St. Paul's Discourse, and observe the
occasion of his saying, That all Writ divinely inspired is profitable, etc. St.
Paul describes in the Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4.
beginning of the Chapter a sort of wicked People, whom in the 5 th Verse he
orders Timothy to avoid. The Characters he marks them by suit very well to the
Gnostics. But it matters not of whom He speaks. It suffices that we observe
that they were Persons who boasted of teaching their Hearers many things;
witness those Ver. 6, 7.
Women they had seduced, which were always learning, and never arrived to the
knowledge of the Truth. Ver. 8, 9,
But the Apostle foretells their Seducement should not long continue. Ver. 10,
11.
He represents to Timothy that he had fully known his Doctrine, his manner of
Life, and the Persecutions he had suffered; in order to strengthen him by his
Example. Ver. 12, 13.
He declares that the Good shall always be persecuted, and that there shall
still be Seducers, and Persons seduced. V. 14. and fol.
But Thou, continues he, be steadfast in the things thou have learned, and have
been assured of, knowing from whom thou have learned them, and that from a
Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise
unto Salvation through Faith in Jesus Christ. He opposes plainly the Study of
the holy Scriptures to the Study of fabulous Doctrines; which some Impostors
then taught, and whereof he complains in many places of his two Epistles to
Timothy (1 Ep. Chapter 1. v. 4. Chapter 4. v. 7. 2 Ep. Chapter 4. v. 4.) And as here he
orders his dear Disciple to continue firm in those things he had learned, and
which he had been assured of; he likewise ends his first Epistle with this
Exhortation, O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy Trust, avoiding
profane and vain bablings, and opposition of Science falsely so called; which
some professing, have erred concerning the Faith. And thus when he adds, That
all Scripture given by Inspiration, etc. It is as if he had said to Timothy,
That he ought to keep close, as he had done hitherto, to the study of the Old
Testament; which would instruct him sufficiently in the way to Salvation, by
joining thereunto Faith in Jesus Christ: Because all Scripture inspired by God,
as is a great part of the Old Testament, is profitable for Instruction: Whereas
if he applied himself to the false Science that some Impostors then boasted of,
he would cultivate Doctrines that would be proper for nothing, but to raise
Disputes, instead of edifying; as he had elsewhere told him. By this it is
evident, that all this reasoning of St. Paul does in no wise suppose that all
the Scripture of the Old Testament is inspired; and that the Apostle pretends
thereby only to intimate that the inspired Writings (without fixing the number
of them) are more profitable than those that some Persons at that time boasted
of.

Rivet had objected this Passage to Grotius, against the Opinion of that
incomparable Critic concerning the Inspiration of the sacred Books. Let us see
how Grotius answers him. Locus 2 Timothy 3. 16. alium sensum habet quam putat D.
Rivetus. Non enim hoc dicit Paulus, Omnis Scriptura est (...) divinitus
inspirata; quam multae enim sunt Scripturae humani ingenii? Nec hoc vult omnem
eam quae est (...); id enim esset nugari: sed hoc vult, Omnem scripturam quae a
Deo inspirata est (id est (...) sermonem propheticum, ut loquitur Petrus 2 Ep.
chapter 1. v. 19.) non in hoc tantum valuisse suo tempore, ut ostenderet Dei
Praescientiam, and Prophetis auctoritatem daret, verum semperesse utilem, quia
simul multa continet documenta perpetua, vitiorum reprehensiones, excitamenta
and justiam. Hunc sensum recte vidit Syrus, sic interpretans; In Scriptura,
quae per Spiritum scripta est, utilitas est ad doctrinam, etc.
The place, says he, (2 Timothy Chap. 3. v. 16.) has another signification than D.
Rivet thinks: For St. Paul says not, All Writing is divinely inspired. (For how
many are the Writings of human Invention?) Nor does he mean that all that is
inspired is divinely inspired. That would be trifling. But this is his meaning:
All Scripture that is divinely inspired (that is the Word of Prophecy, as St.
Peter styles it, 2 Ep. Chap. 1. v. 19.) is not only useful in its own time, to
show God's Praescience, and to give Authority to the Prophets: but is moreover
at all times profitable: because it contains many standing Rules, Reproofs of
Vices, Incitements to Righteousness, etc. This Sense was rightly observed by
the Syriac Interpreter who thus renders it; In the Scripture, which is written
by the Spirit, there is profit in respect of Doctirne, etc.

This Passage then of St. Paul proves nothing against me; let Mr. Simon say
what he pleases. He seems not to understand Christian Religion thoroughly
enough, to treat of these matters.

These, Sir, are the principal Objetions that have been made to Mr. N. against
his Essay concerning the Inspiration of the sacred Penmen. You may judge
whether he has solved the Difficulties proposed or no. For my part I will not
judge of that Question. But this I dare boldly say; that Mr. Simon is not the
Man that will run him down; and that the Answers you have now read, are
plausible enough to puzzle an abler Man than he. I am, etc.

THE FIFTH LETTER.
I Am persuaded, Sir, that the two last Letters I writ you, will have fully
satisfied those among your Friends, who wished that the Writing about
Inspiration had been suppressed, or who desired some Explanation of the
Author's Opinion, or even who believed they were in the wrong that said it was
hard to confute it. We must now try to give some Satisfaction to those who have
said that this Opinion leads to Deism, and that our Friend was infected with
the detestable Opinions of the Deists. Now I having openly maintained the
contrary, he has imposed upon me the Task of justifying him in this Particular.
And I think I can evidently demonstrate, that they who have brought this
Accusation against our Friend, have therein violated that which is most sacred
in Christian Religion; and that while they endeavor to maintain it by a Zeal,
not only wanting Knowledge, but also void of Charity, they have not sufficiently
reflected upon the true Proofs of the Divinity of our Religion, and upon the
Method used by many of those who have undertaken to desend it against Atheists
and Infidels. But I confess to you I dare not promise to my self ever to
satisfy entirely this sort of People; because they are such as fancy they know
every thing. They have given over all Study; they examine nothing; and they
think they should do a thing unworthy of their Character, if they should
confess they had condemned any one wrongfully, and if they abated never so
little of the heat of their Zeal. This Zeal, or rather blind Passion, which is
made up of Choler, and animated by Superstition, Pride and Envy, discomposes
them so violently, and with so little Intermission, that it is very hard to
find a moment wherein they are fit to hear quietly the Justifications of those,
whom they have too rashly condemned. It is not amiss however to tell them our
Reasons. If they themselves will not hear them, yet perhaps these Reasons may
prevent some other Persons of more ingenuous Dispositions from forming such
rash Judgments, as the vehement Declamations of these implacable Zealots would
otherwise move them to.

Two things ought here to be distinguished: The Person, and the Opinions. A Man
may have Opinions, the Consequences whereof are very evil and very dangerous,
without being aware of these Consequences, how necessarily soever they may seem
unto others to follow from them. I have made this plain in the beginning of my
first Letter on this Subject. It ought not then to be concluded, because a Man
embraces a certain Opinion, that therefore he admits all the Consequences. This
Truth is owned by every one; but little made use of by any, when they pass
Judgment upon those that are opposite to their Party. Nevertheless, none that
are equitable can refuse to allow this Justification of our Friend; I mean that
protesting, as he does, an utter abhorrence of those impious Consequences,
which in his Judgment are unduly wrested from his Opinions, he himself (at
least) ought to be absolved, although his Doctrine be condemned.

Natural Equity obliges us to believe that a Man is persuaded of a thing when
he affirms it, and when we have no evident signs of his design to deceive us.
This also is a Rule in Morality generally agreed upon, but of which as little
use is made as of the foregoing one. But let Men do what they will; it must be
acknowledged that those who refuse to believe our Friend, when he affirms that
he is perfectly convinced of the Truth of the Christian Religion, do violate
the Charity, and the Equity, which we ought to have naturally one for another;
seeing they have no evident sign to convince them that this Protestation of his
is hypocritical.

The Truth is, these Zealots, who judge amiss of his Piety, ground their rash
Judgment but upon very light Suspicions. They believe that our Friend has
discovered but part of his Opinions concerning the Inspiration of the holy
Writers, for fear of too much thwarting the Public, and losing altogether his
Reputation. But he, on the other side, protests that he has laid open the very
bottom of his Thoughts, without any Reserve; and without hiding any thing,
which he thought might contribute to discover the whole Extent of his Opinion
in this matter. This is all he can do to repel so unjust a Suspicion. If they
who frame a rash Judgment upon so ill-grounded Suspicions, met with the like
Usage, none of them would be found innocent. It might always be said, when they
maintain any thing from whence an ill Consequence may be drawn (and from what
may not that be done?) that they speak not all they think, for fear of being
cried down, and losing their Pensions. The Zeal, for example, of which they are
so proud, might pass for an Effect of an artificial Policy; by which they
endeavor to render themselves Masters of the Peoples Minds; in order to
satisfy their Ambition, and oppress their Enemies. In a word, they should not
make one step, which might not be interpreted maliciously, and made look
odiously. But it behooves us and them to remember that Precept of our Savior,
founded upon the plain Light of Nature, Do not to another that which ye would
not should be done to you. If the Heat of an indiscreet Zeal keep them from
observing this Precept, yet nothing shall make us trangress it.

I conclude then that our Friend cannot be ill thought of, without wronging the
universal Rules of Equity and Charity; and in this case those Rules will be the
more enormously broken, by how much the Impiety which our Friend is accused of
is more detestable. Rash Judgments and ill-grounded Suspicions are always
Crimes, although the matter they relate to be of small importance: but when the
Concern is not only the Reputation of a Person, but also his Life, and which is
yet more, his Salvation, they become still more heinous. To affirm that a Man
is of an Opinion such as is that of the Deists, without having evident Proofs
of it, is to say that a Man is an Enemy of God and Men; that he is in a State
wherein he can expect nothing but the Anger of Heaven; wherein he merits even
to be no longer suffered upon Earth; and it argues that these Calumniators,
after having made him lose his good Name, would if they could deprive him also
of his Life. Let any reasonable Man judge, if, without certain and convincing
Proofs, a Man may pronounce so terrible a Sentence against his Neighbor, and
not be guilty of the greatest Injustice imaginable.

It seems to me, Sir, that this is so plain I need dwell no longer upon it. The
Person of our Friend then being justified against these rash Suspicions; we
will now show that the Truth of the Christian Religion may be undeniably
proved, without taking any side about the Doctrine of Inspiration; and
consequently without supposing the common Opinion. This I intend to do; after I
have first observed that several great Men, and who have passed for good
Christians, have held this Opinion without losing the Reputation they had of
Piety. There is not a Man of Worth and Honor among the Protestants, who will
dare to say that Erasmus and Grotius were Libertines; and yet both of them
defended openly this same Opinion. But because there are some Divines who
esteem none but those that have been of the Society they live in, I will repeat
some reremarkable words of a Divine famous amongst the Presbyterians in
England, and even amongst those on this side the Water. It is Mr. Richard
Baxter, who speaks thus in an English Book translated not long since into
Dutch, and entitled, The Saints everlasting Rest. 22. In 4o Land. 1656. Edit.
6. par. 2. chapter 3. Sect. 2. page 210.
Though all Scripture be of Divine Authority: yet he who believes but some one
Book, that contains the Substance of the Doctrine of Salvation, may be saved:
much more they that have doubted but of some particular Books. 23. They that
take the Scripture to be but the Writings of godly honest Men, and so to be
only a means of making known Christ, having a gradual Precedence to the
Writings of other godly Men: and do believe in Christ upon those strong Grounds
which are drawn from his Doctrine, Miracles, etc. rather than upon the
Testimony of the Writing, it being purely infallible and divine, may yet have a
divine and saving Faith. 24. Much more those that believe the whole Writing to
be of Divine Inspiration where it handles the Substance, but doubt whether God
infallibly guided them in every Circumstance. And in the next Page. 32. The
Circumstantials are many of them divine, yet so as they have in them something
humane, as the bringing of St. Paul 's Cloak and the Parchments, and (as it
seems) his Counsel about Marriage, etc. 33. Much more is there something human
in the Method and Phrase, which is not so immediately divine as the Doctrine.
34. Yet is there nothing sinfully humane, and therefore nothing false in all.
35. But all innocent Imperfection here is in the Method and Phrase, which of we
deny, we must renounce most of our Logic and Rhetoric. Nothing can be more
expressly said for the Justification of our Friend. Those who have a value for
Mr. Baxter, must forgo their Esteem of him, or else not condemn so lightly
those who in his Judgment may have a saving Faith, together with some Opinions
different from those commonly received.

It may likewise be observed, that many of those who have writ of the Truth of
the Christian Religion, have proved it without supposing the particular
Inspiration of the Historians of the New Testament to be such as it is
ordinarily taken to be; as Grotius, whose Book has been alike esteemed by all
Parties. Which shows that our Belief is not founded upon this Supposition; and
that consequently one may be a good Christian without admitting it. But it is
better to represent this by an Example, which will give you a more lively
Impression of what I aim at.

I will therefore now endeavor, in as few words as is possible, to give you
the Idea of a Method that seems to me very strong, and very proper to convince
a Libertine of the Truth of our Religion, without once mentioning any thing of
particular Inspiration. I do not pretend thereby to condemn all other Methods
that may be used to the like purpose; but it seems to me that this is the
simplest of all, and subject to the fewest Difficulties. You will allow me,
Sir, this small Digression; which may perhaps not be unuseful, in a time when
there are every where so many that doubt of the Truth of the Christian Religion.

The first, and the greatest Objection the Libertines make us is, That our
Judgments are pre-possess'd, which hinders us from being undeceived. We say the
same of them; and maintain that it is nothing but sensual Inclinations that
raise those Difficulties in their Minds, which would vanish if they examined
them without Passion. It is not just that either they or we should take for
granted our Pre-possessions, as Principles demonstrated, or which need not be
demonstrated. Let us then act on both sides as if we had not yet espoused any
party, and let us urge nothing that is not founded upon Principles which both
sides acknowledge.

It is agreed that there are certain Characters by which we may be assured
whether a thing has been done or no, and by which we may distinguish the Truth
or Falsehood of a History. If we do not agree in that, we are Pyrrhoniens; or,
to give it a better Name, altogether senseless: for none but a Madman can
doubt of the Truth of all the Histories in the World. But farther, we must also
agree in another thing, which is no less certain. It is, that there are certain
Matters of Fact, the Truth whereof is better conceived than it can be proved;
and which are of such a nature, that unless a Man be in a proper Disposition of
Mind he can hardly be induced to believe them. For Example, If any one should
tell us here that the Inquisition of Spain and Italy has approved the Works of
Calvin, and allowed the People to read them in Spanish and Italian; although it
is impossible for us to believe it, and that we are firmly persuaded of the
contrary, we should not be able to convince a Person who should be obstinate in
maintaining it, until we had given him evident Proofs thereof. In like manner,
if there were false Witnesses ready to swear that one of our Friends, (whose
Virtue had been well known to us for diverse Years, and who but just then was
gone out of our Company) went then immediately in cold Blood to assassinate a
Person unknown to him, for no other reason but only to make an Anatomical
Dissection of his Body; it is certain we should not believe them, although it
might not be in our Power to prove judicially the contrary.

It is easy to imagine a thousand Examples of such like Truths, which we
apprehend better than we can prove. That being supposed, if we come to the
Christian Religion, there occurs at the very first a difficulty in discerning
what are the Doctrines of this Religion: for Christians have great
Controversies among themselves about their Belief. There would be no end of
going about to examine all these Controversies. Let us therefore suspend our
Judgment thereupon, and see first wherein all Christians are agreed. They all
agree, for Example, that most of the Books of the New Testament are the
Writings of those Authors whose Name they bear, and who writ them more than
sixteen hundred Years ago; that the History therein is true, and that we ought
to obey the Commandments therein contained. This Obedience may be reduced to
these general Heads; a rendering to God the Service due to him; a trusting in
his Promises; and a keeping his Commandments, in what concerns both our selves
and our Neighbor. But this supposes a Belief of all those Scriptural Truths
without which a Man cannot perfom his Duty; as that there is a God, absolutely
perfect, who has sent Jesus Christ into the World to draw Men from their Sins,
and guide them to eternal Salvation; that this Jesus has been raised from the
Dead, and that he now reigns in Heaven, etc. All Christians agree in all this.

Let us suspend still our Jugdment concerning Doctrines, and speak yet only of
the practical Part of our Religion. It cannot be denied but that if all Men
lived according to the Precepts of the Gospel; and that, out of the hope of
another Life, they betook themselves with Care to adore the Creator of the
Universe, to live always in Temperance, and Sobriety, and to do constantly to
their Neighbor as they desire their Neighbor should do to them; It cannot be
denied, I say, but this manner of living would be very agreeable and very
advantageous to Human Society. We should not then hear any words spoken that
could cause us Trouble, or that would kindle Divisions in Religion. There would
be no Sickness through Intemperance, no Vexation, nor any Quarrel occasioned by
Debauchery. The doing Wrong to ones Neighbor, and the suffering any
Inconvenience through the Inhumanity or Malice of Men would be things unknown:
Men would help one another in all their Needs, with all the Fervency and
Earnestness that could be desired: If by mistake any of them had been the
occasion of Inconvenience to one another, they would mutually pardon one
another, and repair that Damage by all sorts of Services. The love of Honors,
or of Riches, would trouble no Man's Mind, nor cause any Envy or Discord. In a
word, the Mind being in a perfect Tranquillity, the Body as healthful as feeble
Nature will admit, and both Mind and Body enjoying the innocent Pleasures which
the Gospel allows, this amiable Life would not be quitted but for the enjoyment
of another, freed from all the inevitable Inconveniences entailed by Nature
upon the Inhabitants of this Earth.

All that have any Idea of the Rules of Morality taught by Jesus Christ, must
necessarily agree in this Truth; that by generally observing them, Men would be
exceedingly happy. But it may perhaps be asked, Where is there in the World a
Society in which, Men live conformably to these Rules of Morality? That is not
the Question. It is sufficient for our present purpose that there are at this
time many Nations that make Profession of it, though they live not up to the
Practice. Let us enquire whether these Nations invented those Rules, or
received them from their Predecessors? They all tell us they are not the
Inventers; and it may well be judged, by their way of living, that they say
true: For it is not probable they should have invented the Precepts of the
Gospel, and yet live so contrary to them. Inventions always savor something of
the temper of the Spirit of the Inventors.

But we have no need of Arguments to convince us of this: We may examine from
Age to Age the Authors that are left us, beginning at our own, and going
backwards to that wherein Christian Religion was first spoken of, to see who
they were that brought it into the World. We shall readily find, by reading
those Authors, that it is more than thirteen hundred Years since the Roman
Emperors being become Christians, Christianity has flourished in a great part
of Europe, Asia, and Africa. Since that time we may be convinced, by a very
great number of Christian Authors, that Profession has been constantly made of
believing that the Morality taught us in the Gospel came from Heaven. If we go
yet further backwards, we shall find that even under the Pagan Emperors there
was a great multitude of Christians that professed the same Doctrine. We have
many Christian Authors, of those times, who assure us of it. But, without
staying to reckon up needlessly Authors sufficiently known, let us examine in
what Age Christianity began first to be spoken of. All Christians agree that it
was under the Reign of Tiberius; and if we consult Heathen Authors, we shall
see that before that time it was altogether unknown. Tacitus, who was born
toward the end of the Reign of Claudius, or about the beginning of that of
Nero, says that Nero, after having set Rome on fire in diverse places, and
thereby destroyed the City, accused the Christians of it, and made them suffer
horrible Punishments. Upon that occasion he speaks of the beginning of
Christianity in these terms. The Author of this Sect (says he) was Christ, An.
l. 15. c. 44.
who in the Reign of Tiberius was put to death by Pontius Pilate Governor of
Judaea. This dangerous Superstition, continues he, in speaking of the Christian
Religion, though nipp'd in the Bud, broke out a fresh, and spread not only
through Judaea, where the Mischief first began, but came even into Rome it
self, where all things shameful and abominable are brought, and find Persons
ready to join with and uphold them. Presently as many as confessed they were
Christians, were seized on, and soon after a great many more were discovered,
but were not found guilty of the Fire, though they were the Objects of the
public Hatred, etc. You see here the Testimony of a Heathen Author, who being
born in the beginning of Christianity, and very well versed in the Passages of
his Time, assures us of two things then publicly notorious. The one, that the
Authors of the Christian Religion had lived in Iudaea in the Reign of Tiberius,
and had been punished during the Government of Pontius Pilate. The other, that
after his Death, in few Years, the Embracers of his Doctrine were extremely
multiplied. Suetonius also tells us, In Claud. c. 15.
that in the time of the Emperor Claudius, the Christians were banished out of
Rome; which shows that there were then a great number of them in that Capital
City.

We find also by the Testimony of another Author, contemporary to Tacitus, that
the Christians at that time made Profession of the same Morals they teach now
adays. Pliny being Proconsul of Bithynia, about threescore and ten Years after
Pontius Pilate had been Governor of Iudaea, by Trajan's Order sought out the
Christians within his Province, and informed himself with all the care
imaginable concerning their Opinions: Hereupon he writes a Letter to Trajan,
Lib. 10. Ep. 97.
which Letter is still preserved. I was informed, says he, that all their
Crime, or Error, consisted only in that they used to assemble themselves upon a
certain Night, and to sing together a Hymn to Christ, as to a God: That they
all obliged themselves by Oath not to any Crime; but on the contrary, that they
would not commit Felony, Robbery, or Adultery; and that they would deceive no
Man, nor break a Trust: This done, they dispersed and returned again after
sometime to eat together, which they did in common, and without any harm: But
that they had given over doing it upon my Proclamation, wherein, according to
your Orders, I had forbidden all sorts of Conventicles. This made me believe
that I could not get out the Truth better than by putting to the Rack two Women
Servants, whom they call Diaconesses; but I discovered nothing but a strange
and excessive Superstition. They that understand the Latin Tongue, will not
wonder that Tacitus and Pliny make use of the word Superstition. The Romans
gave that Name to all sorts of Religious Worship that were not established by
public Authority.

Two such Witnesses as these cannot be excepted against; Seeing it is evident
they had no favor for Christians, and were perhaps the most able Men of their
time; but especially if we consider that they treat of matters of Fact, which
they themselves had either seen, or which were known by all Men, as was the
Death of Jesus Christ under Pontius Pilate. The Writings that we have of
Christians living between the times of Pilate and those of Tacitus or Trajan,
attest the same Truths: They date the beginning of Christianity from the same
Christ that Pilate put to Death, and they preach to us precisely the same
Morals.

We must then necessarily allow that there was in Iudaea, during the Reign of
Tiberius, a Person that laid the Foundation of the Christian Religion, and had
many Disciples. Let us now examine some of his first Disciples, and see what
sort of People they were. Let us read the Epistle which Clement, Bishop of
Rome, writ to the Christians of Corinth, forty Years after the Death of Jesus
Christ, and in the beginning of the Reign of Vespasian. There appears in this
Epistle a Spirit of Peace, of Charity, of Humility, and many lively and
pathetical Exhortations to the Observation of the Gospel-Morals. He reproves
severely those that had not observed them, but commends those that had. In the
beginning of that Epistle, he says among other things, That the Christians of
Corinth had labored day and night for their Brethren (to the end that the
number of the Elect might be saved) in applying themselves to Works of Mercy,
and of a good Conscience; That they had been sincere, without Malice, and
without remembering the Ill that any of them might formerly have done to one
another; That all Division and Schism was abhorred by them; That they were
afflicted for their Neighbor's Failings; That they looked upon his Necessities
as their own; That they never repented them of well-doing, but were always
ready to do all sorts of good Works; That in their Conversation, full of
Virtue, and worthy of Veneration, they did all things in the fear of God, whose
Commandments were writ in their Hearts. He adds afterward, That he had known
may Christians, Page 123. Ed. Ox. in 12o.
who, to redeem others out of Slavery, had put themselves in Chains; That many
having sold themselves for Slaves, had maintained others out of the price of
their own Liberty.

The Masters of this Clement were the first Disciples of Jesus of Nazareth, who
was the first Teacher of Christianity; and he gives Testimony of their great
Piety. Indeed if we read their Writings, we find nothing in them but what
speaks a profound Veneration of the Deity, an extreme Tenderness toward all
Men, and an extraordinary Strictness in all that concerns the Government of a
Man's Self. Let us choose which we will of them, we shall find nothing in their
Works but what tends to Piety. If some of their Writings have been questioned,
let us take those concerning which there never was any Question; Or, without
looking further, the Gospel according to St. Luke, and the first Epistle of St.
Paul to the Corinthians, which are cited by Clement, and we shall perceive
every where the same Morals which they endeavor to implant in the Hearts of
their Disciples.

I suppose all along that the Reader has some knowledge of the Precepts of the
Gospel, and has given some attention to what I said at the beginning; And then
I dare boldly say, that unless he have lost all Sense, he will acknowledge that
there is nothing more reasonable that the Morals of the Gospel; and that it
were to be wished that all the World observed them. The Apostles then in
exhorting their Hearers to live after a manner so reasonable, and so profitable
to human Society, required nothing of them contrary to Reason, or to the true
Interests of all Mankind. And this puts me in mind of the Saying of a Person,
that once had no great Opinion of the Truth of our Religion. When the Morals,
which the Disciples of Jesus Christ preached throughout the World, were thus
livelily described to him, he could not but fall into these words, which the
Evidence of the thing drew from him, I wish all the World had believed them.

This Doctrine of the Apostles ought undoubtedly to make all those who love
human Society, and their own Advantages, to listen to it. But it may here be
objected that perhaps the Apostles preached not this Doctrine, but in design to
insinuate themselves into the Minds of the People; and afterward, upon pretext
of Piety, to get from them whatsoever they had a mind to. But to answer that
Objection, in the first place I observe, and suppose it will be granted me,
that this Suspicion has no Foundation in the Doctrine which they preached. For
that condemns the love of Honors, of Riches, and of Pleasures. There cannot so
much as one single Passage of their Works be alleged that favors Ambition,
Covetousness, or Concupiscence.

This being so, this Suspicion can be grounded but upon one of these two
things; Either that the Apostles could hope to make some advantage of this
their Doctrine, when it should be received; or that they actually made it, when
they preached it. I understand here by Advantage A Good out-ballancing all the
Inconveniences that the Apostles underwent in preaching the Gospel, or at least
such a one as they esteemed in that degree. It is not probable, if they were
Deceivers, but that they proposed an Advantage to themselves greater than the
Pains they took: Otherwise they might justly be looked upon as Fools, which
they cannot (without great Impertinence) be supposed to have been by any that
read their Writings.

Now the Apostles could not hope to make any Advantage of their Doctrine,
unless it were received by the generality of those amongst whom they preached
it. For without that, they would have been exposed to perpetual Persecution.
None but Fools could expect to live quietly amongst People vehemently
prepossest with Opinions directly contrary to those they resolved to profess
and teach; People that believed themselves obliged for the Interest of the
State, and of Religion, to take away both the Estates and Lives of those that
opposed their Superstition. Such were the Romans, the Greeks, and the Jews, in
the times of the Apostles. They must then have hoped that their preaching would
take such effect as would draw after them the greatest part of the World. But
that was impossible to be hoped for, by any that had never so little knowledge
of the Disposition of the Heart of Man. And the Apostles, who had a great share
of this Knowledge, as appears by their Writings, could less than others imagine
such a thing. The Jews were so passionately wedded to their Ceremonies, that
there was not the least likelihood of succeeding with them. The Romans and
Greeks were so over Head and Ears in Pleasures, so covetous, so ambitious, that
the small number amongst them who had not lost all thought of Virtue, speak of
the Manners of that Age with Horror and Detestation. The Histories of both
those People (if we judge of them by the Ideas of the Gospel) present us, in the
Events of those Times, with a Picture of the most horrible Corruption that ever
was. And can it then be imagined that the Apostles should hope to draw to their
Opinions the generality of those that lived in such times? How could they
promise themselves, that People so blinded by their Passions, and so hardened
in their Crimes, would ever relent? No, they tell us plainly (after their
Master) that they hoped not to make the Gospel be received by any great number
of Persons, in comparison of those that would remain in Unbelief.

But if yet it be supposed that the Simplicity of the Apostles might have
encouraged them to hope for the Conversion of the greatest part of the Roman
Empire, Experience however would at length have undeceived them; since after
having preached many Years they were forced to acknowledge they had gained very
few. History shows us clearly, that for some Ages after the beginning of
Christianity there were much fewer Christians in the Roman Empire than
Heathens. Thus then we see that the Apostles were necessarily exposed to cruel
Persecutions all their Lives; scorned, and hated alike by Jews and Gentiles,
they could have no Recompense any way proportionable to their Labors. And so
they tell us plainly, that they expected nothing but Afflictions in this Life;
and that it was all they hoped for from Men of this World, in Recompense of
what they undertook in preaching unto them a Doctrine so reasonable as are the
Gospel-Morals. Nor were they deceived; for after having suffered great
Torments, they in the end lost their Lives in an ignominious manner, by the
hands of Executioners, asserting to the last the Truth of the Doctrine they had
preached. It was by great Injustice and Malice, says Clement, whom we cited
before, that Peter underwent not one or two, but many Pains; and after having
thereby born Testimony to the Truth, went to the place of Glory that was due to
him. It was through the like Malice of Men that Paul received the Reward of his
Patience; having been seven times put in Chains, whipped and stoned; Having
been the Herald of the Gospel in the East and in the West, and having rendered
his Faith illustrious; Having preached Justice to all the Earth, and being
arrived at the utmost part of the West, after having born Testimony to the
Truth before the principal Rulers there, he departed out of this World.

This Event of the preaching of the Apostles, absolutely overthrows the second
Ground whereon Men might build suspicions of their Sincerity, viz. that they
had made an Advantage by their preaching equivalent to the Troubles and Dangers
they were subject to. If they were esteemed by a small number of Persons of
mean Condition, that hindered them not from being despised by all the rest of
Mankind, Jews and Gentiles; from being ill treated and persecuted; from
suffering extreme Poverty; and at last from dying upon Scaffolds and Grosses;
as we have seen by what Clement says, and as all their Disciples unanimously
affirm. One of the Apostles themselves also tells us the same thing in one of
his Epistles: Even to this present hour (says he) we hunger and thirst, 1 Cor.
IV. 11.
and are naked and buffeted, and have no certain dewlling place; and labor,
working with our own Hands. Ib. XV. 19.
And again If in this Life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all Men most
miserable.

There is no body surely that has common Sense, who to obtain the Esteem of a
small number of People, without Power and without Reputation, would suffer so
great Troubles, become the Horror of Mankind, be used as the worst of Men, and
as those that were condemned to the Amphitheatres, be made a Spectacle to the
People. Ib. IV. 9.
A Man may be tickled with the itch of Glory, when he fancies to himself that
most of those among whom he lives will applaud that which he is doing: But it
never came into the Mind of any Man to expose himself to long Sufferings, and
at last to a cruel and ignominious Death, to the end only to be esteemed by a
very few contemptible People, and in the mean while to be looked upon as a
wicked and as a mad Man, by the greatest part of those with whom he lived.

The Truth of these Matters of Fact cannot be denied: That they preached the
Doctrine which we read in their Writings (and whereof the Christians still make
Profession) in the Reigns of Tiberius, and some of the following Emperors: That
they lived in great Trouble, and under many Afflictions: And that at last they
died miserably, in maintaining the Doctrine they had for diverse Years
published. We have seen these Truths attested by Heathens, as well as by their
own Disciples.

If we would suppose that the Apostles lived after a voluptuous manner, and
contrary to the Morals they preached, we must be obliged to deny their having
undergone those Sufferings which are attested by their Disciples; the first
whereof, in imitation of their Masters, as they themselves say, offered
themselves courageously to very many Afflictions, without making any advantage
thereof in this Life. To these Men, says Clement, speaking of St. Peter and St.
Paul, who lived after a divine manner, there joined themselves a great number
of the Elect, who having suffered many Punishments and Torments, have left us a
fair Example. Nay, supposing their living so voluptuously, we must also suppose
an Absurdity that is inconsistent even with common Sense; viz. That they
preaching that Men ought to undergo much Suffering for Religion, exhorting the
People to all sorts of Virtue, and yet living themselves at their Ease (without
taking care to practice the Precepts they gave to others, except only so far as
might serve to deceive the World) did nevertheless make a great number of
Disciples, not only sincere Imitators of their Master's pretended Virtues, but
who also died for a Doctrine, for which those that had taught them it refused
to suffer any thing.

It is conceiveable enough that seduced Persons may be as thoroughly persuaded
of a Falsehood, as others are of the most evident Truths; and may consequently,
in maintenance of a Falsehood, do all that the most resolute Men would do in
Justification of Truths of the greatest importance. But it cannot be conceived,
that Persons prepossessed from their Infancy with Opinions contrary to those of
the Apostles, would let themselves be so miserably seduced, that after having
embraced their Doctrine, they would suffer for it the most cruel Punishments,
whilst they saw that their Masters would not undergo any at all for it. Now we
see, by the Passage of Tacitus which we cited, that at the beginning of
Christianity a great number of People declared themselves Christians, tho they
saw that the bare public Profession of that Religion would expose them to the
Punishments due to Incendiaries, and to Nero's Fury. The reason of this must
necessarily be that some of the first Preachers of the Gospel, as their
Disciples assure us, gave Examples to others. Without that it is impossible to
conceive they could draw so many after them, and especially so many who endured
such horrible Torments for the Religion they learned from them.

From all this I draw no other Consequence than that the Apostles were sincere
Persons, who believed their own Doctrine; as were also those who by their
Example died for it. They must have been truly persuaded of the thing, that
would suffer so many Inconveniences, Fatigues, and Punishments as they
suffered, rather that abandon it.

Now the Apostles having been indisputably sincere Persons, we must confess
that if ever there were any in the World whose Virtue deserved Esteem, they
certainly deserved it from all Men. No design could be conceived more
profitable to Mankind than theirs, as has been shown in treating of the Morals
they preached. None could go about to bring that Design to pass with more
Earnestness and Zeal than they did, who sacrificed to it their Fortunes, their
Preferments, their Honors, their Pleasures, their Repose and their Lives. They
compassed Sea and Land under a thousand Dangers, attempted a thousand
Difficulties, suffered Inconveniences and Pains unexpressible. They exposed
themselves to most Men's Scorn, Malice and Cruelty. And to what end? To persuade
the same Men to live one with another after a manner so conformable to Reason,
so advantageous to Socity, so pleasant, so sweet, that, except the Sovereign
Happiness to be enjoyed in the Life that never ends, nothing can be imagined
preferable to it.

I ask now, If (being persuaded of the probity and sincerity of the Apostles,
and otherwise satisfied by their Discourses that they were not at all out of
their Wits) we could deny Credit to their Testimony, if they had said they had
seen with their own Eyes certain matters of Fact, which they related with many
Circumstances; and that they had heard with their own Ears Discourses full of
Sense and Wisdom, which they repeated from beginning to end. Let every Man ask
himself, if he would refuse to believe one of his Friends, whom he knew to be
sincere and judicious, if he assured him positively that he had heard such and
such a thing. Would one suspect for a Lie the Testimony of a rational Man, and
one who gave good signs of Sincerity, when he affirmed that he had been present
at the Execution of one of his Friends, had seen him die, and had heard him say
many things which he very distinctly remembered? I confess they that know not
the Sincerity or Judgment of a Person, may make a doubt of the Truth of what
they hear him say; but if once they are persuaded of his Integrity and
Understanding, it is impossible they should refuse to believe him. Every Man
may be convinced of this by his own Experience, and may, as I have already
observed, frame a thousand particular Examples to himself of what I have been
saying.

Now the Apostles tell us they lived some Years with Jesus of Nazareth, from
whom they learned all their Doctrine; that they saw him crucified, such a day,
of such a Month, of such a Year; that they saw him die upon the Cross, and
after that buried in a Sepulcher, hewn out of a Rock for the Family of a Jewish
Counselor called Joseph of Arimathea, who begged the Body of Jesus from
Pilate, and who, after having put it into the Sepulcher, roul'd a great Stone
to the Door; that they saw the Roman Soldiers keep Guard about the Sepulcher,
and that the chief of the Jews had carefully sealed it up, for fear any should
take away the Body. Can we, being persuaded as we ought to be of the Sincerity
and Wisdom of the Apostles, refuse to believe them in these things? Certainly
we must have lost all Sense, to believe that Persons of Wisdom and Integrity
would prevaricate, in affirming a thing of this nature with so many
Circumstances. The same Judgment must be made concerning the Discourses of
Jesus Christ, which they relate to us after a manner so lively, and so
circumstantiated, that we could not relate them better, if we came directly
from hearing them.

It is more clear than day, to those who are persuaded that the Apostles had
but common Sense and Sincerity, that they really spoke Truth in all these
Particulars.

That being so, Why should we not believe the same Apostles, when they assure
us that they have often seen their Master, in a moment, cure many incurable
Diseases; restore the Dead to Life; raise himself, after having lain more than
thirty hours in the Sepulcher; eat and drink with them afterward, for several
days; and at last ascend, in their Presence, in a Cloud to Heaven? I perceive
indeed that many Persons who would not have questioned the Testimony of the
Apostles if they had said nothing of the Miracles, Resurrection, and Ascension
of Jesus Christ, do, for that reason only, doubt of it. They would have easily
believed that in Iudaea, during the Government of Pontius Pilate, there had
been a Man named Jesus, who taught the Morals we read now in the Gospels; that
the Jewish Priests through Envy and Malice put him to Death; but that his
Disciples refrained not from teaching his Precepts, and that the most
afrightful Torments hindered them not from publishing them. They would praise
all Christ's Doctrine, as the most excellent Philosophy that ever was known to
have been taught amongst Men, and the best Principles that can be thought on to
oblige them to live well one with another. But they reject all this, and
believe that the Apostles were Impostors, only because they speak of Miracles,
which they say they saw their Master do. Let us consider a little why these Men
do so.

There are but two ways whereby the Falsehood of a matter of Fact may be known.
The first is, when it is known that the Witnesses who relate it are deceived,
or have a design to deceive, though otherwise what they relate seem very
possible. The second is, when by clear and evident Proofs we know that the Fact
in question is in it self absolutely impossible. That the Apostles designed not
to deceive us has been made appear; nor can it be said that they were
themselves constantly deceived in all the Miracles of Jesus Christ which they
relate. If the Question were about a small number of Miracles, that could not
without difficulty be examined, this Suspicion might with some probability be
started: But they relate so many, and of so many different sorts, that if what
they say be not true, it must of necessity be that they have gone about to
deceive us. For Example, they could not be mistaken in Christ's Ascension into
Heaven, which they have constantly affirmed, and of which the Christians from
the very beginning have made one of the chief Articles of their Faith. Those
who, as Pliny reports, sung Hymns to Jesus Christ as to a God, believed without
doubt that Christ was ascended into Heaven. And indeed I cannot but think that
any who will take the Pains to read only the Gospel of St. Luke, and the first
Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians (where are related the Circumstances of
many of the Miracles of Christ, and particularly of his Resurrection, and after
that of his appearing diverse times unto the Disciples) must certainly agree
that those who spoke after that manner were not seduced; and that if what they
say be not true, of necessity they must have designed to deceive those to whom
they related these matters.

Now it has been shown demonstratively that the Apostles were very sincere
Persons. And those who (...) to admit their Testimonies do not tax them of
having been deceived; Nor do they undertake to oppose directly the Reasons, by
which we prove their Sincerity. They content themselves in making Objections
upon the nature of Miracles; and so reduce themselves to the second way of
knowing the Falsehood of a matter of Fact, which consists in showing that the
thing related is in it self absolutely impossible.

I cannot engage my self here in the Examination of their Reasons; neither is
it necessary. It is sufficient to observe in general, that all the Arguments,
with which Spinoza and those that follow his Opinions do dispute against
Miracles, are not comparable in evidence and force to the Principles we have
established. These Men endeavor to show that the extraordinary Effects of the
Divine Power, which we call Miracles, may be the necessary Consequences of some
of the Laws of Nature, to us unknown; and that they are no more to be made use
of as Proofs in this matter, than those which occur daily in the ordinary
course of Nature. They bring also some Metaphysical Arguments, to show that
every thing comes to pass necessarily. But all this overthrows not the direct
Proofs which we have brought of the Truth of these Events, and which are
infinitely more clear than their Reasons, which no body can understand, as
perhaps neither do they themselves. But there is no danger that they should
persuade any Man that the Resurrection of a dead Body, or the Ascension of
Jesus Christ into Heaven, could happen as naturally as the Birth of a Man into
the World. As long as the direct Proofs of the Truth of those matters of Fact
hold good, no Man will be persuaded that the Miracles which the Apostles relate
are natural Effects of certain Laws of Nature, unknown to Men: Because it will
presently be asked, Why then are no more of these Effects produced? How could
Jesus Christ know that after he was buried, he should rise again and ascend
into Heaven? And how came it to pass, at that instant that he commanded a lame
or a Paralytic Man to go, etc. that the Laws of Nature (unknown to us) were
prepared and ready to cause the lame or Paralytic Man to walk.

It is plain then that the Philosophical Difficulties alleged against the
Testimony of the Apostles, are not of so great force as the Arguments we have
brought to confirm it; nor can they rake place, so long as a Man is persuaded
of the Sincerity of the first Disciples of Jesus Christ. And the truth is, that
those who make these Objections do take this course, only because they cannot
possibly alledg any thing against the matters of Fact, which we have proved.
They endeavor to confound the Minds of their Admirers by obscure Metaphysical
Arguments, and Suppositions, which they cannot prove, and which they assert
nevetheless to be common Notions.

This being so, it cannot be doubted that Christ Jesus was extraordinarily
favored by God: And as it cannot be supposed, with any color of Reason, that
God would work Miracles in favor of an Impostor, it must necessarily be
acknowledged that he was a Teacher sent from Heaven, to set Men right that were
gone astray; and consequently, that his Doctrine is true. But I will not insist
upon this Consequence, as well because it is evident in it self, as because
many Learned Men already have thoroughly handled it. I will add only this
Reflection before I end; viz. That we have no Reason to suspect that Jesus
Christ himself designed to deceive us: Because all the Reasons brought to prove
the Sincerity of the Apostles are as strong in respect of him as of them. To be
convinced of this, we need but apply to him, both as to his Person and
Doctrine, all that has been said concerning the Apostles. All the Religion
which he taught Men, and which we find in the Gospels, tends only to bring us
to the Observation of the most holy and most admirable Morals that can possibly
be imagined. And he could have no other Interest in the Establishment thereof
than what we all have; that is, the universal Welfare of all Men.

Thus then you see the Christian Religion established after an invincible
manner, without supposing any Inspiration in the Histories of our Lord and his
Apostles. There remains nothing more to be added, but that to apprehend the
Truth of all our Proofs, it is necessary only that we have the same Disposition
of Mind toward the Apostles, that we have toward any Person whose Sincerity
is very well known to us, and whom we could not refuse to believe when he
should assure us of a thing he had seen and heard, and in which it is morally
impossible that he should be deceived. The chief thing then is, to be well
assured of the Integrity of the Apostles, which is easy to be done in following
the Method we have described. Otherwise, while we attend not to the Reasons
which give Evidence thereunto, we shall never be sufficiently sensible of the
strength of the other Arguments, that may be brought to prove the Divine
Original of our Religion.

I entreat you, Sir, to examine what I have said exactly, and to let me know if
I have been to blame in affirming that we may be perfectly assured of the Truth
of Christianity, without believing the History of the New Testament to be
inspired. If I would have treated of this Subject thoroughly, I must have
composed a Book, not writ a Letter. But what I have said is sufficient to let
you see, that our Friend is not with any sort of Justice to be suspected of
Irreligion, upon the account of his not believing the Inspiration of the
Scriptures as it is commonly believed. I am, etc.

FINIS.
The chief Errors of the Press, which the Reader is desired to correct, are in
Page 63.

Line for Read 17 It is not likely It is apparent. 21 should would. 22 with the
Him with Him. 23 should would.


