AN ACCOUNT At Large of the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Earl of Danby's ARGUMENTS At
the COURT of KING'S BENCH AT WESTMINSTER, Upon his Lordship's Motion for BAIL,
The 27th. day of May, Term. Pasch. 1682.

Together with the JUDGES ANSWERS AND THE EARL'S REPLIES, As they were then
Truly taken.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Mearue, 1682.

AN ACCOUNT At Large of the Earl of Danby's ARGUMENTS At the Court of
KING'S BENCH, Upon his Lordship's Motion for BAIL, The 27th. day of May, Term.
Pasch. 1682, etc.
IMmediately after his Lordship was in Court, the return of the Habeas Corpus
was read, and Mr. Sanders (of Council for his Lordship) did move the Court,
That whereas in Easter Term 1681, the Court had dismissed his Lordship with a
Declaration that they would take into their Consideration till the Term
following, what answer they would make to what had then been said to them by
his Lordship and his Council; he therefore moved, That they might now
accordingly know the pleasure of the Court, and that they would be pleased to
grant Bail to the Earl of Danby.

But before the said Mr. Sanders could well have pronounced the foregoing
words, the Lord Chief Justice Pemberton did reprimand the said Mr. Sanders for
having offered to impose upon the Court what had never been said by them,
saying, that there was no such thing as their having said at any time that they
would take the Earl of Danby's Case into farther consideration; for that they
had told my Lord of Danby the last time, that it was not in their power to give
him any Relief at all, and that he therefore wondered, and must extremely blame
Mr. Sanders for moving the Court again in a matter to which they had already
given such a positive Answer, and could not but admire, that he should so
misinform his Clyent, as to give him any such advice, which could only be to
the giving both him and the Court an unnecessary trouble.

To all which Mr. Sanders replied, that he humbly begged his Lordship's pardon
if he had mistaken him, for that truly he did understand that his Lordship had
declared that he would take time to consider of my Lord of Danby's Case till
the following Term; but that if it was a mistake, he must beg his Lordship's
pardon, and did believe the rest of his Brethren took it so, as well as himself.

The Earl of Danby then spoke himself for about two hours, and said to the Lord
Chief Justice, that he met with an Objection which he did not expect, and that
he must beg his Lordship's pardon not to let that pass for a mistake which his
Council had affirmed, of the Courts having taken time to consider of his Case,
till the next Term after that of his Lordship's being last there; for that his
Lordship did therein appeal both to the rest of the Judges which were upon the
Bench with him, and to all other persons whatsoever who were then in Court,
whether his Lordship had not said that if he (meaning the Earl of Danby)
pleased, they would take time to consider of his Case till the next Term; and
he did declare upon his Honor that those words had been pronounced to him by
my Lord Chief Justice himself, and that he did then accept it as a favor from
the Court, and did return his humble thanks to them for it: In so much that his
Lordship said, that he confessed he was very much surprised to meet with such
an Introduction at the first entrance into a matter which he conceived to be of
so great weight as he doubted not but he should make this Case of his appear to
be.

But yet that it did give him reason to believe that he came with some
prejudice before his Lordship, and that they were so much prepossessed in this
matter, that if he did not think every Man in England would find that he might
be concerned in what resolution should be given in this Case, as well as
himself, he should scarcely have ventured upon it, though he had lain so long
under so unreasonable a Confinement as he took himself to do; and therefore he
must desire their Lordships patience and attention to what he had to offer in
his own behalf, and (as he believed) in the behalf of the Liberty of the
Subject in general.

His Lordship directing himself to the Lord Chief Justice, said, It was just
now a year since he was before his Lordship in this Court, and that he was
assured, that his Lordship did then please to tell him that they would take
time to the following Term to consider of what they should thank fit to do in
his Lordship's Case; But he said, that care was then taken the first day of
that following Term to prevent his coming there, by an Indictment which was
brought against him ( ready and dried, as he had been told) for his being privy
to the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey.

He said he did not wonder at it, Because there was nothing so black, which had
not been Invented to be said against him, but he confessed he did wonder to
hear, that such an Evidence of an Irish Papist (who was upon Trial for his own
Life, and upon an hearsay only) should be believed against an English
Protestant, by a Jury of English men, and some of them Gentlemen; but yet that
that wonder had been much abated, when he heard that the same Foreman had been
as favorable in the Case of a Notorious Murder, as he had been ready to find
that Murder against him, which had not the least probability in it, and which
no man could think of with more Detestation both of the Fact, and of any Man
that could have an hand in it, than himself.

However, this prevented him from coming there again till after notice had been
given to Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey's Brothers, to know if they had any thing
further to say against him on that matter, and that he could get himself
Discharged from that Indictment, and as to the wretch himself Fitz Harris (who
had accused him) he did two days before his Death, send the Minister of the
Tower to his Lordship, to beg of him, that before he died, his Lordship would
forgive him his having sworn falsely against him; and he did consess, that he
was put upon it to save his own Life, and did say by whom he was prompted to
it; and whether it proceeded from those Men, who might think their Villainies
discovered, and so might fear they could no way be safe but by putting that
matter yet farther against him, or from what other Cause his Lordship could not
tell, but (if his Lordship was not misinformed) he did hear that some Men were
still endeavoring to get something more of the same nature to be sworn against
him, if they can contrive how to make their forged Testimonies to agree about
it.

He said he thought that time would have tired out the malice of such
Bloud-suckers before now whom he had found so busy, for the first year and
half after his Imprisonment, that he was not a Week without Endeavors used by
strange People to get to speak with him, and such as he had reason often to
suspect to be Knights of the Post; amongst whom the story of one Magrath
(another Irish Man) he said, was notably remarkable in his endeavor (under
pretense of kindness) to have made him their Tool to prove that Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey had killed himself; but he said he had the good fortune immediately to
detect that Villainy, as he hoped yet to live to do of some others; but that in
the mean time he foresaw, that he was always to be a particular Object of the
malice of such men, so long as he was left under this Confinement, from which
he saw no hopes to be relieved but by that Court, where the Law Directs every
English man to come for Justice, that is oppressed in his Liberty.

He said he hoped his Lordship would forgive him for having been a little
tedious on that Subject of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, because his Reputation had
been so much Exposed in that particular, and before that Court.

After his discharge from that Indictment, he said there seemed to be a
probability of the Call of a Parliament in some short time, and whenever he
could give himself the least hopes of that, he resolved to trouble no other
place; But that now he had not the least prospect of that kind, and that he had
been a Prisoner above three years, and yet could safely swear, he was without
the knowledge to that day, for what real Crimes he was Committed; only he knew
that the name of Treason had been laid to his Charge, without saying wherein
the Treason consisted.

He said he came therefore now to that Court (as the only proper place for all
Persons to resort to for their Liberty) and he was sorry, that he was put to
the great disadvantage of speaking in his own Cause, but because he saw the
last time he was there, that some fault seemed to be found with his Councils,
for urging things which seemed to relate to matters of Parliament (although
upon a due consideration of his request there is nothing in it which does touch
their Jurisdiction) he had chosen rather to rely upon the Courts pardoning his
defects, than put any further hardships upon those Gentlemen who had been his
Council, to whom he had been more beholden, than they had been to him; for that
they had undergone some unheard of rebukes already in another place, for
offering to be of Council with him (though in matters of Law) which he believed
had never been heard of but in his Case, and he hoped that (when all his
Circumstances shall have been well considered) he shall be the last English man
that will ever have so many hardships put upon him, as will appear to be
through every part of his Case.

In the first place he said, that he had been both Accused and Committed,
without any Oath or Affidavit made against him, for any Crime whatever; Which
had been in the Case of no other Lord but himself, and he did believe of no
other Man.

Secondly, That there was no particular Treason mentioned in the Articles
against him, only the word TRAITEROVSLY had been applied to things which were
not Treason, if they had been true (as was then declared by Sir William Jones
the King's Attorney) and he said, there were good store of Witnesses to prove,
that when it could not be maintained by Argument in the House of Commons, that
any of the Crimes mentioned against him were Treason; It was answered by one of
the long Robe there, (who would not have spared to have assigned the Treason,
had there been any) that however they ought to give the title of High Treason
to the Articles, for that otherwise they would dwindle to nothing when they
came into the House of Peers. Now in the Impeachments of the other Lords (not
to meddle with the Truth or Falsity of their Accusers) they were Charged with
the highest Treasons in Name, and upon Oaths made against them.

Thirdly, When a short day was set by the Lords for his being heard, and that
he appeared that day accordingly, his Council was then Threatened if they did
dare to plead matter of Law for him: Which he said was never heard of before in
any Man's Case whatever, nor in the worst of times.

Fourthly, He said if all the Articles had been true against him, and had been
Treason; he had his Majesty's Pardon (which he then showed to the Court, and
demanded the benefit of it) saying, that that did pardon both his Crimes (if he
were Guilty of any) and his Imprisonment, and yet, that both that Pardon and
he, had been Prisoners together for above three years (of which he said he
durst confidently affirm, that his was the first Precedent since the Conquest.

Fifthly, He set forth that he had not only his Majesty's Pardon, but that
there had been his Majesty's Declaration of it in his Speech to his two Houses
of Parliament, together with a Declaration of his Innocence, and a Declaration
that he would give him his Pardon ten times over, if that were defective either
in matter or form. And in this also he said that his Case was not only
particular from any others, but that such Declarations of the King's Intentions
to Pardon (although the formal Pardons have not been obtained) have heretofore
been alone a ground to procure Bail at least, when the Party has been the
King's Prisoner and at the King's Suit, which he supposed was not doubted in
his Case.

Sixthly, He said that he had not only been thus Committed, and thus detained
for above 40 Months, but he had been kept a Prisoner without any prosecution
for the greatest part of that time; which is another sufficient ground by the
Law for Bail: But instead of a restraint Ad Custodiam, he said he had undergone
punishments greater than the Crimes alleged against him could have deserved,
if they had been true; both by the length of his Imprisonment (which was agreed
to be a sufficient Ground for Bail, both by the King's Council and the
Prisoner's, in the Arguments on the Grand Habeas Corpus 3o Car. as also in
Melvin's Case, 1o Car. and in Sir Tho. Darnell's and other Cases.

By the Inconvenience of his Accommodations in the Prison, for above two years
and a half of the time.

By two most dangerous Sicknesses in the Prison. And

By the loss of diverse of his Family since his being in Prison, who would some
of them most certainly not have been in those places where they have been lost,
had he been at liberty.

He said he was informed, that his Majesty had been again pleased to give his
Directions to Mr. Attorney, to give his Consent a second time to his Bail, and
he did beg leave to ask Mr. Attorney if it were so? Whereupon Mr. Attorney did
stand up, and say, that he had his Majesty's Directions to give his Majesty's
Consent again to his Lordship's being Bailed.

His Lordship did thereupon say, that this also was particular in his Case; and
he did believe, there was scarce a Precedent in the World, of the King's
Prisoner, and at the King's Suit, not being Bailed when there has been the
King's Consent to it; unless where the Prisoner has not been able to find
sufficient Security for his Appearance to abide his Trial. For that the two
only Justifiable Grounds for the Continuance of Restraint by the Law are,
either for keeping the Party from being able to do any harm by his being at
Liberty, (of which the King is the best Judge) or for securing the Party to
abide the Judgment of the Law, (in which the Court ought to have good
satisfaction) and so they might have sufficiently in his Case.

He said, that the Precedent would be no less strange and new against the King,
than against himself, if they should not permit him to be Bailed under such
Circumstances: For he had heard, that the Law did admit of no Absurdity; Now he
did desire to know, how any thing could in reason be more absurd on behalf of
the King, than if the King's Prisoner and at the King's Suit, should be kept in
Prison by any of the King's Courts, against the King's Will?

Or how said he can any thing be more dangerous to the Subject, or be a plainer
failure of Justice (whatever may be pretended to the contrary) than to say,
that there can be any such restraint of English liberty, as cannot obtain so
much as Bail, but by the leave of the House of Lords? When that House can
neither meet but when the King pleases, nor can never sit longer than he
pleases: So that to say a Man shall be a close Prisoner (I mean by that a
Prisoner without Bail, for Bail it self is Imprisonment in the Eye of the Law)
till he shall be discharged by the House of Lords; is to say, that a man shall
be a Prisoner during the King's pleasure; which was the Great Grievance
complained of, when the Petition of Right was granted, and that was thought to
have fully and for ever Redressed that Grievance.

But if after so many heats and disputes which our Ancestors have had with the
Crown about their Liberties, this Doctrine should now be admitted for Law; We
would seem to endeavor, (as much as in us lies) to bring it to this
Conclusion, and be our own Felo's De se; That the King shall have a way found
out by our selves, and without his seeking how he may Imprison any Man, or
number of Men when he pleases in a Parliamentary way; and by Dissolving that
Parliament, he may keep them as long as he pleases in a Prison without remedy:
But that he shall neither have power to Relieve us himself by his own
Authority, nor by his Courts of Justice. So as in short by this Doctrine; The
King should only have power to hurt his Subjects as much and as long as he
pleases, but should not be able to do them any Right if he would; and then we
shall have Magna Charta and the Petition of Right Reverss'd, instead of
receiving that benefit by them, which the Kings of England have been so
Gracious as to give us, and all the Learned Writers upon those happy Laws of
Liberty have told us we are secure under, at all times, and against all
Accidents whatever.

He then begged leave to observe to his Lordship what he found in my Lord Chief
Justice Coke's Comments upon Magna Charta, who said, that the words Nulli
Vendemus, Nulli Negabimus, aut Differemus Justitiam vel Rectum, are spoken in
the Person of the King, who (in Judgment of Law) is always present, and
repeating the said words in all his Courts of Justice.

And therefore (says he) every Subject in the Realm may at all times have
remedy by the course of the Law, and may have Justice done Freely, fully, and
Speedily, without delay, for that Delay is a Sort of Denial.

The said Lord Coke observes further, that those words of Magna Charta are
fully Expounded by latter Statutes (viz.) 20 E. 3. etc. which do direct, that
there shall be no delay nor hindrance of speedy Justice to any man, neither by
any Seal, nor by any Order, nor any Writ whatsoever; neither from the King, nor
from any other, nor by any other Cause.

Now whatever may be said out of other Considerations, he said no Man can deny,
but that there is great delay of Justice (to say no worse of it) to any Man who
(through no neglect of his own) can neither get Trial nor Bail in above three
years, although his Crimes were never so great: And he said he durst be
confident, that the Makers of Magna Charta did believe they had secured all
English Men from ever being under the possibility of such a Danger; and that he
made no question at all, but that by Law we are so.

He said, that the said Lord Coke does say in his Comment upon the 15th. W. 1o.
(where he speaks of what things are Baileable, and what are not, and names
Treason amongst the things not Baileable) that is (says he) such offenses shall
not be Replevied by the Sheriff, but all or any of these he says may be Bailed
in the King's- Bench.

And he said he had also some of the present Judges opinions to show, in this
point, which he desired to Read out of a Copy of the Lords Journal, (viz.)
23d. December. 1678, the Question being put, whether the Lord Treasurer should
withdraw, 'twas carried in the Negative; and on the 27th. of the said December,
the Question being put, whether the Earl of Danby Lord High Treasurer (who
stands Impeached by the House of Commons) should be Committed? It was Resolved
in the Negative.

And it was the same day proposed to the Judges, whether the Judges can Bail
any Person in Case of Misprission of Treason, wherein the King's life is
concerned?

To which Sir William Scroggs (Lord Chief Justice of the King's- Bench) Sir
Francis North (Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas) Justice
Windham, Justice Jones, and other of the Judges then present, gave severally
their Opinions; that the Court of King's- Bench may take Bail for High Treason
of any kind, if they see cause.

He cited the Lord Coke also in his Comment on the 24th. W. 2o. where he says,
that it is a Rule in Law, Quod Curia Regis non debet Deficere Conquerentibus in
Justitia Exhibenda. And the reason of this is, that a failure of Justice may be
prevented, which he frequently says, is Abhorred by the Law: So as it appears,
that The Law Abhors all failure of Justice, and he said, that if such failure
do appear in his Case, or any Man's else, no Order can license such Failure nor
no Court can Justify the not giving Relief against it; and he said, he should
either make such failure appear, or his Lordship (meaning the Lord Chief
Justice) would be able to tell him where he might repair for Justice; which
both Magna Charta and the Petition of Right are understood to have provided at
all times for the Subjects Liberty: But if his Lordship could not inform him
where he might appeal forthwith for his Liberty, in that Case he said, that for
that reason alone (were there no other) he ought of right to be admitted to
Bail by that Court, till he could be brought before such a Judicature, as had
power to discharge him.

He observed also, that the Lord Coke (in a Chapter on the King's- Bench) did
say, that that Court might Bail for any Offense whatsoever, and that in the
said Chapter it was particularly observed, that there had been such care taken
by the Law to avoid failure of Justice (even in small matters, in comparison of
Liberty) that he gives there an Example concerning a Clerk or Officer of that
Court: For he takes notice of what things, and against whom, that Court has
power to hold Plea by Bill; And amongst those, he names against any Officer or
Clerk of that Court, and gives the reason; because if they should be Sued in
any other Court, they would have the Privilege of that Court, which might be
the cause of a failure of Justice; and from this his Lordship said it did
appear, that the Law intended, that there should be no failure of Justice by
the privilege of any Court, how great soever it was; for that (as was said
before) the Law did abhor all failure of Justice: And he said, if such care had
been taken against a failure, in such small matters, and not in what concern
our Liberties, all English men ought Justly to break out into the like
Exclamations, as the same Lord Coke and many others did, in their Speeches in
Parliament, and in their Pleadings, 3o and 5o Car. upon the Arguments of the
Grand Habeas Corpus at that time where the Lord Coke breaks forth into this
Expression; Shall I have an Estate of Inheritance for life or for years in my
Land? And shall I be Tenant at Will for my liberty? Shall I have property in my
Goods by the Laws? And not liberty in my Person? And thereupon he tells us,
That Perspicue vera non sunt probanda: As taking from granted, that our
liberties were not to be doubted where our properties were so secured: And the
King (says he) had distributed his Judicial power to Courts, and to his
Ministers of Justice; Who are to see right done.

And he said the Lord Cook gave the Reasons of those Laws which are against
undue Imprisonments, and that one of those is, for the indefiniteness of time,
which he says may be perpetual during Life, and that his words are, That it is
unreasonable to think, that a Man has a Remedy for his Horse or Cattle, (if
detained) and none for his Body Indefinitely Imprisoned: For that a Prison
without any prefixed time is a kind of Hell.

And here his Lordship said, that he hoped the Court would either allow him
Bail, or tell him a prefixed time, when he should be Tried or Discharged: he
did then also Quote the Case of the Duke of Suffolk, 28 H. 6, and the opinions
of Prescot and Fortescue, (who were eminent Judges) who said, that he ought not
to be Committed, (though for Treason) without Especial Cause of the Treason
showed, which had not been in his Case.

He further said, That many other Principal Gentlemen of that Parliament had
spoke most sensibly on the same Subject of Liberty, and amongst the rest, Sir
Robert Philips had said, To have our Liberties (which are the Souls of our
Lives) taken from us, and to be pent up in Goals without Remedy by Law, and
this to be so adjudged, (for so that Court had then thought sit to deny Bail,
for Reasons which were at that time also best known to themselves) he cries
out, Oh improvident Ancestors! Oh unwise Forefathers! to be so curious in
providing for the quiet possession of our Lands, and to neglect our Persons and
Bedies! And to let them lie in Prisons! And without Remedy, durante been
placito! If this be Law, what do we talk of our Liberties? This (says he) is
Summa Totalis of all Miseries.

He said also, That Mr. Seldom did in the same Parliament argue at a Conference
with the Lords, That in all Cases where any Right or Liberty belongs to the
Subject, by any Positive Law, written or unwritten; if there were not also a
Remedy by Law, for enjoying or regaining of this Right of Liberty, when it is
violated, or taken from him; the Positive Law were most vain, and to no
purpose; and it were to no purpose for any Man to have any Right in Land,
Liberty, or other Inheritance, if there were not a known Remedy, by which in
some Court of ORDINART JUSTICE he might recover it; and in this Case of Right
of Liberty of Person, if there were not a Remedy in the Law for regaining it,
when it is restrained; it were to no purpose to speak of Laws.

Here de desired leave to show his Lordship what Sir Nicholas Hide (when
sitting as Lord Chief Justice in that Court) did say on this occasion, viz.
That the Kings pleasure is, his Law should take place and be Executed; and for
that do we sit here; and whether the Commitment be by the King, or others, This
Court is the place where the King does sit in Person to do Right if Injury be
done, and if it appear that any Man has Wrong done to him by his Imprisonment;
We have Power to Deliver or Discharge him: And he further said, That the same
Lord Justice, Doderidg, Jones, and Whitlock, (Answering the Prisoners Council
at that time) did say, the Attorney General had told them, That the King had
done it, and that they (the Judges) do ever trust him in great Matters; and
here he took occasion to say, That he hoped that the Kings Consent to his Bail,
and his Declaration of his Innocence, would be now as much trusted in this
Court.

He Cited also the Arguments of Mr. Calthorpe for Sir John Corbet on the same
occasion, who said, That admit the Commitment were lawful, yet when a Man has
continued in Prison a reasonable time, he ought to be brought to Answer, and
not to be continued still in Prison; for that it appears by the Books of our
Laws, that Liberty is a thing so favored by the Law, that the Law will not
suffer the continuance of any Man in Prison, longer then of necessity it must.

He Cited also Mr. Hackwell, who said upon the same occasion, That the Law
admits not the Power of Deteyning in Prison at pleasure, when the Imprisonment
is but Pro Custodia, for a Man by long Imprisonment might otherways be Punished
before his Offense; and he mentioned an Expression of his, That long
Imprisonment was vita pejor morte.

He mentioned, how the Commons at the end of the Parliament, 3 Car. did desire,
That the Judges might declare themselves upon the matter, why those Gentlemen
had not been Bailed, when (by the Jtdges Arguments) it was possible they might
have been kept Prisoners all their Days.

To which he said Whitlock Answered. First, Not so, but they did Remand them,
that they might better advise of the matter, and that the Gentlemen if they had
pleased might have had a new Writ of Habeas Corpus when they thought fit. And
Secondly, That he had spent much time in this Court, and that in such great
Cases he never knew any Man Bailed without the King first consulted in it, and
the same he said, was then said by the rest of the Judges of that Court.

Hereupon he made two Remarques, First, That by this it did appear, that upon
Consideration, That Court had altered their opinions in the Case of Bail, just
contrary to what their first opinions had been positive in; and Secondly, That
the consulting of the King was ever necessary in such Great Cases; and he said,
he did believe, that there was not a Presedent, where the King had agreed to
the Bail, that ever it had been denied.

He said, That those Men whom he had Quoted were Men of no ordinary
Understanding in the Laws, and as the Judges then did at last acknowledge their
sense of them to be right, so he said, He hoped our Laws were neither changed
nor diminished, in what related to the SVBJECTS LIBERTIES; and he hoped that no
Order of one House, nor Ordinance of both Houses, nor King alone, nor King and
either House alone, could alter them; and he rested assured, that a King and
Parliament would never alter them to the prejudice of Liberty.

He proceeded, That if the Law were still the same it was heretofore, it was
plain that that Law did both give a power to that Court to Bail for all
Offenses whatsoever, (and for Treason perticularly) and did require, that the
Subject should at all times find remedy in it, when his Liberty was Restrained,
BY ANY CAUSE WHATEVER.

The chief Reasons he said, why such large Powers had been given to that Court,
were principally for avoiding all failure of Justice, and to the end, First,
That the King may both have a means of giving Right to his Subjects at all
times, according to his Oath at his Coronation, and according to the intent of
Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right: And Secondly, That there might be a
constant place for the Subject to resort unto for Remedy at all times,
whenever he was oppressed in his Liberty: And he hoped we were not now to
learn a new Law, that the King could neither keep his Oath, nor maintain Magna
Charta, nor the Petition of Right, without the Assistance of an Extraordinary
Court, which he may both choose, whether he will call, or when he will call it,
and how long it shall sit; which (as he had said) would put all under the
King's absolute Will.

He then said, He took for Granted, that there would be no dispute made in this
matter, but that there was an Order of the Lords which was supposed to stand in
the way: But he said, If his Lordship would give him leave, he would first say
something to the Order it self, and then he hoped to show his Lordship, that it
stood not at all in the way as to his Request of Bail; and that it should
neither be interfered with in the least, nor the Jurisdiction of the Lords, nor
their Proceedings meddled with in any kind by his being Bailed; but rather
owned, and submitted to, by his being Bailed to the Parliament.

And first for the Order it self, He desired the Court to observe, that it was
Dated the 19th of March, 1678. and worded as follows, (viz.)

Die Mercurii, 19no Martii, 1678/9.
THE House this Day taking into Consideration the Report made from the Lords
Committee for Privileges, that in Pursuance of the Order of the 17th Instant
to them directed, for considering whether Petitions of Appeal which were
presented to this House in the last Parliament, be still in force to be
proceeded on; and for considering of the State of Impeachments brought up from
the House of Commons the last Parliament; and all the Incidents relating
thereunto; upon which the Lords Committees were of opinion, That in all Cases
of Appeals, and Writs of Error, they continue, and are to be proceeded on in
Statu quo, as they stood at the Dissolution of the last Parliament, without
beginning De novo. And that the Dissolution of the last Parliament does not
alter the State of the Impeachments brought up by the Commons in that
Parliament.

Now upon this Order he observed, That it related as well to Appeals and Writs
of Error, as to Impeachments; and seemed to be more fully worded to them, than
to Impeachments: The Words STATU QUO, and without beginning DE NOVO being
annexed in the Order more particularly to the Appeals and Writs of Error;
whereas all that was said as to the Impeachments, he observed to be, that the
Dissolution of THAT LAST PARLIAMENT does not alter the State of Impeachments
brought up by the Commons in THAT PARLIAMENT, and are not words which (strictly
taken) can bind after the Dissolution of any other then that Parliament.

But he said, if the Order should be Expounded otherways, yet that both the
Law, and the Practice of the Inferior Courts, were undoubtedly contrary, In
the Cases of Appeals and Writs of Error. And he hoped no Court would take upon
them to Expound the Order so, as if they were at liberty, to split the Order,
and to Judge which part of the same Order should be binding and which not, for
that that would be to meddle in a more Extraordinary manner with the
proceedings of the Lords, than he had desired.

Now as to Writs of Error, he said, there were full Resolutions of the Judges
in the Case, tho in times of Prorogations only, when a day is set for the
Sitting of the Lords House, and he cited the Case of Heydon and Godsalve, in
Crooks Reports; as also the Lord Chapter Just. Hales, who did not only grant
Execution upon a Writ of Error (depending in Parliament) but did also Answer
the Defendants Council (who would have pleaded the Lords Order in bar of the
Execution) that he should always pay all due Respect to that Superior Court of
the Lords, but that he must act according to Law, and that he knew, that the
Lords did not intend otherwise. And of this Lord Chapter Just. Pemberton himself,
who he said had denied Restitution upon an Execution lately taken out, in a
Case where a Writ of Error was and is still Depending in Parliament. And in
Cases of Appeals, he said he was Informed, that the Court of Chancery did not
take any notice of the Appeal being in Parliament after a Dissolution, but did
notwithstanding proceed to Sequestration. And he said that there was a late
Precedent in the Court of Exchequer, in the Case of one Fountain, where an
Appeal was brought from a Decree in the Exchequer, and Recognizance entered into
by the said Fountain, to abide the Order of the House of Lords, and after the
Parliament was Dissolved, the Council of the said Fountain did Insist on the
said Order before the Barons, that the House being possessed of Mr. Fountains
Cause, and Security having been given by him to abide the Order of the House,
that no Proceedings ought to be had in the Exchequer upon the said Decree,
until the matter on the Appeal was determined before the Lords. Notwithstanding
which, and that Mr. Fountain produced the Lords Order in Court, and produced
the security allowed, yet the now Barrons Declared and Ordered, that the Decree
by them made should be proceeded on against the said Fountain in the Court of
Exchequer: And a proceeding has been had accordingly.

By all which he Observed, That the Inferior Courts did proceed upon matters
forbid as much by the House of Lords, in the matters of Appeals and Writs of
Error, as it was upon Impeachments, and yet that the reason was plain why they
did so, for that the Parliament might proceed again upon the same Appeals, and
Writs of Errors, notwithstanding those proceedings in the Inferior Courts, in
the interval of Parliaments; for that none of those Acts of the Inferior
Courts, does so hinder the proceedings of the Superior, but that the Plaintiff
in Parliament may revive the same matter there again, by Scire Facias, or by
Re-summons, etc. But he said, It was never heard of, that the Lords themselves
did proceed again Ex Officio, without the Petition of the Party to revive the
Cause: And so he said in the Case of Impeachments, that the Lords would no more
proceed Ex Officio upon that neither, unless they were called upon by the
Prosecutors, and then their Lordships proceedings upon the Impeachment would be
no more hindered by the Bailing of him in the Inferior Court, then they were in
the other Cases by the Executions and Sequestrations which are Granted in the
intervals of Parliament, which were for the the prevention both of DELAY and of
FAILVRE of JUSTICE.

Besides he said, If this should not be done, how could it be known, whether
the Prosecutors of an Impeachment from the House of Commons (who are never the
same Men in a new Parliament,) will proceed any more upon a former Impeachment?
For he said it had many times fallen out otherwise, and he Cited a late Case of
the Lord Mordant, who was Impeached upon Articles in one Session, and having
taken out a Pardon during the Prorogation, was never more called upon, nor
never questioned upon the former Impeachment; although the very same Parliament
sat again, which had Impeached him, and therefore he said, That the Case might
more probably happen to fall out so, when a new Parliament should meet again,
which would consist of new Men.

He said, It was likewise to be Observed, that although the Transcript of the
Record in a Writ of Error might have Days of continuance, yet no Supersedeas is
grantable; and he said, That if the Lords Order be no ground for a Supersedeas
on a Writ of Error, why the lying of an Impeachment should be a ground for
Confining a Man within Four Walls all his Life, he was sure must be both less
reasonable and less just, As Liberty was more valluable then Property, and
without which, Property could be of no comfort.

In the next place he Observed, That if the Order should be continued
literally to mean, that the Impeachments as well as the Appeals and Writs of
Error (and the Incidents relating to all of them) should remain in the same
State they were at the Dissolution of THAT PARLIAMENT mentioned in the said
Order, his case thereupon he said would be quite different from any others, for
that he was not under any Commitment at the Dissolution of THAT PARLIAMENT, nor
at the time when THAT ORDER was made, but was then at liberty to be a sitting
Member of that House, and by a Vote of the House, had leave to continue so, for
that (as he had already Observed) the Date of the Order was the 19th of March,
1678. and the Warrant of his Commitment did appear by the return before the
Court to be, the 16th of April following: Insomuch that he desired the Court to
take notice, that the strict Letter of the words Statu Quo in the Order
(compared with the time when the said Order was made) would be an Argument to
set him in a State of Liberty as he then was.

He then told the Court, That by what he had said, he hoped he had made appear,
that the Order did not afford the least shadow for the hindering of his being
Bailed; but that on the contrary, the Reasons were much stronger for the doing
of that, (as it related not only to him, but to the Liberty of the Subject in
General) then for the proceedings which the Inferior Courts do daily practice
upon Appeals and Writs of Error, (which are but for Property) and are comprised
in the same Order, and therefore he said, That he hoped he should at least find
the same favor in a Case of Liberty, which is allowed every day in Cases of
lesser Moment.

He then said, (that although it did not concern his particular Case) Yet for
the sake of English Liberty it self, he could not but say something further
upon this point; for he could not but be of opinion, That if the Order had
directly forbid Bail, which it was far from doing) and besides, the Lords own
practice had showed their meaning to the contrary, by the Bailing of a
Commonnor, whose Crimes were declared to be greater then his, and in which Case
they made no Non Obstante to their Order, but take that to be still in the same
force toward him, as toward any others who are in Custody) yet he said, In
that Case, if such an Order should be found to be against Magna Charta, and the
Fundamental Right of the Liberty of the Subject, (as any thing must be which
does Subject any Man to an INDEFINITE IMPRISONMENT:) he conceaved that of
Right, that Court ought to free any Man from such a Slavery, (for he said, he
could give it no better a name) and he then Cited an Argument of the Earl of
Shaftsburyes upon that point, which that Lord argued in that Court upon an
Habeas Corpus, when the Court agreed they would have Bailed him, had it not
been in a time of an Adjournment only of the Parliament; his words he said,
were, That this Court will and ought to Judge AN ACT OF PARLIAMENT VOID, if it
be against MAGNA CHARTA, and more might it Judge of AN ORDER OF THE HOUSE OF
LORDS, that is put in Execution to deprive any Subject of his LIBERTY; and as
he said, this could not be denied to be Law, so he was confident the Earl of
Shaftbury was still of the same mind, and so must every Lord in England be, or
(when they consider their own Cases) they would make their Liberties to be very
precarious.

He proceeded to say, That the Earl of Shaftsbury being allowed to be a knowing
Man, both in the Laws, Orders and Constitutions of Parliaments; he would beg
leave to Quote another part of the same Speech, (viz.) That Mr. Attorney,
(which was then Sir William Jones) was pleased to Answer the Instance of one of
his Lordships Council, That if a great Minister should be Committed, he has
the Cure of a Pardon, a Prorogation, or a Dissolution, but (says the Earl) If
the Case should be put, why Forty Members, or a greater number, may not as well
be taken without any Remedy of any of the King's Courts; his Lordship said,
That Mr. Attorney-could not very easily Answer; and if in this Case (says he)
there can be no relief, no Man can foresee what may be hereafter: And in
another place of the same speech, he says, He does not think it a kindness to
the Lords to make them Absolute, and above the Law, for so it must be, if it be
Adjudged, that they may Commit a Man to an INDEFINITE IMPRISONMENT.

He said, He took these Men whom he had named, for no small Authorities in this
Age, and the Earl of Shaftsbury, he said, was a Man still as much for the
maintaining of this Order as ever, but that his Lordship did show himself at
the same time to be for English Liberty, and he plainly showed his own Sense,
both of this, and of all Orders whatever, which concerned the Liberty of the
Subject, and declared, that he took that Court to be the proper Judge of all
such Orders.

He said, It thereby appeared, how sensible that Lord was, that such Cases
might concern Forty as well as One, and Members of either House, as well as
other Men, and without relief, if it should be admitted, that ORDINART COURTS
could not relieve; and the Earl of Danby said, That there was no Answering of
these Arguments of the Earl of Shaftsbury, unless it could be denied, That the
King can Impeach as well as the Commons, or that the King cannot Call and
Dissolve Parliaments at his own Will and Pleasure: For if he may (as was not to
be doubted) he said, He was sure every Man in England was in the same Danger,
when the King pleased, and then he saw nothing whereby we had any Security, but
that we lived under a King who would not Exercise this Power over us, which we
will needs put into his hands, although he does not desire it himself: As if we
were so weary of our Liberties, that we would be Industrious in contriving how
we might insensibly slide into those Slaveries, which our Ancestors have been
some Ages taking pains to secure us from, and our Kings have been so gracious
as to Grant and Confirm to us, so many times over as they have done; and which
other Kings may be as ready to reassume hereafter, as we are to give them away.

He concluded his observations upon that Speech of the Earl of Shaftsbury, with
taking notice, that his Lordship had showed he was one of those Peers who would
take it for no kindness to be made absolute, and above the Law, by such Orders
of theirs being construed to extend to INDEFINITE IMPRISONMENTS.

He then repeated Sir William Jones his Declaration in that Court, that either
a Pardon, a Prorogation, or a Dissolution was a Cure against such
Imprisonments, and he observed thereupon, that if that Doctrine were true, that
any one of those was a Cure against such Imprisonment; (and he could not doubt
of it is being good Law) then certainly he ought to find relief from his
Imprisonment, who had every one of those Cures on his side.

He then desired to put the Court in mind, how in the worst of times, Justice
had taken place so far, as to lay aside the force of Orders made in Parliaments
after the Dissolutions of those Parliaments which made them, although it was to
the prejudice of the Interest of those Usurpers themselves.

He cited an Instance of one Sir John Stowel, who by the Articles of Exciter
was to have been admitted to composition for his Estate, but yet contrary to
those Articles, the Parliament did afterward order his Estate to be sold.
After the Dissolution of which Parliament, Sir John Stowel pleaded by his
Council ( which were Serjant Maynard and Mr. Latch) that that Order was
Dissolved by the Dissolution of that Parliament; and that therefore the
Articles were again in Force; and that the Plea was admitted to be good, and
Sir John restored to the benefit of the Articles upon that Plea, even by
Bradshaw himself. But he said, he was sorry that he could neither have Sir
William Jones to argue those points for him which he had used against my Lord
Shaftsbury, nor Sergeant Maynard to make good the Invalidity of Parliamentary
Orders after Dissolutions, but he said, that it was not his fault, and he
doubted not but he was before more Just Judges than there was in those ill
times, and that he hoped that the Liberty of the Subject was not now more
Precarious than it was in those days.

He added, that if upon such Orders Men could not be Bayled in the Interval of
Parliaments, they would become Grievances equal to the Multiplications of
Treasons in former Days, which have some times been greedily made heretofore by
Parliaments in Distempered Times, but the Commons had never been quiet till
they could get their Bear chained up and their Laws reduced to the old standard
of Treason again; But yet those things had been done by Acts, and not by Orders
of Parliament.

He desired them likewise to remember, that it had been one of the chief
grounds of the late War betwixt the King and his Parliament (in which so much
blood had been shed) that an Ordinance of Parliament should not be held equal
to an Act of Parliament, and yet those were Orders of both Houses: And now said
he, shall we be defending, that an Order of one House only, shall be Equivalent
to a Law? and shall be in force against our greatest and most sacred Laws of
Liberty, which have been so confirmed to us? This, said he, I am not able to
understand the reason of, nor will any Man, who shall give himself the least
leisure to think upon it.

He then said, He desired to ask any Man that then heard him, or any Commonor
of England, who would but take time to consider this Case, ( which may be any
Man's in England,) whether they would be contented to invest the Lords with such
an Inherent Power over their Liberties, which they can no more be exempted from
then the Peers themselves?

And he said, That the Lords had already made it appear, that they would not
have any such Arbitrary Power placed in them, for that they had refused to pass
a Favorite Act, (which was for their own Trials) only by reason of a Clause
which was Incerted therein, To have Enacted the Substance of this present Order
into a Law.

And he said, That the House of Commons desiring that such a Power might have
been Enacted into a Law, (though themselves would have been the first who would
have repented such a Law,) did sufficiently denote, That the Commons did not
think the Order would be binding in Law after their Dissolution; for otherwise
what need was there of a Law? if the Order was in force after Dissolution,
without a Law.

Upon the whole he said, He thought the Distemper of that time had given more
weight to the Order, then any thing else, and some of their Lordships on that
Bench did know, both in what an heat it had been made, and how it had been
since blown upon by the Lords themselves; who he was confident would no more
endure to have it Construed in that Sense which now seems to be put upon it,
(of Subjecting Men to be under INDEFINITE IMPRISONMENT,) then they will endure
themselves to be every Day put in the Stocks.

As he had said thus much to the Order it self, so he said, He hoped to make
appear, That the Courts Bailing of him would not at all Entrench upon the
Order, nor meddle with the Jurisdiction of the Lords, nor their Proceedings in
any kind.

For that he took it for granted, That what is done by that Court, and the
Courts of Chancery and Exchequer, on Appeals and Writs of Error, was understood
not to meddle at all with the Jurisdiction nor Proceedings of the Lords in
those Cases, and that this was just the same, all being alike Subject to the
final Determination of the Lords, whenever they pleased to call the Appeal,
Writ of Error, or Impeachment, before them, and without any prejudice to their
Lordships Proceedings by any of those Acts done by that or the other Courts in
the Interval of Parliaments.

Besides, he said, It had been usual to Bail in that Court to the Justice Seat
in Air, and yet that that Court could not proceed further.

He Instanced also, That Courts allowing of the Pardons of Peers, (when pleaded
there) and yet that they had no power to proceed to the Trial of a Peer.

And so he said, There were diverse other Instances of that Courts proceeding to
such and such degrees of Exercising their power to avoid delays, etc. where the
Court had no Jurisdiction to determine the matter.

Precedents he said were not to be expected, which were exactly fitted to his
Case, because he durst be bold to say, there never was such a Case before,
(when well considered in all its Circumstances,) nor he hoped never would be
again: But he said, That therefore both the Kings Power and the Peoples
Liberties would be the more concerned in what Resolution should be given by the
Court in this Case of his.

He said, There were Precedents of Discharging of Men Impeached in Parliament
upon the Kings Writ to that Court, Commanding the Proceedings to cease, and
they have been Discharged accordingly by that Court, without any other Reason
given in the Writ, but because the King held the Parties to be Innocent and
free from the Crimes Charged against them. As in the Cases of Melton
Archbishop of York, and Gravesend Bishop of London, 7 E. 3.

He mentioned also Hugh Spencer, and Sir Thomas Barkley's being Mainprized to
Parliament, and yet that the latter was upon suspicion for the Murder of a
King, (viz.) Edward the Second.

He said, Inferior Courts had Bailed to Parliament about the Popes Bull, etc.
Reg. Writs, 274.

He said, A single Judge (viz.) Sir Robert Atkins had lately Bayled one for
Treason, and another for Murder, and that he did himself hear his Justification
of both allowed (as to the Legal part) before the King and Council.

He said, That Kings had formerly abolish't Accusations of Treason, and
Instanced a Case of Talbot against Ormond, in the time of H. 6.

And to show how powerful the bare intention of Kings to Pardon had been
heretofore, he Instanced the Case of a man Indicted of Felony, who (without any
Council) showed forth a Charter of Pardon to the Court, which was discordant to
the Indictment, and also to his name, and yet because the Court perceived that
it was the King's Intention he should be pardoned, he was Remanded to get a
better Pardon. 26 Ass. p. 46.

And he did thereupon say, That he hoped the Kings Intention of Pardon as to
him, had been sufficiently declared to the whole Kingdom.

And in short he said, that if the matter was proper for the Jurisdiction of
that Court, before it was in Parliament; it is having been there, did not take
away the Jurisdiction from a Competent Court, when the Extraordinary
Jurisdiction fails; which was not to be supposed could lay all other
Jurisdictions asleep, when itself was not in being; and especially when that
Competent Court should do nothing in Contradiction to the Proceedings of the
Extraordinary Court, as he hoped he had made appear, that that Court would not
do by the Bayling of him.

Whereas on the contrary, he said it was most evident, that Justice did fail in
the highest concern (which is that of Men's Liberties) unless he could be
informed when and where he might certainly be either Tried or discharged, for
that (as he had said before) it was agreed both by the Council for the King,
and the Council for the Prisoners, in the Arguments on the Grand Habeas Corpus;
that INDEFINITE IMPRISONMENT was held to be PERPETVAL IMPRISONMENT which the
Law did admit in no Case where the Imprisonment was only AD CVSTODIAM. And
although his had been intended but AD CUSTODIAM, yet it could not be denied,
but it had already been ad Gravem paenam, and without any particular Cause yet
showed for which he ought not to be Bayled by Law.

He then said, that Littleton had declared in his Arguments 5 Car. That if
Treason in General should be held to be a sufficient Return, yet that the
King's Bench might Bail: And the said Littleton and the Kings Attorney in their
Arguments (one for the King, and the other for Mr. Seldom) did agree, that
where the Party could not avoid the Judgment of the Law, nor that there was no
Danger by his being at liberty, He ought to be Bayled after long Imprisonment,
and at that time, six Months was taken to be long Imprisonment.

He said he had read a passage in the Lord Cokes Institutes, where he spoke of
such Imprisonments as he compared to the Imprisonment of St. Paul by the
Centurion, who first put him in Chains, and then enquired who he was and what
he had done.

He said he would not compare his case to that; but that there was so much of
resemblance in it, that he had been in Chains (or what was there meant by
Chains (which was a Prison) for above three years, on a pretense of Treason,
without being told to that day what kind of Treason he had committed; which had
been done in no bodies Case but his, and by so much the greater was his
hardship.

He had also both been Accused and Committed without any Oath made against him.

When a Day had been appointed for his hearing, his Council had been forbid to
Plead matter of Law for him.

It had been acknowledged that there was no Treason contained in any of the
Articles against him, if they were all true.

And if they had been true, and had amounted to Treason, he had there showed
the Kings Pardon, which did release both the Crimes and the Imprisonment.

That besides that Pardon, he had had his Majesty's Declaration in full
Parliament, both of his Innocence, and that he would Grant him his Pardon ten
times over if this were defective.

That he had now had his Majesty's Consent to his Bail, a second time,
Declared to that Court by the Attorney General, by the Kings Direction.

That in all these foregoing Particulars, his Case was singular, and different
from all others, who are or have been made Prisoners since the beginning of the
late Plot, or (as he believed) at any other time.

Besides these things which are peculiar to his own Case, he said that these
was also what was Common to other Cases as well as his.

The length of his Imprisonment, which had been above 40 Months.

The being Confined so long under pretense (as he conceived) of an Order of the
House of Lords which neither Directs nor Implies any thing to forbid Bayl. But
in that also he had what was particular to himself (which he had already said,
and desired leave to repeat, because it would deserve their Consideration) viz.
That he was at liberty, and had leave to be a sitting Member in the House of
Lords at the time when that Order did declare that the Impeachments, Appeals,
etc. and the Incidents belonging to them should stand in STATV QVO, so that (as
it already observed) the STATVS QVO (as to him) he again said was to put him
into a State of Liberty.

Lastly he said, that he had no prospect now when any Parliament would sit, and
by the examples of past Parliaments he might reasonably fear, whether when they
did meet, they might sit so long as to give him Releif; for that his Petition
had been Read the first Day that the last Parliament entered upon any public
business, or whether greater business of the Kingdom might not (as it had done
already) so take up their time, as not to give them leisure to consider the
Case of a single Person: And since this had already fallen out to be his
misfortune in Three Parliaments successively, he took it to be but too plain a
Demonstration of his lying under an Indefinite Imprisonment, unless he should
find relief in that Court, for that there was no other to Appeal unto.

He said, That in those Great and Eminent Cases which fell out 3 and 5 Car.
about the Bayling of Persons Committed to Indefinite Imprisonment, the Judges
were then very positive against their Bayl, and yet changed those Opinions
afterward; and so he hoped that Court might do upon a due consideration of his
Case and Circumstances; or else he hoped that his Lordship would convince him,
that his Imprisonment was not Indefinite, by letting him know at what prefixed
time, and where he might resort for remedy, which the Law does without question
allow to all men, and at all times.

He said he was a very reasonable man, and when he was convinced by reason
(upon which he was sure all Laws were founded) he could be content to suffer
still, though his Imprisonment had been so long already; for that however he
may have been Misrepresented for an Arbitrary Man, he would rather perish in
his Prison than have any thing done for him which the Law would not warrant:
But on the other side, he should be sorry that his Case should be made a
Precedent against Law, and against English Liberty, which he was sure it would
be, if he should be continued to ly under an Indefinite Imprisonment without
being bailed; and he said he was not ashamed to say, in the behalf of all
English men's Liberties, as well as of his own Case; That it was a Case which
did concern every man to take care of in the Consequences of it, and which did
cry loudly for Relief.

He then told the Court, That he had troubled them long, but that he hoped it
would be excused in a Case of that moment: And in the first place he said, he
hoped it was plain, that That Court had it in their power to grant him Relief
if they pleased.

That it was as plain, that there was nothing in the Lords Order against it,
and that the practice of the Lords had been otherways, even in the behalf of
Commoners.

That it was apparent, that both that Court, and the Courts of Chancery and
Exchequer, do relieve upon Appeals and Writs of Error, which are in the same
Order with the Impeachments, and yet do in no sort meddle with the Judicature
or Proceedings of the House of Lords.

That it was manifest, that let the Order be construed as any man pleases, yet
that Bailing could be no sort of Judging of any Proceedings in the Superior
Court, but would leave the Judgment entirely to the Parliament, and would
continue him a Prisoner in Law, bound to appear before that Extraordinary
Court, whenever his Majesty should be pleased to call it; and he said it was
more evident, that otherwise he was an Indefinite Prisoner, and at the King's
Will only for his Liberty, the Consequences of which every man ought to lay to
his heart with a dread of it, whenever they should live under a Prince that
might not be so merciful as our present King, and he hoped the Court would duly
consider it.

Besides all this he said, he durst confidently affirm, That there was not a
Precedent since the Conquest, of any man's being refused Bayl under such
Circumstances as his were: Whereas he said, the detaining of men under long
Imprisonment, ought either to have express Law for it, or a good number of
Precedents, and in good times to justify it, and not any single Instance or
two (if they could be produced) which he thought they could not.

And he hoped that Precedent which he had already mentioned on his Majesty's
behalf, would be very well considered, which was; How the King's Court should
keep the King's Prisoner, and at the King's Suit, in the King's Prison, with
the King's Pardon, and against the King's Will, twice declared in that Court,
by his Attorney General.

He said he should conclude with letting his Lordship know, that as the King
himself had sufficiently declared, that there was no danger in the letting him
have his liberty, so he had such Bayl to offer to his Lordship as would
sufficiently satisfy the World, that he should be forthcoming to answer when
and where that Court should appoint, and then he hoped the two chief grounds
for detention in a Prison (viz. The danger of a Man's having his liberty; and
the danger of his not appearing to abide his Trial) would be fully answered.

And if it might not seem too great a vanity to say (although the true reason
does take away the vanity of it, because it would not be for his, but for their
own sakes, as what may happen to be their own Cases) he said he does believe,
he could have the Major part of the House of Lords to be his Bayl in this Case,
and some of those very Lords, who were for the making of this Order, although
not in that sense which would seem to be put upon it. In so much that there
would be no more to fear in the Granting him Bayl, than he hoped there was
either Reason or Justice to deny it. And he doubted not, but he was there
before very just Judges, who would duly consider what he had said.

The Lord Chief Justice then speaking did say, That the Earl of Danby had
seemed to reflect upon the Court, as if they had denied him Justice in not
hearing his Counsel.

Then the Earl of Danby desired leave to interrupt his Lordship, saying, That
his Lordship had mistaken him, for that he had said no such thing of that
Court, nor did he mean it of that Court; but said, it was very well known that
his Counsel had been forbid to plead for him in another place, which was then
acknowledged by Justice Jones to be very true.

The Lord Chief Justice then proceeded, and said, That for his Lordship's
saying, they needed not to fear, because he did believe the Greatest part of
the Lords would be his Bayl: That it was not the fear of another Court that had
any kind of influence upon them, or that they should do such things as they
feared to be called to an account for; but that they were to govern themselves
by the doing of Justice.

That they had heard his Lordship with a great deal of patience, and that he
had said many material things, and with much acuteness, and that they were not
senseless of the hardship of his Lordships Case, and of the greatness of his
sufferings.

That they were likewise sensible of the Kings desires that his Lordship should
have no longer Imprisonment than the Law requires; and he confessed that the
King had done as much as lay in his power.

That it was not denied, because that Court could not Bayl for Treason, for
that they had a power to Bayl in all Cases whatsoever, if the Court saw cause:
Neither would the Indictment which was found against him about Sir Edmond-Bury
Godfrey have hindered; nor was it the Order of the House of Lords which hindered
them; But that they were to act there according to Law, and he prayed his
Lordship to consider that they could not relieve him according to Law.

That he did agree to some things mentioned by his Lordship, and that it was a
very hard Case he should lie so long in Prison; but here was the misery, they
could only compassionate him, for that his Lordship was imprisoned by an higher
Hand, and where they had no power to intermeddle.

He instanced in Indictments for Treasons, and several other great Crimes, in
which they could Bayl men, but in this Case, the Supreme Jurisdiction of the
Nation had laid their hands upon it, which was attended by the House of Commons
with an Impeachment.

Whether their Lordships had cause, or not cause to commit his Lordship, they
could not Inspect; But that they ought to believe that his Lordship was justly
Committed, and that their Lordships in their mature Deliberation would do
nothing unjustly.

He said, That they had a Jurisdiction over all the Courts in the Kingdom (that
only excepted) and as it would be very Incongruous for an Inferior Court to
Bayl whom they had Committed, or to call their Processes in question, so would
it be in like manner for them to do in this Case, because the Lords exceed
their Jurisdiction, and were above them: He said also, That the Opinion of all
the Judges in England had been taken therein, and had delivered their Opinions,
that he could not be Bayled, and that the truth was, his Lordship was
imprisoned by too high a Court for them to Bayl him: But that his Lordship was
not Indefinitely Imprisoned as he had alleged; for whenever his Majesty is
pleased to call a Parliament, his Lordship would have remedy.

That the King has power to do it when he pleases; and for his Peoples good, no
doubt he will when he sees fit: But that at some time the Circumstances of
State differ from other times, and that it may not for some space of time be
thought convenient; and though this may prove mischeivous to a single Person,
or to two or three Persons, yet such things must be endured for the good of the
Public. He said also, That if that Court should commit a man for High
Treason, and the King should Adjourn them from time to time, that man could not
be Bailed until they sat again: So that he must confess (as his Lordship had
said) that as this Case did happen, he was under a Temporary Indefinite
Imprisonment.

He concluded which telling his Lordship, That he must be contended to wait the
Kings pleasure when he would call a Parliament.

That for his part, he was before of Opinion that they could not Bayl his
Lordship, and he was so still.

The Earl of Danby to all this answered, that he must confess his Ears did
tingle to hear his Lordship say, That the King had done (...) much as lay in
his power; when his Majesty is bound both by his Coronation Oath, and by the
Laws, to see right done at all times to his Subjects, and he desired to know
whether this was not the Kings Court, and whether he had not deputed a Power to
them to see right done to all accordingly?

He said also, that he was now under greater amazement than before, since his
Lordship had both granted, That this Court could Bayl any Treason, and that the
Order of the House of Lords did not hinder it; which till now he confessed he had
taken to be the only obstruction to his Liberty.

That he had hoped he had satisfied his Lordship, that although he was
Imprisoned by an higher hand, yet that the Bayling of him did not intermeddle
with the Jurisdiction of that higher Judicature, and he had yet heard nothing
to show him that it did.

That for what his Lordship had said of the Opinion of all the Judges in
England, being taken in his Case, he must needs inform his Lordship, that That
was a mistake; for that the Opinion of the Judges had never been asked in his
particular Case, saving once, upon his Petitioning the King for Liberty to go
to his Country House at Wimbledon, with a Guard, or otherwise, as his Majesty
should think fit; which Petition was referred by his Majesty to the Judges; and
they (according to their wanted prudence and caution) did only Report that they
thought his Majesty could not Legally grant the Petitioners request.

That whereas his Lordship said, That he was not Indefinitely Imprisoned, for
that whenever his Majesty is pleased to call a Parliament, he will have remedy;
and that he must be content to await the King's pleasure when he will call a
Parliament; He took those to be fuller Arguments than any himself had made, to
prove that his Imprisonment was Indefinite, and at the Kings pleasure, so that
he was now more fully confirmed than ever to be of that Opinion, and wished that
every man that heard that Doctrine given for Law, might fully consider the
consequences of it.

He said further, that his Lordship had mistaken him in thinking that he had
said he was under a Temporary Indefinite Imprisonment, for that he had said he
was under an absolute indefinite Imprisonment; and that his Lordship had rather
proved him to be so, than showed any thing to the contrary; nor did he know
what Temporary Indefinite did mean.

The Lord Chief Justice then said, That he was not a Judge at that time when
the Judges Opinions were asked, but desired his Br. Jones to relate how it was.

Mr. Justice Jones then said, That he remembered the Case had been put to the
Judges, Whether the Lords in the Tower might be Bayled, and that it was then
the Opinion of the Judges that they might not; but he said he did think the
Earl of Danby was not particularly concerned in the question at that time, but
that it related to the Popish Lords only, and that there was much difference
betwixt his Lordships Case and theirs, Besides he did think that was at a time
when there was a day appointed for the meeting of a Parliament.

The Earl of Danby then said, that the question which was put at that time to
the Judges about the Popish Lords, did not concern his case at all, for that it
differed from theirs in very many particulars, which he had already mentioned,
viz. Of no Oath against him, No special Treason alleged, etc. which he was
loath to trouble them with Repeating again; but he supposed that the then
Opinion of the Judges, ought not to be made any Argument against him.

He said also, that the Lord Chief Justice had argued very strongly for him;
For that it was true, That the King might call a Parliament when he pleased,
but if therefore a Man must stay in Prison till the King did please to do so,
he may (by that very Argument) lie there all his lifetime if the King pleases;
which confirm's what he had been a great part of this time, laboring to prove;
and he said, he must confess he did expect to have heard stronger and more
powerful Arguments to have convinced him that he was in the wrong in what he
had said; but that now he was more encouraged than before, not to give over a
Cause which did so much concern every Man in England.

The Lord Chief Justice then said, that his Lorship was mistaken in believing
that That Court did keep him in Prison, for that he was not keptin Prison by
them, but by a superior Court, which was too big for them to meddle with, or
to examine what they did

To this his Lordship answered, That he had wrong done him, which must be done
by some body, and that it was a Maxim of the Law, That the King could do no man
wrong (being advised by his Courts) besides, that his Majesty had twice showed
his Consent in that Court to have him Bayl'd. Neither could he say, that the
Lords did him wrong, because there was nothing in their Order to hinder his
being Bayled, (besides their own practice to the contrary) and it seemed now to
be said, that it was by the Law, and not by the Order, that he was kept a
Prisoner. He said, he would not say that That Court did keep him a Prisoner,
but by some body he was sure he was kept Prisoner, but perhaps it might be by
the Stars, since he could not find who it was upon Earth that did it.

He concluded that if he were legally Imprisoned, yet by Magna Charta and the
Petition of Right etc. It was impossible for an English Man to be without some
certain prospect of relief in a reasonable time, they being to have Justice
done them by the Law at all times, and without delay; and that he was now in
the Kings proper Court for Justice, wherefore as his Lordship had given his own
opinion, so he did desire that every Judge would be pleased to deliver theirs
severally.

Then Mr. Justice Jones said, that he was not ready to give any present
Opinion, there having been so much, and some things so materially said by his
Lordship; but that for his better satisfaction he did desire to ask his
Lordship a question, in a point which did much stick with him, and would go a
great way in guiding his Judgment; and he was confident that his Lordship was
as able to give him an answer to it as any Man; which was this, His Lordship
(he said) had been charged with Treason by an Impeachment, and had pleaded a
Pardon to the Impeachment before the Lords; He said he took that Plea to be a
Tacit Confession of guilt in Law, (though the Party were never so innocent)
and then it had been a Tacit pleading of Guilty, insomuch that he did believe,
there could be no admittance of any Second Plea, and if so, he did confess he
did not see how that Court could then have any thing to do with his Lordship in
that Case; but it was what he had not yet well considered (though at present he
took the Law to be so) and he did desire to hear what his Lordship did say to
that?

His Lordship answered, that he gave him great thanks for letting him clear any
Objections, and giving him liberty to answer them as well as he could. That
this indeed was a question of Law, which he was but little vers't in, but that
he was at present able to say, that he had read the Opinions of some great Men
of the Law, to be otherwise; and instanced what the Lord Goke had said upon the
Case of Grauesend Bishop of London 7. E. 3. who did get a Writ of Discharge to
the Kings Bench, and did not take a Pardon, upon which he observed the said
Lord Coke to have said. That it may be he thought that the taking of a Pardon
would have implied a confession of the fault, and therefore went a new way; but
that was a mistake, for that no Man that is wise and well advised will refuse
God and the Kings Pardon, how often so ever he may have it; for there is no Man
but offends God and the King almost every Day, and the Pardon is the safest
and surest way.

And though at present he said he was not provided of Precedents in the Case,
yet he remembered there was a Case of a Coyner tried at Durham upon a Pardon,
where the Pardon proved defective, and yet he was allowed to plead over.

And he told him, that the same question had been moved in the House of Lords
upon his own Case, where diverse Lords had declared themselves, that they hoped
it should never pass for Law amongst them, that a Man should not have one Plea
for his Life, and gave for reason that if a Pardon was pleaded, and not
admitted to be good, then the Prisoner had depended upon what he thought had
been a good Plea, but was adjudged by the Court not to be so, and then if he
should not be admitted to plead over, it would be to ensnare a Man's Life,
without giving him any Plea at all for it. And he concluded, saying, he thought
that this question was rather going into the Merits of his Cause, than to what
he only demanded, which was but Bayl.

Mr. Justice Dolben then said he must acknowledge there was a vast difference
betwixt his Lordships Case and the Case of the Popish Lords in the Tower, in
many Material particulars, which his Lordship had mentioned, and he must
confess that he thought it one of the hardest Cases in England: He said also,
that he could not but differ from what his Br. Jones had said, as to the not
having liberty to plead over, for that he was of Opinion his Lordship ought not
to be debarred from having a second Plea, if the Pardon should be overruled,
and if (I did not mistake him) he cited the instance of one Hetleys Case (or
such a name) and he said that his Lordship had said so many things of great
consequence, that he thought it did very well deserve further consideration,
but if he should be put to give any present answer, he must then say (as my
Lord Chief Justice had done) that he thought they could not Bayl his Lordship,
but he thought it might well deserve further consideration.

Mr. Justice Raymond then said, That his Lordships Case had so many weighty
Circumstances in it, as ought to make it to be very well considered, before any
Opinion could be delivered in it. That for what had been said by his Brother
Jones, about the Pleading over or not, he thought that did not properly lie
before them in that place, That his Lordship had said some things, to which he
thought full answers might be given, but that he had also said some things, to
which he thought it would not be so easy to answer. That for his part he
thought it was a Case which might well deserve the consideration of more of the
Judges, betwixt this and the next Term, and that he must acknowledge he must
further consider it, before he would presume to give any Opinion at all upon it.

A Council at the Bar then moved, that a Rule of Court might be made to bring
his Lordship thither again, the first day of the next Term.

The Lord Chief Justice seemed displeased with the forwardness of that Counsel,
and the Earl of Danby Excused it, saying it was not moved by his desire or
directions; but said, that was all one as to him, whether there were any Rule
of Court or no, for that they were like to be troubled with him again, and that
he should not easily give over a Cause, wherein he took the liberty of the
Subject in General to be as deeply concerned as himself, and wherein he had
found so little to be said against him, that he did believe he should be as
troublesome to them as ever Judge Jenkins had been heretofore in the deffence
of English Liberty.

The Lord Chief Justice then standing up said, My Lord, your Lordship must for
the present be content to be remanded; and speaking to the Lieutenant of the
Tower's Officer, told him, he must take back his Prisoner.

And then the Lord Chief Justice immediately lest the Court.

FINIS.

