A LETTER FROM An Impartial HATER OF THE PAPISTS TO A FRIEND.
SIR,
IT cannot be denied but that the death of that worthy Gentleman Sir
Edmund-Bury-Godfrey was that which first created so unanimous a belief of the
reality of the Plot, but why it should be charged upon the Papists, I could
never yet see the least ground of reason for: But to wave that and to come to
the Parties executed for the Fact: For the two first, That allegation (though
non sensicall to common reason) of an absolution, seeing at their Execution
they professed themselves Romanists, may suffice: But should a fobur Enquirer
ask, how came Berry the last of them, both to profess himself a Protestant,
according to the estlabished Church, and that more then seemingly he was never
otherwise? and likewise so positively to deny the Fact, or any knowledge
thereof? sure he could not be lulled into any blind zeal for promotion (as
termed) of the Cause, all mental reservations as well as Indulgences being
there out of doors: But it may well be said of this his Confession or
Declaration (which you please to call it) as was of the Evidences against Sir
George Wakeman, and the rest, That it was shamed over: Give me leave to note to
yo^ the strangeness of a Vote in Parliament, much about that time, viz. that it
being a hellish and damnable Plot of the Papists, Should his Majesty miscarry
(without exception by what hand) that his Death should be revenged upon the
forementioned Parties; This being but a Vote, and that now no Parliament, I
think it cannot be over-criminal to mention who were the proposers, and what
sort condescended I shall leave you to judge: however I could not but observe
in his Majesty's late indisposition, how busy the small Agents were, at every
end of the Town, buzsing about, his being Poisoned; the end is easily gues'd
at; and no doubt, but them styled Masked Papists, would equally have
participated of the malice, not for Religion, but Loyalty sake; I shall
instance 2 or 3 reasons why (in my opinion) the real fire ought to be sought
for, at another door, then the smoke seems to come forth at: and therefore, to
cast an eye toward the merits of the Good old Cause, shall fix a jealousy
there: First, the Rebellion in Scotland, which though the Glorious Monmouth no
sooner appeared, then defeated, yet had they succeeded, no doubt but would have
sound (or rather were assured of) a great deal of encouragement from this our
Nation; but what they would have done for soon a Shooing horn devise, as the
second Article in the late Covenant was, I know not, (though the fained care of
his Majesty and People does much resemble those times) as also for a General;
for I am sure none but a very young one would accept it from their hands
especially, and have put confidence in them, for Richard Cromwells sake:
Secondly, it may be observed, that few or none (the Lesser men excepted) are
the sticklers for a Plot, but what were either actually in the Late Rebellion,
or whose Father was: and it were pity to spoil the old Proverb, too be of other
opinion then that what was bred in the Bone would not easily out of the flesh:
and to add further, there has scarce been an Election for the New Parliament,
where any ancient Royalist was a Competitor, but that some Rascal would brand
him, with the Title of masked Papist, or Courtier; which is now a Character
almost as obnoxious to the Rebellious Commonalty as the Former, a resemblance
too much of the Late Rebellion; And lastly, to confirm this my belief, the
daily endeavors of your ever-opposite Party to Monarchy, to ingratiate
themselves with the Established Church, by their printed Papers, in which they
style themselves only Dissenting Brethren; And to prevent impartial Eyes from
being cast that way, they repeat the expressions of a Reverend Father, when
moved in Late Parliament, that they ought to be looked after as well as the
Papists; whose Reply was, that the one might take him by the slieve, but the
other would by the throat: but by the Reverend Lords favor, if not forgot,
when took by the slieve, I think his Can had a remove too. Its true, we have
bare suggestions of the one, but too late experience of the other; it is
likewise worthy observation the Conformity of these Grandees of late in
appearing once a month at their Parish Churches; a bare Cloak for their
designs: for when there in the Morning, you shall not fail of them, at
Rebellions, School (I mean the Meeting houses) in the Afternoon, for fear of
giving scandal to a weak brother, and so lose a Vote when in Computation for a
Lay Eldership: and no doubt but these sort of Monsters have an itching desire
to be examining (that is) into Crown and Church Lands: but to return to the
Hinges of the Plot: give me leave to put you in mind of the Irish Ruffians,
heretofore so often mentioned; which materials being at last found, the devil's
in it, after so much consideration, and pains, the Eggs should prove addle: No,
for at the meeting of the Parliament you may well expect more of them: (that
is) by that time the Birds will not only be fledged but likewise have their
feathers, so artificially placed, as to set defiance both to wind and weather;
but then should their ambition so decked, make them so high flyers, as to aim
at Eclipsing the Sun; and by that means cause so great a dislocation in their
plumes, as nakedly to reveal themselves, the Workman, if not damned impudent,
surely must sneak. It is not easy without pre consideration to judge how far
crocked revenge, though lapped in a decrepid carcass, yet annexed to an
unlimited Conscience, may extend: but for fear of being too troublesome to you,
I shall conclude according to the dictates of my spirit, that is, to pray, that
God would grant his Majesty long Life; and that he may know his real friends
from them crept under that Cloak; as also never want power to control them,
nor a Legitimate Heir to succeed, without tripping over the Right of
succession: So if what already alleged, is not a sufficient excuse for not
being vulgarly Credulous, yet I doubt not but will necessitate you to conclude
him impartial, that is,

SIR, Yours, W. L.
POSTSCRIPT.
IN case this should escape your pocket, and the Finder prove too inquisitive,
let this suffice, the First Letter stands for Well wishers, and the Second for
Loyalty.



FINIS.

