A TREATISE OF THE Causes of Incredulity.

Wherein are examined the general Motives and Occasions which dispose
Unbelievers to reject the Christian Religion.

WITH Two LETTERS, containing a direct Proof of the Truth of Christianity.

Translated from the French of Monsieur LE CLERC.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row. MDCXCVII.

The Translator's PREFACE.
MR. Le Clerc is a Person so well known to all the learned World, that it could
not be thought less arrogant than superfluous for me to give any Character of
his Capacity or his Writings. Nor can it be said that I transgress either way
in recommending the following Treatise; for, setting aside all personal
Considerations, the Subject of it is enough to justify my Undertaking. The
Study of Religion in general is so natural to Man, that some would make this
Inclination to pass for the only essential Distinction of our Species from all
other Animals. But the Study of the true Religion must needs be of the highest
Importance, since the Profession of it is not acknowledged to be more
necessary, than the Sects pretending themselves to be the only Persons enjoying
that Happiness, are found to be different from one another in their Opinions
and Practices. This Diversity joined to the great number of Parties that lay
their Claim to genuine Christianity exclusively of all the rest, seems to
render the Discovery of the Truth very difficult, if not impossible; And indeed
thousands of well-meaning People have upon this very account given up
themselves to Skepticism and Indifference in Matters of Religion; or, which is
as bad, are content to be implicitly led by their Teachers. Now that Person
deserves best of the World who not only makes the Truth plain and intelligible,
separating it from all the false Notions with which it is so mixed and overrun
sometimes as to endanger the entire Ruin thereof; but who likewise establishes
such an excellent Method that a Man may be most certain he is on the right side,
without being obliged to undergo the endless labor of examining every Religion
successively. How far our Author has contributed to do Mankind this desirable
piece of Service, the Reader must determine; for we pretend not to lead his
Judgment. And tho Mr. Le Clerc is so modest as to think his own Performance
inferior to that of Grotius upon the same Subject, I must affirm, (and that
with all imaginable Impartiality) that in my Opinion there is no Comparison to
be made between them; for were it for nothing else but that the Evidence of Mr.
Le Clerc's Reasons is obvious to Men of all Conditions, whereas most of the
other's Book is not intelligible but to profound Scholars, (as if these only
had a Right to the Privilege of understanding the Grounds of their Religion)
this alone is sufficient to decide the Controversy. But what is more,
notwithstanding the extraordinary Talents of Grotius, he was not near so great
a Master of the Oriental Languages, nor so acute and solid a Philosopher; nor
yet superior in Philology or History; to speak nothing of the Advantages of
writing after him. But let Mr. Le Clerc's Book speak for its Author. As for my
Version, I shall not detain the Reader with any Apology, because it is not more
correct or polite, if it be faithful and intelligible, which is all that is
necessary for those who sincerely study for Truth: and if I be so happy as to
satisfy them, I care not much for the Displeasure of others.

To the READER.
IT IS some Years since I first formed a Design of writing upon the Subject of
this small Piece, which I publish at present; and had my other Occupations
purely depended upon my own Choice, this had been performed long ago: but being
necessarily engaged in some other things, I was forced to put it off till now.
At length having finished my Latin Writings upon the Pentateuch, I happily
became Master of Time enough to turn my Applications upon this Subject. I can
freely say, that I never thought of Matters of this nature without extreme
Satisfaction; for, after what manner soever I could consider the Christian
Religion, it always appeared to me grounded upon the firmest Proofs, and the
Doctrines of it perfectly conformable to sound Reason, or (to say all in one
word) worthy the Creator of Heaven and Earth. Nor did I in my whole Life labor
with more ardour and delight than I did in composing this Work, wherein I have,
I think, evidently made out that Unbelievers act against all good Sense in
refusing their Assent to the Gospel: and I persuade my self, that if they
consider the same things that I have, they must necessarily acknowledge the
Truth of it. But whether I Am mistaken or not, that the World shall judge. If
this Book have the good luck to meet with that Reception in French, which
several others of this kind have had, I may one time or other put it into
Latin; and in my Annotations upon it confirm all that I say by the Authority of
the most ancient Apologists of Christianity, and that too of the most
considering Heathens; as the incomparable Grotius has done in his Books of the
Truth of the Christian Religion. I Am far indeed from equalling my Work to his,
nor do I flatter my self with the same Success, as to the Judgment of the
public: but if Men had regard only to the Intentions of those that write, I
think I may safely say that none in the World had better than mine, nor was
more convinced of the Goodness of that Cause I have undertaken to defend.

John Le Clerc.

The CONTENTS of the Chapters.
THE Preface, or the Design of the Author in this Work. page 1. Part I. Of the
Motives of Incredulity which spring from the inward Disposition or Inclinations
of Unbelievers. Chap. 1. That it is unreasonable and unjust to reject the
Christian Religion, because it is contrary to the Dispositions a Man finds in
himself. p. 9. Chap. 2. That Pride may be the Cause why Assent is refused to
the Proofs of the Truth of the Christian Religion. p. 27. Chap. 3. That what
hinders Unbelievers from yielding to the Proofs of Christianity partly
consists, perhaps in mere Prejudices, which all the while may be false. p. 45.
Chap. 4. That many are Unbelievers, only because they know not how to reason
well. p. 63. Chap. 5. That the Neglect of searching into Truth is often the
Cause of Incredulity. p. 75. Chap. 6. That Laziness keeps many People in
Ignorance, Doubts and Infidelity. p. 93. The Conclusion of the first Part. p.
107.
Part II. Of the Motives of Incredulity which proceed from the Occasions given
Unbelievers to doubt of the Christian Religion, or entirely to reject it. Chap.
1. That the Truth of the Christian Religion ought not to be called in doubt,
because several embrace it more out of Credulity than upon good Reasons. p.
110. Chap. 2. That the Immorality or Ignorance of those who sometimes express
the greatest Zeal for Religion, should not justly render it suspected to
Unbelievers. p. 131. Chap. 3. That the Incredulous are in the wrong for
rejecting the Christian Religion, because Interest seems to be the main Cause
of many Peoples Devotion. p. 143. Chap. 4. That the Divisions which reign among
Christians, is no good Reason why the Christian Religion should not be true. p.
165. Chap. 5. That the Incredulous object in vain, that Christianity being so
little known, and so ill observed in the World as it is, cannot be so useful to
Mankind as a Religion revealed from Heaven for the Good of all Men should be.
p. 180. Chap. 6. That Unbelievers cannot conclude the Christian Religion to be
false, because the Divines of their Acquaintance make bad Answers to their
Objections against it, or because they maintain some false Tenets as true, and
as the Doctrine of Christ. p. 199. Chap. 7. That the Difficulties which may
occur in the Christian Religion, ought not to bring the Truth of it into doubt.
p. 234. The Conclusion of the second Part. p. 277.
Of the Truth of the Christian Religion. p. 282. Letter 1. Wherein is proved
the Sincerity of the Apostles concerning the Testimony they rendered to
Christ's Resurrection. p. 283. Letter 2. Showing what a Miracle is, and proving
that from the Miracles of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, we ought to look upon
them as Persons truly sent of God. p. 307.
ERRATA.
Page 18. line 23. read angusta. P. 23. l. 8. dele and.

OF INCREDULITY.
The PREFACE, Containing the Design of the Author in this Work.
I Cannot determine whether, during the first Ages of Christianity, more Books
were written by the Christians to evince the Truth of their Religion, than
there may have been for these two hundred Years past. But that we have fewer
remaining of the precedent Ages than of the last two, is most certain. The
Teachers of the Primitive Church and their Followers, whilst Paganism was still
considerable in the World, labored more in confuting the Religion of the
Heathens, than to prove the Truth of that of Jesus Christ and his Apostles.
They thought if they could once convince the Heathens of the Falsity of their
own Opinions, that it would be no hard Matter then to make 'em Christians. And
this I could most easily show, were it at all useful to my Design.

On the contrary, when Paganism was abolished in Europe, and Christianity
become the governing Religion, the Teachers of it then left Paganism to attack
the Religion of the Jews, and that of the Mahumetans, both which are yet in
being amongst us. But, beside these two sorts of Unbelievers, there is yet a
third, who, acknowledging the Falsity of the Mahumetan and Rabbinic Doctrines,
doubt notwithstanding of the Christian Religion, or peremptorily judge it not
true, without setting up any other Religion in its Place. Now to reduce these,
a new Method was absolutely necessary. It was agreed therefore to prove
directly the Truth of Christianity, without insisting upon the Confutation of
other Persuasions. And it may truly be said, to the Honor of the present Age,
and of that immediately preceding it, that this Matter was never managed with
better Success. The Heathens, the Jews, and the Mahumetans were not ill
confuted before, but the Truth of the Christian Religion was far from being
ever so well proved.

I am of Opinion nevertheless, that there is still one thing behind, which the
most part of the Writers upon this Subject have either not touched at all, or
but very slightly; I mean, the secret Motives and general Reasons which the
Incredulous have of not believing Christianity to be divinely revealed. Their
internal Disposition or Inclinations do so strongly incline them to reject all
the Reasons offered them, (tho they are not aware themselves of the Motives by
which they do this) that all speaking to 'em is in vain, before the
Unreasonableness of this Disposition be made evident. Just as if any should
plead a good Cause before prepossessed Judges, without endeavoring to cure
them first of their Prejudices, which must needs make them look upon that thing
as false, whereupon all the Reasons alleged are grounded. It Is certain, that
the Pleaders of such a Cause, tho never so just, would expose themselves to be
cast or condemned. This has been notwithstanding the Conduct of a great Part of
the Champions of Christianity. They have proved the Truth of it well enough,
but their Reasons appear weak to the Incredulous, considering the Disposition
wherein they are, and whereof they know nothing themselves. What is
unreasonable therefore in this Disposition must be discovered, and laid so
clearly before them, that they may perceive how it imposes upon the Light of
their Understandings.

This is what the Author of the Christian Religion has taught us, when he said,
that every one that does Evil hates the Light, Joh. 3.20.
neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved: which
signifies that Unbelievers cannot look upon that as true which is contrary to
the Maxims by which they have long governed themselves, and to the Habits they
have been contracting for many Years. On the contrary he says, that he that
does Truth comes to the Light, Ver. 21.
that his Deeds may be made manifest: that is to say, that such as are disposed
to live according to the Prescriptions of the Gospel, are easily persuaded of
the Truth of it. In the same Sense he says elsewhere, that if any will do his
Will, Joh. 7.17.
he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether of himself.

Beside the Disposition wherein those may be who disbelieve the Gospel, and
which deceives them without their perceiving of it, there are likewise certain
general Reasons drawn from without that help to lead them into Error. These
Reasons must by all means be exploded, because they are to them so many
Prejudices whereby they determine the Truth and Falsehood of all that is said
to them. Whilst they think 'em good, all the Proofs imaginable can make no
Impression upon them; because they never fail of opposing to them these
Reasons, which concluding to be solid, they cannot at the same time embrace
Christianity.

There are a world of People, for example, who, discovering several of those
Doctrines that go under the Name of Christ to be false, judge of the rest by
these, and reject the good with the bad. They are told of a thousand lying
Miracles, to whom those of Jesus Christ and his Apostles are joined: but
finding the modern Miracles to be Impostures, they give no greater Credit to
those upon which the Christian Religion is grounded.

As long as they are of the mind that these Miracles are not more certain one
than another, all the Consequences drawn from those of Christ appear to them as
built upon a rotten Foundation, and the Christian Religion therefore but as a
tottering Fabric. It must be shown the Incredulous then, that those Reasons
drawn from without which induce them to reject the Gospel, have no Solidity in
them: and after this it may be hoped that the Proofs of its Truth may have some
Effect upon their Minds.

I design to proceed according to this Method in the present Discourse, where,
after having examined the inward Disposition of Unbelievers, and also showing
the Unreasonableness of it, I shall discover the Weakness of those Arguments
drawn from without, by which they judge of the Christian Religion.

Before I begin I must once more advertise my Reader, that the Unbelievers
which I attack are neither the Jews nor the Mahumetans, but those, who, making
an outward Profession of the Christian Religion, conceal in the mean time their
real Thoughts from the World; but when they think to do it without Danger, they
declare to their Friends in private, that they believe not the Truth of it. Not
but that the Pagans, Jews, and Mahumetans are frequently guilty of the same
Faults with those Unbelievers whereof I treat; but it would be Labor in vain
to trouble our selves with such as never read the Writings of the Christians;
and who, because of their Prejudices, are in a manner incapable of reasoning
rightly. I write merely for the sake of those Unbelievers among Christians into
whose Hands this Book is like to come, or for such as may happen to be seduced
by their Reasons.

Beside this sort of Unbelievers, that commonly reject whatever is said to be
revealed, there is yet another kind of Men infinitely more numerous, who are
Unbelievers by halves, and to whom many things in this Work may be properly
applied. These own in general, that the Gospel is true, but will be sure to
admit of no Particular therein that is absolutely incompatible with their own
Inclinations or Habits. Such Doctrines they cannot persuade themselves to be
Evangelick, which is almost the same thing as if they rejected half the New
Testament, or rather entirely renounced it; seeing that Jesus Christ will not
have the Heart to be thus divided between himself and the World.

Whilst I prove against them who reject all the Christian Religion, that their
Dispositions or Inclinations cannot be the Rule of Truth and Falsehood, I show
to those half-Vnbelievers, that they grossly impose upon themselves in receiving
nothing of the Gospel, but only what serves their turn.

Finally, I don't pretend to have exhausted the Subject I treat of. An infinite
Number of Cases or Questions may be raised about Matters of this nature,
without any possibility of examining them all. And there may be, I deny not,
even some general Maxims forgotten by me, which cannot be commodiously reduced
to those I have laid down, worthy nevertheless to be discussed, and serviceable
to my Design. But this others may do, if they think fit; or I may do it one day
my self, if I should ever enlarge this Work.

I have purposely said in the Title Page, that I examined the general Reasons
of Unbelievers, that the Answers to many particular Objections they are wont to
make may not be expected in this Book. They must be looked after in Systems of
Theology, or in the Commentators upon the Holy Scripture. But I Will presume to
say, that these particular Objections are to be little feared, when once all
general Difficulties are removed out of the Understanding, because the same
Principles that answer the one, may serve to solve the other; or, at least,
prevent their having any ill Effect, if they cannot be answered; as it may be
seen in the second Part of this Discourse.

PART I. Of the Motives of Incredulity which spring from the inward Disposition
or Inclinations of Unbelievers.
CHAP. I. That it is unreasonable and unjust to reject the Christian Religion,
because it is contrary to the Dispositions a Man finds in himself.
HAD Men been pure Intelligences, solely applying themselves to the Search of
Truth and Falsehood, disposed to regulate their Lives according to the
Discoveries they should make, and all this without causing to them any Pain or
Trouble; there could be no other thing needful, than to cure them of their
Errors, or to reform their Conduct, but only to demonstrate those Truths to
them whereof they were ignorant before, and to show that they lived not
accordingly. But the Judgments which Men form of most Things, depend as much
upon the Habits they have contracted, and which they cannot easily correct, as
upon the Light of their Understanding, and Ratiocinations. Such as are
accustomed, for Example, to live idly, never thinking of any thing that is
useful, and that can thus pass away their Time without any Apprehensions of
Poverty; these, I say, look upon all Reasons offered for Pains-taking or Study,
to be only the Discourses of morose People, who are Strangers to the Enjoyments
of Life. The strongest Arguments to prove that every one is obliged to be some
way useful to the Society whereof he is a Member, appear to such without any
Foundation; tho others judge 'em demonstrative. But how comes this to pass? It Is
because the Habit they have got of living in Idleness, keeps them from
attentively considering what is said; for they fix their Thoughts upon quite
contrary Idea's, the Remembrance whereof is at the same time very grateful to
them. They think upon that soft Indolency, and that pleasing Laziness, wherein
they spent the best of their days without any Chagrin; and their Minds are so
taken up with these Contemplations, that there is no room left for any thing
less agreeable.

As much may be said of all good and ill Habits of a long continuance, as it
must be granted by all that are capable of making the least Reflection; and
this Truth every Person has learned a thousand times from Experience, or may do
it when he will.

Some body, perhaps, that has not sufficiently studied the Heart of Man, will
be apt to say, that when a Habit is found to be evil, it ought to be presently
changed into a good one. This is indeed most easily said, but nothing more
difficult to practice. When a Man is used to a certain manner of Living and
Thinking, it must be owned that he takes Pleasure in it; for this is the
necessary effect of all Habits: Now when once a thing is accompanied with
Pleasure, we cannot forbear loving it; and whilst we thus love it, there is no
leaving of it without great Strugglings, and putting an extreme Violence upon
our Inclinations.

As the Habits we already have, were contracted by degrees; so a great deal of
time is requisite to acquire others: for as there is need of Time to destroy an
old Habit, so there is likewise to form a new one. For if to be undeceived in
any thing, it were only necessary to listen like pure Spirits, we should in one
quarter of an Hour run from one Extreme to the other. Nothing makes Time
necessary in order to become Virtuous, but because we are unwilling to be so:
and did we desire it, we should quickly learn to live honestly and happily.
Longam facit operam, quod repugnamus: Erevis est institutio vitae honestae
beataeque, si credas. Quintil. Inst. Orat. lib. 12. c. 6.

Should it happen then that we ha^^ Habits quite contrary to such as the
Christian Religion requires of Men, they would certainly dispose us to look
upon every thing which that Religion does teach to b^ false, and to refuse
Submission to it^ Laws. I don't say yet, that those contrary Dispositions to
the Gospel are good or bad; but I desire only the Supposition which I now made
to be granted me: and I think none can deny me this, without denying at the
same time what I laid down at the Beginning, concerning the Influence our
Habits have over our Reason, with the Difficulty of conquering them. But these
are Truths so evident to all the World, that there is no Possibility of
disagreeing from them.

This being so, behold the Picture of Man that rejects the Christian Religion
because it is contrary to his present Disposition, however he came by it. He Is
a Man that says to himself, All that is taught by this Religion is false,
because it is repugnant to my Condition. I Am too honest a Man to deserve
Damnation; but this must nevertheless be, were the Christian Religion true: It
is therefore false, and I shall never believe it.

It Is absurd, some will say, to suppose a Man's Disposition to be good, without
any other Proof, but that to believe the contrary is a troublesome thing, and
that one is obliged to condemn himself. No body, say they, can reason after
this manner, unless it be some Fool. I grant it; but there are many more Fools
of this sort than we imagine. Such as believe their own Sentiments to be the
only true ones in the World, (and these are almost all Mankind) what Judgment
do they make of those, who, without examining, reject them? Do they not
conclude, that such as act in that manner, being well pleased with their own
Condition, judge every thing true that agrees with it, and the contrary false?

It Is true, nevertheless, that no body reasons formally so, distinctly
considering every Proposition, and their Connection with one another. No Person
makes this formal Paralogism: I Am an honest Man; what is contrary to the Idea's
and the Conduct of an honest Man is false; therefore the Christian Religion,
which is contrary to my Idea's and Conduct, is false. But it is certain, that
the Mind supposing the two first Propositions without expressly reflecting upon
them, does thence infer the mentioned Conclusion We pass over the Premises so
quickly that we perceive not whence the Conclusion is drawn; only we find our
selve^ strongly persuaded of its Truth.

Let us imagine that we understand the Language of the Cannibals, and that we
preach to them this Maxim, received by almost all Nations, That to fatten Men
in order to eat them, is a horrible thing Can we believe that they would
immediately agree to it? that they would detest their former Customs, and live
ever afterward as we do? It Is plain, that they would resist the Truth we
should preach to them, as long a time as other Nations do all Sentiments
contrary to their own. But what Reason can they pretend for this abominable
manner of living? None at all, except what I have now mentioned. And it is so
with all those whose Passions will not permit 'em to renounce their Errors: For
neither the Atrocity of the Crime, nor the Grossness of the Mistake, will cause
any Change in their Conduct.

Were any body assured that his Disposition was good and conformable to Reason;
that is, if he had clear and evident Proofs that he was what he really ought to
be, and that he could not change into better; he might then justly conclude,
That any Doctrine repugnant to his Disposition must be false. Knowing, for
Example, as we do, that it is a horrible thing to eat one another; if any
notwithstanding should persuade us to eat a Man, we might reasonably do all
that the Horror of such an Action could dictate to us. Before we follow
therefore the Inclinations which Custom begets in us, we ought to be fully
convinced by clear and indubitable Reasons, that such a Custom is well grounded.

And if the Unbelievers who reject the Christian Religion because it is
contrary to their Passions, had good Reasons to believe those Passions lawful,
we could not reproach them with their Infidelity. But if, on the contrary, we
can show that these Passions are blameable, and contrary to the Light of
Reason, it is certain they ought to acknowledge themselves in the wrong, and we
might justly complain of their Obstinacy.

I don't know how these Maxims can be contested, seeing they are founded upon
the Evidence of common Sense. It may be said, perhaps, that, without so many
Preambles, I should have come directly to the Point, and show that Unbelievers
refuse Assent to the Gospel from ill-grounded Prejudices. But I thought it
necessary that the Principles whence I draw the following Consequences, should
be seriously considered.

As those who reason from their present Disposition, do it without thinking
on it, I take it for granted, that the greatest part of Unbelievers commit the
same Fault; and I beg of them to retire, as it were, into themselves, there to
examine all the Principles by which they have determined not to believe the
Truth of the Christian Religion.

Seeing the Morals of it are opposite to all the Vices that Reason condemns, it
is impossible that any should reject it, without finding himself engaged in
some of these Vices: For why should any reject as false what is conformable to
Reason, except it be that he is in a Disposition contrary to this same Reason?
Although it is not always perceived, it follows not that the thing is otherwise.
It merits therefore some Attention.

The Morals of the Gospel are reduced, according to the Expression of one of
Christ's Apostles, to live Temperately, Justly, and Piously. Temperance
comprehends all the Virtues which regard our Selves; Justice them that concern
our Neighbor; and Piety those which relate to God. Our own Good requires us to
live temperately, as the Heathen Philosophers have demonstrated: Now Temperance
consists in a moderate Desire of Honors, Riches, and Pleasures. We should not
court Honors but by lawful ways, not as a means to live great, but to be
useful to the Society wherein we live. And this cannot be, except we are
capable of duly discharging those Offices which we seek, and of using those
Honors we are ambitious of, to good purpose. As for Riches, the Gospel forbids
us to desire 'em as a Good; but if, without breach of any Christian Virtue, we
become rich, it commands us, not to deprive our selves of what is necessary,
but to impart our Superfluities to the Needy. And as to Pleasures, we may take
none but such as are not contrary to any Duty the Gospel enjoins, and in such a
measure as will not engage us to violate any of its Laws. Thus the Gospel will
have us to sacrifice all our Pleasures to what it ordains us, and that we
resolve upon suffering all sorts of Evils, rather than neglect one of its
Commands. These are the principal Duties very near, that regard our selves: for
I design not to make here a complete Abridgment of the Christian Morals: for my
Subject does not require it; and it suffices that I bring to mind the chief
Heads of them.

The Justice which the Gospel recommends to us, does contain two things: One
is, to render every one his Due; and this is what the Heathens themselves
called Justice. The other is, to do for our Neighbor all that we would wish
him to do for us were we in his Condition: that we should pardon him, for
Example, when he does us wrong, rather than to revenge it; and help him in all
that we can, and that is no way contrary to the Precepts of the Gospel. The
Civil Laws may compel us, in part at least, to render every Man his Due, and
they are established for this purpose; but nothing can oblige us to do more,
except the Desire of living conformable to the Christian Morals. The Heathens
themselves have acknowledged, that to be good Men there was need of a great
deal more than the Civil Laws required. What a poor Virtue is it, says a
Philosopher, to be only good according to the Laws? How much larger is the Rule
of the Duties we are obliged to, than that of the Law? How many things are
required by Piety, Humanity, Justice, Liberality, and Fidelity, that are not
expressed in the public Records? Quam augusta innocentia est ad legem bonum
esse? Quanto latius patet officiorum, quam juris regula? Quam multa pietas,
humanitas, liberalitas, justitia, fides exigunt, quae omnia extra publicas
tabulas sunt?

As it would be impossible to fulfill these Duties upon all sorts of Occasions,
especially when the Observation of them should endanger Reputation, Goods, or
Life, if there were no Reward to be expected in this Life nor after Death by
such as lived according to the Gospel; so God has promised to protect good Men
here as far as should be needful for them, and to render them eternally happy
hereafter. To believe these Promises, and to have that Gratitude for the
Divinity which his Goodness requires of us, is what the Gospel calls Piety.

This is an Abridgment of the Morals of Jesus Christ, and which no body can
reject, but because he is not disposed to live accordingly; as I Am going to show
by some Examples.

When Jesus Christ and his Apostles began to preach the Gospel, few Persons of
Quality, or that pretended to considerable Employments, embraced it, as we
learn it from themselves. At this day such as doubt of the Truth of
Christianity, or are resolved to believe it false, are frequently Men of the
same Rank. All that are acquainted with the World know very well, that the
common People, and those that have no aspiring Thoughts, are more rarely
troubled with Incredulity or Doubts than Persons of Quality, and those who
pretend to great Preferments, or think themselves worthy of such.

If we look for the Reasons of this in the Persons themselves, we shall not
find that the Ambitious do reason better than others, or discover Defects in
Christianity unknown to the rest of the World. On the contrary, such as think
of nothing but advancing themselves, do not commonly study much in the Gospel;
and as they are ignorant of the Beauties of it, they could not be more capable
than others to find out the Weakness of it if it had any. All the Knowledge they
possess above the rest of Men, is only the Art of so governing themselves in
the World as to come at their Ends.

The true Reason why they doubt, or that throws them into Incredulity, is
nothing else but their predominant Passion Ambition, which is too opposite to
the Morals of the Gospel, to lodge in any Heart thoroughly persuaded of its
Truth, or touched by its Maxims. Let us suppose a Man very desirous to possess
a considerable Charge without having fit Talents for it; or if he has, that he
designs not to serve his Country by his Place, but only to live splendidly and
luxuriously: we may suppose farther, that he makes use of all Tricks to obtain
it, and that he is ready to do any thing sooner than miss of it. This Passion
which entirely takes him up, and fills his whole Imagination with the Pleasure
that accompanies all his Desires, makes him look upon his own Conduct as the
most reasonable and the most innocent in the World. If a Man in this
Disposition hears of the Gospel (the first time we may suppose) and be told
what Christ said of Ambition, can any wonder if he rejects it, or is the Reason
of it hard to be guessed?

Notwithstanding, it were easy to show that what the Gospel teaches concerning
Ambition is conformable to the clearest Evidence of good Sense, and that many
Pagan Philosophers have taught it likewise. If the Disposition therefore of an
ambitious Man determines him to disbelieve the Gospel, he must own at the same
time, that he acts contrary to the clearest Light of Reason.

The same Reasoning may be properly made concerning the avaritious, the
voluptuous, the unjust, the vindicative Man, and all others that are engaged in
Habits opposite to the Gospel. A certain Portugueze called Vriel Acosta, who
turned Jew, and fell into Sadducism, could not digest that Precept of the
Gospel, viz. to love our Enemies; because being naturally revengeful, and
having been ill used by the Jews of Amsterdam, he could never find in his Heart
to forgive them. He concluded therefore, that the Practice of this Command
being impossible, it was in vain to give it to Men, and could not believe that
God had revealed it.

It Is true, that a Man extremely vindicative, and for many Years indulging
himself in this Passion, cannot, without a Miracle, be brought of a sudden to
pardon, or patiently to suffer Injuries. In this Disposition he is always sure
to reject the Gospel, by reason of this one Precept, or at least to refuse
Submission to this Article, supposing that the rest are not too repugnant to
his Inclinations. But if in those Intervals wherein his Revenge is as it were
suspended a while, he comes to consider the fatal Effects of this Passion,
which would engage Men, if they always obeyed it, in perpetual Wars and
Quarrels that could never terminate but in the Death of one or both the
Persons; he must acknowledge that Revenge is a most dangerous Passion, and that
one or the other had better forgive his Enemy, or rather to pardon one another,
so to put an end to their mutual Injuries. He will wish, it may be, that his
Enemies would entertain the same Consideration, and cast off this Spirit of
Vengeance, being ready to do as much on his side. The more this Thought comes
into his Mind, the more reasonable it will appear to him, and the more
conformable to the true Interests of Mankind. By little and little will the
Desire of seeing his Enemies cured of so great an Imperfection increase; and he
will insensibly rid himself of it, to show them a good Example. At length,
instead of longing to revenge himself upon his Enemies, instead of making
Imprecation against them, he will ardently wish they may become better Men, and
will beg it of God in his Prayers. Nay, he will on his side, as much as possible,
contribute toward it, and after praying God, as he does for himself, that his
Enemies may become more virtuous, he will wish 'em all that God is wont to bestow
and more, as much as he would desire it for himself. Now, this it is to love
our Enemies, for we cannot love them above our selves, and the Gospel requires
no more.

It will be granted that these Thoughts are most reasonable, and that it were
to be wished all Mankind had the like Idea's. And as Men so disposed would very
easily comprehend the Possibility of loving our Enemies, they would be far from
doubting of the Truth of Christianity upon the score of this Precept.

All that can be said to this, is, that those who reject the Religion of
Christ, do it not upon the Account of its Morals, which are beyond
Contradiction very good, and grounded upon the clearest Light of Reason; but
because it contains, in their Opinion, incredible Mysteries, and supposes
Miracles that have no Probability.

Two things we must remark then, that we may know whether the Difficulty they
pretend of believing the Mysteries and Miracles of Religion, or whether the
Dislike of its moral Precepts, is the true Cause of their Incredulity. The
first is, if they don't believe many things as incomprehensible or perplexed:
And the second, if the Maxims of their Morals be as reasonable as those of the
Gospel, or if they be not plainly opposite to it. If it happens that upon all
other Accounts they readily believe things they do not comprehend, and that the
Rules of their Conduct be more than the Gospel admits, do they not give us just
Occasion to suspect that their ill Habits are the secret, but true Cause of
their Disbelief of the Gospel, whatever they pretend?

There is nothing so common as to see Unbelievers strongly persuaded of
Judiciary Astrology, and believing that Magicians can do several things beyond
the Power and Order of Nature. Two great Ministers of State, for example, whose
Actions will not let us think that Religion was one of their greatest Virtues,
are both accused of believing the Predictions of Astrologers: and one of them
of persuading himself that a Man who vomited several sorts of Liquors, did it
by the Help of Magic. Cardinal Richlieu, says an Historian, consulted, besides
Astrology, all kinds of Divination, even silly Women, whose Knowledge consists
in Vapors that make 'em foretell by chance some fortuitous Events. He was so
credulous as to attribute to the Operation of the Devil the Art of throwing out
at the Mouth all sorts of Liquors, after having first drunk Water, as was done
by an Italian Mountebank. Mazarin, who was not yet a Cardinal, having at so
simple a Discourse burst out a laughing, had like to lose his Favor by it: for
the Cardinal being provoked at this Mirth, whereby he thought Mazarin jeered
him, said ironically to him, that he was not Monsieur Mazarin who had a
profound and exact Knowledge of every thing. Mazarin very submissively replied,
that giving the fifty Pistols which the Mountebank demanded for teaching his
Secret, it might be seen whether the Devil had any hand in it. Mazarin himself
looked upon all Divinations as Fopperies, except Astrology, which he strongly
fancied, tho he feigned the contrary. When Madam Mancini his Sister died, and
afterward the Duchess of Mercaeur his Niece, according to the Prediction of
an Astrologer, at Rome, given in Writing a great while before, he became
extraordinary sad and melancholy, not out of Tenderness to his Relations, but
because this same Astrologer had fixed the Term of his own Death to a Time that
was very near. He lost his Appetite upon it, and slept not for many Nights, etc.

It Is also known, that the Emperor Julian, who could not believe the Prophecies
of the Old and New Testament, was extremely addicted to the Auguries and
Presages drawn from the Intrals of Victims, and the Heathens themselves have
blamed him for it.

I take it for granted, that such things as these are as hard to be credited,
considered in themselves, as the Mysteries and Miracles of the Christian
Religion. But the Incredulous believe them at the same time that they refuse
their Assent to the Gospel; because these Opinions do not regard the manner of
any Person's living, and are not at all incompatible, as the Christian Morals
are, with their ill Habits.

Moreover, if the Unbelievers would strictly examine themselves, and compare
their Conduct with that which the Gospel prescribes, I Will own my self much
deceived if they find it Proof against the Rigor of its Precepts. Julian, of
whom I was speaking, had many excellent Qualities which he needed not to quit
by any means, had he remained still a Christian; and several bad ones he had
likewise, which he must have rid himself of, would he follow the Morals of the
Gospel. At least, it is certain that he could not be so injurious to the
Christians as he was, which appears by many of his Letters.

From all this I conclude, that notwithstanding whatever can be said, the
Disposition of a Person does exceedingly contribute to make him receive or
reject Christianity; and that Unbelievers ought to examine themselves hereupon,
to see whether this, whereof we accuse them, be not true.

CHAP. II. That Pride may be the Cause why Assent is not granted to the Proofs
of the Truth of the Christian Religion.
PRide is inconsistent with a strong and lively persuasion that Christianity is
true; not only because the Gospel condemns it, as it does all other Passions
contrary to the Good of Mankind, but also because those affected with it find
themselves disposed by a particular Effect of this Vice to reject unexamin'd
the Proofs alleged for the Truth of the Gospel. This is what I design to show,
after I have first described Pride and its contrary Virtue Humility, lest what
I am to say concerning it should not be so well understood.

Pride is no other thing but a Disposition of Mind that makes a Man imagine he
possesses more Knowledge, Endowments or Virtues than he truly does; and that by
Consequence he should be more honored and esteemed than he deserves. The Proud
cannot without Vexation bear that the one or the other should be denied to
them, especially if they are not refused to other Persons. They have not only a
high Idea of themselves, but likewise despise others, who, they are easily
persuaded, have not the same good Qualities, nor any thing worthy of that
Esteem which they pretend to be their own due. The too good Opinion any
conceives of himself, is ever accompanied with a Contempt of others, and both
the one and the other are equally apparent outwardly. Those who suffer
themselves to be blinded with this Passion, believe not only that there are no
good Qualities except in their own Persons, and in such as admire them; but
they also abhor all that to them appears ordinary, and think they should debase
themselves, had they any Thoughts that were common to several others.

Such were, for example, the ancient Stoics, who imagined they had more
Knowledge than all the World besides, and that they were above those Weaknesses
remarkable in other Men. They looked upon those with Scorn and Pity (if their
Principles would permit 'em to have any) who were not persuaded of their
Doctrines. They troubled themselves little with the Sentiments of others which
they confider'd as idle Dreams, and never spoke of the most ordinary things but
in strange Terms. Pain was not an Evil, Pleasure was not a Good, all Virtues
were equal, there was no Difference between Vices; their Sage only had common
Sense, all others were Fools. They uttered a thousand Paradoxes of this Nature,
only to distinguish themselves from the Vulgar, who have Ideas very opposite to
these.

On the contrary Humility, which is the same Virtue the Heathens called
Modesty, consists in having no other Sentiments of our selves but what are
proportioned to our good Qualities, and not to pretend to Honors that are not
due to us. Nay, this Virtue goes yet further, and those whom we may call humble
patiently suffer themselves to be debased much below their Merit. As those who
have this Virtue esteem not themselves more than they ought, so they are far
from despising others, and willing to do them all the Justice they can
reasonably wish. Nor are they vexed to see People that are their Inferiors in
many respects exalted above them, and more considered than they deserve.

This Virtue may be remarkably seen in the Primitive Christians, who perfectly
knowing the Errors of the Heathens, and the Defects of their Philosophy, did
not reject however all that it taught, to distinguish themselves from the Pagan
Philosophers. On the contrary, they readily approved all that was good in it,
and were transported to discover a Conformity between the Notions of those
Sages admired by the Multitude, and the Doctrines of the Gospel. They even
confessed with great Sincerity, that the Heathen Authors did much surpass in
Eloquence the first Writers of the Christian Religion. Clemens Alexandrinus in
his Stromates, and Eusebius in his Evangelick Preparation, can furnish a
thousand Proofs of it; as well as many other Ecclesiastical Authors whom I need
not cite.

Such therefore as reject Sentiments generally received, or at least received
by a great Number of Persons, should take care that the Love of Singularity,
rather than a Demonstration that others are mistaken, has made them quit the
beaten Road. It Is true indeed that the Multitude of those who embrace a certain
Opinion, is not a good Proof of the Truth of it; but on the other hand it is no
cogent Argument that a thing is false, because many People believe it.

It is certain notwithstanding, that to be distinguished from the Crowd, a Man
frequently rejects what he believes true, for no other Reason, but because it
is a vulgar Notion. A vain Spirit cannot bear that he should be equaled in any
thing to an infinite number of Persons whose Knowledge he believes inferior to
his own, and whose mean Inclinations aim at nothing but what is common.

I Am persuaded that several are Unbelievers, because at least the fundamental
Doctrines of Christianity are extremely common. They think it noble to be
indeceiv'd concerning vulgar Opinions, and to look upon others as People that
feed themselves upon Chimera's. A Man thus conceited of himself, thinks he is
elevated far above the credulous Multitude, which is led rather by Custom, than
guided by Reason. There is nothing so pleasant, says an Epicurean Poet, as to
live in the exalted Temple of Wisdom, where you may enjoy a perpetual Calm, and
whence you may look down upon other Men wandering and scattered in their
different ways of living.

-- Nil dulcius est been quam munita tenere
Edita doctrina sapientum templa serena;
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque viam palantes quaerere vitae.
But at bottom, one exposes himself, as I have said already, as much to
Deception by contemning whatever the Vulgar esteems, for no other Reason than
this; as by blindly embracing all that the Multitude authorizes. Neither its
Aprrobation nor its Hatred are the proper marks of Truth or Falsehood. If there
have been Chimera's generally received, there have been also as many ridiculous
Notions countenanced by a small number of People who imagined themselves more
knowing than others. Therefore when any finds himself inclined to forsake
vulgar Sentiments, he ought to take heed that he be not imposed upon by the
agreeable Thoughts of being exempted from those Errors wherein he sees others
engaged. This may be as well the Delusion of a secret Pride, as the Effect of
uncommon Knowledge.

It is by so much the more dangerous to fall out of Vanity into any singular
Thoughts, as that when once a Man is governed by this Principle, it is the
hardest thing in the World to make him change his Mind. The same Passion that
leads him into it, confirms him in it insensibly, by reason of the Pleasure
wherewith it fills those who will be blinded by it, representing them, as I
said, to themselves as Persons highly elevated above the Vulgar. Beside all
this, vain People imagining they are more clear-sighted than others, easily
believe themselves never mistaken, and that the rest of Men have not the
necessary Sagacity for discovering the Truth.

This is the reason that when any, whereof they have not so good an Opinion as
of themselves, proposes to them Sentiments contrary to their own, they will not
so much as give him the Hearing. The first Thought that offers it self then to
their Minds, or, if you please, the Sentiment that is awaked in their Heart,
is, that if this Man spoke the Truth, it would follow that a Person whom they
despise, and not, as they think, without Reason, should have more Penetration
and a sounder Judgment than themselves. But this is what they can never agree
to; for so they must entirely change the pleasing Idea they hitherto
entertained of themselves and others. They would be obliged to allow those whom
they always believed much their Inferiors, a more considerable Rank in their
Esteem than themselves, and, in certain Regards, acknowledge their Superiority.

I shall illustrate this Truth by some Examples. Let Us take a Jewish Doctor,
and, if you will, of the Sacerdotal Race. Suppose him to have studied the Laws
of Moses with great Application, and the Traditions current among the Jews in
the Apostles time. Add likewise, that he succeeded well enough in this Study,
according to the Notion Men had of it then; that he thereby acquired a great
Reputation amongst the most considerable of his Nation; and had been preferred
to the greatest Honors they could confer upon him. A Man in these
Circumstances might very easily conceive a good Opinion of his own Person and
Understanding, and consequently despise such as were destitute of those things
which procured him all that Honor and Esteem.

Now let us suppose, that one of the common People, not of the Priestly Stock,
neither skilled in the Law, nor of any Esteem in the World, goes to see this
eminent Priest, and tells him of things directly contrary to his Sentiments;
maintains against him, for instance, That the best part of the Traditions he
had learned were contrary to the true Sense of the Law, and that a Man may be
acceptable to God without observing any of the Mosaic Ceremonies. Now what
would the Priest, think you, answer to this? What Opinion would he have of a
Person that should speak after this manner? It Is no difficult Business to
guess, that he would treat this Man with Indignation and Contempt; a little of
his Pity is the most he could expect. It is plain notwithstanding, that the
Priest would be more deserving of this Treatment, whatever good Opinion he had
of himself.

To set the Effects of Pride in another Light, let us imagine an Epicurean
Philosopher, a Man of Parts, and that by his Writings and Discourses had got
himself a considerable Reputation amongst the Greeks, such as Lucian was for
Example, or any other that you please. This Man was accustomed for a great
while to laugh at the Heathen Religion, wherein, doubtless, he was not to
blame; but he also joined to it all other Religions, without examining them. He
looks upon Religion in general as mere Superstition, or as a Trick of
Politicians to impose upon the Simple. He has a hundred times declaimed among
his Friends against the Infatuation and Prejudices of Mankind in this respect;
nor did he miss the Return of Applause from those of the same Disposition. His
Friend's and his own Railleries against Religion have been a long time the best
seasoning of their Conversation and Debauches.

Let us also send this Philosopher to some vulgar Person, who undertakes to
prove against him, that his Epicureanism is the most absurd thing in the World;
and endeavors to inspire him with some Awe of a Divinity, whose Providence
governs the Universe. I desire not that this should be granted me as true or
probable, but let us suppose it so a minute or two. Now, What will the
Epicurean say? He Will presently put on a jeering Countenance, and laugh at all
this Man has said to him, without examining any part of it. And indeed, What
Probability is there that a Person of Wit should condescend to learn of one who
seems to have none, and who is infatuated to boot with the Opinions of the Mob?

These Examples belong properly to the Ages past; and to be sensible of their
Force, we must, as it were, forget our own Time, and imagine our selves living
before we had yet a Being. But such as have any Knowledge of Antiquity and the
present Time, and have compared our Passions with those of our Predecessors,
know that the Theater of the World has only changed its Ornaments, and that the
Heart of Man is the same now as heretofore.

Men are proud, as they have always been; and it must be granted, that this
Passion may work the same Effect now, as it could have upon a Jewish Priest or
Epicurean Philosopher sixteen hundred Years ago. We see every day, that a Man
prejudiced in favor of an Opinion, defends it out of Vanity, against the
clearest Evidence of Reason. A Professor, for Instance, that in the University
has long taught the old Philosophy or the old Physic, not only rejects the
most ingenious and probable Conjectures of the Moderns, but even those
Demonstrations which show us the Errors of the Ancients as plain as the Sun.
The Reason of this Conduct is no other, but that if he acknowledged what the
Moderns say to be true, he must at the same time own that he taught nothing for
many Years but pure Chimera's: nor can he find in his heart to humble himself
so much to others, who have discovered Truths whereof he is ignorant.

Those who doubt of the Christian Religion, or that reject it, ought to retire
within themselves, and consider why they yield not to its Reasons. They will
find perhaps, that the imaginary Pleasure of being above the common Level, and
their Unwillingness to be in the same Rank with such as they despise, are the
true Causes which retain them in their Doubts and Infidelity; or at least, that
this Disposition contributes toward it very much.

As it cannot be denied that Pride is a Vice, and Modesty a Virtue, it must be
granted, that such as act by a Principle of Pride do put themselves in danger,
at least of being deceived; and that therefore Pride should never be concerned
in the Search of Truth.

This every body will own; but I may be asked, How we shall know that a Man
judges by a Principle of Vanity, and by what means we can defend our selves
from the Delusions of Pride? for those who reject the common Opinions, will not
acknowledge that they do it out of Vanity. To this I answer, that besides a
Man's own Consciousness, we may know by two things whether the Motive of Pride
comes into our Judgments of things.

The first is, that when we judge after that manner, we never carefully examine
the Matter in question. We content our selves with a very general and
superficial Review; after which we peremptorily conclude, without ever
beginning our Examen anew. It Is to no purpose for those who are condemned to
beg a little patient Hearing, or to have their Reasons exactly considered once
more; for they shall no longer be listened to. They are condemned without
Appeal, and can never recover themselves. So a Judgment once made without
Examination, serves for a Principle to others, who continue to condemn on what
they never well thought of, and will not grant any Hearing to their Adversaries.

If any doubts of what I say, let those who out of Pride have rashly decided
against the Truth they did not understand, endeavor exactly to repeat the
Reasons of them they have condemned. Had they judged after a mature Examen,
which requires a long and strict Discussion of all that was alleged in Defense
of what they condemned, they would so well understand it, as never to forget
it. They could repeat, and show the Weakness of each Reason brought against
them: As we see a Judge, that has carefully read and examined all the Parts and
Papers of a Trial, report the Particulars without any Hesitation; especially
when it is a Matter of Consequence, and deserving Attention.

But I take it for granted, that those who reject the Truth of the Christian
Religion, cannot distinctly report the Reasons of such as defend it, nor tell
what they except against in every one of them. This is what they should examine
themselves about, and without which, they must confess they did pronounce a
hasty Sentence: nor can they, without Injustice, refuse to examine once again a
Matter of so great Importance.

All the Books that have been seen, and all the Discourses we could hear upon
this Subject, contain only some loose Difficulties, which seem by no means to
be the Result of an exact and methodical Examination. These Difficulties cannot
be more sufficient to inform those who would judge solidly of so great an
Affair, than the Objections of one of the Parties are to inform equitable
Judges.

We have therefore Reason to believe, that those who declare themselves against
the Christian Religion, after resolving out of Vanity against the common
Sentiments, continue to reject them by the same Principle. I confess they may
have, and that they actually have, other Motives; for it is very rare, that in
a Judgment which is made of a Subject so full as the Christian Religion with
all its Consequences, there should not enter Motives of diverse sorts. But I
maintain, that the particular one of Pride, I have been speaking of, is found
among the rest. I will not say here, that the other Motives, whatever they may be,
are not better than this. I shall prove it in the Sequel of this Work: for it is
enough now to show that Vanity is concerned in it.

Another thing whereby it may be known what great Influence Pride had upon a
Judgment made of any Subject, is, that after having embraced an Opinion that
cannot be demonstrated, it is presumed that this Opinion unexamin'd must serve
as an infallible Rule to judge of Truth and Falsehood. Mathematicians have their
Axioms, their Definitions, and their Suppositions, which they do not
demonstrate, by reason of their own great Clearness and Plainness, which puts
'em beyond the Reach of all sorts of Doubts. They have Reason to suppose them
therefore, without proving them; but to suppose most obscure and uncertain, not
to say false things, and to make use of those Suppositions as Principles, is
absurd. To expect this Method should be approved of, and to treat scornfully
those who reject it, is so sensible a Mark of their being governed by Vanity,
that I do not know a greater Proof can be given of it.

The Jews, for Example, when the Gospel begun to appear in the World, thought
they had a Right to suppose as indisputable the eternal Duration of the Mosaic
Law, and the Necessity of observing it in order to become acceptable to God;
that to demand a Proof of it was sufficient to gain their Hatred. The Greek
Philosophers likewise of that time, looked upon themselves as so knowing, and
upon their Opinions as so well established, that every thing was false, in
their Judgment, which contradicted them the least in the World. Nevertheless it
may be said, that the particular Principles of the Jews and Heathen
Philosophers, compared to Christianity, were not even probable; as I could
show, if those I have to do with doubted of it. So the Jews, those blind Guides
of the Blind, and the Greeks conceited of a thousand Chimera's, concluded the
Gospel to be false out of mere Vanity.

Those who, being educated among Christians, are got into the same Fancy,
should take heed they do not commit the like Fault, unless they will be
voluntarily deceived. Let them examine then whether, in the Judgment they form
of Christianity, they suppose nothing but what is clear and incontestable. They
reproach Christians with making Suppositions without Proofs; let them not be
guilty therefore themselves of what they object to others.

For my own part, I Am persuaded that if they go back to the first Principles of
their Reasonings, and then reduce them to certain Propositions, they will be
convinced of their having built upon the most obscure and incomprehensible
Principles that ever were. To suppose, for example, that there is but one
Substance in the World, compounded of Extension and Thought, and which modifies
it self, as we see the Universe is, without having any supreme Intelligence
distinct from the Universe it self concerned about it: To suppose, I say, so
strange a Proposition without demonstrating it, is certainly to imagine that
the peremptory manner of saying such obscure things serves them for Evidence or
Demonstration. When I say to demonstrate, I understand, as Mathematicians do,
what leaves no Doubt nor Difficulty behind in the Minds of any who understand
the Terms of the Demonstration. Otherwise they must not talk of demonstrating,
unless they would impose upon the Weak by this Word. Let the Writings of those
be read over and over who maintain the Proposition I have mentioned, and ground
themselves upon it, to deny the Truth of Christianity, and it will appear that
there is nothing in all Religion which equals the obscuring of this Principle.
There are notwithstanding some People, who utter it as an incontestable Truth,
and judge thereby of whatever the Christians say concerning God, the Creation of
the World, and Providence. If these People would diligently examine themselves,
I Am much deceived if they did not discover that one of the greatest Reasons
which brings them to think this a clear Principle, is, their valuing themselves
upon defending an Opinion remote from vulgar Notions, and of admitting rather
the most obscure things imaginable, than they should mix again with the Crowd,
from which they endeavored hereby to distinguish themselves. As Credulity and
Superstition add to their Objects, as it were, a false Light, which serves them
instead of Evidence: So Pride makes a Geometrical Principle of a thing that is
in it self unintelligible.

There are other Persons to whom this dogmatical and peremptory Air is so
displeasing, that they equally condemn such as stick to the vulgar Opinions,
and those who, forsaking what is commonly received, endeavor to establish new
Principles. They think that seeing there are Difficulties every where, and
those sometimes insurmountable, the surest way is to affirm nothing, and to
reject all without establishing any thing. I will not undertake to confute this
Principle here; I shall only say, that although this Way seems very different from
that whereof we have been speaking, it is probable nevertheless that it
proceeds from the like Disposition of Mind. It is not much less agreeable to
humane Pride to consider it self secured from popular Errors by doubting of
every thing, than by establishing Principles contrary to those that are
commonly received. Some look upon other Men as the Sport of their Opinions, and
the Prey, to speak so, of a thousand Chimeras; whilst, under the Shelter of
Doubt, they think themselves safe from the Danger of Error.

It might be said nevertheless by some Men, that not Pride, but the mere
Impossibility of discovering the Truth, which is a very mortifying thing, is
the Cause of their Doubts. I will not say that they appear not over-mortify'd who
are in this Condition, nor will I set about to show the Absurdity of
Skepticism; I shall only remark, that no body stops at a mere Doubt in
Religion. Those who say they have Doubts, are not content to look upon others
as possibly deceived, but as effectually so. They consider not themselves as
Persons who might well be in an Error, but as having found the true Secret of
Infallibility; and this may be the Effect of humane Pride, as much as the
boldest Determinations. Let them have a great Care therefore; and since it is
manifest, that to doubt as well as to affirm out of Vanity, is exposing of ones
self to Error, let them get rid of this fallacious Passion; or, at least,
suspend the Influence of it whilst they judge of Religion.

We require not this of them from the Principles of that Religion whereof they
doubt, or which they reject, but from this Maxim of common Sense, viz. That a
Passion, such as Pride is, cannot be of any Service in the Discovery of the
Truth.

CHAP. III. That what keeps Unbelievers from yielding to the Proofs of the
Christian Religion, partly consists perhaps in mere Prejudices, which all the
while may be false.
WERE I writing against the Pagans, Jews, or Mahometans, and should say that
their Prejudices kept them wedded to the Religions whereof they made
Profession; then all the World, as well those who believe as those that
disbelieve Christianity, would conclude me in the right. But as I write against
Men that have been educated in the Christian Religion, and that are not
persuaded of its Truth, it may be asked what it is I understand here by
Prejudices, when I say that they are the Cause, perhaps, why Unbelievers yield
not their Assent to it. They were brought up, as I said, in Christianity,
which, one would think, should prejudice them in favor of this Religion. But
there are two sorts of Prejudices; the first are the Effects of Instruction,
such as are those of the Jews, of the Heathens, and of the Mahumetans, against
Christianity. The second proceed from a particular Depravation of the Mind and
Understanding of some, and whereof it is somewhat difficult to render a Reason.

These People do easily conquer sometimes the Prejudices of their Education;
but after slightly forming to themselves other Notions without examining them
as they should, they afterward become Prejudices to them all the rest of their
Lives: and it is of these Prejudices I design to treat upon this occasion. I
shall not determine how they are formed, because they owe their Original to
such a Complication of several Motives, and to Circumstances so different, that
it is not possible, it may be, to distinguish them rightly. It Is enough that
they be true Prejudices; that is to say, hasty Conclusions, which serve 'em
afterward instead of a Principle.

Let us suppose, for example, that a Man born in any part of Christendom, where
very gross Errors, as it happens but too often, are mixed with the Doctrine of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles; let us suppose, I say, that this Man comes to
discern these Errors by reading the Books of those Divines who are of the
contrary Party: He Is presently cured of the Prejudices of his Education; for he
was always told that the Sentiments maintained in the Place of his Nativity
were true. It may notwithstanding fall out that a Person capable of discovering
these Errors, cannot go back to the very Spring, and examine the Christian
Religion in it self, such as it is in the Writings of the Apostles. There he
stops then, and imagines not only that the Religion of his Country is false,
but he makes the same Conclusion concerning all Religions, without excepting
that of the first Followers of Christ. He may entertain such Thoughts a great
while before he can find any body to whom he dares open his Mind, or that is
able to undeceive him if he does: and these Thoughts may take such deep Rooting
at length, that it shall not be an easy Matter afterward to eradicate them. If
the Man too be any thing speculative, he may in this Condition form other
Principles, upon on which he shall reason all his Life, tho they be in
themselves most false.

These are the Prejudices from which, I said, we must preserve our selves, and
that may contribute much to get the Christian Religion rejected. All those who
are tainted with them, are not equally capable of expressing them clearly; and
besides, they dare not always declare them freely to those with whom they
discourse upon the Subject; so that it is a most difficult Business to examine
them in such: manner as may turn to their Advantage.

Nevertheless, it may be said in general of all Judgments made of a thing from
Principles which are not certain that if Men should thus hit upon the Truth, it
must be by pure Chance, and consequently not to be relied upon. (...) this Rule
is to be observed in the Search o^ all sorts of Truth, how much more is it to
be regarded in a Truth of so great Importance as Religion is granted by all to
be?

This Rule then is grounded upon common Sense, and no body can disagree to it.
Now let us apply it to a Prejudice very common amongst those who doubt of the
Truth of Christianity, or that plainly reject it. They cannot, they say,
believe the Miracles upon which it is built because they never saw any
Miracles, nor ever spoke to any Persons worthy of Credit who assured 'em that
he had seen the like. They cannot any better imagine that this Earth whereupon
we live had a Beginning, or that ever there was a time when there were neither
Animals nor Plants. The Reason of this is, because they have always remarked in
a manner the same state of things, and have never spoke to any that had seen
this Beginning.

I maintain in the first place, that this is a mere Prejudice, which may be
reduced to this general Maxim; A Man cannot believe that whereof he has never
seen any Examples, nor spoke to any Eyewitnesses worthy of Credit who could
give a Relation of it. We shall find that this is very far from a Geometrical
Axiom, if we examine the Grounds of it. What has persuaded some People to a
Belief of this Principle, is, That many times they discovered Falsehoods by its
means. Some ancient Philosophers, for Example, have confuted the Fables of the
Poets concerning the Centaurs, the Giants, the Monster Chimera, and the like
fictitious things, by this very Maxim, What has been, now is; Palephat. de reb.
incredibil.
and shall be for the future; I agree that this Axiom may be of use, when such
as affirm unheard of things deserve no Credit, as were the Poets, who owned
they had invented a great part of what they said. But I deny that it extends
generally to all things, or that it can pass for a self-evident Maxim.

When a possible thing is attested by People in whom we see no appearance of
Dishonesty or Fraud, this Maxim is of no use, although we never saw any thing like
that which we are told of, nor ever heard others speak of it. Those who first
discovered America, and spoke of the Plants or Animals they had found there,
and which are Strangers to our Continent, were worthy of Credit, and deserved
to be believed, though we had never heard of the like before; nay though none
had gone after them to America, and that we had not read their Voyages till a
long time after their Decease. It is manifest, that such as should count their
Relations fabulous from this Principle, would fall themselves into a very great
Error, as Time has shown. The same may be said of what was declared by the
first who affirmed they had been with our Antipodes. What they said was not the
less true, because till then it was not heard of; and had the Art of Navigation
decayed so much after their Return, that none had since undertaken the same
Voyage, such as should now read their Travels could have no sufficient Reasons
to disbelieve what they said.

It is plain by these Examples, that this Maxim cannot pass for a Mathematical
Axiom, that admits of no Exception; and that consequently nothing can be merely
concluded from it without the Addition of other Proofs. If it be considered in
it self, this will not be the more called in question, seeing there is no body
such a Fool as to make his present Knowledge the Measure or Rule of True and
False in all Matters. Who can, without Extravagancy, flatter himself to have so
extensive a Knowledge of all possible things, as to pronounce that certainly
false which is not contained in his own Stock of Knowledge? But it is not
necessary to be more large in the Confutation of so strange an Imagination.

Nevertheless the Incredulous suppose this, without perceiving it, as a
Geometrical Principle; and from it conclude that what is said, for Instance, of
the Creation of the World, and of Miracles, is not true. Let them seriously
consider the Point, and they will find that from a Prejudice so little reasonable
they draw Consequences which they think clear as the Day. The good Opinion they
conceive of themselves and their Knowledge, joined to Experience, which upon
some occasions does confirm this Maxim, makes them shut their Eyes upon this
account, as I said, without perceiving it.

I shall bring another Example of a Prejudice not better established than the
former, and whereupon is grounded, notwithstanding, a great part of the
Reasonings of Unbelievers. Some who have Sense enough to quit the Opinions of
their Youth which they drew from their Education, without knowing why, have not
always Penetration and Exactness of Judgment enough to substitute any thing
better in their room: Yet they cannot forbear searching out other Principles;
for none can absolutely stop there, as I could easily show, were this the
proper place of doing it.

As they are not satisfied with what they learned concerning God and Religion,
so they form to themselves new Ideas of them, which are little better than
their former ones; but they please them more, because they are the Fruits of
their own Meditation, which never fail of delighting the Understanding that is
their Parent. They imagine, for Example, That if there were a God, who had
created Men, who would do 'em Good, and in order to it had revealed himself to
them, he ought to have done it in this manner. First, He should (according to
them) have made himself known to all Mankind, to render them equally happy,
seeing he is their common Father. Secondly, This Revelation should have begun
from the Creation of the first Man, and so be continued throughout all the
World, according as it was planted with Men; seeing it is not less necessary to
such as are born now, than to those of the Ages past. Thirdly, It should have
been at the Beginning so clear, and delivered with Circumstances so convincing,
that none could doubt of the Sense or Truth of the Revelation; and the Proofs
of it ought to have still subsisted, that every one might examine them, without
relying upon the Relation of another; otherwise, if there be any Revelation, it
is useless, say they, as Experience shows. In the fourth place, This Law should
have been proportionated to the present State of Mankind, that so it might be
obeyed; or else the Creator of Men ought to reform their Nature, to the end it
should not oppose it self to the Observation of his Laws; without which, they
signify almost nothing, and are unworthy a Wisdom that knows the Condition of
them to whom it prescribes them; or of a bountiful Being who prescribes them to
Men, to render them more happy.

These Principles appear specious at first sight, because they seem to be built
upon the high Idea we ought to have of the Divinity. And as the Incredulous
think they see the quite contrary in what the Christians say of Revelation,
they hence conclude, that the Christians are in an Error; and they imagine to
prove it the better against them, in as much as they build upon the same
Suppositions with them concerning the Nature of God.

But I Am going to show, that this way of reasoning is grounded upon a
Prejudice, which is manifestly false: for to come at the Propositions we now
read, they must proceed by these Steps. 1. By reasoning we may exactly know
what should be the Carriage of God toward Men, if there be a God, such as he
is described. 2. We do in effect form an exact and complete Idea of God, which
is contained in the Propositions we have been reading. 3. And if the supposed
Carriage of the Creator is not conformable to it, then there is no such thing,
and all that is said of it is false. 4. We see, by the History of times past,
and by what we know of the present State of Mankind, that the very contrary has
always happened to this day. 5. Therefore, etc.


These are the Propositions which those, I mentioned before, suppose; as all,
who have any Idea of the right Method of Reasoning must grant. But the first of
these Propositions is certainly false: for it is manifest that Revelation is
not clear enough concerning the Designs of God with respect to Mankind in
general, as that we might thence form an exact or complete Idea of his Carriage
toward Men. And it is a thing not material for us to know; no body being
obliged to learn more than he ought to believe and do, in order to become
acceptable to God, without troubling himself about the Methods of his
Providence with relation to Mankind in general, nor yet about his secret
Designs. To be a good Subject to a Prince, it is no ways needful to penetrate
into all the Secrets of his Politics and Designs; it is sufficient to know
what the Laws of the State command him to perform. This is what Moses taught
the Israelites, when he said to them, that secret things belonged to the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but the things revealed to them and to their Children.

The first Proposition being false, the second, which is a Consequence of it,
cannot hold; and no Person, without an extravagant Presumption, can say that he
has a perfect Idea of the Method whereby God ought to govern the World, if he
would act conformable to the Virtues that are attributed to him. For indeed,
although we have some Idea of these Attributes, it follows not that we conceive
them in their whole Extent, or that we can exactly know what Carriage is most
agreeable to them. We know, for Example, that God is most wise; that is to say,
that this Sovereign Intelligence never acts, without proposing certain Ends
worthy of himself, and that he goes to those Ends by the Ways he judges to be
most proper, and that are effectually so. But for all this, we know not, at
least in a distinct manner, every End which he has proposed to himself, nor all
the Ways whereby he designs to come at them. No body could ever boast of
gathering this from either Revelation, or the Events that happen in the World.
We know by History, that some Princes have governed their Subjects with great
Wisdom; but who can value himself upon knowing all their particular Designs,
and the Methods they have used to come at their Ends, only from their Writings
or their Conduct? It must be confessed then, that we may know something of the
Attributes of God, without being able to penetrate into all the Secrets of his
Conduct; and common Sense does teach us, that we ought not to judge rashly
thereof.

This being so, the third Proposition cannot be looked upon, but as the most
presumptuous and temerarious Imagination that could possibly be. It would be
absurd to reason thus concerning an earthly King, and boldly to affirm that he
was guilty of ill Management because he had not followed our Idea of the
Conduct he should observe, without our having an exact Knowledge of the State of
his Affairs, nor of his Designs. And it is a thousand times more absurd so to
judge of the Divine Understanding, infinitely exalted above ours; for we must
remember, that Unbelievers reason upon this Occasion from the Principles of
Revelation.

To come to the fourth Proposition, we cannot exactly judge of God's Providence
toward Mankind during the Ages past, by the Histories we have. Few of 'em are
extant: but if we had all the Histories that ever were written, yet that would
not be enough to form such a Judgment by. The exactest Histories do necessarily
omit a world of things, and relate only the most considerable Events which
regard States, rather than the Opinions of Nations, or the Revelations they
might receive from Heaven.

It must be granted then, that none can, without extreme Rashness, take upon
them to be Judges of Divine Providence; or to conclude that there is no God,
because he governs not the World after that manner they think he should. This
Answer might suffice to show the Falsity of those Prejudices which the
Incredulous form against Revelation and Providence, and which I have set down
in this Chapter.

However, to show fully the Danger of being imposed upon by Prejudices of this
nature, I shall examine them as they are in themselves, though I have already
destroyed their Foundation. I might, without any more ado, say concerning the
first Proposition, That God had sufficiently made himself known to all Men, by
revealing his Will to the first Patriarch from whom they are descended, to
Noah, for Example, and to his Children; and it is very probable, that the
general Belief of a God, and the Service due to him has its Origin hence rather
than from the Reasonings of any People. I might add likewise, That God having
created Men free, and contenting himself with giving them Laws, they have
abused their Liberty by violating his Commands, and so became unworthy that God
should continue to make himself known to them, as perhaps he might have done,
if they had made a better Use of the Favors he was pleased to heap upon them.

But I shall only say, That he might very well, without any way blemishing his
Goodness, bestow more Favors upon some People than others. There is nothing so
free as the Effects of Beneficence which are not due; and no body can
reasonably complain that he has not received from such a Benefactor what he had
given to others. On the contrary, he ought to be thankful that he gave him what
he has, and which was no more due to him than what he has not. As there is a
great Diversity amongst Creatures of several Kinds, some having more and some
less Properties than others; and that all the while no Person maintains that
God ought to have made all equally perfect, without putting any Difference
between his Works: why might not God also be pleased to place some Variety in
the same Species of Beings? Since we see that the Disposition of Humane Bodies
does vary in a world of things, that their Understandings are not more of a
piece, and since it is not thought strange that God has thus differently
distributed his Gifts; why should it be accounted a wonderful thing that God
has imparted more or less Light to the several Nations which compose Mankind?
The greatest Difficulty in this matter, if I Am not mistaken, proceeds from
this, that People, without perceiving it, confound God's Justice with his
Beneficence; and withal they unreasonably suppose, that God requires an equal
Return of Virtue from all Men, and that he will judge them all by the same Law.
Upon this Supposition, it seems repugnant to the Attributes of God to expect as
much from the Cafers of Africa or the Savages of America, as from more knowing
People; and it is thought unjust that God should dispense his Gifts so
diversely, since he would judge all Men upon the same Foot.

But tho the Beneficence of God be, according to Revelation, perfectly free,
insomuch that no Nation can complain that another is preferred to it; Romans
9.10, etc.
his Justice follows the same Rules that he ha^ prescribed to the Justice of
Men. He gives to whom he will, Romans 11.23.
and in what quantity he pleases, but he judges according to what he has
bestowed. He requires no^ what he has not given, Mat. 12.21.
and he reapeth no^ where he has not sowed. Romans 2.12.
Those that sin without the Law shall perish without the Law and those that sin
under the Law shall b^ judged by the Law.

As for the second Question touching the continuance of Revelation, all the
Difficulty is taken away by what is now said God will have all reasonable
Regard to every Circumstance of those People to whom he has so differently
distributed his Favors. Revelation does teach us the contrary no where; and if
any Christian Doctors have added to the Doctrine of the Apostles, it is
incumbent upon them to defend their own Opinions, and not upon those who design
only to defend the Christian Religion. None can, without Injustice, impute to
its Founders all that has been since built upon the Foundations they first
laid, as it shall be made appear more at large in the second Part of this Work.

The third Proposition concerning the Evidence of the Proofs of Revelation, its
perpetual Subsistence, and the Perspicuity of its Expressions, does suppose,
that the Design of God was to teach Men his Will mathematically, which is a
Supposition contrary to the present State of Mankind; a State of Liberty,
wherein Laws and not Demonstrations are proposed to them. Supposing that God
would appoint Rewards and Punishments, he could not lead Men to Virtue, nor
avert them from Vice, otherwise than by Laws whereof the Sense could not be
more clear, and yet the Justice and Authority of them be never mathematically
demonstrated. If all Mankind were convinced of the Truth of Revelation, and of
the Sense of it, by mathematical Proofs, no body then could resist it. There
could be, consequently, no Punishments for the guilty, because none would be
guilty; nor could there be any more Reward; for what Recompense can a Man
expect for assenting to a mathematical Demonstration?

It will be demanded, perhaps, why God should govern Man after this manner, and
not mathematically, as some Unbelievers would have him? But I Am not bound to
account for God's Bounty, which he diversifies as he pleases, for Reasons
unknown to us: It Is enough that I prove he cannot be accused of Injustice; and
this, I Am persuaded, I can perfectly demonstrate.

To be short, the Divine Laws are proportionated to the Nature of Man, whatever
they may say who have not studied them as they ought. It Is an undoubted Truth,
agreed upon by all Christian Divines, That God does not damn any Person barely
for violating his Laws, but for not leaving his ill Habits, that being the
Man's own Fault. I shall insist no longer upon this, lest I digress too far
from the Subject I treat of in this Chapter.

What I conclude from all I have said, is, That Unbelievers do frequently take
ill-grounded Prejudices for clear Principles, from which they hastily judge of
the whole Christian Religion. I have alleged plain Examples of it, and could
have brought several more; but those cited by me may suffice to make a
reasonable Man take care of passing such precipitant Conclusions. This is all
that I require in this place, and which the most incredulous Man living cannot,
without extreme Folly, refuse me. Now, I Am persuaded if Unbelievers would take
the pains to look back upon the first Propositions which they build upon, that
they should perceive a great part of them could by no means pass for Axioms;
and then they would quickly acknowledge how little Solidity was to be found in
their other Principles.

CHAP. IV. That many are Unbelievers, because they know not how to reason
rightly.
IN the preceding Chapters I supposed that Unbelievers did not reason well, and
that, without perceiving it, they suffered themselves to be seduced by their
Passions or Prejudices; but I did at the same time suppose that they might be
reclaimed by Arguments, when they were showed that they followed not the Rules
of good Sense. But there are more than one kind of Unbelievers; and some of
them, those I mean who are to be the Subject of this Chapter, are Unbelievers
upon no other Account, but because they cannot reason well, as I shall
presently demonstrate.

But we must remark before, that, the Christian Religion consisting in
Doctrines and Matters of Fact, to prove both these we must make long
Reasonings, and alledg many Proofs depending upon one another. Thus to perceive
the Force of those Reasons brought to prove the Divinity of the Christian
Religion, we must be capable not only of understanding every Proposition or
every Argument by it self; but likewise to enter into the Discussion of all
that is said, by examining the Connection of the Reasonings, and the Relations
which a great number of Idea. have toward one another. But there are a world
of People who entertain a good Opinion of themselves, and are not capable,
nevertheless, of this Examination nor to consider distinctly so great a
Collection of such compounded and perplexed Ideas.

I shall be immediately told, no doubt, That if this be so, I do but lose my
time in reasoning with them; since I suppose that they are not capable to know
the Solidity of an Argument. Yet two things oblige me to do it, whereof the
first and principal is, that what I have to say upon this Subject may
contribute to keep those who are persuaded of the Truth of Christianity, from
being seduced by the Example of this sort of Unbelievers. An infinite number of
People who believe the Christian Religion true, know not the Proofs of it so
perfectly, and are not so much confirmed in their Belief, but that they may be
tempted by the Example of those Unbelievers who reason little. They are of all
Qualities and Conditions; and the haughty Air whereby they reject Revelation,
is not sometimes less dangerous that the most specious Sophistry.

In the second place, It may happen that such as are not Masters of the true
Method of Reasoning, may notwithstanding be in a Condition of leaving their
Ignorance, and of making a better Use of their Understandings. It is very fit
to convince this sort of People that they are only Unbelievers, because they
know not how to govern their Thoughts. But I grant that those who are grown old
in this kind of Ignorance, and whose Presumption is increased by their Age, are
in a manner incurable, go to work with them how you will; especially if any
Immorality be joined to this want of Judgment, which never fails scarcely to
happen: Nor is it for such that we write, as Books of Physic are not written
about incurable Diseases.

To be persuaded our selves that there are, in effect, some People who for want
of knowing how to reason refuse their Assent to the Gospel, we need only
reflect a little upon the present State of the Heathens, and upon what we know
of many Unbelievers which live among Christians.

Such as undertake to convert the Indians, and the other Idolaters of Asia,
America, and Africa, after taking a great deal of pains to learn their
Language, are forced to take much more when they would by reasoning persuade
them of the Falsity of their Religions, and of the Truth of that of Jesus
Christ. The Monks may long enough make all imaginable Efforts to become
intelligible to those ignorant People, and to convince them of the Absurdity of
their Idolatry, and the Opinions whereupon it is built; but although this thing
be so plain, yet there are but few of them who can be made to understand it,
and fewer that conceive the Reasons upon which Christianity is grounded.

It Is not necessary that I speak here of the Means which the Missionaries have
chosen to employ in their Conversions, rather than Reason. This makes nothing
to my Design. I shall only remark, that the Difficulty of bringing those
Idolatrous Nations to receive the Gospel, proceeds not from any Insidelity
peculiar to them from the People of Europe. They are, upon the contrary, the
most credulous People in the World, and very seriously embrace a great number
of incredible things, whereof their Theology is made up. Their Incredulity,
with respect to the Gospel, proceeds from their not reasoning almost at all,
except about things relating to Life; and that nothing ever enters into their
Minds except from Experience or Education. They are not Men that meditate, and
are capable of attentively considering abstracted Ideas, nor of comparing them
with one another, to draw some Consequence from them. So for want of meeting a
little reasoning in these People, one is extremely puzzled how to get 'em to
change their Opinions.

This cannot be said of the Mahometans, since we know that their Divines do
sometimes write with Subtlety and Sense enough against some of the Doctrines
which the Missionaries would have 'em embrace. Nor can we treat them as
Infidels that reject the Christian Religion out of a Spirit of Skepticism; for
they are every thing rather than Pyrrhonians, seeing they most heartily believe
all the Alcoran. Nevertheless, although they have Sense enough (as I said) to make
Objections against some Doctrines that are preached to them, yet they have not
enough to examine the Principles of their own Religion, and to see upon what it
is grounded. They don't so much as understand what is said to them upon that
Head, nor the Reasons brought to prove the Truth of Christianity. And if the
Missionaries now and then convert some of 'em, it is not from any Reasons they
alledg, but in gaining their Love and Esteem by some other ways.

The Jews are much in the same Condition, as it may be seen by the Books they
have written to establish their own Opinions, or to confute those of the
Christians. This may be easily discovered also by any that discourses with them
upon these Subjects. But between them and the Mahometans there is this
Difference, that the latter give Credit to a Book full of Impertinencies and
Falsehoods; whereas the Jews ground their Persuasion upon the Books of the Old
Testament, which contain a true Revelation. And yet they can reason little
better than the Mahometans; which is one of the greatest Obstacles to their
Conversion. Whilst they are satisfied with the mere Authority of some Rabbis,
tho without any Foundation, they are Proof against the strongest Reasons the
Christians can oppose to 'em; because from their Infancy they are wont to
believe what their Rabbis tell them, and are never taught to reason justly.

Otherwise, if the Jews were in a Condition of pursuing an Argument, and of
distinguishing a good from an ill Consequence, it would then be very easy to
convince them of the Truth of Christianity. It should be only needful, as some
Christian Divines have lately done, to put them upon proving the Truth of the
Divine Mission of Moses, as they would prove it to a Heathen they designed to
proselyte to Judaism. For if they bring any solid Proofs for this matter, it
may be easily made evident, that these same Reasons are incomparably stronger
in favor of the divine Mission of Christ and his Apostles, than in favor of
that of Moses; as it has been shown in the Book whose Title you may see in the
Margin.

Limborch Amica collat. cum Erudit. Judaeo.
Now then, to convince the Jews and other Infidels by Reason, they must be first
taught the Art of methodically digesting their Thoughts, and be accustomed to
reason stricly upon other Heads, that they may learn to understand the Force of
the Proofs upon which the Gospel is founded. But this is what all the
Missionaries in the World are not able to do, especially to those Insidels who
are advanced in Years. It were Injustice to believe that it is only amongst
Infidels that Men are found incapable of discerning the Goodness of an
Argument; and who, upon this account, reject the Christian Religion. There are
Unbelievers among Christians themselves, who are not only such out of some
Disposition engaging them against the Gospel, but likewise out of downright
Stupidity, and for want of understanding the Reasons whereupon Christianity is
grounded.

There are some People who from their Childhood have been brought up to some
Trade, or other constant Business, without any Care taken about the forming of
their Minds, or even of instructing them in Religion; and who, being moreover
of a Genius not very proper for conceiving of things revealed, tho haughty and
presumptuous, have grown to a full Age without any farther Instruction, or
being cured of their Pride. These are rarely persuaded of the Truth of the
Christian Religion; nay, they frequently reject it entirely, or at least, in
part: not only because they know not the Proofs of it, but also because they
understand them not, when they hear them from those that do know them. These
unpolished and ignorant Creatures imagine that there is nothing true, but what
they perceive by their Senses, or what they have found by their own Experience
to be possible, or, in a word, what they find conformable to their Passions.
Thus neither the speculative Doctrines of Religion, nor the Practice of it, nor
yet the History of those who taught it being within the Verge of their
Knowledge, they refuse to believe them rather out of Brutality and Stupidity,
than as deceived by captious Reasonings. If they reject it not altogether, it is
certain however that they retain only what is most pleasing to them; which is
an evident Demonstration that they are not persuaded of it from Reasoning and
Knowledge; because the Proofs which confirm a part of it, are the same that show
the whole Religion to be true.

It Is not only amongst People taken up with Trade and Business that this sort
of Unbelievers is to be found; for there are more of 'em, perhaps, amongst such
as aspire to great Preferments, amongst Soldiers, and Persons of Quality. It
may be said indeed, that Persons of these Ranks have had a better Education
than others, with relation to the Affairs of the World, and those Employments
to which they were designed: But in very truth, it is as common a thing to hear
them reason as wretchedly about Religion, as the most ignorant among the
Populace. When once they are grown old in their Prejudices against
Christianity, then their natural Vanity, increased with their Age, renders them
more obstinate, and not seldom makes 'em altogether inaccessible to Truth. You
propose the most cogent Arguments to them in vain; for they look upon them as
mere Sophisms, tho they know not wherein Sophistry differs from solid Reasoning.

I shall be told, perhaps, that this sort of Men is not so ignorant of the Art
of Thinking as I suppose them to be, seeing they reason not so ill concerning
those things they know by Experience, and that they govern themselves with
Prudence enough in the Affairs of Life. To this I answer, That I do not deny
but those, I speak of, may reason very well about what are the Objects of their
Passions, or when they confine themselves within the Limits of their
Experience. But I maintain, that they have not as much as the Notion of
reasoning solidly about speculative things, that make no Impressions upon the
Senses; such as are the Proofs whereupon the Truth of the Christian Religion is
built.

To be convinced of this, we need only examine them, if we can, upon these two
Heads. First, We must discourse 'em about some abstracted Subject; such as are,
for Example, the general Ideas of most things, the Notions of Virtues and
Vices: And if they reason exactly herein, we may justly conclude, that these
Persons are not of their number who continue Unbelievers, for want of knowing
how to reason rightly. But if we hear them talk of such Matters without any
Principles or Coherence, if we see that they do not comprehend what is said to
them upon such Occasions, be it never so clear, or notwithstanding all the
Pains taken to make it plain, (which happens but too frequently) then it will
be easily granted me, that their Infidelity does, at least, proceed in part
from their Ignorance of the Art of Reasoning.

Another way we have to discover this kind of Unbelievers, is, when we find
them distasted with all Discourses upon abstracted Matters, or with any thing
that relates not to their Passions; when they avoid the reading of all Books
requiring any Attention, especially of such Books as are written to prove the
Truth of what they disbelieve; finally, when they will not enter upon a Discussion
of any such Subjects, nor will be at the Pains of comparing the Answers of
Believers with the Objections of the Incredulous. We may sufficiently know such
Persons, who are, so to speak, so filled with what they have learned from
Experience of the Affairs of the World, that nothing else can enter into them,
and are displeased when they hear other Discourses.

Such was Festus, for Instance, the Governor of Judea, who is mentioned in the
Acts of the Apostles. He could scarcely hear a short Discourse from St. Paul,
and charged him with Madness, after hearing from him another Discourse full of
Evidence and good Sense. Were he told of some Methods how to squeeze Money
dexterously out of his Province, or were he acquainted with some Intrigue that
might contribute to prefer him to a more considerable Post, he would
immediately understand what was said to him; or he would get it repeated to him
so often, and would have asked so many Questions about it, that he should at
least have an exact Notion of the Business. But because S. Paul spoke to him of
things no way relating to his Designs or Passions, he could scarce patiently
hear him, and understood nothing of his Discourse.

There are a world of People at this day in the midst of Christendom, who are
very near in the same Disposition. They speak very well of their Temporal
Affairs, or any thing belonging to them; they willingly converse about the News
of the Times, and that sometimes with Sense enough; but put them once by such
things to talk of Religion, they are presently tired, they speak of it
ridiculously, they show, in a word, so great a Contempt of such Discourses, as
if they were Matters beneath them, and to which they cannot stoop without
Uneasiness.

As these Unbelievers, who reason not at all, are moreover entirely possessed
with Passions opposite to the Gospel, and have been long habituated to obey
them; so they are not accessible on any side, and I see not how, without a
Miracle, they can be convinced of their miserable State, nor reclaimed from
their Error. However it was fit to make some Reflections upon this sort of
Unbelievers, that we might not be imposed upon when we meet with such, nor
seduced by their Ways.

CHAP. V. That the Neglect of searching into Truth is often the Cause of
Incredulity.
THere are many Men who have naturally a Genius good enough for abstracted
Matters, and that also were not wholly neglected in their first Education; but
whom the Course of their Lives has engaged in Occupations which have no
Affinity with the Search of Truth. The Necessaries of their Families, or the
Desire of satisfying their Passions, do so take up their Minds for several
Years together, that they neglect all other things, never improve their natural
Parts, nor distinguish Truth from Falsehood, with any Application, in the
Business of Religion. This Negligence leads 'em insensibly into Doubting; for
if the Connection of religious Truths be not heedfully attended to, there arise
a thousand Difficulties in the Mind, out of which we know not how to extricate
our selves. From Doubt Men easily fall into Infidelity, whilst they neglect the
Search of what may remove their Scruples: for when once they are got into the
Understanding, they are in motion upon all occasions; and as the Solutions to
them are not studied after at the beginning, we should not wonder if in time
they take such deep rooting, as it shall not be an easy Matter afterward to
extirpate them.

If such as refuse to believe the Truth of the Christian Religion seriously
examine themselves, I am much mistaken if the greatest Part of 'em will not
confess that they have extremely neglected the Care they ought to have used, in
order to be informed of a thing of such Importance. Nay, I dare affirm that
there is not any Unbeliever who perceives not, if he minds it, that this
Negligence is one of the principal Causes of his Incredulity: and I shall bring
many Proofs of it in the Sequel of this Work.

Now, to make what I have said more evident, I will instance this Fault in
other Persons, where People may remark it more impartially than in themselves.
When Christianity begun to make a Noise in Judea, that is, chiefly when the
Apostles declared every where the Resurrection of their Master, and showed that
he wanted not faithful Disciples on Earth, tho he was himself no more there;
all the Jews ought, one would think, to have informed themselves of what these
Disciples said, seeing they were things most nearly concerning them to know.
They expected their Messiah about that time; they groaned so heavily under the
Roman Tyranny, that they wished for nothing so much as Liberty, and they hoped
the Messiah should prove their Deliverer. In this Disposition they ought to
hearken, I should think, to every one that spoke to 'em of a Messiah, to get
rid of their Doubt, whether the wished Deliverer was yet come or not. Methinks
too the Apostles should have been heard of all the World, when they preached
the Doctrine and the Miracles of their Master, especially his Resurrection; for
indeed these Miracles were so great and many, that more could not be expected
from the Messiah. The Disciples of the Apostles said in all Places, that not
only Jesus of Nazareth, whom the Jews had crucified, did work numberless
Miracles whilst he dwelt among Men; but that he also left the same Power to his
Apostles, and that, in effect, they wrought Miracles every Day. What could be
said more to excite the Curiosity of the Jews? They were not in the Judgment of
the Epicureans, who thought no Miracles were to be wrought; nor did they
believe that God would send them no more Prophets to work any: on the contrary,
they expected the Messiah the greatest of all the Prophets. And
notwithstanding, they gave so little heed to what the Apostles said, that the
Chief of their Nation never took notice of 'em, unless it was to use 'em ill,
without examining in the least the Ground of their Doctrine. We have two Jewish
Authors who lived in the time of the Apostles, namely, Philo and Joseph; but
nevertheless they did not vouchsafe to inform themselves about these Matters,
as may be seen by their Writings. Philo wrote a great many Books, whereof the
most part are allegorical Discourses upon the Old Testament: now in some of
these he had a thousand Occasions to mention the Gospel, if he had any Idea of
it. If he disbeliev'd the Truth of it, he should, at least, have endeavored to
confute it somewhere: but he says not a word for or against it, which is sign
enough that he knew not what it was. I know very well how Eusebius Hist.
Ecclesiast. l. 2. c. 17. See Jos. Scaliger, l. 7. de Emendat. Temp. Valesius
upon Eusebius, and Thomas Brown in his Dissertation concerning the Therapeutes.
, and some learned Men after him, pretended that the Therapeutes of Alexandria,
whose Encomium is written by Philo in one of his Pieces, were Christians. But
nothing, except a desire of confounding the Jews by their own Authors, could
discover Christians to Eusebius, and those that followed him, in the
Description of the Therapeutes, where one Syllable is not spoken of Jesus
Christ, nor of his Doctrine; and where all that Philo says does perfectly
quadrate to some of the Esseans, who formed, as it is well known, a particular
Sect among the Jews. The Desire of convincing Infidels should not induce us to
make use of weak Proofs against them; for certainly such Methods must needs
render 'em more averse to Christianity.

What I have now said will be easily granted me by Men of any tolerable Reading
or Judgment: But it may be disputed with respect to Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 4,
and 8.
Joseph, by reason of a Passage or two produced out of him, wherein he speaks
of Jesus Christ. This is not the Place to examine these Passages, which learned
Men See Le Fevre in his Critical Letters.
believe were inserted by some Christian into the Text of Joseph. But be this
as it will, it is manifest that Joseph says nothing of the Slaughter of the
Children whereof St. Matthew speaks, nor of most part of the Circumstances of
the Life of Christ, nor of his Doctrine; nor can he be supposed by any to have
been acquainted with Christianity, except by such as never read his Works. Had
he known a part of the Discourses and Miracles of Jesus Christ, he would not
have been content to mention him only en passant, and in so few Words; he would
be large upon that Subject, no doubt, as it well deserved. It may be therefore
positively affirmed, that Joseph, how exact soever reputed to be in other
Matters, did shamefully neglect informing himself about the Christian Religion,
although nothing could have been more easy for him. Nor can any Excuse be pleaded
on the behalf of the Heathens who lived at that time, or a little after; and
that notwithstanding their Acquaintance with some Christians, yet never desired
to know what Christianity it self was. Annak l. 15. c. 44.
Tacitus, Ep. l. 10.
Plinius, and In Claud. c. 25.
Suetonius, have spoken of it, and wanted not Opportunities to understand it,
tho it appears they did not. They were polite and learned Men, and had spent,
according to the Custom of those Ages, a great deal of time in the Study of the
Greek Philosophy. Now this Philosophy was not upon any account comparable to
the Doctrine or Morals of the Gospel; nor could the Learned of Rome neglect
these things only because Barbarians, as the Grecians spoke, had declared them;
for they well knew that the most famous Sages of Greece had undertaken long
Voyages to the Barbarians, to learn their Opinions. What made them contemn the
Christians then? We need not seek for any other Reason, but a scandalous
Neglect, proceeding from the predominant Passion of most People: for ordinarily
they apply themselves only to what is esteemed in the World, and that may
contribute to have them taken notice of in the Places of their Abode. The
Literature and Philosophy of the Sea the Preface of Diogen. Laertius.
Greeks were for a long time in great Repute at Rome, and Persons of the first
Quality did value themselves upon these sorts of Knowledge: but the Gospel was
unknown there, because it contained not any Doctrine proper to add more Luster
to such as did aspire to the greatest Dignities.

Something of this Nature made the Athenians neglect the Opportunity they had
in their Hands of understanding the Gospel, when St. Paul was in their City to
preach it, if they would hear him: and, questionless, they would have heard
him, had they as much good Sense as they had Vanity. At the very first they
called him a Babbler; Acts 17.18, 22.
and after listening a while to him about the Resurrection of the Dead, some of
'em laughed at him, others put him off till some other time, and there were but
a small Number of them that received the Doctrine which he preached to them.
This proceeded in part from a blameable Neglect that would not let them inform
themselves thoroughly about what St. Paul declared, although on the other side, the
Athenians, and the Strangers who followed their Studies there, were Men of much
Leisure, and great Lovers of News. Ver. 21.]
But the Apostle not teaching his Doctrine after the manner of the Philosophers
they were wont to hear, whether in regard of the Method or the Elocution, they
were out of Conceit with his Discourses.

Let us suppose with them, that the outward Appearance of S. Paul was not so
taking as that of their Philosophers; but should this extinguish their
Curiosity? Is Truth always necessarily accompanied with Eloquence? None of them
durst maintain such a thing. Notwithstanding, S. Paul's being there did 'em no
good; and they neglected acquainting themselves with his Doctrine, which was
infinitely more reasonable than that of their Philosophers. They lost a world
of time in the Study of very ridiculous Doctrines, as were the Physics of all
their Philosophers, without excepting any; and the Morals of the greatest part,
to speak nothing of their Dialectick or Logicks. There was not one Philosopher
who had any reasonable, no nor a probable Hypothesis concerning God, except the
Platonists, who accommodated their Opinions so much to vulgar Notions, that by
this Medley of Good and Bad, they rendered all the Good they spoke unprofitable
and fruitless. Notwithstanding, such as spent all their time to hear this sort
of People, did not vouchsafe, out of an unpardonable Negligence, to understand
what S. Paul said to them.

One would think no body could at this time of day be guilty of the like Fault
among Christians, since they generally profess to believe that none can better
spend his time than in discovering the Principles upon which Christianity is
grounded. But the Actions of Christians not being always conformable to their
Belief, it happens but too frequently, that their Course of Life produces an
Effect quite contrary to what the Christian Profession should beget in them.
Although it be not said by any, that it were better employing himself about any
thing else than in the Study of the Christian Religion; yet the Carriage of
most Men is commonly such, as if they believed this. A Man who entirely
neglects this Study, but duly makes his Court to those that can advance him, or
keep him in his present Post; a Man that passes all his Life in heaping up
Riches, tho he be in a profound Ignorance about the Grounds of Christianity;
this Man, I say, is he for all this the less esteemed? The most understanding
Person in the World, but who is not respected for his Preferments, nor
considered for his Riches, is he comparable to this other ignorant, but rich or
honorable Man? Not at all, according to the constant Practice of most
Christians. This Practice cries much louder, if we may speak so, than the
Evangelical Maxims it contradicts, and seems to say to those who are entering
into the World, that it concerns 'em little to learn the Reasons of assenting
to Christianity, but that it is of great Importance to obtain some Employment,
or to enrich themselves, to which this same Christianity contributes nothing.
It falls out likewise but too often, that this dangerous Lesson is confirmed by
the Example of many considerable Persons, who after neglecting the Study of
Religion as much as they cultivate the Art of Advancing themselves in the
World, or of making their Fortune, are nevertheless in great Esteem, and in
such advantageous Posts, that their Lot appears worthy of Envy; whilst such as
might inform others by their Knowledge, live in Contempt and Obscurity.

This general Custom which obtains almost every where, does throw People into a
Neglect of Religion so much the more easily as they find themselves disposed
not to observe the Precepts of it. Thus slighting that Science which signifies
nothing as to their worldly Affairs, and whose Consequences would engage them
to resist those Passions to which they willingly abandon themselves, they think
as little as possibly they can upon those Proofs which persuade us of the Truth
of the Gospel. After this it happens, that some occasion of Doubt comes into
their Mind which begets Difficulties, out of which they cannot extricate
themselves for want of Knowledge; and this at last produces a formal Infidelity,
which is not easily to be cured, especially if it be of any Continuance.

It Is by so much the more dangerous to fall into this Negligence I Am treating
of, as the Causes whence it springs are always in being, and act incessantly
upon the Understanding with a great deal of force; whilst that which might
incline People to be instructed in the Reasons of believing the Gospel acts but
weakly, and is stifled, as it were, every moment by the Example of the more
numerous Party.

But there is likewise another thing, that may greatly contribute in seducing
such as are otherwise Men of good Sense. It Is an Argument they frame without
perceiving it, and which at first sight appears solid enough. When they see
that those who make a Profession of believing the Christian Religion true, obey
nothing of it but just as much as their worldly Interest obliges them to do;
they imagine that most Men act a part only, and pretend to believe what they
really do not; or else they conclude, that Persons so injudicious as to
contradict their Belief upon all occasions, are but an ill Example to follow in
this respect, and that it were better done of Men to regulate their Persuasion
by their Conduct; seeing, as they suppose, they cannot change the latter. Thus
they imitate pretty well the Actions of the greatest part of the World, but
they believe themselves exalted above the Multitude, in as much, at least, as
they have Principles conformable to their Practice. If they neglect informing
themselves in Religion, this proceeds from their not believing the Truth of it;
and if they regulate not their Manners according to its Precepts, it is because
they give no Credit to the Recompenses promised those who shall observe them,
nor to the Pains wherewith they are menaced that violate them. In a word, they
act coherently; whereas the Life of others is a perpetual Contradiction.

Nevertheless, it is most certain, that they are hugely out in their Judgment
of the greatest part of Christians. It Is not true, that the Multitude feigns
only to believe the Truth of Christianity; and it is also false, that
Injudiciousness makes them contradict their Belief by their Practice. It Is much
better to preserve our Persuasion entire, even when we contradict it by our
Actions, than to suit the Doctrines of it to the Conduct we follow.

And I prove it thus. In the first place, a Man may sincerely believe a
Principle to be good and reasonable, and yet not order his Life accordingly.
The Reason hereof is, that what sets most Men's Actions a going, is not so much
the Light of the Understanding as the Disposition of the Heart, and the
Passions, which are not seldom entirely repugnant to this Knowledge. No body,
for Example, will deny but that Bribery ought to have no place in a
well-governed State, and that all Employments should be conferred upon those
only who deserve 'em; nay, the Laws do every where condemn Bribery.
Nevertheless there are few Persons that do not solicit for themselves or for
their Friends when any opportunity of Advancement offers it self. We find also,
that Men are agreed about the Usefulness and Excellency of a great number of
Laws, which they break nevertheless every day, when they reap any present
Advantage from it. We may alledg a more evident Example of this Contradiction
between our Understanding and Practice. A gouty Man who contracted this
troublesome Distemper by drinking too much Wine, doubts not in the least, but
that the immoderate Use of this Liquor must needs prove very hurtful to him;
notwithstanding, the present Pleasure he finds in drinking carries it, and he
cannot forbear drinking more than he should. And thus it is with several other
Passions. In like manner, People whose Desires are contrary to the Spirit of
the Gospel, may indulge those Desires, without calling into question all the
while the Truth of Christianity.

In the second place, the Manners of most Christians are contrary to their
Persuasion, not that they perceive not this Opposition well enough, and condemn
it too, when they think of it; but the Method of Living generally received, and
that is most agreeable to their Passions, carries it over the Judgment they make
of themselves in their own Consciences; and we may be convinced of it by the
Examples already alleged, and by thousands of the like nature.

In short, It cannot be hence concluded that we must judge of Religion according
to our Inclinations, nor that we may accommodate it rather to our manner of
living, than continue to believe what we do not obey. Who will maintain that a
Prince would do better in changing the Laws according to his present Passions,
than to let them subsist, and break 'em every hour? No body. For if he observes
not the Laws as he should, he leaves them their Authority however with respect
to his Subjects, and such other Princes as are willing to observe them; which
is of absolute Necessity to Society. What Disorders would it cause in the
Commonwealth, if an adulterous Prince, lest he should be thought to contemn
their Authority, would abrogate all those Laws prohibiting Adultery? Herodot.
l. 3. c. 31.
It Is said that Cambyses the Son of Cyrus, being in Love with his Sister, and
desirous of marrying her, inquired of the Royal Judges, who were the
Interpreters of the Laws amongst the Persians, whether it was lawful for a
Brother to have his Sister to Wife? They answered him, That there was no Law
which permitted it; but that there was another Law that permitted the Kings of
Persia to do whatever they pleased. Upon this Answer, Cambyses married his
Sister; and the Persians have not from that time scrupled to imitate their King
in this Practice. It had questionless been less criminal, and much less hurtful
to the Society, if Cambyses had married his Sister without saying any thing of
it, and not endeavor to cover his Incest by Authority of Law.

If it be asked then, Which Carriage is most dangerous and blameable, that of
such as violate the Laws of the Gospel whom they believe to be Divine, or that
of the Incredulous who reject the Divinity of these Laws because they have no
mind to obey them. It Is plain, that the latter is much worse than the former,
supposing the Laws of the Gospel to be beneficial to Society, which cannot be
doubted, as I have shown in the first Chapter.

So, whatever be the Conduct of those who profess the Christian Religion,
Unbelievers cannot however excuse themselves because others do not act
coherently, seeing they neglect to understand what imports them most to know.
The greatest part of Christians are doubtless in the wrong herein, and they
deny it not themselves; but the Incredulous are much more to blame than they.
If the latter would examine themselves, they might discover, perhaps, some
other Source of this Negligence in their own Persons; and it is, that generally
they are not very sollicitous about knowing the Truth in Matters of Religion.

There are some People so much taken up with the present, and having so good an
Opinion of themselves, that they shut their Eyes and Ears to all sorts of
Discourse or Examples, which might convince them that they have reason not to
be well satisfied with their Opinions and Practice. Although they seem sometimes
to love the Truth, yet, if it be well remarked, it will appear that they love
nothing but their Passions, and are careful only how to indulge these; for they
receive no more of the Truth, but what is not incompatible with their Desires.
Thus Princes, and Persons of great Quality, cannot bear that such as are about
them should ingenuously acquaint them with what is said of them, and tell
besides their own Thoughts of the Matter. If any is a little too sincere, he is
quickly banished from their Presence. It Is just so with many private Persons,
who take none for their Friends but such as flatter them, and help to keep them
up in the good Opinion they have conceived of themselves. Princes and private
Men do equally drive out of their Minds all Thoughts that might trouble their
Repose, and hinder them from quietly enjoying what they love. They cannot say
therefore, that they are such mighty Lovers of Truth, who care for knowing no
more of it than what is pleasing to them. And it may probably happen that many
Unbelievers deal after this manner with Religion, neglecting to understand what
might convince them, out of a secret Averseness they have of searching into
such Truths as they cannot discover without extremely disquieting themselves.
So S. Paul reasoning before Felix, of Justice, Acts 24.25.
Temperance, and future Judgment, this trembling Governor was quickly weary of
hearing him, and put him off till another time. Had S. Paul entertained him
with some other Discourse, he would have heard him, it may be, as long as he
pleased: but the Virtues whereof this Apostle began to speak to him, were too
opposite to his Manners to obtain a longer Audience from him. It Is evident
then, that this Disposition is entirely against all good Sense, and the whole
World does equally blame Flattery and Flatterers. It Is generally agreed upon
likewise, that there is nothing more remote from Wisdom, than wilfully to
continue ignorant of what is disadvantageous to us; for without knowing it, we
can never bring a Remedy against it, and our Ignorance about it changes not the
Nature of the thing, but contributes not seldom to render our Condition worse.
The Incredulous therefore ought to look to it, and not fear to hazard their
Repose in the Search of disquieting Truths. They ought to beware of that ill
regulated Self-love, which flatters our present Passions, and avoids every
thing that may mix some Bitterness with the Sweetness we taste in the Enjoyment
of them. For my part, I Am persuaded that their Negligence of informing
themselves about the Grounds of Christianity, proceeds in great part from this
dangerous Disposition; and they would agree to it, no doubt, were they capable
of examining themselves.

Did we see Unbelievers use much Application in the Search of Truth, without
omitting any thing that was necessary for their thorough Information, and yet
not quit their Infidelity; we should, perhaps, be tempted to believe that they
were in the right, seeing they did not conclude but after a long and requisite
Discussion. But we see not one of them so disposed, and they are all contented
with a very superficial Knowledge of Religion, without endeavoring to penetrate
into the Proofs of it; which gives us occasion to confirm our selves in the
Belief of the Truth, and to be persuaded that their Infidelity proceeds, as I
have proved, from their Neglect of due Instruction.

CHAP. VI. That Laziness may keep many People in Ignorance, Doubts, and
Incredulity.
WE may reduce those who make Profession of believing Christianity, to two
Orders of Men. Some embrace it rather from the Authority of such as they
esteem, than for having examined the Proofs of it; and we may venture to say,
that these are the greater number. There are, however, many understanding
Persons, who believe the Truth of the Gospel for no other Reason, but because,
after examining the Proofs of it, they have been fully convinced. We may also
divide Unbelievers into two Parties. The one have in some sort examined the
Reasons upon which Christians build their Belief, but have not judged them
worthy of Assent, either because they knew not how to examine them as they
ought, or for some other Reason which I will not stay to examine now. The other
sort have never troubled themselves about examining them, and yet they stick
not to pronounce our Proofs not convincing. They might be led to this hasty
Judgment by diverse Motives; or several Passions might contribute together to
throw 'em into Infidelity. It Is not necessary that I enter upon a nice
Discussion of these Motives and Passions. What I have said in general or
particular in the foregoing Chapters, may suffice to oblige Unbelievers to
retire, as it were, into themselves, and to preserve them from the Delusions of
Self-Love. I must nevertheless add here some Remarks upon one of the particular
Sources of Incredulity, which is but too common, and whereof I have not yet
spoken any thing.

This Source is Laziness, which occasions many People to remove out of their
Minds whatever demands Attention, and that makes no Impression upon them by
their Senses, or by their Passions. We meet with some who have Understanding
and Judgment enough to examine rightly the Proofs of Christianity, if they
would apply themselves to it. But the long Habit they have acquired of not
examining any of these abstracted Ideas which require some Application, makes
them so averse to this Examen, that it is not possible to persuade them to it,
whilst they remain in this Disposition.

To conquer it, if this can be, and to cure those who indulge themselves in it;
or to keep others, at least, from falling into it, we must examine it in its
Rise, Progress, and Consequences: for if we can show that it is the most
unreasonable thing in the World in it self, and in its Consequences the most
dangerous, it must be necessarily granted, that it is not becoming a Man of
good Sense to give way to it.

In the present State of humane Nature, it is certain that nothing can more
quickly excite our Attention than what strikes our Senses, or awakens some of
our Passions. Whatever is conveyed into the Mind by either of these ways, does
so move and occupy it, that if the Sensations be lively, and the Passions
quick, no other thing can enter whilst they act there. And Men have naturally
an Aversion to all things besides; for if a Man continues long in this
Disposition without making any Attempt to subdue it, it happens at last, that
tho he be extremely active with regard to sensible things, and those Passions
to which he has given up himself; he falls nevertheless into a surprising
Laziness as to all other Matters, and will not hear of reading or examining any
thing that has no relation to them. As the Laziness of the Body proceeds from
such an extreme Love to the Pleasure of that Repose to which we are accustomed,
that we cannot think of losing it without trouble; so the Laziness of the Mind,
which I Am now treating of, does so seize upon all those who entertain it, that
they cannot shake it off without great Pains and Molestation.

Were we assured that nothing merited our Attention, but what made Impression
upon our Senses, or related to our Passions, we should then give up our selves
to this pleasing Laziness, and live, with respect to spiritual Objects, in the
same Calm, wherein we live with regard to whatever we think can neither hurt
nor benefit us. it were a Folly to part with a State full of Pleasure, only to
disquiet our selves in examining what would occasion Pain, but procure us no
Advantage. But on the other hand, if our Negligence of those things, which no
way concern the Senses, should occasion us infinitely more Harm, than our
Laziness about them could procure us of Pleasure; it must be granted, that it
were downright Madness for us to live in this Carelessness. But we cannot
assure our selves that there is nothing to be feared, should we neglect
spiritual things, such as the Christian Religion speaks to us of, without
examining the Reasons upon which this Religion is grounded; and consequently,
we must necessarily conquer this Laziness, that keeps us from doing it; or else
prefer the Quiet of a Fool, grounded only upon his Stupidity, to the true
Knowledge of the State wherein we are, and of what we have to fear or hope.

Notwithstanding, those who once abandon themselves to this Laziness, which
hinders them from any Examination of the Principles of Religion, have the
hardest Task in the World to reclaim themselves; some of them, whereof we speak
nothing in this place, choose rather to believe whatever is told them of
Religion, than to be at the pains of examining it; and others again will
believe nothing of it, because they are resolved not to examine any thing of
that nature. It Is of these last that we have undertaken to treat, and of whom
it may be said, that how understanding soever they seemed to be before they
took up this careless way of living, they are afterward very difficulty
brought off from it. Tacit. in Agricol. c. 3.
Subit quippe etiam ipsius inertiae dulcedo, and invisa primo desidia postremo
amatur. The Pleasure of Laziness gets into the Soul, and at last we love that
Idleness which at first we hated.

He acts plainly against good Sense, who condemns what he has never well
examined, because he had not Resolution enough to undergo the Trouble of
examining it; and he breaks the Rules of Common Prudence who obstinately lives
in this Condition, when the Question is about a Matter of such great Importance
as Religion. If he acted thus in relation to any other thing, that is, if he
took Sides without being at the pains of examining, who could he get to approve
his Conduct? None surely; unless he had to do with Men void of common Sense;
since it cannot be denied, but this is visibly exposing himself to be deceived,
and to all the Consequences of the Error he might fall into.

Let Us suppose for a moment with Unbelievers, that the Christian Religion is
not true, although this cannot be known, till it be first examined; but what Risk
do they run in hearing the Reasons of the Christians? None at all; since if
what they affirm be not conclusive, nothing can hinder them from rejecting it.
All the Loss they can fear is only the want of a little Quiet, whereof they
deprive themselves for some small time. But methinks a short term of
Carelessness ought not to be of so great value with a Man, that nothing can be
capable of making him quit it. Is there any in the World who can live in this
eternal Indifference for all that requires Application? If any leaves this
Laziness for other things, what Reason can he bring for not quitting it in
order to discover his own state as to Religion? If indeed, after taking much
pains to no purpose, a Man could not enjoy his former Quiet, he might plead
very plausibly in Defense of this Carriage; but, on the contrary, after
fatiguing himself a little, his Repose is but the more pleasant. And so the
Lazy should by this Principle, at least, be at the trouble of examining
Religion.

But now if the Christian Religion be certainly true, as we maintain, a more
deplorable State could not well be conceived in this Life than that of the lazy
Gentlemen we have described: For what can be imagined more lamentable, than to
precipitate ones self into eternal Misery, rather than take the pains of
learning the Means to avoid it? That Man could not be looked upon as a lazy
Person who would not rise at Night for fear of breaking his Repose, tho the
House was on fire; no, he would be taken for a Fool or a Madman.

We see by these Examples very clearly, how unreasonable that spiritual
Laziness is, which keeps Men from examining Religion. We perceive the dangerous
Consequences of it, or at least the Miseries that may proceed from it.
Nevertheless there have been formerly Men of this Character, and there are now
even among Christians.

Such were those Jews of Thessalonica, Acts 17.4.
whereof very few were the better for S. Paul's Preaching, because they would
not examine what he said; and whereof the most part, very zealous in all other
things, raised a Commotion in the Town against the Professors of Christianity,
as we are told by S. Luke. This appears by the Opposition which we find in the
same History, of the Jews of Berea, another City of Macedonia, to those of
Thessalonica. These, says the Historian, were more noble than those of
Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so; therefore many of
them believed. If those of Thessalonica had Love enough for the Truth to do as
much, they would not have been less ready to receive their Reasons who preached
the Gospel to 'em. But the Laziness that detained them in Judaism, joined to
their other Passions, kept them from examining the Doctrine of S. Paul, and
consequently they acknowledged not the Truth of it.

The present Jews who live among the Christians, and perhaps a part of the
Mahometans, may neglect the Examen of Christianity out of diverse Principles,
such as those we have described in the preceding Chapters; but I Am very apt to
believe that they mix with them a great deal of that Laziness we are treating
of in this Chapter. They are out of Love with all Meditation and Discussion;
nor can there be a better Proof of it, than that they vouchsafe not even to
examine why they give Credit to Judaism or Mahometanism. Being altogether busy
about sensible Objects and the Cares of Life, they cannot without Reluctance
think seriously and attentively of any other Subject. They may be compared to
People extremely weary after walking a great way on foot, but desired to take a
longer Walk to refresh and divert themselves. They would not hearken, be sure,
to such a Proposition, but indulging themselves in the Pleasure of Repose, they
would think of no other thing except quietly enjoying their Rest. Thus, such as
are busy about the Affairs of Life, and fatigued with the perpetual Cares they
occasion, are lazy as to all other things.

Christianity being at this time divided into several Sects, whereof some must
necessarily be in an Error, may we not therefore place in the Number of the
Lazy those Persons, who, full of all other Things but the Love of the Truth,
have never carefully examined which of these Sects is most conformable to the
Sentiments of the Apostles? I own that diverse other Motives might lead them to
remain, without knowing why themselves, in that Party wherein they happened to
be born, and to condemn all others without vouchsafing to examine their Tenets;
but if you remark it well, it will appear that one of the Principles which
occasion this Conduct is a certain lazy Aversion to the Trouble of searching
after the Truth in Matters of this kind.

We may proceed yet further, seeing there are People who condemn not only their
native Religion without having ever sufficiently studied it, but likewise all
other Religions, tho still less known to them: because first persuading
themselves that they have discovered some Falsity therein, they conclude next
that all the rest is of the same Nature; and so can never resolve upon
seriously or thoroughly examining the Truth. After having found out, as they
think, that the ablest Men they know teach a false Doctrine for a Gospel Truth,
they judge by this Sample of the Religion of their own Country as well as of all
others: and that Laziness which keeps 'em as it were enchanted, makes 'em think
it more convenient to condemn all without any more ado, than to engage in a
solicitous enquiry after the true Principles of Christianity.

I have already shown the Danger and Unreasonableness of this Laziness; nor are
there any Persons who disagree to it: but when they would actually get quit of
this Passion, they find themselves so much prejudiced in favor of it, that
they have need of their utmost Endeavors to be cured, or to form an opposite
Habit. Besides all I have hitherto said, we ought to reflect upon the Pleasure
of being in a contrary Disposition to this idle Temper, which is not only
infinitely more satisfactory, but likewise much more reasonable; and it may
happen that the Love of Truth would be preferred to a shameful Quiet, worthier
of Beasts than Men.

Let us imagine now such a lazy Person as we have been speaking of, and let us
compare his Condition to that of a Man whose Mind being accustomed to Enquiry,
finds no Repose except in the certain Knowledge of the Truth. The first having
perceived some false Doctrine which was taught him as a true one (for we may
grant this to several of the lazy Unbelievers) he rejects this Doctrine, and
whatever else is affirmed to be true concerning Religion, without considering
that important Truths might be mixed with Falsehoods in the Theology of his
Country; or that there may be People perhaps elsewhere exempted from those
Errors that were taught him; or finally, that the Doctrine of the first
Founders of Christianity might have been misunderstood. Common Sense would
teach a Man to suspend his Judgment at least, till he had examined these three
Heads. But for this there is more Caution and Moderation requisite than
Unbelievers commonly have, who, looking upon such an Examen to be impossible,
choose rather to deny all at once. This is just as if any Reader, because he had
discovered by chance an Error in some Historian, would immediately conclude,
without reading any further, that the whole was pure Romance, and that there
was no such thing in the World as a true History.

Notwithstanding such a ridiculous and hasty Judgment, Unbelievers seem to live
in as profound a Tranquillity, as a Man could do who knew by Mathematical
Demonstrations that all Religions were false. They appear to have so great an
Indifference for Truth in this respect, as if it did not concern them to know
it. They are ready, while in this Disposition, to do whatever may render the
Enjoyments of Life more pleasing, nor will they hear a word of examining; and
they indulge themselves in those Pleasures as far as they judge it possible
without doing 'em any harm. It is plain then that this Opinion opens a Door to
numberless secret Crimes, and gives Encouragement in public to all that can be
practiced with Safety. I will not insist upon it, that such People are bad
Friends, bad Subjects, or bad Citizens, because they sacrifice every thing to
their Pleasures; I shall only remark, that being no way certain of the Truth of
Religion, or that God would have 'em to be of any Religion, they can enjoy no
other Quiet but what must be an Effect of the most notorious Folly imaginable.
They are, according to their own Judgment, every Moment in a Condition of
parting for ever with what they love, and which to acquire or preserve has
frequently occasioned 'em infinite Trouble. This Loss may happen by a thousand
unforeseen Accidents, and at last it is sure to come unavoidably by Death,
beyond which they expect nothing. Nevertheless they live securely. They behave
themselves much worse than a Man would do, who being seriously told that he is
condemned to Death, but that there were Means of escaping it if he would be at
the Pains to know them; and yet would think of nothing but diverting himself,
without vouchsafing to give Attention to what was said to him, tho with the
Hazard of losing his Life, in case those Advisers whom he would not believe
spoke Truth. If what Christianity tells us be indeed true, there are Pains
infinitely surpassing Death to be feared by such as reject it; and yet
Unbelievers who have no Certainty that these things are not true, rest securely
in their Infidelity and Lazines, without informing themselves any further. In
good Truth such as live in this Disposition, and who imagine themselves exalted
above the Vulgar, are not in this respect much elevated above the Brutes, which
are only concerned about the present.

Now, on the contrary, let us suppose a Man who has well studied the Principles
of true Christianity, satisfied in himself with the Truths he has discovered,
he observes the Precepts they enjoin him with all Tranquillity in this Life,
and after Death he expects the Reward of his Faith, with a Contentment of Mind
that cannot be equaled. The most refined Reason, and the Laws of the Society
wherein Men must necessarily live with one another, requires nothing of him,
but he obeys it without hesitating; and whatever befalls him, he looks upon
Death only as a Passage to a much better Life than this. I dare affirm
something beyond all this; and it is, that supposing this Man deceived, yet his
Condition would be infinitely more desirable than that of such, as refusing to
examine Religion, reject it nevertheless with the Hazard of losing themselves
for ever, and are withal in a perpetual Fear (if not quite bewitched with their
Incredulity and Laziness) of losing for ever all that is dear to them.

It is therefore infinitely more reasonable and more sure both for this and the
other Life, if there be one, to search after Truth, and to examine the Proofs
of Religion, than to live and die in the most extravagant Carelessness
imaginable. This is all that I desire should be granted me here, and that
cannot be denied me by any, without acting against the clearest Evidence of
common Sense. Those who refuse to believe the Truth of the Christian Religion,
ought carefully to examine themselves, and see whether this Laziness I have
described be not at least in some part the Cause of their Incredulity. This
Examination is of the utmost Importance, there is nothing to be lost by making
of it, and you risk all by neglecting it.

The CONCLUSION of the first Part.
I Have described in the preceding Chapters those Dispositions and Motives
contrary to Reason, which might bring Unbelievers to reject the Christian
Religion. Although I have considered these different Dispositions one after
another, and have distinguished them by particular Characters, I am not of
opinion however that they act separately upon any, or that there are
Unbelievers who may be reproached only with one of these Faults. There is not
any questionless that is not at the same time guilty of several of them; but
there are such as may be more culpable in one than in another. Immorality makes
one an Infidel; in another it is Pride that chiefly opposes it self to the Light
of Truth: You see some blinded by their Prejudices which they take for
undoubted Maxims; there are others who do not reason well, or neglect informing
themselves of what they should learn, or whom Laziness keeps from entering upon
a Discussion, which to them appears too tedious and painful. And perhaps there
be those in whom all these Faults may meet in some degree, tho but one of them
may be their predominant Passion. There is likewise infinite Variety in Men's
Genius and Understandings with respect to their good or bad Qualities, and
their different Conjunctions.

Did we meet with Unbelievers who could say, that they renounced the Truths of
the Gospel for no other end, but to follow the most conformable Principles to
sound Reason, and to live in a more regular manner, or more useful to Society;
and could we meet with any of them exempted from the Faults I have described,
it might then be justly said, that my Enumeration of the internal Motives of
Incredulity was not sufficient, but I take it for granted that there is not one
Unbeliever, in whom several of these Defects are not remarkable, and I take
their own Consciences to witness. They are herein to do Justice to themselves:
for such as exhort them, as I do, get nothing by it, but only the Satisfaction
of performing their Duty; nor can the Unbelievers lose any thing by examining,
if they are not in some of those Conditions by me described. If they are
obliged to own themselves in the wrong, what risk can they run by reforming?
and if after a serious Discussion they find me deceived, they will have Reason to
be more satisfied with their own Conduct. The Time they shall lay out upon this
Disquisition cannot be counted lost or vainly spent, seeing the Matter in
Debate is the most important thing in the World, and that the Discovery of
Truth must at all times necessarily produce Joy, Satisfaction and Tranquillity;
or augment them, if enjoyed already.

The Second Part. Of the Motives of Incredulity which proceed from the
Occasions given Unbelievers to doubt of the Christian Religion, or entirely to
reject it.
CHAP. I. That the Truth of the Christian Religion ought not to be called in
question, because some embrace it more from Credulity than Reason.
Although, as I have already said, there is no Unbeliever but is in some blameable
Disposition which inclines him to reject the Christian Religion, it must be
confessed however that there are many other things whereof they cannot be
accused, but which nevertheless confirm them in these Dispositions. It Is true
that it is ill done of them to forsake the Truth upon any Account whatsoever,
but they are not much less to be blamed who furnish 'em with the Occasions of
doing so. I have undertaken to show the one and the other in this Second Part,
where, granting to Unbelievers that many of them who profess Christianity are
in the wrong in several things, I shall demonstrate that it no way follows from
thence that the Christian Religion is not true, and that we ought not to
attribute to the first Teachers of it, those Faults which we remark at this Day
in some of those who call themselves their Disciples. The Occasions which the
latter give Unbelievers to conceive an ill Opinion of Religion, proceed either
from the Persons or from the things themselves. I shall forthwith examine those
which the Persons give, and afterward such as proceed from Things.

One of the most general and common Scandals which occasions the Obstinacy of
Unbelievers is, that they see a world of People who are Christians not from
Reason and Understanding, but from their Education, and out of mere Credulity.
If these had been born in Asia, they would, without changing their Disposition,
be Idolaters or Mahometans; and as zealously embrace the idle Dreams of the
Bramins, or the Errors of Mahomet, as they believe in Europe that the Christian
Religion is true. They receive Fables that are manifestly ridiculous with no
less Respect than the most certain Histories; and they believe not less the
most pernicious Doctrines and the most contrary to the Good of Mankind, than
the holiest and most useful Precepts of the Gospel. It is not the Nature of the
Objects laid open by the Teachers of Religion to their Understanding, which
determines these to believe 'em true, or to look upon them with Respect; but it
is the Authority of those who speak to them well or illgrounded, and a certain
Credulity carefully cherished in their Minds, because of the Advantages drawn
by some from it, as we shall show in the Sequel.

Deceived by a faint Resemblance, they call their Credulity by the Name of
Faith, and maintain that those want it who believe not as they do all that is
told 'em by their Preachers, and consequently that they have not such a
Disposition as the Gospel requires of Men, seeing it promises Salvation only to
those who have Faith. If any Person reasons about Religion, and says that it
can neither be known nor proved without Reasoning, presently these People, who
neither know the Proofs nor the Doctrines of it but very confusedly, are sure
to suspect him of Irreligion, especially if he forsakes any of the common
Sentiments, the Falsity whereof he may have discovered by his Application and
study. These People so much persuaded, if you believe them, of the Truth of
Christianity, cannot believe many times that a Man who knows how to reason well
should embrace it in good earnest, and they are alarmed at the least
Examination of it.

In the mean time, the Unbelievers who hear these Discourses, and behold this
Conduct so visibly repugnant to common Sense, laugh at this pretended Faith,
and draw from it this unhappy Consequence, that the Doctrine to be received so
credulously is either false, or at least to be extremely suspected.

Thus the Heathens formerly hearing the Christians say, that they needed only
to believe in order to be saved; and not understanding what this meant, Origin.
cont. Cells. l. 1, and 6.
laughed in like manner at the Christian Religion, as if none could receive it
but credulous Persons, and such as were not capable of reasoning. And indeed if
it had for a main Principle this Doctrine, That People must embrace it without
knowing why, and that such as should thus believe it should be saved: If they
had maintained this, I say, the Preachers of this Religion might be justly
suspected of Imposture, and those who received it, without being able to render
any Reason, be condemned as too credulous. To speak in such Terms would
confound Religion with all sorts of Impostures, which are only established upon
the Credulity of the People: It would likewise open a Door to all the Falsehoods
that could be told, if Belief were all that was requisite; for there could be
no Reason to receive one thing without Examen no more than another. Were this
so, how could the Christians boast of being certain of the Truth of their
Religion, and the Falsity of others; since the Belief of all Religions would be
built upon the same Credulity?

But it is false that the Christian Religion requires Assent without
Examination, or that it is grounded upon a blind Faith. It is also false, that
such as receive it upon those scores can pass for Christians whose Faith is
praiseworthy.

To be certain of the first of these two things we need but consider the
Conduct and Discourses of Jesus Christ. Had he come into the World without any
Character to distinguish him from Impostors who have frequently imposed upon
the Credulous; was he to be believed merely upon his own Word, or had he
required any such thing, the Jews would have done well to reject him. Nay, and
had he in very deed been sent of God, if he did not offer cogent Proofs of it,
no body could be blamed for not believing on him: for then such as were the
most persuaded of the Truth of the Jewish Religion, and therefore the best
disposed to embrace the Doctrine of those Prophets God would be pleased to send
to them, could not, without hazard of deceiving themselves, acknowledge any Man
to be effectually a Prophet, who could give them no evident Marks of his
Mission.

Therefore Jesus Christ came armed with the Power of working Miracles, and he
wrought so great a Number, if you credit the Evangelists, that he infinitely
surpassed all the Prophets who were before him. Now this is the Mark which
Moses taught the Israelites should discover the true Prophets, and Jesus Christ
grounded himself upon it when he required Assent to his Doctrine. He never
desired any to believe in him purely upon his Word, as it may be seen by diverse
Passages in the Gospels.

If I bear Witness of my self, says he, Joh. 5.31.
my Witness is not true, that is, it cannot be looked upon as true, unless
there be some other Proofs of it besides my saying so. Then, after telling that
John Baptist had bore him witness, he adds, Ver. 36.
I have a greater Witness than that of John; for the Works which the Father
has given me to finish, the same Works that I do bear witness of me, that the
Father has sent me. He further says to those that desired him to declare if he
were the Christ, The Works that I do in my Father's Name bear Witness of me:
Chapter 10.25.
and a little lower, If I do not the Works of my Father, believe me not; Ver.
37.
but if I do, tho you believe not me, believe the Works. What can be said more
to the purpose than what you meet with in the same Gospel, viz. If I had not
done amongst 'em the Works which none other Man did, Chapter 15.24.
they had not had Sin? By this it appears clearly that the Author of the
Christian Religion did not require Assent to his bare Word.

His Apostles have acted just after the same manner; for they did not only
affirm that they had seen the Miracles of their Master, or that he had spoken
to them from Heaven after his Ascension; but they have also joined to their
Testimony all the Marks of Truth that could be possibly defir'd. Their Doctrine
considered in it self did not afford the least Occasion to suspect Imposture;
they could not expect any temporal Advantage by publishing it; on the contrary
they met every where with an obstinate Resistance from the Jews and Heathens;
they were ill used every Moment, and walked in perpetual Dangers: In a word,
many of 'em suffered Death for constantly persevering in the Profession of the
Truth. And to accumulate Proofs, they wrought Miracles like to those of Jesus
Christ, as he promised them they should before he left them. The Incredulous
will object perhaps that I beg the Question by supposing the Truth of what is
doubted of; but my Design is not now to infer any Consequences from these Facts
in favor of the Christian Religion: I only conclude from hence that the
Apostles did not preach a blind Faith or Obedience, as some Christians do at
this time: One of them exhorts those to whom he writes, not to believe every
Spirit, 1 John. 4.1.
but to try the Spirits whether they be of God, because may false Prophets were
gone out into the World. Another advises them, to try all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
and to hold fast that which is best.

It cannot be said therefore that such as cry up implicit Faith do act
according to the Genius of Christianity; nor can the ridiculous Pretenses of
those who require Assent to their say-so, be justly attributed to Jesus Christ
or his Apostles. It may be demanded of me here perhaps, what that Faith is
which is so much commended in the Writings of Christ's Disciples. This is not
the proper Place of discussing this Subject throughtly, nor will I meddle with
any more of it than is absolutely necessary to solve this Difficulty. Faith, as
we have said before, being not an implicit Belief, consists first in assenting
to good Proofs, that is, as strong Proofs as the Nature of the thing will bear.
For instance, A Man affirms himself to be sent of God, he preaches a certain
Doctrine to me, which he confirms by Miracles. Immediately I examine this
Doctrine in it self, without regard to any Prejudices, and without considering
whether it be conformable to my present Disposition or not; and if I find that
it contains nothing false, I conclude it may possibly come from God. Then I
proceed to the Miracles, and if I see 'em wrought, or if I find the Truth of
them attested by Persons worthy of Credit, I cannot doubt but God has actually
sent this Man.

Those who are capable of making this Examen as they ought, are worthy of great
Praise; for in the first place they must quit all their Prejudices, and
consider what is proposed to them, not as it relates to themselves, but with
respect to the eternal Laws of Truth and Falsehood. Secondly, they must have a
great Love for the Truth to go through with an Examination, whose Consequences
may prove very opposite to their temporal Interests, as I have shown in the
first Part of this Work. There are Times and Places when a Man cannot declare
himself persuaded of the Truth of the Gospel, without exposing himself to most
cruel Persecutions; and it may be said, that the Commands of Christ cannot be
exactly observed by us any where almost, without drawing upon our selves the
Hatred and Contempt of such as disobey them, that is, of the greatest Part of
Men. So that to be a good Christian, there is more Courage and Resolution
necessary than is commonly imagined; nor can it therefore be doubted, but that
Faith, such as the Gospel requires of us, is a very great Virtue.

It is also deserving of much Commendation, if we consider that it is never
found but in Minds well-dispos'd. It engages us not only to believe that he who
speaks to us in the Name of God, and adds sufficient Proofs of it, has been
really so sent, but also to expect great things of God for the future,
grounding our selves upon the Proofs he exhibits of his Power. Those who saw
the Persons brought to Life again by Jesus Christ, who saw himself after his
Resurrection, and who could not doubt of the Truth of these Miracles, were
obliged from hence to a firm Persuasion of what he taught them concerning the
general Resurrection of all Men. I Am of opinion that no reasonable Man will
look upon the last as impossible, if he holds the first to be true; for there
is no greater Difficulty in raising an hundred than one again: and it could
not, without Folly, be said by any, that God's Power was all spent upon those
first Effects of it they had seen. Nevertheless, Men being accustomed to
believe nothing but what they learn from their own Experience, can scarcely be
persuaded of any thing without seeing some Examples of it. He must be a Person
of Discernment and good Sense who draws such a Consequence as I have mentioned;
and he must also have some Equity, to expect for the future such great things
from the Marks that God has given of his Power. An unjust and obstinate Man
will believe nothing except what he sees, and has no regard to any thing but
the present.

It cannot be denied therefore, but that such an enlightn'd and understanding
Faith as we have described, is a most commendable Disposition of Mind, and most
agreeable to the purest Light of Reason. But here I foresee an Objection, viz.
I shall be told that I have described the Faith of such as had seen the
Miracles of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and not their Faith who live at this
time. To this I answer, that what I have said of the Persuasion of such as have
seen those Miracles, may be easily applied to them that now will examine the
Proofs we have that such Miracles were really performed. To assent to these
Proofs one must be in a Disposition like to theirs who first embraced
Christianity, by seeing the Micracles of its Founders. Nay, in some sense it
may be said, that such as relish those Proofs, and draw from them their natural
Consequences, ought to be better disposed than those who were the Eyewitnesses
of the Actions of Christ and his Apostles; because what is seen makes an
Impression upon the most ignorant Persons; whereas abstracted Proofs require
more Penetration and Love of Truth than most Men have. This is the Reason that
Jesus Christ speaking to St. Thomas, Joh. 20.29.
who without he saw him would not believe his Resurrection, says to him,
Thomas, because thou have seen me thou believe; Blessed are they that have
not seen, and yet have believed. He accused him of Obstinacy, because having no
just Occasion of suspecting any Faud in the other Apostles who affirmed they
had seen their Master, yet he would not believe them. If this Disposition be
blameable, as indeed it is, we must on the other hand commend their
Disposition, who, without seeing, assent to sufficient Reasons. St. Peter
therefore praises those Christians to whom he wrote, because they loved Jesus
Christ whom they had not seen, 1 Pet. 1.8.
and because they believed in him, tho then they saw him not.

It will be easily granted perhaps that Docility, the contrary Disposition to
Obstinacy, is very praiseworthy; but it may be said to me, that the knowing
Faith which proceeds from it, must be a very rare thing, compared to the blind
Faith I condemn. It is well known that there are few Men of all Qualities and
Conditions fit to examine thoroughly such Proofs as our Belief is built upon,
and that do not judge of the Cause before understanding it. From thence it must
follow, some will say, that you deny to a great many those Commendations which
you bestow upon discerning Faith. The most simple, and these are such as were
thought fittest to receive the Gospel, are not capable to examine their Proofs,
and so excluded, according to you, from the Kingdom of Heaven.

These Difficulties, I confess, appear specious at first sight, but at bottom
have no Solidity. First; I agree that true Faith is a thing infinitely more
rare than Credulity or Infidelity, and herein I do but follow the Doctrine of
the Gospel, which says, Mat. 20.16 and 17.14.
that many are called but few chosen. That Virtue which the Gospel requires of
Men is not a thing commonly met with, no more than extraordinary Knowledge. Nor
ought the Incredulous to wonder that the Description I have made of the true
Faith agrees but to very few People. On the contrary, we might suspect the
Sincerity of the first Teachers of Christianity, had they taught a Doctrine fit
to draw in a great Multitude without Knowledge or Virtue, promising them
Salvation notwithstanding their Ignorance and Vices. It would have been said
not without Reason, that they only designed to gain the Multitude, and to
augment the Number of their Followers. But the Author of the Christian Religion
has said, that strait is the Gate of Salvation, Mat. 7.14.
and that they are few who enter it.

Secondly; The Simple, or the Babes whom the Gospel commends, are not ignorant
or stupid Men, who have no Relish of Truth. They are not self-conceited
Persons, they are troubled with few Prejudices, and are ready to embrace Truth
and Virtue when offered or taught them. On the contrary, the wise and prudent,
who are not fit to receive the Gospel, are Men puffed up with pretended Knowledge,
full of Prejudices, and so disposed as to reject whatever is not conformable to
their Ideas, and their present Condition. Such were the Priests and Scribes of
the Jews, and most of the best Quality of that Nation. They were so strongly
persuaded that there could not be imagined a better way of serving God than
that there was no Theology more excellent than their own; that to offer at
undeceiving them was enough to procure their Hatred and Indignation. Moreover,
they were not Persons who knew how to reason strictly, or that had exact Ideas
of Theology and Morals. The Law of Moses explained by their Teachers, and their
Traditions good or bad, made up all their Knowledge. Jesus Christ calls 'em Wise
and Prudent, only because they were commonly thought so. On the other hand,
such as he calls Babes, were People looked upon by the Doctors of the Law as
Children in comparison of the Learned; but that indeed were much more capable
of relishing Truth than they, because they were neither blinded with
Prejudices, nor filled with a high Conceit of themselves. They were also Men of
good Sense, very competent Judges of the Truth of Christ's Miracles, and the
Sanctity of his Doctrine.

Something of this nature may be met with every Day in those Places where
Theology is corrupted by the Errors that are mixed with it. Let any address
himself to an unlearned Person, but of good Sense and Morals, he can be easily
persuaded that the Divinity of his Country is erroneous: He shall very well
perceive the Force of a good Argument, and yields Assent to Truth as soon as he
knows it. Go on the contrary, and propose the same thing to a Divine, there is
no wrangling Shifts nor Chichaneries that he has not recourse to, rather than
acknowledge the Truth; and his pretended Learning contributes often to render
the clearest Truths obscure to him. In the mean time, if you would represent to
him the Example of one amongst the Vulgar, who had been convinced by your
Reasons, he would treat him immediately as an ignorant or fickle Fellow, although
he had much more Sense and Integrity than himself. This is what Jesus Christ
remarked when he said, I thank thee, O Father, Mat. 12.25.
because thou have hidden these things from the Wise and Prudent, and have
revealed them unto Babes.

But some will press upon me harder, it may be, and ask what I think of that
great Number of People, who not only have no sort of Learning, but that cannot
conceive an Argument of two Lines, that understand not the Proofs of
Christianity, that consequently are not capable of examining them, and that
nevertheless profess to believe in Jesus Christ.

Although an infinite Number of People be comprehended under the Name of rude and
ignorant Persons, we must however acknowledge that there are several Degrees and
Sorts of Ignorance. They cannot be all exactly distinguished, but this is not
necessary to answer the Question proposed. I shall remark in the first place,
that those rude and ignorant Persons who are Men of ill Morals, and continue
such, are not of their Number whose Faith is acceptable to God, tho they make
Profession of believing in Jesus Christ. He will make no more account of 'em
for this, than if they had been in a quite opposite Persuasion; and it is
certain that no Ignorance can excuse them, as we could easily show. Secondly,
if Men not of such ill Morals, at least not in so scandalous a manner, should
embrace the Gospel out of pure Credulity, as they would receive the contrary
were they taught it, it is evident this is not the Faith so much extolled by the
Gospel. A Proof whereof is, that those People ordinarily change from black to
white, according as they alter their Minds who have the Conduct of their
Consciences. Nor do I well know whether such Men can be properly said to be of
any Opinion: for they have no Conception of what is never so little abstracted,
and only conform themselves externally to those for whom they have a Respect.

But among those that may be termed gross and ignorant Persons, there are some
who, without any Learning, have much Uprightness and Integrity of Mind, which
makes them admire and receive the Truths of the Gospel as soon as proposed to
them, tho they are not always capable to express clearly all that they think.
The Beauty of the Evangelick Morals makes a great Impression upon such Men, and
easily gains their Souls; and as they discover nothing in the other Doctrines
of Christianity that shocks their Notions or Desires, they cordially embrace
them, and constantly persevere to believe them. This Disposition and Carriage
is certainly very commendable, and conformable to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ.
Such were, for example, the Apostles, before they were extraordinarily
illuminated. The Miracles and Discourses of Jesus Christ gained them in a small
time; and the more they continued with him, the more they admired him, although
they were still prepossessed with some Jewish Errors.

We may place also in this Rank the Publicans and Women of ill Lives, who were
converted by seeing the Miracles and hearing the Doctrine of Christ. There are
a world of People of this sort, who are for a time drawn into an evil and
shameful manner of Life by seducing Temptations, and the Force of certain
Conjunctures; but all the while the Love of Truth and Virtue is not quite
extinguished in them. And this is the Reason that when Providence lays the one
or the other before them in a sensible and touching way, as in the time of
Jesus Christ, and upon a thousand other Occasions, they forthwith renounce
their Immoralities, and zealously take up the opposite Method of Living.

At this Day such as truly believe in Christ, and that are not capable of
making long Deductions, have not indeed the same Advantages as the Apostles
had, and the other Disciples, who saw those Miracles wrought which convinced
them, without much reasoning, of the Truth of his Mission, and the Divinity of
his Doctrine. But the Doctrine of Jesus Christ being always the same, the
Holiness of its Precepts recommends them as much as ever to the understanding
of such as are not quite corrupted with the bad Customs of the Age. We see
every day the Excellency and Usefulness of them, whether we consider them as
practiced by others, or remark the Disorders which accompany all ways of living
opposite to them. To perceive this, there is need only of a little Virtue and
good Sense. On the other hand, if we cast our Eye upon the Doctrines contained
in the Gospel, and which solely tend to lead us to the Observation of its
Precepts, to procure us eternal Happiness, there is nothing herein but what is
worthy of God, especially if they be drawn out of those Fountains which the
Subtlety of Modern Divines has not corrupted. Nor does the History of the first
Establishment of the Gospel contain any thing but what is conformable to the
Doctrine of it, and proper to persuade us of its Truth. This History written in
so plain and natural a Method, carries in it self all the Characters of
Sincerity; insomuch that in reading of it, one has not the least Suspicion to
make him doubt, whether the Writers of it believed it or not. The most part of
the Matters of Fact mentioned in it are of such a Nature that few could be
deceived about them. All this joined together is more than sufficient to
persuade a Man whom Vice, or I know not what Science falsely so called, has not
blinded: and the Difficulties which the Incredulous find in them proceed rather
from their Disposition of Mind than from the things themselves.

It is indeed true that the Persons we speak of are not capable to judge of
those subtle and perplexed Questions which divide the Divines. But it cannot be
said neither, that the distinct Belief of Doctrines above the reach of a
discreet and sincere Man that loves Virtue, tho he has no Learning; it cannot
be affirmed, I say, that such a distinct Belief is necessary to his Salvation.
Every Man that loves the Truth, that according to his best Understanding
embraces all that he conceives in the Gospel, that orders his Life by what he
believes, and that endeavors as much as possible he can to increase his
Knowledge, does all that is requisite to obtain Salvation from the Mercy of God,
according to the Ideas we have of it from the Gospel. For it may be said. that
this Man improves the Talents he received as much as God indispensibly requires
it of him; and nothing hinders, but we may apply to him what Jesus Christ said
in the Parable; Good and faithful Servant, Mat. 25.23.
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many
things: enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

If it be objected to me further, that there are some who are not by any means
capable to see in the Morals of the Gospel, in its other Doctrines, and in the
History of it, that Usefulness, Excellence and Sincerity which I said might be
remarked therein, and nevertheless believe it to be true; I have nothing to
reply to this but what I have said already. These People imitate others, but
they have not that Faith which the Gospel demands. It is not calculated indeed
for the Learned alone, but no more is it for Brutes. Such as understand not, or
are supposed not capable to understand any thing of it, should become Men
before they think of being Christians; for there is no great Difference between
them and the Savages of Africa or America.

So I may conclude that the Incredulous do calumniate the Christian Religion
when they accuse it of requiring from Men a blind Credulity, and to condemn
Examination. It has been shown that there is nothing more false, by Reasons, if
I Am not mistaken, that can never be answered.

CHAP. II. That the Immorality or Ignorance of those who sometimes show the
greatest Zeal for Religion, ought not to render it suspected to the Incredulous.
THE Christian Religion demanded not only that it should be thought true, but
also that this Belief be externally professed, and that a Man let no
Opportunity slip of showing others by his Life and Discourse that he is firmly
persuaded of it. It Is by no means a speculative Science to continue locked up
in the Memory, without bearing any Fruit out of it, and without appearing in
their manner of Living who are convinced of its Truth. It fills them with a
certain Ardour for the Observation of what it commands, that the true
Christians are easily perceived to be in earnest. It Is this Disposition that is
called Zeal from a Greek Word which signifies Jealousy, to show that we ought
not to have less Ardour for the Honor of Christianity than a Bridegroom should
be concerned to preserve that of his Bride.

This Zeal extends generally to all the Doctrines, and to all the Precepts of
the Gospel, and not to some of them only. We ought zealously to defend the
Truths we learn from it, otherwise it were to betray and equal it to Falsehood;
nor ought we to manifest less Ardour in observing its Injunctions, seeing this
is not less essential than the Belief of its Doctrines. The one and the other
must be joined; for Christianity is entirely ruined, if those things be
separated which the Author of it has united. The Reason of this is, that the
Doctrines lead us to the Observation of the Precepts, being revealed to us for
this end; and the Observation of the Precepts does indispensibly suppose a
strong Persuasion of the Doctrines.

All Christians are agreed about this Principle, and Jesus Christ and his
Apostles are very express about it, so that there is no necessity to prove it.
Nevertheless, it is evident that such as show the greatest Zeal for the
Christian Doctrines, and for the way of explaining them in their Country, are
frequently seen to violate the clearest Precepts of it after a most scandalous
manner, as if this Ardour they show for the Defense of the Doctrines were all
that the Gospel requires of Men.

There are some People, for instance, whose Discourses breathe nothing else,
one would think, but the Love of the Truth, and the Desire of preserving the
Knowledge of it, and of propagating it amongst Men. They write in favor of it,
they defend it with much heat against opposite Errors, and they stick at no
difficulty to make Truth triumph over Falsehood. Nay, they expose themselves
sometimes to Dangers for this with a surprising Courage. But these very same
People who seem entirely devoted to the Service of God, and the Defense of
Religion, are sometimes altogether intractable, when a Man has any Dealings
with them. Selfish, proud, deceitful, Slanderers, uncharitable, and breaking
most of the Commandments regarding their Neighbor, they imagine themselves the
best Christians in the World; and the ignorant or corrupt Multitude looks upon
'em as in effect good Men. Such were in Christ's time the Pharisees, whose Zeal
for the Law we read of in the Gospel, where at the same time they are
represented as a very ill sort of Men. There are too many such at this time,
and every Country will furnish frequent Examples to all that have a mind to
make their Observations. What St. Paul said long ago to the hypocritical Jews,
may be now said to many People; You that make your boast of the Law, Romans 2.23
by breaking the Law, dishonor God; for the Name of God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles through you.

The Unbelievers who take notice of these Men, draw a Consequence very
injurious to the Christian Religion; which is, that seeing those who pass for
the Pillars of Religion, who have sometimes the best Employments, and who are
in most Esteem, are such ill People, the Religion it self is but a mere
Artifice to deceive the Simple, and to cover their Passions under a Pretense
which gains 'em Respect: For in a word, all that the Zealous do, if you believe
'em, is for no other end but the Service of God. Thus Unbelievers come to
imagine that the Beauty of the Christian Morals, which they cannot deny, is
only a fine Idea to impose the more easily upon such as are not always upon
their Guard. They are much talked of, say they, but the most Zealous observe no
more of them than serves their turn. They would have others, perhaps, obey them
exactly, that they might get by it, but as for themselves they laugh at them.
You Will hear those, for example, preach Charity and Impartiality, who have
neither the one nor the other, but are wonderfully pleased to find those they
have to do with not selfish or uncharitable, because it makes for their
Advantage.

This is what Unbelievers say, and they are never unfurnished with Examples to
cite about all the Christian Virtues, whereof there is not one that has not
been violated by some Zealot, and many times without doing him any Injury in
the Opinion of the World, because this Appearance of Zeal covers all Defects.

The Fact we deny not, and we may add further, that Jesus Christ and his
Apostles have foreseen it, by exalting that Charity which is principally
violated by this false Zeal, above not only Orthodoxy, but even the highest
Knowledge, and the Power of working Miracles it self. Not every one that cries
unto me, Lord, Mat. 7.21.
Lord, says Jesus Christ, that is, who makes Profession of the Truth of my
Doctrine, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the Will of
my Father which is in Heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have
we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils? and in thy
Name have done many wonderful Works? And then will I profess unto them, I never
knew you; depart from me you that work Iniquity. This is a manifest Admonition
which the Author of the Christian Religion gives to his Disciples, to prevent
the evil Example of pretended Zealots making any Impression upon them. St. Paul
likewise expresses himself upon this occasion in such emphatical terms, that it
was not possible for him to speak more home: Tho I speak, says he, 1 Cor. 13.1
with the Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I Am become as a
sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. And tho I have the Gift of Prophecy, and
understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge: and tho I have all Faith, so that I
could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing. And tho I bestow all
my Goods to feed the Poor, and tho I give my Body to be burned, and have not
Charity, it profits me nothing.

It appears plainly hereby that the Carriage of pretended Zealots is directly
contrary to the Principles of the Gospel, as I have shown from the beginning of
this Chapter. This may serve for an Answer to Unbelievers, who cannot, without
Injustice, confound some Persons Abuse of Religion with Religion it self. If
any pretended to have very much studied a certain Science, and that it appeared
by some of his Discourses that he understood nothing of it, could it be
concluded from thence that this Science was only a Chimera? No body durst
maintain it. But it is just thus with the Christian Religion, and such as are
carried away* with a false Zeal.

The Incredulous object further, that since those who show the greatest Zeal
observe not the most important Precepts of this Religion, it is at least a sign
that they are not themselves persuaded of its Truth; for otherwise, say they,
they would not quit the best part of it, seeing, if the speculative Doctrines
be true, what concerns Practice is not less so. But if the most zealous are not
persuaded of their Religion, what may be judged of its Proofs?

This is certainly a Prejudice that is very difficultly conquered in the Minds
of those who have more regard to what is said than to what is done, and who
look upon Men's Morals as the Character of their Belief. Every Person has not
strength of Thought enough to consider the Laws of the Gospel in themselves,
without any respect to the manner how they are obeyed, or to the Judgment that
Christians seem to make of them by their Conduct. But at bottom this is an
ill-grounded Prejudice, from which no Consequence can be inferred against the
Truth of the Christian Religion, as it will appear by the following Remarks.

First of all, we may grant that there are some of those Zealots in show for a
part of the Christian Doctrines, who are not in effect persuaded of any of
them, and who make use of the Cloak of Religion to impose upon the Multitude,
the better to carry on their Affairs in the World. But does it follow from
hence that the Christian Religion is not true? By no means; since it is evident
that these Men may be deceived as well as others. They are not always such as
make the greatest Noise about an Art that best understand it. And if all the
Discourses of these People were well examined, it might be easily perceived
that the Christian Religion has Beauties to which they are utter Strangers.
There might be also remark^d in their Dispositions some invincible Obstacles to
the sincere Acknowledgment of the Truth of Christianity, which is entirely
contrary to those Dispositions. The greatest part of these People believe, for
example, that Force must be made use of to establish Truth, and that the
Magistrates who favor them ought to use those hardly that are not of their
Sentiments. Nay, they maintain, that without this Christianity is lost, and
that all other Religions shall triumph over it. All had been still Pagan,
according to them, if Constantine and the other succeeding Christian Emperors
had not employed their Authority to destroy Heathenism. Now what other thing
can such Discourses mean, but that they are Strangers to the true Proofs of
Christianity, as well as to the Spirit of Charity and Moderation, which is the
Life and Soul of the Gospel? Those who have well study^d these Proofs, and
carefully examined all the Parts whereof the Christian Religion is made up,
find it so well grounded, its Promises so becoming God and Men, and its
Precepts so useful to humane Society, that to make it wholly triumph over
Error, it is enough in their Judgment to obtain a Liberty of preaching it, and
that such as profess it may incur no Danger for so doing; in a word, that it
may oppose the contrary Opinions with equal Arms. These Persons animated with
that Spirit of Moderation, whereof I spoke, and equally pressing all the Parts
of Christianity, do not contradict by their Actions the Doctrines they profess
with their Mouths. If Religion therefore were to be judged of from the Conduct
and Discourses of its Professors, regard ought to be had rather to these Men
than to others.

Secondly, I have showed elsewhere that since Men do not always act according
to their Knowledge, but most frequently follow the Movements of their Passions,
their Sentiments must not be always concluded from their Carriage. This being
so, it may probably happen that certain Zealots might act very disagreeably to
their Profession, which is an Argument that we ought not to judge of their
Persuasion from their Manners. We must confess however, that if in those
Zealots there appears a continual Series of Actions contrary to the clearest
Commands of the Gospel, or inveterate Habits of walking contrary to what must
be known to be an essential part of Christianity, then we have great occasion
to suspect them of Hypocrisy, and a Design of covering their Infidelity with a
show of Zeal. For it is not possible but that a strong and sincere Belief
should at length eradicate out of the Heart all Habits which are directly
contrary to it. But the most ingenuous Men may act sometimes against their
Persuasion by Surprise, or the sudden Motions of a violent Passion.

Thirdly, As it would be Injustice to judge of the Goodness of the Laws of any
Government from the way how they are observed, so it would be very ill
reasoning to condemn the Christian Religion, because such as profess it obey it
not. There may be most excellent Laws, and acknowledged too for such, yet not
always strictly observed, by reason of the Interests and Passions of those who
break 'em, as it may be remarked in all Kingdoms of the World. It Is just so
with the Christian Religion. What causes this Contradiction between the
Sentiments and Carriage of Men, besides the Reasons already alleged, is
perhaps because they know not how to apply the general Laws to the particular
Cases which happen every day, and that they mistake the most prohibited Actions
for Exceptions to the Rules. Arrian upon Epictetus, l. 3. c. 26.
A famous Philosopher said, that most of Men's Errors proceeded from their not
knowing how to apply general to particular Ideas. If we consider it nearly, we
shall find that the same thing occasions at least in part the violation of many
Laws, which are all the while thought just and well-grounded.

Zeal accompanied with very great Ignorance, and the greater as the Ignorance
is grosser, furnishes the Incredulous likewise with another Pretense of looking
upon Religion as a blind Persuasion merely built upon the Credulity of the
People. And indeed we see that in all Religions such as have least examined
things, and that are the less discerning, appear frequently the hottest in
defense of the Party with which they are engaged. The furious Zeal of the Jews
and Mahumetans, as well as that of the Pagan Populace, is so well known, that I
need bring no Examples of it. In those Sects also into which Christianity is at
present divided, the Heat wherewith the ignorant Multitude defend their
Sentiments, and endeavor to propagate them, is but too common. This blind Zeal
has so often broke out, and has made use of such ill Methods to advance each
Party, that there is no Sect but has some reason to be ashamed of it.

But if this false Zeal may be considered as a Consequence of the Principles of
the Heathens, the Mahumetans, the Jews, and some of the Christians; it is
certain that true Christianity gives it no Approbation: so that if the Falsity
of these Religions or Sects may be hence concluded, yet it follows not that we
can reason against Christianity in the same manner. I have already shown in the
precedent Chapter that it requires no such thing as a blind Obedience from such
as embrace it, and that it expressly condemns the furious Zeal which flows from
this Spring. One of Christ's Apostles acknowledging that the Jews had a Zeal
for God, Romans 10.2 Gal. 1.14.
adds, that it was without Knowledge, and blames it exceedingly. Another says to
those to whom he writes; Jam. 3.14.
If you have bitter Zeal and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the Truth: This Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, devilish: for where this Zeal and Strife is, there is Confusion and
every evil Work.

This blind Zeal then is not an Effect of the Christian Religion, and cannot be
reasonably attributed to it; it is a Consequence of the Temper and Education of
the ignorant Populace, who instead of defending the Truth by its proper Light,
and the Virtues it does produce in their Hearts who duly receive it, defend it
with the same Arms they would Error, that is, with Passion and Fury. This sort
of People cannot, without extreme Injustice, be looked upon as Models whereby
to judge of the Spirit and Effects of Christianity, since it clearly condemns
their Conduct. We must on the contrary cast our Eye upon the understanding
Persons who make use of none but good Reasons in its Defense; and that, to
procure themselves Love and Respect, practice only those calm and peaceable
Virtues they learn from Truth. This is the Character which the Founders of
Christianity bestow upon them who ought to be considered as the true
Christians. The Wisdom that is from above, says the same Apostle, is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy.

CHAP. III. That Unbelievers are in the wrong for rejecting the Christiam
Religion, because Interest seems to be the Cause of most Peoples Devotion.
SInce Christianity has flourished in the World, it has frequently proved an
advantageous thing to show great Zeal for the Doctrines of it. Although this makes
no Change in the thing it self, (Truth not depending upon the Interest one has
or has not to defend it) yet the Incredulous are sure to take an occasion from
hence of doubting the Truth of the Christian Religion. There are Endeavors
made sometimes to gain them over, by representing to them the Consent of the
Clergy in so many Places and Ages: but they instantly reply, that it is no
wonder if those Men did make a Profession of Christianity, since they would be
great getters by it in so doing, but must lose infinitely if they did not.

And indeed we must confess, that no cogent Conclusion can be drawn from the
Example of all such as have defended, or that now defend the Christian Religion
against Infidels. But their Reasoning is still less solid, as I shall show
after putting it in a greater Light. It is not well done to give those
Occasions of saying, that the Defenders of the Christian Religion diminish the
Force of their Objections; and those who by their ill Carriage put before them
this Stone of Offense and Stumbling, deserve to be reproached for it, not to
speak of revenging in this place the Wrong they do to Christianity. Moreover, I
have from the very beginning of this Work proposed to my self not only to deal
with such as entirely reject it, but with those also who seem to embrace it
only by halves.

Let us imagine then a cheating Priest, (People but too much known in all
Christendom) who pretends to some Benefice, if he has none already, or aspires
to a greater Dignity than what he possesses. He appears humble, gentle,
moderate, and kind. He speaks of nothing but Disinterestedness, and the Vanity
of all the Enjoyments of this Life. If he has a Talent for the Pulpit, he there
principally shows his Zeal against the corrupt Manners of the Times. Nay, he is
in a Fury against scandalous Clergymen, and the Abuses committed in
Ecclesiastical Matters, so long complained of, and not yet reformed. In a word,
he uses all the Discourses that should be made in that Place, in order to pass
for an honest Man, and to make the World believe, that had his Incomes been
greater, he would put 'em to much better Uses than most Ecclesiastics do.

After acting his Part for some Years, at last he obtains his end, that is, a
Dignity and Income that render him considerable in the World and in the Church.
But then it may be said of him, Quantum mutatus ab illo? for indeed he is no
longer to be known. He Is forthwith haughty, hard-hearted, untractable, and
passionate toward all such as he thinks his Inferiors. Those who were his
Friends before, and upon whose Friendship too he valued himself, ought to be
very well satisfied with him, if he now vouchsafes them a Look. The Obligations
they laid upon him, while he continued a private Person, and when they expected
no Returns from him, are quite lost. He thinks they were all due to his Merit,
and that more were owing him; but as for himself, he owes nothing to any body,
and does 'em too much Honor, when he coldly receives the Incense they are base
enough to offer him. If he prefers any Man, he must be some Blockhead or
Flatterer, People that have no Idea almost of their Duty, and that are ready to
admire any thing, the Bad as well as the Good, so be you make 'em live at their
Ease.

This Man so disinterested heretofore, becomes oftentimes insatiable, and the
Revenues of the best Benefices are not sufficient to satisfy his Avarice. He
procures therefore as many as he can, and has never too many. If he be
naturally covetous, all that he preached before of Liberality is quite
vanished, all the Invectives he made against Avarice are laid in perpetual
Oblivion. He does Good to no body, and thinks of nothing but laying up
Treasure. If on the contrary he be a voluptuous or stately Person, he consumes
his great Incomes in keeping a magnificent Table, in having a stately Train,
and living as the proudest Men, or the most addicted to their Pleasure in the
World. The sordid Avarice of the one is a Frugality becoming a good Clergyman,
and the excessive Luxury of the other is but an Expense absolutely necessary to
keep up his Rank in the World, and to beget Respect in the Laity. Far from
making the least Reformation in the Clergy that depend upon them, they let them
loose to all the ill Customs and Manners to which they are subject, on
condition they be submissive to them, and meddle not with their particular
Method of living.

When Unbelievers consider such a Conduct, they cannot help being persuaded
that these Prelates, even before they get those Dignities which they so
scandalously abuse, did not believe a word of the Matter. They imagine that
they were not devoted to the Church to edify it, and to lead Christians to a
virtuous Life by their Discourses and their Example, but out of Ambition or
Avarice; and that they made use of the Cloak of Religion to come at their ends.
They likewise draw hence a further Consequence, which is, that the Christian
Religion is not true in it self, since Men of the first Order, and that make a
Profession of defending it, believe it not, whatever they say by reason of
those great Advantages they get by it.

It must be confessed, that the Clergy who live after this manner, cannot
reclaim Unbelievers, their Actions being directly contrary to their Discourses.
They may long enough say the finest things in the World, and use the most solid
Reasons; yet the Prejudice which Unbelievers imbibe from their Morals is so
violent, that it carries it over all that can be said or imagined.

It Is still much worse when Clergymen, whose Morals are not better, and who
were preferred by ill Arts, without being capable of discharging their Office,
take upon them to censure unbelieving Laymen. All that they can say serves for
nothing else but to recall into the Minds of these Laymen their Unworthiness,
or the Artifices they made use of to get Preferment; nay, and what they say
upon such Occasions does pass for a Continuation of their unlawful Ways. It Is
believed they persist in acting a part, and all the Marks they give of their
Zeal procures them nothing else but the Reputation of being the best Comedians.
Men's Eyes are fixed upon their evil Actions, and their Incapacity. They think
always upon their Solicitations, and the shameful Practices they made use of to
come at the Dignity which they enjoy. It Is remembered that they made assiduous
Court to such as could serve 'em, without being at the least Pains, in the mean
while, of acquiring the necessary Talents and Knowledge for discharging this
Employment they so much intrigu'd for. The Flatteries they so liberally
bestowed upon the Great, to whom they were ready to sacrifice all in order to
be preferred, are not forgotten; and there is reason to believe they have not
changed their Thoughts, when they are seen every day as servile toward such as
are above them, as they are haughty toward their Inferiors.

If Damasus Bishop of Rome had endeavored to convert Ammianus Marcellinus, he
had no sooner begun to speak, but this Pagan Historian would remember the way
how Damasus was elevated to the Episcopal Dignity: Damasus and Ursinus, says
he, Lib. 27. c. 3
burning with an excessive Desire of obtaining the Episcopal See, opposed one
another with so much Violence, that they and their Parties came to Blows, and
to cut one another's Throats after they had sent for Arms. Juventius (Governor
of the City) not being able to repress nor appease them, was constrained to
force his way, retreating into the Suburbs. Damasus had the better, his Party
having been very zealous in this Affair. It Is certain that in one day there
were found in the Palace of Sicininus, where there is a Christian Church, an
hundred and thirty seven dead Bodies; nor was it an easy Matter to pacify the
People, who for a long time had been as it were in a Fury. For my part, when I
consider the Splendour of the City of Rome, I must confess that such as aim at
those things ought to oppose one another with all their Might to obtain their
Desires: for after they enjoy it, they live at their Ease, they enrich
themselves with the Offerings or Gifts of Women, they ride in their Chariots,
they are well clad, and make Banquets so sumptuous that they exceed the Tables
of Kings.

This is what Marcellinus writes of Damasus, and which, no doubt on it, could
not dispose him to hear this Bishop. The good Order and Policy that at this
time is almost every where established, does hinder indeed the committing of
such Irregularities; but the secret and public Brigues, the Solicitations for
Men neither of Merit or Capacity, are not less frequent now than formerly. We
see as many Persons who have nothing to recommend them to Preferment, but their
Diligence in making their Court to such as could assist them; Persons who have
no other Talents for discharging the Employment they seek, but that of living
easily and idly, joined to an extreme Desire of obtaining it. Therefore we
should not wonder if Clergymen thus preferred increase instead of diminishing
the Number of the Incredulous.

Another thing which contributes much to keep up Infidelity among Christians,
is, not only that such as profess the study of Religion, and of teaching it to
others, are slight Observers of it themselves; but also that they have often
but a very confused Idea of it, and even in things of the greatest Consequence.
I will give an Example of it, whereby it appears that Churchmen do violate
almost every where one of the clearest Precepts of the Gospel, as much out of
Ignorance, I believe, as Passion.

There is nothing so strongly recommended in the New Testament as the Love of
our Neighbor; and this Love consists not only in helping, and being
compassionate to him, in the things of this Life, but also in behaving our
selves charitably toward him, if he be in any erroneous Opinion as to
Religion, especially when it has little or no Influence upon his Manners. This
charitable Carriage is one of the principal Branches, so to speak, of that
general Love of our Neighbor, whom the Gospel commands us to love as our
selves; and it is by so much the more considerable as it has been of perpetual
Use since Christianity came into the World; and that it shall be perhaps till
God thinks fit to call all Mankind to render an Account of their Actions.
Christians have been divided almost from the very Beginning into diverse
Opinions; they are so still, and so they will continue, it may be, for ever; so
that Charity toward such as are in Error, or are looked upon so to be, has
been always of great Use, and will be so* for ought we know, to the end of the
World. Nevertheless it may be said, that no part of Christian Theology has been
so long neglected as this has been. It Is but in the last Age, and especially in
the present, that any Reflection has been made upon it. Nor have there been but
a very few Persons that made it their Business, and dared to affirm that it was
one of the principal Points of the Morals of Christ, in the state of Ignorance
wherein we live here below. Most of the Teachers of Religion treat with Vigor
and Cruelty those they look upon as erring in their Opinions, let their Morals
be never so good, tho they commonly pardon in others crying Vices. I will not
as much as speak of the Inquisition, whose cruel Maxims are abhorred by a
considerable Part of Christians, but of the Management observed in many
Countries where it is not established. Nor will I treat expressly here of this
Question, which would require a Volume as great, at least, as this; I shall
only touch as much of it as makes for my Purpose, without making any
Digressions.

How is a Clergyman treated in many Places if he forsakes the common Opinions
never so little? If he has a Benefice, he is in great danger of losing it, or
at least exposed to the cruel Slanders of such as would fain get his Place, and
who are always a good Number, although he punctually discharges all his Duties,
and that his Morals be irreproachable. But if he be not yet preferred, an
Opinion contrary to the received Doctrines, be it of never so little
Consequence, is sufficient to exclude him for ever from all sorts of
Ecclesiastical Preferments. And so zealous are some about the Conformity of
Opinions, that the least Suspicion is enough to do a vast Prejudice to any it
falls upon. Nevertheless a great Number of Clergymen are so uncharitable as to
raise many Suspicions against such as they do not love. There Is not a
Consequence so odious but they boldly draw it from their Sentiments, and accuse
them thereof to those whereupon they depend; and whom they often find so
credulous about the ill that is said of their Neighbor, or so little inclined
to believe the Good, that those Clergymen in many Conversations ruin for ever
some innocent Persons in the Opinion of such as listen to their Calumnies.

On the contrary, if a Clergyman who is already in possession of a Benefice,
or that aims at one, be a Blockhead, idle, spending his time in eating and
drinking, smoking, slandering, or doing some very scandalous thing, provided he
be Orthodox, as they speak, he quietly enjoys what he has got, or is in a
condition of being preferred in the Church without changing his Manners. Good
Men censure in vain his manner of Living, without objecting any thing to him
except what is public; but they are not hearkened to, and toward him alone are
practiced the Duties of that Charity which thinks no Evil, 1 Cor. 3.5, 7.
bears all things, hops all things, endures all things.

The Unbelievers who have their Eyes principally fixed upon the Carriage of the
Clergy, conclude from hence two things; the one, that good Morals, that is, the
principal Duties of Christianity are the Qualities they have least regard to;
and the other, that the Body of Ecclesiastics is only a mere Faction, where
the Discovery of Truth is not intended, but to support by all ways what can
procure or preserve their temporal Interests. The Incredulous add further, that
the Candidates or Pretenders to the Benefices look upon them as a Prey
whereupon they may seize whenever they are vacant; or which they may forcibly
snatch from such as possess 'em by whatever Means they can. They conclude that
the end of all this Zeal affected for the Doctrines is no other thing but a
good Income, and that they would not vouchsafe even to inform themselves about
those Doctrines, if this Income were not settled only upon such as should.

It Is in vain for the Clergy to say the contrary to Unbelievers; the constant
Practice of so many Ages and Nations makes more Impression upon them than all
the Discourse that can be made to them. From hence it is that they come to
consider Christianity it self as they do the falsest Religions, and so die in
an incurable Infidelity; by their own Fault, it is true; but also by a specious
occasion of judging wrong, which several Clergymen give 'em.

They are by so much the more confirmed in their Infidelity, as they see the
Zeal for Temporals very different from that concerning Spirituals. And this
they easily discover by the Distinction that is made of those who defend and
are passionate for the temporal Interests of their Party; and of them, who,
defending Christianity by the strongest Reasons imaginable, and after the best
Method of clearing Peoples Understanding, deny not but that there are some
Disorders in the Discipline of the Church which need Reformation. Those last
who ought to be esteemed and advanced by such whose Profession obliges to
favor them, are put back for ever, and looked upon as very dangerous Persons,
whilst the first are in favor all the while, and are sure to obtain what they
desire.

The Incredulous judge by this Conduct that it is not Christianity in general
they mind, whatever they say, but the temporal Interests of the Party; since
those who consecrate themselves for the Defense and Propagation of the first
are disgraced, and no Reward is thought too great for others.

These are the principal Prejudices which Ecclesiastics by their Fault
occasion Unbelievers to entertain. I could add several things much more home
upon them, if I would speak of all the Abuses committed in the Places where
Christianity is most corrupted; but if what I have mentioned does an
extraordinary Injury to Religion, what may we not say of the rest? And besides,
the Answer I design to make to these Prejudices, may solve the Difficulties
which might proceed from greater Disorders than those whereof I have spoken.

To show that the Occasions of Scandal and Stumbling which are given to the
Incredulous, and of which we have been now speaking, ought not to injure
Christianity in general, and that consequently they should not hinder any from
acknowledging its Truth; it must be considered in it self, and in its first
Original. If there have been Additions made to it, and if it has been since
corrupted, that is no Defect in Christianity, but their Fault who made these
Additions or Alterations.

Those who have read the Gospel, and the other Writings of the Apostles, cannot
say that the first Founders of the Christian Religion have engaged such as
would preach it to discharge this Duty from any Consideration of Interest.
Jesus Christ promises nothing but Persecutions and Miseries in this World to
the first Ministers of the Gospel: I send you forth, says he, Mat. 10.16
as Sheep among Wolves. They will bring you into their Synagogues, and scourge
you. You shall be brought for my sake before Governors and Kings. The Brother
shall deliver the Brother to Death, and the Father the Child; and the Children
shall rise up against their Parents, and cause them to be put to Death; and you
shall be hated of all Men for my Name's sake. He also says unto one of his
Apostles, whom he called after an extraordinary manner; Acts 9.16.
I will show him how great things he must suffer for my Name's sake.

The Event did quickly convince the Apostles that these Predictions of Jesus
Christ were not vain. The Jews and the Heathens, for the most part, gave them a
very ill Reception; and many of Christ's first Disciples suffered Death for
discharging the Function wherewith their Master honored them. It cannot be
said therefore that it was Interest which engaged them in it, or that confirmed
them in their first Undertaking. Had Jesus Christ made a considerable Provision
for such as would preach his Gospel (as he might, and his Doctrine be never the
falser) it must be confessed that it would have been somewhat difficult to show
Unbelievers that the Apostles did not act at all by any Interest, and we should
want a most considerable Proof of their Sincerity, and consequently of the
Truth of those Matters of Fact which they preached. Herein we have Matter of
praising Divine Providence that has taken such Care about the first
establishing of the Gospel, as to prevent those disadvantageous Suspicions
which People might nourish concerning any Establishment like the present State
of Christianity. If Jesus Christ himself had enjoyed all the Conveniences of
Life; as if he had been exalted, for example, upon the temporal Throne of the
Family of David, from whom he was descended; then his Morals, as fine as they
are, and even the Sanctity of his Life had never made any Impressions upon Men's
Minds; because, when any great temporal Advantage is joined to Virtue, or made
the Reward of it, we easily suspect then that such as adhere to it are more
influenced by this Advantage than by Virtue it self.

Since that time the Christian Religion being well established, the Piety of
its Professors has not only provided for the Subsistence of those who succeeded
in the Apostolic Functions; but also, considering all Places, for their
Conveniences, and a considerable Expense in which they were engaged. As soon as
Persons of Quality became Christians, and that the Emperors themselves embraced
it, it was thought fit that the principal Guides of the Church should live in
some Splendour, without which they must become contemptible, and unable not only
to keep up their Respect with the People, but likewise with Kings, and Men of
the first Order. To consider Mankind such as it is now, and ever will be, and
not such as it ought to be, it is evident that this Settlement was necessary
after Christianity became the governing Religion.

Upon this it happened that many of those who aimed at Ecclesiastical Dignities
did look upon them as mere temporal Settlements, whereby they might live great.
But the Worldliness of those People cannot, without Injustice, be attributed to
the Christian Religion, nor to the Founders of it, as I have shown. Nor can
they be blamed neither, who have augmented the Dignity and Revenues of
Churchmen, because they did it with a good Design, and that it is possible
enough for such as enjoy those Dignities and Revenues, to make a better Use of
them than most do. If after making as modest Expenses as can be for the
external Part, they spend the rest of their Revenues to some good Purposes;
where is the harm of this? Is there any Law in being that prohibits it? No
surely; neither is there any thing that hinders them from being obliging,
humble, and moderate, or from remembering their former Condition before they
came to these Dignities. Who would not heap Commendations upon them, if they
did so manage themselves that it might appear as much as possible that it was
not to satisfy their Avarice, or any other Passion, they endeavored to obtain
the Dignities aforesaid; but to edify the Church more, and to lead the People
to Piety and Charity by their Example, which is of much greater Efficacy than
their Discourses? Have there not been in diverse Places and Times some
Clergymen that behaved themselves after this manner, and who drew upon
themselves the Respect and Admiration of the whole World. Such were the Bishops
whereof Ammianus Marcellinus speaks immediately after giving that Description
of those Bishops of Rome which I mentioned before. His Testimony is of so much
greater Weight as he was a Heathen, and shows every where clear Tokens of his
Sincerity. They might, says he, be really happy, if despising the Grandeur of
the City of Rome, wherein they concealed their Vices, they had imitated the way
of Living of some Prelates in the Provinces whom the Frugality of their Tables,
the Simplicity of their Habit, and their Eyes always fixed upon the Ground, did
render acceptable to God, and to his true Worshippers, as virtuous and modest
Persons. Therefore it is unjustly done of Unbelievers to attribute to the old
or modern Christianity the Faults of those who abuse the Ecclesiastical
Dignities; and to conclude from hence the Falsity of the Christian Religion is
the worst Reasoning that can be.

The same thing may be answered to the Objections of Unbelievers drawn from the
scandalous manner after which several Clergymen have been preferred, and spend
the Revenues destined by their Founders for Men fit to edify the Church. If
they make a mere Trade of these Employments, and look upon their Revenues as
Pensions granted to their Importunities or Flatteries, is this either the Fault
of the Religion it self, or of the Founders of those Benefices? Do we not see
many virtuous Clergymen who have been advanced only by their Merit, and that
make an excellent Use of their Dignities and Revenues?

'True it is indeed, that those who abuse them are not proper Persons to cure
the Incredulous of their Prejudices, and that, far from edifying such as know
them, they cannot fail almost, considering Men's Dispositions, of corrupting or
scandalizing them. It Is the Duty therefore of all good Men to provide a Remedy
against this Disgrace of the Christian Religion, and to stop the Mouths of
Unbelievers.

If the Author of the Christian Religion, or those who first spread it
throughout all the World, had ordered their Disciples to suffer no Diversity of
Opinions, not even in things that are not essential, and to persecute those who
would not in every thing follow the Sentiments of the greatest Number; the
Libertines might then questionless justly attribute to them all the sad
Consequences that proceed from that intolerating Principle whereof some Divines
make Profession. But it is just the contrary; the Founders of the Christian
Religion recommend nothing so much as Moderation and Charity in such
Dissensions.

The Jews and the Heathens that were converted to Christianity agreed not well
with one another in the Days of the Apostles. The Jews, among other things,
would have the Gentiles observe the Distinction of Meats which the Levitical
Law introduced, and condemned all those who refused to do it. The Gentiles, who
knew that God required this Observation only from the Jews, and that too but
whilst they had a separate Government to themselves, denied Submission to this
Yoke, and laughed at the Superstition of the Jews. Now what did the Apostles in
this Affair? What Counsel does St. Paul give his Disciples? Do they say that
the one must follow the Practice and Opinions of the other in all things, under
pain of Excommunication? Do they order the Christian Church to persecute, as
soon as she could be able, all those whose Sentiments should in any thing
differ from the Majority? Nothing less than all this: For the Apostles divide
the Controversy, as it were; and will have both the Parties to have a
Condescension for one another. They do not enjoin the Jews to eat without
scruple the Flesh of those Creatures prohibited in their Law; nor do they on
the other hand subject the Gentiles to the Superstition of the Jews. They only
command them, Acts 15.29.
to abstain from Meats offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from things
strangled; because the Jews were exceedingly offended to see those who believed
in Jesus Christ, and kept Company with the Apostles, eat such things, whereof
they thought the Use forbidden all Mankind. They declare, that it seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and to them, to lay upon them no greater Burden than those
necessary things. St. Paul, after telling the Corinthians, that no Man can lay
any other Foundation than what is already laid, which is Jesus Christ, adds, 1
Cor. 3.11, etc.
That if any Man builds upon this Foundation Gold, Silver, precious Stones,
(that is, true Doctrines) Wood, Hay, Stubble, (that is to say false Doctrines,
tho not destroying the Foundation) the Fire shall try every Man's Work; and
that if any Man's Work abide, he shall receive a Reward; but that if any Man's
Work shall be burnt, he shall indeed suffer Loss, but yet shall be saved so as
by Fire. In his Epistle to the Romans, where he speaks distinctly of that
Controversy decided by the Apostles, Romans 14.1, etc.
hear what Advice he gives them; Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not
to doubtful Disputations: for one believes that he may eat all things, another
who is weak eats Herbs. Let not him that eats despise him that eats not,
for God has received him. Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant? To
his own Master he stands or falls; yea he shall be holden up; for God is
able to make him stand; that is, to keep him from being led by Weakness into
fundamental Errors. St. Paul adds several things upon the same Subject, which
now I shall not relate; but all that he says does clearly suppose that we must
bear with one another in such things as destroy not the Foundation, that is,
which do not hinder us from putting our Trust in Jesus Christ, or keeping his
Commandments.

Now if after all this, other Maxims are observed in our time, they cannot be
attributed to the Apostles, nor consequently be looked upon as Doctrines of the
Christian Religion. Whatever Imputations they may be liable to who violate this
Branch of Charity relating to the Erroneous, (for they give too great Occasions
of Reflection) yet these disadvantageous Characters cannot stain the Christian
Religion.

It is no way needful for me to prove, that according to the Notions of the
Gospel, the Care of the spiritual Part is incomparably above that of the
temporal. The whole System of the Christian Religion speaks no other Language;
and therefore they deserve much more Esteem who endeavor to extirpate
Infidelity and Vices, than they who defend the temporal Interests of
Christianity; for the first are infinitely more useful to the Church than the
latter. Wherefore if some convert the Interest of Religion to that of a Party,
they must be blamed, and not the Religion which wholly condemns this Practice.

CHAP. IV. That the Divisions reigning among Christians should not hinder any
from believing that the Christian Religion is true.
WE learn from Ecclesiastical History, that from the very Decease of the
Apostles, nay and during their Lives too, the Christians begun to be divided
into Parties. But it was principally in the second Age that a world of Sects
grew up which tore Christianity into pieces after a most scandalous manner; and
since that time one Sect has constantly succeeded another, so that it may be
said the Christian Church was never without Divisions. What is yet worse is,
that most of those Sects mutually condemn one another. Each of them pretends
that there is no Salvation for such as embrace not the Doctrines they teach. I
need not enter upon Particulars, or bring distinct Proofs of these Divisions
and Anathemas; for they are Matters of Fact but too well known to all the World.

From hence Unbelievers take an occasion of saying that the Christian Religion
is like all others, and that if it had come from Heaven, as it is said to do,
Christians would be better agreed than they are found to be. The same God, say
they, who gave it to Men, would take care to prevent those Divisions that
extremely lessen the Effects of it. On the contrary, it seems to be the Apple
of Discord, which no sooner appeared in the World, but it caused numberless
Divisions. They add, that this keeps Infidels and such as have been educated in
other Religions from embracing it: for not knowing which of those Sects it is
that teaches the true Christianity, and being not in a condition to examine
them all, they are at a loss how to determine the Affair. They ask further of
such as write for the Truth of Christianity, as I do now, which Christian
Religion it is we defend; whether it be that which the Roman Church professes,
or that of any of the other Sects that make a separate Body? There is not, say
they, any Christianity in general, and therefore you must determine for some of
the Parties; which is it then you have undertaken to defend?

There are another sort of People whose Conduct is not more prudent than that
of the Incredulous, and who after another manner abuse the Divisions which
reign among Christians. They say, that not being capable to examine all these
different Sentiments, they find no Method more sure than implicitly to embrace
the Religion of the Country wherein they live, since they must needs be of some
Party. The Incredulous reject all the different Opinions of Christians, as
equally ungrounded by reason of their Divisions; and such as say that without
any Examination they believe the Religion of their Country, know not well
themselves what they profess to believe, and are exposed to almost as much
Danger of mistaking as the Incredulous: for, in short, to reject all Opinions,
and to embrace, not knowing why, the first Opinion that offers it self, is much
the same thing. At bottom the latter are not a greater Honor to Christianity
than the first, seeing they both of them suppose it destitute of any Marks to
distinguish it from Error or Imposture; therefore I thought it necessary to
examine in this Chapter the Conduct of the one and the other.

To begin with the Incredulous, and to answer their Objections in the same
Order that I alleged them, I absolutely deny that it follows from the
Divisions of Christians, that the Christian Religion is not divinely revealed.
If the Christians could produce a Promise from the Founder of their Religion,
assuring them that they should never be divided, then the Reasoning of the
Incredulous might pretend to some Force; they could say that this Promise not
being performed, it was a sign it did not proceed from God. But Matters are
quite contrary; Jesus Christ and his Disciples considering the Dispositions of
Men, and foreseeing likewise future Events, have clearly prophesied of the
Divisions that should spring up among Christians. Suppose you, says Jesus
Christ, that I am come to give Peace on Earth? Luke 12.51.
I tell you, nay; but rather Division: For from henceforth there shall be five
in one House divided, three against two, and two against three, etc. There must
be Heresies among you, 1 Cor. 11.19.
says St. Paul, that they which are approved may be also made manifest among
you. Here are express Words signifying that Jesus Christ and his Apostles were
not ignorant of the Divisions, which the Christian Religion ill understood, or
rather the Passions of Men would occasion among Christians.

But some may say, that it is a thing unworthy of a Religion revealed from
Heaven to cause so many Divisions, especially having such fatal Effects. I
grant this, if it be supposed that this Religion does of it self inspire the
Spirit of Division and Disorder; but if it be only the innocent occasion of
them, there can be no ill Consequence drawn from hence against it. Now it
cannot be doubted, but that Christianity is directly opposite to the Divisions
of Christians, since Jesus Christ presses no Commandment so strongly as that of
our loving one another, John 13.33, 34. and 15.12, 17, etc.
and consequently of living peaceably one toward another. Every one knows
this. Christ however knew so perfectly the Heart of Man, that he saw very well
the new Command of loving one another, which he left his Disciples, should not
be well obeyed; and that his Doctrine, as peaceable as it was, would frequently
serve for a Pretense to the Passions of Men in occasioning infinite Broils; so
that if his Design were to be explained by the Event, it might be certainly
said he came to bring Divisions on the Earth. This is the Sense of those Words
I cited a little above.

But what, some will say? Does it not seem a thing becoming God, for the Honor
of Religion and for the Good of Men, to prevent its producing any Disorders,
not even by Accident? No surely, God ought not to intervene by the
extraordinary Effects of his Power to keep the Peace among Christians. The
Reason of this is, that his Design, as it appears both by Revelation and the
thing it self, was by no means to bring Men, at least ordinarily, to his
Obedience by Miracles of this nature; but only by Laws to which he fixed
Rewards and Punishments, as I have already said in Part 1. Chapter 3.
another Place. This is what St. Paul hinted to in one word in that Passage I
cited before, when he says, That there must be Heresies, that they which are
approved may be also made manifest. This plainly signifies that if God by
extraordinary means would hinder all Divisions about his Doctrine among
Christians, it should be no longer a Virtue to remain steadfast on the good
side, or to quit the bad in order to join it. Those who love the Truth, and
keep to it out of Choice and Knowledge, would be confounded with those who
should embrace it without knowing why, and who are as ready to embrace an
Error, were they taught it. The constant Profession of the Truth could not
expect any Reward, since it would not be in any ones Power to forsake it. In a
word, it would be superfluous to propose any Laws at all to Men, since it could
not be in their Power to violate them; for God, according to our Adversaries
Supposition, would prevent this by his Omnipotency.

But it will be said perhaps that a wise Legislator who foresees that his Laws
may be ill understood, or cause Division should he express them obscurely,
would take care to use very clear Expressions; and that God, who foresees all
things, ought by Consequence to express his Will in so clear a manner as to
prevent all the Disputes which we see now among Christians. To this I answer,
that God has expressed himself plainly enough in the Writings of the Apostles,
especially about what is necessary to be believed, hoped, and done, to obtain
Salvation according to the Laws of the Gospel; and that there would be no
Disputes about Necessaries if Men did content themselves with the
Scripture-Notions. What made Divisions spring among Christians are the
Additions and ill-drawn Consequences, and not the Text of the New Testament.
Such as look in it only for the Truth, they easily find this, and are never
deceived about any thing essential; but those who would find therein what vain
Subtlety and humane Interests or Passions have added to it, are apt, I confess,
to be deceived every moment. In a word, to all sincere Persons who love the
Truth preferably to every other thing, the Gospel is as clear as the Sun, and
cannot occasion any considerable Dispute: But to Men governed by their
Passions, and conceited of their Prejudices, the most evident things in the
World are obscure. There is no Law so clear, but a Wrangler may raise a
thousand Difficulties about it; and if a Legislator should not pass for a wise
Man, except he expressly prevented all possible Difficulties, and marked all the
Cases wherein ill-disposed Persons would abuse his Laws, there had never been
any Legislator to whom any Wisdom could be attributed. None ever undertook to
perform such a thing, because then they would be obliged to write an infinite
Number of Volumes, to which something new must be added every Moment, since
there might happen infinite Cases every day. Therefore if God had designed to
prevent all those Controversies already moved, or that shall hereafter arise
about the Sense of Revelation, and rejected by Name all possible Errors, he
must have made so great a Number of Volumes, that, to use St. John's
Expression, the World could not contain them, and their Multitude would render
them useless.

For proof that the clearest Laws, and the most proper to prevent all sorts of
Disorders, become obscure to such as are not disposed to observe them; we need
only call to mind what is already said of the Charity to be used toward those
who are in an Error about any Article of Religion. It was not possible to speak
more clearly or effectually upon this Head than the Apostles have done: and
nevertheless the most part of Christians practice at this time what they ought
to have done if they had said just the contrary. Thus they dispute about the
Sense of the Revelation, rather because they are blinded by Prejudices, and
willing to dispute, than because it is in it self obscure with regard to
necessary Doctrines; and God was not obliged by any means to condemn expressly
all possible Errors to prevent Disputes, as I have now shown.

The Divisions that are among Christans, should not hinder the Incredulous or
Infidels from giving them the hearing when they exhort them to embrace the
Christian Religion. The Reason of this is, that all Christians, notwithstanding
their Divisions, are agreed about certain Articles, by the Examination whereof
Unbelievers must necessarily begin; and not by those particular Controversies
which divide Christians. All Christians are agreed about the Creation of the
World, about Revelation in general, the moral Precepts of the Gospel, with the
Rewards and Punishments annexed to them. They agree likewise about the History
of the Gospel, the Divine Mission of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, the
Resurrection, and last Judgment. These are the things they undertake to prove
first, when they deal with Infidels or Unbelievers; and this is what with
common Consent they call the Principles of Christianity, which they prove all
with like Reasons.

It Is just with Religion as with several other Sciences in which the Learned
are not less divided. There are very great Disputes, for example, among the
Physicians, about the Causes of Diseases, the Virtues of Remedies, and the way
of applying them; but, maugre all their Contests, there are certain things
wherein in they all agree. In Anatomy, in the Description of the Symptoms of
Diseases, in the Knowledge of Simples, and in Chemistry there are a thousand
things whereof no body doubts, and which are the most important Parts of
Physic, with which a Learner of this Science must first begin. And it is so, as
I have already said, with the different Sects of Christianity. As the Diversity
in the Opinions of Physicians keeps none that has a mind to it from examining
the Principles of their Art; so the Difference of Sentiments in Religion cannot
discourage the Lovers of Truth: and indeed, as we have shown in the first Part,
they are other sorts of Motives which take off the Incredulous from examining
it.

What I have called the Principles of Christianity, is the same thing with what
we may name, Christianity in general. Although there be no Christian Society that
comprehends all its Belief within those Ideas only about which all Christians
are agreed; yet this hinders not but that those Ideas may include the
fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, and that we must be determined about
these before we examine any particular Doctrine of those Societies which
profess our Religion. This is also what I undertake to defend in this Work, and
from the Truth or Falsehood whereof depends all the rest. If it be acknowledged,
for instance, that these general Doctrines are true, we must then examine in
what Society they are most purely taught: but were they found to be false, then
we needed not examine any particular Sect; seeing that all defending the same
general Principles, if they were not true, then all the Sects would be all
equally false.

It is manifest then that the Divisions of Christians ought not to be any
Prejudice against Christianity in general, nor hinder the Incredulous from
examining it. Nor is it less certain that they cannot take any Person off from
this Examen, that has a mind to embrace any one Sect. The Divisions indeed
render this Disquisition somewhat difficult, but by no means impossible. I
shall be told, no doubt, that this is true with respect to Men of Letters or
understanding Persons; but the Question is, what the ignorant Populace must do
in these Divisions? As they are commonly judged incapable of this Disquisition;
so the surest way for them, some think, is to engage with the first Party that
offers it self.

To this I answer, first, That to pass for a good Christian one must know, at
least, those general Principles we spoke of. If there be People so stupid as to
comprehend nothing of 'em, tho otherwise Men of good Morals, we leave the
Disposal of them to God; but, as I said in another Place, they differ very
little from the Savages of America or Africa.

Secondly, If such as have Parts enough to comprehend the Principles of the
Christian Religion, and Virtue enough to frame their Morals according to this
Model, are not able however to take Cognizance of those Differences which
divide Christians; it is not very difficult to determine what they must do both
in Equity and Prudence. They ought not to judge of what they do not understand.
They ought neither to approve or condemn any Party concerning the Doctrines in
Dispute. He that requires more of them, makes them pass the Limits of their
Understanding, and obliges them to form an unjust and hasty Judgment. While
they find themselves incapable to receive true Information of the Reasons on
all sides, or to distinguish certainly which is in the wrong, they ought to
suspend their Judgments about Controversies. It Is a Rule authorized by common
Sense not to judge of what we do not understand; nor can we believe, without
renouncing common Sense, that God would have any body acquiesce without good
Reasons for it. St. Paul tells us, Romans 14.23.
that whatever is not of Faith (or Persuasion) is Sin; that is, that before we
resolve to act in point of Religion (for this is what he there treats of) we
must be persuaded that we are in the right: but this we cannot be, unless we
evidently know why.

It will be said perhaps that God may be pleased with this Cautiousness and
Moderation, but that Men will not bear it, since they commonly oblige those
that live in the same Society with them to declare for all their Doctrines.
Notwithstanding whatever is required of Men, it is certain that they keep to
this Wariness whereof I spoke; because they are luckily incapable of
understanding such Controversies as divide Christians; although they easily
comprehend the Ground of Christianity, which is suited to all sorts of
Capacities that are not quite destitute of their reasoning Faculty about what
makes no Impression upon the Senses. Those People giving little Attention to
what they do not understand, apply themselves wholly to what they comprehend.
Thus they leave their Controversies to Divines, whilst they mind only the
Essentials of Christianity. Such as are not more knowing, and yet venture
further in their Opinions, and act accordingly, do judge and act manifestly
against common Prudence and natural Equity. To imagine that God would have any
Regard to so unreasonable a Conduct, is to extinguish the most certain Light of
Reason or Religion.

In the third place, If it be supposed that such as cannot enter into the
Detail of Controversies have nevertheless a little more Knowledge than those I
have described, then they may easily determine themselves after this manner,
without running any risk at all. By reading Confessions of Faith they may learn
wherein all Parties in Christendom agree, and take that for the Foundation and
Ground of Religion; because it is not likely that so many different Parties who
dispute so eagerly against one another, should agree in acknowledging certain
Heads as the true Doctrines of Christianity, if they were not such in effect.
By the different Parties of Christendom I understand not all the Sects that
ever have been, but such as subsist at this time. The greatest Part of the old
Sects are unknown to us; and if we may judge of them by what we read in History,
most of them did maintain such extravagant Positions, or led such shameful
Lives, that it was no difficult thing to discover their Errors. If to this they
add the reading of the New Testament, they will be entirely confirmed in this
Point. But if after all this any would oblige them to approve or condemn beyond
what they understand, or what they learnt in the New Testament, and from the
unanimous Consent of all Christians, they may desire to be rightly informed
concerning those things. And if such Informations be so obscure that they
cannot understand them, after all possible Application on their part; or if
they plainly perceive that they are repugnant to that general Idea of
Christianity which they found before, then they cannot look upon them but as
false or suspected, or at least as unnecessary. But if they be not permitted to
judge according to their Knowledge, nor to search after Truth, they must retire
into those Places where they may freely do it, rather than to live against the
Light of their Consciences.

I shall not enlarge more upon this Subject; and it is an easy Task to infer
from what I have here said the necessary Consequences to answer all Questions
that may be made hereupon. It is sufficient for me rightly to conclude, that
the Divisions of Christians cannot engage a reasonable Person either
implicitly to embrace the first Party that offers it self, or to reject all
the Christian Religion.

CHAP. V. That the Incredulous object in vain, that Christianity being so
little known, and so ill observed, is not so useful to Mankind as a Religion
revealed by God in favor of all Men ought to be.
IT is a Doctrine generally received among Christians, that the Christian
Religion is not revealed for any one People, or any peculiar Places, but for
all Nations, and the whole Earth. And this is certainly the Doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles. Hereupon the Incredulous make two Objections: The first is,
that there are a great many Nations to whom the Gospel has not been yet
preached, and who live still in a profound Ignorance. The other is, that among
Christians themselves every Party affirms that Christianity is not so well
known as it should be among the rest. Thus most Men know nothing of it, and
great part of such as heard of it understand it so little, if you believe the
rest, that it signifies nothing at all to them. The Incredulous are of opinion
that Providence should have ordered this Matter better; but we can easily
answer these Difficulties.

Jesus Christ and his Apostles have indeed taught us that the Christian
Religion was not as the Jewish, and that it should be preached to all Nations;
but they said no where that this should happen all of a sudden, or in a few
Ages. They have not excluded any People from the Knowledge of the Gospel, or
from the Worship which God requires of Men, as the Jewish Religion did, which
was given only to the Jews, and could not be entirely observed by any that did
not live in Palestine. But they did not say, that at a certain time the Gospel
should be spread over all the Earth, strictly taken, that is, in both the
Hemispheres; and that all the People of the World would acknowledge the Creator
of Heaven and Earth for their God, and Jesus Christ alone for their Savior,
their Priest, and their King. They cannot therefore be blamed if the Gospel is
not yet known to all Men. This Objection does no more concern them, than if
they were charged with the Ignorance of such as lived before the Coming of
Christ. For as God did not think fit to send Jesus Christ sooner, so he was not
yet willing, it may be, that all People should know him. However there are no
People to whom he has not been gracious enough to expect their thankful
Returns, tho he has been more kind to one than to another. There is no
Injustice in this, provided he requires no more than he has given; I mean if he
judges all Nations according to their Portions of Knowledge, as he infallibly
will do.

It might be said perhaps, that if the Gospel be not yet made known to all the
World, it is the Fault of Christians. Some of 'em think of quite another thing,
besides imparting their Knowledge to those People who live yet in Ignorance.
They are at immense Expenses to satisfy their Desires, or to make War upon one
another; but would not be at a very moderate one to declare the Gospel to such
as are ignorant of it. The hope of Gain makes them run to the end of the World,
and hazard all in order to be rich; but they will not put themselves to the
least Inconvenience to carry the Gospel where it is not. Nevertheless God's
Command of doing it to the Apostles extends to all Christians, as I could
easily prove. Others who seem more sensible of this Command of Christ do send
indeed a great number of Missionaries whithersoever they can. But without
blaming their Intention, which is undoubtedly good considered in general, it
may be justly said that a great Number of those Missionaries are not themselves
Masters enough of Christianity to convert true Disciples for Jesus Christ among
the Heathens. They frequently carry with them the Spirit of Lying, and never
gain those People but by imposing upon them. Instead of the plain Principles of
the Christian Religion, and the admirable Maxims of its Morals, they teach 'em
a thousand useless, not to say false things, and an infinite Number of vain or
frivolous Practices which have no relation with Charity at all. We ought not
therefore to wonder if the Gospel has not any great Success, seeing those whom
God has commanded to spread it, either wholly neglect this Precept, or not duly
perform it. Men are to be blamed then, and not God, who has given them
excellent Laws, but not constrained them to Obedience.

But Unbelievers pretend that Providence should have looked to this by
extraordinary Means, and not vainly expect from Christians the execution of
those Orders, which, according to us, were given so long a time since, tho not
hitherto observed as they ought. To this I answer, besides what I have already
said of God's Liberty to dispose of his Favors as he pleases, that the Conduct
of Providence ought not to be judged of by what is past. The Time may come
perhaps when Divine Worship shall be paid to none, except the Creator of the
Universe, and no other Doctrine be acknowledged but that of Jesus Christ. This
time likewise may be infinitely longer than what is past since the Creation,
and the Ages of Ignorance not go but for a very few Years in comparison of the
times of Light; so that the Duration of God's Beneficence in this regard shall
be infinitely more considerable, than were those Ages wherein he seems to some
to have neglected the greatest part of Mankind.

The Christian Religion does teach us, that one day the present State of Men
upon this Earth shall be entirely changed, and that they must give an account
of their Actions to be rewarded or punished accordingly; but we are not
informed when this time shall be: and such as thought it should happen soon
after the Coming of Christ, from some obscure Expression of him or his
Apostles, were altogether mistaken, as we see now. He before whom a thousand
Years are but as one day, 1 Pet. 3.8. Psalm. 30.5.
whose Anger endures but for a Moment, but in whose Favor is Life, may have
Prospects infinitely more extended, and which require a great deal more time.
We whose Lives are short, and who look upon the future as a thing not relating
to us; we, I say, grow impatient, and the Ardor of our Desires makes us think
the time yet longer than it is: but God who changes not, and that sees all Time
as present, considers things after quite another manner than we do, and looks
upon all limited Durations as most short. We must not therefore judge of
Providence by that small time which is past since the Creation, seeing in the
Eternity that follows it, he may choose what Space he pleases to bestow liberal
Favors upon all Nations.

This indeed is but a Conjecture, but it must be granted that it contains
nothing, except what agrees very well with that great Idea which the Christian
Religion as well as our own Reason gives us of the Goodness of God and his
eternal Duration. Nothing demonstrative can be alleged against this Notion,
and Unbelievers cannot suppose it to be false without they prove it so.

What has been said is sufficient to solve their second Objection, grounded
upon that little Knowledge of true Christianity wherewith Christians reproach
one another. It Is through the Fault of Men that this happens, and God does not
ordinarily oppose it otherwise than by Laws accompanied with Rewards and
Punishments. But some People there are who believe that God will one day reform
Christianity after an extraordinary manner. This might well be; but suppose it
should never happen, we must remember that there is no Sect of any
Consideration so corrupted, but that the Essence of Christianity is preserved
among 'em, although the Additions made by several of them strangely disfigure it.
Such as keep only to these essential Points, (which is all that may be easily
understood) and who leave the rest to the Schools, have a just Idea enough of
Religion, and cannot be said not to understand all that is necessary to
Salvation. The Reproaches of Controvertists fall rather upon the Preachers than
upon those upright and sincere Persons, who take of Religion as much as they
understand, and live conformably to their Notions.

Unbelievers make another Objection against Religion, which at first sight
appears difficult to answer; and it is, that the most clear and essential
Precepts of Christianity are very little observed among Christians: whence the
Incredulous infer, that it has not a sufficient Influence upon Men's Lives for a
Religion maintained to be revealed from God, and that consequently it is not
originally Divine. This Consequence is very false, as I shall show: But I think
it material, before I do this, to enlarge a little upon the Disorders of
Christianity; because in effect the best Answer we can make to Unbelievers, and
the properest to get them over to us, is to acknowledge frankly that we are
greatly to blame in not better observing the Commands of Christ, and to
endeavor for the future to reform our Manners.

Whereas the Christian Religion obliges us to think frequently of God, to wean
us from the Vanities of this Life, and to teach us our Duties contained in his
Laws, that we may obey them, by reason of the great Rewards and terrible
Punishments annexed to them; the quite contrary is commonly practiced among
Christians. God is rarely thought of, and Christians are almost as much blinded
and possessed with Avarice, Ambition, or the Love of Pleasure, as those People
to whom the Gospel is unknown, although there be some Difference as to the manner
of their giving themselves up to these Passions. There is a Diversity, I grant,
in their Customs; but the three Passions I named are the Soul of almost all
Christians Actions, as well as of those of the Heathens. Men are as much
intoxicated among us with the Vanities of this Life, as among them; and the
Pride or Insolence of Riches are not much less in Europe than in the midst of
Asia. Christians study the Art of satisfying their Passions, and apply
themselves so wholly to it, as if God had promised eternal Happiness to them
for so doing, and threatened those with Damnation that would spend their time in
the study of his Will, or regulate their Manners according to his Laws.

It Is true that they spend some time at Church, that they say some Prayers, and
read some pious Books; but is this time to be compared with that which is spent
in things they may very well be without? or, not to mention the time, will they
say that they are more desirous to be instructed in their Duties, and to
practice them, than to grow rich, or satisfy some other Passion? Do they, for
example, understand the Morals of Christ, as well as the cunning Part of
Traffic, and speak of the former with as great a Pleasure as those who follow
Trade speak of the latter? Yet it should be otherwise, seeing Men shall not be
saved, because they were industrious Merchants, but because they knew and
practiced Christianity well. The same may be said of some other Professions,
wherein Christians spend all their Lives. Could many of them say sincerely,
that they had rather have their Minds full of Knowledge, and their Hearts
inclined to obey the Gospel, and be poor, despised, hated and miserable, than
to be rich, esteemed, and have but a small Knowledge of the Christian Doctrine,
and observe it as it is commonly done?

Notwithstanding this lamentable Disposition, they profess to live like honest
Men, they put on the outside, and as it were the Garments of Religion; but they
unluckily stop there, and the Conduct of their Life contradicts, as I have
showed, their Profession. They commonly behave themselves as if the Christian
Religion was wholly shut up within the Walls of Churches, and consisted only in
some outward Practices; whereas the Apostles teach us, that what Religion, next
to the Worship of God, requires from us, chiefly consists in our manner of
living and conversing with other Men.

If we examine somewhat carefully the public Behavior of most Christians, we
may take notice that they observe no Rule of Justice among themselves, but
inasmuch as it agrees with their private Interest. If they are the better for
breaking the Rules of Justice, that is, if the doing of it will prove
advantageous to them, and they neither endanger their Reputation, nor expose
themselves to the Severity of the Laws for so doing, they never fail to break
them. They will be guilty of any Fraud and Cheat, provided they be not sued for
it, and their Reputation be not so blemished as to do them some Prejudice in
the World. They commonly call an honest Man, a Man who cannot be punished by the
Laws, and lives not worse than others, according to the Customs of the Place he
is in. A good Man, according to the Notions of the Vulgar, is a Man who keeps a
better Outside, with respect to what we call Piety, that is, with respect to
public Exercises, the frequenting whereof is a very equivocal Sign of a good
inward Disposition. We see every minute some Men careful of that sort of
Duties, and who seem to be pious Men by their Discourses; but nevertheless they
are as greedy and unjust as those who profess no Virtue. If we examine
thoroughly those good and honest Men, we shall see very often that we are only
beholden to the Laws and Custom for their outward and seeming Virtue, and not
at all to the Gospel, which they know but very imperfectly, and observe but as
far as it serves their ends.

If Justice is so generally violated, what shall we say of Charity, which goes
much farther? Do we see many People who concern themselves in the Reputation of
their Neighbors, as in their own? Are they slow and reserved in judging of
them? Do they not presently pass an ill Sentence upon them, without minding the
wrong it may do them? On the contrary, have they not much ado to have a good
Opinion of them? Their Judgment of the Sentiments of those who are not of the
same Christian Society, is most unjust. They damn them without any more ado,
without having any regard to their Manners, or understanding their Opinions:
And then they do them all the harm they can in this Life. Nay, such a Conduct,
so contrary to Charity, is accounted Zeal and Devotion; and Christians fancy
(who would believe it, were it not to be seen every day?) that they shall
inherit Heaven, by cruelly tearing and persecuting their Neighbors. Meekness
and Charity, so often mentioned in the New Testament, are looked upon by those
false Zealots as Indifferency to any Religion; and, if they are to be believed,
Fury and Cruelty are the only Characters of a good Christian. Those who should
teach others to be modest in their Judgment of their Neighbors, and the
Doctrines they understand not, (which are Duties Humanity should teach us)
spend their Life in exasperating ignorant People, by their public and private
Discourses, against other Christians; and are as good Patterns of judging
rashly, and persecuting without any Pity, as they are ill Examples of living
like Christians.

As for the other temporal Interests of our Neighbors, how few are they, I
will not say, who look upon them as their own, (as they should, according to
the Gospel) but who endeavor to procure them, as they might without
prejudicing themselves? It seems, that provided we live well, and have nothing
to fear for our selves, it is no matter whether others groan, for example, under
excessive Labor, to earn what is absolutely necessary to them, and live in the
fear of begging by the first Misfortune that befalls them. Others may be without
any thing, but we must want nothing; there is no Reward too little for them,
and no Profit too great for us; it is enough if they don't starve; but as for us
no Riches can be too vast. In many Places a Man is accounted even a Person of
exemplary Virtue, when he endeavors not to hurt his Neighbor, tho he does him
no good, being nevertheless able to help him, without prejudicing himself.
Charity, among that sort of Men is, if I may say so, but a negative Virtue,
which consists in doing no harm, not in doing good, and eagerly promoting our
Neighbors Interests, as the Gospel commands. It Is extremely difficult for
these Men to part with their Indolence in the behalf of those who stand in need
of them, when it is not their Interest; but the least thing is sufficient to
engage them to act against their Neighbors, or at least to do nothing for them.

If we consider the other part of Charity which concerns the Poor, who want our
Alms; how many are they, I will not say, who deprive themselves of what is
necessary to them, or give away their Overplus, but who keep any proportion
between their vain or foolish Expenses and their Alms.

If among Christians we look for the Virtues we owe, if I may say so, to our
selves, such as Modesty or Humility, Abstinence from unlawful Pleasures,
Patience in Adversities; I doubt whether we shall find more of them than among
some of the ancient or modern Heathens, provided we be willing to do Justice to
both; however it is certain at least, that they are very scarce, especially in
an eminent degree. Nay, it often falls out, that those who pretend to those
Virtues more than others, are mere Hypocrites, as one may easily observe, if
their whole Behavior be carefully examined. Humility or Modesty hinder them
not from hunting after Preferments, which they are not fit for; from making
extraordinary Expenses, when they have got them; nor from treating Men
contemptuously, whose Virtues and Talents shine infinitely above theirs.
Abstinence from Pleasures hinders them not from enjoying at least all the
Conveniences, and when they can, all the Delights of this Life, whilst they
preach Frugality to others. They will do, or are ready to do any thing, rather
than lose the Favor of those, who gave them, or keep them in the Employments
they enjoy. The highest degree of their Virtue consists in doing nothing but
what will please the Multitude; and if they are afraid to be censured, for
having performed one of their Christian Duties, or to draw Hatred on themselves
by practicing it, we must not expect to see them prefer Obedience to God's
Commandments, to the Reputation they endeavor to get, or keep among Men. The
rest of Christians do the like, not to make their Rulers ashamed.

Sixthly, The Unbelievers who compare the Christian Morals with the Manners of
the Christians, say they cannot believe that those Morals are revealed by God,
seeing the Effects of them are so inconsiderable. They say they cannot apprehend
that a Religion revealed, as we affirm, for the Good and Happiness of Mankind,
and so excellent above all others, made not a greater Alteration in the World
in what concerns good Manners. But if they had reflected enough upon the Nature
of the Christian Religion, and the State of Europe and Asia, before it was
established, they would spare that Objection.

They should remember that the Christian Religion contains some Laws, as I have
already said, which tho admirable in themselves, force no body to observe them,
that there may be room for Rewards and Punishments. So that we must not wonder
if they are violated, as all others are, especially if it be considered that
those Rewards and Punishments concern another Life. Men, tho persuaded of the
Truth of the Christian Religion, look upon them as remote, and are so affected
with outward Objects, which work upon their Senses or Imagination, that the
present Time prevails over the future. Besides, it ought to be observed that
there are different degrees of Persuasion, tho Persuasion it self be most true.
No body doubts of some considerable Facts of ancient History; for example, that
Caesar overcame Pompey; however there is some Difference between the degree of
this Persuasion, and the degree of that whereby every body is persuaded of what
he sees. Tho those who have read the Roman Authors that were contemporary, and
those who spoke of it in the next Century, doubt not at all of Cesar's Victory;
yet it must be confessed, that the Persuasion arising from what we have seen,
is stronger and more lively. The Christians who believe the Divinity of the
Laws of the Gospel, and are sometimes moved with it, are, by the same Reason I
just now alleged, more moved with the present Pleasure of giving up themselves
to some Passion; and so this last Motion overcomes the other. Jesus Christ
foresaw that Disorder, and said that few Men would observe his Commandments,
and many break them, Part II. Chap. 2.
as I have already observed elsewhere.

But it will be said, Why does not God make the Rewards and Punishments of the
Gospel as sensible to Men as what they see? Why do they not see, if I may say
so, Paradise and Hell opened; good Men in the one, and wicked Men in the other?
I answer, that if it were so, those who obey God, not only because of the
Rewards and Punishments, but out of Thankfulness, and because they are
convinced that his Laws are just and reasonable, could not be distinguished
from those who obey only out of Fear, and wish that God had been pleased to let
them satisfy their Passions. For it is certain that if Rewards and Punishments
were made sensible, every body would pay to God the same outward Obedience.

Besides, tho it is most certain that the Christian Religion is not observed as
it should be, and that the Difference between the Manners of Christians and
Heathens is not so great as it ought to be; yet it must be confessed that
Christianity has several great Advantages above Paganism. First, there is a
great Difference between a Commonwealth that has good Laws, which teach
exactly to distinguish Good from Evil; and a Commonwealth, the Laws whereof
approve or suffer some Crimes which are very prejudicial to Society. In the
former, good Laws keep at least part of the Citizens to their Duty, and hinder
others from running themselves into great Excesses; but in the other the
Lawgiver lets loose all manner of Vices, and puts no Bounds to them: from
whence it comes to pass that an infinite Number of Men give up themselves to
them. The same may be said, in several respects, of Christianity and Paganism;
but I shall only alledg two Examples. Indeed the Notions of Justice and
Charity, which the Gospel has brought into the World, have not been so
effectual as they should have been; but however those Notions are the Reason
why a horrible Custom practiced among the Romans has been condemned. They took
great Pleasure in seeing Men kill one another, or fight with wild Beasts. So
cruel a Diversion lasted during many Ages at Rome; nor was the Humanity of the
Roman People, so much boasted of by their Historians, so much boasted of by
their Historians, offended at it in the least. The same People as well as the
Grecians were so horribly addicted to Fornication and Sodomy, that they never
imagined there was any harm it it, provided it might not prejudice their
temporal Interests. Those who will read their comical and satirical Poets, will
not only see the Matter of Fact, but also the sad Consequences of those
Debaucheries. Among Christians one of them has been always detested, and not so
common; and the other has not been so great as amongst the Heathens, because
they are both condemned in the Gospel. The Heathens gave up themselves to a
thousand infamous Debaucheries, not only without being punished for it, but
also without feeling any Remorses of Conscience, because they knew not that
they were unlawful. Hence it is that they never gave over their Lewdness, but
when the Body being worn out, could no longer answer the Disorder of the Mind;
and that they never showed any Sorrow for it, whereby Youth might be deterred
from it. All that old Men could say to young Men was, to enjoy the Pleasures of
the Flesh only as much as they were consistent with the Welfare of their
Families. But under the Gospel the Knowledge Men have of doing Evil, when they
give up themselves to Lewdness, is as it were a Bridle, which stops a great
many in the midst of their Pleasures; and a Leaven which often works
Repentance, and excites Men to deter others from doing the like.

I will not say that Justice is much better administr'd among Christians than
elsewhere, but it cannot be denied that their Civil and Political Laws are
better. What may be the Reason of it? It Is because the Laws of the Gospel have
settled the Notions of Good and Evil, which were uncertain among other Nations,
or rather have introduced them anew: from whence it is that those who do Evil
dare not assert it; and that many Crimes are not daily committed, which
otherwise would be committed openly. To live somewhat modestly among the Greeks
and the Romans, one needed to have been well bred up, or to have learned
Philosophy; nor did this hinder them from doing several unjust things, which
Excess only could make infamous. But among Christians Men learn whether they
will or not, the Laws that condemn them; and no body will be so bold as to say,
that the least Unjustice is allowed them. Princes abuse not their Authority, as
they did in Paganism, for the same Reason; and Subjects enjoy more quietly and
safely the Fruits of their Labors, especially in the Places where the Knowledge
of the Christian Religion is greater than in others.

CHAP. VI. That Unbelievers cannot conclude that the Christian Religion is
false, because the Divines, whom they know, answer not their Objections well,
or maintain some false Doctrines, as true ones, and as being the Doctrine of
Christ.
IF I say in general that one of the chief things that lead Men into
Incredulity who have Wit and Judgment enough, is the weak Answers which are
often returned to their Objections, and the absurd Doctrines which are
maintained against them as true ones: No Christian Society will contradict me,
because they accuse one another of very great Errors. Thus, without naming any
in particular, I leave to every one the liberty of making such Applications as
he thinks fit.

Forasmuch as there are many things difficult to apprehend in Systems of
Divinity, which raise great Difficulties in the Minds of those who read, or
hear talk of them; it is no wonder if Men of Sagacity and Penetration propose
some Doubts to Divines. Nay, according to the Supposition of every Christian
Society, viz. that all others err in something, it cannot be wondr'd at, if it
be said that Unbelievers offer some Objections to Divines, which they cannot
resolve according to their Hypothesis, or which they resolve by contradicting
themselves. Divines upbraid one another with it. Let us therefore suppose that
a Man, not altogether ignorant, observes in the Society in which he was born,
that the manner after which some Doctrines of the Christian Religion are
explained, is subject to great Difficulties, or is altogether false. Let us
suppose further, that the Divines of his Country are very learned Men, and
understand the Christian Religion better than others; an Opinion common enough,
especially among those who never went out of their Country, or never read the
Books of other Sects. When they perceive that the Divines whom they consult
satisfy them not, or maintain palpable Falsities, they conclude from thence
that the Religion of their Country is not true, and consequently that the
Christian Religion is altogether false. If it happens that a Man having such
Thoughts, never reads the Works of other Christians, who are free from the
Errors he is offended at; the more he lives, the more he confirms himself in
his Opinion; because as soon as an Error has been found out, the longer it is
thought of, the better it is known. When Men know nothing better about the
Subject in question, and have not Penetration and Learning enough to find out
Truth of themselves, they can hardly forbear doubting of every thing, because
they presently suspect that the other Parts of Divinity which they have not
examined, are not better; and observe that the same Doctrine, whereof they have
found out the Falsity, is accounted as essential as others. But let us suppose
again, that a Man, taken up with other Business, and who has no time to spare
for such an Examination, (as there are a great many) comes to read Books of
Controversy written by ingenious Men of both sides, he will often perceive that
both Parties attack very well, and defend themselves ill. That Man will
conclude from thence, and often with Reason, that both Parties are in the
wrong; the more he hears them one after another, the more he will be convinced of
it, and at last he will believe that there is nothing true, because he has not
Parts enough to distinguish Truth from Falsehood. If we add that there are some
other external and internal Motives, which make him incline to Unbelief, as
there are but too many, that Man will get into a Skepticism almost incurable,
or into a formal Unbelief, out of which he will hardly be able to extricate
himself.

What I have proposed as Suppositions, is really to be found in a great part of
Christendom; and there are a great many People in Italy, France, Spain and
Germany, (for I must tell it, and I ought not to conceal that I don't follow
the particular Opinions which prevail in those Places) there is, I say, an
infinite Number of Men in the same case, as I have described. They see some
Opinions manifestly false, established in those vast Countries by a public
Authority: if they offer any Objections, they are pitifully resolved; and then
if they dare reply any thing, they are overwhelmed with Censures and
Threatenings, not to say that they are sent to the Inquisition, and burnt if
they grow obstinate. Nevertheless Divines maintain those Doctrines, tho
evidently false, with great Heat; they make use of all their Wit and Eloquence
to prove them. Many Laymen who want not Penetration, but know no better, think
that indeed this is the Christian Religion; and because they distinctly
apprehend the Falsity of what is said, they conclude from thence that Religion
is not true.

Others add to their Meditations the reading of some controversial Book of
Roman Catholic and Protestant Authors; and they see that the latter altogether
destroy the Doctrines of the Church of Rome. They rightly conclude from thence,
that they are false, and the utmost Endeavors of their Teachers cannot free
them from that Opinion. On the other hand, they often find some Books of Roman
Catholic Authors, who attack well enough some particular Opinions of certain
Protestants; and those Protestants are as unlucky in defending their own
Opinions, as they are successful in assaulting those of the Roman Catholics.
They also think that those Protestants are in the wrong, and because their
Examination reaches not to all the Sects separated from the Church of Rome,
they confound them one with another, and condemn them alike; so that at last
they persuade themselves that Truth is to be found no where. Besides other
Motives which may confirm them in those Thoughts, and which I have already
mentioned; they see two things which affect them so much, that they retain
their Opinions for ever, if no better Books come into their Hands, or if no
body frees them from the Doubts they are in.

The first is, that it clearly appears that it is the temporal Interest of
Divines to maintain those Doctrines. Those who assert them with Heat, and
declame with the greatest Violence against other Christian Societies, are
preferred, and get the most considerable Dignities of the Party they are in. On
the contrary, if any one seems to be modest, and thinks himself obliged in
Conscience to be moderate toward those who are called Heretics or Heterodox;
he must needs be very much favored, if he be not excluded for ever from all
sorts of Employment, and ruins not himself. In some Places that is enough to be
altogether undone; and almost every where if any intimates that he approves not
all the Opinions of the Party he is in, (tho he does it never so modestly) they
show him no Pity, he must suffer whatever Hatred and Cruelty can do, when they
are clothed with the Pretense of Religion.

The second thing that confirms Unbelievers in their Disposition, is, that
Divines will be Judges and Parties in controverted Doctrines, against the
clearest Principles of Equity, tho it is most evident that it is their Interest
to favor one of the Parties. Tho their Decisions be never so unreasonable and
unsatisfactory, they must be submitted to, because they look upon them as good
and solid. Nay, if they are to be believed, the Books of their Adversaries
ought-not to be read; or those who read them ought to do it with a Design of
not approving their Arguments, otherwise they must undergo the Condemnation of
their Parties.

Unbelievers, who are convinced of the Falsity of several particular Doctrines,
and observe that they are maintained out of a worldly Interest, and by unjust
and violent Means, conclude that Divines, and consequently all Christians, are
factious People, and Enemies to Truth, as well as those who profess the other
Religions which are seen in the World.

It cannot be doubted but these are most violent Prejudices against some
Christian Societies; but it is an easy thing to show, that they ought not to
involve all Christianity in general. First, Unbelievers cannot suppose without
Examination, as they do on this occasion, that the Notion Men have of the
Christian Religion in their Country, or that of some Divines whom they have
read, is really the same with that of its Founders. Some Alterations may have
by degrees crept into the Doctrine of the Christians whom they know, and so it
may be very different from that of Christ and his Apostles. No body can be sure
of the contrary, without going to the Source, to compare it with the Streams
which are said to flow from it; that is, without reading the Writings of the
Apostles, and comparing their Doctrine with that which is now pretended to be
the true Doctrine of the Founders of Christianity. This Unbelievers are
necessarily obliged to do before they affirm that the Doctrine of Jesus Christ
is false. Else they would imitate corrupt Judges, who vouchsafe not to examine
the Instruments of a Suit in Law, but give their Sentence at the first Report
of it. I am persuaded that if the Unbelievers of the abovementioned Places
would undertake that Examination, they would presently see that most of the
Doctrines which they dislike are not to be found in the Writings of the
Apostles, and consequently that whatever Christians think now, ought not to be
ascribed to them.

The same thing ought to be observed every where, and Men ought not to judge of
the Gospel according to the Opinions that are commonly received where they
live; or, which is worse, to condemn it from hearing a silly Preacher, who
represents it quite otherwise than it is. Yet there are many People who
entertain no favorable Thoughts of the Christian Religion, by reason of the
Explications thereof, which they hear from the Pulpits, which are but too often
ill provided. A great many things spoken there, are so far from bearing a
severe Examination of judicious Men, that they could scarce be allowed in the
Conversation of any Persons not altogether destitute of common Sense. That sort
of Discourses cannot, without great Injustice, be confounded with the Word of
God; tho there are some who affect to give them that Name, as if such Preachers
were inspired Apostles, and authorized with Miracles. They should have a
greater respect for the Gospel than to call such Meditations by the same Name
with the Discourses of Christ and his Apostles. I had not made this Remark,
were it not that such Expressions give occasion to Unbelievers to despise
Christianity, which deserves as much to be admired by the most penetrating and
solid Wits, as many Sermons deserve to be despised by the meanest and most
illiterate Persons.

As no body could bear the Injustice of that Man, who should judge of the
Opinions of an Author by the Discourses of another, who perhaps understands
them not, and whose Interest it is to explain them otherwise, and then pretends
he may with Reason vent his Explications as infallible: so Unbelievers cannot
ascribe to the Apostles the Opinions which they hear preached, as Apostolical
Doctrines, before they have carefully compared them with the Writings of the
Apostles, unless they are willing to be looked upon as the most unjust of Men.

Secondly, Unbelievers are guilty of another Fault, which is not much less than
the foregoing, when by reason of the false Doctrines which they have read in
the Writings of some Divines, or heard them preach, they reject all
Christianity. For it must be granted, that it is not impossible but many Truths
may be mixed with Lies: and as it cannot be said that a Book contains nothing
but Truth, because some few Truths are to be found in it; so it cannot be
affirmed that every thing in it is false, because some Lies have been found in
it. Is there, for example, any profane History, either ancient or modern,
without a mixture of Truth and Falsehood? Yet no body says that History contains
nothing that is true and certain. They endeavor only to distinguish what is
true from what is false. The like ought to be practiced with respect to the
Explications of Christians Doctrines which we read or hear. We ought neither
wholly to reject them nor embrace them, because there may be a Mixture of Truth
and Falsehood. We ought, as I said before, to compare them with the Writings of
the Founders of Christianity, and judge by those Writings of Religion it self,
and of what is true in the Opinions of modern Divines; this is, if I may say
so, the Touchstone by which only the true Doctrine of the Apostles can be
known.

Thirdly, Unbelievers undoubtedly know, that a Truth changes not its Nature for
being ill defended. We see every day very good Causes ill pleaded by some
Lawyers, who understand not their Profession. Nay it is confessed among all
Christians, that there are a great many Books whose Authors are really engaged
in the Defense of Truth, but they do it so ill, that it would certainly be
condemned if it had no better Support. Many People, for example, who have not
studied well the Writings of the Apostles, say they see no Character of
Divinity in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and cannot convince an Unbeliever of it;
but nevertheless they believe it to be Divine with as great a Certainty as if
they perceived the Finger of God in every part of it, because they are, say
they, inwardly persuaded of it by the Holy Ghost, without knowing why. That Is
the Cant of a perfect Phanatick, who equals, without being aware of it, the
Gospel with the Alcoran, and all the false Religions, the Followers whereof may
all say, as he does, that they are persuaded of it by a secret and inward
Operation of God upon their Hearts. But the Apostles never said any such thing;
all their Preaching consists in some Facts, and in good Reasonings, attended
with the miraculous Gifts they had; and it is by such Means they pretended to
prove the Divinity of their Doctrine. So that we should wrong them very much
should we believe that they taught their Doctrine could not be embraced by the
means of Knowledge, but by a mere Enthusiasm.

Others, to do the Christian Religion a greater Honor, ascribe to the Apostles
an Art which they themselves seriously 1 Cor. 1.17. and 11.4, 13, etc.
say they have not. They set forth their Style as an admirable Pattern of
Eloquence, which exceeds that of the Grecians and Romans. What follows from
thence? Unbelievers read the Writings of those Holy Men, to seek what they are
told is contained in them; and because they don't find it, they fancy that
those who said so, designed to deceive them; and thereupon being exasperated
against them who grounded in part the Truth of the Doctrine of the Apostles
upon their wonderful Style, they wholly reject it. They could not be blamed for
that, if the Apostles themselves boasted of their Eloquence; but seeing they
say quite the contrary, it is a great piece of Injustice to condemn them as
Impostors, upon the Assertion of those who ascribe to them what they never had,
nor pretended to have.

The true Character of the Apostles Style, to say so by the by, is this. First,
it is simple and plain, such as is the Style of those who propose some things,
of which they are fully persuaded. Secondly, it is a Style without any Ornaments
of Rhetoric, whether it be with respect to the Choice of the Words, or the
Disposition. If a thousand sublime Strokes are to be found in it, they come
from the things they say, which are very sublime, not from the Words or Order.
Thirdly, we must add to it that Providence undoubtedly watched over their
manner of writing, that they should always say Truth; and lest, if they had
expressed themselves ill, they should be misunderstood by their Readers. But
this is not a fit Place to treat of that Subject. I only made those Remarks to
hinder Unbelievers from taking Advantage at the ill Rhetoric of some Defenders
of Christianity, who contradict the Apostles without being aware of it.

It Is manifest in general, that the Defects of those who defend Truth, ought
not to prejudice it; and I declare as to my self, that I don't desire at all to
be believed in any thing, but when it has been examined and compared with the
Writings of the Apostles; or that any of my Thoughts should be ascribed to
them, but when they have been found in their Works. If I have been mistaken in
any thing, I desire those Mistakes may be ascribed to me, and not at all to the
Religion I vindicate.

There is no need I should say here, that the Apostles had no temporal Interest
to move them to preach such a Doctrine. I have already said so elsewhere, and I
will prove it more at large in my first Letter at the end of this Discourse. I
will not repent neither that they pretended not their Doctrine should be
received with any Examination, because I have proved it in the first Chapter of
this second Part. So that if Self-Interest and Ambition are often the Reason
why Divines maintain now some Opinions, and after a manner unbecoming
Christianity; it is their Fault, not the Apostles, who can be charged with no
such thing.

After those general Observations I must set down some particular Examples of
false Doctrines, which hinder Unbelievers from believing the Gospel. It Is but
too true that one might write large Volumes about that Matter, but I shall be
contented to alledg three or four Examples of Doctrines which offend
Unbelievers, and are contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles.

There are some People now who pretend that we ought scarce to make use of
Reason in Matters of Religion. They maintain that we ought to believe its
Divinity, without knowing why; that when the Question is about the Sense of the
Revelation, or the Books which contain it, we ought not to reason, neither to
discover it; and that we ought to believe even the things that are most
contrary to Reason, rather than forsake the literal Sense. They are so full of
this Thought, viz. that Reason may overthrow all Divinity, if those who apply
themselves to it are allowed to make use of it; and if they see any body who
reason better than ordinary Divines do, or has any Principles somewhat
different from theirs, which he has embraced by using his Reason, they slander
him as a dangerous Man, because he ventures to reason about the received
Doctrines. Such a Character is always attended with Hatred, and stirs
ill-affected Persons against those who received it from Heaven; and if it were
impossible for a Divine to live quietly with a Man who endeavors to reason
well, and grounds the Christian Religion upon undeniable Principles. Others
will have us humbly to submit to the Decisions of those whose Profession it is
publicly to explain Religion, without mistrusting them, or reasoning at all,
because we ought to look upon on them as infallible, tho we have no Proof of
it. They think it is impossible for most Christians to examine those Doctrines;
and their best way is, as they say, blindly to follow their Guides.

Such Discourses which are commonly to be heard from the Pulpits, and
elsewhere, have made long ago a great many Unbelievers. For the first thing
that comes then into ones Mind, is, that those who speak at this rate are not
very sure of what they say, and design to deceive others, because there is
nothing, tho never so false and absurd, but what may be maintained by the same
Principle. If we were told the same thing in our ordinary Affairs, we would
really think that those who say so design to deceive us. If they would sell
something to us, and we were told that we must not examine it, we would
presently suspect that they designed to cheat us. In Matters of Religion, as
well as in other things, we have no other Guide but Reason to distinguish a
false Religion from a true one. Besides, it is only by the use of Reason we can
find out the Sense of the Words contained in those Books wherein we know the
Revelation is. Nevertheless those Men would have us to read those Books with an
unlimited Credulity, and be ready to receive whatever we are told, tho it be
never so contrary to all our Notions. They are afraid, as soon as they hear of
a Man who is only for Reason, and whom insignificant Words and an ill-grounded
Authority cannot satisfy. Unbelievers conclude from thence that there is a
Design upon them, and that Divines very well perceive that the Doctrines which
they would introduce cannot be maintained, seeing they will not allow that they
should be examined. And because that strange Doctrine is cried up as one of the
chief Doctrines of Christianity, those who have not carefully read the Writings
of the Apostles, fancy that they have taught it, and involve them in the same
Suspicious with some modern Divines.

When Divines have taught Principles so contrary to the Nature of Men, they
preach Transubstantiation and other such Doctrines to credulous Men, which they
insinuate by virtue of that Maxim of not reasoning in Matters of Religion. But
Unbelievers fail not to perceive the Falsity of those Doctrines, and persist
the more in their Thoughts concerning the Falsity of the Christian Religion.

But they should observe that the Apostles teach us no where that we ought not
to use our Reason to examine whether Religion is true or not, or to know the
Sense of their Words. On the contrary, they suppose every where that we ought
to examine what they say, and not believe it before we are sure that they say
nothing but Truth. They also suppose that we are rational Creatures, and able
to put a good Sense upon their Words, by observing all the Rules that are made
use of to understand the Language of other Men. They no where say that they
teach us some things that seem to be or are contrary to Reason, and that we
must part with our Notions to embrace them. They knew very well that they were
to deal with Men who judge of nothing but by acquiescing in their own Reasonings.

It Is true we comprehend not perfectly all the things mentioned in the Writings
of the Apostles, such as are, for example, the Divine Properties; but we form
at least some Notions of them which are not at all contrary to Reason; there is
no need we should have an exact and adequate Notion of them to be saved. Reason
also teaches us that we cannot know exactly this sort of things, nor many
others, and that we must not judge of things we understand not. It Is also a
critical and grammatical Rule, to decide nothing about an equivocal or obscure
Expression. So that we ought not to sacrifice our Reason and our grammatical
Rules to Faith, as if it was contrary to them, in order to believe what the
Apostles say; but we must remember that we have not exact Notions of every
thing, and ought to judge only of such things as are known to us. We ought not
neither to part with the Rules of Critics, which are grounded upon good Sense
and the constant use of Languages, to understand what the Apostles say. On the
contrary, we ought to make use of Reason and Critical Rules in their whole
Extent; and we shall see that there is nothing in the Doctrine of the Apostles
that clashes in the least with the Light of Reason, or that cannot be
explained, as much as it is necessary, by good Critical Rules.

Those who reject any of them, do it because they have introduced new Doctrines
into the Christian Religion, which they falsely ascribe to the Apostles; and
both because such Doctrines cannot bear the Test of Reason, and because they
cannot reason well themselves, or make a good use of Critical Rules: for
example, what is called the Real Presence of the Body of Christ in the
Eucharist, or Transubstantiation, which cannot be believed without forsaking
Reason, nor be found in the Writings of the Apostles, by using good Grammatical
Rules; the real Presence, I say, or Transubstantiation, are Doctrines which the
Apostles never thought of. Divines declame against Reason and Critics in the
behalf of those new Doctrines, not at all in the behalf of the Doctrine of the
Apostles.

For my part, having studi'd those Matters as much as I can, I think I may
affirm that no Proposition can be extracted out of the Gospels, or any other
Writings of the Apostles, which being expressed in their Words, is not
perfectly agreeable to Reason, if it be interpreted by the same Grammatical
Rules, as all other Authors are. Moreover, I affirm that one need suppose
nothing but what is most reasonable, to know that the Christian Religion is of
Divine Revelation.

Some Divines who have not studi'd the Holy Scripture well, maintain another
thing, which is not less proper to hinder Infidels from believing in Jesus
Christ, than the Maxims I have confuted. They say that many Commands of the
Gospel are Arbitrary Precepts, whereof no other good Reason can be given but
the mere Will of God; or, that he gave them to Men to humble them. They believe
that God would have some Mysteries in Religion, such as the Real Presence, or
Transubstantiation, to mortify Man's Pride, who understands nothing of them.
They say that to deny ones Passions, as the Gospel commands, is a Commandment
grounded upon no other Reason but the Will of God.

It cannot be doubted but that when we are sure a thing is of Divine Revelation,
we must believe it, or practice it, tho we should not apprehend the Reasons of
it; and this many Divines say concerning several Ceremonial Precepts of the Law
of Moses. Some learned Marsham, Spencer, etc.
Men undertook to show the contrary with respect to those Ceremonies, and it
may be said in general, that they have not been unsuccessful in it. But as for
the Commandments of the Gospel, one may boldly assert that there is none, of
which it is a hard thing to give a good Reason, supposing humane Nature in the
State it is in.

Nothing can be more false and contrary to the Nature of the Gospel than to
fancy that God designed in part to show only that he is Master, by enjoining
some Commandments which have no relation with the Good of Mankind. Religion was
only revealed for us, not for God, who, absolutely speaking, neither wants what
we think of him, nor the Worship we pay him. He manifested himself to us, only
to make us happy; and gave us some Laws fit to make us enjoy a Happiness as
great as can be here, if all Mankind would observe them; and at the same time
fit to lead to an eternal Felicity those who obey them, notwithstanding the ill
Examples of others.

For example, the Gospel commands us to deny our Passions, or our selves, which
is the same thing; not only to give to God that mark of our Submission to his
Orders, but for the Good of humane Society. To deny ones self, or ones
Passions, signifies only to prefer the Observation of the Commandments of the
Gospel to ones unruly Desires. Now all those Commandments tend to the Good of
Men, and there is none but what is of that Nature. Let us suppose that a Man
who has been injured by another desires to revenge himself; if he reflects upon
what the Gospel commands him, he will find that it is one of those Desires he
ought to deny. The Reason of it is, because if he should revenge himself, he on
whom he should do it would not fail to revenge himself too; and so there could
be no end of it, which would altogether disturb the Society. Wherefore God who
formed it, and protects it, forbids Revenge, and declares he will punish those
that shall break that Commandment. Let all other Desires that are contrary to
the Commands of the Gospel be examined, and it will be found that they cannot be
satisfied without hurting humane Society.

However it will be said, that when the Gospel commands us to deny our Desires
rather than break any of its Commandments, or to suffer Death for it, if it be
necessary; it has no regard to the Good of the Society, but the Will of God.
But if we carefully consider it, we shall find that Men can scarce do any thing
more useful to Mankind than that. It is undoubtedly useful to them to observe
the Laws of Christ, which are so advantageous to them; and there is no Example
more effectual to encourage them to that Observation than that of those who
hand rather die than break any of those Laws. If all Men were so disposed, it is
manifest they would contribute as much as they could to one another's
Happiness, and would love their Neighbors as themselves; so that those who
sacrifice their Life to bring others to the Obedience of the Gospel by their
Example, do a thing very useful to the Society. It Is therefore false that the
Laws of the Gospel are Arbitrary Laws, and no Commandments given to Men for
their Good.

It Is also false, that God would have Mysteries in Religion altogether
incomprehensible, only to humble Man. The Doctrine of the Real Presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist is no Apostolical Doctrine; and the Apostles
have taught none, of which we can have no Notion, not so much as a confused
one, as it may be said of that. To believe a thing, it is not necessary to have
an exact and distinct Idea of it, but we must have at least a general and
confused Notion of it. For no body can believe what he understands not at all;
seeing to believe that a Proposition is true, is to acquiesce in the Relation
which is perceived between the Terms it is made of, as Logicians teach, and
none can acquiesce in a Relation that is not perceived.

For example: when I am told, the Dead shall rise, I understand not only the
meaning of those Words, the Dead, and to rise, but also clearly perceive the
Relation which is said to be between those two things, tho I don't know
distinctly the Manner and Circumstances of the Resurrection. But if I was told,
the Dead shall rise and not rise at the same time, without any Equivocation in
the words dead and to rise, perceiving no relation between an Affirmation and a
Negation, I could not believe it. The same may be said of all contradictory
Propositions, they cannot be an Object of Faith, which receives nothing but what
it understands, at least in some measure. Such is the Doctrine of the Real
Presence, which contains several such Propositions.

When the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles are proposed to Unbelievers, as
undeniable Proofs of their Divine Mission, they fail not to question the Truth
of them. The chief Reason they alledg to make that History suspected, is the
false Miracles which are now given out as true ones, to keep People in their
Duty by this pious Fraud. Those who make use of that Art, or endeavor to
vindicate those pretended Miracles, can reply nothing to Unbelievers, without
condemning themselves, or betraying the Christian Religion. They are far from
confessing that they are in the wrong, they boldly maintain that there is no
more reason to believe the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, than to
acknowledge the Truth of their modern Miracles. In the mean time the
Unbelievers, who see that the latter are mere Impostures, fancy the former were
so too. Those who cast in their way that Stumbling Block, are bound to remove
it, and acknowledge the Truth, unless they will be looked upon as Men of no
Judgment, or less Conscience.

But tho Unbelievers may triumph over that sort of Men, who undertake to assert
some Facts which cannot be maintained, they cannot say against Christians in
general, that the Miracles on which their Faith is grounded, are like those
which are said to be wrought every Day. First, Christ and his Apostles affected
not to work Miracles every minute, and out of Ostentation; such as are those
that are now talked of. Secondly, Christ and his Apostles, and those in whose
behalf those Miracles were wrought, got no Money by publishing them abroad, as
it is now practiced by those to whom those Churches belong, wherein they are
said to be wrought. That very thing, viz. that the Opinion of Miracles being
wrought in a certain Place, brings Wealth to the Master of it, is enough to
make one rightly suspect whatever is said about it. Thirdly, The Miracles on
which the Gospel is grounded, were done in the midst of the Enemies of the
Christian Religion, among whom it was not safe to bear witness to those
Miracles; and on the contrary, those who having examined them, should have
discovered the Falsity of them, had nothing to fear. Such a Discovery had been
very acceptable to the Jews and Heathens. But now Miracles are wrought among
Men ready to believe any thing, or at least to say they believe it, for fear of
being delivered to the Inquisition, where it is set up, or of drawing on
themselves the Hatred of the Mob, which sometimes is not less to be fead'd than
that dreadful Tribunal. To be sure that the Testimony of another is
well-grounded, he ought to have the liberty to say the contrary: But when he
exposes himself to Danger, if he says the contrary, his Testimony is of no
weight. Besides, to be sure of the Truth of a Fact, one ought to have the
liberty of examining it, but no body dares do that now, with respect to modern
Miracles, in the Places wherein they are looked upon as true. Thus there is a
vast Difference between the Certainty of the Miracles wrought in the beginning
of Christianity, and what is said for those of our time. None but those who
want either Judgment or Sincerity, will compare the one with the other.

But I must not forget here, that Unbelievers pretend to take advantage of what
I have supposed, viz. that there are no Miracles now. They say, that if there
is no Reason to make us believe that they are necessary now; there is none
neither that can persuade us that there was any formerly, because the only
Reason that could oblige God to work Miracles, many Centuries ago, was the
Incredulity of Men which could not be cured and other way, and that the same
Reason subsists still. So that if they are to be believed, God is not less
obliged to work Miracles out of his Goodness, in the behalf of those who doubt
now of the Truth of the Christian Religion, than he was in the time of the
Apostles.

In answer to it I say, First, that the Proofs we have of the Truth of ancient
Miracles make them as it were sensible, if we reflect upon it; so that they may
also be of use to cure our Doubts. It was necessary that God should work
Miracles to establish the Christian Religion; but being established, they are
no longer necessary, because the History of Religion preserves the Proofs of
those that were done, at its first Establishment. But it will be said, that the
Truth of that History is doubted of, and that therefore new Miracles are now
required.

I answer in the second Place, That if the Proofs of the Truth of that Doctrine
are good, as we affirm, and if they are doubted of only out of an ill
Principle, they have no reason to complain of God's Goodness. If there remained
no Proof of the Truth of the History of Christ and his Apostles, it might be
said that God has forsaken us, and deals with us much worse than with those in
whose behalf he wrought Miracles formerly. But having very good Reasons to
believe that History to be true, they ought to be to us instead of Miracles.
This being so, it is manifest that Men have not now the same Reason to wish for
Miracles, as when the Christian Religion was not yet established.

Thirdly, it ought to be observed, that to require new Miracles from God, with
and show of Reason, Men should have made a right use of the Means they have to
know the Truth, so that after a careful and impartial Examination they could
not be satisfied about the thing they inquired after, but must doubt still of
it whether they would or not. Upon this Supposition it might be said, that God
would be in a manner obliged, by reason of his Goodness, to help Men's
Incredulity. Hence it is that those who made a good use of the Revelation of
the Old Testament, and might be apt to doubt of the Mission of Christ and his
Apostles, not out of Obstinacy, but because the Proofs thereof were unknown to
them, had the Advantage of seeing many Miracles in our Savior's time. But let
us suppose some Men of a quite contrary Disposition, who perform not the Duties
which the Light of Reason teaches us, who have no Love for the Truth, who are
full of a thousand ill-grounded Prejudices, and blinded with unruly Passions,
who have examined nothing, but doubt of every thing out of a voluntary
Perverseness of their Mind and Inclinations. Can such Men complain because God
works no Miracles in their behalf? Will they be so bold as to say that they are
worthy of new Favors, for having despised those which they had already
received from him? If the Unbelievers of our time would but examine themselves
by this Picture, they might easily find out the Answer we can return to them.

Fourthly, I affirm that Miracles would be of no use to such Men. The
unbelieving Jews, in our Savior's time, are a manifest Argument of what I say,
seeing that being not able to deny his miraculous Works, they ascribed them to
the Devils. The Unbelievers of our time would never want shifts to bring into
question Miracles wrought in their Presence, seeing they have found out several
to hinder us from drawing any Consequence from those of Christ, supposing they
are true. But of this I shall speak in my second Leter at the end of this
Discourse.

Therefore it may be said, that God has more reason to work no Miracles in the
behalf of the Unbelievers of our time, than to work any. And such was the
Method of Christ. When he saw some obstinate Men, who required from him some
Miracles, he wrought none, because he saw they would not make a better use of
them than of other Divine Graces, and would but thereby increase their Guilt.
The Evangelists observe Mat. 13.58. Mark 6.5.
, that being come to Nazareth, he did not many mighty Works there, because of
the Unbelief of the Inhabitants of that Town. Some unbelieving Teachers having
required of him a Miracle more than once, Mat. 12.38. and 16.1.
he denied them, and referred them to that of his Resurrection, whereof
notwithstanding they never had the Honor to be Eyewitnesses. Wherefore he
sometimes asked those who desired that he would cure their Diseases, whether
they believed Mat. 9.29, etc.
he could do it, to teach them that none deserves a new Grace but he that made
a good use of others. It would have been an absurd thing to expect or demand a
Cure from him, had they not certainly known, by other Examples, or some good
Reasons, that he was able to do it.

Those who suppose that the Goodness of God should incline him to deal
otherwise with Unbelievers, suppose at once two things most absurd and
altogether unworthy of Men who pretend to Reason. The first is, that God ought
to have no respect to the Use Men have made of his Favors, but that the more
they increase their Unbelief, whatever the Reason of it may be, the more he is
obliged to grant 'em new Graces; so changing the Course of Nature, as soon as
they are pleased, doubt of Revelation; whereby the Conduct of God will depend
upon the Will and Humor of Men. The second Absurdity that follows from thence
is, that God would be obliged out of his Goodness to satisfy as many Parties as
there are Unbelievers in the World, and every one according to his own Humor
and Method. For every one of them would see some Miracles, and as it were put
the Divine Providence to a Trial, without minding what it might have done at
other times, or in other places. If any can brook those Consequences which
necessarily follow from the Unbeliever's Objection; there is no need we should
longer dispute with him. From what has been said it appears that God is not
obliged to work Miracles now, because he wrought some formerly.

In those Places where the modern Miracles are not believed, there is an ill
Custom, as well as in those where they are believed, which is very prejudicial
to the Christian Religion, with regard to the Incredulous; and it is this:
Several People who maintain some Doctrines of no great Moment and Certainty,
with too great a Heat, are wont to say, to magnify their Zeal, that if the
Opinion of their Adversaries was true, the Christian Religion would be lost,
that one could be sure of nothing, and such other things. In the mean time
their Adversaries endeavor to prove the Truth of their Opinions, and sometimes
prove it so clearly, that the contrary Opinion cannot be maintained without
Obstinacy. The Unbelievers who are as it were a third Party, and perform only
the part of Spectators of those Quarrels, conclude from thence that the
Christian Religion is not truer than the Doctrines which they see so well
confuted; and those who have exaggerated too much the Importance of their
Opinions, cannot hinder the Unbelievers from drawing such a Consequence against
them.

There are but too many Examples of that ill manner of disputing; but I shall
alledg only one, which will be sufficient to make Men sensible of what I say.
There have been many Disputes in this Age about the Antiquity of the Jewish
Vowels. Some have maintained that they were invented by the Masorethes some
Centuries after Christ. Others have pretended on the contrary, that they were
at least as ancient as Esdras, and consequently grounded upon the Authority of
the Prophets. The latter, to stir, if it were possible, all Christendom against
their Adversaries, exclaimed after a tragical manner, that this Dispute was
about no less a thing than the Authority of the Old Testament, and of the whole
Bible, which was destroyed by those who asserted the Novelty of the Vowels. But
Ludovicus Cappellus has showed in his Arcanum Punctationis, and its Defense,
with as much Evidence as can be desired in a thing of that nature, that the
Masorethes were the Authors of those Vowels. The most learned Critics have
embraced his Opinion, and looked upon those who maintained the contrary as
obstinate Persons. The same happened with respect to another Dispute which that
learned Man had concerning the various Readings of the Old Testament.

He proved that there are many Readings which may be preferred before those of
our modern Copies. Did it follow from thence, as his Adversaries would have it,
that the Authority of the Scripture should be destroyed, Unbelievers would
undoubtedly have reason to triumph, and it would be impossible to make any
tolerable Reply to them. But Cappellus showed very clearly that nothing can be
more false than this Consequence, as well as that which is drawn from the
Novelty of the Vowels; and so he freed the Authority of the Scripture from
those Insults of Unbelievers, to which his Adversaries had exposed it.

It Is manifest that there are scarce any more effectual means to confirm
Unbelievers in their Obstinacy, than the drawing of such Consequences. For they
hear on the one side some grave and much esteemed Teachers say after a doleful
manner, that if certain Opinions are not true, then Religion is lost; and on
the other hand, they see Men of great Learning not only acknowledge those
Opinions, but also maintain them with very good Reasons. They conclude from
thence that nothing can be less certain than Religion, by the Confession even
of a Part of those that profess it. It Is to no purpose to undertake to prove
the contrary to them, by rejecting some Opinions grounded upon very solid
Arguments; whatever the Defenders of the opposite Opinion can tell them, will
only serve to make them pass for conceited Men, and of no great Sincerity.

This helps them also to perceive in many Divines a strange Disposition, which
would dishonor the Christian Religion, if it had any hand in it, viz. it does
plainly appear, that they seek not what is true, but what they think proper to
maintain the Doctrines they have embraced. When they fancy that if a certain
thing was believed, some of their Doctrines might be doubted of; they don't
trouble themselves with inquiring whether their Fancy be ill grounded, or
whether that thing can be proved on not, as they should do; but they cry out in
a woeful manner, That such an Opinion is dangerous; that is to say, it cannot be
easily reconciled with Religion, as they fancy. This is the true Character of a
Pleader, who is not very sure of being in the right; he suppresses whatever
seems to him any way contrary to what he defends, whether it be true or false,
if he is afraid it might appear from thence that he is in the wrong. Such is
the Conduct of the Governor of a Place, who wanting Skill or Courage should
say, that if some ill-fortifi'd and inconsiderable Out-work were taken by the
Enemies, he must unavoidably surrender the Fortress. Those who observed the
Conduct of both, would presently suspect the Pleader to be in the wrong, and
the Governor to be sensible of the weakness of the Place, and that neither of
them hopes to make a good Resistance.

Unbelievers have the same Thoughts concerning Divines, when they observe that
they greedily collect and catch at whatever can in any manner make their Cause
better, or at least make it appear so. But what ought to be said, is, that
those Divines don't know very well the Truth of Religion, and stick to it only
by a Spirit of Faction or Interest. The Christian Religion is grounded upon
clear and undeniable Arguments; it stands in need of no weak Reasons to support
it; it needs but appear naked, and such as it came from Heaven, to put an end
to all sorts of Difficulties. If any one who does not understand it, and loves
not Truth, but only the worldly Advantages that attend it, seem to be afraid
for Religion; it will never want more able Defenders, who will be devoted to it
out of a Principle worthy of so holy a Doctrine. They will never be afraid as
long as Religion is only assaulted with Reasons and Arguments.

CHAP. VII. That the Difficulties which may occur in the Christian Religion,
ought not to make any doubt of the Truth thereof.
1. THE abovementioned Difficulties rather concern some Modern Divines than the
Christian Religion, which they explain or defend not so well as they should.
But because there is no Science without some Difficulties, however it be
understood; it must be confessed that there are some in the Christian Religion:
of which I speak in this Chapter, wherewith I shall conclude this Work. First
I Will make some general Reflections upon the Difficulties which may occur in the
Christian Theology; and then I Will alledg some particular Examples thereof,
whereby I Will show, that they ought not to make any Body doubt of its Truth.

There may be two sorts of Difficulties in a Science; some of which don't shake
its Principles; but others show it is no Science at all, tho so called, but a
Collection and a heap of ill-grounded Opinions and Conjectures. For Example;
There are indeed some Difficulties in Geometry, but no Body doubts of the truth
of its Principles: The Reason of which is, because they are all grounded upon
clear Proofs, and which can neither become obscure, nor doubtful. Whatever
difficulty there may be, with respect to a Proposition following from those
Principles, they don't change their Nature; and a Man is more apt to accuse
himself of not understanding Geometry well, than to doubt of it, because he
cannot resolve a Difficulty: or else they show that the Proposition in question
is of such a nature as not to be fully resolved. On the contrary, there are
some Difficulties raised against Judiciary Astrology, which not only perplex
those who are fond of it, but also are the Cause why all its Principles are
looked upon as false, and all that pretended Science as a heap of Chimerical
Thoughts. The reason of that Difference is, because the Principles of Geometry
are either mere Definitions, or Maxims clear of themselves, or demonstrated
Propositions: whereas Judiciary Astrology is only grounded upon false
Suppositions. So that as soon as the Truths on which a Science is grounded, have
been demonstrated, and there is no fault in those Demonstrations; whatever
Difficulty there may be in any Proposition drawn from them, we don't look upon
that Science to be less certain.

Now to apply that Observation to the Christian Religion, and to the
Difficulties which Unbelievers find in it; The first thing to be done, when any
Objection is raised against Christianity, is to see whether that Objection
directly shows that the Proofs thereof are false. Tho nothing could be answered
to that Difficulty, if those that raise it cannot reply to the direct Proofs of
Christianity, that Difficulty does not weaken the strength of the Proofs; and
all that can be said is, that the Objection is about a Thing which we do not
well understand, or that the Christian Theology is not perfectly known to us.
Wherefore the Incredulous act not wisely, when they reject the Christian
Religion, because of some Difficulties, tho they are not able to confute the
Proofs on which it is established. Now I maintain that there is no Difficulty
can destroy those Proofs; and if Unbelievers will mind it, they may observe
that most of their Objections have no relation to them.

That Observation is of very great moment, when the Question is about some
Facts, which happened many Centuries ago, and are attested by some Historians,
whose Knowledge and Sincerity have been well proved. Although one may raise some
Difficulties, with respect to some Circumstances, which cannot be now easily
resolved; yet if those Difficulties destroy not the direct Proofs we have of
the sincerity of the Historians, and the exact knowledge they had of what they
related, they ought not to make us doubt of the Truth of the History. To be
able to answer all the Queries which may be made about a Relation, one should
have been an Eyewitness of whatever it contains: and a History cannot be looked
upon as fabulous, because no Body can satisfy us now about it, if we have no
reason to suspect the Historians from whom we have it, of want of Honesty or
Knowledge. I could easily clear this Matter with some Instances; but it would
carry me too far.

To go on with the Comparison I used, two sorts of Objections may be raised
against such a Science as Geometry, and the Christian Theology. Some do only
require the exact knowledge of two or three Propositions, to be fully resolved;
and so they may be answered in few words. But others require a long
Concatenation of many Propositions, depending one upon another; so that one
cannot be convinced of the last, before he is sure of the Truth and Connection of
many others. In such a Case it is impossible to satisfy in few words, those to
whom all those Propositions, or the greatest part of them, are unknown; because
they ought to examine them one after another.

Notwithstanding, it has been observed several times, that some Men who have
some Difficulties about Religion, would have their Objections presently
resolved, without having any regard to what I said; tho that Resolution
necessarily supposes the knowledge of several other things, which they are
ignorant of. Because it is impossible to satisfy them without instructing them
in those things; and because they grow presently weary with a long Discourse,
it is a difficult matter to make them sensible of their Mistake. Tho it be their
Fault, if they retire without being well pleased with those to whom they
proposed their Objections, seeing they would not hear them; they fancy they
have forced them to be silent, or to speak of something else. It Is just as if a
Man, altogether ignorant of Geometry, should hear another speak of Asymptot
Lines, or that approach nearer and nearer in infinitum, without ever touching
one another, and would know, in two or three words, how that can be. No
Mathematician could make him understand it in so short a time. If hereupon that
Man should say, that there are very great Falsities in Geometry, and that that
Science is not more certain than several others; what other Judgment could be
made of him, but that he is the most unreasonable of all Men, seeing he would
judge of a Thing, the Knowledge of which depends upon many more, without knowing
them? The same may be said of those, who propose any difficulty about an
Article of Religion, which cannot be understood without the help of some others,
and are angry because they are not answered in a word.

Some who want not Wit, and doubt of the Christian Religion, or reject it
because they find some Difficulties in it, do most times make a most
unreasonable supposition, without being sensible of it, viz. That whatever they
do not distinctly comprehend, is not true; as if Human Knowledge ought
necessarily to comprehend whatever exists, or is done in Nature. I could easily
show that there is an infinite number of things which our Knowledge cannot attain
to; but it will suffice to observe here, that the Principle of the Unbelievers,
which I mentioned just now, is a mere Supposition they are pleased to make,
because they imagine it raises them above what they are. I maintain that this
Proposition cannot be denied, viz. That there may really be some things, the
Modus or Manner of which Humane Nature cannot know at present, tho it studies
for it never so much. It ought to be observed that I do not say, there may be
some things contrary to our distinct Notions, which is impossible; but only
that it may be, we have not the Knowledge that is required, or the Means of
acquiring it, to know some things; which notwithstanding are not contrary to
what we certainly know. It Is necessary to make that distinction, because
several People, who are not aware of it, confound things that are extremely
different. We cannot believe what is really contrary to our clear Notions; but
we believe an infinite number of things, tho we know not how they come to pass.

Most Unbelievers are commonly guilty of another Fault, which is less excusable
than the former. Instead of being in such a Disposition as is necessary for
such as seek after Truth, they act like Men who only strive to get the better,
without inquiring who is in the Right or in the Wrong. They wrangle as much as
they can, and if those with whom they dispute, do it unsuccessfully, they will be
sure to take advantage of it, as if the Truth of the Christian Religion
depended upon that. They will not show those, who do not defend Religion well,
what Mistakes they are guilty of, but only labor to make advantage of it, that
they may the more easily triumph over them.

But when the Question is concerning a thing of that nature, about which no Man
can deceive others, without doing himself a greater prejudice: and when Truth
is equally advantageous to every Body, Men should only labor to find it out,
and instead of insulting those who cannot show the way to it, they should
endeavor to put them in the right way. The Spirit of Dispute is altogether
inconsistent with the search of Truth; and a Heathen Philosopher said well,
Arist. lib. 1. de Coelo, c. 10.
That those who will rightly judge of Truth, ought to be Arbitrators, not
Parties. As Soon as one has put on the Character of an Adversary, he thinks no
more of Truth, but of the Glory which may be gotten by triumphing over him whom
he has assaulted. He is only intent upon his Adversary's way of reasoning, to
take him up upon all Occasions, but not to endeavor to find out a better: He
considers no longer the thing in question, as the subject of his Enquiry, but
of his Censure: He views it on every side, to find fault with it, not to know
what it is grounded upon. It Is certain that this is an ill disposition of Mind,
and Unbelievers themselves cannot deny it.

After what has been said, it is no wonder if Men, who shut their Eyes against
the clear and beautiful part of the Christian Religion, and only open them to
see what is obscure and difficult in it, that they may find fault with something
or other, should at last grow so conceited of their pretended Sagacity, as to
be almost incurable. Such a Disposition is not at all agreeable to the love of
Truth, which they profess, and can only serve to increase one's Errors. And
indeed what Truth can he find out, who only seeks an Occasion of disputing and
overcoming? Truth, which often flies from those that seek it with Application,
offers not it self to the sight of those that fly from it.

After those general Observations concerning the Difficulties that are offered
against Religion, I must alledg some particular Examples of the chief Doctrines
which Unbelievers are wont to assault. There is none they more frequently speak
against, than what Christians believe concerning the Creation of the World; and
it is of so great Moment, that it may be said this Doctrine being once well
proved, it is no hard matter to get the rest admitted; whereas if it remains
doubtful, the other Doctrines of Religion will necessarily be uncertain. All
Revelation depends upon this, viz. That there is a God, who created Heaven and
Earth: And he that begins not with that, can make no Progress in the Knowledge
of Religion. So that it will be necessary to prove it in few words.

There are two sorts of Beings; some, called Spirits, Perceive, Will, Feel, and
Reason; the other, who have no Understanding, are Extended, Divisible, and
Solid, and are called Bodies. Those Spirits and Bodies are variously modifi'd,
as we see or know by Experience. This is all that we know in the World, besides
God. The Christian Religion teaches us that those Spirits and Bodies, with all
their Properties, had a Beginning, and that they were created by a Being, who
has no Beginning. This is what Unbelievers say they cannot apprehend, and it
seems to them that every thing was always as it is now.

To know whether there is any appearance of Truth in what they say, we must
examine those two sorts of Beings, and see whether they contain any thing,
whereby we may suspect that they are Eternal. As to Spirits, we only know our
own Souls well, and Unbelievers acknowledge no other. Now I ask of them whether
they perceive any thing in their Minds, which induces them to suspect that they
are Eternal? It Is certain that there is no such thing, unless they will say
that Ignorance and Weakness are Characters of Eternity. If we examine Bodies,
which are inferior to Spirits, because they are without Understanding, we shall
see nothing in them neither, which may make one believe that they are Eternal.

There are but two things that can be considered in this latter kind of Beings,
viz. Matter and Form; and if neither of them affords us any reason to believe
that they have always been, we cannot affirm it. As for the Matter of Bodies,
it is but a Substance Extended, Solid, Divisible, and capable of Motion, and all
sorts of Figures. That collection of Qualities, which makes up the Essence of
all Bodies, as far as it is known to us, contains nothing that looks like
Eternity. The notion of this Property, however it be considered, cannot be
found in that Collection. So that it cannot be affirmed that the Matter of
Bodies is Eternal.

All that can be said thereupon may be reduced to these two things. First, That
one cannot conceive how mere Extension had a Beginning; because notwithstanding
all our endeavors to think upon the Time when God was alone, before Bodies
were created, a simple and boundless Extension always offers it self to the
Mind. But a mere Extension, in which we apprehend no Solidity, is not a Body;
as it appears by the abovementioned Definition of a Body. There is another
manifest Proof of it, viz. because mere Extension is Indivisible and Boundless,
as we perceive it by trying to divide or put some bounds to it in our Mind;
whereas all Bodies are Divisible, and continued within Bounds. So that all that
could be concluded from thence, is, that the Place of Bodies is Eternal.

Secondly, Unbelievers say that they cannot apprehend how such a Substance as
that of Bodies should be produced out of Nothing, as the Christians say. If to
be created out of Nothing, signified to have no preexistent Cause, and yet to
begin to exist, I confess that would be altogether impossible. For supposing
that nothing exists but a mere Extension, how can it be conceived that a solid
and divisible Substance should be formed in it? One might as well apprehend
that all sorts of Beasts, Plants and Minerals may spring forth out of the Air,
without any Productive Cause. But to be created out of Nothing, signifies to
have a Cause, which contains in a more excellent manner the Proprieties which
we see in the things created, besides an infinite number of others; from which
Cause the things created have their Existence, or by the Will whereof they
begin actually to exist. There is nothing in all this that is contradictory; and
if we do not clearly apprehend wherein the Action of the Cause, which creates
out of nothing, consists, it is because the Nature of that Cause is not
perfectly known to us.

To explain what I have said by an undeniable Example, no Man will deny that
there is in Nature a Principle of Motion different from Matter, seeing we
perceive that Matter moves not of it self. All that we perceive in it, is
Mobility, but it cannot be said that we have any reason to believe that Matter
moves and modifies it self. This being so, the immaterial Principle of Motion,
whatever it be, produces Motion in Matter out of nothing; that is to say, being
able to move, without having the imperfections of Actual Motion, he makes
Motion to begin to exist in Matter, which before was in the state of Rest. This
is a Fact which cannot be doubted of, seeing Motion exists, and Matter is not
the Cause of it. But it is not known how a Being incapable of Motion, seeing it
is not Material, can produce it in Matter. If any one should say that Motion is
Eternal, because he cannot apprehend how it can have a Beginning; he might be
referred to Experience, which teaches us that we move our Arms and Feet when we
please, after they have been at rest, tho we don't know how it is done. I know
some Philosophers say, that we only determine the Actual Motion of the Animal
Spirits, which move our Members as many ways as we please. I will not here
confute that Conjecture, (for it is only a mere Conjecture) but I maintain that
it is as difficult a thing to apprehend that an immaterial Being determines a
Motion a certain way, as to apprehend that he produces it anew. So that if
those Philosophers may be allowed to affirm the one; or if they cannot deny it,
tho they apprehend not how it comes to pass; it would be a great piece of
Injustice to find fault with those that say there is an immaterial Principle
which produced Motion in Matter, tho it is not known how he did it.

This being undeniable, I conclude from it, that tho I have no distinct Idea of
the Manner after which God may have produced Bodies out of nothing, yet I cannot
deny it: especially if we observe in Matter no Character of Eternity, it is an
absurd thing even to suspect that it is Eternal; and much more absurd still to
find fault with Christian Divines, who say that it was created out of Nothing.

Tho nothing can hinder us from grounding the Creation of the World upon that
Foundation; yet it must be confessed that the Christian Religion, which was
instituted for illiterate Men, as well as for Scholars, does not necessarily
suppose these sorts of things which require a greater Meditation than the
Vulgar is capable of. It Is enough to apprehend that God imparted to Matter the
Form it now has, to pay to him all the Duties which he requires from us in the
Gospel. So that, without supposing what I have proved concerning the Creation
of the Matter of Bodies, we must inquire whether there is any Reason to believe
that the Form they have is Eternal.

There is nothing in the Form no more than in Matter, which can make us
suspect, that the World, as it is now, never had a Beginning. Tho we have not
seen the Formation of the great Bodies that surround us, and not one
Eyewitness has left a Relation of it; tho it seems that little or no sensible
Alteration happens in the World in general; yet no Body can say for all that,
that it has been the same from all Eternity; because the World might have been
framed before there was any Man upon the Earth.

But besides, we cannot say that the Form of the World is Eternal, and
consequently that Men, and other Animals (which make a part of it) have always
been upon Earth; the perpetual Succession, which we see in their Kinds, does
plainly teach us, that they had a Beginning. It cannot be said that the Animals
who live at present, are born of their Fathers and Mothers, and These after the
same manner, and so in infinitum, so as never to come to the first. The Reason
of it is, because Beings that have a limited Duration, as that of every
Generation is, cannot equal Eternity by such a Duration: as a number of limited
Measures, tho never so great, cannot be equal to an infinite Extension. Every
Generation singly taken having had a Beginning, we must necessarily come to the
Beginning of those Generations.

It Is therefore manifest, that Men and Beasts began to exist upon Earth, and
consequently that they were formed by some Cause. Epicurus, who said that they
were formed by a fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, made more ridiculous
Suppositions, and more absurd Conjectures, than what we find in the ancient
Fables. Hence it is that no body maintains his Hypothesis now. But others say,
that whatever exists, is properly but one Being, that modifi'd it self by a
necessary Consequence from its Nature. If any body knew what they mean, or if
they knew it themselves, they might be confuted; but an Opinion that is so
absurd and nonsensical, tho it has the outward Appearance of a Geometrical
Order, can deceive no body but those who will be deceived, and are inclined to
it from some other Reasons.

Wherefore seeing nothing can give a Beginning to it self, it must be confessed
that there is a Being more excellent than all Animals, who formed them upon
this Earth; and this is that Being which Christians call GOD: Thus they must of
necessity acknowledge a God who has created us.

It Is an easy thing to prove that he created the Sun and the Planets; because
limited Periods, as those of the Planets are, can never exhaust Eternity, tho
they be never so much multiplied. So that we may very well say, that there is a
Maker of Heaven and Earth; and no Objection can force us to renounce that
Proposition, seeing we directly prove it by undeniable Arguments; and the
Objections that may be opposed to them do not destroy them, and are but the
natural Effects of our Ignorance.

They object, for example, That they cannot apprehend how God, who is supposed
to be immaterial, could create Bodies out of nothing. None can give what he has
not, say they; so that God being incorporeal, could not give to Bodies the
Proprieties which they have. But it ought to be observed, that this very
Argument will prove that there is no Motion in Nature; for one may say, Matter
has no Motion of it self; and that which is immaterial has less still: None can
give what he has not; wherefore Matter has no Motion. Let them try to answer
this Argument, and the Answer, if it be good, will resolve the proposed
Objection against the Creation of Matter. It may be said, that God contains the
real Proprieties of all Beings, but without having the Imperfections and
Defects of them, seeing it is certain he has created them, and he is infinitely
more perfect than all the Things to which he gave a Beginning. By this Argument
we ascend from the Effects to the Cause, but we don't learn by it, nor by any
other Argument, how the real Proprieties of Creatures are in God, nor how he
made them to exist. The Fact is as certain as the Manner of it is above human
Understanding, as well as the Origin of Motion, tho no body can doubt of its
Existence.

There is another thing which the Incredulous will not believe, viz. the
Revelation which we say is contained in the Old and New Testament. Whatever
they say concerning Revelation in general, is grounded upon this Prejudice,
viz. that they themselves having no Experience of a Revelation, they cannot be
persuaded that there has been any. But nothing can be weaker than Arguments
grounded only upon our Ignorance, and which suppose that what we know not is
not true, as I have already observed. Those who deny Revelation, should either
manifestly prove that God cannot reveal himself to his Creatures after an
extraordinary manner, which no body will ever be able to prove, or find out in
that Revelation some manifest Characters of Falsity, which no body can show in
the Revelation of Holy Scripture.

This might be sufficient to stop the Mouths of Unbelievers; but their
Repugnancy to believe the Christian Religion arising partly from their being
ignorant of the History thereof, and not perceiving how the Wisdom of God
appears in it, I shall set down that History in a few Words.

Men knowing nothing but by Experience and Reflection; and Experience being
slow, and Reflection oftentimes difficult, God showed them by some
Revelations, from the Beginning of the World, what they ought to know
concerning his Nature, and the Worship he required from them. Tho Moses has
given us but a short Abridgment of the History of what past during above two
thousand Years, before he received the Law of God; yet he mentions Genesis 3.3.9,
etc. and 6.13. and 7.1. and 8.15. and 9.1. and 12.1, etc.
several Revelations, and every where supposes that they were very frequent, as
all those who have read the Book of Genesis know very well. But it appears that
Men made not a very good Use of them. The Egyptians, one of the most ancient
and happy Nations in the World, were already in his time infected with a
shameful Idolatry, See Exodus 8.16. and 32.4.
which made them worship Beasts. The Cananeans were also Idolaters, as he says
Lev. 20. 2. Numb. 25.3, etc.
in many Places, and lived a very wicked Life. There is no likelihood that the
other neighboring Nations made a better Use of those ancient Revelations, or
the Light of Reason, which God has given to all Men.

So that there was not one Nation that could boast to have improved the Talents
it received from Heaven, as it ought to do; and if God had given them up to
their Darkness and Wickedness, none of them could have justly complained of
him. Notwithstanding, to pass by the Nations whose History is not well known to
us, God being moved with Compassion toward Men, would not permit that Idolatry
and corrupt Manners should, as it were, overflow the whole World. He continued
to reveal himself more particularly to the Family of Abraham and his Posterity;
and to make those Revelations more useful, and hinder them from being corrupted
by the Mixture of the false Opinions of other Nations, he ordered the
Israelites to frame a Commonwealth by it self, and forbad them to converse much
with their Neighbors. To frame that Commonwealth, and enable it to maintain it
self till he should think fit to call the other Nations to the same Knowledge
the Hebrews had, he gave them some Laws, the Observation whereof he required
under most severe Penalties. There are several things to be observed in those
Laws, which may help us to see the Wisdom contained in them; but it will
suffice to say that some of them are grounded upon the very Constitution of
Nature and humane Society; so that all Nations are bound to observe them, at
least in some measure, and that they cannot be violated without hurting the
Society. They are called Moral Laws. The other do so concern the Commonwealth
of the Hebrews in particular, that other Men are not the worse for not
observing them; and they are called Political Laws. Lastly, the other concern
the Ceremonies which God would have to be observed in his Worship. They are
styled Ceremonial Laws.

The first sort of Laws, as those which command to acknowledge a God, and to
worship him, to honor our Parents, and to do to our Neighbor as we would be
done by; that sort of Laws, I say, was approved by the wisest Heathen
Legislators and Philosophers; and Jesus Christ has since confirmed them. The
necessity of those Laws cannot be doubted of, seeing they cannot be neglected
without feeling the dismal Effects of that Neglect; and seeing the Nature of
humane Society necessarily requires the Observation of those Laws, it cannot be
doubted but that they are worthy of him to whom humane Nature owes its Origin.
Tho this is manifest, it would be an easy thing to show that several Nations
had many Laws contrary to them, because the Interests and Passions of some
private Men prevailed above the public Good. Lest therefore the Light that was
contrary to those ill Customs should be wholly extinguished among Men, it was
necessary that there should be at least one Nation upon Earth, in which good
and sound Laws should be so clearly and undeniably established, that no body
could doubt of them. This we find among the Jews: God himself delivered part of
those Laws with his own Mouth, and acquainted them with the rest by a Prophet
whom he authorized with Miracles.

Those Laws are, as I said, equally necessary at all times, and in all places,
in order to the Peace and Happiness of humane Society: but because it was
necessary that the Commonwealth of the Jews should not be mixed with other
Nations, lest those Laws should be destroyed, God gave them some other Laws
accommodated to the Genius of that People, and to their State in the Land of
Canaan, which they were to possess. Such are the Political and Ceremonial Laws;
the chief Excellency of which consists in having nothing that is contrary to
the Moral Laws and in being suited to the People who received them. One may
easily perceive that the Political and Ceremonial Laws of Moses contain nothing
that is contrary to the Moral ones: but to convince ones self that God could
give no Laws more suitable to the State and Genius of the Jews, one ought to
have a competent Knowledge of the Manners of the Nations among which they had
lived, and with which they were then surrounded. Those who have applied
themselves to that Study, have found out that a great part of those Laws were
like those of the neighboring Nations, and that they were also See my
Commentary upon the Pentateuch.
contrary to them in several things; so that it may be said that God,
accommodating himself to the Genius of the Israelites, took care so to
distinguish the Form of their Commonwealth and Worship, from that of their
Neighbors, that it was impossible they should mix themselves with them, as
long as they should observe those Laws. I will not come to the Particulars of
those Facts, because I have treated of them at large in the Latin Book which I
just now quoted in the Margin.

As God had settled those Laws chiefly by his Authority, or that of a Prophet
authorized with Miracles, so he still required the Observation of them, not
only by the ordinary Magistrates who might themselves neglect them in time, but
also by several Prophets whom he sent to the Jews from time to time to censure
them for their Vices, and excite them to obey him by some Rewards and
Punishments, which they preached in his Name.

All the Laws that have relation to a certain State of a Nation, which makes
them useful and necessary, do evidently suppose that they are only good, as
long as that State lasts; and such were the Political and Ceremonial Laws of
the Jews. Notwithstanding the Lawgiver, who would give no body an occasion of
breaking his Laws, on pretense that they were no longer necessary, and so of
overthrowing the Commonwealth of the Jews before the time, speaks everywhere
of them as of eternal Laws. He kept to himself the Power of abrogating them
when the time should come, lest the Jews should do it unseasonably, and atter a
manner contrary to his Intention.

In the mean time the Prophets whom he sent to keep the Jews to their Duty, or
to bring them to it, were ordered to say many things, which by degrees disposed
that People to what was to happen some time or other, that is, to see
themselves mixed with all the other Nations, and to observe only such Laws as
are of an eternal Use, and grounded on the Constitution of humane Nature. For
example, Jeremiah was commanded to say to the Jews of his time; Chapter 31.31, etc.
The Days come, says the So the word Jehovah may be rendered. See my Remarks
upon Exodus 6.3.
Creator, that I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with
the House of Judah: not according to the Covenant which I made with their
Fathers in the day that I took them by the Hand to bring them out of the Land
of Egypt -- But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of
Israel, After those Days I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it
in their Hearts; (that is, it will be of such a Nature that Reason only will
almost teach it, and they will easily remember it) and I will be their God, and
they shall be my People: And they shall teach no more every Man his Neighbor,
and every Man his Brother, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the
least of them unto the greatest of them, etc. This clearly denotes some new
Laws, which one might easily learn and remember; whereas it was not so with the
Ceremonial Laws of Moses, which can neither be easily remembr'd nor understood.
Another Prophet introduces God speaking thus; Mal. 1.11.
From the rising of the Sun even unto the going down of the same, my Name shall
be great among the Gentiles; and in every Place Incense shall be offered unto
my Name, and a pure Offering; for my Name shall be great among the Heathen.

There are also some Promises in the Prophets concerning him whom God was to
send to instruct the Jews more clearly in his last Intention, as in the 53d
Chapter of Ifaiah, wherein God fays, amongst other things; By his Knowledge
shall my righteous Servant justify many, and he shall bear their Iniquities.
Elsewhere he is represented as a King: Mich. 5.2. See Zech. 9.9.
Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, tho thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet
out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be Ruler in Israel. Tho it
is no easy thing to prove now to the Jews or others, by some grammatical
Arguments, that those Passages, and the like, concern the Deliverer who was
promised to the Israelites; yet it appears by the History of the Gospel, and
their most ancient Teachers, that the Jews understood then the Prophecies in
that Sense. It was a general Opinion that a King was to come, (whom they named
Messiah by Excellency, that is to say Anointed, because Kings were anointed)
and that he would change the State of the Commonwealth of Israel. But neither
the Words of the Prophets, nor what Tradition might have preserved of their
Doctrine, were clear enough to give them a distinct and true Notion of the
Person of that King, or the Nature of his Kingdom. Hence it is that they
expected a King like those whom they had formerly, who should subdue their
Neighbors to their Empire.

There are many such Promises in the Prophets which I will not insist upon,
because some few Examples will be sufficient to show the Design of the
Revelation, and the Effect it wrought in the Minds of the People. The Jews
having had some Prophets when they returned from the Captivity of Babylon, had
none since, at least that we know of, to the time of the Empire of Augustus,
which was the time appointed by the Divine Wisdom, to send not only to the
Jews, but to all Mankind, a new Lawgiver, to instruct them more fully in the
Knowledge of their Duty.

I must somewhat insist upon this Place, to show God's Wisdom in the Choice of
the Time wherein he sent Christ to the World. The Jews stood no more in need of
such Prophets as the foregoing were, to require from them the Observation of
the Law of Moses, and censure their Vices. The Writings of the ancient
Prophets, which they read then more carefully than ever they did, were
sufficient for that. There was no need neither to make further Promises of a
Messiah by new Revelations; they thought they perceived him clearly enough in
the Old. But they stood in great need of two things. The one was to learn that
the true Worship of God does not consist in Ceremonies, but in entertaining
noble Thoughts of God, and in praying to, and trusting in him, and in loving
one's Neighbor as himself. It ought to be observed that by the word Neighbor
we must understand all Men in general. The other thing the Jews wanted then,
was to know certainly that there is a future Life, and that God will reward
good Men, and punish the Wicked after this Life.

The Jews entertained a most pernicious Error concerning the first thing, viz.
that the Observation of the Ceremonies was the chief thing Men could do to be
acceptable to God, whereas those Ceremonies were but some Laws which God had
given them out of Condescension, and to keep them separate from other Nations,
until a certain time; as it appears from the thing it self, and Experience.
Besides, the Romans being then ready to deprive them of a small Remainder of
Liberty which they enjoyed, and to take from them the Means of preserving their
Temple, it was very necessary that the Jews should know that it was no great
Loss, seeing they would be no less acceptable to God, by worshipping him only,
and obeying his Moral Laws, tho they should observe no longer the Ceremonial
ones. Forasmuch as they were to be mixed for ever with all Nations, their
Commonweath being destroyed without any hope of a Re-establishment; one of the
most useful Advices that could be given them, was to look upon all Men as their
Neighbors. They were forbidden before to converse familiarly with them, as
long as the Commonwealth of Israel should subsist; but after its total
Destruction there was no room left for that Distinction; nay, it was
impossible. The Reunion of the Jews with the rest of Mankind was most worthy
of God, the common Father of all Men, who had separated his Children for a
time, lest a general Corruption should overflow them.

As for what concerns a future Life, together with its Rewards and Punishments,
it was altogether necessary that Christ should ground that Belief upon a new
Foundation. The Prophets spoke not clearly enough upon that Point, and it cannot
be found in their Writings but by the help of several Consequences, and those
sometimes extremely nice. That Doctrine is not expressly treated of therein, and
there is nothing concerning it where any would think it should be handled at
large, and in express Words, as in that Part of the Law wherein Rewards are
promised to those who shall obey God, and Punishments denounced against those
who shall break his Commandments. Hence it is that the Sadduces laughed at that
Doctrine, and pretended it was a vain Tradition. Yet it is certain that Religion
runs a great Danger without this Doctrine, which is undoubtedly always
necessary to excite Men to the Practice of Virtue, as I could easily show; but
it was especially necessary to the Jews at that time. The Persecutions of their
Neighbors, or their own Dissensions, had reduced them to a miserable
Condition, and the temporal Promises of the Law were no more fulfilled. Which
made even good Men murmur, and the learned Men of that time were not at all
able to hinder it, as it appears from the Authors of the Wisdom of Solomon and
Ecclesiasticus, who are strangely perplexed with this Question, See Wisdom, chapter
4, and 5, etc.
Why wicked Men are often very happy in this Life, and those that keep the Law
very miserable? That Question could not be otherways answered, than by saying,
that God being not willing that the Commonwealth of Israel should last longer,
ceased to grant to the Observers of his Laws the Rewards he had promised them;
and that calling them now to a more sublime Virtue, he would grant them in
another Life an infinitely more excellent Reward than the temporal Happiness
they wished for.

It Is true that the Pharisees asserted the Resurrection of the Dead, and an
eternal Life, but it seems they grounded their Belief more upon Tradition than
the express Words of Scripture. Nay, they spoke of another Life as the Heathens
did, if we believe Ant. Jud. lib. 18. c. 2.
Josephus. To build so important a Doctrine upon a solid Foundation, nothing
less could be required than the Authority of the Messiah, who very clearly
teaches it everywhere, and was himself a sensible Example of what God will do
for good Men: which made one of his Apostles say, 2 Timothy 1.10.
that he has brought Life and Immortality to Light through the Gospel.

It appears from what has been said, how necessary it was that Christ should be
born among the Jews at that very time, and how necessary and useful his
Doctrine was to them. But perhaps it will be asked, why there was no Reason
then to fear the Jews would corrupt themselves among the Pagans, as they did
formerly? The Reason of it is, because the Belief of the Unity of a God, Maker
of Heaven and Earth, and his Spirituality, were so rooted in the Minds of the
Jews, that nothing could persuade them to the contrary hereafter. The Jews were
better qualified, and more like to convert the Heathens, than the Heathens to
draw the Jews to their Opinions, tho they had the uppermost. The most
celebrated Philosophers among the Grecians believed the Unity of a supreme God;
and the Religion of the Mob, which was built upon Fables, was not at all
approved by Men of Sense, as may be easily proved. So that the Jews ran not so
great a danger, in that respect, as they did before. Besides, it was none of
the Romans Maxims to make Proselytes, as the Jews did; so that they endeavored
not, at least commonly, to make them embrace their Opinions, either by cunning
Arts, or by Force. They tolerated them everywhere, provided they would obey
the Laws which were not repugnant to their Religion.

Besides, God, who was making every thing ready to call the Gentiles to his
Knowledge, was shortly to form a great People in the midst of Paganism, with
whom the Jews might live without any danger of corrupting themselves. But it
will be asked, Why God staid so long before he manifested himself to the
Heathens? Perhaps what I said just now, is one Reason of it, viz. lest the Jews
being obliged to live amongst them, should altogether corrupt themselves, if
Heathenism should prevail everywhere. But besides, it may be said that the
Romans and Grecians were never better qualified to receive the Gospel. The
Study of Philosophy had in some measure delivered them from the Ignorance and
Superstition they lay under during many Ages; and the Grandeur of the Romans,
who were not very well persuaded of the Truth of their Ancestors Religion, did
not allow them to mind whatever might be said against their Gods. The Jews and
Christians have not more railed at them than the Epicureans, as it appears by
the Example of Lucian. Tho the Discourses of the Epicureans arose from a
Principle of Atheism, altogether contrary to the Disposition of the Jews and
Christians, yet they contributed much to facilitate the Belief of the Christian
Religion, because the Epicureans knew very well how to destroy the Pagan
Religion, but had no better Principles to establish in its stead; whereas the
Jews and Christians had a very rational System to supply the room of the
Heathenish Errors. Thus God, who can draw Light out of Darkness, made use of
the Effect the Epicurean Philosophy had wrought, to introduce his Knowledge more
easily among the Heathens.

The most civilized and frequented Parts of Europe and Asia being at that time
under one and the same Empire, and under some Laws that were just enough; the
Peace which was then more general than it had been before, and the Safety
wherewith Men might travel through the Roman Empire, did very much contribute to
the Propagation of the Christian Doctrine; so that it may be said, that if God
designed to have Compassion on the Heathens, it was then the time, or never, to
call them to his Knowledge.

During those Circumstances, which I desire the Reader to recall to his Mind,
God was pleased that a Lawgiver should be born among the Jews, of another
Nature than he whom they expected, and infinitely more useful to them. Instead
of a temporal King, who might have increased their Power and Renown, but would
not have lessened their Ignorance nor their Vices; God sent them a King worthy
of him who taught them how they ought to live here, to be eternally happy after
this Life; and showed them, that instead of being Members of a little
Commonwealth, and Enemies to the rest of Mankind, they ought to look upon the
whole World as their native Country, and all Men as their Fellow-Citizens; a
Thought worthy of those who already professed to believe that all Men are
equally the Work of God.

As for those Pagans who were not content with their own Religion, they made
use in vain of the Light of their Philosophers, to find out something better,
when Christianity happily offered it self to them, to free them from their
Doubts. There was a general Corruption among them, proceeding from some having
no Religion, and others ridiculous ones. It Is true that the Philosophers
opposed that Corruption in some measure: but some of them exhorted Men to
Virtue only as much as it was necessary for them in this Life, as the
Epicurcans which took off all the Force of their Discourses; others, as the
Platonicks and Stoics, mentioned indeed the Rewards, which may be expected
after Death, but only in a doubtful manner, and without any Proof; so that
their Exhortations were in effect very weak. Tho their Morals were fine indeed,
yet there were several things in them to be found fault with, and their
Theology was full of Chimeras, which now I will not insist upon. Then the
Christian Religion appeared with a Theology altogether agreeable to the Light
of Reason, with so perfect a System of Morals, that it contains whatever the
several Sects of Philosophers said, that was good, upon that Matter; and with
Rewards and Punishments so certain, that Men are necessarily moved with them
when they think of them. It must be confessed that God could reveal nothing to
Men that was more suitable to their needs, nor enlighten them in a more proper
time.

It appears from thence that God had very good Reasons to manifest himself to
the Jews and Heathens, as I have said. Not that I will affirm that those are
precisely the Reasons of the Conduct of Providence, and that it had no other.
My Design was only to make it appear that it is a very easy thing to show the
Wisdom thereof, and to stop the Mouths of Unbelievers; for if Men,
notwithstanding their Ignorance, can give very probable Reasons of God's
Conduct, how great a Light might he dart into our Minds, if he were pleased to
draw off the Vail, if I may speak so, under which he hides himself?

I must make some more Observations upon the Persons whom he made use of to
manifest himself to Men, because Unbelievers fancy that they should have been
quite other Men than they were. They think that if God designed to send any in
his Name to Men, he should have chosen Men of Authority, to keep them in awe;
and eloquent enough to excite the Attention of others, and write according to
all the Rules of Eloquence what they designed to leave to Posterity.

I confess that most of those whose Ministry God made use of to reveal his Will
to Men, were not at all Persons of Authority. The Gospel it self, which is his
last Revelation, was preached only by mean and ordinary Men, without any
Dignity in the Commonwealth of the Jews. But I maintain that there are sensible
Marks of God's Wisdom in that Choice, which could not appear in a contrary
Choice. I will only speak of the first Preachers of the Gospel, because what I
shall say of them may be easily applied to the Prophets of the Old Testament,
who were Men of the same Condition.

Tho Christ was born of a Royal Line, his Family was become so poor, that he
could make no great Figure among the Jews upon the score of his Extraction.
Most of his Apostles were Fishermen, or Men of no greater Account: So that they
had no Authority among their Countrymen whereby they might command any Respect.
But that which seemed proper to expose them to Contempt was the only thing that
could authorize their Doctrine, especially in future Ages. To be convinced of
it, let us suppose the contrary a little, and see what would be thought of it.
If Christ and his Apostles had been Men of Authority, it might be said, with
great show of Reason, First, that they were Men of great Parts, who seeing the
Jews in such a Corruption, which altogether destroyed the Civil Society amongst
them, as we learn from the History of that time, undertook to reform them, by
feigning new Revelations, and authorizing these pretended Revelations by false
Miracles. It Is a Design that Men of the first Rank may easily think of, and
several have been accused of it, as Lycurgus, Numa See Plutarch in their Lives:
Diodorus Siculus, Bibl. lib. 1. toward the end. Lactantius Inst. Div. lib. 1.
c. 22.
, and other Pagan Lawgivers, who feigned to have received their Laws from some
Deity, to make them more sacred. Secondly, it might be said, that by giving
better Laws to their Fellow-Citizens, as being come from Heaven, they not only
did them good Service in deceiving them, but also that they themselves got
Credit by it, because they were looked upon as Ministers of the Godhead.
Thirdly, it would be said that their Miracles were false, because Men of
Authority and Power may easily deceive others, by appointing some Men who
favor their Design, and frighting by their Authority those who could discover
their Cheats. 'Twas, for example, an easy thing for Numa Pompilius to pretend
that he had a particular Acquaintance with the Nymph Egeria, and persuade the
Romans that he went to see that Goddess every Night in a Wood, wherein he might
easily hide some body who made them believe, by a thousand Cheats which may
easily come into one's Mind, that this Wood was the Residence of the Goddess.
He might reward those who favored his Design, and revenge himself of those who
should endeavor to cross it. So that it must be confessed that Men of
Authority preaching a new Revelation, might have been so much suspected by
their Contemporaries, and especially by Posterity, that it would have been a
very difficult thing, to assure one's self of their Sincerity.

On the contrary, it is manifest, that such a Design of reforming the Jewish
Nation, and even all Mankind, by feigning a false Revelation, could not easily
come into the Mind of Men who had no Authority. So vast a Project is not for
ordinary Men, who seldom entertain great Thoughts; and the Danger of being
discovered and punished by the Magistrates is more than sufficient to deter
them from doing it, if they had any such Thoughts. They would be so far from
hoping with any probability to get more Credit and Authority by such a Cheat,
that they would be afraid of being discovered by their Superiors, who always
suspect such Designs. Lastly, Such Men can promise no Rewards to those who
assist them, nor threaten those that cross their Designs of revenging
themselves upon them. Their Superiors watch over their Actions, and will not
allow them to meddle with any thing that is out of their Sphere, and will be
sure to punish them upon the first Motion they make. It Is therefore much more
likely that Men of no Authority may act sincerely on such an occasion, than
those of the first Rank. But there was nothing more necessary for all future
Ages than to choose for the Preaching of the Gospel, Men whose Honesty could not
be suspected, seeing it is only upon their Sincerity that all our Belief is
grounded.

And besides, the Success of the Preaching of the Gospel by Men of no
Authority, is a plain Evidence of the Finger of God, and the Strength of the
Apostles Arguments; whereas the Success of a Design contrived and put in
execution by considerable Men, would be looked upon as an Effect of their
Authority, rather than of their Reasons. 1 Cor. 1.27, etc.
God has chosen, says one of Christ's Apostles, the foolish things of the World
to confound the Wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the World to
confound the things which are mighty: and base things of the World, and things
which are despised has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are, that no Flesh should glory in his Presence.

I come now to the Art and Eloquence which Unbelievers would require in the
Writings of the Apostles, to believe that they are inspired: but I affirm
again, that that very thing would raise Suspicions against them, and Doubts
concerning the Truth of their Doctrine. Before I show it, I must not forget to
say, that I don't blame Art and Eloquence as being pernicious and useless on
all occasions. On the contrary, those that make a good use of it, cannot be too
much esteemed, that is, those who use it to vindicate and clear Truth, or to
lead Men to Virtue. I only design to show that it fell out better that the
first Preachers of the Gospel were destitute of it.

Let us suppose again the contrary of what happened; and that the Apostles who
left to Posterity the Life, Discourses and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, were Men
of great Eloquence, and perfect Masters of the Art of Writing exactly and
methodically. Let us suppose that their Writings as well as their Discourses
were composed with great Exactness, and all possible Elegancy; I Will tell you
the Effect it would work upon the Minds of Men, especially of those who should
read them now. They would think that they were very ingenious Men, whose
Learning and Eloquence had moved them to propagate their Doctrine through the
whole World, and get Reputation by it; as it cannot be doubted that 'twas
Plato's Design as well as of many other Philosophers. It would be said that
those Men, in order to convince others not only of the Excellency of their
Morals, by the Eloquence of their Writings, but also to make them observe so
excellent a Doctrine, out of a more powerful Motive, contrived all the Miracles
contained in the Life of Christ. The more exact they had been in observing the
Circumstances of Time, Places, and Persons; the more careful they had been to
set off the wonderful Parts of that incomparable Life, and the Beauty of their
Master's Thoughts, by their manner of expressing them, the more they would have
been suspected of Artifice, especially in the following Ages, when what they
said of Christ would be the only Reason of believing in him. Thus Plato Vid.
Diogenes Laert. lib. 3.. 3. and Intt. in h. loc.
was suspected to have adorned the Discourses of Socrates his Master; nay it
has been said, that he sent him some of his own Thoughts, as those who have any
Knowledge of the Master and his Disciple cannot doubt of it.

The Success of the Gospel, which is no inconsiderable Mark of its Divinity,
would be looked upon as the Effect of the Eloquence of its first Preachers, not
of an extraordinary Providence. It would have been said at most, that the
Doctrine of the Apostles was the most excellent and rational Philosophy that
had been taught till that time. But by granting the Truth of their moral Rules,
they would have doubted of its Divinity, and looked upon it rather as the
effect of the Apostles Meditations, than a Divine Revelation.

But having written the Life of their Master, and published his Discourses
without any Art or Method, they cannot be suspected neither to have contrived
what they said, nor to have used any Artifice to make a Lie look with the Air
of Truth. Their great Simplicity, which appears every where, and their taking
no care to impose upon the Reader, are evident Marks not only of their being
not able to deceive, but also of their Sincerity. The wonderful Success of
their Preaching, tho destitute of whatever raised the Admiration of the Orators
and Philosophers, is a convincing Proof of their being favored by Heaven. 1
Cor. 2.4, 5.
My Speech and my Preaching, says one of them, was not with enticing Words of
Men's Wisdom, but in Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, (to wit, in the
Miracles) that your Faith should not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in the
Power of God.

If we reflect upon those Circumstances of the Revelation, and all the other,
which at first seem to make one doubt of it, when they are not thoroughly
examined, we shall see that God could not give more sensible Marks of the Care
he took about it, but by choosing those whose Ministry he made use of to
propagate it through the whole World.

I shall not undertake to resolve the particular Objections which Unbelievers
may raise against the Christian Religion: the Answer to which must be looked
for in the Writings of those who have directly proved the Truth of it, or
written upon the Holy Scripture.

The CONCLUSION of the Second Part.
I Think I may conclude now (nor can Unbelievers accuse me of drawing a
Consequence that extends farther than the Proofs I made use of) that nothing
can be more false than to fancy that the Christian Religion is grounded upon
mere Credulity: That the Ignorance or corrupt Manners of those who profess it,
ought not to prejudice it in the least: That tho many profess it out of
Interest for many Ages past, rather than out of Persuasion, no such thing can
be suspected concerning its first Founders: That the Divisions which are among
Christians ought not to make one doubt of the Truth of it: That the Gospel is
very useful to the greatest part of Mankind, both in this Life and the next:
That the Falsities which are to be found in the Doctrine of some Christians
now, must not be ascribed to the Apostles. Lastly, That the History of the
Creation of the World, and of God's Revelation to Men, such as the Christians
represent it, contains nothing but what is most agreeable to Reason, and most
worthy of the Wisdom of the Maker of Heaven and Earth.

If Unbelievers would seriously think upon what I have said concerning those
Propositions, I am persuaded that they would easily grant them; and then they
might find, without any difficulty, an Answer to all their particular
Objections. As soon as some undeniable Principles have been laid down, which
influence all the Parts of the Christian Theology, several things, which before
seemed difficult, cease then to be so; and thus one's Knowledge may be increased
every day. On the contrary, the general Principles of Religion remaining
uncertain or unknown, every thing makes Men perplexed, and the longer they live
in such a State, the more the Difficulties increase. As soon as Men have
learned to distinguish the Religion of Christ and his Apostles from what is
taught in several Parts of Europe, and the Maxims of the first Founders of
Christianity, from those of many Christians of this time; they may easily
perceive that a great Part of the Doctrines which they were offended at, and
the Behavior which they dislike, are not at all like the Doctrine of ancient
Christianity, or the Manners of the Primitive Christians.

The thing we treat of is not a Dispute, wherein Men only design to show their
Wit, and get the Victory, but the Question is about the Search of a Truth, the
Knowledge whereof is equally useful to both Sides: Unbelievers ought therefore
to part altogether with that Spirit of Wrangling, which makes them so eager to
find fault, as if they were sorry to be convinced that the Christian Religion
contains nothing that clashes with right Reason. On the contrary, they should
be disposed as those who search a Truth necessary to them, and think rather to
discover it themselves, than to find some Falsities in the Doctrine of those
who would lead them to it, and to whom it is not perhaps well known. If those
to whom they make their Application to resolve their Doubts, do not satisfy
them, they ought to apply themselves to the Divines, or read the Writings of
another Party, which perhaps will afford them greater Satisfaction. Nay, if no
body did altogether satisfy them, they would not be less bound to seek the
Truth; and having known it in part, they should endeavor to go farther, if it
were possible, and take care not to part with what seemed to them certain,
because they are not convinced of the rest.

This common Sense would require from Unbelievers, if Christianity was now in
so deplorable a Condition, that of all the Sects whereof it is made up, none
knew it in its whole Extent, or could defend it as they ought. But Thanks be to
God we are not reduced to that Extremity. The Method of Reasoning about
Religion, as about all other things, and the manner of explaining the Holy
Scripture, were brought in the last Century, and in this, by some Christians,
to such a degree of Perfection, as they never attained to before. Those who
lived in the first Ages of Christianity had reason to thank God for showing
them clear a living Proofs of the Truth of the Christian Religion by the
Miracles that were wrought in the sight of all Men, and the exact Knowledge they
had of the History of its first Founders. If we have not the same Advantages,
we have at least reason to give him our Thanks for teaching us that tho the
Christian Religion was founded without much Reasoning or Eloquence, for the
Reasons I have alleged, yet the more we are able to reason well, the better we
may be convinced of it; and that the Art of Writing according to the Rules
grounded on Reason, may be of great Use to set all the Beauties of the
Christian Religion in their due Light. The Suspicions which those Talents might
have raised concerning its first Founders, have no room left with respect to
those who write now. There can be no better Service done to Religion than by
enquiring into its Proofs with all the Exactness that we are capable of, and
setting before the Eyes of the Reader what has been discovered, with all the
Ornaments of true Eloquence Those who know the History of past Ages, are not
ignorant that in many of them false Reasonings and great Ignorance were the
best Talents of the Interpreters of Religion; so that a Man who read them, was
almost to part with Reason and common Sense. God be thanked we are no more in
such a Darkness! May the increase more and more the Light we enjoy by his Grace!

FINIS.
Two LETTERS concerning the Truth of the Christian Religion.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEN I began the foregoing Discourse, I thought it not necessary to add any
direct Proofs of the Truth of the Christian Religion: But, as I went on, I
perceived that this Work would not be complete enough, if I proved it not at
least in few Words. What I have said concerning Incredulity, being designed
only to remove the general Obstacles which hinder the Incredulous from
believing it to be true, it would seem that I was contented to make part of
that Way smooth which may lead them to Heaven, without caring to guide them to
the End of it. Therefore I thought my self obliged to add these two Letters,
one of which was published about ten Years ago, but it will be found here
larger, more correct, and in a better Order than it was before. As for the
other, it is almost but an Extract, by way of a Letter, of a Chapter of a Latin
Book, wherein I have treated of the Nature of Spirits, which was made public
above these three Years.

LETTER I. Wherein is proved the Sincerity of the Apostles in the Testimony
they bore to the Resurrection of Christ.
1. SIR, You desire that I prove to you in few Words the Truth of the Christian
Religion, that you may use my Proofs to cure some Gentlemen of your
Acquaintance, who are fallen into Infidelity. I could refer you to others who
have successfully treated of that Matter, but because most of them have
enlarged very much upon it, I Will endeavor to tell you more briefly what I
think proper to convince your Friends of the Truth of Christianity.

The most common Reproach Unbelievers cast upon us, is, that we are full of
Prejudices, which hinder us from undeceiving our selves. We say the same thing
of them, and we affirm that it is commonly their ill Disposition which raises
some Difficulties in their Minds, which otherwise they would not so much as
think of. Besides, we upbraid them with supposing a thousand uncertain things
in their Reasonings, as if they were certain; and they fail not in their turn
to accuse us of the same Fault. It Is not just that either of us should suppose
our Prejudices as Principles that are either demonstrated, or that want no
Demonstration. Let us therefore act on both sides, as if we had embraced no
Party, and let us say nothing but what is grounded upon some Principles granted
on both sides.

2. It Is granted on all hands, that there are certain Characters whereby we may
often know whether a Fact be true or not, and distinguish a false History from
a true one. If this was not granted, Men must be Scepticks, or rather mad Men;
for one cannot, without being stark mad, doubt of the Truth of all Histories.
But another thing must be also granted, which is not less certain, viz. that to
know the Truth or Falsity of a Fact, several Circumstances of Things, Time,
Places and Persons, must be present to the Mind, without which one cannot judge
solidly of that Fact, and by which one may most certainly determine whether it
be true or false. Those who know those Circumstances, and have examined them at
their leisure, may certainly give their Judgment about the Facts in question;
but they cannot convince others, without having instructed them before, and
convinced them of the same Circumstances: For example, those who have read the
Roman History cannot doubt whether there was a Julius Caesar, who made himself
Master of the Commonwealth, because the Multitude of contemporary Historians,
and of the following Ages, who attest the same thing, the Series of the Time
and History, Inscriptions, Medals, and the Air of Sincerity which is to be
perceived in all those things, do not allow them to doubt of it. But if a Man
was ignorant of all these Reasons which we have to believe the Facts I have
mentioned, and would doubt of them, it would be impossible to free him from his
Doubt, without instructing him in all those Circumstances.

The Divinity of the Christian Religion being established upon some Facts, one
cannot judge of it neither but by the Knowledge of the Circumstances which attend
them. Wherefore those who desire it should be proved to them, without
acquainting them with those Circumstances, require a thing equally unjust and
impossible. What I have said concerning Julius Caesar cannot be proved to a Man
altogether ignorant of the Roman History, whilst he remains in that Ignorance;
and consequently 'twould be unjust to require any such thing with respect to
Religion.

3. The first thing therefore that ought to be done, to prove the Truth of the
Christian Religion, is to set down the Facts it supposes, with all their
Circumstances: but an Objection offers it self, which must be resolved before.
They ask what are the Doctrines of that Religion, for the Christians have great
Controversies among themselves about their Belief. But our business is not to
prove the private Opinions of any Party of Christianity. It Is enough to show,
that the Doctrines about which all Christians agree are true, by proving the
Truth of some Facts, about which they agree too. Those who are sure of the
Truth of its Doctrines and Facts, may, if they will, afterward examine all the
Controversies they please.

Therefore without undertaking to decide those Matters, I begin with the
Examination of the Gospel-Morals, See are Abridgment of them in chapter 1. of Part
1.
without coming to any Particulars. It cannot be denied, that if all Men lived
according to its Precepts, and by reason of the Rewards and Punishments of
another Life were careful to worship the Creator of the World; to live with
Modesty, Temperance, Sobriety and Patience; and to deal with their Neighbors
as they would be dealt by them; it cannot be denied, I say, that such a Life
would be most pleasant and advantageous to human Society. We should not see a
thousand impious Extravagancies, and so many Superstitions, which have very
dismal Consequences, as we see among Idolatrous Nations. The excessive Love of
Dignities, Riches and Pleasures, would not be the Cause of any Disorder, and
would be attended with no public or private Sorrows. Men should not know what
it was to wrong their Neighbors, or suffer any Trouble, because of others
Inhumanity or Malice. They would help one another in all their Needs, with all
the Ardour and Eagerness that can be wished for. If they should happen to give
one another any Trouble, without any premeditated Design, they would forgive
one another, and make amends for it by all sorts of good Services. Lastly, the
Mind enjoying a perfect Tranquillity, and the Body being as healthful as its
natural Weakness can allow, and both enjoying the harmless Pleasures which the
Gospel allows us, Men would not part with so pleasant a Life, but to enjoy
another that would be free for ever from the unavoidable Inconveniences to
which Nature has made those liable who live upon Earth.

Such as have any Notion of the Morals of Christ, will necessarily grant this
Truth, viz. that Men would be most happy if they observed them all alike. It
will perhaps be asked, whether any Christian Society does it? But that is not a
proper Question; it is enough if it be granted that a Doctrine which can work so
admirable Effects, must needs make one entertain favorable Thoughts of those
who preached it at first. We cannot forbear admiring those who first exhorted
Men to live one with another after a manner so agreeable to Reason, so
advantageous to Society, and so pleasant and charming, that nothing can be
preferred to it but the supreme Happiness, which cannot be enjoyed but in an
endless Life.

4. To know when that Doctrine was brought into the World, and by whom, we need
only examine from Age to Age the Authors who spoke of it, by ascending from ours
to that wherein Christianity began first to be known. We shall learn from
thence, or from the reading of some History, that above thirteen hundred Years
past the Roman Emperors having embraced the Christian Religion, it flourished
in a great part of Europe, Asia, and Africa. We may be convinced by a great
number of Christian Authors, that from that time they professed to believe the
Divinity of the Gospel-Morals. If we go higher still, we shall find by the
reading of Heathen and Christian Authors, that there was already a great
multitude of Christians under those Emperors, who taught the same Doctrine. All
those who spoke of the Origin of Christianity grant it began under the Empire
of Tiberius, and that it was not heard of before. Tacitus who was born toward
the end of the Empire of Claudius, or in the beginning of Nero's, says that
Nero having set on fire several Parts of Rome, charged the Christians with it,
and put them to horrible Torments. He takes occasion from thence to speak of
the Origin of Christianity in these Words: Annal. lib. 15. c. 44.
The Author of that Sect is Christ, who was put to Death under the Empire of
Tiberius by Pontius Pilate, Governor of Judea. That pernicious Superstition,
tho suppressed in the beginning, quickly broke out again, and spread it self
not only throughout Judea, the Place where this Evil had its Origin, but also
in Rome, whither every villainous and shameful thing resorts, and finds
Abettors. Those who confessed that they were Christians, were presently seized,
and then a great multitude of People, whom they discovered, but were not
convicted of being Incendiaries, so much as they were run down by the Hatred
that all Men bore against them. It appears from hence that Tacitus, tho a Man
of Sense, was not at the pains to know what Christianity was, of which he
speaks after a most absurd manner. It Is a shameful Effect of his Negligence, as
I have observed elsewhere, and perhaps of the Roman Vanity, which despised
every thing, except the Learning of the Grecians. But two things may be
observed in those Words: One is the Truth of the Fact, which the Evangelists
teach us, that there was one Jesus in the Time of Tiberius, who was looked upon
as the Christ or Messiah, whom Pontius Pilate put to Death: The other is, that
the Christians were not found guilty of the Fire of Rome, and could not be put
to Death, as Tacitus believes, but upon that Accusation which concerned also
the Jews, viz. That they were Enemies to Mankind. The Interpreters of See
Lipsius upon this Place.
Tacitus. have showed that that Historian confounded the Jews with the
Christians. As it was but too true that the Jews were Enemies to other Men, so
nothing can be more absurd than to accuse the Christians of it, who had drawn
on themselves the Hatred of the Jews, by maintaining that all Men are Brethren,
and freely conversing with all Nations.

We have also the Testimony of another contemporary Author, and a Friend of
Tacitus, but who was somewhat more careful to know the Opinions of the
Christians. It Is Ep. lib. 10. Ep. 97.
Pliny the younger, who being Proconsul of Bithynia, about seventy Years after
Pontius Pilate was Governor of Judea, searched out, by Trajan's Orders, the
Christians who were in his Province, and would know what Opinions they had.
Afterward he wrote to Trajan about it, in a Letter, which is extant still:
They affirmed, says he, that all their Crime and Error consisted in their using
to meet at Night, on a certain day, and sing together a Hymn to CHRIST as to a
GOD; that they bound themselves by an Oath indeed not to perpetrate any Crime,
but to commit no Theft, nor Robbery, nor Adultery, to deceive no body, to deny
no Trust: afterward they went to eat together, which they did in common,
without any harm; but that they had left off doing it after my Edict, whereby,
according to your Orders, I had forbidden all sorts of Fraternities. Wherefore
I thought it was necessary to extort the Truth by Torments from two Maids who
were said to be Deaconesses: But I have only found a strange and excessive
Superstition. Pliny as well as Tacitus calls Superstition some Opinions
contrary to those of the Romans, according to the Custom of that time.

Two such Witnesses cannot be rejected, who certainly favored not the
Christians, and the first whereof acknowledges some Facts that were known to
every body: and the other relates what he knew from two Christian Women whom he
put to the Rack. The Writings we have of the Christians who lived from the time
of Pontius Pilate to Trajan's, tell us also the same things. They refer the
beginning of Christianity to that CHRIST whom Pilate put to Death; and they
say, that they had precisely the same Morals. This we see not only in the
Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, but also in the Letter of St.
Barnabas, in that of St. Clemens, in the Books of Hermas, and the genuine
Epistles of St. Ignatius and St. Polycarp.

5. It must therefore be granted, that under the Empire of Tiberius there was a
Man in Judea who gave a beginning to the Christian Religion, and preached most
excellent Morals. All the Christians who lived since attest it from Age to Age,
and no body did ever doubt of it; the Heathens themselves don't deny it.

To be certain whether the Apostles and other Primitive Christians were sincere
Persons, or whether there was any Reason to suspect their Honesty, let us see
what sort of Men they were. Let us examine the Letter which St. Clemens, Bishop
of the Church of Rome, wrote to that of Corinth about forty Years after the
Death of Christ, or in the beginning of the Empire of Vespasian. We see in that
whole Epistle a Spirit of Peace, Charity, Humility, and very pressing
Exhortations to obey the Morals of the Gospel. He severely chides those who
observe them not, and praises the Corinthians for having conformed their
Actions to its Precepts during some time. One may see the beginning of his
Epistle, wherein he bears witness. 2.
to the Christians of Corinth; That they had labored Day and Night for all the
Brethren, that the number of the Elect of God might be preserved with Mercy and
Conscience; that they had been sincere, without Malice, and without remembering
the Harm they might have done one to another; that all Livisions and Schisms
were abhorred by them; that they were sorrowful for the Faults of their
Neighbors; that they looked upon their Wants as their own; that they never
repented of having done well, but were always ready to do all manner of good
Works; that in their Conduct full of Virtue and worthy of Respect, they did
every thing in the Fear of God, whose Commands were written in their Hearts.
Nay, he says toward the end, that he knew many Christians who put themselves
in Chains to redeem others; and that many having sold themselves to be Slaves,
had fed others with the Price of their own Liberty. His whole Letter is full of
the like Expressions.

That Clemens had for his Masters the Apostles of JESUS OF NAZARETH, who first
taught Christianity, and he bears them witness of a great Piety. If we read
their Writings, we shall find nothing in them but what breathes a great Respect
for the Deity, an extreme Love to all Men, and an extraordinary Modesty in
whatever relates to a Man's Behavior toward himself. Let any of these
Writings be pitched upon, nothing will be found in it but what tends to Piety
and Charity. If some of their Writings have been controverted, let us take
those that were never doubted of; or, if you please, those which were quoted by
St. Clemens, St. Luke's Gospel, and the first Epistle of St. Paul to the
Corinthians; and we shall find in them the same Morals, which they endeavor to
infuse into the Minds of their Disciples.

6. The Apostles therefore, by exhorting all those that would hear them, to
live after a manner so rational and so advantageous to human Society, could not
be suspected thereby of want of Sincerity. But it will perhaps be said, that
they preached that Doctrine only to insinuate themselves into the Minds of the
People; and then under pretense of Piety to obtain from them what they desired.
But it must be granted me, that this is a mere Suspicion, not at all grounded
upon the Doctrine they taught, seeing they condemn alike the unlawful Love of
Riches, Dignities and Pleasures, and all sorts of Fraud and Cheat. Not one
Place of their Writings can be quoted that favors Ambition, Covetousness, or
Voluptuousness.

This being so, that Suspicion can be grounded but upon one of these two
things, viz. either that the Apostles could expect some Advantage by their
Doctrine, if it were generally embraced, or that they actually got some by it,
as soon as they began to preach it. I call Advantage a Good greater in it self
than all the Toils and Dangers which the Apostles exposed themselves to by
preaching the Gospel, or at least which they thought to be greater. It Is not
likely, that if they were Deceivers, they would not propose to themselves a
greater Advantage than the Trouble they were at. Otherwise we should look upon
them as mad Men, which cannot be supposed without Extravagancy, by those who
have read their Writings.

But the Apostles could not expect any Advantage from their Doctrine, but on
supposition that most of those to whom they preached it would embrace it.
Otherwise they could expect but a perpetual Persecution; for none but a mad Man
would have expected to live quietly among Men extremely conceited of some
Opinions contrary to those he professes, who think themselves obliged both for
the Good of the State, and the Interest of their Religion, to take away the
Estates and Lives of those who oppose their Superstitions, such as were
generally the Romans, Grecians and Jews, in the time of the Apostles.

They expected then that their Preaching would be so successful as to work upon
the greatest part of Mankind? But this they could not expect, if they were
never so little acquainted with the State wherein those Nations subject to the
Roman Empire then were. The Jews were so addicted to their Traditions and
Ceremonies, and besides so See Josephus in the History of that time.
corrupt in their Manners, that there was no likelihood of freeing them from
their Prejudices and Vices. The Romans and Grecians were either Atheists or
superstitious; and generally so given to their Pleasures, so covetous and
ambitious, that the small number of those who had not lost all Sense Vid.
Sallust. in Bell. Catilin. Senecam Ep. 7. Quaest. Not. lib. 4. Praefat. and
passim Juvenal. Persium, etc.
of Virtue, speak with Horror and Detestation of the Manners of their Time. The
History of both represents to us, in the Events of that time, an Image of the
most horrible Corruption that ever was, if we judge of it according to the
Gospel-Notions. After what has been said, can any Man fancy that the Apostles
hoped to get their Opinions embraced by most of those who lived in their time?
How could they expect that Men so blinded by their Passions, and hardn'd in
their Crimes, would ever embrace Opinions that are altogether contrary to them?
Indeed the Apostles openly said after their Master, that they expected not a
great number of Men would receive their Doctrine, in proportion to those who
should remain in their Unbelief.

But supposing the Apostles Simplicity had made them hope to convert the
greatest Part of the Roman Empire, Experience would have soon undeceived them,
seeing after having preached during many Years, they were obliged to
acknowledge, that they had converted but few People. The Roman History plainly
teaches us, that during three hundred Years after the Beginning of
Christianity, the number of Christians was far less than that of Heathens in
the Roman Empire. Thus the Apostles were necessarily exposed to a cruel
Persecution during their whole Life. Being despised and hated by the Jews and
Heathens alike, they could have no Reward that might be compared with their
Labors, and the Dangers they were in every Minute. Hence it is that they 1
Cor. 15.19.
themselves say they expected all sorts of Misery in this Life. They were not
mistaken, seeing after an infinite number of Sufferings they were cruelly put
to Death, maintaining still the Truth of the Doctrine they had preached.. 5.
It Is out of an unjust Envy, says Clemens, whom I have cited already, that
Peter suffered not one or two, but several Pains; and having undergone
Martyrdom, is gone into the Place of Glory, which was due to him. It Is out of
Envy that Paul got the Price of Patience. Having been put seven times in Irons,
whipped and stoned; being the Herald of the Gospel in the East and West, he made
his Faith famous. Having taught the whole World Justice, and being come to the
Extremity of the West, when he had suffered Martyrdom before the Chief of the
State, he went out of the World.

That Event of the Apostles Preaching destroys altogether the second thing on
which the Suspicion of their want of Sincerity might have been grounded. If
they were esteemed by a small number of Men, See 1 Cor. 1.26.
most of them of a low Condition, they were despised by the rest of Men, Jews
and Heathens; ill-treated and persecuted, suffered an extreme Poverty, and at
last died by the Hands of public Executioners, as I have showed by Clemens's
Words, and as all their other Disciples affirm it. One of the Apostles teaches
us the same thing, when he says in one of his Epistles; 1 Cor. 4.11.
Unto this present Hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain Dewlling Place: and labor, working with our own
Hands. Ib. c. 15.19.
If in this Life only we have Hope, we are of all Men most miserable.

Certainly no Man of Sense would become the Execration of most Men, by
maintaining a Forgery, to be esteemed by some few who have no Credit or
Reputation, nor would he be Ib. c. 4.9.
dealt with as those that were appointed to Death in the Amphitheaters, to be a
Spectate to the People. A Man may be moved with the Desire of Glory, when he
considers that most of those among whom he lives will applaud him; but no body
ever thought fit to expose himself to Long-sufferings, and at last to a cruel
and shameful Death, only to be esteemed by very few Men, and be looked upon as
an impious or mad Man by the greatest part of those among whom he lived.

7. The Truth of those Facts cannot be denied, viz. that the Apostles have
preached the Doctrine we read in their Books (which Christians profess still)
under the Empire of Tiberius, and some following Emperors; that they lived in
Sorrows and Afflictions; and at last some of them were put to a cruel Death,
maintaining the Doctrine they taught during many Years.

If we suspected that the Apostles lived after a voluptuous manner, and
altogether contrary to the Morals they preached, we should doubt of the
Testimony of their first Disciples, who in imitation of their Masters, as they
themselves say, have courageously exposed themselves to an infinite number of
Sufferings, without getting any Advantage by it in this Life.. 6.
To those Men, says Clemens, speaking of St. Peter and St. Paul, who lived
after a divine manner, a great multitude of the Elect were joined, who having
undergone several Torments, were a most noble Example amongst us. It would be
one of the greatest Absurdities to say that the Apostles preaching that Men
must suffer for Religion, exhorting them to the Practice of all manner of
Virtues, and yet living at ease, without caring to practice the Precepts they
gave to others, but as far as it might serve to cheat the World, made a great
number of Disciples, not only sincere Imitators of the seeming Virtues of their
Masters, but ready to die, and who really died for a Doctrine, for which those
of whom they learned it would suffer nothing.

One may easily conceive that some seduced Persons may be as strongly persuaded
of a Lie, as we are of the most evident Truths, and do consequently, to
maintain a Falsehood, whatever the most resolute Men can do for the most
important Truths. But one cannot apprehend that Men who have imbibed from their
Childhood some Opinions altogether contrary to those of the Apostles, suffered
themselves to be seduced; so that after they embraced their Doctrine, they
suffered the most cruel Torments for it, tho they never saw their Masters
suffer any thing for it. But it appears from the Passage I have quoted out of
Tacitus, that in the beginning of Christianity a great many People declared
themselves Christians, tho they saw that the public Profession of the
Christian Religion should expose them to the Punishments inflicted upon
Incendiaries. It appears also from Pliny, that some Christian Women suffered to
be put to the rack for their Christianity, without accusing the Christians of
any thing. From whence it necessarily follows, that some of the first Preachers
of the Gospel gave an Example to others, as their Disciples affirm it. One
cannot apprehend otherwise how they could get their Doctrine received by so many
People, who suffered horrible Torments for the Religion they learned of them.

From what has been said I only draw this Consequence, viz. that the Apostles
were sincere Men, as well as those, who, following their Example, died for the
same Doctrine. The Apostles having been therefore undeniably sincere Men, it
must be further confessed, that if there ever were any Men whose Virtue
deserved our Esteem, they are they. One cannot think of a Design more useful to
Mankind than theirs, as I have showed already, speaking of the Morals they
preached. No body could endeavor to make it succeed with greater Zeal and
Ardour, than they who sacrificed to it their Repose, Pleasures, Estates, hopes
of raising themselves, Honor, and Life it self.

Now I ask, whether being convinced of the Probity and Sincerity of the
Apostles, and knowing besides from their Discourses that they were far from
being mad Men, we may justly refuse to believe their Testimony, when they
affirm they have seen some Facts which they relate with a vast number of
Circumstances, and heard some Discourses which they set down from the beginning
to the end, and which are full of Sense? Let every one put the Question to
himself, whether he would not believe a Friend of his, whom he knew to be a
sincere and judicious Man, if he affirmed he had heard and seen several things
which he relates, without having any Interest to deceive him? Could he look
upon the Testimony of a Man of Sense, who should give all imaginable Marks of
Sincerity, as a Lie, if he affirmed he had heard a Friend of his say something,
and afterward had been present at his Torments and Death? I confess that those
who knew not his Sincerity and Judgment, and that he had no Interest to tell a
Lie, might doubt of what they should hear him say; but I affirm, that being
persuaded of his Honesty and Wisdom, it were impossible not to believe him.
Every one may be convinced of it by his Experience, and may imagine a thousand
Examples of what I said.

The Apostles tell us they lived some Years with JESUS of Nazareth, of whom
they learned all their Doctrine; that they saw him crucified on such a day,
giving up the Ghost upon the Cross, and afterward buried in a Sepulcher dug
in a Rock by a Jewish Counselor, whose Name was Joseph of Arimathea, who
obtained from Pilate leave to bury Jesus, and who having put him in a
Sepulcher, caused a great Stone to be rolled at the Entrance; that they saw
some Roman Soldiers guard that Sepulcher, which the Chief of the Jews had
sealed, lest the Body of Jesus should be taken away. Can we, being persuaded,
as we are, of the Sincerity of the Apostles, and having so strong Proofs of it,
refuse to believe them in this? Certainly we should be out of our Wits, did we
believe that wise and sincere Men would tell a Lie, when they affirm a Fact of
that Nature with so many Circumstances. We cannot forbear having the same
Thoughts concerning the Discourses of Jesus, which the same Apostles relate
with so many Circumstances, that we could not relate them better, if we had
heard them. It Is as clear as the Noon-light to those who are persuaded that the
Apostles were Men who had at least common Sense and Honesty, that they said
Truth concerning the Facts I have mentioned.

9. This being so, we can have no good Reason not to believe them when they
affirm they have often seen their Master heal in a moment incurable Diseases,
restore dead Men to Life, and himself raised at last, after he had been above
thirty Hours in his Sepulcher, and then speaking and eating with them during
many Days, and at last ascending to Heaven in a Cloud, in their Presence. I
know that several Men, who perhaps had never doubted of the Truth of the
Apostles Testimony, if they had said nothing of the Miracles, Resurrection and
Ascension of Christ, doubt of it only for that Reason. They could have easily
believed that a Man named JESUS taught the Morals we find in the Gospel in
Judea, when Pontius Pilate was Governor of it, and that the Jews obliged the
Roman Governor to put him to Death out of Envy and Malice; and that his
Disciples went on after his Death and taught his Doctrine, and that the most
cruel Torments could not hinder them from preaching it. They would praise the
whole Doctrine of Christ as the most excellent Philosophy that ever was taught
among Men, and which contains the best Principles that can be thought of, to
oblige them to live well one with another. But they persuade themselves, that
the Apostles were Impostors, only because they say they saw their Master work
Miracles, that he was seen by them after their Resurrection, and ascended into
Heaven in their sight. Let Us see why they do so.

The Falsity of a History can be known but two ways. First, when we perceive
that the Witnesses who relate it were deceived themselves, or designed to
deceive others, tho what they relate be very possible. Secondly, when we know
by clear and evident Arguments that the Facts in question are absolutely
impossible in themselves.

I have clearly showed that the Apostles designed not to deceive others, and it
cannot be said that they themselves were always deceived in all the Miracles
they relate. If the Question was about a small number of Miracles, difficult to
examine, one might have such a Suspicion with some likelihood; but they relate
so many, and of so many sorts, that if what they say be not true, they must
necessarily have been Deceivers. For example, they could not be imposed upon by
Christ's Ascension into Heaven, which they constantly preached, and of which
the Christians made from the beginning one of the chief Articles of their
Faith. Those who, as Pliny relates it, sung Hymns to Christ as to a God,
believed without doubt that he ascended into Heaven. If we read only St. Luke's
Luke 24. 1 Cor. 15.
Gospel, and the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, which contain
several particular Circumstances of many Miracles of Christ, especially of his
Resurrection, and his several Apparitions after he came out of his Grave, we
may certainly know that those who spoke so, were not seduced; and that if what
they say is not true, they must necessarily have designed to deceive those to
whom they related such Facts. But I have undeniably showed, that the Apostles
were sincere Men, and consequently that their Testimony cannot be rejected.

Wherefore those who believe it not, accuse them not of having suffered
themselves to be seduced, neither do they undertake to overthrow the Arguments
by which we prove the Apostles Sincerity. They are contented to offer some
Objections concerning the Nature of Miracles, and so confine themselves to the
second way of knowing the Falsity of a Fact, which consists in discovering that
it is a thing absolutely impossible.

But I shall speak of this in another Letter, wherein I shall explain the
Nature of Miracles.

I am, SIR, Yours.

LETTER II. Wherein is showed what a Miracle is, and that we ought to conclude
from those of Christ and his Apostles, that they were truly sent of God.
1. SIR, I promised you to discourse of the Nature of Miracles, and I must
perform my Promise, seeing without it I should but half prove the Truth of the
Christian Religion. It Is not enough to believe that the general Doctrines of
Christianity are true and agreeable to Reason; we must be also persuaded that
they are of Divine Revelation, and this we learn from the Miracles of those who
first preached them. That is the Seal whereby we clearly discover the Truth of
the Christian Religion. To show that it was revealed by the same God who made
Heaven and Earth, and gave to Nature the Laws, according to which natural
Causes act; they have often desired him to suspend the Effects of those Laws,
tho unavoidable; at their Prayers they were suspended, and the contrary of what
the Experience of all Ages had observed hitherto, and of what we still see,
happened then. That Is an undeniable Proof, not only of their Doctrines being
agreeable to the Will and Designs of the Maker of all Things, as it seems to be
if it be merely considered in it self, but also of their having an express
Order from God to publish it among Men.

Wherefore I Will show first, what a Miracle is, and how true Miracles may be
distinguished from false ones. Secondly, I Will enquire into the Author of them,
and what Consequence may be drawn from them. Lastly, I shall say something
concerning the Extent of Miracles, and their different kinds. I Will show at the
same time the Truth of the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, and I shall
answer some Objections of Unbelievers.

2. To look upon an extraordinary Effect as a Miracle, and draw any
Consequences from it; First, it must be a thing above the Power of Men.
Secondly, it ought to be above the ordinary Course of Nature, or corporeal
Causes; and above the Strength of humane Souls; for Nature, or natural Causes,
and the Order or the Laws of Nature, are nothing but the Souls and Bodies of
Men, other Bodies, and the Laws according to which they constantly act, without
being able to violate them. Thirdly, he in whose Behalf that thing is done,
ought to know it beforehand, or at least it must happen when he wants it. I
shall examine those three things one after another; for the whole Strength of
the Proofs which can be fetched from Miracles depends upon it.

3. There are some Divines who maintain that a Miracle is only the Effect of an
infinite Power, and consequently that God only is the Author of it; so that it
is not only above the Power of Men, but also above that of all other Creatures.
I shall speak of that hereafter. It Is enough to observe here, that nothing
which Men are able to do, can be looked upon as a miraculous thing. Wherefore
to be sure whether what is vented as a Miracle is really so, the first thing
that is to be considered, is, whether Men can do it. For if it appears that it
is not above the Power of Men, there would be no reason to believe that it is
an extraordinary Effect of God's Power, or of some other intelligent Being.

Thus if a Man showed an usual Skill in Swimming, and boasted of it as of a
miraculous thing, he might be justly accounted an Impostor, because one may by
Use get a Skill in Swimming, which seems wonderful to those who have it not.
But if any body walked upon the Water as upon the Land, without sinking in the
least, it could not be doubted that he did a thing which is above all the
Strength and Skill of Men, provided he had nothing under his Feet that might be
seen, or elsewhere, to uphold him. Every one knows that there being a certain
Relation of Gravity between humane Bodies and Water, the Laws of Nature allow
not that a Man should stand upon the Water. So that if it appears that any body
walked upon the Water as upon the Land, without having under his Feet, or
elsewhere, any thing to hold him so, it must be granted that a Power greater
than that of Men acted in his behalf.

4. But because there are an infinite number of natural Causes which Men make
use of to produce some Effects, which they themselves cannot produce by their
mere Skill and Strength; a thing, to be looked upon as miraculous, ought not to
be done by any other natural Cause, such as are the Bodies which surround us.
For example, great Weights, which would presently sink if they were thrown into
the Water, will lie upon it without sinking, if a Body much lighter than Water,
as Wood, be put between the Water and those Weights. There is nothing
miraculous in that, because it is done by a corporeal and known Cause. But it
could not be denied to be a miraculous thing, if a Man should walk upon the
Water as I have said.

When a learned Physician cures a sick Person with some Remedies, after he has
spent a long time in studying the Nature of Diseases, and the Effects of
Remedies, that Cure is not looked upon as a Miracle; it is ascribed to the
natural Effect of the Remedies which have been well applied. But if we should
see a Man, who only by touching all sorts of sick Persons, or by speaking to
them, without using any sensible Remedy, cures them upon the spot, that Effect
could be ascribed only to some supernatural Causes.

Some Spinosa in Tract. Theologico-Polit. cap. 6.
Unbelievers have endeavored to make that Character of Miracles uncertain, by
saying that we know not so perfectly natural Causes and their Effects, as to be
able to distinguish what they can produce, from what is above their Strength.
Nay, they pretend that what is called Miraculous should only be looked upon as
an extraordinary or rare Accident, and the Effect of natural Causes, which were
not well known. But tho it be very true, that we are very far from having a
perfect Knowledge of natural Causes, yet it is not less certain that we know
most certainly some things by Experience, especially when that Experience is
common and easy. For example, we perfectly know that no Man can stand upon the
Water so as to touch it only with the Sole of his Feet, without using the help
of any other Body for it. If any one should say that it may be such a thing
happened sometimes by an extraordinary Effect of some natural Causes which we
know not; it is certain that such a Conjecture could only be heard as a
Proposition which is not contradictory, but is not the less false for that, as
the Experience of all Mankind teaches us. Indeed those who use that Argument to
make Miracles doubtful, do it only to perplex simple Men who hear them. They
know very well that we are perfectly sure of some things, and that they cannot
be made doubtful, by saying only that it is not contradictory that the contrary
be true. If they durst deny the miraculous Effects on which Religion is
grounded, they would roundly do it, and not have recourse to Objections so
little judicious; but not daring to do it, and being not able to make the
contrary of what we believe look probable, they confine themselves to some such
Objections. I shall not undertake now to confute all their particular
Objections, because the Principles I lay down destroy them.

5. It Is therefore certain that we may know some things are above the Power of
Men, and cannot be the Effect of any other natural or corporeal Cause; and that
if we see some happen, or learn from faithful Witnesses that there happened
some, we may say, without being mistaken, that they are miraculous things. Such
is, for example, the Action of walking upon the Water, and curing all manner of
Diseases without Remedies.

However, to draw any Consequences from a miraculous Fact in the behalf of any
body, he ought to know beforehand that that Miracle will happen; or at least
it must happen just when it is necessary, for otherwise it would be
insignificant. If when no body thinks of it there happened a thing wherein
neither Men nor other natural Causes had a hand, and no body knew of what use
it would be, nothing could be concluded from it; and he who should say that it
happened in his behalf, ought to be suspected of Fraud.

Some See my Dissertation De Trajectu maris Idumaei.
Historians, for instance, tell us that Alexander going to meet Darius, led
part of his Troops to pass at the foot of Mount Climax, where there was no
Passage when the South Wind blew, because the Sea covered that way; and that as
soon as he came thither the North blew, so that they went through it. Not to
say the Change of Wind at that time might be natural, I affirm that Alexander
having not known it before, and being able to go another way, it cannot be
looked upon as a Miracle, which Providence wrought in his behalf; nor can it be
concluded from it, that Heaven approved his Designs.

To give another Example fetched from the History of the same Prince, Vid. Q.
Curt. lib. 10. c. 10.
it is said that his Corpse remained seven Days at Babylon before it was
embalmed, without smelling ill in the least; nor had his Face a different
Color than what it had whilst he was alive, tho it be extremely hot in that
Climate wherein Babylon was situated. Let us suppose not only the Truth of that
Fact, but also that natural Causes had no hand in it; it is manifest that
nothing can be concluded from such a thing either for or against Alexander. For
indeed what could the invisible Power mean by preserving the Body of Alexander
from Corruption during seven Days? None but that Power can teach it; and if any
one had undertaken to make his advantage of it, he had been justly laughed at.

That Character of a true Miracle altogether destroys the Objection I have
confuted already: for if miraculous Facts were extraordinary Effects of natural
but unknown Causes, it is manifest they could not be foreseen. No Man can
foresee a thing which scarce ever happens, and is the Effect of some Causes
which are unknown to him, unless that Man be warned of it by an Effect of the
same Causes, which is to suppose without reason a thing altogether
incomprehensible.

6. Wherefore if we can show that there happened some things that neither Men
nor other natural Causes could do, which notwithstanding were foretold by those
in whose behalf they were done; it must be granted us, that they are miraculous
Facts which happened in the behalf of those who foretold them. The Gospels are
full of the like Miracles, but I shall only pitch upon one, to apply what has
been said to it. It is of of great moment, that if it be granted that it is
true, the rest cannot be denied. I mean the Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
wherein we see all the Characters of a true Miracle. First, it is certain by the
Experience of all Ages, that no Man, or any other natural Cause, can restore a
dead Man to Life. Tho the humane Body is not perfectly known to us, no more
than the Virtue of an infinite number of things, yet we may affirm without
Rashness, that no body raises himself, nor by his own Virtue, or that of any
other thing. One cannot affirm the contrary without being looked upon as a mad
Man among all the Nations in the World. Secondly, Jesus Christ Mat. 16.21. and
17.23. and 26.61. and 27.63.
often foretold his Resurrection, and said it should happen on the third Day.
He concluded from thence beforehand, that Men would be obliged to believe that
he was sent by God, his Resurrection being the greatest Sign of it that could
be asked. Mat. 12.39, 40.
An evil and adulterous Generation, said he, seeks after a Sign, and there
shall no Sign be given to it, but the Sign of the Prophet Jonas; for as Jonas
was three Days and three Nights in the Whale's Belly, so shall the Son of Man
be three Days and three Nights in the Heart of the Earth.

If the Apostles were sincere Men, and were not deceived, that Fact is
undeniable, and consequently it must be acknowledged that he who raised Jesus
Christ, bare him a Testimony which cannot be doubted of. I have showed in the
foregoing Letter, that the Apostles were sincere Men, and could not be deceived
on that occasion. Their Master was not hid in a Chamber when it was said that
he was dead; 'twas upon a Cross, and in a public Place, surrounded with Roman
Soldiers. He had been buried, his Enemies sealed his Sepulcher; they set a
Guard of Soldiers about it, and he was above four and twenty Hours in it.
Therefore no body could doubt of his being truly dead, and his Apostles did not
question it. Afterward they saw him several times, touched him, spoke with
him, and ate with him; so that they could not be mistaken in it. Wherefore if
the thing had not happened, it were not possible to vindicate their Sincerity;
and if they were sincere Men, which they certainly were, as has been showed,
the Truth of the Fact cannot be doubted of.

7. The more we examine their Testimony, the more we shall be convinced of it;
and without insisting longer upon that, I had rather observe, against those who
acknowledge a God and a Providence, that what may be said of feigned Miracles
cannot be objected against that Miracle and other Miracles of Christ, viz. that
there is no great likelihood that God would disturb the Order of Nature for so
inconsiderable Matters as those are for which he is said to disturb it every
day. The Unbelievers who lived in the Apostles time, and had not attentively
considered the Circumstances which attend the preaching of the Gospel, might
perhaps have said then that they apprehended not how Providence was so much
concerned in the Establishment of Christianity, as to work an infinite number
of Miracles in its behalf, seeing it made so little a Progress in the World.
But those who live now cannot raise the like Objections against us, having seen
the Duration and Progress of the Christian Religion. If it has not produced yet
among Men all the Effects it should have produced, if they had known their true
Interest, it cannot be said that such a thing will never happen hereafter. Those
who would have conjectured at the beginning of Christianity, that it should
always be a contemptible Sect, because it was then despised, would have been
grossly mistaken, as we see at present; and the Knowledge we have of the Time
past ought to make us reserved with respect to the future.

8. Let us see now what is the efficient and immediate Cause of Miracles. We
have seen already, that they are neither Men, nor other Bodies, which act
according to the Order of Nature. It must be therefore some invisible Power,
that is, either some intelligent Beings more excellent than we, tho they are
created, or else God himself.

Some believe, as I said already, that Miracles are the Effects of an infinite
Power; and there is no doubt but God himself wrought several Miracles: but the
Question is, whether they are all above the Strength of all other Creatures; so
that they have no other efficient and immediate Cause but God himself. To deny
that intelligent Beings, more perfect than we are, can work Miracles, we should
exactly know what is the Extent of their Power, and distinctly see that
Miracles are above it. It Is true we know they are above the Laws of Nature,
which God established from the beginning; but we know not whether he gives not
to Angels the Power of altering sometimes that Order. Tho it be originally the
Effect of an infinite Power, it follows not that none but an infinite Power can
make some Alteration in it, if the Power which established it will permit it.
We cannot therefore say that Angels work no Miracles; in effect it appears from
sacred History that God often made use of them when Miracles were wrought. But
I will not insist upon it, because it belongs not to my Subject.

9. It will perhaps be asked, supposing Angels work Miracles; First, how one
may know whether it is God or an Angel that wrought a certain Miracle. And,
Secondly, how one may know that a Miracle was done by a good or bad Angel.

A Miracle being not of a Nature which necessarily requires a Cause, whereof
the Power is infinite, I confess we see no Character in it, if it be considered
in it self, whereby we may know whether it was wrought by God or an Angel. But
the more we see a thing above our Power, the more it seems difficult to us, and
the more we persuade our selves that it is the Effect of an infinite Power. For
example, to foretell a contingent Event, or depending upon Men's Will, and which
is to happen many Ages after, seems to us to be a thing above the Knowledge of
created intelligent Beings, tho it be never so great. But the raising of a
Storm, tho the Air is not disposed for it, seems not to be a very difficult
thing, tho it be above our Power; and we easily believe that Angels either good
or bad can do it. However it matters little to know whether God immediately
wrought a Miracle, or a good Angel, seeing it is certain good Angels do nothing
but what is agreeable to the Will of God, or is an execution of his Orders.
Whether God himself acts, or an Angel, it is the same thing with respect to us,
seeing we neither see the Cause that works, nor the manner of its Operation.

As for the other Question concerning the manner of knowing whether a Miracle
was wrought by a good or a bad Angel, one may say something more positive.
Truth being always the same contradicts not it self; it is a manifest Principle
to all those who are not Pyrrhonians. Wherefore the Miracles of God and good
Anglels ought always to tend to the confirming or establishing some Doctrines
agreeable to Truths, that are known either by Revelation or Reason, seeing it is
certain that God and good Angels always love the Truth. If we see therefore
that a Miracle confirms or establishes something contrary to a certain Truth,
we may be sure that Miracle is an Effect of a Power contrary to that of God and
good Angels. Thus the Design of a Miracle discovers its Author. If we cannot
apprehend what is the end of a Miracle, we can give no certain Judgment about
it, nor draw from it any Consequence for or against Truth.

A bad Angel being not able to work Miracles which favor Truth and Virtue, all
those which contribute to it, ought to be looked upon as coming from a good
Principle. On the contrary, a good Angel being not able to act for Lies and
Vices, all the Miracles which should favor either of them, ought to be looked
upon as Miracles of bad Angels. This is an infallible Rule to know by what sort
of Angels a Miracles was wrought, supposing it were known that an Angel was the
Author of it.

10. If the Miracles of the Gospel are examined according to those Principles,
it cannot be denied that they were wrought either by God himself or good
Angels, because their only Aim is to establish or settle Truth, and lead Men to
Virtue. Now this is altogether inconsistent with the Notion one may form of a
Power which delights in doing ill, and deceiving Men. This Christ showed to the
Pharisees, who accused him of casting out Devils, by virtue of a Power he had
received from the Prince of Demons. Mat. 12.25, 26.
Every Kingdom, says he, divided against it self, is brought to Desolation; and
every City or House divided against it self, shall not stand: and if Satan cast
out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his Kingdom stand?
That Is a convincing Proof of the Divinity of the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles, against the Jews, who were so extravagant as to ascribe them to an
ill Power, that was an Enemy to Virtue. But because I write not against them, I
shall not longer insist upon it. The Unbelievers who live among Christians are
not more persuaded of the Power of the Devil, than of God, and deny all sorts
of Miracles alike. But I have showed, from the Sincerity of the Apostles, and
the thing it self, that they have no reason to deny those of Christ.

11. Lastly; If it be considered that Miracles are the Effects of the Power of
God or Angels, one may easily apprehend that they are not contradictory things.
That which is contradictory is the Object of no Power, it is a mere Nothing, as
all those who know the Meaning of that word will grant it. No positive Idea can
be formed of it, and every contradictory Proposition is unintelligible in it
self. If the Miracles mentioned in Holy Scripture are examined, not one of that
Nature will be found among them. There is none but what may be expressed in
intelligible Propositions. For example, God can make a Man who lived to live no
longer; that is, his Blood shall no more circulate, and all his Members shall
cease to perform their Functions. On the Contrary, he can make a Man whose
Blood was settled, and whose Members performed none of their Functions, to
begin to live again, as it did before. Those Propositions are easily
apprehended. But to make a Man to live and not to live, at the same time,
taking the word to live in one and the same Sense, is a contradictory thing,
which is not the Object of the Divine Power. God never wrought any such
Miracles.

Those who rank among the Miracles of Christianity, that whereby they pretend
that God makes a humane Body to be extended, and not extended at the same time,
and to be in many Places at one time; those Men, I say, feign a Miracle, of
which they have no Idea, and rest contented with Words they understand not.
They ascribe to the Christian Religion a Mystery absurd, and contrary to the
clearest Light to Reason and Revelation.

What I said concerning Miracles has no relation with that, and I pretend not
to defend any such thing. My Design was to show wherein Miracles consist, to
make Unbelievers apprehend that they are very possible, that they cannot be
assaulted but by showing that there is an Impossibility in the miraculous Facts
on which the Christian Religion is grounded.

There is besides another sort of Miracles, which tho perhaps they happen every
day, cannot be of any use to prove the Truth of the Christian Religion, because
they are not sensible. God can very often do, either by himself or the Ministry
of Angels, an infinite Number of things without the intervention of natural
Causes, when he thinks fit, or good Men pray him to do it. But because one
cannot perceive whether a supernatural Cause acts or not on those occasions,
because what happens is not in it self above the Strength of natural Causes,
and it is not known whether they intervened, it cannot be affirmed that a Miracle
was wrought. For example, a sick Man whom Remedies could not naturally cure, is
restored by the Prayers of his Relations, because God or Angels supply what is
wanting in the natural Virtue of Remedies. But this cannot be affirmed without a
Revelation.

Hereupon it is asked, How we come to suppose that God who works no more
sensible Miracles, according to us, performs every day some invisible ones,
such as that which I have described; and why he should be desired to work this
kind of Miracles, not those which strike our Senses? In answer to that I say,
that we can know nothing of God's Conduct but by sensible Effects, or a
Revelation. Wherefore seeing we see no more such Miracles as strike our Senses,
we ought to say that God will work no more any such Miracles; and if we can
give some Reasons of it, which are not unworthy of God's Wisdom, nothing can
hinder us from alleging them, Part II. chapter 6.
as I have done elsewhere. On the other hand, Revelation commanding us to offer
Prayers to God in our Necessities, and assuring us that if what we ask is truly
advantageous to us, if we ask it as we ought, and it we obey the Precepts of
the Gospel, we shall obtain what we pray for; we have reason to suppose that
God will interpose after an extraordinary manner, if it be necessary, to hear
our Prayers, because he promised it. But why, will it be said, did God make
such Promises, which suppose that he works still some Miracles of this latter
sort, seeing he will no more do sensible ones? I have showed already, why he
works no more Miracles, that fall under our Senses, and there is no need I
should repeat what I have said about it. As for the other, they are a necessary
Consequence of God's Providence, which consists not only in having given some
Laws to Nature, according to which it acts; but in supplying the Defects of
those Laws, and making such Exceptions to them as God thinks fit. Seeing
therefore Providence exists not less now than it did formerly, no body ought to
wonder that God works Miracles of that kind. There is nothing in it that is
unworthy of him; and seeing he promised it, it cannot be doubted whether he does
it, and Men have reason to pray to him on that Supposition. It cannot be said
that it is an impossible thing, and proved thereby that our Prayers are useless.

I think I have undeniably showed it, by supposing that there is a God who made
the World, and is consequently the Author of the Laws of Nature; and that there
are some other intelligent Beings, who can do what is above the Power of Men. I
proved the first thing in the last Chapter of the 2d Part of my Discourse
concerning Incredulity; and the other cannot be doubted of, if we acknowledge the
Authority of Christ and his Apostles, confirmed with undeniable Miracles.

Christ and his Apostles might have made their Doctrine to be admired with mere
Reasonings, as we do now; but their Business was not only to show that they
said nothing but what was most agreeable to Reason; they taught not their
Doctrine as mere Philosophers or Divines, but as Men authorized by Heaven; they
were therefore to convince Men that they were sent from God. To prove it
undeniably, there was no better way than to do some things above the Laws of
Nature, which were sensible Signs of God's approving their Doctrine, and
whereby they undeniably proved that they were his Messengers. If they had done
or said nothing but what other Men might have done of said, they would have
been looked upon as Divines or Philosophers, who vented their own Thoughts; but
when Men saw that after they had appealed to the Maker of the World for the
Truth of what they said, that there happened at their Prayers some things which
are above the Power of all Men and all natural Causes; they could not doubt but
God declared himself in their behalf, especially if they considered that the
Doctrine they preached was most worthy of him. So that the finest Doctrine that
ever was, attended with unheard of Miracles, ought to excite the Attention of
all those who were not altogether blinded by their Vices and Prejudices, and
make them look upon them as the true Ministers of that God, who created the
World.

This is, Sir, what I had to say to you concerning Miracles; not to exhaust the
Matter, but only to show the Possibility and Truth of those of Christ and his
Apostles. I heartily pray God, that it may contribute to reclaim those who out
of Ignorance or otherwise doubt of the Truth of the Christian Religion. I am,
etc.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Awnsham and John Churchill.
A Short Discourse of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus; to which are added some
Passages in the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. and its Vindication. With
some Animadversions on Mr. Edwards's Reflections on the Reasonableness of
Christianity; and on his Book entitled, Socinianism Vnmasqued. By Samuel Bold,
Rector of Steeple, Dorset. 8o.

Prince Arthur, an Heroic Poem in 10 Books. By Richard Blackmore, M. D. And
Fellow of the College of Physicians in London.

Several Papers relating to Money, Interest, and Trade, etc. Writ upon several
Occasions, and published at different Times. By John Lock, Esquire 8o.

Mr. Talent's Chronological Tables; or a View of Universal History, from the
Creation, to the Year of Christ, 1695. Wherein the most memorable Persons and
Things in the known Kingdoms and Countries of the World, are set down in
several Columns, by way of Synchronism, according to their proper Centuries and
Years. In 16 Copper Plates.

Notitia Monastica; Or, a short View of the Religious Houses in England and
Wales, etc. By Thomas Tanner, A. B. 8o.

The Resurrection of the same Body asserted, etc. By Hump. Hody, D. D.

The Gentleman's Religion, with the Grounds and Reasons of it. 12o.

The Reasonableness of Christianity as delivered in the Scriptures, etc. With a
Vindication against Mr. Edwards's Exceptions; by the same Hand. 8o.

An Abridgment of Mr. Lock's Essay of Human Understanding. By Mr. John Win,
of Jesus College, Oxford. 8o.


