A Trumpet Sounded Out of the Wilderness of AMERICA; Which may serve as a
Warning to the Government and People of England to Beware of Quakerisme.

Wherein is showed the Great contradictions of the QUAKERS, both in their
former and later Writings. Also how they deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the
CHRIST. And how in Pensilvania and there-away, where they have the Government
in their own Hands, they hire and encourage Men to fight; and how they
Persecute, Fine, Imprison, and take away Goods for Conscience sake.
Notwithstanding they formerly exclaimed against the Government of England, etc.
for the same things. Setting forth likewise there base Temporizing with
whatever Government is uppermost, etc.

By DANIEL LEEDS.

Prove. 27. v. 5. Open Rebuke is better than secret Love.

^^d by William Bradford at the Bible in New ^^k; and are to be Sold by B.
Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, and C. Brom at the Gun the West End
of St. Paul's London. 1699.

Friendly Reader;
THere has happened some Errors in printing the following treatise, occasioned
partly by my distance from the Press, and partly by reason of its being
thronged with other Work. But the chief of them are here noted, which the
Reader is desired to observe in reading, and particularly one above the rest,
it is in page 11. 2d collumn, at the end of 8th line, these following words are
left out, which the Reader is desired to add, viz. [And his Flesh, and Blood,
and Bones are of his Nature] for Isaac Pennington's words are these, viz. For
that which he (Christ) took upon him was our Garment, even the flesh and blood
of our Nature, which is of an earthly perishing Nature; but he is of an eternal
Nature, and his flesh and blood and bones are of his Nature.

The rest are escapes of less Note, which follow, viz.

Page 4. line 23. blot out but. p. 10. l. 10. for 83 read 283. p. 26. l. 10.
read so that as W. P. p. 38. l. 1. for as above, r. before at Numb. 27. p. 52.
l. 17. read deny Christ to be God and Man. p. 54. l. 10. f. 10. r. 107. p. 58.
l. 3. r. lugg. p. 72. ^6^ f. and r. or. p. 74. l. 9 r. know. p. 78. l. 15.
^^cutting. p. 106. l. 24. r. if. p. 107. l. 26. for 5.13. read 513. p. 110. l.
20. r. fears. p. 111. 11. r. falsely. p. 130. l. 7. f. after r a few. p. 133 ^2.
r. et ernal God.

The PREFACE.
NOtwithstanding the ensuing Treatise seems to render the People called Quakers
not only Hetrodox in their Doctrines, but Unconstant and Hypocritical therein
also; yet it is my real belief, That the Quakers at first came forth in Life
and Power, and made a good beginning, Indeed so did most of Sects in
Christendom.
according to what was made manifest to them. Yet nevertheless by reading their
Books of Contrversie, it is easily seen how the Life and Power, that formerly
attended them, did more and more vanish, as they sell to contending with one
another about Trifles and Ceremonie^, instituting this aend that Order, and
getting into Form; and this some of themselves did formerly discern* They at
first came forth in Power, at last settled down in Form. And yet* I am livingly
sensible that there are many, yea, very many honest sincere hearted People
among the Quakers, even among those who are Opposers of Georg^ Keith and the
late S^pera^es. And therefore God forbid that my D^sign should be other than
that the Haughtiness of the Proud in Spirit should be abased, and Babels
Buildings overturned, etc. And when my Intentirns were first set on this
ensuing Work, I had taken G. R's Books in equally with the rest, or else I
should have been partial, as Caleb Pusey has been [ being blinded with
Prejudice, as his Term is] in only faulting G. K's Books, but not his Opposers;
but as I proceeded on, at length I found G. K. (according to the Example of
good men in all Ages^ has publicly acknowledged himself guilty of Errors in
diverse of ^is former Books, and promised a Correction of the same; and now of
late we have his Retractation come over in Print. And I would to God his
Opposers had been as sensible of this great discovering Day, to have made the
like Confession, and so at once have laid the Controversy in the Dust, and
thereby have stopped this from ever seeing the light, which would have been
matter of joy to me, and all concerned in this Controversy, who have a true
Zeal for God and his Truth. For as I have from my Youth been trained up in the
Quakers Discipline, so it has been the goodness of God to me to incline my Mind
to seek after him, and that with a Desire after Knowledge, lest my Zeal should
only proceed from Ignorance.

And it still remaining in my Memory, That when I was scarce seven Years old,
my Mother (being Religious) used to take me aside to pray to God with her upon
my Knees; but soon after she turned to the Quakers; and then I heard no more of
that kind of Exercise.

Yet at Twelve Years of Age the God of Heaven visited me, and made me sensible
of Eternity, and I ho^d then a Vision of Christ coming down from Heaven, which
was Wonderful, but I calling to my Mother to behold the Glory, the Vision
vanished.

Again, at Twenty Years of Age I was afresh ^urned to Religion, often weeping
in secret places because of sin, till at length I was meditating on a place of
Scripture, I was suddai^ly surrounded with Glory, and with Soul Ravishments of
Love and Joy, in so sweet and ravishing a manner as no Pen can or ought to
describe, or Tongue declare (with which I have also some time since been
visited) And I being a Hearer and Follower of those Ministers of the Church of
England who had the best Name among the People, did at last take a dislike of
them by a story one of them told in his Sermon, which I telling to my Parents,
they soon prevailed with me to go with them to their Friends Meetings, which I
no sooner did, but their Ministry had such effect upon me, that I was
constrained to believe, what they preached was Infallible, even as the Oracles
of God; ^till on a time at a Meeting where Giles Baruadiston and Sam. Cater
preaching, I observed a Contradiction in their Doctrine. Which Clash, together
with bitter Reflections that I saw between two Elders in the Men's Metting, not
long after, gave the first stroke to my former Faith, of our ^riends being led
by the Unerring Spirit, and put me ^t upon pensive Thoughts concerning them;
but I (...) these things to my self. At length, concluding ^^at all other
Societies that I knew, had also their ^^lings, and being joined, along with my
Parents, (...) the Quakers, (and being trained up in their Dis^pline) Resolved
to sit down content, and bear these ^^ings, so long as I could feel my heart in
a mel^^ng ^^sture at all Opportunities offered; but could not afterward
swallow down all Doctrines that I heard ^^m preach, without examination, as I
found most ^^d (though my Understanding was much darkened (...) their turning
the S^iptures into Allegories yet (...) apt as others I was to take up a rest
in the established form set up amongst us, and I thought I was ^appy and safe in
thus keeping my self within the ^a^e of the Church; and the rather because the
^r^achers often brought Scripture to show, That such (...) were lukewarm in
their Profession God ^ould spew them out. But Experience has ^^ce showed me,
That their Mis application of this ^cripture has proved a stratagem of Satan
only to ^ive People into Form.

For the Consciences of my old Friends are my ^^cord this day, That many in
their Church have ^^n ill Persons, who at the same time have not ^^^ed heat of
Zeal for the Form, and for Unity (...) Friends; and so far my Experience agrees
with (...). Penn's Doctrine in his Address to Protestants, ^^ 177. It Is not to
be saved (says he) to be within the Pale of any visible Church -- fo^^ that is
putting an eternal Cheat upon our selves Ill Things are Ill Things within or
without the Pale, that matters not. So I also find, Tha^ Good Things are Good
Things within or without the Pale, that matters not; for Scripture and Church
History shows, That many t^mes single Persons have been in the right, when
gathered Churches and Congregations have been wrong; Examples of this w^^ have
in all Ages.

But passing on to the Year 1691. when Difference arose at Philadelphia between
George Keith and others, from his being accused to preach Two Christ's, because
he preached Faith in Christ without us, as well as within, and I giving
diligen^ heed to the Points controverted, my Understanding and Intellect was
quickly enlarged, and the Thoughts of my former Vision of Christ descending
from Heaven, attended me, and my Zeal and Faith in Christ was increased, and
diverse Scripture Mysteries were then opened to me, to my great Satisfaction,
which I never before could attain to. And I began to find a Call within me, To
be active in the station and Capacity wherein God had put me. Wherefore I set a
Resolution to Search and Try things for my self, and not to believe on trust,
or because others did. Well, accordingly I searche^ our Friends Books, to see
if those various Reports were true or false; and having, by diligence, received
Satisfaction therein, I could not find case in my breast without taking the
Opportunity that God by (...) Providence affords me, thus to Expose and Pub^^^
what here follows, believing that God Almighty ^^ll bless my Endeavors to
those who are desirous to ^^for themselves, and to try all things, in regard I
^^ow my proceeding herein was by a Motion heavenly, love we Self-will, my self
having fought against (...) Publication hereof near two Years, under diverse
^^ntations, being not insensible what Suffering I ^ay hereby outwardly incur;
but a peaceful Con^^ence I esteem above all.

Now an Objection falls in my way, which I ^ave heard my Old Friends make, viz.
That faith (...) Christ, as without us, is only a Notional ^istorical Faith,
the Professors Faith, which we ^e taught when Children, and is no saving ^aith.

I Answ. And in true Experience I affirm, That (...) the very same at this day
of the Light within; ^^d I appeal to all their own Consciences, whether ^^re is
not ma^ny now amongst them, that have the (...) Belief in this inward
Manifestation of the ^ight, and yet know not the Work of Regeneration?

And it was worthily observed of Calvin (as ^^ed in one of their own Books,
entitled, Righ^ous Judgment, p. 128.) viz. That Calvin ^^lined to the Divinity
of the Light in men universally, but a little shy of speaking more positively,
for fear of abuse by Phanaticks, Behold! now this great Reformer had a perfect
fence how men might run into Abuses, by high pretenses to Light and
Spirituality. And whether what that great Reformer feared in that Age, be not
come to pass now in this Age, I leave to the judgment of the Impartial Reader
of the ensuing Book

Lastly, We have account from England, That since G. Keith's arrival there, the
Doctrine of Christ crucified, and faith in him, as without men, is now
frequently preached by the Quakers, causing many to say, That if ever Christ
was preached out of Envy, now is the time (as we read some did in the Apostles
days) hence it is not impossible, but in time they may come to preach that
Doctrine in true love, and so confess that George Keith has been the greatest
Instrument in Gods hand, of good to the Quakers, that ever yet arose amongst
them.

But by the Complaint that their Friend A. Hulins lately made to their Men's
Meeting at Burlington, by a Paper given in under his hand, it appears, that the
Preachers about Delaware are not yet come so far as to preach such Doctrine out
of Envy, much less for love. For the satisfaction of some, I shall here an
abstract of his give own words, as I have it by me under his hand, viz.

Friends and Brethren, It being my lot to be disowned the 3d of November last,
by Samuel Jenings, Mahlen Stacy and George Gray, with whose leave I make my
Address to this Meeting, showing the cause, etc.

[One preached thus] It is the Work of the Devil to cause People, that have
professed the Appearance of Christ in the heart, to respect the Person without
them. [Another preached thus] I am grieved that any, that have professed the
Light, should now direct the Minds of People to respect him as he is now in
Heaven above the Clouds: Truly (Friends) it is Delusion [Another preached thus]
There is that would have Flesh added in the Creed, but let them take it that
will, I believe the Lord will give them his Plagues and Torments with it. -- If
these things are owned by you, I remain

Your Disowned Brother, Abr. Hulings.


Now, who would think any other, but that this Quakers Church at Burlington
should condemn ^uch Doctrine as this? No, but this they did not do, ^ut gave A.
Hulings his Paper again, without any Answer. Why, if they had done otherwise
they had not acted agreeable to their Brethren at Philadelphia some time
before. For there is one John Humphery, a Preacher near Philadelphia, that
writes a Letter against G. K. and his Friends, wherein he has this Expression,
I am grieved to hear some say they expect to be justified by that Blood that
was shed at Jerusalem. In justification of which Passag^, he writes in another
Letter, thus, viz. His (Christ's) own words will clear me from your aspersion,
John ^.63. It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits Nothing. So he
himself ascribes the work of man's Salvation and Sanctification, Not to the
Flesh that suffered, but to the Spirit that quickened, Not to the Blood that
was shed at Jerusalem, but unto that Flesh and Blood which is Spiritual, etc.
Of this false Doctrine G. K. complained to the Quarterly Meeting at
Philadelphia, but no Answer could be have, nor no blame nor condemnation must
pass against their Brother J. Humphery for this false Doctrine; though its near
six Years since these Letters were writ.

Well, Reader, This is a Taste of the Doctrine and Faith of our Delaware
Quakers, though as I said before, we hear the contrary Doctrine is now preached
in London; and thou may expect to find much more such like false Doctrine,
Clashes and Contradictions in the ensuing Treatise. And I should have been glad
if I could been easy without detecting the same; but I have now done it, and
hope it may be the last I shall be concerned in: And whatever may be my lot for
this, I am content, knowning my Intentions and proceeding herein to be honest
and sincere. Amen.

D. L.

The Contents
THe Introduction, page 1. Chap. 1. The Dis-harmony, Clashes and Contradictions
of the Quak^^s in both their ancient and later Writings, p. 4. Chap. 2. Of
Opposition at Unity, p. 46. Chap. 3. A short Summary of Citations from the
Quakers Books, showing that they deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ, p.
52. Chap. 4. Of calling Names for Religion, p. 55. Chap. 5. Of Prophecyes, p.
59. Chap. 6. Of Infallible Discerning, p 61. Chap. 7. Of the Scriptures, p. 68.
Chap. 8. Of Magistracy and Government, p. 77. Chap. 9. Of Persecution and
Prosecution, p. 1. Chap. 10. Friends Sufferings to be recorded by London
Meeting, p. 91. Chap. 11. Of Swearing, p. 97. Chap. 12. Of Fighting, Swearing
and paying Tithes, p. 102. Chap. 13. Of Miracles, p. 810 Chap. 14. Of Life and
Doctrine, p. 113. Chap. 15. Sabbath Day, Wheel turned round, p. 118. An
Appendix, p. 12 Of In allibility p. 12 O^ Temporizin, p. 13 Concerning Papists,
p. 13
A Postscript, by way of Question to the Leaders my Old Friends, p. 13 A
Proposition to meet our Adversaries in a pu^lick Meeting, concerning the
matters contai^ed in this Book, p. 14
A Copy of a Letter sent to the Author by a Person of Note, p. 14
INTODVCTION.
EXperience shows, That the Quakers have always been exceeding Clamorous
against those who have opposed any of their Doctrines especially in those books
whose Authors ^re dead. And yet notwithstanding no Christian ^rofessors are
more gu^lty than themselves, not only ^f condemning Doctrines of Persons that
are ^ad [as diverse of their Books testify] but also ^uilty of Censu^ing Persons
too after their de^ease, especially such as have been their opposers. ^or this
take one Example from W. Penn, viz.

Reason against Railing, p. 163. Tho. Hicks com^laining of E. Buroughs for
giving ill Names to (...) Bentist, for asking Questions of the Quakers. (...)
P. makes Thomas Hicks this Reply, viz. It Is sicked, with a witness, and like a
most irreligious Miscreant indeed; God is my Record this day, I ^ould not to
inherit more Worlds than there are Stars (...) the Firmament, have so violated
the Laws of ^harity against the most violent of our deceased Op^sers, Ungodly
Traducer, whose Envy, no doubt, (...) fire enough in it to burn this good man's
bones, (...). Note, at what a rate he goes on [consider^^g the cause] more like
a Domineering Ranter ^^en a meek and humble Quaker, seeing himself, is really
guilty of Censuring and inveighing at J. Perrot, one of there deceased
Opposers, as may be seen in his Book, called Judas and the Jews; And yet I know
not that he got so much by so doing as to pay one Debt, and much less so many
Worlds as there are Stars in the Firmament; but having not the Book at hard, to
cite particulars, I Will set down what John Tailor and Jo. Field [Brethren of W.
P.] say of the said Perrot after his decease, p. 9. of their Loving Invitation,
viz. J. Perrot (say they) became a Troubler and Opposer, and lost the Unity of
Friends in general, and so was cut off from the Vine Christ, and dyed miserably
[being in debt, as they say.] See now here they censure one of there deceased
Opposers to Damnation. Behold the self-condemnation of these men! and their
want of charity to the deceased! Where has any of their Opposers been so
Uncharitable to any of them, after death especially?

But my present business is not at all about the Dead, neither about Men, nor
Things that are Dead, but against confused Doctrines now living, viz. owned
patronized and justified by men now living [as witness the late general account
give^ in the City Merurcy or News Book, by the 24 Quakers at London.] And W.
Bailey, p. 568. opposing some Doctrine of a Quaker who was dead says, As for
that which is dead, I have little to say one way or other; I look not [sayes
he] at the Person of any Living or Dead in that respect, but (...) is that that
lives that makes the difference. And just as W Bailey says, so it is; For those
citations following are the Doctrines of those now living, though some of the
first Authors be dead. And my care has been to cite the Passages so large as to
deliver the plain and full sense and meaning of their Authors to all
intelligent Readers, as they will find who please to examine and compare the
same impartially. But if through my distance from the Press some Errors or
Escapes should pass Uncorrected, I desire the candid Readers excuse or pardon,
seeing none are designed.

Lastly. Whereas some Preachers of late [to (...) se such confused Doctrines as
follow] tell the P^^ple, That^ it is easy to find seeming Contralictions in the
Scriptures; And why then may it not be so in our Friends Books? To which I say,
they themselves in their Books give the reason why ^is so with the Scriptures;
which reason cannot hold as to their Books; for W. Penn takes up several pages
in his Rejoinder, to show to J. Faldo the. Uncertainty of the Scriptures,
bringing Reasons to Prove them not the same as given forth, but altered and
corruptud; so Jo^^n Whitehead, to the same effect in Refuge fixed: also G.
Whitehead in diverse Books, and S. Fisher at large in Rustions, etc. all which
shall be showed hereafter. Now this cannot be alleged of their Books, because
we have the first Impression of them, and therefore they canaot be altered of
corrupted. So that this is too short a cover for this Mystry of Confusion,
which I desire all sober Readers well to Note.

Having thus premised, shall now proceed to note some of the Contradictions and
Clashes of the Quakers, as I find them set down in their ancient and latter
Writings: with some Observations on the fame.

CHAP. I. The Dis-harmony, Clashes and Contradiction of the Quakers in both
their ancient and latter Writings.
Numb. I.
SAndy Foundat. p. 13. W. P. says, Since the Father is God, and the Son is
God, and the Spirit is God, then unless the Father, Son and holy Ghost are 3
disti^ct Nothings, they must be three distinct Substances and consequently
three distinct Gods.

Qrs. Plainness, p. 23. G. W. says, That the Distinction of the Father and Son
are not only Nominal but Real.

Note, here if G. W^^ Real distinction do not make the Father and Son distinct
Substances. But W. Penn tells him they are distinct nothings. Reconcile these
who can.

Numb. III.
Qrs. plainness, p. 19. G. W. there declares, that they cannot deviate from
Scripture Phrase in their Creed; For until you bring us plain Scripture (says
he) that says, the humane Nature is the Christ [which phrase is
conscientiously scrupled] we must rather patiently bear your censure, than
deviate from Scripture Language in our Creed.

But in p. 18. G. W. says, Have we not plainly and often confessed, that the
divine Nature or word clothed with the most holy Manhood, was and is the
Christ? Note, [cloathed with the most holy Manhood] is not Scripture Language
or phrase; so that here he deviates from Scripture Language in his Creed, in
the very next page. Pray what is this but Hypocrisy?

Numb. IV.
Sandy Founda. p. 22. W. Penn says, Since Christ could not pay what was not
his own [Debt] it follows, that in the payment of his own, the case still
remains equally grievous, since the debt is not hereby absolved or forgmen,
^^^r transfered only.

Divi. of Christ Ans. to T. D. p. 16. How false and Blasphemous (says G. W.)
this charge is against Christ, I appeal to all sober Professors of
Christianity, viz. That when God required Satisfaction of Christ, it was due
from Christ.

Now observe, That as before W. P. Renders Geo. Whitehead's Doctrine Ridiculous
and Shameful, so here G. W. renders W. Penns Doctrine basphemous for holding,
that Christ had a Debt of his own to satisfy to God, as W. P. more laregly
affirms, p. 22. of his Sandy Foundat. Therefore as G W. in his Quakers
plainness, p 20 says, Pray you Baptists agree upon a consistent Creed that you
intend to stand by, so now the Bap^sts may say, Pray yon Quakers agree upon a
consistent Creed that you intend to stand by; etc.

Again, I cannot but observe, that though G. Whetchead (as before) pretends,
that they concientiously scruple to deviate from Scripture, Language or phrase,
yet I have not met with one Book of controversy that G. W. has written, but he
himself diviates from Scripture phrase herein.

Likewise in Divinity of Christ by G. W. and G. Fox, they begin in the Epistle
with Commanding and charging Professors to bring express Scripture for their
Doctrine, saying, whether do the Scriptures speak of three Persons in the
Godhead, in these express words? Let us see where it is written; Com^, do not
shuffle, for we are resolved the Scripture shall buffet you about. And where
does the Scripture speak of a Humane Nature of Christ in Heaven? And where does
the Scripture say, the Soul is part of man's Nature? Give us plain Scripture,
without adding or diminishing. Come let us see Chapter and verse, etc.

Now may not the Professors say, Come G. W. Come Quakers, where does the
Scripture say, the Distinction of Father and Son is not only Nominal, but Real,
in these express words? Let us see where it is written: Come, do not shuffle.
And where does the Scripture speak or say, the divine Nature clothed with the
most holy Manhood, was and is the Christ? And where does the Scrip-say (these
words) The Light within every man? Give us plain express Scripture for this
your first and grand Principle of all, without adding or diminishing. Come let
us see Chapter and Verse, seeing you pretend you cannot deviate from Scripture
phrase in your Creed.

Besides, if G. W. does not hereby mean deceit and hypocrisy, for what end
does he pretend they cannot own this or that in their Creed, if it be expressed
in plain Scripture, seeing they so often and plainly testify that the Scripture
is not their Rule but the light within is their rule in Faith, But for
Professors to call for Scripture is but according to their principles, because
they own it for their rule.

Numb. V.
Sandy Founda. p. 15. W. P. says, In the fullness of time [God] sent his Son,
who so many hundred years since in PERSON testified the virtue, etc.

Quakers. plainness p. 24. G. W. says, The Title PERSON is toc low and
unscriptural to give to the Christ of God.

Numb. VI.
E. Buroughs p. 142. J. Bunjon said, How are they deceived who own Christ no
otherwise then as he was before the world began! E. B. Replys, Here thou have
discovered thy self more plainly: Did not the Saints own Christ Jesus, the same
yesterday, to day and forever, for Salvation.

Quakers vindication p. 16. by G. Bishop, We distinguish between Christ which
was before the Foundation of the World, and his being within, the true Light,
and the Body which he took of the Virgin, etc.

Note, here G. B. owns Christ otherwise [For Salvation] than as he was before
the world began, for he makes 3 distinctions of Christ*

Numb. VII.
R. Huber thorns works, p. 20. Priest says, Christ himself was not capable ^f
Faith and Repentance. ^. H. Replys, Here I ^harge thee to be a Liar and a
Slanderer; for he ^as capable of Faith and ^epentance.

Divinity of Christ. Ans. to T. D. p. 22. Christ he never did not could sin
(says G. Whitehead)

Note, does not G. W. here hold Christ not capable of sin? And how then was he
capable of Repentance.

Numb. VIII.
Quakers Challenge, by Solomon Ecclis, George ^og, whose Name (says ^e) thou
art net worthy (...) take in thy Mouth, who (...) a Prophet indeed: It ^as said
of Christ, that (...) was in the World, and the World was made ^y him, and the
World ^ew him not; so it may (...) said of this true Pro^^et, whom John said,
he ^as not: But thou will ^^ul this Prophet one day (...) heavy as a Millstone
upon thee etc. G. W. ^^cuses this in his seri^^s search, p. 58.

Book called Ishmael, etc. p. 9. by G. W. One said, It is all one to say the
Scripture says, and God says. G. W. Replys, Thou Blasphemous Beast, do thou
make no difference between the Scripture and God! Here let all that reads this,
see thy Blasphemy.

Note, upon what occasions they revile others for Blasphemy, But G. W. excuses
that real Blasphemy in his Brother S. E. and only says It Is a little failure
in syntax.

But let G. Whitehead tell me, If a man should affirm it is all one to say, His
Book Ishmael says and the Spirit of God says, Whether this would be
blasphemy? since he asserts in the Title page* That it was given forth from the
Spirit of the Lord Pray Reader take good Notice of this, for he can no ways
answer it without baffling himself

Numb. IX.
G. F's Great Mystr. p. 264, 264, 283. Priest says, A man by his own power
cannot get into Regeneration, for they are d^ad in sins and Trespasses. G. F.
Replys, Some are sanctified from the Womb, and some Children are holy; so all
are not dead in sins and trespasses; and some Children were born of Believers.
And p. 355. Believers are the holy: so the Believers Children, A new Creation,
a holy Generation.

Divin. of Christ, An^ to T. D. p. 20 G. W. says, Condemnation oam^^ upon all
men -- Death past upon all men; for that all have sinned. p 24 Again, Christ
dyed for all so all were dead in Sins and Trespasses, etc.

Note. is not here a little failure in syntax too? else how is it that G. W.
contradicts G. F. a Prophet indeed! But pray take a view and se^ if the
Children of believers in the Light are not Children of Wrath too as well as
others; or let us know by what Marks we shall distinguish their Children to be
a holy Generation.

Numb. X.
Jos. Coal Ans. to Jo^^w-man, p. 332. If by (...) Body of Flesh which ^^rist
had, he means his ^^urch, then I am one ^^h him; for his having ^^at Body after
his Ascen^^, I never denied, nor and to do -- and such a ^ay we own Christ had
^^ur his ascension. Again ^. P Rejoinder, p. 312. (...) true Church is become
^^rists Body. Again, in ^^uge fixed, p 90, 41. ^^rist has a Body, or is a Body
snitable to his (...) it, consisting of h^a^uly flesh and Bone. A^ain, he
says, Whereso^^r the Spirit of Christ (...) that is in the Body of ^^rist.

I. Pennington, Quest. p. 20. For that which [Christ] took upon him, was our
Garment, even the flesh and blood of our Nature, which is of an earthly
perishing Nature, but he is of an Eternal Nature.

Mark, Though nothing be of an Eternal Nature but God, yet here one holds Christ's
Body of Flesh and Bones to be such, whilst the other holds, the Church to be
his Body. But pray, had the Church no beginning? Can that be Eternal? But this,
and the rest in these Passages let who can explain and reconcile them, for it
passes my skill to do it.

Numb. XI.
Readiness Errand, by G.F. p. 14. Christ is the substance of all Figures, and HIS
FLESH is a Figure.

But I. Pennington, (...) above, holds his Flesh (...) be of an Eternal Nature

Note the Contradiction and false Doctrine o^ both these, or (if G W. please) a
FAILUR^ in Syntax.

Numb. XII.
Chr. Quaker, p. 97 by W. P. Now nothing can bruise the head of the Serpent but
something that is also internal, as the Serpent is; but if the Body of Christ
were the Seed, then could be not bruise the Serpents head in all, because the
Body of Christ is not so much as in any one, and consequently the Seed of the
Promise is an holy and spiritual Principle of Light, Life and Power, that being
received into the heart, bruiseth the Serpents head; and because the seed
(which cannot be that Body) is Christ.

Foundat. of Tithes, p 238, 240. by T. Ellwoo^^ Nor do the Quakers (...) scribe
Salvation to the fo^lowing the Light with^^ but to Christ Jesus, (...) whom the
Light leads -- If any one expects Remission of sins by any other w^^ than by
the death of Christ renders the death of Christ useless.

Note the confuse Clash of these 2 Champions, W. Penn is for al^ the work to be
done by the Light within. T. ^ denies it to be done by the Light within, no^^
not so much as Remiss^on of sins.

Numb XIII.
G. F's Catechism, p 69. (...) Light (within) which ^^^y hate, is their
condem^tion, which is the Sal^^tion of all that believe ^^it.

T. E. as above, No^ do the Quakers as^ribe Salvation to the following the
Light within, etc.

Come, let us see if T. Ellwood with all his So^^istry and false glosses can
reconcile these two ^^rtions.

Numb. XIV.
Ed. Buroughs, p. 285. Bunion said (These ^^is. believe that Salva^^^ was not
completely ^^ought out for sinners by (...) Man Christ Jesu^^ (...) B. answers,
Here tho^^^ta Liar.

W. P. Reas. agt. Rail. p. 16. says, The Light, which in all ages was the j^st
man's path, is, ever was, and ever will be s^fficient and saving. Thus also J.
Co^^, l. 329. That Christ is not a Savior as Man, but as God.

Let W. Penn reconcile these, if he can, and tell ^how the Light is the Man

Numb. XV.
Ed. Buroughs, p. 283 (...) Bunion said, The QIS. ^^swade Souls, That that
^^^an that was born of the ^^ing be Mary, is not above (...) stars. E. B.
answers, ^his is another Lie.

Sword of the Lord dr. p. 5. Your imagined God beyond the stars is utterly
denied and restified against by the Light.

Pray compare these. Also Note Sa. Jennings dissent from his Brethrens Religion
[unless (...) dissembles] in scrupling to say, Thou art a Lyar^^ p. 34. state
of the case:

Numb. XV.
Chr. Quaker by G. W. p. 2^2 The man's mistaken (...) he suppos^ that we plead
for the Righteous^ness of a Creature, [ i e Christ as Man] or man's own
Righteous^^ss, which he himself is enabled to perform, as the cause o^ our
Justification, etc.

W. P 's Serious Apology p. 148. Death came (...) act ^al, not imputation
therefore Justification un^^ o^^ L^i^e came by act^^^ Righteousness, not
imp^^^tative.

Note, Whether is th^^ Error of both these, or (...) Contradiction greater.

Numb. XVII.
G. F 's Great Mystry, p. 248. There is no man felt denied and justified in the
sight of God, but by Christ alone.

Note, Does not G.^ above oppose G F. her^ who holds Justificatio^ by the Man
Christ, u^^less it be proper to sa^^ God in the sight of Go^ justifies man.

Numb. XVIII.
W. P 's Rejoinder, p. ^87, No present work, how good soever, can ju^^^^fie any
man from the Condemnation which is due for the guilt of sin, that is past.

Sandy Fonndat. p 16^ Gods Remission is groun^ed on our Repentance ((...) as
above) Justification by actual Righteousness.

Note, A Self-Contra^diction, unless Repentance and actual Righteousness be no
present wor^^

Numb. XIX.
W. P 's Rejoinder, p. (...), That Body did not ^^litute Christ, he is
in^^sible, and ever was to ^^igodly World.

Guide to the blind, p. 49. Christ's first appearance to the world was in the
flesh, and the fleshly eye saw HIM.

Just so the Priests, as Fisher says,
Believe it one of these two ways;
Sometimes one way then another,
Sometimes both ways, this and t'otaer.
See S. Fishers Works, p. 748.

Numb. XX.
G. W 's Light and Life, ^3, As to Christ being every man, that is not (...)
affirmation nor words, (...) that there is a Light (...) Christ in every man.

W. Smith 's Catechism, p 57, That of God in us is the only Foundation, it is
Christ, and being Christ it must needs be only, and admits not of another.

Numb. XXI.
G. F 's Catechism, p 2, ^^e Light that shows to ^^ry man his evil Deeds,
Christ.

W. P 's Chr. Quaker, p 91, We do not say that the Light in every man is
Christ, but of Christ.

Numb. XXII.
G. F 's Great Mystry, ^ 185, The Devil teach^^ them, in whom he sows his Seed,
not to have the Light within them, the Seed Christ, The Root of God.

Note, Who must we believe, G. Fox, or G. W. and W. P. as above? for here G. F.
holds the Light within to be not only Christ, but ever The ROOT of God.

Numb. XXIII.
G. F 's Gr. Mystry, p. 249, Priest says, There is not whole Christ, God and
Man, in men. G. F. answers, Then how must men grow up in the measure of the
fullness of the stature of Christ? And Christ and God will dwell in man, and
walk in man. And p 185, as above, he calls the Light within The Root of God.

W. P 's Rejoinder, p 25, We never said the Light within every man was the only
Lord and Savior, and very God, etc.

Note, But does not G. F. grant whole Christ God and Man, to be in man? And is
not this whole Christ the only Lord and Savior? Also, is not the Root of God
very God? Let W. P. reconcile it if he can.

Numb. XXIV.
G. F 's Great Mystry, p 324, Priest says, The Seed to whom the Promise of
Salvation is made, is or has been sinners. G. F. answers, The Promise of God
is to the Seed, which has been laden as a car^ with sheaves by the sinner,
which Seed is the Hope Christ that purifies -- and the Seed Christ never sin^d
-- This Promise is not unto Seeds, as many, ^^nt to one, the Seed which (...)
Christ.

Arr^ignment of Popery by G. F. The Prophets showed, that all Nations are
blessed in the Seed of Abraham, and so the Seed of Abraham to be the Savior of
the World.

Note these well, and read them once and again, and if it be really so, that
the Seed Christ is both the Savior and the saved, then 'ti^ no
self-Contradiction; that is, that the Seed only saves the same Seed; for he
says, it is all but one Seed, which is Christ.

Numb. XXV.
Josiah Coal, p. 329, ^aith, Though J. Newman ^^ldly and blasphemously ^ffirmeth,
That he was ^ot a Savior, as he was God, but as he was Man, ^et it is easy to
prove the ^ontrary.

But G. F. before calls the Seed of Abraham the Savior of the World. Now is
not here a Contradiction? unless Christ, as Man, be not the Seed of Abraham.

Numb. XXVI.
G. W 's Div. of Christ ^pist. by G. F. says, Thou (Priest) say, The Soul is
part of man's Nature: Where does the Scripture, thy Rule, say ^o? The Scripture
says, God breathed into man the ^^eath of Life, and man ^^came a living Soul
-- And is not this of God, of his Being? And is not this that comes out from
God, part of God, and from God? This last part W. P. cites in Reas. against
Railing, p 66. and defends and justifies and denis it.

Rejoinder, page 375, W. P. cites H. More, to prove the Soul to be the Man,
saying, That the Soul of every man is his individual Person, and the Body but a
Garment.

Note The Contradiction; for here the Soul is so great a part o^ man's Nature,
that it i^ Man himself. Note also Ranters say, the Soul is (...) part of God,
and return again to God, and God will not punish himself Therefore to talk o^
going to Hell is an idle story,

Numb. XXVII.
G. F's Great Mystry, p 273, Priest says, It is horrid Blasphemy to say, the
Soul is a part of God. G F. replies, It Is rot horrid Blasphemy to say, the Soul
is a part of God, for it came out from him, and tha which came out from him is
of him.

Note, That both W. P. and G. W. do a^ once, by their fallaciou^ Equivocations,
both justify this Doctrine o^ the Soul being part of God, and also confidently
deny that G. F. holds any such thing; for which see Reason against Railing, p.
65. and Qrs. plainness, p. 57.

Numb. XXVIII.
G. F 's Great Mystry, p. 205. and p. 63. The Saints came to see the end of
Sabbaths* and New Moons, and witnessed the Body, Christ, before the ^ay was
made -- for the Body is the Light of the World, the Body is the life given for
the life of ^he World, in whom there ^rest -- Christ gave him ^elt, his Body,
for the life (...) the world; he was the Offering for sin.

W. P's serious Apology, p. 146. But that the outward Person that suffered was
properly the Son of God, we utterly deny -- A Body has thou prepared me, said
the Son; so the Son was not the Body, though the Body was the Sons.

Let W. P. reconcile these, and also tell us who is the Father of that outward
Person.

Numb. XXIX.
W. P. Reas. agt. Rail. ^ag. 91. Forgive us our ^ebts as we forgive our
^^btors, w^^re (says he) ^^thing can be more ob^^ous, than that which is
^^rgiven, is not paid; and if it is our Duty to ^^rgive without a Satis^action
reccived, and that God is to forgive us, as ^e forgive them, then is a
^atisfaction Totally Ex^^ded.

Rejoinder, page 284, W. P cites (...) defends We believe that Christ in us
does offer up himself a living Sacrifice to God for us, by which the wrath of
God is appeased to us.

Note, A self-contradiction, for in the one he totally excludes a satisfaction,
and in the other he grants it.

Note also, how many ^housand Offerings this new Scripture makes of christ; as
many Saints, so many times Christ ^ffers up himself a Sacrifice*

Numb XXX.
Great Mistry, p. 63. Christ gav^imself, his Body ^or the Life of the world, he
was the Offering for the sins of the whole World, and paid the Debt, and made
satisfaction.

Note, In contradiction to W. P's Contradiction, G. F. here holds Satisfaction
was made for sin, by the Body being offered. Is not this like Sampsons Foxes,
tho^tyed by the ^all, their faces look contrary?

Numb. XXXI.
G. W' s Div. of Christ, the Epist. by G. F. Where (says he) does the
Scripture speak of a humane Nature of Christ in Heaven? Is not Christ and his
Body glorified, and he the Lord from Heaven?

G W's answer to W^ Harw^rth, p. 13. H^^ Reasons to prove Christ now a Man in
Heaven, do not (says G. W.) reach nor touch us, the thing not being denied,
but really believed and confessed unto by us.

Numb. XXXII.
W. Shewins Treatise of Thoughts, p. 35. Not to Jesus, the Son of David and
Mary, Saint or Angel, but to God the Father all Worship, Honor and Glory is
to be given, thorough Jesus Christ.

Chr. Doctrine, etc. by G. W. and others, That divin Honor and Worship is due
to the Son of God; and that he is, in true Faith to be prayed unto, and the
Name of the Lord Jesus to be called upon, as the primitive Christians did.

Note, Though they clash, yet we see here they ^ave dropped some Christian
Expressions more of ^ate then formerly; And what may we think they ^^tend
thereby? why G. Whitehead in his Coun^^feit Convert, p. 72. says, I May see
cause other^ise to word the matter, and yet our intentions be ^he same. Now is
it not admirable that a man of (...). W's Cloth [as the proverb is] should be
^rown so bold in crafty and deceivible Glosses, (...) deceive his Readers? Is
this like the ancient ^mplicity of a Quaker, to say, I may see cause ^therways
to word the matter, and yet in^^nd the same? Pray who knows when such a ^an i^
sincere, or how to believe him in what he ^^ys, that thus hides his meanings,
sa^s one thing, and means another? Does not G. W. hereby ^ender himself like
those Deceivers with false ^^oney, who counterfeit the Kings Coin, upon
^eprobate Silver, to make it pass current? But ^hatever they intend or mean in
their newest Creed or Confession of Faith, in answer to (...). Lancasters
Querys, given at London, 1695. ^y G. W. and six others, and also in some other
(...) their Books, that at times [of late years specially] has been extorted or
streined from ^^em, yet I think fit here following to compare (...) with their
former Doctrine, and leave it to (...) reconciled by those who are cunning
enough (...) to word the matter, seeing that in their said Answer to Dr.
Lancaster, they refer to their former Books for Answers to his Querys.

Numb. XXXIII.
Answ. to Dr. Lancaster, by G. W. and six other, We sincerely believe in Jesus
Christ, both as he is true God and perfect Man, our Immanuel and Mediator; and
as in the fullness of Time he was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, and was crucified and put to Death, was buried, rose again, and
visibly ascended into Heaven -- And that this same Jesus Christ that wa^
crucified, shall so in like manner come* as he was seen to go into Heaven) at
the last and great Day of Judgment.

G. W's Truth defend. p. 65. Chr. VVade affirmed, That our blessed Savior does
instruct men to lay fast hold of, and to abide in such a faith which confideth
in himself, being without Men. G. W. answers, That Is contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine, etc.

Note, But now G. W. is one with C. W's Doctrine, which he then said was
contrary to the Apostles; for now he professes faith in Christ as born of the
Virgin, crucified and visibly ascended, unless he says, This was not without
men, and so deceives his Readers by thus Otherwise wording the matter.

Numb. XXXIV
G. W's answ. to W ^arworth, p. 23. Christ (...) rise in that Body ^^^rein he
suffered, and in (...) same ascended into the ^^avens -- and it is so (...)
circumscribed in the ^^avens as it is capable of ^^d as is proper to it; and
(...) it be spiritual and ^^rious, yet a Body, and ^^erefore not in every place
^here God is. Again, in ^is Book, called, Judgment fixed, he says, Thou ^at
can not see consist; ^^y of Salvation by the ^^an Christ, and by his ^^ight
within, art gone ^^om his Light into Ima^^nations.

G. W's Truth defend. p. 23, T. Smith asks, When you tell us you have faith in
Christ, do you mean Christ whose Person is now ascended into Heaven, or do you
mean only a Christ within you? G. W. answers, Here thou would make two Christ's
-- But how provest thou two such Christ's?

Note here, That G. W. now in his answer to VV. Harworth opposing himself,
makes two such Christ's as T. Smith does, viz. not only Christ within, but a
Christ whose Person or body is ascended into Heaven.

Numb. XXXV.
G. W's answ. to VV. Harworth, That very Body of Christ which was ^aised from
the dead, how should it but be in being, ^^^ing he dyed not again. Page 7. The
same Body that was put to death, was raised -- We confess the same Man Christ,
not only still in being, but also glorified -- This Man Christ did neither
vanish nor perish, either as to his Spirit, Soul or Body.

G. W's Nature of Christianity, p. 29. Christ has not the Body of Man. And p.
41. he denis Christ's bodily existence without us.

Note, If G. W. can so word the matter, as truly to reconcile himself with
himself in these two Books, we shall then have some ground to believe he has
not sinned since the year 1659. when he told us That his sins were pardoned,
see Truth defend. p. 8.

Numb. XXXVI.
VV. Smith's Primmer, p. 8. They that are false Ministers preach Christ
without, and bid People believe in him as he is in Heaven above.

Note here, Does not G. W. (as above in Nu, 34, 35,) preach a belief in Christ
as he ascended into Heaven above? Therefore a false Minister by VV, Smith's
Doctrine.

Numb. 37,
Christian Doctrine, by G. W. etc. p. 5. That Christ's Body that was crucified,
was not the Godhead, yet by the Power of God was raised from the dead; and that
the same Christ that was Therein crucified, ascended into Heaven. And in answ.
(...) Dr. Lancaster he de^ares, That both Soul and Body was sacrificed.

G. W's answ. to VV. Harworth, His dying was only as to the Body, he was put to
death as concerning the flesh.

Note, A self contradiction: in one Book, he says, None but the Body dyed; yet
in the other he says, A Christ was crucified in that Body; in the third, yea,
both Soul and Body was sacrificed.

Numb. 38.
W. P's Apology, p. 146. ^ut that the outward Per^^n that suffered was pro^^rly
the Son of God, we ^^terly deny; A Body ^^st thou prepared me, ^^id the Son; so
the Son ^as not the Body, though the Body was the Sons. [But ^he same Christ that
was ^^erein crucified, ascended ^^to Heaven, as above] and says W. P. We deny
that Person that dyed at ^erusalem to be our Re^eemer.

Ans. to Dr. Lancaster by G. W. and others, where they own him to be Christ
that visibly ascended, and was outwardly put to Death, and that he was true God
and perfect Man, and our Redeemer that was thus visible

Note, Though G W. sees cause now to word the matter thus, yet he gives us
Notice, (as above) that his faith is still the same as formerly.

Numb. 39.
Divin of Christ, p 83. by G. W. While we were sinners, Christ dyed for us,
(...) was Christ that dyed.

Refuge fixed, p. 38. by Joh. Whitehead, Nothing that was mortal was called
Christ.

Observe the sum of the last three particulars, (as they have seen cause to
word them) G. W. holds, Nothing but the Body dyed, and that it was Christ that
(...), so that the Body that dyed was Christ (...) holds, That the Body was not
Ch^^^, no^ that the Person that dyed was Christ.

Ag^^^ G. W. holds, that a Christ dyed in that Body (...) W. holds, that
nothing that dyed was Christ (...) So that VV. Penn in his (...) at the Priests
so (...) And S. Fisher mocks at them for (...) SO, NO.. But the Priests may now
(...) at the Quakers for their (...) and mock at them for their NO, SO

Therefore (...) the ingenious Figure of NO, SO, with some (...) that Sam
Fisher inserts in page 773 of (...), which are now pertinently, truly and
^^^cly to be turned back again upon these Quakers, viz.

Sometimes its this, sometimes its that,
Sometimes its this and this and that,
Sometimes its either this or that;
Sometimes its neither this nor that;
One while it looks like SO, not NO,
Another while like NO, not SO;
One way it seems or SO or NO,
Another way nor NO nor SO;
Some ways it shows both SO and NO,
So it is a mere Endless NO and SO.


You have observed before the Clashes, Contradictions, Sayings, Gainsayings and
false Doctrines of these men, one contradicting the other, and many times the
same man contradicting himself. ^o pray observe once more how G. Whitehead
^ances the Rounds (as S. Fisher says in his Appendix to J. Owen) For in his
Introduction to Divi^ity of Christ, he defines a Person to be a Man, and a Man
to be a Person. And in Qrs. plainness, p. 19. confesses Jesus Christ to be a
Man, but not a Person, p. 23, 24. Again, That Jesus Christ is a Man, whose
glorious Body in Heaven is not a humane (or man's) Body; and yet (as in Numb.
35.) declares it to be the same Body that dyed, and yet denis Christ to have
the Body of Man. Thus as S. Fisher says, p. 773.

Now it is One thing, then Another,
And now and then nor the one nor the other.
Numb. 40.
G F's Great Mist. p. ^06, 131, 250, If Christ that is crucified be not within,
and that Christ that is risen be not within, I say, you are all Reproba^es --
The Apostles preached Christ that^s crucified within, and not another, for the
other is the Antichrist -- And thou say thou art saved by Christ without
thee, and so have recorded thy self a Reprobate -- At be in the fancy that be
out of the state of witnessing Christ that suffered within them, and rose again.

Answ. to Dr. Lancaster, They own Christ that was crucified without the Gates,
did visibly ascend into Heaven ( and answ to W Harworth) is in Heaven in a Body
of Flesh circumscribed, and not in every place where God is.

No^e, While they justify their old Doctrine, and the new not being free, but
streined out, we must take it as G. W. tells F. B. That they may intend the
same, only now see cause Otherwise to word it.

Numb. 41.
G W's Light and Life of Christ, p. 58. he there defends this Passage, viz. The
Blood that was forced out of him (Christ) by the Soldier, after he was dead,
was no more than the Blood of another Saint.

Ans. to Dr. Lancaster, The whole sacrifice of Christ, whereof his Blood
outwardly shed, was a part, was of great price with God, for man's Redemption.

Note the Contradiction or the Craft.

Numb. 42.
I bid. Light and Life, p 38. The Quakers see ^o need of directing men ^o the
Type for the Antitype, viz. neither to the outward Temple, nor to Jerusalem,
either to Jesus Christ or his Blood, knowing that neither the Rightousness of
Faith, nor the Word of it does so direct: And where do the Scriptures say, the
Blood was there shed for Justification, and that men must ^e directed to
Jerusalem to it?

Ans. to Dr. Lancaster* We sincerely believe in Jesus Christ a^ born of the
Virgin Mary -- Christ's Blood that was shed without the Gates of Jerusalem, with
the whole Sacrifice of himself, both Soul and Body, was a true Propitiation --
through Faith, etc.

Note here, G. W. (still opposing his Old Doctrine) row sees cause to woro the
matter Otherways.

Numb. 43.
J. W 's Refuge fixed, p. 90 I have several times (says he) denied that Christ
has now a Body of Flesh and Bones, circu^nscript or limited in that Heaven
which is cut of every man on Earth.

Let these 2. Brother Whiteheads reconcile their Doctrine.

Ans. to W Harworth, (as above at Numb. 34, 35 G. W. declares, the same Body of
Christ which was put to death ascended into Heaven, and is still in being; and
though made spiritual, yet a circumscribed Body, not in every place where God
is.

Numb. 44.
G. W's Light and Life, p. 39, 47. As for those Expressions (says he) God-Man
being born of Mary, we do not find them in the Scriptures, nor do we read that
Mary was the Mother of God, but in the Popes Canons, etc. -- What Nonsense and
Unscriptural Language is this to tell of God being co-Creator with the Father?
or that God had Glory with God? does not this imply two Gods, or that God had a
Father?

Ans. to Dr. Lancaster, as above, We believe in Jesus Christ, both as he is
true God and perfect Man -- and as he was conceived by the holy ghost born of
the Virgin Mary.

Note here, G. W. in contradiction to himself, owns Mary to be the Mother of
God-Man, and God to be his Father. And if he implys two Gods thereby, I cannot
help it, seeing he now sees cause so to word the matter.

Numb. 45.
G. W 's Qrs. plainness, p 19 That Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, That he
is God-man, etc.

Note, how inconsistent G. W. is with himself; he Quarrels with the word
God-man before, but here he uses it.

Numb. 46.
G. F's Great Mystry, p 289, God was in Christ, and they are one, the Creator;
the Father in the Son and the Son in the Father, and Christ in you, and God in
Christ, the Creator. And in Qrs. plain^^ss, p. 24. G. W there says, The Son is
co-worker with the Father.

Light and Life, (as before) what Nonsense is this (says G. W.) to tell of God
being co-Creator with the Father?

Note, Does not G. W. here accuse both G. F. and himself also, with Nonsense?
for what is the difference between Co-worker and Co-Creator?

Numb. 47.
Paper against J. ^. London 6 m. 1670. And (...) also testify, That i^ ^^y
Person whatsoever all act or speak any thing ^^at is evil, under pre^^nce of a
motion from the spirit of God, we utterly ^^ny that Motion to be of God.

G F's Great Mystry p. 77. And as for any being moved of the Lord to take your
(i. e. Priests) Hourglass from you, by the eternal Power, it is owned.

Note, here the Father, G. Fox, Justifies what is Felony by the Law; But his
London Children are so bold as to control him.

Numb. 48.
If. Pennington'^ Que. (...) 33, Now the Scriptures (...) expressly distinguish
be^^een Christ and the Gar^^nt which he wore, be^^een him that came, and the
body in which he came, between the Substance which was veiled, and the Vail
which veiled it; there was plainly HE and the Body in which HE came; this we
certainly know, and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ.

Quakers plainness; p. 23. G. W. says, The mere Body of Jesus was not the
entire Christ, yet the Name Christ is sometimes given to the Body, though not so
properly a^ (...) the whole Man Christ.

Note, though G. W. here grants the Scriptur^^ sometimes calls the Body Christ,
yet he will neither call it Christ, no^ own it to be so much as any part of
Christ, bu^ as a garment, if he be o^ his Brother I. P's faith.

Numb. 49.
If. Pennington, p 20, That which he (Christ) took upon him was our Garment,
even the fi^sh and blood of our Nature, which is of an earthly perishing Nature.

G. W 's answ. to W^ Harworth, That flesh sa^^ no Corruption, but wa^ raised
from the dead.

Note the Contradiction, for G W. here denis that it corrupted or perished.

Now least my old Friends should say, that I am so hard pinched to make them
contradict themselves, as that if I should find in their Book that they say
four Pence at one time and a Groat at another, that I would go near to make a
Contradiction of it: Therefore I Will give a short hint of what G. W. calls
Contradictions in their Opposers Books. In Christ Aseend. p. 58. he brings John
Newman to contradict himself, thus; The Scriptures principally called the Word
-- The Word that God has spoken by his holy Prophets, blessed Son and
Apostles. Now this may be called false Doctrine, but I profess they have better
Eyes than I, that can see it to be a Contradiction. Pray judge if this be any
more than to say four Pence in one place, and a Groat in another. Again, p. 60.
he brings I. N. to contradict himself, thus; The Scriptures properly and
principally called the Word. -- The Will and Mind of God contained in the
Scriptures. Note, Here J. N. in one Sentence explains his meaning in the other;
but how it is a Contradiction, I leave to the judgment of the Impartial, and
whether G. W. here was not hard pinched to find Contradictions; and yet many
more such things he cites for Contradiction in that and several other of his
Books, too large to insert here) to which I refer the Reader, with request to
take notice what I might venture to call Contradictions by G. W' s Rule, should
I show my self so silly as to follow his Examples.

Numb. 50.
A Book entit This to go among Friends, by W. Smith, p. 17. As for G. Fox (says
he) the Lord God has exalted him, and his glory rests upon him, -- not setting
up a Man, or throwing down a man, but in all things giving the Power
pre-eminence, and endeareaness to the Vessel filled with the excellency of that
Treasure.

W. Bayleys works, p. 307. For they (his Disciples) loved his Person for the
sake of the frame and Quality of the Spirit that dwelt in him, or else what was
his Person [being mean and Contemptible) to them, more than another Person?

Qu. To which of these do they give the Preference? To the Person of Christ, or
Vessel of G. Fox?

Numb. 51.
Great Mystr. p. 246. Priest says, God the Father never took upon him humane
Nature. G. F. answers, That Is contrary to Scripture, who says, God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself, and art ignorant of the great Mystry,
God manifest in the Flesh.

Sword of the Lord drawn, page 5. Whereas you say, this Christ is God and Man
in one Person, it is a Lie

Note, in one he is so far from denying God and Man in one Person, that he
holds, not only God the Son to have taken Man's Nature, but God the Father also.
O Confused Divinity!

Numb. 52.
Reas. agt. Railing, p. 20. In the fullness of Time he (Christ) manifested
himself in a more familiar manner to Mankina, in order to which he an holy
Body, in which he preached his everlasting Gospel. [ Mark, an holy Body.]

T. Musgroves doctrine preached about Delaware, in the year 1695. That Christ as
to his Manhood accounted himself not good -- Took nothing on him that was good.

Note, The one holds the whole Manhood not good, the other, the very Body to be
holy, and therefore good.

Numb. 53.
Ans. to Dr. Lancaster, by G. W. etc. Christ's Blood that was shed without the
gates of Jerusalem together with the whole Sacrifice of himself, both of Soul
and Body, was a true Propitiation and Atonement for man's Recon^iliation and
peace with God, for Remission o^ sins, through a living Faith, etc.

Sandy Foundation, by W.P. p. 21. The Justice offended being infinite, his
Satisfaction ought to bear a proportion therewith, which Jesus Christ as Man
could never pay, he being finue.

Observe, Here G. W. opposing W* P. declares Christ, as Man, pays the debt for
sin (through faith) if Soul and Body be the Man.

Numb. 54.
G. W's Light and Life, p. 41, 22. But three Co^ings of Christ (says he) that
in the flesh at Jerusalem, and that in the Spirit, ^^t also of another coming
in the flesh, yet to be expected, we do not read -- But his second coming and
appearance without sin unto Salvation, I own and witness.

Also, W. Bayley, page 306. says, I never rea^ in all the Scriptures of a Third
coming of Christ Personally, besides what shall be in (...) Saints.

Finally, This is the former Faith of W. P. and the Quakers ingeneral, too
tedious he re to cite, of which we no where find they have made any Recantation.

Ans. to Dr Lancaster, by G* W. etc. Jesus Christ, true God and perfect Man,
was put to death, buried, rose again, and Visibly ascended into Heaven, shall
so in like manner come [as he was seen to go into Heaven] at the last and great
day of Judgment and end of the World. Again, (in answ. to W. Harworth) The same
Body that wa^ put to death is still in being the Man Christ di^ not perish nor
vanish either as to his Spirits, Son or Body.

Observe how plait their New Doctrine (...) for Christ's visible coming in the
same Body expressly Contrary to their O^, or else dissemblingly they now s^
otherwise word the matter, but mean as formerly

As Fisher says, thus they dance round,
And round again in the self same ground,
It staggers to and fro and reels,
Skips up and down, and runs on Wheels,
Starts aside like some broken Bow,
Crosses, Christ-like, Criss-cross in the Row;
Wind, D^^st, Husk, Chaff, no stable Steepl^
A Tale that takes unstable People,
A Toy, a Cloud, Mist, Smoke, a Fog,
('It Is Quakerism) and some Quavering Bog,
A Quick-sand, a Quagmire that sucks,
Who is in it, his feet out hurdly plucks
vid. Fishers Appendix, p. 773.

Numb. 55.
G. F's Gr. Mystry, p. 55, 63. All that makes ^ompence ^or sin is he ^^at never
sinned, Christ ^^e second Adam, and not ^^e first -- Christ gave himself, his
Body, for the ^se of the World; he was ^^e Offering for the sins of ^^e whole
World, and paid ^he debt, and made Sa^isfaction.

Sandy Foundat. p. 21. W. P. denies Christ to pay the Debt of our sins as he is
God, because then the Father and Spirit being God, they also pay the Debt. Nor
not as Man, he being Finite, (as above) Nor not as God and Man, as W. P. in
that page expressly affirms.

A Little of G. Whiteheads help here might do well to word the matter so as to
reconcile this Doctrine of W. P. and G. F.

Numb. 56.
R. B' s Apology, p. 95. Wherefore as we believe he (Christ) was a true and
^^al Man, so we also believe that he continues so to be glorified in the
Heavens in Soul and Body.

Note, W.P. says, as above, Christ as Man was finite, viz. came to an end. But
here R.B. says, he continues a real man in Soul and Body, and so is not finite.

Choose which of these you will believe.

Numb. 57.
G F 's Gr. Mystry, p. 90 P^iest says, There is a kind of Infiniteness in the
Soul, but it cannot be infiniteness in it self* G F. answers, Is not the Soul
without beganning, coming out from God, returning into God again?

Note, W. P. as above, holds the Soul to be properly the man And here according
to G. F. this Man is without beginning; and if no beginning then no end, which
is not only Infinite, but also Eternal. And yet, [Mark the Confusion,] W. P.
before denis the Man Christ to be Infinite

Numb. 58.
G. W 's Div. of Christ, p. 27. The God whom we ser^^e and believe in, is
infinite, the only wise God, and nothing relating to him, or his being, finite.

Sandy Foundat. p. 20. W. P. there calls the Man Christ, The Finite Impotent
Creature.

Note the Clash, unless the Man Christ be not relating to God.

Here I cannot but take notice, that though W. Penn ^lasphemously calls the Man
Christ the finite imp^t^nt Creatu^e, yet he afterward in his Reas. ag^^nst
Rail. (a above) and in other Books, calls his Body a ^oly Body, as if he
thought that way to salve and excuse his former gross Doctrine, o^ at least to
hood-wi^k his Readers, so as to let them see that he has so reverent esteem of
Christ as to call his Body a holy Body, after he had (so irreverently) called
his whole Man the finite impotent Creature.

Again, I observe W. P. to be one with his 24 Brethren, that in the City
Mercary or News Book, owns and and defends these sayings, first in the Battle
door, viz. All Languages are to me (says G. F.) no more but Dust, who was
before Languages were. Next, in J.P's Collection, p. 199. But to the end of all
Disp^tes and Arguments I am come; for before they were LAM, says James Parnell;
To Pre-exist is to have a being before.
where it is plain they declare themselves (at least) to preexist; and yet W. P.
denis the Apostles to pre-exist; for in his Rejoinder, p. 299. he says, Paul
did not pre-exist, Christ did. Now is not this a setting themselves above the
Apostles, and equal with Christ? For Christ pre-existed, ( G. Fox and Ja.
Parnell pre-existed but Paul did not pre-exist, says VV. P. Nay, further, I
find in page 1. of the Book of the two women at Malta, D. Baker is not only for
having his Friends, the Quakers to pre-exist, but also declares them to be
Eternal, saying, O ye Eternal and blessed Ones! whilst the man CHRIST must be
called, The finite impotent Creature, by this high and elevated dust and ashes
VV. Penn.

I shall now return to insert a few more Contradictory Clashes, and so haste to
another head.

Numb. 59.
W. P's Rejoinder, p. 13 That (Christ) his coming was but [ Mark. but] to bring
the world to a more improved knowledge and large enjoyment of that divine
Power, Wisdom, Life and Righteousness which former Ages had, comparatively, but
an obscure sight and imperfect sense of. And p. 296, 300. he justifies this
saying, viz. That which Christ took upon him was but a Garment, even the flesh
and blood of our Nature, which is of an earthly perishing Nature.

Truths Principles, by J. Crook, If Christ had not dyed, Man must have perished
in sin, this being the way, found out by God, to ^ecover him.

Note, Here Is one Christian he grants the merit of Christ's coming and Death.
But W. P. makes the benefit of his coming to be no more but to show man more
plain what he saw before as through a glass, and perhaps thinks he mends ^he
matter by often calling the Body A holy Body, whilst yet he renders that
earthly and perishing.

Numb. 60.
G. F's Gr. Mystry, p. 222. Priest says, Christ is without his Saints, in
respect of his Bodily pres^ho^. G. F. answers, H^w then are they of his flesh
and his bone.

W. P. Chr. Quaker, p. 97. The Body of Christ is not so much as in any one.

Note, This W P. is still clashing against G. F. almost on every hand.

Numb. 61.
W. P's Address to Pro^estants, p. 119. Let us, (says he) but soberly con^^der
what Christ is, and ^e shall the better know ^hether Moral men are (...) be
reckoned Christians: What is Christ but Meck^^ss, Justice, Mercy Pa^^ence,
Charity and Virtue (...) Perfection?

Note, Though W. P. Allegorizes Christ, and makes him nothing but Virtues, yet
his Brother G. W. tells W. Harworth as above) that Christ is something else,
viz. a MAN, consisting of Spirit, Soul and Body, the same Body as dyed, or be
only words the matter so to deceive the People.

Observe now, That though these two men's Books quarrel about Doctrine, yet they
agree in praising ^ne another; for G VV. in Qrs. plainness, p 5, ^alls VV. P. A
sincere hearted and zealous Man; and VV. P in one of his Books does as much for
G. VV. And it is abundance of Books these two ^en have written, yea, more by
half than ever I ^ave seen, nor do I desire to see them; for truly find
Confusion enough in those I have seen, yea, more than I intend to demonstrate
at this time, ^ere being enough to show the reason why they have not profited
the People at all. W Penn says, Christ left nothing in writing, Chr. Quak. p
114, Christ wrote no Books. But they have not followed his Example in this; and
yet he says, Christ was their Example.

But Note further, though W. P. will have Moral men to be Christians, yet R.
Hubberthorn denis that Christ or Gods gift is obtained by moral means, and in
p. 33. he calls them Liars that so affirm. So let the Reader judge who is the
Liar in this case.

Again, I cannot but mind W P 's devised distinction and unscriptural
Expression [if it were no worse] in calling the Man Christ The FINITE and
IMPOTENT Creature; and yet G. VV. in his Introduction to Divinity of Christ,
says, We judge that such Expressions and words as the holy ghost taught the
Apostles and holy Men, mentioned in the Scriptures, are most meet to speak of
GOD and CHRIST, and not the words of man's Wisdom and devised Distinctions,
since the Apostles days. Now is not here a double face they carry, in seeming
and pretending one thing, and yet practice the quite contrary. Again, in the
Epistle to the same Book, they say, We charge you Presbyterians to give us
printed Scripture for (the word) Abstract, etc. And yet in Qrs plainness, p.
26. G. VV. there uses the word Abstract. And it is abundance of such dissembling
and silly Confusion these (seeming) wise men's Books are stuffed with, too tedious
here to mention.

And now I cannot but expect there will be great devising, pulling and drawing
here, by some Quakers, rather than confess themselves guilty of the Confusion
and Contradiction here charged, because they have so much accused others of the
same thing. Surely some curious Wyre-drawing, ^incing, Mangling, Otherwise
wor^ing and Equivocating we must expect herein. But they ^aving caught
themselves in this Net (ten to one ^ot) the more they will flutter, the more
they will ^etter themselves; for they cannot thus dance in (...) Net but
somebody will see them; for they are ^ow as easily seen through, as they
pretend they ^an see through others; yea, this will certainly ^e the
consequence, till they use the only Christian ^eans to get out of this Net,
which is by humbly confessing and condemning their Errors in their Books, as G.
K. has done.

I shall now return to the matter in hand, and ^^sert a Clash or two about the
Resuirection.

Numb. 62
W. P's Rejoinder, page ^69, 307, I do utterly deny (says he, that this Text, [
viz. It is sown a natural Body, and raised (...) spiritual Body] is con^^rned
in the Resurrection ^f man's carnal Body -- (...) say, this does not concern the
Resurrection of carnal Bodies, but the two states ^f men under the first and
^^cond Covenant.

W. Bayley's Works, p. 592, I own the Resurrection of the Body (says he) as
Paul did, viz. It is sown a natural Body, and raised a spiritual Body.

Qu. Whether it be one and the same Spirit that leads these men to expound
Scripture in contradiction to each other? Surely old Israel with their Rams
Horns were more Unanimous.

Numb. 63.
Chr. Quaker, p. 375 G. N. deciares, That this thing tends to Atheism, and to
make men Atheist^, viz other men's self confidence in asserting things contrary
to reason and manifest Experience, and in particular, in their affirming that
these self-same Terrestrial Bodies of flesh and bones shall be made spiritual,
immortal and incorruptible. It Is true, (sa^s G. W.) Hen More had finer and more
excellent Notions about the Resurrection, than many other learned men, and
aimed at the Truth and spirituality thereof, from the Vision of the holy men
recorded in the Scriptures.

Chr. Quaker, p. 372. G. W. cites H. More about the Resurrection, saying, Flesh
and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; and I think (says he) there is the
same reason of flesh and bones, viz. I understand natural flesh and bones, not
glorified.

Note, G. VV. commends this Notion of H. More, as savouring of truth and
spirituality, and yet renders those Atheists that believe the same; for H. More
does not here deny the Resurrection of the same Body that dies, only
understands it must be glorified.

Note also, G.W. here confounds the same G. W. in his answer to W. Harworth, p
17, where he holds, That a very wonderful change may be in the Body, and yet
the Substance not Annihilated or destroyed.

Reader, I do here honestly declare, that I would have cited more
Contradictions about the Resurrection, if I could readily have found them; but
indeed, their Books do generally agree in this matter, viz. in denying the
Resurrection of the Body that dies (as G. K. has largely made appear in his
late Narrative of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall, London) so that I found no
Passages to the contrary. But had it been my business here to have answered
Books, I would have showed how miserably blind Caleb Pusey shows himself aabout
the Resurrection in his book, called, A Modest Account, pray read from page 31,
to p. 38. and see how he endeavors to show G. K. inconsistent with himself
[where indeed there is no inconsistency] he gropes in the dark, like the
Sodomites, carnally apprehending G. K. and very well demonstrating himself to
be of the same faith with his Brethren, as aforesaid. Also, let all that read
that Book of C. Pusey, take notice, that though he banters at G. K. for holding
the Light not sufficient to save man, without something else, yet C. P. does
not say in all his Book, that it is sufficient for Salvation without any thing
else. Therefore how hypocritical is this to accuse a man for an Error, and yet
dares not assert the contrary; but I refer the Reader to G. K 's answer to said
C. Pusey, for further satisfaction, and so proceed to the next Chapter.

CHAP II. Of Opposition at Unity.
THis is briefly to show (and that chiefly from what is before cited) that
those Quakers hold the same Doctrines which they have condemned in their
Opposers, as Errors, blasphemous and damnable Doctrines; To do which, I shall
only give an Example from two of their eminent Opposers, viz. John Bunion and
Muggleton; the first quoted by Ed. Buroughs, the last by G. Whitehead.

E. B. cites J. Bunions Principles, p. 304, 306. Now I come (says he) to
reckon up John Bunions damnable Doctrines and Errors, viz.

1st, John Bunyon said, That Christ's second coming was not his coming in the
Spirit, for his coming in the Spirit is no Coming.

For this, see at Numb. 33. where G. W. owns the two comings of Christ, one
that is already past, and another to come at the end of the world or last Day.
And at Numb. 54. he there declares against three Comings, and will own but two;
so that here G W. holds his coming in the Spirit to be no Coming.

2dly, J. B. said, That Christ had two Bodies, and ^ne of the Bodies was out of
the sight of the Saints.

For this see at Numb. 11. where Jo. Coal holds the Church to be the Body of
Christ, and this Body G. I. (in Gr. Mystry, p. 93.) calls The Mystical ^ody;
that is one Body. Again, at Numb. 34, 35. G. W. holds, That Christ's Body that
dyed, is in ^ing, a circumscribed spiritual Body. Note, here is ^he two Bodies,
as J B. holds.

3dly, J. B. said, That Christ ascended into Hea^^n in our Nature.

For this, see at Numb 31, 35. where G. W. ^olds, Christ to be a Man in Heaven,
the same Body that was put to death, etc.

4thly, J. B said, That the Soul of man is the ^ight, wherewith every man is
enlightened by Christ, (...) God.

For this, see at Numb. 26, 27, 24. where G. F. ^olds, the Soul to be a part of
God, and to be the Seed (...) which Salvation is promised, which, he says, is
the Hope, Christ.

Thus far they agree with Bunyions Principles, which they call damnable
Doctrines.

Next, see Qrs. plainness, by G. W. p. 37, 38. ^uggelton holds these false and
blasphemous Doctrines (says he) that the Quakers utterly deny, viz.

1st, That Death took Christ's Soul into it, and that Christ's Soul dyed when the
Body dyed.

For this, see at Numb. 37, 38, 39. where the deny the Body to be Christ, and
that it was Christ that dyed, yea, they declare, That Christ in tha^ Body dyed,
or was crucified. And that both So^^ and Body was sacrificed, see Numb. 42.

2dly, That Muggelton holds, That the Godhea^ Life dyed; That when Christ dyed,
God dyed.

Now, see above whether they do not hold th^^ same; for at Numb 39, 11, G. N.
says, It w^^ Christ that dyed; and ^. P. says, Christ is of an E^ternal Nature,
and his flesh and bones are of his Nature; or nothing is Eternal but God [Mark
that] an^ compare it with their holding, That Christ in t^^ Body dyed.

3dly, That Muggleton holds, That Christ bei^^ God, imbodied with flesh and
bone, one Person without us, cannot be in the Quakers.

For this, see at Numb. 35, 36, 12* where the hold, Christ remaias a Man,
consisting of Spirit Soul and Body, the same Body that dyed; and th^^ the Body
of Christ is not so much as in any one.

4thly, That Muggleton holds, That God was bo^^ of Mary.

For this, see at Nuwb. 33, 51. where they declare, Christ to be true God born
of Mary; also That God the Father took humane or Ma^^ Nature.

5thly, That Muggleton holds, That the De^^ became Flesh, Blood and Bone.

For this, see the Preface to G. W 's Judgmen^ fixed, where he says of some
separate Quakers That they are Devils incarnate, viz. made flesh or become Man,
which is flesh, blood and bone. Let G. W. otherwise demonstrate this, if he
can, see^ng he says, The Lord laid a necessity on him to write (...)

Thus it appears how far their Doctrine agrees ^ith what G. W. calls Muggletons
false and blas^^mous Opinions. Therefore as G. W. in p. 20. ^f the same Book,
says to the Baptists, Pray you ^aptists (says he) before you conclude a final
Sentence ^on us, agree upon a consistent Creed that you intend (...) stand by,
if you intend to impose upon us to believe (...) you believe, upon pain of
Damnation. So now ^^e Baptists and other Professors may face about, ^^d say to
the ^uakers, Pray you Quakers tell us ^hy did you not agree upon a consistent
Creed ^at you intend to stand by (if you intend to im^ose upon us to believe as
you believe) before you ^^tenced us to Damnation, as many of you have ^^ne, and
as G. W. has done, in his Book called Ish^^el, etc. p. 11, 12. in these words,
viz. Senseless ^^tural brute Beasts, MADE to be DESTROYED, ^^served in
EVERLASTING Chains, under Dark^^, for everlasting Fire, Dogs, Sorcerers, shut
out ^^n God; with many more such dreadful Sen^^ces, or Quakers, Complements
which agree ^^ll with Muggleton's Curses, at which George (...) been an Artist
in his day, and his Brother Penn ^ows him close, for he avouches the most cruel
of these sort of Complements, in Reas, agt. Railing p. 165. as if these Quakers
had a Patent to revile, and pronounce People Damned.

But pray look upon G. W 's other confident face, in his Apost Incendary, p. 4.
where he says, As for our consessing that WE are the Church of the first born,
let OUR DOCTRINE, TESTIMONY, LIVES and SUFFERINGS bear witness.

To which I say, SO BE IT, let their Doctrine and Testimony (before cited) bear
witness, and let their Lives bear witness; for let their preaching against the
Delights and Fashions of the world, and against REVILINGS, Envy, Pride,
Covetousness, and other Debauche^ies, bear witness, while the world sees them
guilty of all these things, as well as others.

Now, let them come forth and give a better Demonstration than their bear
Say-so, that they are the Church of the first born, more than other Professors
of Christianity, or else who do they think will believe them?

And lastly, As to their Sufferings bearing witness that they are the Church of
the first born; I say, if they will have Sufferings to be a Demonstration, then
is the Church of England, (whom they have so much condemned) the Church of the
first born; for they have really outdone the Quakers in Sufferings, as all the
impartial will judge; for how many of them have expired in the Flames! how many
strange cruel Torturers and bloody Massacrees in diverse places, have many of
them seffered for Religion! and doubtless, God would enable them to endure the
like Sufferings again, rather then they would renounce their Religion. The like
may be said of the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, what cruel Sufferings have
they undergone!

Thus (my Old Friends) you may perceive how willing I am, that you should see
that you are (at highest) but upon even ground with other Christian Professors,
whom you condemn; yea, certainly you have exceeded all that I yet ever knew, in
Equivocation, hiding of Sin, Reviling, etc. It Is my Prayer to God that I may be
Instrumental to bring you down from despising your Fellow Creatures, Professors
of Christ as well as you

But G. W. to prove the Quakers to be indeed the true Church, and not the
Baptists* says, in Qrs. plainness, p. 33. We have a Record in Heaven, and also
in many Consciences, etc. Now, Mark, does not the Baptists say the same, in
their Book, called, A way to Zion? So that here one brings as good Proof as
the other; one says, and the other says; yet G. F. unchristians all Professors, but
themselves, for in his Professors Catechism, his very first words are* Come you
Vnchristians, let us talk with you. But to face about again, W. Penn in his
Persuasive to Moderation, page 46 calls them all Christians, and says, They
only differ in the Comment, all allowing one Deity, Savior and Judge, good
Works, Rewards and Punishments. But the same W. P. turns again, and in his
Rejoinder, p. 339. says, Oh! the Dreadful Darkness that overspreads the hearts
of the called Christians. Therefore says S. Fisher, p. 773.

Now this, not the other, anon its either,
Then by and by, its both and neither.
CHAP. III. A short Summary of Citations from the Quakers Books, showing they
deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ.
SEe at Numb. 36, 20. where they hold those to be false Ministers, who preach
Christ without, and bid People believe in him as he is in Heaven above; And
that the Light within is Christ, and is ONLY and principal, and admits not of
another. Also, at Numb. 15, 51. where they deny a God imagined to be beyond the
Stars. And deny God and Christ to be a Man in one Person.

Now, he who is the Christ of all true Christians is Jesus of Nazareth, who is
God and Man in one Person; and this Person is without all men in Heaven above,
yea, and beyond the Stars too, and cannot be in any man. But he who is the
Christ of these Quakers, they here show, is not without man, not in Heaven
above, not beyond the Stars, ^ot God and Man in one Person; but that the Light
within is Only their ^h^i^t and admi^^ of (...) Other. And W. P. largely
declare, That this Christ, or Light within, is the same, and no other than was
in the Jews and Gentiles, before Christ became Jesus of Nazareth, see R^ason
agt. ^ailing, p. 16. Behold how plain their Books are (...) denying Jesus of
Nazareth to be the Christ!

Again, see at Numb. 43. where J. W. denis Christ to have any Body of flesh and
bones, but ^^ly the Bodies of men on earth. Also, denis ^^at Christ dyed. And
also, I. P. Quest. p. 27. ^^ys, Is not the Substance the Light, the Life,
called ^^rist, wherever it is found? Does not the Name (...) Christ] belong
to the whole Body, and every Mem^^^ of the Body, as well as to the Head?

Thus, by their Doctrine, every believing Qua^^ (...) may be called Christ, as
well as he that suffered (...) the Cross. But I dare say, no true Christians
^^^ieve thus, they believe Jesus of Nazareth to (...) Christ, and that the Name
belongs to no man ^^e, no, not to the best man on Earth. Also, ^^ey believe the
true Christ has a Body of flesh ^^d bones, without all men, and that he did
dye ^^^trary to what those Quakers say of their ^^rist.

You may also see many other Passages cited (...) this Book, that confirm this
their denial of ^^us to be Christ. As, one at Numb. 38 where (...) P. denis the
outward Person that suffered to be the Christ of God. And another at Numb. 24.
where G. F. says, The Seed of Abraham is the Savior of the World; and at Numb
12. W. P. says, This Seed is the Light within, and not what proceeded from the
Virgin, Chr. Quaker, p 97.

But to be brief, take one Passage from Christian Quaker, p. 10 W. P. says,
Though this general Victory was obtained, and holy Privileges therewith, and
that the holy Body was not Instrumentally without a share thereof, yet the
Efficient and Chief cause was the Light and Life -- Page 111. So that thus far
w^^ can approach the honester sort of Professors of Religion etc.

Observe how far they approach other Christi^stians; He calls the Body H^LY,
but can this b^^ other than Hypocrisy? for as is noted at Numb^^ 49, 59. he
holds the Body to be earthly and perishing and yet here calls it Holy; nay, the
whole Ma^^^ Christ he calls, The Finite Impotent Creature; an^ yet here, (four
years after to hide the matter calls the Body holy. Behold the Fruits of
pr^tending to be Infallible! for whatever they polish, though never so
blasphemous, they cann^^ retract nor condemn it, but use what deceit the can to
cover and justify all.

Note, Though some of their late Doctrine see^ to contradict some here cited, by
being otherw^^^ worded, G. W. shows, that all that may well (...) and yet they
intend the same thing, Connt. Conve^^ p 72 and we must be content so to take
it, they repent and condemn their old Doctrine.

CHAP. IV. Of calling Names for Religion.
THough these Quakers do blame all others for calling hard Names, yet they seem
not to ^ome short of others in this matter, by what follows.

Rejoynded, p. 427 W. Penn with one Tongue accuses J. Faldo of Railing, and ill
bred Names, and yet with his the other Tongue he calls J. Faldo these ill ^red
Names, viz. Revengeful, Canniball, Cur yelping at the Moon, etc. see his
Introduction, and p. 405.

Also, G* Whitehead, with his smooth Tongue, (in Counterfeit Convert) says, Why
do you thus write, why do you trouble the World with such BITTER Treatment? But
then with his Rough Tongue he calls some separate Quakers, for their denying
Women's Meetings, etc. Vile Apostates, Unruly Beasts, Dogs, Wolves, Devils
incarnate, etc. So now it may be said to him, Why do thou thus write? Why
do thou trouble the world with such bitter Treatment?

Again, W. P. in Reas. agt. Railing, p. 165. he justifies, and declares that he
abides by these ill Names given by E. Buroughs, p. 30, etc. to wit. Thou
Jesuit, thou Sot, t^ou Sorcerer, thou art a Serpent, and the Curse of God is
eternally upon thee; Thou art shut out from God forever, thou sottish filthy
polluted Beast, thou dark Beast and Conjurer, etc.

And yet in Addres^ to Protestants, p. 242. he at once unchristians himself and
all his Brethren, for so doing, for says he, Men that call Names ^or Religion,
may tell us they are Christians, if they will, but no body would know them to
be such by their fruits, to be sure they are no Christians of Christ's making --
Good Reader take Notice of it; Alas! how has the man forgot himself!

Again, in brief Discovery, p. 7, 8, 9. by G. F. and others, The Priests are a
Viperous and Serpentine Generation, Thieves, Liars, Antichrists, Conjurers,
Witches, Devils, greedy Dogs, really they are Bloodhounds, still hunting and
gaping for their Prey like the Mouth of Hell -- Being universally the Bane of
Soul and Body, for whom the Theater of Gods most Dreadful Vengeance is reserved
to act their Eternal Tragedy upon; Thus W. Ponn in his Guide Mistaken. etc.

But hold, let us hear what G. F. says, That himself and W. P. are for
distinguishing a Generation of men by hateful and reproachful Names, Why,
(...); page 8 of West ans. North, it is said, He, whoever he be, who
distinguishes a Generation of Men, under one and the same Government, from the
rest, and puts upon them a hateful Name of Distinction and Reproach, whereby
they and others are set in Opposition, breaks the Peace, overthrows the end of
the Law, and ^^ads into War, and every evil Work, and s^ow a one (...) an evil
doer in a high degree.

Thus here is a Continuation of their SO* NO, NO, SO: Here they call themselves
no Christians of Christ's making, and not only so, but also Evil ^^ers in a high
degree; for I here affirm, by all the skill they have, they cannot invent or
use more ^ateful and reproachful Names than these; let ^^em confute me, if they
can.

Thus I thought fit to give a hint only of their ^musing the World with such
Bitter Treatment (as G. W 's word is) I could insert forty times as many such
Complements out of their Books, if (...) were worth reading, yea, e^ough to
fright sober People, if this will not. But I shall conclude, with only
inserting a few Rhymes out of their Book, called Righteous Judgment, in answer
to Fr. Bugg, p. 97. to s^ew what prodigious and profound Railery proceeds out
of their second Days Meeting at London, as if the Quakers were ^he only People
excellent in the more serious part of that Infernal Practice of inventing or
using Hellish Epithites They begin thus,

Think tho^ to scare us out of our good Order (of Men and Women's Meetings)
with thy Goggle-eyed Image of Jealousy, which if thou did see through thy
Spectacls, might afright thee out of thy shallow ^^^nceits.

An Ugly Spectael^^ for Rogers Team, ^risp, Penny man, Bullock and Bug,
Dark Devil driven dungy Gods, desperarely lugg,
Being tied to the Tail of their separate S^^ism,
Popish Libertine, Heathanism, Juda^sm, Atheism.


Now, is it not impossible for men, by words, to utter more base and wicked
railing Reflections than these Rhymes contain? But herein are they still
self-condemned also, for says G. F Gr. Mystry, p. 237. The Work of the
Ministers of the Gospel was not to reflect on Persons, or strike at Creatures;
thou that reflects on Persons, thou art a false Prophet, etc. Thus not only our
Neighbor Preachers, but also those who have of late come over Sea to visit us,
are false Prophets (by this their Doctrine) for their Reflections. And yet, how
frequently do these false Prophets tell their Hearers, It Is for your good that
we spend and are spent, and leave our Countries, our dear Wives and tender
Children, and altogether deny our selves of this World, etc? I confess, this is
so plausible, that I think it might affect all Christian hearers, but
especially such who neither considers the manifest effects of their late
Ministry, nor the worthy Observation that our Savior made of some, who
compassed Sea and Land to make one Proselite [and why not these to make many]
but when he is made, says our Lord, they make him two fold more the Child of
Hell, etc.

Note, These five men i^esrted in the aforesaid Rhymes, they call a Team of
Devils, and here I expect they will put me in for a sixth Devil. But seeing
it is contrary to Law to out six Horses in a Team, I query whether a Team of six
Devils be not unlawful also?

CHAP. V. Of Prophesies.
OF the many Prophecies and Predictions that I could mention out of my old
Friends Writings, I shall at present only set down two.

The first is the Prophecy of Solomon Eccles against John Story who (as S
Eccles charged him) contemned Women's Meetings, viz. This is the Word of the
LORD to thee, This year thou shall Dye, because thou have taught Rebellion
against the Living God.

The second, is the Prophecy of G. Whitehead against George Keith, viz. And
thus says the LORD, Because thou have poured out Contempt, Scorn and Reproach
upon my Servants and People, I will assurealy pour out and bring great Contempt
and Scorn upon thee

Note, If others think Curses to be fitter Names for these, I Will not contend.
But however, Sol. Ecclis not wording that of J. S cunningly enough, he happened
to he a false Prophet. Therefore Age and Experience has taught George Whitehead
Other wise to word the matter, (as he tells us in his Counter. Convert, p. 72.)
for if G. W had predicted some signal or eminent Judgment or Mischief to have
befallen G K according to the gr^^^^eds of the Wick^dness, that they charge
(...) to be guilty of, he might have mist it too, and to have ^az^eded his
honor of being accounted a Prophet, by his Brethren and Friends. But now, it is
but to conceit that G K. is scorned and contemned [the fate of all men, less or
more] and G W 's Prophecy is fulfi^^ed, and he keeps his Honor by thus
draftily wording the matter.

And truly, we can hear no better account of th^se Preachers late Prophecys of
Judgments to fall ^o sever^l Towns and Places in England within ce^tain Months,
not one of them is fullfilled, that we hear of; And though the Prophecy and
^ust Plymouth was so particular, that at the Time prefixed most or many of the
People left the Town, but the Judgment not happening, they returned home,
saying, This Quaker was a false Prophet. Well, my Friends, I was willing only
to give you a small hint of some of your Prophets Infallible Prophecys,
advising you and them to observe G. W 's Rule, viz. Otherwise to word the
matter for the future, or cease blaspheming and taking the Name of the Lord in
vain, as is too frequent for you to do.

CHAP. VI. Of Infallible Discerning.
HAaving met with but poor proof of their being Infallible Prophets, among the
Pro^hecys, let us in the next place come to their spirit of Infallible
Discerning, and see how they ^n discern more than others. The first instance
shall here bring is out of G. F's Great Mystry, 107. where he says,

The Quakers are of Abraham 's stock, before Anti^^rist was, or you (Priests)
were; and the Quakers (...) witness, they are made free from the wrath to come.
and thou (Priest) say, that the holiest man cannot ^^ve an Infallible
Character of another man; have (...) thou in this discovered thy self to be no
Minister Christ, or of the Spirit, who cannot give an infal^^ble Character of
another man, how can thou mini^^r to his Condition? how can thou see where
he is? ^ow can thou see them that be turned from the Dark^ss, and that be in
Darkness, and distinguish the (...) from the other, an holy man from an unholy
man, ^at can not give an infallible Character of any man's ^ate? Page 89. Thou
art an ignorant man, no^ ^^nst minister to the People, not knowing the
Condi^^^^ they be in, unless they tell thee. And p. 9. You that have not that
which is Infallible to judge in you, know not the Spirit of Christ, neither can
you judge of Persons or Things, and have not the Infallible Judgment, neither
have you the Word of God in your hearts, nor Christ which is Eternal and
Infallible.

Y^u must Note, that this is spoke of and to the World, the Priests of the
World; but then he turns ^^out, and tells what Friends have, viz. All which (i.
e. the Word of God, infallible judgment, etc.) the Quakers have to judge of
Persons and Things. And p. 8, 249, 267. The Quakers are the Preservers and
Savers of Souls. [A^rare People] -- Them called Quakers the ONLY Ministers o^
Christ -- And how can they but delude the People, tha^ are not infallible? Thus
far G F.

Now by this Doctrine the Quakers are not Ministers of Christ, but Deluders of
the People; for they have not this infalliabe Discerning, as thos^ manifold
Examples testify, for have not many o^^ their Preachers and Elders been guilty
of diver gr^ss ^^ils especially Whoredoms and Adultery and yet have still kept
their outward Minister and Station, and their state not discerned b^ their B^^^
been till by accident it has been out wardly discovered? And therefore, should
the not look upon the many Discoveries that has be^^ made of their falling into
those snares, to be bo^^ from the Justice and Mercy of God to them? fir^^ as a
Judgment upon them, for presu^ning to pretend to such high Seize, beyond
all other Christian Professors now living; Next, as a Mercy unto them, to show
them their Weakness and Presumption, if happily they could see it.

For why cannot my old Friends about Delaware ^^e that they want this Spirit of
Discerning, as ^uch as other People, by those late ill Examples of diverse of
their Preachers, especially of their ^eing unlawfully concerned with Women, yet
their state undiscerned, till discovered, as afore^id; and especially that of
Rob. Ewer at Phila^^^phia, whom the Meeting of Ministers that was kept at his
House, did not discern? But which is to be lamented, some are so blinded by
their Preachers crying out, All is Lies, that they will ^carce believe these
things, No, not this of Rob^wer, though Publicly proved.

Take one Passage more for Infallible Discerning, from Richard Hubberthorns
Works, patron^z'd by G. W. and others, p. 212. he there tells a Priest, That
they are Liars that say the Ministers of the Go^pel do not know who are Elect;
for they could dis^urn the Elect from the World. So these Teachers that know
not the Elect (says he) and yet exhort all their Hearers to believe, and lay
hold on Christ, their ^reaching is vain. And these Priests (says he) though they
take Sums of Money of their Hearers, yet they ^ow not who are elect among them.

Come on, my old Friends, come prove your ^elves, try your selves, and let us
know next time you print, whether by this your Rule, there be one Gospel
Minister now left amongst you?

But ^o wheo^ round about, and knock all down again, W^^oms says, in his Rebuke
p, 22. We ascribe not Infall^bil^ty to Men, but to the Grace of God, and to men
SO (...) AR as they are led by it. Behold Reade^, and (...) this Rhetoric
well! For are no^ other Professors, yea, ALL men in the world SO FAR
infal^able, as well as Quakers? here W. P has given away the Quakers cause, and
set them on even ground with others. But says G. W I cannot give away our
cause, for we have sufficient evidence of discerning of Spirits, Timorous
Reviler p. 3. Thus George thinks fit to keep up his Confidence with bace Say
so's, though he cannot but know that the world knews his Say so's, to be false.
And I have known a silly Women cheat their pretended Spirit of discerning, who
traveled from Meeting to Meeting, through several Counties (being bravely
received and entertained by Friends) und scerned, till discovered to be no
Quaker by others: And such things as these has made them find out a way to help
their Spirit of Discerning by admitting none now to travel [on Truths account,
as they call it] without Certificates* so that though G. W. in Qua. plainness,
etc tells us They have a Record in Peoples Consciences; yet now they must have
a Record in their Pockets, or else I Will assure them, their Friends will not
receive them, by their Conscience Record; Let them deny this if they dare; and
tell me how many Friends comes over Sea hi^her, or goes hence to other
Countries to preach by their Consciences Record, without their Pocker Record.
And thus is G. W 's Deceit seen, with their ^uffici^nt Evidence of Spiritu^d
Discerning, aforesaid.

But I had almost forgot, how that of late years their infallibility seems to
be run our of particular Persons into the Body of Friends or Church, as G. W.
demonstr^tes in his Apost. ^^ncend. p. 4, 16. there he declares them (the
Quakers To be THE People and Church of God, and so to be In^alli^le, and CANNOT
ERR, nor be deceived. But where is this Body or Church? sure not that Meeting
of Ministers at Robert Ewer's House in Philadelphia. No, Sam. Jenings lets us
know, it is at London; for in his Speech at that Yearly Meeting, 1694. he
declared. That the Meeti^g i^ America depended on that at London. So then it
seems, the Meeings else where are but Members of that Body at London and it is
clear, that the Members so depend on the Body, that if the Body dies, the
Members cannot live) This indeed is the Foundation Principle of Old Rome. And
here Samuel Je^ings has showed us where New-Rome is. In^eed I lately read how
that the Quakers in England presented six Public Addresses to the late King
James in four years time; but in five years that King WILLIAM had reigned, the^
had not presented one to him: And does not this then show, that those Quakers
who thus addressed King James, are as near a kin to the Papists as Sam.
Jenings? I also read one thing more, viz. That the Pope once set up Women's
Meetings for the increase of Faith among the Waldenses; and I cannot find that
ever any else has done the like, beside Geo. Fox, etc. and yet I have searched
the Scriptures, and some Church Histories too; and it is pity that they have no
other President but the Pope, for those Meetings are certainly of service in
Deeds of Charity and Hospitality.

In diverse other things there seems a very great Harmony between Old Rome and
Sam. Jening'ss New Rome, which I am not desirous to repeat now. This know for
certain Friends, that the way to recover the deceived, is to discover, lay open
and witness against the Deceivers, see T. Elwood's Epist^ p. 72. Therefore
sinee this Truth has chanced to drop from T. E.'s Pen, I shall add, that though
my old Friends often bless themselves thus, viz. WE are redeemed from a vain Life
and Conversation more than any Society in Christendom; WE are the ONLY
Professors of Truth; and WE are in the Truth, and ALL OTHER Professors are OUT
of the Truth [and so says the Pharisees, We are no as other men, We give Alms,
We Fast twice a week etc.] Yet I must now say for them, We Quaker do not, nor
never did outdo the Papists in general as to Life and Conversation; but herein
the Righ^ teousness of Papists and Quakers does so harmonize that it made the
late Ring James say (as I have an account) in his discourse one with R.
Barclay, That if he were disposed to change his Religion, he would turn Quaker.
No marvel then why.

But I cannot well omit giving one instance more about the Foundation Principle
of Old Rome or top stone of Popery; See Plain Dealing, etc. by P. Livingstone,
page 12, 20, 22. where treating about that he calls the form of Truth, viz.
giving the Hand, the Hat, and going to Meeti^gs, he says, Friends that stand in
the Life, and are in the Body, k^ow that there is not, NOR CANNOT be
preservation out of the Body; for they that are out of the Body [of Friends]
are out of the Faith; And the Lord has chosen the Quakers a peculiar People,
above ALL People upon the Earth; and we are to turn to no other People, etc.
Mark just so the Papists say, There is no Salvation or Preservation out of the
Body or Church. And that they must believe as the Church believes, or they
cannot be saved; as he further says, p. 23. They that believe not as the true
Church believes, CANNOT be saved; but this we know of an infallible Certainty,
that WE being faithful in the Truth, those that are gone from us are of another
Spirit, and Not of the Faith of the TRVE Church.

The very same the Papists say, WE are the true Church, and All that are gone
from us, are not of the says of the true Church. Pray consider, where these
Quakers are, And also whether Old Rome can lay a greater Necessity on such low
exteenal Ceremo^^^ as the Hand the Hat, and going to Meetings? for, ^he assim^s
p. 5. That Spirit that leads from the pra^^r^^ thereof, to b^^^^^ dark Spirit,
clearness and fr^eo^o^ is not (...), but it does lead it to bondage.

But how quite contrary this is to that in Truths P^^^^iol^, p 24, 51. Every
Man ought to be left FRE^, as the Lord shall persuade his OWN Mind, in doing,
or leaving undone, this or the other Practice in Religion. This indeed looks
quite with another face, clean contrary to Rome's Impositions aforesaid; and
yet these Quakers would have us believe they are led by the ONE Spirit. But I
perceive J. Crook that wrote that Book, is not a fit Man for their Society.

CHAP VII. Of the Scriptures.
CHristian Quaker, page 104. W. P. cites and transposes the Apostles words,
thus, Lo, in the Volumn of the Book it is written, I come to do thy Will, O
God, A Body have thou prepared me. But grant W. P has not altered the Sense of
that Text, yet by W. P 's own Doctrine, it is very questionable whether that be
true Scripture, especially because what is written in the ^olumn of the Book of
the old Testament, is only this, Sacrifices and Offerings thou aidst not
desire, mine Ears ^ast thou opened, Psalm. 40.6. Mark, here ^s not a word of a
Body have thou prepared me, which ^e and his Brethren make such a Noise about
in their Books.

Now says W. P. ( Rejoinder, p. 38) I cannot but observe at what a suspected
rate the Scriptures have been both first collected, and then conveyed through
the several succeeding Ages -- I may well object, Are we sure the Judgment of
them who first collected them was sufficient to determine what was right, and
what not? -- (Also How shall we be assured that in above 300 years, so many
hundred Copies as were doubtless taken, should be pure and uncorrupted,
considering the private Dissentions, the readiness of each party to bend things
to their own belief, and the growing and succeeding Faults of leaving out,
a^ding, transposing, etc. Nor was the Collectors Judgment In^allible -- Learned
men tell us of little less than 3000 several Readings of the Scriptures of the
New Testament in Greek Hence we may observe the Uncertainty of J. Faldo 's Word
of God, etc.

Now therefore since W. P. thus declares the Uncertainty of the Scriptures of
the New Testament, and the Psalmist (to which the Apostle seems to refer) shows
that Text to be altered, why then should he and his Brethren build such
monstrous Principles upon so uncertain a Foundation as they render it? That
upon these words, (which it seems are properly) Mine Ears have thou opened; as
that therefore he who dyed a^ Jerusalem was not Christ, but a prepared Body;
and that the Jews did not see Christ, but a prepared Body; and that the outward
Person born of the Virgin was no part of Christ, but only a Garment (see Numb.
38, 48.) And to strengthen this Anti-scriptural Doctrine, T. Elwood has one
knack in his Truth Desended, p. 138. where he ventures to belie the common
Creed; The common Creed (says he) called the Apostles Creed, says, Christ was
conceived by the holy Ghost, Though born of the Virgin. Now pray search the
common Creed, and see if the word [Though] be there to be found. Behold this
great Quakers Champion! O what an Imposture would he have rendered George Keith
to the World, had he wrote this Lie of the Creed.

Note further, W Penn cites and defends this Passage, Rejoinder, p. 61. Quest.
Of what service are the Scriptures, as they are given forth and recorded
without? Ans. Much every way (says he) and there is an Agreement and Union
between the Spirit within and the words without.

Observe here how this wise Man confounds himself: The Scriptures, by his
account, are altogether Uncertain, and suspicious (at least) of being
corrupted; and yet there is an agreement and u^ion between the Scriptures, as
recorded without, and the Spirit within. How does he here render the Spirit
Uncertain! One may see by this, that a man who writes much had need have a good
^emory, or a stable Faith.

Again, something like this is that late Confession of G. W. in his Counter.
Convert, p. 26. We ^^^refer the holy Scriptu^es (says he) before all the books
extant in the World.

Now, observe here how G. W. carries a double ^ice to deceive his Reader; for
he does not say, that he prefers the Book called the Bible, before ^ll Books
extant; no, for then he would contra^ict their Old Books; for the Scriptures in
the ^ible they esteem Uncertain (as above) And their ^ormer Doctrine shows
plainly what those holy Scriptures be, which they prefer; for in Truths
Defense, p. 2*104. they say, You might as well have condemned the Scriptures to
the fire, as our Papers and Querys -- for our giving forth Papers or printed
Books it is from the immediate and eternal Spirit of God. Hence it appears,
that those holy Scriptures which they prefer, are their own Books, and so much
or such parts of the Bible as they will allow to remain uncorrupted, etc. And
thus this insincere G. Whitehead hides himself, by a deceivible meaning, as is
more plain by what he says in his ^ntient Book, called, Truth defending, p. 7.
That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any (says G. W.) is of as
great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and GREATER, etc.

Now, let the Reader judge what those holy Scriptues are, that they prefer
before all Books extant in the World* And as to what parts of the Bible they
will allow to be holy Scriptures, hea^ what Joh. Wh^^ch ad says in Refuge
fixed, p. 17. viz. Whether Moses o^ H^rmis were the first Penman of the
Scriptures? or whether both these, and not one? And whether some words were not
spoken by the grand Imposter, some by Wicked Men; some by Wise Men ill applied;
some by good Men (...) expr^ssed; some by false Prophets, and wet true; some by
true Prophets, and yet false, etc. Now Reader, do but compare this with what W.
Penn says before; and then if my old Friends, for time to come, should object
and say, There are seeming Contradictions in the Scriptures, (or Bible) and
therefore well may our Friends Books seem to contradict eac^ other. Pray let
them know, that there are not only seeming, but real Contradictions in their
Books, but not in the Bible. And as to any see ^ing Contradictions that may be
in the Bible, they themselves (as above) have given the reasons why it is so,
viz. having been corrupted; but their Books cannot be corrupted, because we
have the first Impression of them, which they say, are given forth from the
Immediate and Eternal Spirit of God, and so must needs be better and mo^e
certain Scripture than the Bible, a^c^^^^ng to their ow^ Doctrine

Now as to the Titles they give to the Scriptures, take a little more of their
Clink Clank as W. P. says of the Priests) for in a Book of G W 's called,
David's Enemies discovered, p. 7. he says, These Quakers, do NOT call the ^our
Book^ of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the New Testament and ^ospel, as thee
and thy Generation (of Priests) do.

But T Elwood, in his Antidote, p. 81. calls the Writings of Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John The New Testament Scriptures of Truth, and so is no Quaker, if
G. W. say true; for so he sees cause (...) word the matter.

Again, J. Tomkins and W. Penn put out a Book, and call it, The Harmony of the
Old and New Te^^ament, and so are no Quakers, if G. W. say true. ^ut pray Note,
Though they tell of the Harmony ^f the Old and New Testament, yet there is but
^^ttle Harmony in their Books, which they esteem ^qual with, if not prefer to
the Scriptures.

Again, W. Caton, in his Books to his Friends, ^ag. 35.42. calls the VVritings
of Matthew, Mark, ^uke and John, The GOSPEL, and so is no Quaker, (...) G. W.
says true. Well, what think ye, my ^ld Friends, can we suppose these men are
any ^ore led by the ONE Spirit, than others are? ^^ely Nay.

But to face about again, G. Fox, in his Book, News from the North, p. 14
says, Your Church is Steeple House, which is Carnal, and your Teacher Carnal,
your O^iginal is Carnal, Hebrew, Greek and Latin; and your Word is Carnal, the
Letter; and the Light is Carnal, the Letter. ^o Dust is the ^erpents Meat;
their Original is but Dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death; Their
Church i^ Dust, a ^^e ap^o Lime and Stone gathered together. So the Se^pent
feeds upon Dust -- And their Gospel is DUST, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
which is the Letter.

(...) Now Observe, first, how he tells of the Serpent feeding on Lime and
Stone; pray is not this Carnal too? had not the Devil need to have strong Teeth
to know upon Ste^ple-Houses? Sure this is both Carnal and Ridiculous, or
Ranter-like. Secondly, He renders the Scriptures all alike Carnal, Dust and
Serpents Meat, with Hebrew, Greek and Latin. Here Is no preference, except in
their own Books, and some of those they entitle, The Word of God, The Word of
the Lord, A living Testimony, etc. Now if they say the Bible will grow Old and
molder away, and become Dust, I say, so will their Books too. And if they say,
It Is the Sense contained in the Words of their Books, which they call the Word
of God, the Word of the Lord; I say, the like is understood of the Scriptures
in the Bible. And yet (as do the Papists, so) they have opposed others, calling
them Liars that say The Scripture is the Word; If this be not Equivocation, I
say again, it is an exalting their ow^ Books above the Bible. Above the Bible
did I say yes, why not? for the aforesaid Book, called News out of the North,
was (as G. Fox says, p. 1.) Written from the MOUTH OF THE LORD, b^^^^^ ^^ who
is Naked, and stands Naked before the ^^d, clothed in Righteousness, whose
Name is not ^wn to the World, which was prophesied of, but (...) in fulfilled.
Therefore it must needs be better ^^^ipture than the Bible, for they tell (as
above) ^^w Uncertain that is.


Therefore, whatever late Confession they have ^^d^, in pretending to prefer
the Scriptures of (...) Prophets and Apostles before all Books, it (...) be no
other but Deceit, till they condemn ^^^^r old Doctrine; for G. VV. confesses,
Their ^^^entions may be the same, though they may see cause ^^ow) otherways to
word the matter, Count Conv. ^^g. 72

And Lastly, Sam. Fisher says of the Scriptures. (...) were their
Transcriptions and Translations never ^^^tain and entire, by answering to the
first Original ^^^s, yet are not ^apable to be to all men) any other (...) a
Lisbian Rule or Nose of Wax, see his Addi^^^nal Appendix, p. 21. Mark how he
affirms ^^^t if the Scriptures were never so true, yet ^^^y are capable of
being NO OTHER than a ^^^se of Wax. Now I dare affirm, there is no sort (...)
People else in Christendom, except Papists, will ^^^k thus of the Scriptures.
But experience tells (...) That all sensible Christians who protest against
(...) Popish Principle, cannot but have an evidence (...) themselves to the
worth and purity of the Scriptures, by those sweet Streams of Life that (...)
felt by reading and meditating thereon, beyond what can be felt by reading any
other Books.

But before we conclude this Head, take on Verdict more from W. P^s Spirit of
Truth, p. 38^ The Scripture (says he) is much like the Shadow of the true Rule.
Now all men know, That the shado^^ is a vain empty uncertain thing, sometimes
two or three times longer or shorter than the True or Substance.

Again, W Smiths Primer, p. 11.12. Quest Wh^^ is the Service of the Scriptures,
if they be not a Rule and for trial of things that are spoken? Ans. Th^^ are of
great Service, Child, and are to be read are believed -- (But) if thou look
upon the Scripture for A RULE, and for Trying, thou give that un^^ them which
belongs unto Christ, etc.

Note, Here the Scripture is denied to be a^^ Rule at all, no, not so much as
to try actions (...) words. But he says, They are to be believed; a^^ yet W.P.
shows them to be Uncertain. So (...) must believe that which is Uncertain, and
no Ru^^ in any case. Is not this rare Doctrine!

But to face round about again, E. Burrou^ in his Hu^-and-Cry after false
Prophets, says, I sh^^ lay all People to the Line of Judgment by THE RULE of
the Scriptures, and the Spirit that g^^^ them, see p. 880. where he not only
makes (...) Scripture A Rule, but The Rule, yea, so far (...) Rule, that he
trys, judges and condemns the Prie^^ by the express words of Scripture; as
Vncerta^^ and Corrupt as they render them before.

But as Sam. Fisher says of the Priests, so pray ^^serve G W 's Rounds,
Wheelings and Whirlings, (...) in his Book, Tit. Ishmael, etc. p. 3.10. he
asserts, (...) Scripture of the Bible is Carnal, the Letter is ^ath, and
kills; yet he calls his own Writings, ^^e Light and Lise of Christ, etc. But
to face ^out again, he tells us, They prefer the holy Scriptures before all
Books in the World. But then Round (...) goes again, saying, That which is
spoken by the ^^^rit of Truth is of as great Authority as the Scriptures are,
and greater, etc. [And that their Writings ^^^t given forth by the Eternal
Spirit of God] But ^^ound again comes George with a back stroke, ^^d in Qrs.
plainness, p. 71. he says, Our Intention ^^^d Principle never was to bring our
Books in Compa^^son with the Scriptures. O Confused Confidence ^^^d
Self-Contradictions!

CHAP. VIII. Of Magistracy and Government.
ALthough I have plenty of Instances before me to cite out of my Old Friends
^^^^s, I shall ^^gin with my Neighbor Sam. Jer^^^^ ^^^k, ^all'd, The state of
the Case, p. 73. where he says, Magistracy and Government we always on ^^d to
be (...) Ordinance of God.

Now Observe, here S. Jenings deals deceitfull^ and dishonestly, in pretending
to be what reall^ they are not; for he does not tell what nor whose Government
they have always owned to be God^^ Ordinance; for these words of his imply,
that the^^ have owned all Government under which they have lived, to be Gods
Ordinance, when as their Books declare they own no Government to be such but
the Government of those who witness Christ to rule an^ r^ign in them, all other
Government being but as (...) c^^^ersome Tree that must be cut down; for in T^^
Light, by W. Smith, p. 16. says, We ow^ Government and Magistracy that stands
in the Power of God and executes true Judgment within the Gates, calling down
Sin and Evil doers, and setting up Reghteousness, and THOSE that walk therein
So here it is not the Government of such as caus^ them to suffer loss of Goods
and Liberty, tha^ they own to be Gods Ordinance, As is furthe^ showed from
Great Mistry p. 90. by G^F. Suc^ as are turned to Corruption (says he) are
Hypocrite^ they are gone from the higher Power, and so for the Lords sake the
Saints cannot be subject to that Power^ And p. 20. of News from the Noath, Sing
all y^^ Saints, clap your hands and be glad, for the Lord Jehovah will reign,
and the Government shall be taken from you pretended Rulers, Judges, Justices,
Law^^ yers and Constables; all this Tree must be cut down and Jesus Christ will
Rule alone. Again, I the Ligh^ will Overturn Kingdoms, Nations and gathered
Churches, that will not own me the Light in them; ^^^e G. W 's Light and Life,
p. 11.

Now, is it not evident from hence, that if Sam. Jenings had expressed himself in
the ancient implicity of a Quaker, he should have worded it thus, viz.
Magistracy and Government we own to (...) Gods Ordinance, so far as we (or
Christ in us) ^ave the Command of it, because we know no People ^^se, that so
own and witness Christ to Rule. So that ^hen such men rule, it is no more them
that Rule, ^^t Jesus Christ alone (as above G. F. intimates) ^^e present
Government being but a dead loath^^om Form. As T. Ellwood ( Sam Jenings
intimate ^rother) says, in his Alarm, p. 6. Did you not (...) says he) make a
solemn Covenant with God, That (...) would Extirpate Episcopacy, that Dead
Loath^^m Form? Did you not spew it up? And will you ^^^n again, and lick up
your old Vomit? O do not ^ol do not run wilfully into Destruction again. We
(...) Misery to the Vpholders of the Priests of the World, [ i. e. the Rulers,
for it is they that uphold ^he Priests.]

Again, G. Fox, in his Book called, Papers given ^orth to the Heads, etc. p. 9.
says, Are not all those that will dote so much on an Earthly King TRAITORS
against Christ? Neither do you ^^ad (says he that there were any Kings since
the Apostles days, but among the Apostate Christians and false Church. Christ
is King alone, and makes his Disciples Saints, Kings and Priests, to reign upon
the Earth: These are true Christians, and will these have any more Kings among
them but Christ? They are out o^ the Life and Power that make such work for an
Earthly KING, and EARTHLY POWERS.

Come, Mark that, W P^nn, with thy Industry in getting Grant after Grant for
Kingly and Earthly Power. And Mark that, S. Jenings, wh^ sa^dst to the
Seperates, [not long before the second time thy Horns were cut from pushing
with Kingly or Earthly Power] We will take car^^ that you shall not be our
Judges. And Mark that my old Friends in general, with your diligence t^ engross
and keep what hold you can on Earthly Power. And behold your Apostasy!

Now had not the Wheel been so turned about that S. J. and his Brethren have
lost the ancient Marks of simple hearted Quakers, what need he us^ such craft,
to pretend to own what they really d^ not? or are they sensible how they are
fallen from their ancient Principles, and now see their forme^ Weaknesses, why
then are they too Proud o^ ashamed to follow the Example of good men in all
Ages, to confess and repent, and leave a Memorial thereof to Posterit^, as they
have done. O^ I know the reason; this they cannot yet do! for then down goes
their great pretense to Infallability.

Lastly, W.P. Address to Protestants, p 234. (...) we will give ancient Story
credit (says he) we shall find, that worldly Weapons were never employed by
the Christian Church till she became Worldly, and so ^^ast to be truly
Christian: But why should I say the Church? her Leaders have taught her to ERR.
I ^onfess had not ancient Story informed me, that (...) Christian Societies
have apostatized, when ^^ey grew numerous, I should have admired at ^is
passage, that the same W. P. should in so few ^^ars after he wrote it, nor only
fall into that ^postacy himself, but also draw many more with ^^m. But some
think W. P. has wit enough to ^^ke out to all that see with his Eyes, that the
lord of the Magistrate, viz. Constables Staves, ^eriffs Weapons, Stocks,
Prisons and Gallows are ^ot woridly Weapons, but Spiritual Weapons, ^^^en used
by Quakers. But however, though he ^^s showed the whole Church of the Quakers
concerned in Governments about Delaware, are ^ast to be Christian, yet he
confesses himself (as ^ne Leader) to be the cause of it; for he says, ^^er
Leaders, have taught her to Err.

CHAP. IX. Of Persecution and Prosecution.
VIndication of the Quakers Principles, p. 55. says, We bear Indignities and
Injuries, and being reviled, they revile not again; and we resist not evil, nor
are we in Revenge, but leave it to the Lord, whose Vengeance is, and he will
repay it.

But Sam Jenings in his State of the Case, p. (...) alleges, That they could
do no less than prosecute and fine G. K. and T. B. without the violation of
their Trust to the King. O trusty Trojan since the days of Edw. Billing.


Therefore Sam. Jenings must now make their ancient Principles to speak thus,
viz. We bear Indignities and Injuries when we have no Power to Revenge them;
and we leave Vengeance with the Lord, when we are not trusted with Power by the
King to take Vengeance our selves. And thus S. Jenings and his Brethren,
Apostate-like, have lost (if ever they had) the pretended innocent Nature of
the Quakers, and are in the Fall, and Unredeemed; for so they say in their
Catechism, by W. S. It Is the disposition of OUR NATURE not to seek Revenge,
though we do suffer Wrong; for the Revenging Nature is in the Fall; but it is
not so with us whom God has redeemed, etc. Beside, let S. Jenings compare
their late Practice with their old Principle about Contending and Suing at Law;
see Possession of the living Faith, p 7. It was NEVER the Faith of Christ to
Sue, Contend, etc. thus S. J. and his Brother Preachers about Delaware, yea,
and Hearers too [like Preachers, like People] are Apostate^, and have not the
Faith of Christ, by their own plain Rules; for the same Principle is held forth
by R. H. G. F. G. W. E. B. and others.

Again, I observe S. Jenings tells that the reason of T. B. and G. K. being
prosecuted, was for saying, Sam Jenings was too high and imperious in worldly
Courts, and ca^sing him ignorant, presumptuous and insolent. N^w is not Sam.
Jenings here blinded by a sordid persecuting Spirit, that thus has the face to
publish this to the wo^ld, seeing it is yet to be read in the Books of the
^ryals of W. P. W. M. M. F. G. W. and others, that they accuse the Magistrates
in England most severely with Injustice, Oppression, Wic^edness and Corruption,
and yet these Magistrates did ^ot punish them for that; nor was G. F. punished
for telling, Justice Bennet, He was a shame to the Government, as in the Book
called, West to North, etc Th^s ^h^ws the Magistrates in England more No^l^,
more Christian, and far more f^ee from a Revengeful Persecuting Spirit, than
these Quakers, wh^ cannot bear to be called, Ignorant, Presumptuous and
I^^olent (though by m^no^ their own ^en^mination, nor spoken when exe^c^^ing
his Magistratical Office, but in Controve^^ies about Religious matters) without
taking Revenge on their Persons. But hear what G. F. says of such in Gr.
M^^tery, page 125. 366. You are inwardly ravened (says ^e) that strike at the
Creatures -- and to cause People to be put in Prison, and to be perse^^ted, and
have their Goods taken away, such are disorderly Teachers, and shall be rooted
our And so far they are self-condemne^ Apostates, by their ancient Testimonies,
so their actions in Pennsilvania. Witness their imprisoning John M^^Combe when
his Wife was but two days delivered of a Child, and in danger of Death, by a
Flux, and another of his Family sick also, that dyed in a short time after, and
yet he could not prevail so much as to go home to take leave of his Wife, or
set his House in order, though earnestly desired by him, promising to appear at
any time when they should require him; No, that favor could not be gran^ed,
but to Prison he must g^, although Humphry Murrey, the Mayor and chief Magistrate
of the place, offered to be bayl for him, at which Sam Jenings raged, and
bitterly reflected upon him, for that he knew his place no better. And what was
all this for? surely some he^uous Crime, one would think; why, 'twas nor more
nor less than for letting a person have two of the printed Appeals to the
yearly Meeting (put forth by G. K. etc.) for 2 d. piece, as they cost him. But
surely some Seditious matter was contained in this single Sheet; why, the
matter they were so offended at, was an Article, wherein it was queried,
Whether some Magistrates, called nakers, at Philadelphia, did not act contrary
to the Qrs. Principles, in commissionating one hiring men to fight. And for
this they not only imprisoned him, but did what they could other ways to ruin
him, by taking away his Lisence which he had to keep an Ordinary, that cost him
3 l 12 s. And yet, like Preachers, like People so dark are many of them, to
say, This was not any thing like Persecution, though no Law had this poor man
broken, nor did they so much as pretend he had broken any Law.

Also, the Imprisoning William Bradsord, and taking away his very Tools that he
should get maintenance for his Family by, contrary to the Law of England, so
justly pleaded by him, he being one of the Kings Subjects Also, their
imprisoning Peter Boss, till Providence put the Government into the hands of
Coll. Fletcher, Governor of New York, who released him our of Prison. And pray
what was his Crime? Why, 'twas for writing a Letter to Sam Jenings, querying
about several Miscarriages reported of him, as inserted in p. 59* State of the
case, and among the rest, Whether S. J. was not drunk? In the Trial of which D.
Lloyd being Attorney, pleaded for S. J. and read a Case out of an old Law Book,
to this effect, That though a Bishop was seen to be drunk, yet was not to be
reproved. He also produced an Act against W. Brad^ord made in the reign of K.
James 2d against printing Books without putting the Printers Name to them, which
they alleged W. B had done, and not put his Name to the printed Appeal (though
the Authors Names were affixed thereto.) Well, to Trial W. B. was brought, D.
Lloyd pleaded hard against him, the Jury had their Charge given by S. Jenings,
out they went to tr^ this ^^ime, but it happening so, that there was two or
three upon the jury that were not Quakers, they stood upon the Nicet^^ as some
of their fellow jurors called it, of two Evidences, to prove that W. B. printed
said Appeal, which not appearing, after about 48 hours the Jury came into
(ou^t, and told the Bench, they were not like to ag^ee. To whom A Cook made
this learned Speech, viz. Well, seeing, Friends that you are not like to agree,
you are Absolved from your ^est or Oath) and are discharged; and we will have
another Jury that shall agree, and find the Bill. But before another Court, the
Government was changed, W. Bradford discharged from his the V^ngence which they
intended.

And yet for all this, these degenerate Quakers with not believe these manifest
Truths, known to so many, but th^^'ll believe Sam Jenings Book of Law, who in
his P^eface, would make People believ^, That the Report of these men's
Sufferings is ^^t Sham p^t upon the World, and so far from an^^hing like
Pe^secution, that it was only Sport and Play; and I'il warrant him, can make
Drove Oratio^^ (...) in hi^ Preaching too. 'Twas Prosecution, s^^s (...), and
not Persecution, see state of the case, p 45 Just so also the New England
Priests say, what they did to the Quakers was Prosecution, and not P^rsecuti^n,
see the Book, called, New England judged.

But there was a man punished for taking away an Hourglass from a Priest, and
this G. Fox calls Persecution, in his Instructions, etc. p. 30. Behold! is
there greater Blindness and Partiality to be found in the whole World, than is
among these Quakers, that call punishment, for breach of just Laws,
Persecution, and yet when they punish men, who have broke no Law, they say,
that is no such thing as Persecution* but Prosecution.

And though the Quakers have all along made such a great Noise and continual
Cries to the Rulers, complaining of their great and grievous Sufferings by
Persecution, even in so much, that they have declared to the World, That their
Sufferings have been greater Sufferings, and more Unjust ^han the Sufferings of
Christ, or his Apostles, or of my others since the Apostles days, as in p. 273.
of Edw. Buroughs Works; which passage was lately ^astified in the City Mercury
or News Book, by 24 Quakers at London* And yet themselves scarce any sooner
mounted into the Seat of Government, ^ut they fell to persecuting one another,
till Pro^idence stopped them, by the Government being taken from them. Therefore
they being a con^^derable People for Number in some places, the ^ing and
Parliament had great Reason to make that Law which was made last year, That no
Quaker or reputed Quaker shall serve on any Juries, (...) bear any Office or
place of Profit in the Government. Thus though they may see what their ill
Manners in

^ennsilvania has brought on them; yet on the other hand they may take it as a
blessing unto them, they being a People not qualified for Government,
especially in respect of Principles anciently delivered; for when T. Budd
declared the Duty of Magistrates, in his Book, called, Good Order, etc. p. 34.
viz. I do believe it to be both lawful and expedient (says he) to bring
Offenders to Justice by the Power of the Magistrates Sword, which is not to be
used in vain, etc Hear how G. Fox condemns him for this, in a Letter to
Pennsilvania, which Letter I have by me, to show upon occasion; his words are
these, Dear Friends, R F^^well and A. Cook, Remember me to T. Budd, and tell
him, he gave forth a Book, which grieves the honest hearted, and some dirty
Spirits have got advantage, and how that it Thwarts our ancient Principl^s,
that part concerning Magistracy, p. 34. i^ w^^ l^^ld upon W. Penn; but he is
clear of it. And he c^^ not do well to print it, and spread it, for Friend ^ere
will not sell it -- but stopped it -- let him write over b^t^^r for Friends to
call it in again. So with my love,

G. Fox.

Yet such miserable Darkness has overspread those Quakers a^ Delaware, that
they see not their Apostasy herein. Nor indeed how should they s^^ing the
Yearly Meeting at London did not find i^ proper or fir to condemn these
Practices, no^ to put the Actors upon condemning it; No, no so much as that of
their g^ving a Commission, and hiring men for a hundred Pound, and furnishing
them with Arms and Ammunition, to recover a Sloop that Babit and his Mon had
stole from Philadelphia harbor; though it was an Action to the furthest extent
that those words in T. Bada Book could reach, as all that reads the same may
see.

Hence it is plain, that the whole Body in general are now so far Apostatized
herein, that they encourage their Brethren to grieve the honest hearted, give
dirty Spirits advant^ge, and thwart their ancient Principles, unless they will
say. G. F. is a Liar, whom they call, The Father of many Nations see W. P 's
Rejoinder, p 354.

But to show further of my old Friends Apostasy in this particlar, R. Barclay
in his Apology, p. 399. 407. says, As to what relates to the Magistrates of the
Christian World, albeit we deny them not the Name of Christians, because of the
public Profession they make of Christ's Name, yet we may boldly affirm, that
they are far from the perfection of Christian Religion, because of the state in
which they are, they have not come to the pure Dispensation of the Gospel. But
for such whom Christ has brought hither, it is not lawful to defend themselves
by Arms, but ought over all to trust in the Lord Thus this Doctrine of R. B.
runs almost parrallel with that of W. P. before cited, only he unchristians the
whole Body of his Friends concerned in Government; but R. B 's sentence is only
on the Magistrates; of which, let those that are Preachers look to it, and
study the most effectual means to keep their Hearers from reading such things
as these, so dangerous for then discovery.

Come on my old Friends yet a little further, I wish you were as willing to see
your Apostasy, as I am to show you Read your Ancient Principle of disallowing
to go to Law, and being no Contenders, Patronized by G. F. G. W. and E. Bur. in
p. 23. of R. Huberthorns Works.

Priests says, Many Diffrences may arise which cannot well be decided without
going to Law. R H. Replys, Thou do allow of going to Law, which the Apostle
did not, and he was a Minister of Christ; and here thou have showed, thou art
none -- and who are come to the Doctrine of Christ, which is Yea and Nay, there
is NO DIFFERENCE, They need NO GOING TO LAW, there is NO CONTENTION; and many
Differences are in thy Generation, which is without Christ and his Doctrine,
which many of you Sue men at the Law. -- And here openly I charge you all in
the presence of the living God, to be no Ministers of Christ. O when will you
blush for calling all but your selves No Ministers of Christ, no Professors of
Truth! All that join not with you, or believe not as you believe, you say, do
not own Truth, or profess Truth. But I appeal to Gods Witness in all your
Consciences, whether this Priest was not a betrer Owner of Truth, or Professor
of Truth than you? for his Doctrine and Practice agrees, but your Doctrine is
one, and your Practice another; contrary to Truth, double ^^ded men. Therefore
condemn our ancient Doctrine in your Book, caked, The Quakers ^^lenge, p. 3
viz. The Quakers are in the Truth, NONE but they. And O learn to be more
^^ritable!

CHAP. X. ^^ends Sufferings to be recorded by London Meeting.
^RIENDS;
THis is in some sense to answer your Request; for I have met with some Papers
sent from ^or Meeting at London, wherein you frequently for all Friends
Sufferings to be sent in to be orded. Therefore I shall here set down the
^ferings of some Friends about Delaware, called, ^erate Quaekers, and request
your care, that ^en you meet with this Account, together with ^aforesaid
Imprisonments, etc. to Record the ^^e, as you do others, if you are impartial
men, (...) if not, pray let them alone.

In the Year 1695. A. Smith, W. Budd and W. ^^inson in West Jarsey, for
cons^ientiously refu^^g to serve on Jurys, were fined by the Court, which a Gun
was taken from A.S. and a stitch of Bacon from W. B. But by the Sheriffs
pleading for VV. A. being poor, he got his Fine remitted. [ Note, This Sheriff
is a Baptist, and he declined the Office of Sheriff, and refused to serve,
rather than so to take awa^ his Neighbors goods for matter of Conscience; but
those Seperates have not met with so much Christianity in any of their old
Friends, that have been so concerned in Office. Pray let your London Meeting
take Notice of that, and order those Ministers that come from you to visit
them, to do what they can to recommend the Virtue of Love to your Brethren
here; for all that have hither to come, has set them still more in Opposition
against the S^perates, and have increased Envy instead of Love; and are so far
from counting the Soperates to be any of the lost Sheep of the House of Israel,
whom Christ's Ministers should seek after, that they call them Amaleck, and
exhort one another to smite Amaleck, and yet like Cowards, never come at them;
or like Cocks crowing on their own Dunghills, they do it only in their own
Meeting Houses among their own Friends; and he that is most ingenuous at
comparing G. Keith and his Friends to the worst of Men and Devils they can find
named in the whole Bible, he is an excellent Prea^her, and followed from Meeting
to Meeting many Miles, and of this Truth, my own Eyes and Ears are witness.

In the years 1694, and 95. Ralph Ward, a poor Friend at Philadelphia, was
several times fined for ^^nscientiously refusing to serve on Juries, and had
^oods taken from him to the value of 4 l. 6 d. (...) which he complained to the
Governoar and ^ouncil, but had no Relief. The Members of ^ouncil present were
S. Carpenter, S. Richardson, (...) Morris, C. Pusey, D. Lloyd, all Quakers.

At a Court at Burlington, 3d Mo. 1697. Daniel ^^con was fined 10 s. by Quaker
Justices only, for ^^fusing to serve on a Jury, though he pleaded both ^iberty of
Conscience and the Law lately made in ^ngland, which says, No Quaker or repured
Quaker ^^ll serve on any Jury, nor bear any Office of Profit in (...)
Government.

Now here take Notice, The Quakers in England ^sed to plead with the Rulers,
against the Kings ^aws, for Liberty of Conscience. But now being ^ot into the
Saddle of Government, and being Rulers themselves, they deny Liberty of
Conscience ^o others, that plead FOR the Kings Laws for ^iberty of Conscience.
Let my old Friends at London consider that, and whether it is not. Time ^ow to
cry out, as Sam. Fisher once did, p. 144. (...) Gross, Horrid, Hideous and
Sordid!

Also, several Friends in East and West-Jersey had Goods taken from them for
not answering sumons to Courts, and also for refusing to pay a Tax raised to
pay Soldiers wages. Where Note, the Quakers in East-Jersey, who were in Unity
with their persecuting Brethren at Philidelphia, paid this Tax either directly
or indirectly, which was to pay Soldiers wages. I shall give no perticula^
account of these di bress^s, believing the rest are more than you will Record;
but I cannon wel^ omit, to in^tance one more, and leave it and the rest to your
Consideration. And that is,

Jo^^ Wood, one of your Brethren, a Preacher (...) Gl^ucester County in
V^st-Jersey, being Sheriff o^^ that County, came with men armed to tak^ Goods
from John Roberts at Pensoaken, and sent tw^ men before, who pr^tended they had
lost their way of which the said Joh. Roberts and h^^ Wife took pit and gav^
^nen meat to eat. Soon after they espie^^ Wood coming with his Company,
wherefor^ Roberts made fast the Door, but Wood told him he had those within
that would do his business they seeing him so treacherous, opened the Door this
Wood when came in offered his hand: Rober^^ said, if he came as a Friend it was
well. But sa^^ Wood, I come not as John Wood the Preacher, b^^ as the Sheriff
of Gloucester. [Now by the way observe, that in the case between G. R. and the
Magistrates at Philadelphia, those Magistrates could not find how to
distinguish between Magistrates (...) Quakers or Preachers, but here you see
their Brother J W. had the art to do it.]

But his J. VVood proceeded, and took severa^ sorts of Goods in use in the
house, among whi^^ was a Warming pan, which the woman earnestl^ desired him to
leave by reason of the great u^^ themselves and the Neighbors had of it, in
cas^ of Sickness or Childbed (there being none there about except that) But
she could not prevail with this VVood, but away he carried, it and soon after
this Roberts sell sick, and beginning to Recover again, he sat ^pone day; but
at night going ^o his Cold Bed (for want of the p^n to warm it being Winter)
the cold Bed made such impression ^on him, that his speech was soon taken away,
which he did not recover again, but dyed in a ^^w days; and what trouble this
was to the Wid^ow, the Neighbors can tell how much she im^^ted the death of
her Husband to the want of the ^^n, which she could not persuade this Wood to
^ave, though she offered him to take any other thing ^stead of it.

Note, the occasion of this Distress was only, ^or not answering a Summons to
Gloucester Court, when the Court at Burlington required the same, ^he place
having been some years in contest be^ween the woe Counties about the bounds, not
de^^ded which County it belonged to.

Come you London Friends [to say no more of he. Inhumanity of this Action of a
Preaching Quaker] can you parrellel this in the whole World, that over a
pre^ended Gospel Minister ^ook the Office of sheriff before! W. Penn cites
^lenty of old Authors in most of his Books, pray ^^^t him to search all the
Rusty Authors to see if he ^an find a President, and if he can find none, you
^ay Record this for one, if you please; for the said Roberts was an honest
Friend of your Society, and I being with him in his sickness, that very day
that he sat up, as aforesaid, he desired me to publish this Preachers Action to
the World, and so far have I now fullfi^led the Will of the deceased, a^ also
the Desire of his Widow and Neighbors since his Death.

Now, perhaps some for want of other Falsity to accuse me of, will say I Taunt
or Scoff: But what would such sa^, if I should use such Airy Expressions as hat
eminent Friend Sam. Fisher has done in his Rusticus ad Accademico^, viz. As the
Fool thinks, so the Clock Clirketh; The Cat wink^ when both her Eyes were
shat; The Wheel-barrow runs Rumble to Ramble; A Tale of a Tub with the bottom
out; Tittle Tattle, Twittle Twattle; Whirle-gig^, Flim-flams, Gim-oracks,
Hog-styes; Bumble-bee Propositions, Magpye Premises, Roaring Meggs; Thundering
Canons to frighten poor fools, etc. This was Sam. Fishers phrase in writing
Religious matters, and re-printer for Posterity by the lisence of the 2d Days
Meeting in London. And W-Penni in his Testimony before that Book, makes the
Scriptures their Rule for this stuff too, and cites 1 Kings 18.27. of Elijah's
words to Baal's Priests. Thus I see how far I should be Justified were of their
Society. Though the same W. P. with his the other Tongue is so far from owning
the Scriptures for their Rule, that both he and S. Fisher (as is before showed)
would make them unsit for any Rule at all in any case, by rendering them
Uncertain, etc. Therefore pray ask W. P by what Rule he knows any such word
were spoke. as recorded, 1 Kings 18. seeing he holds the Scriptures so
Uncertain? Doubtless he is as able to give an answer, as if he had served seven
years at Rome, as G. W. tells the Baptists, in his Quakers plainness, p. 31.

CHAP XI. Of Swearing.
IN W. Penn's Book, called, Reason against Railing, p. 41. the Question is thus
put, How could you now that Swearing in any case were unlawful, if it had not
been written, Swear not at all? Is not then the Scripture your Rule in this
case?

W. Penn there answers, This shows the Ignorance ^f Tho. Hicks in the Writings
of the best Gentiles, and his acknowledgment of the Light's sufficiency, in
^ase we are able to prove Swearing disallowable before Christ came in the
flesh. The seven wise men, (says (...)) famous among the Greeks 500 years
before Christ ^ome in the flesh esteemed Swearing but a Remedy against
Corruption.

Now observe, does not this plainly show, that ^^y held Swearing not only
allowable, but also good to be used; for what good men would not use means to
remedy Corruption? was not W. P. dot^sh when he brought this Instance to prove
the Light sufficient (without the knowledge of what is written, to show men
they should not swea^? B^ndes, was it likely that the Light o^ Law in the best
Gentiles would ^o^ bid a^^ Swearing at the same time when the Law (outward) was
in force, that allowed and commanded Swearing? or that the Gentiles had a sight
beyond the Prophets, who never did forbid such Swearing, but on the contrary
commanded it, Jer. 4 2.

Another Instance W P brings, is, That Socrates said, There is a Life more fi^m
and unquestionable than an Oath.

I Answ. Does not the Law hold forth the same, viz. that here is no need of an
Oath among men that live a life unquestionable, or out of S^rite? for an Oath
was for reconciling and putting an end to st^^fe; so that this of Socrates was
so far from saying, Swear not at all, that it says as the ^aw says; an evidence
of what Paul said, That the Gem^les did by Nature the things contained in the
Law. Now let wise men judge how far W. P. has proved the Light sufficient to
show men they should not swear, without knowing the written Command of Christ.
And does not W. P. also confound himself in accusing T. Hicks of Ignorance? for
if we ask him, who they be that live an unquestionable Life? he shows us that
the Saints do not; for in Rejoinder, p 175 he says, The Saints shall judge the
World, and much more by (...) Judgment determine or reconcile things among
themselves. Thus seeing the Saints live not a life unquestionable, but that
they need to have things judged and reconciled, how much less do others?

But more particular of Swearing, W. P. and R. R. in their Treatise of Oaths,
put out in the Na^^e of the Quakers, p 46. cites this Passage, viz. They Swear
in God, or to God, or by God, who fromise an inviolable Obedience of Mind to
him.

Now, to say, I solemnly Promise or Declare in ^he Presence of Almighty God,
etc. is a ca^^i^g upon God to ^e a Witness to the Truth of the Testimony given,
which in p 17. they look upon to ^^e no less than a presumptuous Tempting of
God to immo^^s him to be a Witness not only to our Terrene, it Trivial
Business. These are their express ^ords. And yet are they now so far
apostatized ^ad fallen from their ancient Yea and Nay, that ^is is the Oath
that the Quakers have used under ^^e new Name of a Test, especially in W.
Pen^'s ^rovince of Pennsilvania till of late, that G K. ^^^d his Friends bore
Te^^^mony against it. And ^f now in England they have got it confirmed by ^^w,
as l'^^ show a^on.

But to proceed; In page 68 they cite, That it ^evil to compel, not only to
Swear by God, but by ^^r things. But how do they here condemn them^ves? for in
their Courts about Delaware have seen Quakers give and command the English
formal Oath to be given to those that were not Quakers. And yet for this very
thing they condemn J. Perrot as an Apostate, in their Book, called, A loving
Invitation, p 8. because when he was Clerk of a Court, he gave some People the
Oath. Yet behold! now their Brother Da. Lloyd can do the like, and be accounted
no Apostate.

Again, in the Book of the Trial of O. Whithead and T. Burr at Norwich, p. 28,
29. the Recorder threatening to Praemunire them unless they would take the
formal Oath, We are ready and willing (says G. W.) to sign this est or
Declaration, viz. I do in the Presence of Almighty God solemnly declare, etc. I
do hereby faithfully promise, by Gods help, etc. Note, This they declare in p.
82. to be the Substance of the Oath, which they then offered to sigh; and
kissing the Book, and saying, I swear, they there call the Ceremony and
Circumstance; so it seems they can now dispense with swallowing the Substance,
for they there say, They conscientiously scruple the Ceremony and Circumstance,
to say, I Swear, and kiss the Book; as much as to say, We offer to swear, but
cannot in Conscience say I Swear [Behold the Hypocrasie!] He sur^^er adds, That
he is willing to sign such Declaration of his Duty of Allegiance, if he may not
otherways be believed. Mark, If they may not be believed b^ ^^^ing Yea of Nay,
they will do that now which (...) more, rather than he praemunired. I confess
that would have been hard, but why then have they bound themselves up to Yea or
Nay, by ^rinting so much in denial of Swearing, if they cannot defend it by
Suffering, out will Apostatize rather than Suffer.

Lastly, in p. 35. their Keepers pulling the^ from the Bar, to have them to
Prison again, I ak^ t^^ce says G. W. to the Court) we have not yet refused the
Oath, being not duly nor regularly brought upon the point, etc. Behold! could
any man know^^^g the Quakers. Faith about Swearing, ever have expected to hear
such a word to come out of the mouths of Quakers, and a chief Leader espcially
I were it not better to be plain, as chose Quakers have been, whose Names are
R^corded in the Court of Chancery, London, for taking the form^d Oath? for this
Hypocrifie has but caused some to publish in print, That the Quakers can work
Miracles. for they can take an Oath, and yet not Swear at all.

And G W. in said Book, shows, That he and some other Quakers did Petition to
the Parliament to have the aforesaid Test established by Law, for the Quakers
to take instead of an Oath. So the Parliament did last year grant their
Request, and confirmed it by Law in these words, viz. [ I A. B. do declare in
the Presence of Almighty God, the Witness of the Truth of what I say] This is
the Quakers Oath, that they call a Test, now made into a Law, according to
their desire Behold now, what is become of their ancient Yea or Nay! Ca^^ they
now say this is no more than Yea or Nay? Pray what is become of their tender
Consciences, that cannot Swear, and yet can swallow down this T^^t with
^ucscruple? Than which no Oath in the World can be greater, or more binding;
yea, were I read in History, I doubt not but I could prove this T^st to be the
very form of Oath used in some other N^^ion And thus far these Quakers are
fallen from what the formerly professed, as before cited, and can now stretch
their Consciences, by using G. White^ea^t's Art of Otherways wording the
matter. If this be the effect of W. P 's Light, that (without the knowledge of
what is written) shows them they should not swear, sure it is now become
Darkness, as their Term is to others. And yet I cannot see how they can use
that Term without Blasphemy, seeing they say, the Light within is Christ and
God; for I am sure God and Christ can never be Darkness.

CHAP. XII. Of Fighting, Swearing and paying Tithes.
THe Quakers having denied Jesus of Nazareth to be the Savior of the World,
and to be in Heaven glorified in the true Nature of Man, both in their ancient
Books, as is before showed, and now being charged with the same, and the
Persons so accusing o^ cha^ging them having proffered to prove the same upon
them at any public Meeting they shall think fit to appoint, yet they refuse to
hear with that Ear; and (knowing their guilt in the case) notwithstanding their
former Challanges made by them in Print, To disp^te with (...) sorts of
Professors, yet now they use all their skill to evade and shift from being
brought to the point, but cry out they are belyed and wronged. Wh^^ef^^e some
Preachers, particularly J. Dick^n and S. Je^ings have now found out a new
Argument to prove to their Hearers that they are ^ndeed holy'd and that is,
That their refusing to ^ay lythes, ^o ^ight and to Swear, are three Proofs that
they own Jesus to be Christ, and therefore they ^re falsl^ accused.

Now suppose they had not in the least fallen ^^om their ancient Testimony
against Swearing, ^ighting and paying Tithes, yet to what a low ^ob are these
spiritualized Persons now come, who ^awing all along declared themselves to be
The ^nly Ministers of Christ, should be now driven to ^^eir shifts as to fly to
outward Marks to demonrate their Christianity, especially in that they
themselves say, That any Man may keep to outward observations and yet be no
Christian. But they have ^^t kept to their ancient Testi^ony against these
either, but are Apostatized, as is before shew^d ^u^erning, Swearing, wherein
they have only dressed up the Oath in a new Garb, and call it a Test, they now
see cause so to word the matter.

And then as to Fighting, that little Time they have had the Government in
Pennsilvania has given the world sufficient Proof how far they may be trusted
to be true to their Principles therein. And they being the commanding parts of
the Assemblies ^oth there and in Jersey, rather than let go the hold they have
of the Government, what shifts have they made in raising Money to be employed
to secure and defend the Provinces from the French and Indians, by using G.
Whiteheads Craft aforesaid, of Otherways wording the Laws and Orders they have
made for raising such Money. So that instead of declaring the Duty of Rulers,
(in case of Defense) by words of Truth, they have only exchanged their Old
Testimony for New Hypocrisy. As for Instance,

When the present Governor presented a Bill to the Assembly of West-Jarsey to
raise a Fund or Sum of Money to be employed to secure and defend the Province
from the Enemy, not one Quaker in the Assembly would touch with it; but so soon
as a new Bill for the same thing was framed, Otherways worded, then not one
Quaker opposed it, but gave his Vote for it, and so it passed into a Law; but
it was otherways worded, though they intended the same thing.

Next, let us step over into the Government of Pennsilvania, where in the year
1695. we find ^oll. Benjamin Fletcher, then Governor of that Province,
pressing upon the Assembly to raise a fund for his Majesty's Service, toward
securing the Province from the French and Indians, but this they could not do,
No, it was against their tender Consciences, contrary to their ancient
^estimony and Principle; and so no Fund was raised. But the next year W. Penn
got the Government into his ^ands again, and then the Assembly meets again, and
now they must do something toward maintaining the Fronteers at Albany, or lose
their beloved Honor of having the Government: for ^he Queen had commanded it,
and W. P. had ^ngaged to comply therewith: Well, to work ^hey went, and soon
found a new Name for their ^ct, and then courageously raise Three Hundred
Pounds for the Indians at Albany, and starcht D^bloyd is sent to New York with
it, to pay it to Governor Fletcher, for the use afo^esaid; for ^ow it was not
against their tender Consciences* why so? because they had Otherways worded the
Act, yet intended is for the same Use.

I had almost forgot to mention, how one Babie ^his Company in the Year 1692.
stole a Sloop from Philadelphia, upon Notice of which the Quatis very speedily
got a Company of Men together, ^^archt the Town for Arms, supplied them with
^uns, Swords, Powder and Lead, and gave them Commission, and hired them for 100
l. to Re^over the Sloop from said Privateers, which they did, and Sam.
Carpenter paid down the 100 l. to the men, and the ^^ss^bly has since voted it
to be a Debt of the Province.

Well, as they were Magistrates they were obliged to do all this. But he that
reads the several foregoing quotations out of their Books concerning Christ,
and also considers these matter of fact concerning fighting, acted in the face
of the Sun, may ^afely conclude, That the Quakers own Jesus to be Christ, just
so as they testify against Fighting.

Friends and Neighbors, your LEADERS are so unwilling to be discovered in
these things, that ten to one but they will tell you this which I have asserted
about W. P 's Grant or Commission, is a Lie, as their usual manner is in other
things. And if they tell, (...) so, I know no Remedy, but you must believe
them, so long as you see with their Eves; for S. Jennings informed me that it
was a Lie, and truly I believed him, till by chance I came to read it my self,
etc. and so found him to be the Liar in the case. And thus by searching out
things my self I came to discover now blindly I was (and you are) led on and
deluded wi^h such Religious Lies (it I may so call them) For W. P. says in his
Address to Protestants, That it is the Leaders that teach the People to Err. And
S. Fisher says ( Rusticus, p. 191.) of such Leaders, That the Wheel-barrow runs
Rumble to Rumble,
Therefore they will never leave climbing up by Lies till down they tumble.


Lastly, for refusing to pay Tithes, many honest Quakers have suffered much,
and I do believe conscientiously too, while many eminent amongst ^^^m have (to
my knowledge) used diverse c^a^^est ^^e Shifts to satisfy or otherways to cheat
the Receivers. And T. Ellwood in his Foundation of Tithes, among ten Reasons
that he brings against paying Tithes, there is one to show Tithes inconsistent
with the Gospel State; And I know none in Christendom, no, not the Priests
themselves, but they will deny that they take Tithes, as Tithes, but only as
Maintenance for Preaching, and not as any other part of the Ceremonial Law.
And the most weighty Reasons T. E. brings to show why they refuse to pay
Tithes, is, That it is the highest Injustice in the Priests to take Tithes of
the Quakers, who neither set the Priests on work, nor like their works, nor
receive their Work, calling it the Yoke of Oppression as indeed it really is
so) Therefore it is the Um^asonableness and Unjustness thereof that is the
ground of their refusing to pay Tithes, together with Coveteousness, and not
that the paying Tithes is a Denial of Christ; for T. E. is so far from charging
those with breaking any Command of Christ, [or of the Apostles, who pay Tithes,
that he implicity grants, they do not, in p. 5.13. So then, seeing they who day
Tithes break no Command of Christ] how much less shall their refusing to pay
Tithes constitute any to be Christians; so invalid and weak is this their
greatest Proof that they own Jesus to be Christ, while their Books are standing
Evidences, that they deny him. Again, the Turks and Pagans that are not
concerned in paying Tithes, do by this their Rule own Christ to be the Savior
of the World, though all Christendom knows the T^rks Principle is to deny him so
to be.

CHAP. XIII. Of MIRACLES.
JEsus Christ wrought Miracles by the Power of God, The Disciples wrought
Miracles in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. G. Fox (is said to have) wrought
Miracles by the Power of God, [not a word of Jesus, in whose name the Disciples
did it] This is to be seen in the Journal of G. Fox, in the third Table, under
the word Miracle, which Miracles they there cite to be, She that was ready to
dye, raised up again, The La^e made whole, The diseased restored, John Jayes
Neck broke, Restored, etc.

Now, as to she that was ready to dye raised up. I have known a Woman recover
from the poin^ of Death at the Prayer of a Priest, who took Tyths, and such
they call Conjurers, greedy Dogs, etc. Yet this was not looked upon as a
Miracle, though believe God might have regard to the Prayers of both G. F. and
the Priest in that ^ase.

Again, as to John Jayes Neck broke, I knew the man, and spoke with him
afterward, who a^ ^e was riding with G. F. in East-Jersey, ^ell off his Horse
and disjoynted his Neck, and G. F. seeing ^ow it was, pulled his neck into
Joint again, and so saved his life; And such a thing as that many ^ave done,
yea, a Profane man has done the like (...) ^y knowledge.

Also in the Book, called A Reply to the Vindication, etc. p. 14. it is said,
Visible Miracles have ^^^n done amongst us in the sight of the World, etc. ^^e
also the Journal of G. F. p. 307. And had a large ^eeting at a Constables
House, on whom the Lord had ^rought a great Miracle, etc. Note, here is neither
^he Name of the Constable, nor the Town where ^e dwelt, Nor what kind of
Miracle it was, and also 28 years before it was published: Pray what ^s here to
induce any to believe it, but such whose says is to take all upon trust? Let
all discreet Persons consider if such things as these will not ^arden, instead
of converting the Jews; considering Equality wi^^ God, see p. ^, 3. of A Brief
Relation, c. confirmed in p. 67 and 127. Great Mystery, where he says, he spoke
it out of all Creatures. And in News coming out of the North, p. 1. ^e declares
himself to be The Prophet that was prophesied of, etc. And S. Eccles calls him,
The Prophet whom John was not. And G. W. and W. P. in their Books Judas and the
Jews, p. 44. Serious Search, p. 58. Judgment Fixed, p. 19, 26. and in several
other Books, justify and excuse as wel^ these Titles, as also, That he the
said G. Fox is THE Father of many Nations, whose Being and Habitation is in the
Power of the Hig^est, in which he Rules and Governs in Righteousness, and his
Kingdom is established in Peace, and the INCREASE thereof is without End, and
much more to the same purpose, together with his thus being set up a Worker of
Miracles too; I say, if the Jews should give equal Credit to these Things with
the History of St. Luke, how will they know who is accounted the Messiah, G.
FOX or JESUS of Nazareth, especially seeing W. Penn denis that Outward Person
to be him, which suffered at Jerusalem, who was called Jesus of Nazareth, see
Serious Apology, p. 146.

Good Christian Reader consider the Event and Effects of these things! Be
otherwise minded than G. Whitehead is, who says. He neither consults Events,
nor ^ears Effects in what he writes; see his Introduct. to Judgment fixed. It is
not high Time for some to be raised up to testify against these Things!

But that which seemed most like a Miracle to me, and many more, as blind as I
was the, was, That G. F. should have the gift of Tongues to interpr^t all
Languages, as in his Book, called, The Battle door to the Docter^ and
Scholars, etc. when alas! it has been of late discovered, that certain Jews
were hired to do it for him, and had 80 pounds for their pains paid them by G.
Roberts, besides 12 Bo^les of Wine over and above. And were not this Treatise
swelled bigger then I in^ended, would here have showed some Examples, ^o prove
the said Journal to be a History not fairly ^elated, ou^ Partial and Painted,
some things (...) in, some left out, some mended and pe^ced, etc. But which is
yet worse, if true, I have seen Sheet, called, An Essay, etc. lately put out by
one T. ^. wherein he shows that G F. in answering Priests and Professors Books,
f^stly Quoted heir words and preverted them, and took pieces of sentences,
transposed the words thereof, so as to make them say another thing, that the
Authors never intended, and then called them he ^utho^s sayings, and so
answered them; which (...) really true, must needs be judged wicked by all
^oderate intelligent Persons. Therefore it be^oves W. P. to appear and clear G.
F from this ^ross Charge, the which if he cannot do, h^w ^ainly and falsely does
he say in the Preface to his ^ournal, Many have done well, but thou, dear
George ^xcellest them ALL.

Note I mention these things, because I always ^s believed plainness and honest
simple hearted deal^ng was the way to set up Christian Religion, and ^ot such
Craft.

But a to real and unfeigned Miracles, when we ^ately heard a Report of two
Miracles wrought ^n London, one upon a girl, being restored suddenly from a
lameness in her Limbs, which she ha^ from her Infancy, the other of a Woman
suddenly made whole from a Leprosy; I sincerely declare I was stricken with a
dread on my Spirit at the News, fearing I should hear that they were People
belonging to my old Friends, the Quakers, because I knew them to be already too
much exalted in their minds above all other professors of Christianity, and if
these Miracles should be done upon any of them, it would cause them to insult
still more presumptuously; but by reading the Relation I found the one to be a
French Protestant Girl, and the other a Baptist Woman, Persons (no doubt)
humble enough to beg of God in their Prayers for Pardon for their Sins, as I
never heard any Quakers do in more then 20 years attending their Meerings, etc.

Lastly, This Observation I made thereupon, which I entreat all to take Notice
of, That these Miracles were wrought by or thorough a living ^aith in Christ,
as he is Jesus of Nazareth, or a Person without men, and therefore I deliver it
as my sense to be an everlasting Truth, that till the Quakers close with this
Faith, it is impossible that any real Miracles can be wrought either on them or
by them.

But though they say (as before) that visible Miracles have been done among them,
vet it seems by what G^ W^ writ in the year 1674 in Quakers plainness, p. 14.
they have now lost this and other Evidences of the Spirit, if ever they had
them; for he there says, And what if God will not bestow such Gifts and Signs
now, must we therefore be no Christians? Are the Baptists willing to be thus
con^luded on this ground? Now Mark, he here grants themselves to be as low,
poor and empty as others, having no evident Signs or Gifts whereby it may be
known they are sent of God more then other Professors. Now though this be such a
known Truth, yet to face about again, the same G. W. (in Apost. Incend. p. 4.)
lets as know. That he and his Friend are THE Church of the first born. So that
as S. Fisher says, p. 748.

Sometimes it is one way, then Another.
Sometimes both ways, This and The Other.
CHAP. XIV. Of Life and Doctrine.
If the Trumpet gives an Uncertain Sound, who shall prepare himself to Battle?

1 Cor. 13.
MUCH more than formerly do my old Friends the Quakers cry out, It Is Life is
the only thing that is our All in All; It Is no matter for Doctrine or Knowledge
in this or that Principle: Away with Creeds and Points of Faith, so that we
feel Life in our Bosoms, and flowing from V^ssel to Vessel.

To which I say, go then thou that counts thy self a rational Creature, and
learn of so mean a t^ing as a Vegetable, and see if a Plant can grow (with the
Life it has within it self) without Leaves. But how comes it to pass that the
Quakers have written such a multitude of Books, great Volumns about Principles
and Doctrine, opposing all others both Priests and Professors about points of
Faith and Doctrine. And E^^ B^rr^^ghs in the Name and behalf of the Quakers
having made great Challenges to dispute with all sorts, and any Number of
People, at any Time and Place, about Principle^ and Doctrine: Why, I say was
all this, if Life had been sufficient without Doctrine? Again, if Life may be
felt by those who are ignorant of Doctrine, and that be enough, why do the advice in their Book, called, An awakening Voice, p. 15. viz. People open your
Eyes, and be not so besooled with that dotish and blockish Principle, That
Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, but search the Scriptures, and try all
things -- Have not the most knowing Men in the World been always the most
devout to God?

Note the uncertain Sound of their Trumpets; Here, it seems, Life is not
sufficient without Knowledge, and therefore they advise to search after
Knowledge for Life or Devotion. And yet now in opposing others that contend for
Knowledge in Faith and Doctrine, they cry out, Life, Life, no matter for
Doctrine; C^eeds and Confessions of Faith (they say) came in with the Apostasy,
etc. This brings to my Memory how once I heard a Priest preach so affecting a
Sermon (as he commonly did) that looking about me, I saw weeping Eyes on every
hand, and yet this Priest was known to me and those People, to be a debaucht
man, that thus caused his Hearers to feel Life, (as they accounted) in their
Bosoms: even such is the Devotion of all zealous but ignorant) People,
especially at the sound of a smooth and affecting Delivery of words, ^ho
believe it their Duty to keep within the Pal^ ^f the Church, and be content
with whatsoever drops from their Preachers Mouths, so mean spirited are the
People (says W. Penn) to take all upon trust for their Souls, see Adress to
Protestants. p. 177. Here-W. P. has truly expressed the present Case; for I am
livingly sensible, that there are hundreds, yea, Thousands of honest Souls at
this day among the Quakers, who are afraid to hear or receive any thing from
these who are out of the Unity of their Church; so far are they willingly held
from obeying that good Command of the Apostle, and the Advice of one of their
Leaders, (as above) To try ALL Things. And it was observed, when Tho. Musgrove,
at many Meeting^ about Delaware, preached, That the flesh of Christ was a
constant enduring Patience, and his Blood a lively operating Spirit of Life, or
divine operating living Love; This set many into (...) singing frame, raising
Life in the Meeting (as they term it) partly in that he applied it to oppose
some Doctrine of G. K. and he preaching it as a new Opening, and they believing
it so to be. When alas for them! we who have taken their own Advice before, Not
to be so dotish and blockish, but have learnt to be more knowing, we know it to
be not an opening of Thomas Musgrove, but a piece of an old Creed made at
Constantinople in the year 1585. [Thus while they are crying out against Creeds
in others, they patch up Creeds to themselves.] And following their Advice
before, we have also learned to know, that if another Minister had preached the
same things to the same People, though a Person of as good a Life, and more sound
in the Knowledge and Faith of Christ, yet wanting either the Unity of the
Church, or that faculty of gift of a fluent and affecting delivery of his
words, would not raise that Life in the People at all.

But what says W. P. further to these things? Why, says he, I am amazed with
what Confidence they expose their Souls. This Principle it is, and not Enquiry,
that makes Men careless and unactive abo^t their own Salvation -- It Is not to
be saved, (says he) to be within the Pale of any visible Church in the World;
see Address to Protestants, p. 177. But pray why then do they publish such
Doctrine in their book called, A loving Invitation, page 9 viz. That those who
forsake their the Quakers) Unity, and oppose them, are cut Off from Christ,
Why, this has been the Sound their Rams horns, have all along made. But in p.
156. W^ Penn plainly tells us, That the consequence of Peoples not doubting
their Ministers, and not putting them upon the Proof of what they preached, has
been the Introduction of much false Doctrine, Superstition and Formality.
Here Is the ground, it seems, of those false and confused Doctrines before
cited, by reason of our being too long before we doubted our Ministers. And
yet, now some are set to do it, how do them turn their the other face, and Rage
at them, calling them Liars, Apostates, Wolves, Dogs, Devils Incarnate, etc.

Lastly, Though G. Whitehead in Apost. Incend. p. 4. says, He [God] has chosen
us to be his People and Church -- We are the Church of the first Born, etc. Yet
W. Penn says again, That to be of the Church of which Christ is Head, is quite
another thing than to be of any visible Society whatsoever, see Address, p.
177. So that as I began, so I must end,

Since their Trumpets give so Uncertain a Sound, Who shall prepare himself to
Battle?

CHAP. XV. Sabbath Day Wheel turned Round.
IN Rejoinder, p. 191. W. Penn says To call any Day of the Week a Christian
Sabbath, is not Christian, but Jewish -- The Apostle (says he) makes their
Observation or Preference of days, to be no less then a token of their turning
from the Gospel; and Christians ought not to be judged for rejecting such
Customs, etc. And pursuent to this Doctrine, some Quakers formerly have opened
their Shops and followed their usual Employments on the First Day, both in old
England and elsewhere.

But behold how the Wheel is now turned! for the Quakers at Delaware being the
commanding parts of the Assemblies, have lately made a Law to prefer the First
Day before others, calling it The Lords Day; so far are they now turned from
their former Gospel, Nay, and this Law has been put in execution too in
West-Jersey, and that by none others but Quakers, causing several Persons to
suffer, one tried at Court [but cleared by the Jury] after he had been
imprisoned, for doing no more on the First Day than those who prosecuted him
have been frequently guilty of, viz. taking up a fettered Horse, or Mare that
had strayed from him, that was in danger of being spoiled, he having been
seeking the said Horse several days before It Is true the man was no Quaker,
that thu^ suffered for taking this pity and honest care on his Beast and
himself; But what then? must they needs show to the world, that partiality,
etc. is inherent to their best sort of Apostasy? But if they now see the evil
of their old Testimony of forbidding to prefer the First day before another,
why do they carry a double face, and not condemn it? O but that is the way to
show themselves fallible, and so confess themselves on even ground with other
Christians! here lies the pinch.

And G^ W. is upon the same double strein too: for when T. S. asked, Whether
that Quaker did not sin who sowed a Doublet on the Sabbath day? G. W. in Truth
de^end. etc. p. 21. Replys, Where do thou read in the Scriptures, that men
must do no Work on the First Day of the week? And yet the same G. W. in his
Trial at Norwich, when the Oath was tendered to him on the First day, he
excepted against it, because it was tendered on the Lords Day, as he calls the
first day, in p. 26. of the Book of his Trial; But G. W. might have seen in his
Brother S. Fisher's Rusticos, that what is sauce for the Goose is sauce for the
Gander also.

Here several other things come before me, of the degeneration of my old
Friends, both in Faith and Practice, which for a reason best known to my self,
I at present forbear to expose; for I know they think I have already done too
much; and I heartily* wish I may never do more of this kind, but that I may be
employed hereafter in what is more delightful to me, but be it as God Almighty
shall direct me; for methinks I already hear the bitter Treatment I must have
from my Neighbors, my old Friends round about, far and near* And how the
Preachers thunder out Woes and Judgments against me. But this I the less value
seeing it is an advantage the Preachers have had in all Ages above other men, to
preach their pleasure against those who offend them, and that without control.
Hark also how they caution and warn their Hearers, not to read such Books as
this, whilst with their other Tongue they bid them, Try all things.

But I have faith to believe, that the Prophesies they utter against me shall
be as false as [I am informed] W Pen's was against T. Hiks, viz. So sure as God
lives -- The Lord will make the an Example of his ^URY, and thy head shall not
go down to the Grave in Peace, and by this shall thou know (says he) that not a
Lying nor Delusive, but a true and Infallible Spirit has spoke by me; see
Railing against Reason, p. 181. Now whether W.P. did not there belly the Spirit
of God? for I do understand that T.H. dyed at Peace in his bed, and with great
satisfaction.

But as it is noted in the Title page, I am not the man that gives out things to
lay open wickedness, but that men may take warning, and fear, and come to know
themselves.

AN APPENDIX.
THe case with me is just as with S. Fis^er, p. 736. viz. That flood of Follies
and Absurdities, that Cloud of Confusions and Contradictions, which Shatters it
self up and down (...) plat^ in sundry Showers, throughout the sundry ^ges of
those men's Books, Every Eye that reads then* ^as they lie at a distance] may
possibly not set ^^ght of them easily; Therefore have ^^^lled some (...) of
them out [for the whole Number passes ^^^y skill to cast account of] and ^l^pt
them to^^ther a little closer, Not so much to sham^ ^h^m, (...) to honor the
Truth, which they would shame; that they may be the more ready to be read, and
(...) parent to the view of every ordinary Capacity, that any [save such as
seeing will not see] may see (...) Sword of the Lord already laid on the Arm
and right Eye of the Idol [Prophets.] Thus far S. Fisher. So I shall proceed to
enlarge upon a few perticulars.

First, At Number 8* I have Noted, that G. W excuses that Blasphemy there set
down o^ S. Eccles, in Serious Search, p. 58. he undertake^ to direct S. E's
Intention in this matter, and gives us to understand that S. E. did not intend
as he writ and published; for though he said it o^ G (...) yet he intended it
only of Christ; so it seems he spoke o^ writ one thing, and meant another And
such a one as does so, W. P. says [in hi^ Rebuke, p 8.] is no better then one
of the wor^^ of Knaves. So here G. W. is vindicating one o^ the worst of Knaves
by his sincere hearted Brother W. P 's rule. They are his own words le^^ them
share the matter as well as they can betwee^ them.

But says G. W. It is a little failure in Syntax that is to say. S E. failed a
LITTLE in the Joining of his words. Thus they can excuse blasphemy, when
uttered by their own Friend^ but if any of their Opposers do but write A so
THE, You for Thou, or fail in a word, O the^ they cry out, Forgery, Lies,
Blasphemy, an^ what not (as I could give many instances) The it is not a little
failure in ^yntax only, which the Law of Charity would not take notice of But
if a Quaker write that which is ten time worse, then they can use the Papists
art to Dir^c^^^^ their Intention. Pray read else in the Book call'^ ^he Mystry
of Jesuitism, begin at p. 122. and see (...) George does not here teach people
how to equi^ocate exactly like the Jesuits.

Now let all Intelligent people weigh and seri^^sly consider, whether this ^e
like the simplicity and single heartedness that the Quakers pretend ^^to, for
them to write one thing, and say them^^lves they mean Anot^er, or do not intend
all they ^eak or write; [or as in the Title page] see ^^use otherways to word
the matter, and yet intend (...) same: just as S. Fisher says of the Priests,
P. ^7 Shameful Shiftings from sense to sense, Mis^^able Marchings from Meaning
to Meaning, so ^^at one can hardly know where, nor how to find them, (...) what
they mean; But (says he) WE mostly or ^^ER keep to the true, honest, ordinary
and plain ^^rport of the words, as they lie open and clear to ^^ERY ordinary
and common Capacity, that is ^illing to know and do the Truth. Thus far S. F.
(...) it whether the Quakers do this, I lave to the ^^dgment of all Impartial
Readers of this Book, (...) which take a further instance, viz.

They having in their Books called the Scrip^^res Carnal, Death, Dust, Serpents
Meat, etc. and ^^^e of their own writings* they call, The Word (...) the Lord,
The Word of God, The voice of W^s^^m, etc. G. W. in Quakers plainness, p. 71.
^epl^s, That such Titles therefore have been not ^rictly, but figuratively
placed on some Books, (...) here, it seems, they do not keep to the ordinary,
true, honest and plain purport of the words, but they must be understood in a^
Figurative sense.

Again, on the other hand, though the Quaker^ one while teach, That all Figures
were ended by Christ, yet G. W. directs the intention for that too, in his
Timorous Reviler, p. 4. where he let us know, They do not intend All, but some,
viz the Figures under the Law; And also there justifies their writing or
speaking in Figurativ^ Speeches, Mataphors and Metonymyes, and defends it from
Scripture. But here let G W turn back to another of his own Books called The
Divinity of Christ, and Read these word^ (...) Epistle (about figurative
Speeches) viz W^^ charge thee [Priest Danson] show us a Verse i^ Scripture,
that speaks such Language, and where one word may be put for anothr by
Metalepses, and so leave People in doubts and Questions.

Mark Reader, does not here need some curiou^ equivocating and otherways
wording the matter to Reconcile these Doctrines and clear themselves of the
Guilt of what they condemn in others.

And seeing those high Titles they give their own Books are Figurative (as they
say) let the^ therefore direct the intention next time the^ print, so as we may
know, whether those Title they have given the Scriptures, are figurativ^ too,
viz. Death Dust, Carnal, Serpents Meat etc. for I cannot yet find in their
Books, whether they intend these Titles to be Figura^^^e or Real; for they
should not leave people (...) Doubts and Questions, by putting one word (...)
another, by their own Doctrine; Nay, if (...) may believe S. Fisher they do
keep to the plain, ^^^e, honest, ordinary Sense of the words, as ^^ey lie open
and clear to common Capacities. (...) which it appears, their faith is, that
the ^^riptures are Really Carnal, Death, Dust and ^^pents Meat. But then pray,
what are their ^^oks? what Names can be found out or inven^^d bad enough for
their Books, seeing G. W. (...) Quakers plainness, p. 71. positively asserts,
(...) was NEVER their intentions to bring their ^^oks in Comparison with
Scriptures, but prefer (...) Scriptures before All Books [O Rare and ^^^s^!
says S. F. p. 145.]

But if on the contrary, they intend the said ^itles given to the Scriptures,
to be figurative; ^^d if G. W. be Sincere in pretending to prefer ^^e
Scriptures above their Books, then surely ^^eir Books should have had the
worser Titles, ^^d the Scriptures the better Title.

Good Reader weigh this point well; for if these ^^akers do not really and
indeed prefer their ^^wn Books above the Bible, why can they not ^^ll the
Scriptures, The Word of the Lord, or Word God, in a figurative sense, as well
as call their ^^n Books so in a figurative sense?

Therefore I am bold to affirm it, as my real sense, that those late
confessions they have made, in Pretending a preference of the Scriptures above
their own Books, is gross Equivocation and Hy^ocrisie, so long as they justify
their old Doctrine in the case.

Behold! how these men deserve to be mocked as S. Fisher Mocks the Priests, viz.
They sing their Old New Song to the Tune of the Truth turned out of doors, p.
726. For do but read another short instance also about Christ; G. F. in his
great Mystery, and^. [as in Heb. 2.1^.] says Christ, took on him the Seed of
Abraham. And in p. 223. Arreign. of Popery, he says, the Seed of Abraham is
the Savior of the world. Thus it seems Christ took the Savior of the World of
the Virgin Mary. But if that was the Savior that Christ took, what i^ Christ
that took that Savior? Consider that. However, here he lets us know, that what
Christ took of the V^^gin, is both the Seed and the Savior of the World, Both
which W. P. expressly denis in Chr. Quaker, p. 97. where he largely declares,
That it is the Light in man that is this Seed, and not what Christ took of the
Virgin; And that this Light EVER was in ALL Ages, Sufficient and Saving, Reas.
Ag. Rail. p. 16.

Now choose R^ader, whether to take to this Faith published in the year 1674. by
W. Penn, or that published a dozen years before by G. Fox, or their more new
Faith, now published in the Year 1695. in answer to Dr. Lancaster's Queries
before cited. Great is their Confusion ^roughout their Books, especially about
Christ (...) the Scriptures; and G. F. tells in his Several ^^pers for the
spreading of Truth, p. 17. That ^^^d is not the Author of Confusion; but such
hold the ^^uth in Unrighteousness.

And G. W. and his Brethren in their Books ^^quently call to Priests and
Professors for Signs (...) Proofs of their Ministry, saying, Have you (...)
same POWER and Spirit that gave forth the ^^riptures? see the Epist. to
Divinity of Christ. ^^in, G. W. in his Enthusiasm above Atheism, (...) says,
Timothy and Titus, and others who (...) GIFTS in them for the Ministry, were
Ap^^ved; but this is no Proof that these Opposers Mi^^ers are eitheir so gifted
or approved. Now, ^^y not their Opposers say the same, viz. Nei^^er is it any
Proof that the Quakers Ministers (...) either so gifted o^ approved.

Again, G W. in answer to R. Baxter, p. 16. ^^never understood that they that
set up these Priests, ^^e called as Peter or Paul, or the Elders who had ^^WER
to lay on the Hands, that the holy Ghost ^^on the Party on whom they laid their
hands [And (...), let us see but one Quaker thus called^].

But now take Notice, that when others de^^d a Sign or Proof of the Quakers, of
their (...) to the Ministry, or to prove themselves to ^^ore the Ministers of
Christ than others are, ^^^n they turn the the other face, and tell them, That
it is a foolish and an Adulterous Generation, seck a Sign. Thus G. W. in Quakers
plainness, p. 34. Now I say, it is true, our Savior did so upbraid the Jews,
and might very well, for he had showed Sign upon Sign, and wrought very many
Miracles amongst them, and done many mighty Deeds before them; and yet for them
to cry out for more, was indeed foolish. But what is this to the Quakers, who
produce No such Miracles, No such Signs, No, No more than other Professors?
Must all others therefore be a foolish Generation for asking a Sign or Proof of
the Quakers, and yet the Quakers not foolish in demanding the same of others? O
consider the conceited Confidence, Arrogance and Pride of these Men! I pray God
give them Humility and Charity instead thereof.

But notwithstanding, though the Jews were such an Adulterous Generation, and
had so many Miracles wrought before them, yet Jesus Christ promised them one
Sign more, and that doubtless was the greatest Sign of all. Therefore if these
Quakers will hold to this Scripture (which they ought to do, seeing they bring
it against others) they then ought to give this Adultrous Generation one sign;
and that doubtless would be more convincing then all their Books, and whatever
they can say.

Of Infallibility.
William Penn in his Rebuke to 21 Divines, p. 22 says, We are horribly abused
in saying, we pretend all our Ministers to be Infal^^ble.

But whether what W. P. here says be true, Read what the same W. P. says in
Judas and the ^ews, p. 43. viz. Our Ministry is of God, it stands ^n the Power
of the living spiritual Gift of God. and in A True account, etc. p. 18. says,
We ^ave Thousands at our Meetings, and none of us dare ^peak a word, but as
eternally moved of the Lord.

Now observe, That which is spoak by the ^ternal Motion of the Lord must needs
be ^nfallible, or nothing is Infallibly spoke. Therefore (...) not this rather
horrible falsity. Deceit and Double dealing in W. P. etc. especially seeing ^.
W. largely declares in his Voice of Wisdom, p. 33 That they that want
Infallibility are not true Ministers.

Besides, G. F. says, Their preaching is from Con^^ration, that is not spoken
from the Mouth of the Lord -- All you that speak, and not from the Mouth ^f the
Lord are false Prophet^^^ see his Ans. to the ^est. Pet. p. 25. and Saul's
^rrand. c. p. 7. And in Truths defense, p. 107. and News from ^he North, P. 1.
and other Books, they declare that themselves write and speak, To be from the
Mouth of the Lord. And also in Gr. Mist. p. 267. says, The Quakers are the only
Ministers of Christ* And E. Buroughs says, p. 318. 462. All that ever own God
and Salvation, shall own us -- We are of one Mind and one Soul.

But though I have sufficiently showed they are not of one mind and Soul, yet
here follows after more of their Temporizing Clashes, which they write suiting
the Times and their own Interest, viz.

Of Temporizing.
1. G. Fox to the Parliament of the Common Weal, etc. p. 8. 1650. says, Let All
those Abbey Lands (...) are given to the Priests, be given to the poor of the
Nation.

But facing about in 1686. W. P. in Preface to Persuasive to Moderation, says,
Far be it from me to Solicit any thing in Dimunition of the just Rights of the
Church of England; let her rest protected where she is.

E. Buroughs, p. 105. says, You are in the Witchcraft who receive Commands
from without, from the Letter.

But to go round again, in 1675. p. 36. Englands Interest W P says, me say Holy
writ is the declared Fundamental Law of Heaven.

Note, how W. P. confounds himself or deceives his Readers, or both, for in his
Rejoinder (as aforesaid) he takes up several pages to prove (...) Scripture
Corrupt and uncertain, so much ^^ghting it that he terms it J. Faldo's
Uncertain ^^rd of God, p. 39. and yet here calls it, The ^^lared Fundamental
Law of Heaven.

3. E. Buroughs in An Epistle, 1661. Keep ^^se to the Lords, and to the
measure of himself, ^^de manifest in your own hearts; for unto THAT (...) were
directed to, in the beginning, and in it is ^^r safety and preservation to the
end.

But afterward, W. P. controuls this plea of (...) B. in his Brief Exam. p.
11. saying, The ^^emy is at work to scatter the minds of Friends, by ^^t loose
plea. viz. What have thou to do with me? ^ave me to my freedom, and to the
Grace of God in (...) self, etc.

4. W. Smith's Primmer, p. 46. Give Honor whom honor is due: But to a proud,
h^ady, ^^^h minded man, there is no honor due, Though he ^^y be great in she
World, and in place to Rule.

But G. F. in a time of need, could say, I ^^our ALL men, much more the King;
see G F 's ^^ryal, etc. p. 8. And G. F. in his Papers to he ^^esbyterians, p.
2. says, All Kings have spru^g in the Night, since the days of the Apostles,
among (...) Antichrists.

Note the harmony, Notwithstanding their ^^^ing, They are of one Mind and Soul.

5. E. Buroughs Advice to the Parliament, 59. says, It was thorough Ignorance
that the People subjected to herriditary Government, or to the Government
standing in a single Person successively -- and our Nation has been under the
Bonds of Slavery in this respect.

But let us hear what contrary Doctrine G. F. preached, when Times were turned,
1664. If I could take any Oath at all (says he) I could take that Oath ( viz
the Oath of Allegiance, which Oath binds to the King, his heirs and Successors)
see his Trial, etc. Behold! what good can be expected from that People, whose
Leaders are such Temporizers! But Note, this last passage of E. Buroughs is
left out of his Works, Printed 1672.

6. Quakers Vindication, p. 3. by G. W and 24 more, 1693. given to the
Parliament, where they accuse F. Bugg of Justifying Cromwells Usurpation, which
they say was testified against by E. B. and others.

But pray hear how E. Buroughs testified against Cromwells Usurpation, p. 552.
The Lord gave thee [Oliver Cromwel] the Necks of Princes to tread upon, their
Dominions to inherit. And to the Kings party, he said, To All you called
Delinquents, Cavileers, Thus says the Lord, my Controversy is against you,
even my hand of Judgment is upon you already, and you are become cursed in all
your Hatchings -- and you and your Kings and Lordly Power, shall be enslaved by
the Devil, in the Pit of Darkness in everlasting Bondage, where he shall reign
your Lord and King for evermore, etc. Given under my hand, and sealed by the
Spirit of God, ^horough E. Buroughs.

Note, this Passage was taken out of E. B 's Trumpet of the Lord p. 9. but left
out of his Works in the reprint. Surely they did not believe E. B. was so
moved, nor that his Message was sealed by the Eternal God, else why did they
leave out this Notable Prophecy? Thus not only their Temporizing is seen, but
also the deceit and falsity of G. W. and his 24 Brethren, for pre^ending, yea,
declaring to the Parliament, that E. B. Testified against the Usurpers, when
indeed it was the Kings party that he Testified against, and justified
Cromwells Rule. But as I have before noted, that they have mended, pieced and
painted G. F 's Journal, so it appears [in this respect] they have done the
same by E. Buroughs Works, and others. Now because G. W. and his 24 Brethren
speak of others, as well as E. B. that reprehended O. Cromwels Usurpation, let
us hear what G. Fox says in the case.

7. Counsel and Advice, etc. p 37. Let thy Soldiers go forth with a free
willing heart, that thou (Oliver Cromwell) may rock Nations as a Cradle

And in his Papers to the Presbiterians, p. 9. he wrote against the King,
calling those Traitors against Christ, who desire an earthly King. And, in his
Papers to the Parliament, 1659. about Tithes, he bids them sell all the late
Kings Parks and his Rents, and give to the Impropriators.

But as soon as the King came in, viz. June the 5. 1660 they faced about again,
and published a Declaration, signed by G. F. and 12 more, where in p 4. they
say, They Love, own and honor the King, etc. -- I could cite more but let
these suffice at this Time.

Concerning Papists.
A Caveat again Popery, p 37. Eng. Interest, etc p. 4. both by W. P. The Papal
Interest is a Combination against good Sense, Reason and Conscience. Whether in
case they could not be conformed to, they would allow a Toleration were they
powerful? Whether in case they should say, Yes, we ought to believe them,
since it is one of their most sacred Maxims, Not to keep faith with H^^^ticks,
etc.

But to go round again, Read p. 6. of The Pennsilvania Defense o^ the D. of
Buckinghams Book, And p. 22 of A Reply, etc. by G. C. (i. e. Gulielmus Calamus
Anglica, William Penn) published after K. James came to the Crown, viz I must
tell him (i. e. the Church of England man) I cannot a^mi^e his Wisdom, Manners
or Justice in his Reflections upon the Roman Catholics, after the Assurance of
so great an ONE has given him and his Friends, of their Security and Protection
-- One thing I must say, Roman Catholics have been Loyal in England and
Holland, etc. See more in the aforesaid Books to the same purpose.

Now let us hear what some Quakers say in two Addresses they made to K James,
one in April, 1687. viz. We Pray God to bless the King and his Royal Family,
etc. The other Address, in June, 1687. viz. We cannot but with grateful hearts
both admire and acknowledge the Providence of God, that made the Kings
Retireing ( into Scotland) give a happy Turn to his Affairs, to the defeating
and disappointing the Designs of his Enemies -- We do justly conceive our selves
obliged to praise God for his goodness in carrying him Thorough and over ALL
his Troubles.

Note; as affectionate as they were to K. James, they could not by their
Prayers help him in those Troubles that followed, nor did they by their Spirit
of Discerning tell him of it before hand (no more then other Professors) But
rather that he was Secure, and got thorough ALL his Troubles. But it appeared
they were grossly deceived therein.

What shall I say to my old Friends, but as one latel said, viz. Fret not at
Instruments, neither look so much at them, as at the Righteous* Hand that is
turned against you. Those who once knew the way of the Lord, and afterward
gave way to a Spirit of deceit, Hypocrisy, Temporizing and Formality, such
must be laid open, and are more to b^ Testified against, than the very Heathen
or open Profane.

Thus Reader this Book helps thee to sight of many of their Sayings and
Unsayings, backward and forward, Contradictions, Confusions and Rounds, yea,
Round and Round again, Condemning, Confuting and Confounding themselves, and
one another, especially George Whitehead, George Fox and Will. Penn, chief
leading Men among the Quakers, as may be seen throughout this Book. Yet
notwithstanding all this, I know my old Friends so well, that I expect and
doubt not, but that they will have that stupendous Confidence, as to deny all
this, (or at least not confess it) and say, It Is false, and horrid Slanders,
etc. Though we read it, though we see it with our Eyes, and though we hear it
with our Ears, yet our Senses must all be deceived, and as in Quakers
Challenge, p. 3. The Quakers only are in the Truth, and NONE but They. What
else may I say! God in his Infinite Mercy open the Eyes of all sincere hearted
(though not so discerning, yet) well meaning Christians, and deliver them from
such strange Delusion, as he has in a good measure done for me, blessed be his
Name forever.

Postscript, by way of Question, To the Leaders of my Old Friends
BEcause W. P. in his Rejoinder, p. 312. declares, That he and his Brethren
make it their business to CONTEND thorough all Difficulties to promote this
glorious Dispensation of Light in the World. Therefore if you will abide by
this, and not decline this Testimony too, but that you make a Reply to this
foregoing Treatise, pray let Lies, Wherewith S. Jenings state of the Case is
stored, see G. K's Answer.
Equivocations, Reviling and Sophestical Wrangling be no longer your Refuge in
the case, so much used by your Brother Ellwood against G. K. till several of
his own Brethren were ashamed of it. And if you expect God shall prosper you,
let that be condemned that is condemnable by his Truth, and no longer justify
all by the lump, as you have done formerly. And along with the rest, I desire
you give a plain honest Answer also to this Question, viz.

Why this following Doctrine, so frequently preached form^rly by ancient
Friends, is now let fall, and not preached by any of you, viz.

I the Light will overturn Nations, Kingdoms and gathered Churches, that will
not own me the Light in them. I will make you knew, that I the Light am the
true Eternal God, p. 11. Light and Life, etc. Again, News out of the North, p.
15. I am the same Door that ever was (says G. F.) the same Christ, to day,
yesterday, and forever, the Light is the Eye that sees it. Again, Quest* to
Professors, p. 27. Does not the Name [Christ] belong to the whole Body, and to
every Member of the Body, as well as to the Head Again, News from the North,
says, I speak, the same Seed, which is Christ (says G. F.) and if the Seed
speak, which is Christ, he has no other Name. Again, Readiness Errand to
Damafcus, p. 7, 8. If Christ be in you, must be not say, I am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life? -- And he that has the same Spirit that raised Jesus from
the dead, is Equal with God, viz. the holy Ghost, see great Mystry, p. 66, 127.
To be short, I omit much more such Doctrine from diverse others.

Now I say, seeing you have hither to justified this as Gospel, and Christian
Doctrine in those who published it, why do you not continue to preach it, as
they did, seeing also it is the Faith or Belief of all you Preachers in general,
That when you preach or pray, it is not you, but Christ in you that prays I
prove this to be your Belief by these two Reasons,

First, You do never in your Meetings pray for Pardon or Forgiveness of Sin
(Not that I have heard in Twenty years due attendance) for seeing it is Christ
in you that prays, there is no need of it, he being without sin. Secondly, You
do not pray to Christ, because it being Christ in you that prays, it is absurd
for Christ to pray to himself.
But I Will take leave to tell you, (and prove it too, if need be) That you are
of a different Faith in these two things from the Apostles, Saints and Martyrs,
yea, your Faith or Principle herein is contrary to all the primitive Christians
in general; for the Scriptures, Church History and Book of Martyrs show, that
their Religion led them to pray publicly for Pardon for their Sins, and some
even at the point of Death; and also both Apostles and other Christians
frequently prayed to Jesus Christ, as well as to God the Father.

Indeed your Presumption in this Antichristian Principle is to be lamented,
for when some of your Fellow Ministers have been guilty of Whoredoms,
Adulteries, etc. though not then openly known, yet these men, thus secretly
guilty, cannot stoop, no more than you, to pray for Pardon for their Sins, but
still keep to their common Form in Prayer; and this is a Truth known to more
than your selves. Now I ask you, Whether do you Believe it is Christ that prays
in these men too, as well as in you, who may not so be guilty? Pray answer in
Truth and Sincerity to this and the rest of the particulars, or other ways
e^silent; but I have cause to believe you will do neither, but rather, as G. W.
has of late years done, in answering Books, as I have seen, where he has not
taken notice of scarce a twentieth part of a Book, but only send out something,
and call it an Answer, to Please your People, and that they may have something
to say, when people cry, where is the Answer to such or such a Book?

Now I sincerely profess, that I have done nothing herein but with an honest
design, not having wilfully or knowingly wronged either Books or Authors, in
any one passage; Therefore I propose this to you Preachers, who publicly
accuse us that have lately printed) calling us, Apostates, Liars, and that we
have both abused you and your Friends Books (in falsely citing P^ssages out of
the same, and wronging their sense, and the like) to come forth to prove these
Charges in the face of the world, and if it be found that we have indeed
therein wronged you (Errors of the Press and other causual Mistakes excepted,
which are incident to all) you shall (in justice and equity) have public
Satisfaction. Come S. Jenings, Come John Simcock, Come John Rodman, Juda.
Allen, W. Gabitas, and all other our Accusers, appoint a public Meeting at
Philadelphia at a Months warning, by a few Lines under your hands, put at some
Public places at Burlington and Philadelphia, and giving me also under your
hand, that you intend no other and I promise in the behalf of my self and
Friends, to meet you, if God permit, provided it be in some public place where
all may hear how you prove your Charges; Come forth I say fairly to prove your
Charges, and no longer ^i^ backbiting, belying and abusing of us in your own
Meeting Houses, as you do, where you will give none leave to answer you.

But I must tell you ^lainly, I know you so well that I expect no such fair
dealing at your hands.

Therefore I Will give the world a Sign, by which they may know that you do not
only abuse, belly and Charge us falsely in this case, But also, that your own
Consciences tells you that you are guilty of so doing. The Sign is this; If you
know and are conscious to your selves that you have and do so belly us, etc.
then you will not come forth, according to this Proposition; But if you find you
can get the least advantage of us, by out witting or otherways wording the
matter (though with never so much falsity) Then you will come forth, and be glad I
give you this opportunity. And by this SIGN shall you be Proved. Thus my
Conscience bears witness, that I am clear of the guilt of your charge,
Therefore (as says W. P.) with Religious boldness, (...) subscribe your Friend,

Daniel Leeds.

A COPY of A LETTER Sent to the Author by a Person of Note, whose Name is left
out, because printed without his Knowledge.
Esteemed Friend D. L.
I Have perused thy Book, entitled, News of a Trumpet sounding in the
W^lderness etc. in which thou have discovered and laid open the Mystery of
Iniquity more clearly than I have seen done by any other. And for thy labor
and pains therein, I pray God of his Bounty to reward thee, and also protect
thee from the cruel Effects of the Envy of those People therein concerned, who
being Potent round about thee, thou can expect no other Protection. Though
perhaps the thoughts of the sudden stop that the Philadelphia Quakers met
with, when they were so hot at persecuting G. K. and his Friends, may in some
degree check them, and hinder them from doing what otherwise they would. Since
I was with thee at Burlingion in 16^2. I have thought God Almighty was then
fitting thee for some purpose, because of the sudden and Miraculous Recovery,
in great part, of thy Speech, from that extreme ^mpediment of Stammering, which
thou had when I was with thee two years before; and I remember I heard thee
then say, thou had it from a Child: I call it Miraculous, because I have
known many to have such Impediments, but never before did I know any to loose
it, and Recover their Speech again.

The current of great part of thy Book excellently confirms my Observation of
the Quakers, viz. That their Religion really consists in a cross Method to all
other Societies of Christians that ever were in being; For such things as are
indeed Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, they account Nicities,
Circumstantials and Smaller matters, and care not how confusedly they preach
them. But what are really Circumstantials or smaller matters, as Tithe, Mint,
etc. (and not of necessity for a Christians practice) they make the
Fundamentals of their Religion. And yet, as thou have noted, they are
Hypocritical in the practice of most of those things too, as might also be
instanced in diverse other things; I will name two.

First, They make it matter of conscience not to sing David's Psalms, and yet
they use another way of singing in their Meetings; and make a great noise with
it too, especially when any fluent or thundering Preacher comes amongst them;
yea, many of them have written in Posie or Rhymes, which is to be sung; and as
I remember W. Baily and J Coal call some Rhimes that they have written by the
Name of Songs, so that it seems People may sing the Quakers Writings, but not
David's, by their allowance.

2dly, They pretend Conscience not to Honor or Respect their Superiors, by
putting off the Hat, but they will bow the Body, and pray what is the
difference? I take bowing the Body to be a greater Respect than doffing the
Hat. But though they cannot doff the Hat to others, yet those Quakers who are
wealthy that live in great Towns and Cities in England, love Hat Honor so
well, that they cause their Apprentices to doff their Hats and stand beat
headed before them; this their Conscience will allow.

Again, as to Fighting, thou has well noted their Hypocrisy and wheeling and
turning about both in their Writings, and also in their Actions about Delaware
River. But I wonder how thou came to neglect that notable Instance of my old
Friend and Acquaintance Walter Clark, an ancient Preacher, now Governor of
Rhode Island, who has given several Commissions to Masters of Vessels and
Privateers to fight the French, etc. to defend which and his Commissionating
the Officers of the Train-bands under his Government, (and sometimes heading
the said Train-bands himself on his lofty prancing Horse, and Souldier-like,
caused the Inhabitants to sign the Association on the head of the Drum) brings
this Scripture for his Defense, Ephesians. 6 12. We wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Worldly
Governors, etc.

Thus by little and little, Inch by Inch they come round, and can do that which
at another time is against their tender Consciences; yet I question whether
ever they will be able to wrestle down the worldly Governors with only little
Guns, till they get great ones; as some of them do already maintain in Ships,
notwith^tanding their Father G. Fox his Papers to the contrary. But do they
think the world does not see their Hypocrisy in this and many other things?
Yea sure, and laughs as them too.

My Friend, I perceive thee not willing to enlarge, else I could have assisted
thee with many things out of Books, which I suppose never came to thy sight,
and especially out of the Books of G Fox, who was the first setter up of their
Religion, as W. P. declares in his Preface to G. F 's Journal; But methinks the
world cannot but see W. P. turned Painter in that Preface; for he there
declares the outward Vocation of G. F. to be a Shepherd, and yet it is well
known he was a Shoe-makers; But it is obs^rvable, that in Luke. 2. we find, that
the Shepherds were the first that preached Christ, the worlds Savior; so G F.
was the first that preached the Quakers Christ, therefore it is convenient he be
recorded a Shepherd too, though in truth he was a Shoe maker. -- But in all W.
Pen^s Preface, ^or any where in the Journ^^ can I find, that One Remarkable
Passage of G F 's having the Midwife so long attending on his Wife, expecting
her delivery of some Child of Wonder (she being near 59 years of Age) but at
last brought forth no Child, and the Midwife dismissed No, they thought it not
convenient to insert this, though so eminent a Passage; for it would be enough
to give the lie to his pretended Spirit of Discerning

But as for G. Fox Books, I dare engage, the Quakers will never print a
Collection of them; for there such a mess of Confusion as the World never saw
the like, nor can all their art of Mending, Patching and Pa^nting ever hide it.

I wish thou had enlarged upon the Quakers exal^ing their own Sufferings
above the Sufferings of Christ, and his Apost^es, and Martyrs, viz on that
Doctrine that says, The Sufferings of the People of God called Quakers) in this
Age, is greater ^ufferings, and more Unjust then in the days of Christ, or of
the Apostles, or in any time since: Queen Marys days brought not forth a
Suffering more Cruel -- What was done to Christ, or the Apostles was chiefly
done by a Law, and in great part by the due Execution of a Law; see E.
Buroughs Works, p. 273.

And though this was Reprinted by the Quakers in 1672. and also lately
justified by the 24 London Quakers, yet I affirm it to be a grand vainglorious
Error and wicked Lie. For the Sufferings of all the Saints are not to be
compared with the Sufferings of the ever blessed Jesus. And yet the Quakers
Sufferings were neither so Great, so Cruel, nor so Unjust, as were the
Sufferings of the Apostles or Martyrs; for not one Quaker had then been put to
death, viz. in 1657. when that Doctrine was first published. And let the
Quakers show by what Law the Apostles and Martyrs Suffered so many various
s^r^s of Cruel Deaths, by those Bloody Tyrants and how the Law was duly
executed on them, or forever be ashamed of this vain Boast, which has no
parrellel among ^rotestants. Besides, they come in as Advocates, and plead for
all those Tyrants, persecuting Papists, and Cru^l Irish, that Murdered so many
Thousands for Christ's sake, saying but about six Lines off, And herein it
appears the Sufferings to be more Unjust, because what the Persecutors of Old
did they did by a Law, and by the due Execution of a Law, etc.

But seeing these People have the Impudence to impose such things on the World,
in their Doctrine, it is no wonder that their Books of Controversy are so stuffed
with gross Lies, grand Forgeries, wicked Perversions, false Insinuations, and
shameful Calumnies, as are the late Books of S. Jenings, T. Ellwood* The
Peningtons, G. Whitehead, C. Pusey and others I suppose thou have seen the
Answers to them by G K. etc wherein these things are made appear. But I must
take leave. Only this;

I cannot but smile to see how like men driven to their la^t shifts, they thrust
in the Revolution of Souls into the present Controversy, though it be no part
of the Controversy; No, they can scarce write a B^ok, but in that must go at
one end or other on'^; and this they do, thinking to fright ignorant People
from having any converse with G. K or as S. Fisher tells the Priests, It may
serve to frighten poor Fools; though they have made it a worn Thread bare
story, by so often printing it in their Books

But I am considering where they will now shelter themselves; for they have all
along hitherto been battering at G. K. for his Contradictions and
Inconsistencies between his former and late Books; and though they have done in
this just as S. Fisher says of those lewd Women who being most Whore, call
Whore first; yet now G. K. has cut down this Tree, under which they have all
along sheltered themselves; for he has now not only acknowledged, but also
Corrected his own Errors in Print. Now what remains, is for them to do the
like, or else the very World will soon discern them as dry as the Fig-Free
which our Savior cursed.

Farewell.
FINIS.

