Counterfeit Convert, by G. Whithead, p. 72. I may see cause Oath ways to word
the matter, and yet our Intentions be the same.

Great Mystery, by G Fox, I am not the Man that gives out things to lay open
Wickednesses, but that Men may take warning, and fear, and come to know
themselves.

T. Ellwoods Epist. to Friends, p. 72. The way to recover the deceived is to
discover, lay open and witness against the Deceivers.

NEWS of A TRUMPET Sounding in the WILDERNESS. OR, The Quakers Ancient
Testimony Revived, Examined and Compared with it self, and also with their New
Doctrine.

Whereby the Ignorant may learn Wisdom, and the Wise advance in their
Understandings.

Collected with Diligence, and carefully cited from their Ancient and Later
Writings, and Recommended to the serious Reading and Consideration of all
Enquiring Christians, by Daniel Leeds

Prove. 27. v. 5. Open Rebuke is better than secret Love.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Bible in New York, 1697.

Friendly Reader;
THere has happened some Errors in printing the following treatise, occasioned
partly by my distance from the Press, and partly by reason of its being
thronged with other Work. But the chief of them are here noted, which the
Reader is desired to observe in reading, and particularly one above the rest,
it is in page 11. 2d collumn, at the end of 8th line, these following words are
left out, which the Reader is desired to add, viz. [ And his Flesh, and Blood,
and Bones are of his Nature] for Isaac Pennington's words are these, viz. For
that which he (Christ) took upon him was our Garment, even the flesh and blood
of our Nature, which is of an earthly perishing Nature; but he is of an eternal
Nature, and his flesh and blood and bones are of his Nature.

The rest are escapes of less Note, which follow, viz.

Page 4. line 23. blot out but. p. 10. l. 10 for 83 read 283. p. 26. l. 10.
read so that as W. P. p. 38. l 1. for as above, r. before at Numb. 27. p 52. l.
17. read deny Christ to be God and Man. p. 54. l. 10. f. 10. r. 107. p. 58. l.
3. r. lugg. p. 72. l. 6. f. and r. or. p. 74. l. 9 r. know. p. 78. l. 15. r.
cutting. p. 106. l. 24. r. if. p. 107. l. 26. for 5.13. read 513. p. 110. l.
20. r. fears. p. 111* l. 11. r. falsely. p. 130. l. 7. f. after ^ a few. p. 133
^2. r. eternal God.

The PREFACE.
NOtwithstanding the ensuing Treatise seems to render the People called Quakers
not only Hetrodox in their Doctrines, but Unconstant and Hypocritical therein
also; yet it is my real belief. That the Quakers at first came forth in Life
and Power, and made a good beginning, Indeed so did most of Sects in
Christendom.
according to what was made manifest to them. Yet nevertheless by reading their
Books of Contrversie, it is easily ^een how the Life and Power, that formerly
attend^d them, did more and more vanish, as they fell to contending with one
another about Trifles and Ceremonies, instituting this and that Order, and
getting unto Form; and this some of themselves did formerly ^iscern. They at
first came forth in Power, at ^ast settled down in Form. And yet, I am livingly
^nsible that there are many, yea, very many honest ^incere hearted People among
the Quakers, even among those who are Opp^sers of George Keith and (...) late
Seperates And therefore God forbid that ^^y Design should be other than that
the Haughtiness of the Proud in Spirit should be abased, and ^abels Buildings
overturned, etc. And when my Intentions were first see on this ensuing Work, I
had taken G. K's Books in equally with the rest, or else I should have been
partial, as Caleb Pusey has been [ being blinded with Prejudice, as his Term
is] in only faulting G. K's Books, but not his Opposers; but as I proceeded on,
at length I found G K. (according to the Example of good men ^n all Ages has
publicly acknowledged himself guilty of Errors in diverse of ^is former Books,
and promised a Correction of the same; and now of late we have his Retracta^on
come over in Print. And I would to God his Opposers had been as sensible of
this great discovering Day, to have made the like Confession, and so at once
have laid the Controversy in the Dust, and thereby have stopped this from ever
seeing the light, which would have been matter of joy to me, and all concerned
in this Controversy, who have a true Zeal for God and his Truth. For as I have
from my Youth been trained up in the Quakers Discipline, so it has been the
goodness of God to me to incline my Mind to seek after him, and that with a
Desire after Knowledge, lest my Zeal should only proceed from Ignorance.

And it still remaining in my Memory, That when I was scarce seven Years old,
my Mother (being Religious) used to take me aside to pay to God with her upon
my Knees; but soon after she turned to the Quakers; and then I heard no more of
that kind of Exercise,

Yet at Twelve Years of Age the God of Heaven visited me, and made me sensible
of Eternity, and I ^ad then a Vision of Christ coming down from Heaven, which
was Wonderful, but I calling to my Mother to behold the Glory, the Vision
vanished.

Again, at Twenty Years of Age I was afresh turned to Religion, often weeping
in secret places because of sin, till at length I was meditating on a place of
Scripture, I was suddai^ly surrounded with Glory, and with Soul Ravishments of
Love and Joy, in so sweet and ravishing a manner as no Pen can or ought to
describe, or Tongue declare with which I have also some time since been
visited. And I being a Hearer and F^llower of those Ministers of the Church of
England who had the best Name among the People, did at last take a disti^^ of
them by a story one of them told in his Sermon, which I telling to my Parents,
they soon prevailed with me to go with them to their Friends Meetings, which I
no sooner did, but their Ministry had such effect upon me, that I was
constrained to believe, what they preached was Infallible, even as the Oracles
of God; till on a time at a Meeting where Giles Barnadiston and Sam Cater
preaching, I observed a Contradiction in their Doctrine. Which Clash, together
with bitter Reflections that I saw between two Elders in the Men's Metting, not
long after, ^ave the first stroke to my former Faith, of our Friends being led
by the Unerring Spirit, and put me ^e upon pensive Thoughts concerning them;
but I kept these things to my self. At length, concluding that all other
Societies that I knew, had also their failings, and being joined, along with my
Parents, to the Quakers, (and being trained up in their Discipline) Resolved to
sit down content, and bear these things, so long as I could feel my heart in a
m^lting posture at all Opportunities offered; but could not afterward swallow
down all Doctrines that I heard them preach, without examination, as found most
did (though my Understanding was much darkened by their turning the Scriptures
into Allegories) yet as apt as others I was to take up a rest in the established
form set up amongst us, and I thought I was happy and safe in thus keeping my
self within the Pale of the Church; and the rather because the Preachers often
brought Scripture to show, That such as were lukewarm in their Profession God
would spew them out. But Experience has since showed me, That their
Mis^application of this Scripture has proved a stratagem of Satan only in drive
People into Form.

For the Consciences of my old Friends are my Record this day, That mary in
their Church have been ill Persons, who at the same time have not wanted heat
of Zeal for the Form, and for Unity of Friends; and so far my Experience agrees
with W. Penn's Doctrine in his Address to Protestants, p. 177. It Is not to be
saved (says he) to be within the Pale of any visible Church -- for that is
putting an eternal Cheat upon our selves. Ill Things are Ill Things within or
without the Pale, that matters not. So I also find, That Good Things are Good
Things within or without the Pale, that matters not; for Scripture and Church
History sh^w^, That many times single Persons have been in the right, when
gathered Churches and Congregations have been wrong; Examples of this we have
in all Ages.

But passing on to the Year 1691. when Differences arose at Philadelphia
between George Keith and others, from his being accused to preach Two Christ's,
because ^e preached Faith in Christ without us, as well as within, and I giving
diligent ^^ed to the Points controverted, my Understanding and Intellect was
quickly enlarged, and the Thoughts of my former Vision of Christ descending
from Heaven, attended me, and my Zeal and Faith in Christ was increased, and
diverse Scripture Mysteries were then opened to me, to my great Satisfaction,
which I never before could attain to. And I began to find a Call within me, To
be active in the station and Capacity wherein God had put me. Wherefore I set a
Resolution to Search and Try things for my self, and not to believe on trust,
or because others did. Well, accordingly I searched our Friends Books, to see if
those various Reports were true or false; and having, by diligence, received
Satisfaction therein, I could not find ease in my breast without taking the
Opportunity that God by his Providence affords me, thus to Expose at a Publish
what here follows, believing that God Almighty will bless my Endeavors to
those who are desirous to see for themselves, and to try all things, in regard
I know my proceeding herein was by a Motion heavenly, above Self-will, my self
having forget against the Publication hereof near two Years, under diverse
Tentations, being not insensible what Suffering I may hereby outwardly incur;
but a peaceful Conscience I esteem above all.

Now an Objection falls in my way, which I have heard my Old Fri^nds make, viz.
That faith in Christ, as without us, is only a Notional Historical Faith, the
Professors Faith, which we were taught when Children, and is no saving Faith.

I Answ. And in true Experience I affirm, That it is the very same at this day
of the Light within; and I appeal to all their own Consciences, whether there
is not many now amongst them, that have the like Belief in this inward
Manifestation of the Light, and yet know not the Work of Regeneration?

And it was worthily observed of Calvin (as cited in one of their own Books,
entitled, Righteous Judgment, p. 128.) viz. That Calvin inclined to the
Divinity of the Light in men universally, but a little shy of speaking more
positively, for fear of abuse by Phanaticks. Behold! now this great Reformer
had a perfect sense how men might run into Abuses, by high pretenses to Light
and Spirituality. And whether what that great Reformer feared in that Age, be
not come to pass now in this Age, I leave to the judgment of the Impartial
Reader of the ensuing Book.

Lastly, We have account from England, That since G. Keith's arrival there, the
Doctrine of Christ crucified, and faith in him, as without men, is now
frequently preached by the Quakers, causing many to say, That if ever Christ
was preached out of Envy, now is the time (as we read some did in the Apostles
days) hence it is not impossible, but in time they may come to preach that
Doctrine in true love, and so confess that George Keith has been the greatest
Instrument in Gods hand, of good to the Quakers, that ever yet arose amongst
them.

But by the Complaint that their Friend A. Hulins lately made to their Men's
Meeting at Burlington, by a Paper given in under his hand, it appears, that the
Preachers about Delaware are not yet come so far as to preach such Doctrine out
of Envy; much less for love. For the satisfaction of some, I shall here an
abstract of his give own words, as I have it by me, under his hand, viz.

Friends and Brethren, It being my let to be disowned the 3d of November last,
by Samuel Jenings, Mahlen Stacy and George Gray, with whose leave I make my
Address to this Meeting, showing the cause, etc.

[One preached thus] It is the Work of the Devil to cause People, that have
professed the Appearance of Christ in the heart, to respect the Person without
them. [Another preached thus] I am grieved that any, that have professed the
Light, should now direct the Minds of People to respect him as he is now in
Heaven above the Clouds: Truly (Friends) it is Delusion. [Another preached
thus] There is that would have Flesh added in the Creed, but let them take it
that will, I believe the Lord will give them his Plagues and Torments with it.
-- If these things are owned by you, I remain

Your Disowned Brother, Abr. Hulings.


Now, who would think any other, but that this Quakers Church at Burlington
should condemn such Doctrine as this? No, but this they did not do, but gave A.
Hulings his Paper again, without any Answer. Why, if they had done otherwise
they had not acted agreeable to their Brethren at Philadelphia some time
before. For there is one John Humphery, a Preacher near Philadelphia, that
writes a Letter against G. K. and his Friends, wherein he has this Expression,
I am grieved to hear some say they expect to be justified by that Blood that
was shed at Jerusalem. In justification of which Passage, he writes in another
Letter, thus, viz. His (Christ's) own words will clear me from your aspersion,
John ^.63. It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits Nothing. So he
himself ascribes the work of man's Salvation and Sanctification, Not to the
Flesh that suffered, but to the Spirit that quickened, Not to the Blood that
was shed at Jerusalem, but unto that Flesh and Blood which is Spiritual, etc.
Of this false Doctrine G. K. complained to the Quarterly Meeting at
Philadelphia, but no Answer could he have, nor no blame nor condemnation must
pass against their Brother J. Humphery for this false Doctrine; though its near
six Years since these Letters were writ.

Well, Reader, This is a Taste of the Doctrine and Faith of our Delaware
Quakers, though as I said before, we hear the contrary Doctrine is now preached
in London; and thou may expect to find much more such like false Doctrine,
Clashes and Contradictions in the ensuing Treatise. And I should have been glad
if I could been easy without detecting the same; but I have now done it, and
have it may be the last I shall be concerned in: And whatever man ^e my lot for
this, I am content, knowning my Intentions and proceeding herein to be honest
and sincere. Amen.

D. L.

The Contents
THe Introduction, page 1. Chap. 1. The Dis-harmony, Clashes and Contradictions
of the Quakers in both their ancient and later Writings, p. 4. Chap. 2. Of
Opposition at Unity, p. 46. Chap. 3. A short Summary of Citations from the
Quakers Books, showing that they deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ, p.
52. Chap. 4. Of calling Names for Religion, p. 55. Chap. 5. Of Prophecyes, p.
59. Chap. 6. Of Infallible Discerning, p 61. Chap. 7. Of the Scriptures, p. 68.
Chap. 8. Of Magistracy and Government, p 77. Chap. 9. O Persecution and
Prosecution, p 81. Chap 10. Friends Sufferings to be recorded by London
Meeting, p. 91. Chap. 11. Of Swearing, p. 97. Chap. 12. Of Fighting, Swearing
and paying Tithes, p. 202. Chap. 13. Of Miracles, p. 810 Chap. 14. Of Life and
Doctrine, p. 113. Chap. 15. Sabbath Day Wheel turned round, p. 118. An
Appendix, p. 121 Of In alli^lity p. 129 O^ Temporizing, p. 130 Concerning
Papists, p. 134.
A Postscript, by way of Question to the Leaders of my Old F^iends, p. 137. A
Proposition to meet our Adversaries in a public Meeting, concerning the
matters contained in this Book, p. 140.
A Copy of a Letter sent to the Author by a Person of Note, p. 142.
INTODVCTION.
EXperience shows, That the Quakers have always been exceeding Clamorons
against those who have opposed any of their Doctrines especially in those books
whose Authors are dead. And yet notwithstanding no Christian Professors are
mo^e guilty than themselves, not only of condemning Doctrines of Persons that
are dead [as diver of their Books testify] but also guilty of Cens^ring Persons
too after their decease, especially such as have been their opposers. For this
take one Example from W Penn, viz.

Reason against Rai^ing, p. 163. Tho. Hicks complaining of E. Buroughs for
giving ill Names to P. Bennit, for asking Questions of the Quakers. W. P. makes
Thomas Hicks this Reply, viz. It Is Wicked, with a witness, and like a most
irreligions Miscreant indeed; God is my Record this day, I would not to inherit
more Worlds than there are Stars in the Firmament, have so violated the Laws of
Charity against the most violent of our deceased Opposers, Ungodly Traducer,
whose Envy, no doubt, has fire enough in it to burn this good man's bones, etc.
Note, at what a rate he goes on [considering the cause] more like a Domineering
Ranter then a meek and humble Quaker, seeing himself, is really guilty of
Censuring and inveighing at ^. Perrot, one of there deceased Opposers, as may
be seen in his Book, called Judas and the Jews; And yet I know not that he got
so much by so doing as to pay one Debt, and much less so many Worlds as there
are Stars in the Firmament; but having not the Book at hand, to cite
particulars, I Will set down what John ^ayl^ and Jo. Field [Brethren of W. P] say
of the said Perrot after his decease, p. 9. of their Loving Invitation, viz. J.
Perrot (say they) became a Troubler and Opposer, and lost the Unity of Friends
in general, and so was cut off from the Vine Christ, and dyed miserably [being
in debt, as the say.] See now here they censure one of there deceased Opposers
to Damnation. Behold the self-condemnation of these men! and their want of
charity to the deceased! Where has any of their Opposers been so Uncharitable
to any of them, after death especially?

But my present business is not at all about the Dead, neither about Men, nor
Things that are Dead, but against confused Doctrines now living, viz. owned
patronized and justified by men now living [as witness the late general account
given in the City Merurcy or News Book, by the 24 Quakers at London.] And W.
Bailey, p. 568. opposing some Doctrine of a Quaker who was dead, says, As for
that which is dead, I have little to say one way or other; I look not [sayes
he] at the Person of any Living or Dead in that respect, but it is that that
lives that makes the difference. And just as W Bailey says, so it is; For those
citations following are the Doctrines of those now living, though some of the
first Authors be dead. And my care has been to cite the Passages so large as to
deliver the plain and full sense and meaning of their Authors to all
intelligent Readers, as they will find who please to examine and compare the
same impartially. But if through my distance from the Press some Errors or
Escapes should pass Uncorrected, I desire the candid Readers excuse or pardon,
seeing none are designed.

Lastly. Whereas some Preachers of late [to ey^se such confused Doctrines as
follow] tell the People, That it is easy to find seeming Contradictions in the
Scriptures; And why then may it not be so in our Friends Books* To which I say,
they themselves in their Books give the reason why it is so with the Scriptures;
which reason cannot hold as to their Books; for W. Penn takes up several pages
in his Rejoinder, to show to J. Faldo the Uncertainty of the Scriptures,
bringing Reasons to Prove them not the same as given forth, but altered and
corruptud; so Joan Whitehead, to the same effect in Refuge fixed* also G.
Whitehead in diverse Books, and S. Fisher at large in Rusticus, etc. all which
shall be showed hereafter. Now this cannot be alleged of their Books, because
we have the first Impression of them, and therefore they cannot be altered or
corrupted. So that this is too short a cover for this Mystry of Confusion,
which I desire all sober Readers well to Note.

Having thus premised, shall now proceed to note some of the Contradictions and
Clashes of the Quakers, as I find them set down in their ancient and latter
Writings; with some Observations on the same.

CHAP. I. The Dis-harmony, Clashes and Contradictions of the Quakers in both
their ancient and latter Writings.
Numb. I.
SAn^y Foundat. p. 13. W. P. says, Since the Father is God, and the Son is
God, and the Spirit (...) unless the Fathers, (...) and holy Ghost are 3
distirct Nothings, (...) must be ^^e^ distinct S. ^^^ances and consequently
three distinct Gods.

Qrs. Plainness, p. 2^ G. W. says, That the Distinction of the Father and Son
are not only Nominal but Real.

Note, here if G. W's Real distinction do not make the Father and Son distinct
Substances. But W. Penn tells him they are distirct nothings. Reconcile these
who can.

Numb. II.
Quakers Plainness, p. 24. G. W. says, we own that the Father is in the Son
and the Son is in the Father; And also that the Son is the mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

Sandy Foundation. p. 14. W. Penn says, If the only God is the Father, and
Christ be the only God, then is Christ the Father; which is Ridiculous and
Shameful.

Note, how W P. calls his Brother Whitehead's Doctrine Ridiculous and Shameful.

Numb. III.
Qrs. plainness, p. 19. G W. there declares, that they cannot deviate from
Scripture Phrase in their Creed; For until you bring us plain Scripture (says
he) that says, the humane Nature is the Christ [which phrase is
conscientiously scrupled] we must rather patiently bear your censure, than
deviate from Scripture Language in our Creed.

But in p. 18. G. W. says, Have we not plainly and often confessed, than the
divine Nature or word clothed with the most holy Manhood, was and is the
Christ? Note [cloathed with the most holy Manhood] is not Scripture Language on
phrase; so that here he deviates from Scripture Language in his Creed, in the
very next page. Pray what is this but Hypocrisy?

Numb. IV.
Sandy Founda. p. 22. W. Penn says, Since Christ could not pay what was not
his own [Debt] it follows, that in the payment of his own, the case still
remains equally grievous, since the debt is not hereby absolved or forgmen, but
transfered only.

Divi. of Christ Ans. ^^ T. D. p. 16. How false and Blasphemous ( says G. W.)
this charge is against Christ, I appeal to all sober Professors of
Christianity, viz. That when God required Satisfaction of Christ, is was due
from Christ.

Now observe, That as before W. P. Renders Geo. Whitehead's Doctrine Ridiculous
and Shameful, so here G. W. renders W. Penns Doctrine basphemous for holding,
that Christ had a Debt of his own to satisfy to God, as W. P. more laregly
affirms, p. 22. of his Sandy Foundat. Therefore as G. W. in his Quakers
plainness, p 20 says, Pray you ^aptists agree upon a consistent Creed that you
intend to stand by, so now the Bap^^sts may say, Pray you Quakers agree upon a
consistent Creed that you intend to stand by; etc.

Again, I cannot but observe, that though G. Whitehead (as before) pretends,
that they concientiously scruple to deviate from Scripture Language or phrase,
yet I have not met with one Book of controversy that G. W. has written, but he
himself diviates from Scripture phrase herein.

Likewise in Divinity of Christ by G. W. and G. Fox, they begin in the Epistle
with Commanding and charging Professors to bring express Scripture for their
Doctrine, saying, whether do the Scriptures speak of three Persons in the
Godhead, in these express words? Let us see where it is written; Com^, do not
shuffle, for we are resolved the Scripture shall buffet you about. And where
does the Scripture speak of a Humane Nature of Christ in Heaven? And where does
the Scripture say, the Soul is part of man's Nature? Give us plain Scripture,
without adding or diminishing. Come let us see Chapter and verse, etc.

Now may not the Professors say, Come G. W. Come Quakers, where does the
Scripture say, the Distinction of Father and Son is not only Nominal, but Real,
in these express words? Let us see where it is written: Come, do not shuffle.
And where does the Scripture speak or say, the divine Nature clothed with the
most holy Manhood, was and is the Christ? And where does the Scrip-say (these
words) The Light within every man? Give us plain express Scripture for this
your first and grand Principle of all, without adding or diminishing. Come let
us see Chapter and Verse, seeing you pretend you cannot deviate from Scripture
phrase in your Creed.

Besides, if G. W. does not hereby mean deceit and hypocrisy, for what end
does he pretend they cannot own this or that in their Creed, if it be expressed
in plain Scripture, seeing they so often and plainly testify that the Scripture
is not their Rule but the light within is their rule in Faith, But for
Professors to call for Scripture is but according to their principles, because
they own it for their rule.

Numb. V.
Sandy Founda p. 15. W. P. says, In the fullness of time [God] sent his Son,
who so many hundred years since in PERSON testified the virtue, etc.

Quakers, plainness p. 24. G. W says, The Title PERSON is too low and
unscriptural to give to the Christ of God.

Numb. VI.
E. Buroughs p. 142. J. Bu^jo^ said, How are they deceived who own Christ no
otherwise then as he was before the world began! E. B. Replys, Here then have
discovered thy sel^ more plainly: Did not the Saints own Christ Jesus, the same
yesterday, to day and for ever, for Salvation.

Quakers vindication p. 16. by G. Bishop, We distinguish between Christ which
was before the Foundation of the World, and his being within, the true Light,
and the Body which he took of the Virgin, etc.

Note, here G. B. owns Christ otherwise [For Salvation] than as he was before
the world began, for he makes 3 distinctions of Christ.

Numb. VII.
R. Huberthorns works, p. 20. Priest says, Christ himself was not capable of
Faith and Repentance. R. H. Replys, Here I Charge thee to be a Liar and a
Slanderer; for he was capable of Faith and Repentance.

Divinity of Christ, Ans. to T. D. p. 22. Christ he never did nor could sin
(says G. Whitehead)

Note, does not G. W. here hold Christ not capable of sin? And how then was he
capable of Repentance.

Numb. VIII.
Quakers Challenge, by Solomon Eccl^s, George Fox, whose Name (says he) thou
art ne^ worthy to take in thy Mouth, who is a Prophet indeed: It was said of
Christ, that he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World
knew him not; so it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said, he was
not: But thou will feel this Prophet one day as heavy as a Millstone upon thee
etc. G. W. excuses this in his serious search, p. 58.

Book called Ishmael, etc. p. 9. by G. W. One said, It is all one to say the
Scripture faith, and God says. G. W. Replys, Thou Blasphemous Beast, do thou
make no difference between the Scripture and God! Here let all that reads this,
see thy Blasphemy.

Note, upon what occasions they revile others for Blasphemy, But G. W. excuses
that real Blasphemy in his Brother S. E. and only says It Is a little failure
in syntax.

But let G. Whitehead tell me, If a man should affirm it is all one to say, His
Book Ishmael says, and the Spirit of God says, Whether this would be
blasphemy? since he asserts in the Title page, That it was given forth from the
Spirit of the Lord: Pray Reader take good Notice of this, for he can no ways
answer it without baffling himself.

Numb. IX.
G. F's Great Mystr. p. 264, 264, 283. Priest says, A man by his own power
cannot get into Regeneration, for they are d^ad in s^at and Trespasses. G. F.
Replys, Some are sanctified from the Womb, and some Children are holy; so all
are not dead in sins and trespasses; and some Children were born of Believers.
And p. 355. Believers are the holy: so the Believers Children, A new Creation,
a holy Generation.

Divin. of Christ, Ans. to T. D. p. 20. G. W. says, Condemnation came upon all
men -- Death past upon all men; for that all have sinned. p 24. Again, Christ
dyed for all, so all were dead in Sins, and Trespasses, etc.

Note. is not here a little failure in syntax too else how is it that G W.
contradicts G F. a Pro^^es indeed! But pray take a view and see if the Children
of believers in the Light are not Children of Wrath too as well as others; or
let us know by what Marks we shall distinguish their Children to be a holy
Generation.

Numb. X.
Jos. Coal Ans. to ^o. New-man, p. 332. If by the Body of Flesh which Christ
had, he means his Church, then I am one with him; for his having that Body
after his Ascension, I never denied, nor intend to do -- and such a Body we own
Christ had after his ascension. Again W. P. Rejoinder, p. 312 The true Church
is become Christ's Body. Again, in Refuge fixed, p 90, 41. Christ has a Body, or
is in a Body suitable to his Spirit, consisting of heavenly flesh and Bone.
Again, he says, Wheresoever the Spirit of Christ is, that is in the Body of
Christ.

I. Pennington, Quest, p. 20. For that which [Christ] took upon him, was our
Garment, even the flesh and blood of our Nature, which is of an earthly
perishing Nature, but he is of an Eternal Nature.

Mark, Though nothing be of an Eternal Nature but God, yet here one holds Christ's
Body of Flesh and Bones to be such, whilst the other holds, the Church to be
his Body. But pray, had the Church no beginning? Can that be Eternal? But this,
and the rest in these Passages let who can explain and reconcile them, for it
passes my skill to do it.

Numb. XI.
Readiness Errand, by G.F. p. 14. Christ is one substance of all Figures, and HIS
FLESH is a Figure.

But I. Pennington, as above, holds his Flesh to be of an Eternal Nature.

Note the Contradiction and false Doctrine of both these, or (if G. W. please)
a FAILURE in Syntax.

Numb. XII.
Chr. Quaker, p. 97. by W. P. Now nothing can bruise the head of the Serpent
but something that is also internal, as the Serpent is; but if the Body of
Christ were the Seed, then could be not bruise the Serpents head in all,
because the Body of Christ is not so much as in any one, and consequently the
Seed of the Promise is an holy and spiritual Principle of Light, Life and
Power, that being received into the heart, bruiseth the Serpents head; and
because the seed (which cannot he that Body) is Christ.

Foundat. of Tithes, p. 238, 240. by T. Ellwood, Nor do the Quakers ascribe
Salvation to the following the Light within, but to Christ Jesus, to whom the
Light leads -- If any one expects Remission of sins by any other way than by
the death of Christ renders the death of Christ useless.

Note the confused Clash of these 2 Champions, W. Penn is for all the work to
be done by the Light within. T.E. denies it to be done by the Light within, no,
not so much as Remission of sins.

Numb XIII.
G.F's Catechism, p 69. The Light (within) which they hate, is their
condemnation, which is the Salvation of all that believe in it.

T. E. as above, Nor do the Quakers ascribe Salvation to the following the
Light within, etc.

Come, let us see if T. Ellwood with all his Sophistry and false glosses can
reconcile these two assertions.

Numb. XIV.
Ed. Buroughs, p. 285. J. Bun^on said (These Qrs. believe) that Salvation was
not completely wrought out for sinners by the Man Christ Jesus E. B. answers,
Here thou art a Liar.

W. P. Reas. age Rast. p. 16. says, The Light, which in all ages was the just
man's path, is, ever was, and ever will be sufficient and saving. Thus also J.
Coal, p. 329. That Christ is not a Savior as Man, but as God.

Let W. Penn reconcile these, if he can, and tell us how the Light is the Man

Numb. XV.
Ed. Buroughs, p. 283. J. Bunion said, The Qrs. persuade Souls, That that Man
that was born of the Virgln Mary, is not above the stars. E.B. answers, This is
another Lie.

Sword of the Lord dr: p. 5. Your imagined God beyond the stars is utterly
denied and restified against by the Light.

Pray compare these. Also Note Sa. Jennings dissent from his Brethrens Religion
[unless he dissembles] in scrupling to say, Thou art a Liar, p. 34. state of
the case.

Numb. XVI.
Chr. Quaker by G. W. p. 212 The man's mistaken if the suppose that we plead
for the Righteousness of a Creature, [ i. e. Christ as Man] or man's own
Righteousness, which he himself is enabled to perform, as the cause of our
Justification, etc.

W. P. 's Serious Apology, p. 148. Death came by actual sin, not imputative,
therefore Justification an of Life came by actual Righteousness, not imputative.

Note, Whether is the Error of both these, or the Contradiction greater.

Numb. XVII.
G. F's Great Mystery, p. 248. There is no man self denied and justified in the
sight of God, but by Christ alone.

Note, Does not G.W. above oppose G F. here, who holds Justification by the Man
Christ, unless it be proper to say, God in the sight of God justifies man.

Numb. XVIII.
W. P's Rejoinder, p. 287, No present work, how good soever, can justify any
man from the Condemnation which is due for the guilt of sin, that is past.

Sandy Foundat. p 16, Gods Remission is grounded on our Repentance (and as
above) Justification in by actual Righteousness.

Note, A Self-Contradiction, unless Repentance and actual Righteousness be no
present work.

Numb. XIX.
W. P's Rejoinder, p. 300. That Body did not con^titute Christ, he is
invisible, and ever was to Ungodly World.

Guide to the blind, p. 49. Christ's first appearance to the world was in the
flesh, and the fleshly eye saw HIM.

Just so the Priests, as Fisher says,
Believe it one of these two ways;
Sometimes one way then another,
Sometimes both ways, this and the other.
See S. Fishers Works, p. 748.
Numb. XX.
G. W's Light and Life, p. 13, As to Christ being in every man, that is not our
affirmation nor words, but that there is a Light of Christ in every man.

W Smith 's Catechism, p 57, That of God in us is the only ^^^ndation, it is
Christ, and being Christ it must need be only, and admits not of another.

Numb. XXI.
G. F 's Catechism, p 2, The Light that shows to every man his evil Deeds, is
Christ.

W. P 's Chr. Quaker, p 91, We do not say that the Light in every man is
Christ, but of Christ.

Numb. XXII.
G. F's Great Mystry, p 185, The Devil teaches them, in whom he sows his Seed,
not to have the Light within them, the Seed Christ, The Root of God.

Note, Who must we believe, G. Fox, or G.W. and W. P. as above? for here G. F.
holds the Light within to be not only Christ, but even The ROOT of God.

Numb. XXIII.
G. F 's Gr. Mystry, p. ^49, Priest says, There is not whole Christ, God and
Man, in men. G.F. answers, Then how must men grow up in the measure of the
fullness of the stature of Christ? And Christ and God will dwell in man, and
walk in man. And p 185, as above, he calls the Light within The Root of God.

W. P's Rejoinder, p 25, We never said the Light within every man was the only
Lord and Savior, and very God, etc.

Note, But does not G. F. grant whole Christ God and Man, to be in man? And is
not this whole Christ the only Lord and Savior? Also, is not the Root of God
very God? Let W. P. reconcile it if he can.

Numb. XXIV.
G. F 's Great Mystry, p 324, Priest says, The Seed to whom the Promise of
Salvation is made, is or has been sinners. G. F. answers, The Promise o^ God
is to the Seed, which has been laden as a ca^^ with sheaves by the sinner,
which Seed is the Hope Christ that purifies -- and the Seed Christ never sined
-- This Promise is not unto Seeds, as many, but to one, the Seed which is
Christ.

Arreignment of Popery by G. F. The Prophets showed, that all Nations are
blessed in the Seed of Abraham, and so the Seed of Abraham to be the Savior of
the World.

Note these well. and read them once and again, and if it be really so, that
the Seed Christ is both the Savior and the saved, then it is no
self-Contradiction; that is, that the Seed only saves the same Seed; for he
says, it is all but one Seed, which is Christ.

Numb. XXV.
Josiah Coal, p. 320, says, Tho J. Newman bolary and blasphemously affirms,
That he was not a Savior, as he was God, but as he was Man, yet it is easy to
prove the contrary.

But G. F. before calls the Seed of Abraham the Savior of the World. Now is
not here a Contradiction? unless Christ, as Man, be not the Seed of Abraham.

Numb. XXVI.
G. W 's Div of Christ Epist. by G. F. says, Thou (Priest) say, The Soul is
part of man's Nature: Where does the Scripture, thy Rule, say so? The Scripture
says, God breathed into man the breath of Life, and man became a living Soul
-- And is not this of God, o his Being? And is not this that comes out from
God, part of God, and from God? This last part W. P. cites in Reas. against
Railing, p 66. and defends and justifies and denis it.

Rejoinder, page 375, W. P. cites H. More, to prove the Soul to be the Man,
saying, That the Soul of every man is his individual Person, and the Body but a
Garment.

Note The Contradiction; for here the Soul is so great a part of man's Nature,
that it is Man himself. Note also, Ranters say, the Soul is a part of God, and
returns again to God, and God will not punish himself; Therefore to talk of
going to Hell is an ^^^e story,

Numb. XXVII.
G. F 's Great Mystry, p 273, Priest says, It is horrid Blasphemy to say, the
Soul is a part of God. G F. replies, It Is not horrid Blasphemy to say, the Soul
is a part of God, for it came out from him, and tha which came out from him is
of him.

Note, That both W. F. and G. W. do at once, by their fallacious Equivocations,
both justify this Doctrine of the Soul being part of God, and also confidently
deny that G. F. holds any such thing; for which see Reason against Railing, p.
65. and Qrs. plainness, p. 57.

Numb. XXVIII.
G. F's Great Mystry, p 205. and p. 63 The Saints came to see the end of
Sabbaths and New Moons, and witnessed the Body, Christ, before the day was made
-- for the Body is the Light of the World, the Body is the Life given for the
life of the world, in whom t^ the is rest -- Christ gave him self, his Body,
for the life of the world, he was the Offering for sin.

W. P's serious Apology, p. 146. But that the outward Person that suffered was
properly the Son of God, we utterly deny -- A Body has thou prepared me, said
the Son; so the Son was not the Body, though the Body was the Sons.

Let W. P. reconcile these, and also tell us who is the Father of that outward
Person.

Numb. XXIX.
W. P. Reas. ag^. Rail. page 91. Forgive as our Debts as we forgive our
Deb^o^s, w^ere (says he) nothing can be more obvious, than that which is
forgiven, is not paid; and if it is our Duty to forgive without a Satisfaction
received, and that God is to forgive us, as we forgive them, then is a
Satisfaction Totally Excluded.

Rejoinder, page 284, W. P cites defends We believe that Christ in us does
offer up himself a living Sacrifice to God for us, by which the wrath of God is
appeased to us.

Note, A self-contradiction, for in the one he totally excludes a satisfaction,
and in the other he grants it.

Note also, how many thousand Offerings this new Scripture makes of Christ; as
many Saints, so many times Christ's offers up himself a Sacrifice!

Numb XXX.
Great Mistry, p. 63. Christ gav^ himself, his Body for the Life of the world,
he was the Offering for the sins of the whole World, and paid the Debt, and
made satisfaction.

Note, In contradiction to W. P 's Contradiction, G. F. here holds Satisfaction
was made for sin, by the Body being offered. Is not this like Sampsons Foxes,
though tied by the Tail, their faces look contrary?

Numb. XXXI.
G. W 's Div. of Christ, the Epist. by G. F. Where (says he) does the
Scripture speak of a humane Nature of Christ in Heaven? Is not Christ and his
Body glorified, and he the Lord from Heaven?

G. W's answer to W. Harworth, p. 13 H^s Reasons to prove Christ now a Man in
Heaven, do not (says G. W.) reach nor touch us, the thing not being denied,
but really believed and confessed unto by us.

Numb. XXXII.
W. Shewins Treatise of Thoughts, p. 35. Not to Jesus, the Son of David and
Mary, Saint or Angel, but to God the Father all Worship, Honor and Glory is
to be given, thorough Jesus Christ.

Chr. Doctrine, etc. by G. W. and others, That divin Honor and Worship is due
to the Son of God; and that he is, in true Faith to be prayed unto, and the
Name of the Lord Jesus to be called upon, as the primitive Christians did.

Note, Though they clash, yet we see here they have dropped some Christian
Expressions more of late then formerly; And what may we think they intend
thereby? why G. Whitehead in his Counterfeit Convert, p. 72. says, I may see
cause otherwise to word the matter, and yet our intentions be the same. Now is
it not admirable that a man of G. W's Cloth [as the proverb is] should be
grown so bold in crafty and dece^^ible Glosses, to deceive his Readers? Is this
like the ancient simplicity of a Quaker, to say, I may see cause Otherways to
word the matter, and yet intend the same? Pray who knows when such a man i^
sincere, or how to believe him in what he says, that thus hides his meanings,
sa^s one thing, and means another? Does not G. W. hereby render himself like
those Deceivers with false Money, who counterfeit the Kings Coin, upon
reprobate Silver, to make it pass current? But whatever they intend or mean in
their newest Creed or Confession of Faith, in answer to Dr. Lancasters Querys,
given at London, 1695. by G. W. and six others, and also in some other of their
Books, that at times [of late years especially] has been extorted or streined
from them, yet I think fit here following to compare it with their former
Doctrine, and leave it to be reconciled by those who are cunning enough so to
word the matter, seeing that in their said Answer to Dr. Lancaster, they refer
to their former Books for Answers to his Querys.

Numb. XXXIII.
Answ. to Dr. Lancaster, by G. W. and six other, We sincerely believe in Jesus
Christ, both as he is true God and perfect Man, our Immanuel and Mediator; and
as in the fullness of Time he was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary, and was crucified and put to Death, was buried, rose again, and
visibly ascended into Heaven -- And that this same Jesus Christ that was
crucified, shall so in ^ike manner come as he as seen to go into Heaven) at the
last and great Day of Judgment

G. W's Truth defend. p. 65. Chr. VVade affirmed, That our blessed Savior does
instruct men to lay fast hold of, and to abide in such a faith which confideth
in himself, being without Men. G. W. answers, That Is contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine, etc.

Note, But now G. W. is one with ^. W's Doctrine, which he then said was
contrary to the Apostles; for now he professes faith in Christ as born of the
Virgin, crucified and visibly ascended, unless he says, This was not without
men, and so deceives his Readers by thus Otherwise wording the matter.

Numb. XXXIV.
G. W's answ. to W Harworth, p. 23. Christ did rise in that Body wherein he
suffered, and in the same ascended into the Heavens -- and it is so far
circumscribed in the Heavens as it is capable of and as it proper to it; and
though it be spiritual and glorious, yet a Body, and therefore not in every place
where God is. Again, in his Book, called, Judgment fixed, he says, Thou that
can not see consistency of Salvation by the Man Christ, and by his Light
within, art gone from his Light into Imaginations.

G. W's Truth defend. p. 23, T. Smith asks, When you tell us you have faith in
Christ, do you mean Christ whose Person is now ascended into Heaven, or do you
mean only a Christ within you? G. W. answers, Here thou would make two Christ's
-- But how provest thou two such Christ's?

Note here, That G. W. now in his answer to VV. Harworth opposing himself,
makes two such Christ's as T Smith does, viz. not only Christ within, but a
Christ whose Person or body is ascended into Heaven.

Numb. XXXV.
G. W's answ. to VV. Harworth, That very Body of Christ which was raised from
the dead, how should it but be in being, seeing he dyed not again. Page 7. The
same Body that was put to death, was raised -- We confess the same Man Christ,
not only still in being, but also glorified -- This Man Christ did neither
vanish nor perish, either as to his Spirit, Soul or Body.

G. W's Nature of Christianity, p. 29. Christ has not the Body of Man. And p.
41. he denis Christ's bodily existence without us.

Note, If G. W. can so word the matter, as truly to reconcise himself with
himself in these two Books, we shall then have some ground to believe he has
not sinned since the year 1659. when he told us That his sins were pardoned,
see Truth defend, p. 8.

Numb. XXXVI.
VV. Smith's Primmer, p. 8. They that are false Ministers preach Christ
without, and bid People believe in him as he is in Heaven above.

Note here, Does not G. W. (as above in N^, 34, 35,) preach a belief in Christ
as he ascended into Heaven above? Therefore a false Minister by VV, Smith's
Doctrine.

Numb 37,
Christian Doctrine, by G. W. etc. p. 5. That Christ's Body that was crucified,
was not the Godhead, yet by the Power of God was raised from the dead; and that
the same Christ that was Therein crucified, ascended into Heaven And in answ.
to Dr Lancaster he declares, That both Soul and Body was sacrificed.

G. W's answ. to VV. Herworth, His dying was only as to the Body, he was put to
death as concerning the flesh.

Note, A self contradiction: in one Book, he says, None but the Body dyed; yet
in the other he says, A Christ was crucified in that Body; in the third, yea,
both Soul and Body was sacrificed.

Numb. 38.
W. P's Apology, p. 146. But that the outward Person that suffered was properly
the Son of God, we utterly deny; A Body have thou prepared m^, said the Son; so
the Son was not the Body, though the Body was the Sons. [But the same Christ that
was therein crucified, ascended into Heaven, as above] And says W. P. We deny
that Person that dyed at Jerusalem to be our Redeemer.

Ans. to Dr. Lancaster by G. W. and others, where they own him to be Christ
that visibly ascended, and was outwardly put to Death, and that he was true God
and perfect Man, and our Redeemer that was thus visible

Note, Though G. W. sees cause now to word the matter thus, yet he gives us
Notice, (as above) that his faith is still the same as formerly.

Numb. 39.
Divin of Christ, p 83. by G. W. While we were sinners, Christ dyed for us, it
was Christ that dyed.

Refuge fixed, p. 38. by Joh. Whitehead, Nothing that was mortal was called
Christ.

Observe the sum of the last three particulars, (as they have seen cause to
word them) G. W. holds, Nothing but the Body dyed, and that it was Christ that
dyed; so that the Body that dyed was Christ. But W. P. ^olds, That the Body was
not Christ, nor that the Person that dyed was Christ.

Again, G. W. holds, that a Christ dyed in that Body; But J. W. holds, that
nothing that dyed was Christ, he was not mortal. So that VV. Penn in his
Address to Protestants vaunts at the Priests for their Clink Clank. And S.
Fisher mocks at them for their SO, NO. But the Priests may now face about, and
vaunt at the Quakers for their Clink Clank, and mock at them for their NO, SO.

Therefore behold the ingenious Figure of NO, SO, with some Verses that Sam.
Fisher inserts in page 773. of Rusticus, which are now pertinently, truly and
justly to be turned back again upon these Quakers, viz.

Sometimes its this, sometimes its that,
Sometimes its this and this and that,
Sometimes its either this or that;
Sometimes its neither this nor that;
One while it looks like SO, not NO,
Another while like NO, not SO;
One way it seems or SO or NO,
Another way nor NO nor SO;
Some ways it shows both SO and NO,
So it is a mere Endless NO and SO.
chart of NO and SO

You have observed before the Clashes, Contradictions, Sayings, Gainsayings and
false Doctrines of these men, one contradicting the other, and many times the
same man contradicting himself. So pray observe once more how G. Whitehead
dances the Rounds (as S. Fisher says in his Appendix to J. Owen) For in his
Introduction to Divinity of Christ, he defines a Person to be a Man, and a Man
to be a Person. And in Qrs. plainness, p. 19. confesses Jesus Christ to be a
Man, but not a Person, p. 23.24. Again, That Jesus Christ is a Man, whose
glorious Body in Heaven is not a humane (or man's) Body; and yet (as in Numb.
35.) declares it to be the same Body that dyed, and yet deny^ Christ to have
the Body of Man. Thus as S. Fisher says, p. 773.

Now it is One thing, then Another,
And now and then nor the one nor the other.
Numb. 40.
G F's Great My^t. p 206 131, 250. If Christ th^^ crucified be not within, and
that Christ that is risen be not within, If (...) are all Reproba^es -- The
Apostles preached Christ that is crucified within, and not another, for the
^^the is the Antichrist -- And thou say thou are saved by Christ without
the^, and so have recorded ^oy self a Reprobate -- A^^ (...) in the fancy that
he out of the state of witnessing Christ that suffered within them, and rose
again.

Answ. to Dr. Lancaster, They own Christ that was crucified without the Gates,
did visibly ascend into Heaven ( and answ. to W Harworth) is in Heaven in a
Body of Flesh circumscribed, and not in every place where God is.

Note, While they justify their old Doctrine, and the new not being free, but
streined out, we must take it as G. W. tells F. B. That they may intend the
same, only now se^^^ cause Otherwise to word it.

Numb. 41.
G W's Light and Life of Christ, p. 58. he there defend this Passage, viz The
Blood that was forced out of him (Christ) by the Soldier, after he was dead,
was no more than the Blood of another Saint.

Ans to Dr. Lancaster, The whole sacrifice of Christ, whereof his Blood
outwardly shed, was a part, was of great price with God, for man's Redemption.

Note the Contradiction or the Craft.

Numb. 42.
Ibid. Light and Life, p. 38. The Quakers see no need of directing men to the
Type for the Antitype, viz. neither to the outward Temple, nor to Jerusalem,
either Jesus Christ or his blood, knowing that neither the Righteousness of
Faith, nor the Word of it does so direct: And where do the Scriptures say, the
Blood was there shed for Justification, and that men must be directed to
Jerusalem to it?

Ans. to Dr. Lancaster, We sincerely believe in Jesus Christ as born of the
Virgin Mary -- Christ's Blood that was shed without the Gates of Jerusalem, with
the whole Sacrifice of himself, both Soul and Body, was a true Propitiation --
through Faith, etc.

Note here, G. W. (s^^h opposing his Old Doctrine) now sees cause to word the
matter Otherways.

Numb. 43.
J. W's Refuge fixed, p. 90. I have several times (says he) denied that Christ
has now a Body of Flesh and Bones, circumscript or limited in that Heaven
which is out of every man on Earth.

Let these 2 Brother. Whiteheads reconcile their Doctrine.

Ans. to W. Harworth, (as above at Numb. 34, 35 G. W. declares, the same body
of Christ which was put to death ascerced into Heaven, and is still in being;
and though made spiritual, yet a circumscribed Body, not in every place where
God is.

Numb. 44.
G. W's Light and Life, p. 39, 47. As for those Expressions (says he) God Man
being born of Mary, we do not find them in the Scriptures, nor do we read that
Mary was the Mother of God, but in the Popes Canons, etc. -- What Nonsense and
Unscriptural Language is this to tell of God being to Creator with the Father?
or that God had Glory with God! does not this imply two Gods, or that God had a
Father?

Ans. to Dr. Lancaster, as above, We believe in Jesus Christ, both as he is
true God and perfect Man -- and a^ he was conceived by the holy ghost born of
the Virgin Mary.

Note here, G. W. in contradiction to himself, owns Mary to be the Mother of
God-Man, and God to be his Father. And if he implys two Gods thereby, I cannot
help it, seeing he now sees cause so to word the matter.

Numb. 45.
G. W's Qrs. plainness, p ^9. That Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, That he
is God-man, etc.

Note, how inconsistent G. W. is with himself; he Quarrels with the word
God-man before, but here he uses it.

Numb. 46.
G. F's Great Mystry, p 289, God was in Christ, and they are one, the Creator;
the Father in the Son and the Son in the Father, and Christ in you, and God in
Christ, the Creator. And in Qrs. plainness, p. 24. G. W there says, The Son is
co-worker with the Father.

Light and Life, (as before) what Nonsense is this (says G. W.) to tell of God
being co-Creator with the Father?

Note, Does not G. W. here accuse both G. F. and himself also, with Nonsense?
for what is the difference between Co-worker and Co-Creator?

Numb. 47.
Paper against J. ^. London 6 m. 1670 And we also testify, That ^ any Person
whatsoever shall act or speak any thing that is evil, under pretense of a
motion from the Spirit of God, we utterly deny that Motion to be of God.

G F's Great Mystry p. 77. And as for any being moved of the Lord to take your
(i.e. Priests) Hourglass from you, by the eternal Power, it is owned.

Note, here the Father, G. Fox, Justifies what is Felony by the Law; But his
London Children are so bold as to control him.

Numb. 48.
If Pennington's Que. p 33, Now the Scriptures do expressly distinguish between
Christ and the Garment which he wore, between him that came, and the body in
which he came, between the Substance which was veiled, and the Vail which
veiled it; there was plainly HE and the Body in-which HE came; this we
certainly know, and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ.

Quakers plainness; p. 23. G. W. says, The mere Body of Jesus was not the
entire Christ, yet the Name Christ is sometimes given to the Body, though not so
properly as to the whole Man Christ.

Note, though G.W. here grants the Scripture sometimes calls the Body Christ, yet
he will neither call it Christ, nor own it to be so much as any part of Christ,
but as a garment, if he be of his Brother I. P 's says.

Numb. 49.
If. Pennington, p 20, That which he (Christ) took upon him was our Garment,
even the flesh and blood of our Nature, which is of an earthly perishing Nature.

G. W 's answ. to W. Harworth, That flesh saw no Corruption, but was raised
from the dead.

Note the Contradiction, for G W. here denis that it corrupted or perished.

Now least my old Friends should say, that I am so hard pinched to make them
contradict themselves, as that if I should find in their books that they say
four Pence at one time and a Groat at another, that I would go near to make a
Contradiction of it: Therefore I'^l give a short hint of what G. W. calls
Contradictions in their Opposers Books. In Christ Ascend. p. 58. he brings John
Newman to conttadict himself, thus; The Scriptures principally called the Word
-- The Words that God has spoken by his holy Prophets, blessed Son and
Apostles. Now this may be called false Doctrine, but I profess they have better
Eyes than I, that can see it to be a Contradiction. Pray judge if this be any
more than to say four Pence in one place, and a Groat in another. Again, p. 60.
he brings J. N. to contradict himself, thus; The Scriptures properly and
principally called the Word -- The Will and Mind of God contained in the
Scriptures. Note, Here J. N. in one Sentence explains his meaning in the other;
but how it is a Contradiction, I leave to the judgment of the Impartial, and
whether G. W.Numb. here was not hard pinched to find Contradictions; and yet
many more such things he cites for Contradiction in that and several other of
his Books, (too large to insert here) to which I refer the Reader, with request
to take notice what I might venture to call Contradictions by G. W 's Rule,
should I show my self so silly as to follow his Examples.

Numb. 50.
A Book entit. This to go among Friends, by W. Smith, p. 17. As for G. Fox
(says he) the Lord God has exalted him, and his glory rests upon him, -- not
setting up a Man, or throwing down a man, but in all thing, giving the Power
pre-eminence, and endearedness to the Vess^ fi^ed with the excellency of that
Treasure.

W. Bayleys works, p. 307. For they (his Disciples) loved his Person for the
sake of the frame and Quality of the Spirit that dwelt in him, or else what was
his Person [being mean and Contemptible) to them, more than another Person?

Qu. To which of these do they give the Preference? To the Person of Christ, or
Vessel of G. Fox?

Numb. 51.
Great Mystr. p. 246. Priest says, God the Father never took upon him humane
Nature. G. F. answers, That Is contrary to Scripture, who says, God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself, and art ignorant of the great Mystry,
God manifest in the Flesh.

Sword of the Lord drawn, page 5. Whereas you say, this Christ is God and Man
in one Person, it is a Lie

Note, in one he is so far from denying God and Man in one Pers^n, that he
holds, not only God the Son to have taken Man's Nature, but God the Father also.
O Confused Divinity!

Numb. 52.
Reas. agt. Railing, p. 20. In the fullness o^ Time he (Christ) manifested
himself in a more familiar manner to Mankind, in order to which he prepared a^
as holy Body, in which he preached his everlasting Gospel. [ Mark, an holy
Body.]

T. Musgroves doctrine preached about Delaware, in the year 1695. That Christ as
to his Manhood accounted himself not good -- Took nothing on him that was good.

Note, The one holds the whole Manhood not good, the other, the very Body to be
holy, and therefore good.

Numb. 53.
Ans. to Dr. Lancaster, by G W. etc. Christ's Blood that was shed without the
gates of Jerusalem together with the whole Sacrifice of himself, both of Soul
and Body, was a true Propitiation and Atonement for man's Reconciliation and
peace with God, for Remission of sins, through a living Faith, etc.

Sandy Foundation, by W.P. p. 21. The Justice offended being infinite, his
Satisfaction ought to bear a proportion therewith, which Jesus Christ as Man
could never pay, he being finite.

Observe, Here G. W. opposing W P. declares Christ, as Man, pays the debt for
sin (through faith) if Soul and Body be the Man.

Numb. 54.
G. W's Light and Life, p. 41, 22. B^t three Comings of Christ (says he) that
in the flesh at Jerusalem, and that in the Spirit, but also of another coming
in the flesh, yet to be expected, we do not read -- But his second coming and
appearance without sin unto Salvation, I own and witness.

Also, W. Bayley, page 306. says, I never read in all the Scriptures of a Third
coming of Christ Personally, besides what shall be in a Saints.

Finally, This is the former Faith of W. P. and the Quakers ingeneral, too
tedious here to cite, of which we no where find they have made any Recantation.

Ans. to Dr. Lancaster, by G W. etc. Jesus Christ, true God and perfect Man,
was put to death, b^ried, rose again, and Visibly ascended into Heaven, shall
so in like manner come [as he was seen to go into Heaven] at the last and great
day of Judgment and end of the World. Again, (in answ. to W. Harworth) The same
Body that was put to death is still in being, the Man Christ did not perish nor
vanish, either as to his Spirit, Soul or Body.

Observe how plain their New Doctrine is for Christ's visible coming in the same
Body, expres^y Con^r^ry to their O^^, or else dissemblingly they now so
otherwise word the matter, but mean as formerly.

As Fisher says, thus they dance round,
And round again in the self same ground,
It staggers to and fro and reels,
Skips up and down, and runs on Wheels,
Starts aside like some broken Bow,
Crosses, Christ-like, Criss-cross in the Row;
Wind, Dust, Husk, Chaff, no stable Steeple,
A Tale that takes unstable People,
A Toy, a Cloud, Mist, Smoke, a Fog,
('It Is Quakerism) and some Quavering Bog,
A Qui^k-sand, a Quagmire that sucks,
Who is in it, his feet out hardly plucks
vid. Fishers Appendix, p. 773.
Numb. 55.
G. F's Gr. Mystry, p. 355 ^03. All that makes re^ompence for sin is he that
never sinned, Christ the second Adam, and not the first -- Christ gave himself,
his Body, for the li^e of the World; he was the Offering for the sins of the
whole Wo^ld, and paid the debt, and made Satisfaction.

Sandy Foundat. p. 21. W. P. denies Christ to pay the Debt of our sins as he is
God, because then the Father and Spirit being God, they also pay the Debt Nor
not as Man, he being Finite, (as above) Nor not as God and Man, as W. P. in
that page expressly affirms.

A Little of G. Whiteheads help here might do well to word the matter so as to
reconcile this Doctrine of W. P. and G. F.

Numb. 56.
R. B's Apology, p. 95. Wherefore as we believe he (Christ) was a true and real
Man, so we also believe that he continues so to be glorified in the Heavens in
Soul and Body.

Note, W. P. says, as above, Christ as Man was finite, viz. came to an end. But
here R.B. says, he continues a real man in Soul and Body, and so is not finite.

Choose which of these you will believe.

Numb. 57.
G F's Gr. Mys^ry, p. 90 Priest says, There is a kind of Infiniteness in the
Soul, but it cannot be infiniteness in it self G F. answers, Is not the Soul
without beginning, coming out from God, returning into God again?

Note, W. P. as above, holds the Soul to be properly the man And here according
to G F. this Man is without b^ginning; and if no beginn^^g then no end, which
is not only Infinite, ^ut also Eternal. And yet, [Mark the Confusion,] W. P.
before denis the Man Christ to be Infinite

Numb. 58.
G. W's Div. of Christ, p. 27. The God whom we serve and b^lieve in, is
infini^e, the only wise God, and nothing relating to him, or his being, finite.

Sandy Foundat. p. 20. W. P. there calls the Man Christ, The Finite Impotent
Creature.

Note the Clash, unless the Man Christ be not relating to God.

Here I cannot but take notice, that though W. Penn blasphemously calls the Man
Christ the finite imp^tent Creature, yet he afterward in his Reas. against
Rail. (a above) and in other Books, calls his Body a holy Body, as if he
thought that way to salve and excuse his former gross Doctrine, or at least to
hood-wi^k his Readers, so as to let them see that he has so reverent esteem of
Christ as to call his Body a holy Body, after he ha^^ (so irreverently) called
his whole Man the finite impotent Creature.

Again, I observe W.P. to be one with his 24 Brethren, that in the City Mercury
or News Book, owns and and defends these sayings, first in the Battledoor, viz.
All Languages are to me (says G. F. no more but Dust, who was before Languages
were. Next, in J. P^s Collection, p. 199. But to the end of all D^sput^s and
Arguments I am come; for before they were I AM, says James Par^ell; To
Pre-exist is to ^ave a being before.
where it is plain the declare themselves at least) to pre-exist; and yet W. P.
denis the Apostles to pre-exist; for in his Rejoinder, p. 299. he says, Paul
did not pre-exist, Christ did Now is not this a setting themselves above the
Apostles, and equal with Christ? For Christ pre-existed, ( G. Fox and Ja.
Parnell pre-existed but Paul did not pre-exist, says VV. P. Nay, further, I
find in page 1. of the Book of the two women at Malta, D. Baker is not only for
having his Friends, the Quakers to pre-exist, but also declares them to be
Eternal, saying, O ye Eternal and blessed Ones! whilst the man CHRIST must be
called, The finite impotent Creature, by this high and elevated dust and ashes
VV. Penn.

I shall now return to insert a few more Contradictory Clashes, and so haste to
another head.

Numb 59.
W.P's Rejoinder, p. 13 That (Christ) his coming was but [ Mark, but] to bring
the world to a more improved knowledge and large enjoyment of that divine
Power, Wisdom, Life and Righteousness which former Ages had, comparatively, but
an obscure sight and imperfect sense of. And p. 296-300. he justifies this
saying, viz. That which Christ took upon him was but a Garment, even the flesh
and blood of our Nature, which is of an earthly perishing Nature.

Truths Principles, by J. Crook, If Christ had not ^yed, Man must have pe^ished
in sin, this being the way, found out by God, to recover him.

Note, Here Is one Christian he grants the merit of Christ's coming and Death.
But W.P. makes the benefit of his coming to be no more but to show man more
plain what he saw before as through a glass, and perhaps thinks he mends ^he
matter by often calling the Body A holy Body, whilst yet he renders that
earthly and perishing.

Numb 60.
G. F's Gr. Mystry, p. 222. Priest says, C^rt^^ is wit^out his Saints, in
respect of his Bodily presence. G. F. answers, H^w then are they of his flesh
and his bone.

W. P. Chr. Quaker, p. 97. The Body of Christ is not so much as in any one.

Note, This W P. is still clashing against G. F. almost on every hand.

Numb. 61.
W. P's Address to Protestants, p. 119. Let us, (says he) but soberly consider
what Christ is, and we shall the better know whether Moral men are to be
reckoned Christians: What is Christ but Meekness, Justice, Mercy Patience,
Charity and Virtue in Perfection?

Note, Though W. P. Allegori^es Christ, and makes him nothing but Virtues, yet
his Brother G. W. tells W. H^r^orth as above) that Christ is something else,
viz. a MAN, consisting of Spirit, Soul and body, the same Body as dyed, or he
only words the matter so to deceive the People.

Observe now, That though these two men's Books quarrel about Doctrine, yet they
agre^ in praising one another; for G VV. in Qrs. plainnes^, p 5, calls VV. P. A
sincere hearted and zealous Man; and VV. P in one of his Books does as ^uch for
G. VV. And it is abundance of Books these two men have written, yea, more by
hal^ than ever I have seen, nor do I desire to see them; for truly I find
Confusion enough in those I have seen, yea, more than, I intend to ^emonstrate
at this time, here being enough to show the reason why they have not profited
the People at all. W Penn says, Christ left nothing in writing, Chr. Quak. p
114, Christ wrote no Books. But they have not followed his Example in this; and
yet he says, Christ was their Example.

But Note further, though W. P. will have Moral men to be Christians, yet R.
Habberthorn denis that Christ o^ Gods gift is obtained by moral means, and in p
33. he calls them Liars that so affirm. So let the Reader judge who is the Liar
in this case.

Again, I cannot but mind W. P 's devised distinction and unscriptural
Expression [if it were no worse] in calling the Man Christ The FINITE and
IMPOTENT Creature; and yet G. VV. in his Introduction to Divinity of Christ,
says, We judge that such Expressions and words as the holy ghost taught the
Apostles and holy Men, mentioned in the Scriptures, are most meet to speak of
GOD and CHRIST, and not the words of man's Wisdom and devised Distinctions,
since the Apostles days. Now is not here a doubl^ face they carry, in seeming
and pretending one thing, and yet practice the quite contrary. Again, in the
Epistle to the same Book, they say, We change you Presbyterians to give us
printed Scripture for (the word) Abstract, etc. And yet in Qrs. plainness, p.
26. G. VV. there uses the word Abstract. And it is abundance of such dissembling
and ^^ly Confusion these (s^eming) wise men's Books are stuffed with, too tedious
here to mention.

And now I cannot but expect there will be great devising, pulling and drawing
here, by some Quakers, rather than confess themselves guilty of the Confusion
and Contradiction here charged, they have so much accused others of the same
thing. Surely some curious Wy^e-drawing, Min^ing, Mangling, Otherwise wording
and Equivocating we must expect herein. But they having caught themselves in
this Not (ten to one but) the more they will flutter, the more they will fetter
themselves; for they cannot thus dance in a Net but somebody will see them;
for they are now as easily seen through, as they pretend they can see through
others; yea, this will certainly be the consequence, till they use the only
Christian means to get out of this Net, which is by humbly confessing and
condemning their Errors in their Books, as G K. has done.

I shall now return to the matter in hand, and insert a Clash or two about the
Resurrection.

Numb. 62
W. P 's Rejoinder, page 369, 307, I do utterly deny (says ^e that this Text,
[viz. It is sown a natural Body, and raised a spiritual Body] is concerned in
the Resurrection of man's carnal Body -- I say, this does not concern the
Resurrection of carnal Bodies, but the two states of men under the first and
second Covenant.

W. Bay^y's Works, p. 592, I own the Resurrection of the Body (says he) as Paul
did, viz. It is sown a natural Body, and raised a spiritual Body.

Qu. Whether it be one and the same Spirit that leads these men to expound
Scripture in contradiction to each other? Surely old Israel with their Rams
Horns were more Unanimous.

Numb. 63.
Chr. Quaker, p. 375. G. W. deciares, that ^as thing tends to Atheism, and to
make men A^heists, viz other men's self confidence in asserting things contrary
to reason and manifest Experience, and in particular, in their affi^ming that
these self-same Terrestrial Bodies o^ flesh and bones shall be made spiritual,
immortal and incorruptible. It Is true, ( says G. W.) Hen. More had finer and
more excellent Notions about the Resurrection, than many other learned men, and
aimed at the Truth and spirituality thereof, from the Vision of the holy men
recorded in the Scriptures.

Chr. Quaker, p. 372. G. W. cites H. More about the Resurrection, saying, Flesh
and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom o^ God; and I think (says he) there is the
same reason of flesh and bones, viz. I understand natural flesh and bones, not
glorified.

Note, G. VV. commends this Notion of H. More, as savouring of truth and
spirituality, and yet renders those At^eists that believe the same; for H. More
does not here deny the Resurrection of the same Body that dies, only
understands it must be glorified.

Note also, G.W. here confounds the same G. W. in his answer to W. Harworth, p
17, where he holds, That a very wonderful change may be in the Body, and yet
the Substance not Annihilated or destroyed.

Reader, I do here honestly declare, that I would have cited more
Contradictions about the Resurrection, if I could readily have found them; but
indeed, their Books do generally agree in this matter, viz. in denying the
Resurrection of the Body that dies (as G. K. has largely made appear in his
late Narrative of the Proceedings at Turners-Hall, London) so that I found no
Passages to the contrary. But had it been my business here to have answered
Books, I would have showed how miserably blind Caleb Pusey shows himself aabout
the Resurrection in his book, called, A Modest Account, pray read from page 31,
to p. 38. and see how he endeavors to show G. K inconsistent with himself
[where indeed there is no inconsistency] he gropes in the dark, like the
Sodomites, carnally apprehending G. K. and very well demonstrating himself to
be of the same faith with his Brethren, as aforesaid. Also, let all that read
that Book of C. Pu^ey, take notice, that though he banters at G. K. for holding
the Light not sufficient to save man, without something else, yet C. P. does
not say in all his Book, that it is sufficient for Salvation without any thing
else. Therefore how hypocritical is this to accus^ a man for an Error, and yet
dares not assert the contrary; but I refer the Reader to G. K 's answer to said
C. Pusey, for further satisfaction, and so proceed to the next Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of Opposition at Unity.
THis is briefly to show (and that chiefly from what is before cited) that
those Quakers ho^d the same Doctrines which they have condemned in their
Opposers, as Errors, blasphemous and damnable Doctrines; To do which, I shall
only give an Example from two of their eminent Opposers, viz. John Bunion and
Muggleton; the first quoted by Ed. Barroughs, the last by G. Whitehead.

E. B cites J. Bunions Principles, p. 304, 306. Now I come (says he) to reckon
up John Bunions damnable Doctrines and Errors, viz.

1st, John Bunyon said, That Christ's second coming was not his coming in the
Spirit, for his coming in the Spirit is no Coming.

For this, see at Numb. 33. where G. W. owns the two comings of Christ, one
that is already past, and another to come at the end of the world or last Day.
And at Numb. 54. he there declares against three Comings, and will own but two;
so that here G W. holds his coming in the Spirit to ^e no Coming.

2dly, J. B. said, That Christ had two Bodies, and one of the Bodies was out of
the sight of the Saints.

For this see at Numb. 11. where Jo. Coal holds the Church to be the Body of
Christ, and this Body G. F. (in Gr. Mystry, p. 93.) calls The Mystical Body;
that is one Body. Again, at Numb. 34.35, G. W. ^olds, That Christ's Body that
dyed, is in being, a circumscribed spiritual Body. Note, here^s the two Bodies,
as J B. holds.

3dly, J. B. said, That Christ ascended into Heaven in our Nature.

For this, see at Numb 31, 35 where G. W. ho^^s, Christ to be a Man in Heaven,
the same Body that was put to death, etc.

4thly, J. B said, That the Soul of man is the Light, wherewith every man is
enlightened by Christ, as God.

For this, see at Numb. 26, 27, 24. where G. F. holds, the Soul to be a part o^
God, and to be the Seed to which Salvation is promised, which, he says, is the
Hop^, Christ.

Thu^ far they agree with Bunyions Principles, which they call damnable
Doctrines.

Next, see Qrs. plainness, by G. W. p. 37, 38. Muggelton holds these false and
blasphemous Doctrines (says he) that the Quakers utterly deny, viz.

1st, That Death took Christ^ Soul into it, and that Christ's Soul dyed when the
Body dyed.

For this, see at Numb. 37, 38, 39. where they deny the Body to be Christ, and
that it was Christ that ^^od, yea, they declare, That Christ in that Body dyed,
or was crucified. And that both Soul and Body was sacrificed, see Numb. 42

2dly, That Muggelton holds, That the Godhead Life dyed, That when Christ dyed,
God dyed.

Now, see above whether they do not hold the same; for at Numb 39, 11, G. W.
says, It was Christ ^^at dyed, and ^. P. says, Christ is of an Eternal Nature,
and his flesh and bones are of his Nature; for nothing is Eternal but God [Mark
that] and compare it with their holding, That Christ in the Body dyed

3dly, That Muggleton holds, That Christ being God, imbodied with flesh and
bone, one Person without us, cannot be in the Quakers.

For this, see at Numb. 35, 36, 12. where they hold, Christ remains a Man,
consisting of Spirit, Soul and Body, the same Body that dyed; and that the Body
of Christ is not so much as in any one.

4thly, That Muggleton holds, That God was born of Mary.

For this, see at Numb. 33, 51. where they declare, Christ to be true God born
of Mary; also, That God the Father took humane or Man's Nature.

5thly, That Muggleton holds, That the Devil became Flesh, Blood and Bone.

For this, see the Preface to G. W 's Judgment fixed, where he says of some
separate Quakers That they are Devils incarnate, viz. made flesh or become Man,
which is flesh, blood and bone. Le^ G. W. otherwise demonstrate this, if he
can, seeing he says, The Lord laid a necessity on him to write it.

Thus it appears how far their Doctrine agrees with what G. W. calls Mu^gletons
false and blasphemous Opinions. Therefore as G. W. in p. 20. of the same Book,
says to the Baptists, Pray you Baptists (says he) before you conclude a final
Sentence upon us, agree upon a consistent Creed that you intend to stand by, if
you intend to impose upon us to believe as you believe, upon pain of Damnation.
So now the Baptists and other Professors may face about, and say to the
^uakers, Pray you Quakers tell us why did you not agree upon a consistent Creed
that you intend to stand by (if you intend to impose upon us to believe as you
believe) before you sentenced us to Damnation, as many of you have done, and as
G. W. has done, in his Book called Ishmael, etc. p. 11, 12. in these words,
viz. Senseless natural brute Beasts, MADE to be DESTROYED, Reserved in
EVERLASTING Chains, under Darkness, for everlasting Fire, Dogs, Sorcerers, shut
out from God; with many more such dreadful Sentences, or Quakers Complements
which agree well with Muggleton's Curses, at which George has been an Artist in
his day, and his Brother Penn follows him close, for he avouches the most cruel
of these sort of Complements, in Reas. agt. Railing p. 165 as if these Quakers
had a Patent to revile, and pronounce People Damned.

But pray look upon G. W 's other confident face, in his Apost Incenta^y, p. 4.
where he says, As ^or our confessing that ^E are the Church o^ the first born,
let OUR ^O^TRINE, TESTIMONY, LIVES and SU^FERING's bear witness.

To which I say, SO BE IT, let their Doctrine and Testimony (before cited) bear
witness, and let their Lives bear witness; for let their preaching against the
Delight and ^ashions of the world, and against REVILINGS, Envy, Pride,
Covetousness, and other Deba^che^ies, bear witness, while the world sees them
guilty of an these things, as well as others.

Now, let them come forth and give a better Demonstration than their bear
Say-so, that they are the Church of the first born, more than other Professors
of Christianity, or else who do they think will believe them?

And lastly, As to their Sufferings bearing witness that they are the Church of
the first born; I say, if they will have Sufferings to be a Demonstration, then
is the Church of England, (whom they have so much condemned) the Church of the
first born; for they have really outdone the Quakers in Sufferings, as all the
imp^rtial will judg^; for how many of them have expire^ in the ^^ames! how many
strange cruel Torturers and bloody Massacrees in diverse places, have many of
them suffered for Religion! and doubtless, God would enable them to endure he
like Sufferings again, rather then they would renounce their Religion. The like
may be said of the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, what cruel ^ufferings have
they undergone!

Thus (my Old Friends) you may perceive how willing I am, that you should see
that you ^re (at higher) but upon even ground with other Christ an Pro^essors,
whom you condemn; yea, certainly you have exceeded a^^ that I yet ever knew, in
Equivocation, hiding o^ Sin, Reviling, etc. It Is my Prayer to God that I may be
Instrumental, to bring you down from despising your Fe^low Creatu^es,
Professors of Christ as well as you

But G. W. to prove the Quakers to be indeed the true Church, and not the
Baptists, says, in Qrs. plainness, p. 33. We have a Record in Heaven, and also
in many Consciences, etc. Now, Mark, does not the Baptists say the same, in
their Book, called, A way to Zion! So that here one b^ings as good Proof as
the other; one says, and the other says; yet G. F. unchristians all Professors, but
themselves, for in his Professors Catechism, his very first words are, Come you
Vnchristians, let us talk with you. But to face about again, W. Penn in his
Persuasive to Moderation, page 46. calls them all Christians, and says, They
only differ in the Comment, all allowing one Deity, Savior and Judge, good
Works, Rewards and Punishments. But the same W P turns again, and in his
Rejoinder, p. 339 says, Oh! the Dreadful Darkness that over-spreads the hearts
of the called Christians. Therefore says S Fisher, p. 773.

Now this, not the other, anon its either,
Then by and by, its both and neither.
CHAP. III. A short Summary of Citations from the Quakers Books, showing they
deny Jesus of Nazareth to be the Christ.
SEe at Numb. 36, 20. where they hold those to be false Ministers, who preach
Christ without, and ^id People believe in him as he is in Heaven above; And
that the Light within is Christ, and is ONLY and principal, and admits not of
another. Also, at Numb. 15, 51 where they deny a God imagined to be beyong the
Stars. And deny God and Christ to be a Man in one Person.

Now, he who is the Christ of all true Christians is Jesus of Nazareth, who is
God and Man in one Person; and this Person is without all men in Heaven above,
yea, and beyond the Stars too, and cannot be in any man. But he who is the
Christ of these Quakers, they here show, is not without man, not in Heaven
above, not beyond the Stars, not God and Man in one Person; but that the Light
within is Only their Christ, and admits of No Other. And W. P. largely
declares, That this Christ, or Light within, is the same, and no other than was
in the Jews and Gentiles, before Christ became Jesus of Nazareth, see Reason
agt. Railing, p. 16. Behold how plain their Books are in denying Jesus of
Nazareth to be the Christ!

Again, see at Numb. 43. where J. W. denis Christ to have an Body of flesh and
bones, but only the Bodies of men on earth. Also, denis that Christ dyed. And
also, I. P. Quest. p. 27. says, Is not the Substance the Light, the Life,
called Christ, w^ere-ever it is found? Does not the Name [Christ] belong to the
whole Body, and every Member of the Body, as well as to the Head?

Thus, by their Doctrine, every believing Quaker may be called Christ, as well
as he that suffered on the Cross. But I dare say, no true Christians believe
thus, they believe Jesus of Nazareth to be Christ, and that the Name belongs to
no man else, no, not to the best man on Earth. Also, they believe the true
Christ has a Body of flesh and bones, without all men, and that he did dye
contrary to what these Quakers say of their Christ.

You may also see many other Passages cited in this Book, that confirm this
their denial of Jesus to be Christ. As, one at Numb. 38 where W. P. denis the
outward Person that suffered to be the Christ of God. And another at Numb. 24.
where G. F. says, The Seed of Abraham is the Savior o^ the World; and at Numb
12. W. P says, This Seed is the Light within, and not what proceeded from the
Virgin, Chr. Quaker, p. 97.

But to be brief, take one Passage from Christian Quaker, p. 10. W. P. says,
Thoug^ this general Victory was obtained, and holy Privileges therewith, and
that the holy Body was not Instrumentally without a share thereof, yet the
Efficient and Chief cause was the Light and Life -- Page 111. So that thus far
we ^an approach the honester sort of Professors of Religion, etc.

Observe how far they approach other Christitians; He calls the Body H^LY, but
can this be other than Hypocrisy? for as is noted at Numb. 49, 59. he holds
the Body to be earthly and perishing, and yet here calls it Holy; nay, the
whole Man Christ he calls, The Finite Impotent Creature; and yet here, (four
years after to hide the matter) calls the Body holy. Behold the Fruits of
pre^ending to be Infa^ible! for whatever they publish, though never so
blasphemous, they cannot ^etract nor condemn it, but use what deceit they can
to cover and justify all.

Note, Though some of their late Doctrine seems to contradict some here cited, by
being otherways perded, G. W shows, that all that may well be, and yet they
intend the same thing, Count, Convert, p 72 and we must be content so to take
it, till they repent and condemn their old Doctrine.

CHAP. IV. Of calling Names for Religion.
THough these Quakers do blame all others for calling hard Names, yet they seen
not to come short of others in this matter, by what follows.

Re^ownded, p. 427 W. Penn with one Tongue accuses J Faldo of Railing, and ill
bred Names, and yet with hi^^ other Tongue he calls J. Faldo these ^ll ^^ed
Names, viz. Revengeful, Canniball, Our yelping at the Moon, etc. see his
Introduction, and p. 405.

Also, G Whitehead, with his smooth Tongue, (in Counterfeit Convert) says, Why
do you thus write, why do you trouble the World with such BITTER Treatment? But
then with his Rough Tongue he calls some separate Quakers, for their denying
Women's Meetings, etc. Vile Apostates, Unruly Beasts, Dogs, Wolves, Devils
incarnate, etc. S^ now it may be said to him, Why do thou the write? Why do
thou trouble the world with such bitter Treatment?

Again, W. P. in Reaf. agt. Railing, p. 165. h^ justifies, and declares that he
abides by these i^ Names given by E. Buroughs, p. 30, etc. to wi^ Thou Jesuit,
thou Sot, thou Sorcerer, thou art a Serpent, and the Curse of God is eternally
upon thee; Thou art shut out from God forever, thou sottish filthy polluted
Beast, thou dark Beast and Conjure, etc.

And yet in Address to Protestants, p. 242. he at once unchristians himself and
all his Brethren, for so doing, for says he, Men that call Names ^or Religion,
may tell us they are C^ristians, if they will, but no body would know them to
be such by their fruits, to be sure they are no Christians o^ Christ's making --
Good Reader take Notice of it; Alas! how has the man forgot himself!

Again, in brief Discovery, p. 7, 8, 9. by G F. and others, The Priests are a
Viperous and Serpentine Generation, Thieves, Liars, Antichrists, Conjurers,
Witches, Devils, greedy Dogs, really they are Bloodhounds, still hunting and
gaping for their Prey like the Mouth of Hell -- Being universally the Bane of
Soul and Body, for whom the Theatrae of Gods most Dreadful Vengeance is
reserved to act their Eternal Tragedy upon; Thus W. Penn in his Guide Mistaken.
etc.

But hold, let us hear what G. F. says, That himself and W. P. are for
distinguishing a Generation (...) men by hateful and reproachful Names, Why,
(...) page 8. of West ans. North, it is said, He, who^er he be, who distinguishes
a Generation of Men, ^der one and the same Government, from the rest, ^d puts
upon them a hateful Name of Distinction and ^proach, whereby they and others
are set in Opposition, breaks the Peace, overthrows the end of the Law, and
lea^s into War, and every evil Work, and such a one is an evil doer in a high
degree.

Thus here is a Continuation of their SO, NO, NO, SO: Here they ca^^ themselves
no Christians of Christ's making, and not only so, but also Evil doers in a high
degree; for I here affirm, by all the skill they have, they cannot invent or
use more hateful and reproachful Names than these; let them confute me, if they
can.

Thus I thought fit to give a hint only of their amusing the World with such
Bitter Treatment (as G. W's word ^) I could insert forty times as many such
Complements out of their Books, if it were worth reading, yea, enough to fright
sober People, it this will not. But I shall conclude, with only inserting a few
Rh^mes out of their Book, called Righteous Judgment, in answer to Fr. Bugg, p.
97. to show what prodigious and profound Railery proceeds out of their second
Days Meeting at London, as if the Quakers were the only People excellent in the
more serious part of that Internal Practice of inventing or using Hellish
Epithites They begin thus,

This k^st tho^ to scare us out of our good Order (of Men and Women's Meetings)
with thy Goggle-eyed Image of Jealousy, which if thou did see through thy
Spectacls, might afright thee out of thy shallow Cinceits.

An Ugly Spectacles for Rogers Team, ^risp, Pennyman, Bullock and Bug,
Dark Devil ariven dungy Gods, desperately ^^gg,
Being ^yed to the Ta^l o^ their separate Se^is^,
Popish Libertine, Heathenism, Juda^sm, Atheism.


Now, is it not impossible for men, by words, to u^^er more base and wicked
ruling R^flections than these Rhymes con^^^? But herein are they (...)
condemned also, for ^v^^ G F Gr. Mast^y, p 237 The Work (...) Mi^^ter o^ the
Gospel was not to effect on Persons, o^ st^ik at Creatu^es, thou tha^ rest on
Persons, thou art a false Prop^e^, etc. Thus not only ou^ Neighbor Preachers,
but also those who have of late come ove^ Sea to visit us, are false Prophets
(by this their Doctrine) for their Reflections. And yet, how frequently do
these false Prophets tell their Hearers, It Is for your good that we spend and
are spent, and leave our Countries, our dear Wives and tender Children, and
altogether deny our selves of this World, etc? I confess, this is so plausible,
that I think it might affect all Christian hearers, but especially such who
neither considers the manifest effects of their late Ministry, no^ the worthy
Observation that our Savior made of some, who compassed Sea and Land to make
one Proselite [and why not these to make many] but when he is made, says our
Lord, they make him two fold more the Child of Hell, etc.

Note, These five men in^srted in the aforesaid Rhymes, they call a Team of
Devils, and here I expect they will put me in for a sixth Devil. But seeing
it is contrary to Law to put six Horses in a Team, I query whether a Team of six
Devils be not unlawful also?

CHAP. V. Of Prophesies.
OF the many Prophecies and Predictions that I could mention out of my old
Friends Writings, I shall at present only set down two.

The first is the Prophecy of Solomon Eccles against John Story who (as S
Eccles charged him) contemned Women's Meetings, viz. This is the Word of the
LORD to thee, This Year th^^ shall Dy^, because thou have taught Rebellion
against the Living God.

The second, is the Prophecy of G. Whitehead against George Keith, viz And thus
says the LORD, Because thou have po^red out Contempt, Scorn and Reproach upon
my Servants and People, I will assuredly pour out and bring great Contempt and
Scorn upon thee

Note, If others think Curses to be fitter Names for these, I Will not contend.
But however, Sol. Ecclis not wording that of J. S cunningly enough, he happened
to be a false Prophet. Therefore Age and Experience has taught George Whitehead
Otherwise to word the matter, (as he tells us in his Counter, Convert, p. 72.)
for if G W had predicted some signal or eminent Judgment or Mischief to have
befallen G K according to the greatness of the Wickedness, that they charge him
to be guilty of, he might have mist it too, and so have hazarded his honor of
being accounted a Prophet, by his Brethren and Fri^nds. But now, it is but to
conceit that G K is scorned and contemned [the fate of all men, less or mo^e]
and G. W's Prophecy is fulfi^^ed, and he keeps his Honor by thus craftily
wording the matter.

And truly, we can hear no better account of those Preachers late Prophecys of
Judgments to ^a^ on several Towns and Places in England within certain Months,
not one of them is fullfi^^ed, that we hear of; And though the Prophecy against
Plymouth was so particular, that at the Time prefixed most or many of the People
left the Town, but the Judgment not happening, they returned home, saying, This
Quaker was a false Prophet. Well, my Friends, I was willing only to give you a
small hint of some of your Prophets Infallible Prophecys, advising you and them
to observe G. W's Rule, viz. Otherwise to word the matter for the future, or
cease blaspheming and taking the Name of the Lord in vain, as is ^00 frequent
for you to do.

CHAP. VI. Of Infallible Discerning.
HAaving met with but poor proof of their being Infallible Prophets, among the
Prophecys, let us in the next place come to their Spirit of Infallible
Discerning, and see how they can discern more than others. The first instance I
shall here bring is out of G. F's Great Mystry, p 107. where he says,

The Quakers are of Abraham 's stock, before Antichrist was, or you (Priests)
were; and the Quakers do witness, they are made free from the wrath to come.
And thou (Priest) say, that the holiest man cannot give an Infallible
Character of another man; have not thou in this discovered thy self to be no
Minister of Christ, or of the Spirit, who cannot give an infallible Character
of another man, how can thou minister to his Condition? how can thou see
where he is? how can thou see them that be turned from the Darkness, and that
he in Darkness, and distinguish the one from the other, an holy man from an
unholy man, that can not give an infallible Character of any man's state? Page
89. Thou art an ignorant man, nor can minister to the People, not knowing the
Condition they be in, unless they tell thee. And p. 5. You that have not that
which is Infallible to judge in you, know not the Spirit of Christ, neither can
you judge of Persons or Things, and have not the Infallible Judgment, neither
have you the Word of God in your hearts, nor Christ which is Eternal and
In^allible.

You must Note, that this is spoke of and to the World, the Priests of the
World; but then he them about, and tells what Friends have, viz. All which (i.
e. the Word of God, infallible judgment, etc.) the Quakers have to judge of
Persons and Things. And p. ^^, 249, 267. The Quakers are the Preservers and
(...) Souls [^^are People!] -- Then called Qu^kers the ONLY Ministers of Christ
-- And how can they but delude the People, that are not infallible? (...) G F.

Now by this Doctrine the Quakers are not Ministers of Christ, but Deluders of
the People; for they have not ^^is infalliabe Discerning, as those manifold
Examples testify, for have not many of their Preachers and Elders been guilty
of diverse gross E^^^ especially Whoredoms and Adulteries, and yet have still
kept their outward Ministry and Station, and their state not discerned by their
Brethren, till by accident it has been outwardly discovered? And therefore,
should they not look upon the many Discoveries that has been made of their
falling into those snares, to be both from the Justice and Mercy of God to
them? first, as a Judgment upon them, for presuming to pretend to such high
Seize, beyond all other Christian Professors now living; Next, as a Mercy
unto them, to show them their Weakness and Presumption, if happily they could
see it.

For why cannot my old Friends about Delaware see that they want this Spirit of
Discerning, as much as other People, by those late i^ Examples of diverse of
their Preachers, especially of their being unlawfully concerned with Women, yet
their state undiscerned, till discovered, as aforesaid; and especially that of
Rob Ewer at Philadelphia, whom the Meeting of Ministers (that was kept at his
House) did not discern? But which is to be lamented, some are so blinded by
their Preachers crying out, All is Lies, that they will scarce believe th^se
things, No, not this of Rob. Ewer, tho Publicly proved.

Take one Passage more for Infallible Discerning, from Richard Hubberthorns
Works, patronized by G. W. and others, p. 21^. he there tells a Priest, That
they are Liars that say the Ministers of the Gospel do not know who are Elect;
for they could discern the Elect from the World. So these Teachers that know
not the Elect (says he) and yet exhort all their Hearers to believe, and lay
hold on Christ, their preaching i^ vain. And these Priests (says he) though they
take Sums of Money of their Hearers, yet they know not who are elect among them.

Come on, my old Friends, come prove your selves, try your selves, and let us
know next time you print, whether by this your Rule, there be one Gospel
Minister now left amongst you?

But to wheel round about, and knock all down again, W. Penn says, in his
Rebuke p, 22. We ascribe not Infallabili^, to Men, but to the Grace of God, and
to men SO FAR as they are led by it. Behold Reader, and note this Rhetoric
well! For are not other Professors, yea, ALL men in the world SO FAR
^nfailable, as well as Quakers? here W. P. has given away the Quakers cause,
and set them on even ground with others But says G. W. I cannot give away our
cause, for we have sufficient evidence of discerning of Spirits, Timorous
R^viler, p. 3. Thus George thinks fit to keep up his Confidence with bare Say
so's, though he cannot but know that the world knows his Say so's, to be false.
And I have known a silly Women cheat their pretended Spirit of discerning, who
traveled from Meeting to Meeting, through several Counties, (being bravely
received and entertained by Friends) und^scerned, till discovered to be no
Quaker by others: And such things as these has made them find out a way to help
their Spirit of Discerning, by admitting none now to travel [on Truths account,
as they call it] without Certificates; so that though G. W. in Qua. plainness,
etc. tells us They have a Record in Peoples Consciences; yet now they must have
a Record in their Pockets, or else I Will assure them, their Friends will not
receive them, by their Conscience Record; Let them deny this if they dare; and
tell me how many Friends comes over Sea hither, or goes hence to other
Countries to preach by their Consc^ences Record, without their Pocke^ Record.
And thus is G. W 's Dec it seen, with their Sufficient Eviden^ of Spiritual
Discerning, aforesaid.

Ba^ had almost forgot, how that of late years their infa^^ibility seems to be
run out of particular Persons into the Body of Friends or Church, as G W
demonstrates in his Apost. n^end. p. 4, 16. there he declares them (the Quakers
To be THE People and Church of God, and so to be Infallible, and CANNOT ERR,
no^ be deceived. But where is this Body of Church? sure not that Meeting of
Ministers at Robert Ewer's House in Philadelphia. No, Sam. Jenings lets us
know, it is at London; for in his Speech at that Yearly Meeting, 1694* he
declared That the Meeting in America depended on that at London. So then it
seems, the Me^^ings elsewhere are but Members of that Body at London and it is
clear, that the Members so depend on the Body, that if the Body dies, the
Members cannot live) This indeed is the Foundation Principle of Old Rome. And
here Samuel Je^ings has showed us where New-Rome is. Indeed I lately read how
that the Quakers in England presented six Public Addresses to the late King
James in four years time; but in five years that King WILLIAM had reigned, they
had not presented one to him: And dous not this then show, that those Quakers
who thus addressed King James, are as near a kin to the Papists as Sam,
Jenings? I also read one thing more, viz. That the Pope once set up Women's
Meetings for the increase of Faith among the Waldenses; and I cannot find that
ever any else has done the like, beside Geo. Fox, etc. and yet I have searched
the Scriptures, and some Church Histories too; and it is pity that they have no
other President but the Pope, for those Meetings are certainly of service in
Deeds of Charity and Hospitality.

In diverse other things there seems a very great Harmony between Old Rome and
Sam. Jenings's New Rome, which I am not desirous to repeat now. This know for
certain Friends, that the way to recover the deceived, is to discover, lay open
and witness against the Deceivers, see T. Elwood's Epist. p. 72. Therefore
since this Truth has chanced to drop from T. E's Pen, I shall add, that though
my old Friends often bless themselves thus, viz. WE are redeemed from a vain Life
and Conversation, more than any Society in Christendom; WE are the ONLY
Pro^essors of Truth; and WE are in the Truth, and ALL OTHER Professors are OUT
of the Truth Land so says the Pharisees, We are not as other men, We give Alms,
We Fast twice a week, etc.] Yet I must now say for them, We Quakers do not, nor
never did outdo the Papists in general, as to Life and Conversation; but
herein the Righteousness of Papists and Quakers does so harmonize, that it made
the late King James say (as I have an account) in his discourse one with R.
Barclay, That if he were disposed to change his Religion, he would turn Quaker.
No marvel then why.

But I cannot well o^ it giving one instance more about the Foundation
Principle of Old R^me or top stone of Popery; See Plain Dealing, etc. by P.
Living stone, page 12, 20, 22 where treating about that he calls the form of
Truth, viz. giving the Hand, the Hat, and going to Meetings, he says, Friends
that stand in the Life, and are in the Body, know that there is not, NOR CANNOT
be preservation out of the Body; for they that are out of the Body [of Friends]
are out of the Faith; And the Lord has chosen the Quakers a peculiar People,
above ALL People upon the Earth; and we are to turn to no other People, etc.
Mark just so the Papists say, There is no Salvation or Preservation out of the
Body or Church. And that they must believe as the Church believes, or they
cannot be saved; as he further says, p. 23. They that believe not as the true
Church believes, CANNOT be saved; but this we know of an infallible Certainty,
that WE being faithful in the Truth, those that are gone from us are of another
Spirit, and Not of the Faith of the TRVE Church.

The very same the Papists say, WE are the true Church, and All that are gone
from us, are not of the Faith of the true Church. Pray consider, where these
Quakers are, And also whether Old Rome can lay a greater Necessity on such low
exteenal Ceremonies, as the Hand the Hat, and going to Meetings? for, he
affim^s p. 5. That Spirit that leads from the practice thereof, to be A dark
Spirit, clearness and freedom is not in it, but it does lead into bondage.

But how quite contrary this is to that in Truths Principles, p 24, 51. Every
Man ought to be left FREE, as the Lord shall persuade his OWN Mind, in doing,
or leaving undone, this or the other Practice in Religion. This indeed looks
quite with another face, clean contrary to Rome's Impositions aforesaid; and
yet these Quakers would have us believe they are led by the ONE Spirit. But I
perceive J. Crook That wrote that Book, is not a fit Man for their Society.

CHAP VII. Of the Scriptures.
CHristian Quaker, page 104. W. P. cites and transposes the Apostles words,
thus, Lo, in the Volumn of the Book it is written, I come to do thy Will, O
God, A Body have thou prepared me. But great W. P has not altered the Sense of
that Text, yet by W. P 's own Doctrine, it is very questionable whether that be
true Scripture, especially because what is written in the volumn of the Book of
the old Testament, is only this, Sacrifices and Offerings thou aidst not
desire, mine Ears ^ast thou opened, Psalm. 40.6. Mark, here is not a word of a
Body have thou prepared me, which ^e and his Brethren make such a Noise about
in their Books.

Now says W. P. ( Rejoinder, p. 38) I cannot but observe at what a suspected
rate the Scriptures have been both first collected, and then convered through
the several succeeding Ages -- I may well object, Are we sure the Judgment of
them who first collected them was sufficient to determine what was right, and
what not? -- (Also How shall we be ass^red that in above 300 years so many
hundred Copies as were doubtless taken, should be pure and uncorrupted,
considering the private Dissentions, the readiness of each party to bend things
to their own belief, and the growing and succeeding Faults of leaving out,
a^ding, transposing, etc. Nor was the Collectors Judgment In^allible -- Learned
men tell us of little less than 3000 several Readings of the Scriptures of the
New Testament in Greek Hence we may observe the Uncertainty of J. Faldo 's Word
of God, etc.

Now therefore since W. P. thus declares the Uncertainty of the Scriptures of
the New Testament, and the Psalmist (to which the Apostle seems to refer) shows
that Text to be altered, why then should he and his Brethren build such
monstrous Principles upon so uncertain a Foundation as they render it? That
upon these words, (which it seems are properly) Mine Ears have thou opened; as
that therefore he who dyed at Jerusalem was not Christ, but a prepared Body;
and that the Jews did not see Christ, but a prepared Body; and that the outward
Person born of the Virgin was no part of Christ, but only a Garment (see Numb.
38, 48.) And to strengthen this Anti-scriptural Doctrine, T. Elwood has one
knack in his Truth Desended, p. 138. where he ventures to belie the common
Creed; The common Creed (says he) called the Apostles Creed, says, Christ was
conceived by the holy Ghost, Though born of the Virgin. Now pray search the
common Creed, and see if the word [Though] be there to be found. Behold this
great Quakers Champion! O what an Imposture would he have rendered George Keith
to the World, had he wrote this Lie of the Creed.

Note further, W Penn cites and defends this Passage, R^joynder, p. 61. Quest.
Of what service are the Scriptures, as they are given forth and recorded
without? Ans. Much every way (says he) and there is an Agreement and Union
between the Spirit within and the words without.

Observe here how this wise Man confounds himself: The Scriptures, by his
account, are altogether Uncertain, and suspicious (at least) of being
corrupted; and yet there is an agreement and union between the Scriptures, as
recorded without, and the Spirit within. How does he here render the Spirit
Uncertain! One may see by this, that a man who writes much had need have a good
Memory, or a stable Faith.

Again, something like this is that late Confession of G. W. in his Counter,
Convert, p 26. We prefer the holy Scriptures (says he) before all the Books
extant in the World.

Now, observe here how G. W. carries a double face to deceive his Reader; for
he does not say, that he prefers the Book called the Bible, before all Books
extant; no, for then he would contradict their Old Books; for the Scriptures in
the Bible they esteem Uncertain (as above) And their former Doctrine shows
plainly what those holy Scriptures be, which they prefer; for in Truths
Defense, p. 2. 104. they say, You might as well have condemned the Scriptures
to the fire, as our Papers and Querys -- for our giving forth Papers or printed
Books it is from the immediate and eternal Spirit of God. Hence it appears,
that those holy Scriptures which they prefer, are their own Books, and so much
or such parts of the Bible as they will allow to remain uncorrupted, etc. And
thus this insincere G. Whitehead hides himself, by a deceivible meaning, as is
more plain by what he says in his ancient Book, called, Truth defending, p 7.
That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any (says G. W.) is of as
great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are, and GREATER, etc.

Now, let the Reader judge what those holy Scriptues are, that they prefer
before all Book ex^a^^n the Word And as to what parts of the (...) they (...)
allow to be holy Scriptures, h^a^ (...) so h^ad says in Refuge fixed, p. 17.
viz. Whether Mo^ (...) H^^mis were the first Penman of the Scriptures? or
whether both these, and not one? And whether some words were not spoken by the
grand Imposter, some by Wicked Men; some by Wise Men ill applied; some by good
Men in expressed; some by false Prophets, and yet true; some by true Prophets,
and yet false, etc. Now Reader, do but compare this with what W. Penn says
before; and then if my old Friends, for time to come, should object and say,
There are seeming Contradictions in the Scriptures, (or Bible) and therefore
well may our Friends Books seem to contradict each other. Pray let them know,
that there are not only seeming, but real Contradictions in their Books, but
not in the Bible. And as to any seeming Contradictions that may be in the
Bible, they themselves (as above) have given the reasons why it is so, viz.
having been corrupted; but their Books cannot be corrupted, because we have the
first Impression of them, which they say, are given forth from the Immediate
and Eternal Spirit of God, and so must reeds be better and more certain
Scripture than the Bible, a^c^^^ng to their own Doctrine

Now as to the Titl^s they give to the Scriptures, take a little more of their
Clink Clank as W. P. says of the Priests) for in a Book of G W 's called,
David's Enemies discovered, p. 7. he says, These (Quakers) do NOT call the our
book of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the New Testament and Gospel, as thee and
thy Generation, (of Priests) do.

But T Elwood, in his Antidote, p. 81. calls the Writings of Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John The New Testament Scriptures of Truth, and so is no Quaker, if
G. W. say true; for so he sees cause tow^rd the matter.

Again, J. Tomkins and W. Penn put out a Book, and can it, The Harmony of the
Old and New Testament, and so are no Quakers, 1 G. W. say true, But p^ay Note,
Though they tell of the Harmony of the Old and New Testament, yet there is but
little Harmony in their Books, which they esteem equal with, if not prefer to
the Scriptures.

Again, W. Caton, in his Books to his Friends, page 35.42. calls the VVritings
of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, The GOSPEL, and so is no Quaker, if G. W. says
true. Well, what think ye, my Old Friends, can we suppose these men are any
mo^e led by the ONE Spirit, than others are? Surely Na^.

But to face about again, G Fox, in his Book, News from the North, p. 14 says,
Your Church is a Steeple-House, which is Carnal, and your Teacher is Carnal,
your O^iginal is Carnal, Hebrew, Greek and Latin; and your Word is Carnal, the
Letter; and the Light is Carnal, the Letter. So Dust is the Serpents Meat;
their Original is but Dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death; Their
Church is Dust, a heap of Lime and Stone gathered together. So the Serpent
feeds upon Dust -- And their Gospel is DUST, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John,
which is the Letter.

Now Observe, first, how he tells of the Serpent feeding on Lime and Stone;
pray is not this Carnal too? had not the Devil need to have strong Teeth to
know upon St^ple-Houses? Sure this is both Carnal and Ridiculous, or Ranterlike.

Secondly, He renders the Scriptures all alike Carnal, Dust and Serpents Meat,
with Hebrew, Greek and Latin. Here Is no preference, except in their own Books,
and some of those they entitle, The Word of God, The Word of the Lord, A living
Testimony, etc. Now if they say the Bible will grow Old and molder away, and
become Dust, I say, so will their Books too. And if they say, It Is the Sense
contained in the Words of their Books, which they call the Word of God, the
Word of the Lord; I say, the like is understood of the Scriptures in the Bible.
And yet (as do the Papists, so) they have opposed others, calling them Liars
that say, The Scripture is the Word; If this be not Equivocation, I say again,
it is an exalting their own Books above the Bible. Above the Bible did I say,
yes, why not? for the aforesaid Book, called, News out o^ the North, was (as G.
Fox says, p. 1.) Written from the MOUTH OF THE LORD, by One who is Naked, and
stands Naked before the Lord, clothed in Righteousness, whose Name is not
known to the World, which was prophesied of, but now is fulfilled. Therefore it
must needs be better Scripture than the Bible, for they tell (as above) how
Uncertain that is.

Therefore, ^hatever late Confession they have made, in pretending to prefer
the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles before all Books, it can be no
other bu^ Deceit, till they condemn their old Doctrine; for G. VV. confesses,
Their Intentions may be the same, though they may see cause (now) otherways to
word the matter, Count Conv. page 72

And Lastly, Sam. Fisher says of the Scriptures, That were their Transcriptions
and Translations never so certain and entire by answering to the first
Original. Copies, yet are not capable to be to all men) any other than a
Lisbian Rule or Nose of Wax, see his Additional Appendix, p. 21. Mark how he
affirms That if the Scriptures were never so true, yet they are capable of
being NO OTHER than a Nose of Wax. Now I dare affirm, there is no sort of
People else in Christendom, except Papists, will speak thus of the Scriptures.
But experience tells me, That all sensible Christians who protest against this
Popish Principle, cannot but have an evidence in themselves to the worth and
purity of the Scriptures, by those sweet Streams of Life that are fel^ by
reading and meditating thereon, beyond what can be felt by reading any other
Books.

But before we conclude this Head* take one Verdict more from W. P's Spirit of
Truth, p. 38. The Scripture (says he) is much like the Shadow of the to ^e
Rule. Now all men know, That the shadow is a vain empty uncerta^n thing,
sometimes two or three times longer or shorter than the Truth or Substance.

Again, W Smiths Primer, p. 11, 12. Quest What is the Service of the
Scriptures, if they be not a Rule, and for trial of things that are spoken?
Ans. They are of great Service, Child, and are to be read and believed -- (But)
if thou look upon the Scriptures for A RULE, and for Trying, thou give
that unto them which belongs unto Christ, etc.

Note, Here the Scripture is denied to be any Rule at all, no, not so much as
to try actions or words. But he says, They are to be believed; and yet W. P.
shows them to be Uncertain. So we must believe that which is Uncertain, and no
Rule in any case. Is not this rare Doctrine!

But to face round about again, E. B^rroughs in his Hu^-and-Cry after false
Prophets, says, I shall lay all, (People) to the Line of Judgment by THE RULE
of the Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them, see p. 880. where he not only
makes the Scripture A Rule but The Rule, yea, so far The Rule, that he trys,
judges and condemns the Priests by the express words of Scripture; as Uncertain
and Corrupt as they render them before.

But as Sam. Fisher says of the Priests, so pray observe G W 's Rounds,
Wheelings and Whi^lings, for in his Book, Tit. Ishmael etc. p. 3.10. her^after,
The Scripture of the Bible is Carnal, the Letter is Death, and kills; yet he
calls his own Writings, The Light and Life of Christ, etc. But to face about
again, he tells us, They prefer the holy Scriptures before all Books in the
World. But then Round he goes again, saying, That which is spoken by the Spirit
of Truth is of as great Authority as the Scriptures are, and greater, etc. [And
that their Writings are given forth by the Eternal Spirit of God] But Round
again com^s George with a Back stroke, and in Qrs. plainness, p. 71. he says,
Our Intention and Principle never was to bring our Books in Comparison with the
Scriptures. O Confused Confidence and Self-Contradictions!

CHAP. VIII. Of Magistracy and Government.
ALthough I have plenty of Instances before me to cite out of my Old Friends
Books, I shall begin with my Neighbor Sam. Jenings's book, called, The state
of the Case, p. 73. where he says, Magistracy and Government we always owned to
be the Ordinance of God.

Now Observe, here S Jenings deals deceitfully and dishonestly, in pretending
to be what really they are not; for he does not tell what nor whose Government
they have always owned to be Gods Ordinance; for these words of his imply, that
they have owned all Government under which they have lived, to be Gods
Ordinance, when as their Books declare they own no Government to be such but
the Government of those who witness Christ to rule and r^ign in them, all other
Government being but as a cu^^hersome Tree that must be cut down; for in The
Light, by W. Smith, p. 16. says, We own Government and Magistracy that stands
in the Power of God and executes true Judgment within the Gates, calling down
Sin and Evildoers, and setting up R^ghteousness, and THOSE that walk therein.
So here it is not the Government of such as cause them to suffer loss of Goods
and Liberty, that they own to be Gods Ordinance, As is further showed from
Great Mistry p. 90. by G F. Such as are turned to Corruption (says he) are
Hypocrites they are gone from the higher Power, and so for the Lords sake the
Saints cannot be subject to that Power. And p. ^0. of News from the North, Sing
all ye Saints, clap your hands and be glad, for the Lord Jehovah will reign,
and the Government shall be taken from you pretended Rulers, Judges, Justices,
Lawyers and Constables; all this Tree must be cut down, and Jesus Christ will
Rule alone. Again, I the Light will Overturn Kingdoms, Nations and gathered
Churches, that will not own me the Light in them; see G. W 's Light and Life,
p. 11.

Now, is it not evident from hence, that if Sam. Jenings had expressed himself in
the ancient simplicity of a Quaker, he should have worded it thus, viz.
Magistracy and Government we own to be Gods Ordinance, so far as we (or Christ
in us) have the Command of it, because we know no People else, that so own and
witness Christ to Rule. So that when such men rule, it is no more them that
Rule, but Jesus Christ alone (as above G. F. intimates) the present Government
being but a dead loathsome Form. As T. Ellwood (Sam Jenings intimate Brother)
says, in his Alarm, p. 6. Did you not (says he) make a solemn Covenant with
God, That you would Extirpate Episcopacy, that Dead Loathsome Form? Did you not
spew it up? And will you turn again, and lick up your old Vomit? O do not so!
do not run wilfully into Destruction again. Woe and Misery to the Vpholders of
the Priests of the World, [i. e. the Rulers, for it is they that uphold the
Priests.]

Again, G. Fox, in his Book called, Papers given forth to the Heads, etc. p. 9.
says, Are not all those that will dote so much on an Earthly King TRAITORS
against Christ? Neither do you read (says he) that there were any Kings since
the Apostles days, but among the Apostate Christians and false Church. Christ
is King alone, and makes his Disciples Saints, Kings and Priests, to reign upon
the Earth: These are true Christians, and will these have any more Kings among
them but Christ? They a^^ but of the Life and Power that make such wo^k for an
Earthly KING, and EARTHLY POWERS.

Come, Mark that, W Penn, with thy Industry in getting Grant after Grant for
Kingly and Earthly Power. And Mark that, S Jenings, who said to the
Seperates, [not long before the second time the Horns were cut from pushing
with Kingly or Earthly Power] We will take care that you shall not be our
Judges. And Mark that, my old Friends in general, with your diligence to
engross and keep what hold you can on Earthly Power. And behold your Apostasy!

Now had not the Wheel been so turned about, that S. J. and his Brethren have
lost the ancient Marks of simple hearted Quakers, what need he use such craft,
to pretend to own what they really do not? or are they sensible how they are
fallen from their ancient Principles, and now see their former Weaknesses, why
then are they too Proud or ashamed to follow the Example of good men in all
Ages, to confess and repent, and leave a Memorial thereof to Posterity, as they
have done. O I know the reason; this they cannot yet do! for then down goes
their great pretense to Infallability.

Lastly, W.P. Address to Protestants, p 234. If we will give ancient Story
credit (says he) we shall find, that worldly Weapons were never employed by
the Christian Church till she became Worldly, and so ^east to be truly
Christian: But why should I ^ay the Church? her Leaders have taught her to ERR
I confess had not ancient Story informed me, that all Christian Societies have
apostatized, when they grew numerous, I should have admired at this passage,
that the same W P. should in so few years after he wrote it, not only fall into
that Apostasy himself, but also draw many more with him. But some think W. P.
has wit enough to make out to all that see with his Eyes, that the Sword of the
Magistrate, viz. Constables Staves, Sheriffs Weapons, Stocks, Prisons and
Gallows are not worldly Weapons, but Spiritual Weapons, when used by Quakers.
But however, though he has showed the whole Church of the Quakers (concerned in
Government) about Delaware, are ceast to be Christian, yet he confesses
himself (as one Leader) to be the cause of it; for he says, Her Leaders have
taught her to Err.

CHAP. IX. Of Persecution and Prosecution.
VIndication of the Quakers Principles, p. 55. says, We bear Indignities and
Injuries, and being reviled, they revile not again; and we resist not evil, nor
are we in Revenge, but leave it to the Lord, whose Vengeance is, and he will
repay it.

But Sam Jenings in his State of the Case, p. alleges, That they could do no
less than prosecute and fine G. K. and T. B. without the violation of their
Trust to the King. O trusty Trojan since the days of Edw. Billing.


Therefore Sam. Jenings must now make their ancient Principles to speak thus,
viz. We bear I^dignities and Injuries when we have no Power to Revenge them;
and we leave Vengeance with the Lord, when we are not trusted with Power by the
King to take Vengeance our selves. And thus S. Jenings and his Brethren,
Apostate-like, have lost (if ev^^ they had) the pretended innocent Nature of
the Quakers, and are in the F^ll, and Unredeemed; for so they say in their
Catechism, by W. S. It Is the disposition of OUR NATURE not to seek Revenge,
though we do suffer Wrong; for the Revenging Nature is in the Fal^; but it is
not so with us whom God has redeemed, etc. Beside, let S. Jenings compare
their late Practice with their old Principle about Contending and Sai^g at Law;
see Possession of the living Faith, p 7. It was NEVER the Faith of Christ to
Sue, Contend, etc. Thus S. J. and his Brother Preachers about Delaware, yea,
and Hearers too [like Preachers, like People] are Apostates, and have not the
Faith of Christ, by their own plain Rules; for the same Principle is held forth
by R. H. G. F. G. W. E. B. and others.

Again, I observe S. Jenings tells that the reason of T. B. and G. K. being
prosecuted, was for saying, Sam. Jenings was too high and imperious in worldly
Courts, and calling him ignorant, presumptuous and insolent. Now is not Sam.
Jenings here blinded by a sordid persecuting Spirit, that thus has the face to
publish this to the world, seeing it is yet to be read in the Books of the
Trials of W. P. W. M. M. F. G. W. and others, that they accuse the Magistrates
in England most severely with Injustice, Oppression, Wickedness and Corruption,
and yet these Magistrates did not punish them for that; nor was G. F. punished
for telling Justice Bennet, He was a shame to the Government, as in the Book
called, West to North, etc This shows the Magistrates in England more Noble,
more Christian, and far more free from a Revengeful Persecuting Spirit, than
these Quakers, who cannot bear to be called, Ignorant, Presumptuous and
Insolent (though by men of their own Denomination, nor spoken when exercising
his Magistratical Office, but in Controversies about Religious matters) without
taking Revenge on their Persons. But hear what G. F. says of such in Gr.
Mystery, page 125, 360. You are inwardly ravened (says he) that strike at the
Creatures -- and to cause People to be put in Prison, and to be persecuted, and
have their Goods taken away, such are disorderly Teachers, and shall be rooted
out And so far they are self-condemned Apostates, by their ancient Testimonies,
for their actions in Pennsilvania. Witness their imprisoning John M"Comb when
his Wife was but two days delivered of a Child, and in danger of Death, by a
Flux, and another of his Family sick also, that dyed in a short time after, and
yet he could not prevail so much as to go home to take leave of his Wife, or
set his House in order, though earnestly desired by him, promising to appear at
any time when they should require him; No, that favor could not be granted,
but to Prison he must go, although Humphry Murrey, the Mayor and chief Magistrate
of the place, offered to be bayl for him, at which Sam Jenings raged, and
bitterly reflected upon him, for that he knew his place no better. And what was
all this for? surely some heinous Crime, one would think; why, 'twas nor more
nor less than for letting a person have two of the printed Appeals to the
yearly Meeting (put forth by G. K. etc.) for 2d. piece, as they cost him. But
surely some Seditious matter was contained in this single Sheet; wh^, the
matter they were so offended at, was an Article, wherein it was queried,
Whether some Magistrate, called ^uakers, at Philadelphia, did not act contrary
to the Qrs. Principles, in commissionating and hirl^g men to fight. And for
this they not only imprisoned him, but did what they could otherways to ruin
him, by taking away his Lisence which he had to keep an Ordinary, that cost him
3 l 12 s. And yet, like Preachers, like People, so dark are many of them, to
say, This was not any thing like Persecution, though no Law had this poor man
broken, not did they so much as pretend he had broken an^ Law

Also, the Imprisoning William Bradford, and tak^ng away his very Tools that he
should get maintenance for his Family by, contrary to the La^ of England, so
justly pleaded by him, he being one of the Kings Subjects

Also, their imprisoning Peter Boss, till Providence put the Government into
the hands of Coll. Fletcher, Governor of New York, who released him out of
Prison. And pray what was his Crime? Why, 'twas for writing a Letter to Sam
Jenings, querying about several Miscarriages reported of him, as inserted in p.
59 State of the ease, and among the rest, Whether S. J. was not drunk? In the
Trial of which D. Lloyd being Attorney, pleaded for S. J. and read a Case out
of an old Law Book, to this effect, That though a Bishop was seen to be drunk,
yet was not to be reproved. He also produced an Act against W. Bradford made in
the reign of K. James 2d. against printing Books without putting the Printers
Name to them, which they alleged W. B. had done, and not put his Name to the
printed Appeal (though the Authors Names were affixed thereto.) Well, to Trial W.
B. was brought, D. Lloyd pleaded hard against him, the Jury had their Charge
given by S. Jenings, out they went to try this Crime, but it happening so, that
there was two or three upon the Jury that were not Quakers, they stood upon the
Nicety (as some of their fellow-Jurors called it) of two Evidences, to prove
that W. B. printed said Appeal, which not appearing, after about 48 hours the
Jury came into Court, and told the Bench, they were not like to agree. To whom
A Cock made this learned Speech, viz. Well, seeing, Friends that you are not
like to agree, you are Absolved from your lest (or Oath) and are discharged;
and we will have another Jury that shall agree, and find the Bill. But before
another Court, the Government was changed, W. Bradford discharged from his
Imprisonment, and they disappointed of executing the Vengence which they
intended.

And yet for all this, these degenerate Quakers will not believe these manifest
Truths, known to so many, but they will believe Sam Jenings Book of Lies, who in
his Preface, would make People believe, That the Report of these men's
Sufferings is but a Sham put upon the World, and so far from any thing like
Persecution, that it was only Sport and Play; and I Will warrant him, can make
brave Orations on it in his Preaching too. 'Twas Prosecution, says he, and not
Persecution, see state of the case, p 45. Just so also the New England Priests
say, what they did to the Quakers was Prosecution, and not Persecution, Ye^ the
Book, called, New England judged.

But there was a man punished for taking away an Hourglass from a Priest, and
this G. Fox calls Persecution, in his Instructions, etc. p. 30. Behold is there
greater Blindness and Partiality to be found in the whole World, than is among
these Quakers, that call punishment, for breach of just Laws, Persecution, and
yet when they punish men, who have broke no Law, they say, that is no such thing
as Persecution, but Prosecution.

And though the Quakers have all along made such a great Noise and continual
Cries to the Rulers, complaining of their great and grievous Sufferings by
Persecution, even in so much, that they have declared to the World, That their
Sufferings have been greater Sufferings, and more Unjust than the Sufferings of
Christ, or his Apostles, or of any others since the Apostles days, as in p.
273. of Edw. B^rro^ghs Works; which passage was lately justified in the City
Mercury or News Book, by 24 Quakers at London. And yet themselves scarce any
sooner mounted into the Seat of Government, but they fell to persecuting one
another, till Providence stopped them, by the Government being taken from them.
Therefore they being a considerable People for Number in some places, the King
and Parliament had great Reason to make that Law which was made last year, That
no Quaker or reputed Quaker shall serve on any Juries, or bear any Office or
place of Profit in the Government. Thus though they may see what their ill
Manners (...) Pennsilvania has brought on them; yet on the other hand they may
take it as a blessing unto them, they being a People not qualified for
Government, especially in respect of Principles anciently delivered; for when
T. Budd declared the Duty of Magistrates, in his Book, called, Good Order, etc.
p. 34. viz. I do believe it to be both lawful and expe^tent (says he) to bring
Offenders to Justice by the Power of the Magistrates Sword, which is not to be
used in vain, etc Hear how G. Fox condemns him for this, in a Letter to
Pennsilvania, which Letter I have by me, to show upon occasion; his words are
these, Dear Friends, R Fretwell and A. Cook, Remember me to T. Budd, and tell
him, he gave forth a Book, which grieves the honest hearted, and some dirty
Spirits have got advantage, and how that it Thwarts our ancient Principles,
that part concerning Magistracy, p. 34. it w^^ laid upon W. Penn, but he is
clear of it. And he did not do well to print it, and spread it, for Friends
here will not sell it -- but stopped it -- let him write over h^to^r for Friends
to call it in again. So with my love, G. Fox.

Yet such miserable Darkness has overspread those Quakers at Delaware, that
they see not their Apostasy herein. Nor indeed how should they? seeing the
Yearly Meeting at London did not find ^^^roper or sit to condemn these
Practices, nor to pu^ the Actors upon condemning it; No, not so much as that of
their giving a Commission, and hiring men for a hundred Pound, and furnishing
them with Arms and Ammunition, to recover a Sloop that Babit and his Men had
stole from Philadelphia harbor; though it was an Action to the furthest extent
that those words in T. Budds ^ook could reach, as all that reads the same may
see.

Hence it is plain, that the whole body in general are now so far Apostatized
herein, that they encourage their Brethren to grieve the honest hearted, give
dirty Spirits advantage, and thwart their ancient Principles, unless they will
say G. F. is a Liar, whom they call, The Father of many Nation see W. P 's
Rejoinder, p 354.

But to show further of my old Friends Apostasy in this particlar, R. Barclay
in his Apology, p. 399. 407 says, As to what relates to the Magistrates of the
Christian World, albeit we deny them not the Name of Christians, because of the
public Profession they make of Christ's Name, yet we may boldly affirm, that
they are far from the perfection of Christian Religion, because of the state in
which they are, they have not come to the pure Dispensation of the Gospel. But
for such whom Christ has brought hither, it is not lawful to defend themselves
by Arms, but ought over all to trust in the Lord. Thus this Doctrine of R. B.
runs almost parrallel with that of W. P. before cited, only he unchristians the
whole Body of his ^riends concerned in Government; but R. b 's sentence is only
on the Magistrates; of which, let those that are Preachers look to it, and
study the most effectual means to keep their Hearers from reading such things
as these, so dangerous for their discovery.

Come on my old Friends yet a little further, I wish you were as willing to see
your Apostasy, as I am to show you Read your Ancient Principle of disallowing
to go to Law, and being no Contenders, Patronized by G. F. G. W. and E. Rur. in
p. 23. of R. Huberthorns Works.

Priests says, Many Differences may arise which cannot well be decided without
going to Law. R H. Replys, Thou do allow of going to Law, which the Apostle
did not, and he was a Minister of Christ; and here thou have showed, thou art
none -- and who are come to the Doctrine of Christ, which his Yea and Nay,
there is NO DIFFERENCE, They need NO GOING TO LAW, there is NO CONTENTION; and
many Differences are in thy Generation, which is without Christ and his
Doctrine, which many of you See men at the Law. -- And here openly I charge you
all in the presence of the living God, to be no Ministers of Christ. O when
will you blush for calling all but your selves No Ministers of Christ, no
Professors of Truth! All that join not with you, or believe not as you believe,
you say, do not own Truth, or profess Truth. But I appeal to Gods Witness in
all your Consciences, whether this Priest was not a better Owner of Truth, or
Professor of Truth than you? for his Doctrine and Practice agrees, but your
Doctrine is one, and your Practice another; contrary to Truth, double minded
men. Therefore condemn your ancient false Doctrine in your Book, called, The
Quakers Challenge, p. 3. viz. The Quakers are in the Truth, and NONE but they.
And O learn to be more Charitable!

CHAP. X. Friends Sufferings to be recorded by London Meeting.
FRIENDS;
THis is in some sense to answer your Request; for I have met with some Papers
sent from your Meeting at London, wherein you frequently call for all Friends
Sufferings to be sent in to be recorded. Therefore I shall here set down the
Sufferings of some Friends about Delaware, called, separate Quakers, and
request your care, that when you meet with this Account, together with the
aforesaid Imprisonments, etc. to Record the same, as you do others, if you are
impartial men, but if not, pray let them alone.

In the Year 1695. A. Smith, W. Budd and W. Atkinson in West Jarsey, for
constientiously refusing to serve on Jurys, were fined by the Court, for which
a Gun was taken from A.S. and a slitch of Bacon from W. B. But by the Sheriffs
pleading for VV. A. being poor, he got his Fine remitted. [ Note, This Sheriff
is a Baptist, and he deemed the Office of Sheriff, and refused to serve, rather
than so to take away his Neighbors goods for matter of Conscience; but these
Seperates have not met with so much Christianity in any of their old Friends,
that have been so concerned in Office. Pray let your London Meeting take Notice
of that, and order those Ministers that come from you to visit them, to do what
they can to recommend the Virtue of Love to your Brethren here; for all that
have hitherto come, has set them still more in Opposition against the
Seperates, and have increased Envy instead of Love; and are so far from
counting the Seperates to be any of the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, whom
Christ's Ministers should seek after, that they call them Amaleck, and exhort
one another to smite Amaleck, and yet like Cowards, never come at them; or like
Cocks crowing on their own Dunghills, they do it only in their own
Meeting Houses among their own Friends; and he that is most ingenuous at
comparing G. Keith and his Friends to the worst of Men and Devils they can find
named in the whole Bible, he is an excellent Preacher, and followed from Meeting
to Meeting many Miles, and of this Truth, my own Eyes and Ears are witness.

In the years 1694, and 95. Ralph Ward, a poor Friend at Philadelphia, was
several times fined for conscientiously refusing to serve on Juries, and had
Goods taken from him to the value of 4 l. 6 d of which he complained to the
Governor and Council, but had no Relief The Members of Council present were S.
Carpenter, S. Richardson* A. Morris, C. Pusey, D. Lloyd, all Quakers.

At a Court at Burlington, 3d Mo. 1697. Daniel Bacon was fined 10 s. by Quaker
Justices only, for refusing to serve on a Jury, though he pleaded both Liberty of
Conscience and the Law lately made in England, which says, No Quaker or reputed
Quaker shall serve on any Jury, nor bear any Office of Profit in the Government.

Now here take Notice, The Quakers in England used to plead with the Rulers,
against the Kings Laws, for Liberty of Conscience. But now being got into the
Saddle of Government, and being Rulers themselves, they deny Liberty of
Conscience to others, that plead FOR the Kings Laws for Liberty of Conscience.
Let my old Friends at London consider that, and whether it is not Time now to
cry out, as Sam. Fisher once did, p. 144. O Gross, Horrid, Hideous and Sordid!

Also, several Friends in East and West-Jersey had Goods taken from them for
not answering sumons to Courts, and also for refusing to pay a Tax raised to
pay Soldiers wages. Where Note, the Quakers in East-Jersey, who were in Unity
with their persecuting Brethren at Philidelphia, paid this Tax either directly
or indirectly, which was to pay Soldiers wages. I shall give no particular
account of these distresses, be^leving the rest are more than you will Record;
but I cannot well omit, to instance one more, and leave it and the rest to your
Consideration. And that is,

John Wood, one of your Brethren, a Preacher in Gloucester County in
West-Jersey, being Sheriff of that County, came with men armed to take Goods
from John Roberts at Pensoaken, and sent two me^ before, who pretended they had
lost their way, of which the said Joh. Roberts and his Wife took pity and gave
them meat to eat. Soon after they espied Wood coming with his Company,
wherefore Roberts made fast the Door, but Wood told him, he had those within
that would do his business; they seeing him so treacherous, opened the Door;
this Wood when came in offered his hand: Roberts said, if he came as a Friend
it was well. But said Wood, I come not as John Wood the Preacher, but as the
Sheriff of Gloucester. [Now by the way observe, that in the case between G. R.
and the Magistrates at Philadelphia, those Magistrates could not find how to
distinguish between Magistrates and Quakers or Preachers, but here you see
their Brother J. W. had the art to do it.]

But this J. VVood proceeded, and took several so^s of Goods in use in the
house, among which was a Warming pan, which the woman earnestly desired him to
leave, by reason of the great use themselves and the Neighbors had of it, in
case of Sickness or Childbed (there being none there about except that But she
could not prevail with this VVood, but away he carried, it and soon after this
Roberts fell sick, and beginning to Recover again, he sat up one day; but at
night going to his Cold Bed (for want of the p^n to warm it (being Winter) the
cold Bed made such impression on him, that his speech was soon taken away,
which he did not recover again, but dyed in a few days; and what trouble this
was to the Widow, the Neighbors can tell how much she imputed the death of
her Husband to the want of the pan, which she could not persuade this Wood to
leave, though she offered him to take any other thing instead of it.

Note, the occasion of this Distress was only, for not answering a Summons to
Gloucester Court, when the Court at Barlington required the same, the place
having been some years in contest between the woe Counties about the bounds, not
decided which County it belonged to.

Come you London Friends to say no more of the Inhumanity of this Action of a
Preaching Quaker] can you parrellel this in the whole Worl^, that ever a
pre^ended Gospel Minister took the Office of sheriff before! W. Penn cites
plenty of old Authors in most of his Books, pray set him to search all the
Rusty Authors to see if he can find a President, and if he can find none, you
may Record this for one, if you please; for the said Roberts was an honest
Friend of your Society, and I being w^^h him in his sick^ess, that very day
that he sat up, as aforesaid, he desired me to publish this Preachers Action to
the World, and so far have I now fullfilled the Will of the deceased, as also
the Desire of his Widow and Neighbors since his Death.

Now, perhaps some for want of other Falsity to accuse me of, will say I Taunt
or Scoff: But what would such say, if I should use such Airy Expressions as
that eminent Friend Sam. Fisher has done in his Rusticus ad Accademic(...),
viz. As the Fool thinks, so the Clock Clinketh; The Cat winkt when both her
Eyes were shut; The Wheel-barrow runs Rumble to Rumble; A Tale of a Tub with
the bottom out; Tittles Tattle, Twittle Twattle; Whirle-gigs, Flim-flams,
Gim-cracks, Hog-styes; Bumble-bee Propositions, Magpye Premises, Roaring Meggs;
Thunde^ing Canons to frighten poor fools, etc. This was Sam. Fishers phrase in
writing Religious matters, and re-printe^ for Posterity by the lisence of the
2d Days Meeting in London. And W. Penn in his Testimony before that Book, makes
the Scriptures their Rule for this stuff too, and cites 1 Kings 18.27. of
Elijah's words to Baal's Priests. Thus I see how far I should be Justified were
of their Society Though the same W P. with his the other Tongue is so far from
owning the Scriptures for their Rule, that both he and S. Fisher (as is before
showed) would make them unfit for any Rule at all in any case, by rendering
them Uncertain, etc. Therefore pray ask W. P. by what Rule he knows any such
word were spoke, as recorded, 1 Kings 18. seeing h^ holds the Scriptures so
Uncertain? Doubtless he is as able to give an answer, as if he had served seven
years at Rome, as G. W. tells the Baptists, in his Quakers plainness, p. 31.

CHAP XI. Of Swearing.
IN W Penn's Book, called, Reason against Railing, p. 41. the Question is thus
put, How could you know that Swearing in any case were unlawful, if it had not
been written, Swear not at all? Is not then the Scripture your Rule in this
case?

W. Penn there answers, This shows the Ignorance of Tho. Hicks in the Writings
of the best Gentiles, and his acknowledgment of the Light's sufficiency, in
case we are able to prove Swearing disallowable before Christ came in the
flesh. The seven wise men, (says he) famous among the Greeks 500 years before
Christ came in the flesh esteemed Swearing but a Remedy against Corruption.

Now observe, does not this plainly show, that they held Swearing not only
allowable, but also good to be used; for what good men would not use means to
remedy Corruption? was not W. P. dotish when he brought this Instance to prove
the Light sufficient (without the knowledge of what is written) to show men
they should not swea^? Besides, was it likely that the Light or Law in the best
Gentiles would forbid all Swearing at the same time when the Law (outward) was
in force, that allowed and commanded Swearing? or that the Gentiles had a light
beyond the Prophets, who never did forbid such Swearing, but on the contrary
commanded it, Jer. 4 2.

Another Instance W P brings, is, That Socrates said, There is a Life more f^^n
and unquestionable than an Oath.

I Answ. Does not the Law hold forth the same, viz. that there is no need of an
Oath among men that live a life unquestionable, or out of Strife? for an Oath
was for reconciling and putting an end to strife; so that this of Socrates was
so far from saying, Swear not at all, that it says as the ^aw says; an evidence
of what Paul said, That the Gentiles did by Nature the things contained in the
Law. Now let wise men judge how far W.P. has proved the Light sufficient to
show men they should not swear, without knowing the written Command of Christ.
And does not W. P. also confound himself in accusing T. Hicks of Ignorance? for
if we ask him, who they be that live an unquestionable Life? he shows us that
the Saints do not; for in Rejoinder, p 175 he says, The Saints shall judge the
World, and much more by their Judgment determine or reconcile things among
themselves. Thus seeing the Saints live not a life unquestionable, but that
they need to have things judged and reconciled, how much less do others?

But more particular of Swearing, W. P. and R. R. in their Treatise of Oaths,
put out in the Na^^e of the Quakers, p 46. cites this Pass^ge, viz. They Swear
in God, or to God, or by God, who promise an inviolable Obedience of Mind to
him.

Now, to say, I solemnly Promise or Declare in the Presence of Almighty God,
etc. is a calling upon God to be a Witness to the Truth of the Testimony given,
which in p 17. they look upon to be no less than a presumptuous Tempting of God
to summons him to be a Witness not only to our Terrene, but Trivial Business.
These are their express words. And yet are they now so far apostatized and
fallen from their ancient Yea and Nay, that this is the Oath that the Quakers
have used under the new Name of a Test, especially in W. Penn's Province of
Pennsilvania, till of late, that G K. and his Friends bore Testimony against
it. And yet now in England they have got it confirmed by Law, as I Will show anon.

But to proceed; In page 68. they cite, That it is evil to compel, not only to
Swear by God, but by other things. But how do they here condemn themselves? for
in their Courts about Delaware have seen Quakers give and command the English
formal Oath to be given to those that were not Quakers. And yet for this very
thing they condemn J. Perrot as an Apostate, in their Book, called, A loving
Invitation, p 8. because when he was Clerk of a Court, he gave some People the
Oath. Yet behold! now their Brother Da Lloyd can do the like, and be accounted
no Apostate.

Again, in the Book of the Trial of G. Whithead and T. Bar at Norwich, p. 2^
29. the Recorder threatening to Praemunire them unless they would take the
formal Oath, We are ready and willing (says G W.) to sign this est or
Declaration, viz. I do in the Presence of Almighty God solemnly declare, etc. I
do hereby faithfully promise, by Gods help, etc. Note, This they declare in p.
82. to be the Substance of the Oath, which they then offered to sign; and
kissing the Book, and saying, I swear, they there call the Ceremony and
Circumstance; so it seems they can now dispense with swallowing the Substance,
for they there say, They conscientiously scruple the Ceremony and Circumstance,
to say, I Swear, and kiss the Book; as much as to say, We offer to swear, but
cannot in Conscience say I Swear [Behold the Hypocrasie!] He further adds, That
he is willing to sign such Declaration of his Duty of Allegiance, if he may not
otherways be believed. Mark, If they may not be believed by saying Yea or Nay,
they will do that now which is more, rather than be praemunired. I confess that
would have been hard, but why then have they bound themselves up to Yea or Nay,
by printing so much in denial of Swearing, if they cannot defend it by
Suffering, out will Apostatize rather than Suffer.

Lastly, in p. 35. their Keepers pulling them from the Bar, to have them to
Prison again, Take no^^e says G. W. to the Court) we have not yet refused the
Oath, being not d^ly nor regularly brought upon the point, etc. Behold! could
any man knowing the Quakers Faith about Swearing, ever have expected to hear
such a word to come out of the mouths of Quakers, and a chief Leader
especially? were it not better to be plain, as those Quakers have been, whos^
Names are R^corded in the Court of Chancery, London, for taking the formal
Oath? for this Hypocrisy has but caused some to publish in print, That the
Quakers can work Miracles, for they can take an Oath, and yet not Swear at all.

And G W. in said Book, shows, That he and some other Quakers did Petition to
the Parliament to have the aforesaid Test established by Law, for the Quakers
to take instead of an Oath. So the Parliament did last year grant their
Request, and confi^med it by Law in these words, viz. [ I A. B. do declare in
the Presence of Almighty God, the Witness of the Truth of what I say.] This is
the Quakers Oath, that they call a Test, now made into a Law, according to
their desire. Behold now, what is become of their ancient Yea or Nay! Can now
say this is no more than Yea or Nay? Pray what is become of their tender
Consciences, that cannot Swear, and yet can swallow down this Test without
scruple? Than which no Oath in the Wo^ld can be greater, or more binding; yea,
were I read in History, I doubt not but I could prove this Test to be the very
form of Oath used in some other Nation And thus far these ^uakers are fallen
from what they formerly professed, as before cited, and can now stretch their
Consciences, by using G. White^ea^'s Art of Other way^ wording the matter. If
this be the effect of W. P 's Light, that (without the knowledge of what is
written) shows them they should not swear, sure it is now become Darkness, as
their Term is to others. And yet I cannot see how they can use that Term
without Blasphemy, seeing they say, the Light within is Christ and God; for I
am sure God and Christ can never be Darkness.

CHAP. XII. Of Fighting, Swearing and paying Tithes.
THe Quakers having denied Jesus of Nazareth to be the Savior of the World,
and to be in Heaven glorified in the true Nature of Man, both in their ancient
Books, as is before showed, and now being charged with the same, and the
Persons so accusing o^ cha^ging them having proffered to pro^e the same upon
them at any public M^eting they shall think fit to appoint, yet they refuse to
h^^r with that Ear; and (k^owing their guilt in the case) notwithstanding their
former Challanges made by them in Print, To dispute with all sorts of
Professors, yet now they use all their Ski^ to ev^de and shift from being
brought to the poi^^, ^ut cry out they are belyed and wronged. Wh^^ ^f (...)
some Preachers, particularly J. Dick^so^ (...) J^^gs have now found out a new
Argument (...) p^ove to their Hearers that they are (...) and that is, That
their refusing to pay (...), to ^ight and to Swear, are three Proofs that they
own Jesus to be Christ, and therefore they are ^^ls^ accused.

Now suppose they had not in the least fallen from their ancient Testimony
against Swearing, Fighting and paying Tithes, yet to what a low ebb are these
spiritualized Persons now come, who having all along declared themselves to be
The Only Ministers of Christ, should be now driven to such shifts as to fly to
outward Marks to demonstrate their Christianity, especially in that they
themselves say, That any Man may keep to outward Observations, and yet be no
Christian. But they have not kept to their ancient Testimony against these
neither, but are Apostatized, as is before showed concerning Swearing, wherein
they have only dressed up the Oath in a new Garb, and call it a Test, they now
see cause so to word the matter.

And then as to Fighting, that little Time they have had the Government in
Pennsilvania has given the world sufficient Proof how far they may be trusted
to be true to their Principles therein. And they being the commanding parts of
the Assemblies both there and in Jersey, rather than let go the hold they have
of the Government what shifts have they made in raising Money to be employed to
secure and defend the Provinces from the French and Indians, by using G.
Whiteheads Craft aforesaid, of Otherways wording the Laws and Orders they have
made for raising such ^one; So that instead of declaring the Duty of Rulers,
(in case of Defense) by words of Truth, they have only exchanged their Old
Testimony for New Hypocrisy. As for Instance,

When the present Governor presented a Bill to the Assembly of West-Jarsey to
raise a Fund or Sum of Money to be employed to secure and defend the Province
from the Enemy, not one Quaker in the Assembly would touch with it; but so soon
as a new Bill for the same thing was framed, Otherways worded, then not one
Quaker opposed it, but gave his Vote for it, and so it passed into a Law; but
it was otherways worded, though they intended the same thing.

Next, let us step over into the Government of Pennsilvania, where in the year
1695. we find Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, the^ Governor of that Province,
pressing upon the Assembly to raise a ^und for his Majesty's Service, toward
securing the Province from the French and Indians, but this they could not do,
No, it was against their tender Consciences, contrary to their ancient
Testimony and Principle; and so no Fund was raised. But the next year W. Penn
got the Government into his hands again, and then the Assembly meets again, and
now they must do somethi^g toward maintaining the Fronteers at Albany, or lose
their beloved Honor of having the Government: for the Queen had commanded it,
and W. P. had engaged to comply therewith: Well, to work they went, and soon
found a new Name for their Act, and then courageously raise Three Hundred
Pounds for the Indians at Albany, and starcht Da. Lloyd is sent to New York
with it, to pay it to Governor Fletcher, for the use afo^esaid; for now it was
not against their tender Consciences; why so? because they had Otherways worded
the Act, yet intended it for the same Use.

I had almost forgot to mention, how one Babit and his Company in the Year
1692. stole a Sloop from Philadelphia, upon Notice of which the Quakers very
speedily get a Company of Men together, searched the Town for Arms, supplied
them with Guns, Swords, Powder and Lead, and gave them a Commission, and hired
them for 100 l. to Recover the Sloop from said Privateers, which they did, and
Sam. Carpenter paid down the 100 l. to the men, and the Ass^mbly has since
voted it to be a Dent of the Province.

Well, as they were Magistrates they were obliged to do all this. But he that
^e^ds the several foregoing quotations out of their books concerning Christ,
and also consider these matters of fact concerning fighting, acted in the face
of the Sun, may afel^ conclude, That the Quakers own Jesus to be Christ, just
so as they testify ^gain^t Fighting.

Friends and Neighbors, your LEADERS are so unwilling to be discovered in
these th^^gs, that ten to one but they w^^ tell you the which* have asserted
a^ou^ W. P's Grant or Commission, is a Lie, as their usual manner is it other
t^^ngs. And if they tell you so, I know no Remedy, but you must believe them,
so long as you see with their Eyes; for S. Jennings i^ formed me that it was a
Lie, and truly I believed him, (...) ch^^^^ I came to read it my self, etc. and
so found him to be the Liar in the case. And thus by searching out things my
self I came to discover now ^lindly I was (and you are) led on and deluded wi^h
such Religious Lies (it I may so call them) For W. P. says in his Address to
Protestants, That it is the Leaders that teach the People to Err. And S. Fisher
says ( Rusticus, p. 191.) of such Leaders, That the Wheel-barrow runs Rumble to
Rumble,
Therefore they will never leave climbing up by Lies till down they tumble.


Lastly, for refusing to pay Tithes, many honest Quakers have suffered much,
and I do believe consci^^^iously too, while many eminent amongst them, have (to
my knowledge) used diverse clandestine Shifts to satisfy o^ otherways to cheat
the Receivers. And T Ellwood in his Foundation of Tithes, among ten Reasons
that he brings against paying Tithes, there is one to show Tithes inconsistent
with the Gospel State; And I know none in Christendom, no, not the Priests
themselves, but they wi^^ deny that they take Tithes, as Tithes, but only as
Maintenance for Pre^ching, and not as any other part of the Ceremonial Law.
And the most weighty Reasons T. E. brings to show why they refuse to pay
Tithes, is, That it is the h^ghest Injustice in the Priests to take Tithes of
the Quakers, who neither set the Priests on wo^^, nor like their works, nor
receive their Work, cas^ing it the Yoke of Oppression ^as indeed it really is
so Therefore it is the Unreasonableness and Unjust^ess thereof that is the
ground of their refusing to pay Tithes, together with Coveteousness, and not
that the paying Tithes is a Denial of Christ; for T. E. is so far from charging
those with breaking any Command of Christ, [or of the Apostles, who pay Tithes,
that he implicity grants, they do not, in p. 5. 13. So then, seeing they who
pay Tithes break no Command of Christ] how much less shall their refusing to
pay Tithes constitute any to be Christians; so invalid and weak is this their
greatest Proof that they own Jesus to be Christ, while their Books are standing
Evidences, that they deny him. Again, the Turks and Pagans that are not
concerned in pa^ing Tithes, do by this their Rule own Christ to be the Savior
of the World, though all Christendom knows the Turks Principle is to deny him so
to be.

CHAP. XIII. Of MIRACLES.
JEsus Christ wrought Miracles by the Power of God, The Disciples wrought
Miracles in the Name of Jesus of Nazaren^. G. Fox (is said to have) wrought
Miracles by the Power of God, [not a word of Jesus, in whose name the Disciples
did it] This is to be seen in the Journal of G. Fox, in the third Table, under
the word Miracle, which Miracles they there cite to be, She that was ready to
dye, raised up again, The La^^ made whole, The diseased restored, John Jayes
Neck broke, Restored, etc.

Now, as to she that was ready to dye raised up, I have known a Woman recover
from the point of Death at the Prayer of a Priest, who took Tyths, and such
they call Conjurers, greedy Dogs, etc. Yet this was not looked upon as a
Miracle, though I believe God might have regard to the Prayers of both G. F. and
the Priest in that case.

Again, as to John Jayes Neck broke, I knew the man, and spoke with him
afterward, who as he was r^a^ng with G F. in East-Jersey, fell off his Horse
and disjoy^ted his Neck, and G. F. seeing how it was, pulled his neck into
Joint again, and so sav^d his life; And such a thing as that many have done,
yea, a Profane man has done the like to my knowledge.

Also in the Book, called A Reply to the Vindication, etc. p. 14. it is said,
Visible Miracles have been done amongst us in the sight of the World, etc. see
also the Journal of G. F. p. 307. And had a large Meeting at a Constables
House, on whom the Lord had wrought a great Miracle, etc. Note, he^e is neither
the Name of the Constable, nor the Town where he dwelt, Nor what kind of
Miracle it was, and also 28 years before it was published: Pray what is here to
induce any to believe it, but such whose faith is to take all upon trust? Let
all discreet Persons consider if such things as these will not ha^den, instead
of converting the Jews; considering the Titles G. F puts on himself, as
professing Equality wi^^ God, see p. ^, 3. of A Brief Relation, ^c. confirmed
in p. 67 and 127. Great Mystery, where he says, he spoke it out of all
Creatures. and in News coming out of the North, p ^1. he declares himself to be
The Prophet that was prophesied of, etc. And S. Eccles calls him, The Prophet
whom John was not. And G W. and W. P. in their Books Judas and the Jews, p. 44.
Serious Sta^ch, p. 58. Judgment Fixed, p. 19, 26, and in several other Books,
justify and excuse as well these Ti^^e, as also, That he the said G. Fox is
THE (...) of many Nations, whose Being and His (...) the ^ower of the Highest,
in which he Rules and Gov^rn in Righteousness, and his Kingdom is established
in Peace, and the INCREASE thereof it without End, and much more to the same
purpose, together with his thus being set up a Worker of Miracles too; I say,
if the Jews should give equal Credit to these Things with the History of St.
Luke, how will they know who is accounted the Messiah, G. FOX or JESUS of
Nazareth, especiall^ seeing W. Penn denis that Outward Person to be him, which
suffered at Jerusalem, who was called Jesus of, Nazareth, see Serious Apology,
p. 146.

Good Christian Reader consider the Event and Effects of these things! Be
otherwise minded than G. Whitehead is, who says. He neither consults Events,
no^ ^ears Effects in what he writes; see his Introduct. to Judgment fixed. Is it
not high Time for some to be raised up to testify against these Things!

But that which seemed most like a Miracle to me, and many more, as blind as I
was the, was, That G. F. should have the gift of Tongues to interpret all
Languages, as in his Book, called, The Battle-door to the Docters and
Scholars, etc. when alas! it has been of late discovered, that certain Jews
were hired to do it for him, and had 80 pounds for their pains paid them by G
Roberts, besides 12 Botles of Wine over and above And were not this Treatise
swelled bigger then I intended, would here have showed some Examples, to prove
the said Journal to be a History not fairly related, but Partial and Painted,
some things put in, some le^t out, some mended and peiced, etc. But which is
yet worse, if true, I have seen a Sheet, called, An Essay, etc. lately put out
by one T. C. wherein he shows that G F. in answering Priests and Professors
Books, f^stly Quoted their words and prevented them, and took pieces of
sentences, transposed the words thereof so as to make them say another thing,
that the Authors never intended, and then called them ^he Authors sayings, and
so answered them; which if really true, must needs b^ judged wicked by all
moderate intelligent Persons Therefore it behooves W. P to appear and clear G. F
from this gross Charge, the which if he cannot do, h^w vainly and falsely does
he say in the Preface to his Journal, Many have done well, but thou, dear
George Excellest them ALL.

Note, I mention these things, because I always believed plainness and honest
simpl^ hearted dealing was the way to set up Christian Religion, and not such
Craft.

But as to real and unfeigned Miracles, when we lately heard a Report of two
Miracles wrought in London, one upon a girl, being restored suddenly from a
lameness in her Limbs, which she had from her infancy, the other of a Woman
su^dainly made whole from a Leprosy; I sincerely declare, I was stricken with a
dread on my Spirit at the N^ws, fearing I should hear that they were People
b^longing to my old Friends, the Quakers, because I knew them to be already too
much exalted in their minds above all other professors of Christianity, and if
these Miracles should be done upon any of them, it would cause them to insult
still more presumptuously; but by reading the Relation I found the one to be a
French Protestant Girl, and the other a Baptist Woman, Persons (no doubt)
humble enough to beg of God in their Prayers for Pardon for their Sins, as I
never heard any Quakers do in more then ^0 years attending their Meetings, etc.

Lastly, This Observation I made thereupon, which I entreat all to take Notice
of, That these Miracles were wrought by or thorough a livi^g Faith in Christ,
as he is Jesus of Nazareth, or a Person without men, and therefore I deliver it
as my sense to be an everl^sting Truth, that till the Quakers close with this
Faith, it is impossible that any real Miracles can be wrought either on them or
by them.

But though they say (as before) that visible Miracles have been done among them,
yet it seems by what G W. writ in the year 1674 in Quakers plainness, p. 14.
they have now lost this and other Evidences of the Spirit, if ever they had
them; for he there says, And what if God will not bestow such Gifts and Signs
now, must we therefore be no Christians? Are the Baptists willing to be thus
concluded on this ground? Now Mark, he here grants themselves to be as low,
poor and empty as others, having no evident Signs or Gifts whereby it may be
known they are sent of God more then other Professors. Now though this be such a
known Truth, yet to face about again, the same G. W. (in Apost. Incend. p. 4)
lets us know That he and his Friend are THE Church of the first born. So that
as S. Fisher says, p. 748.

Sometimes it is one way, then Another,
Sometimes both ways, Tun and The Other.
CHAP. XIV. Of Life and Doctrine.
If the Trumpet gives an Uncertain Sound, who shall prepare himself to Battle?
1 Cor. 13.


MUCH more than formerly do my old Friends the Quakers cry out, It Is Life is
the only thing that is our All in All; It Is no matter for Doctrine or Knowledge
in this or that Principle: Away with Creeds and Points of Faith, so that we
feel Life in our Bosoms, and flowing from V^ssel to Vessel.

To which I say, go then thou that counts thy self a rational Creature, and
learn of so mean a t^ing as a ^egetable, and see if a Plant can grow (with the
Life it has within it self) without Leaves. But how comes it to pass that the
Quakers have written such a multitude of Books, great Volumns about Principles
and Doctrine, opposing all others both ^riests and Professors about points of
Faith and Doctrine. And E. Buroughs in the Name and behalf of the Quakers
having made great Challenges ^o dispute with a^ sorts, and any Number of
People, at any Time and Place, about Principle and Doctrine; Why, I say, was
all this, if Life had been sufficient without Doctrine? Again, If Life may be
felt by those who are ignorant of Doctrine, and that be enough, why do they
advise in their Book, called, An awakening Voice, p. 15. viz. People open your
Eyes, and be not so befooled with that dotish and blockish Principle, That
Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, but search the Scriptures, and try all
things -- Have not the most knowing Men in the World been always the most
devout to God?

Note the uncertain Sound of their Trumpets; Here, it seems, Life is not
sufficient without Knowledge, and therefore they advise to search after
Knowledge for Life or Devotion. And yet now in opposing others that contend for
Knowledge in Faith and Doctrine, they cry out, Life, Life, no matter for
Doctrine; Ceeeds and Confessions of Faith (they say) came in with the Apostasy,
etc. This brings to my Memory how once I heard a Priest preach so affecting a
Sermon (as he commonly did) that looking about me, I saw weeping Eyes on every
hand, and yet this Priest was known to me and those People, to be a debaucht
man, that thus caused his Hearers to feel Life, (as they accounted) in their
Bosoms; even such is the Devotion of all zealous but ignorant) People,
especially at the sound of a smooth and affecting Delivery of words, ^ho
believe it their Duty to keep within the Pale of the Church, and be content
with whatsoever drops from their Preachers Mouths, so mean spirited are the
People (says W Penn) to take all upon trust for their Souls, see Adress to
Protestants. p. 177. Here- W. P. has truly expressed the present Case; for I am
livingly sensible, that there are hundreds, yea, Thousands of honest Souls at
this day among the Quakers, who are afraid to hear or receive any thing from
these who are out of the Unity of their Church; so far are they willingly held
from obeying that good Command of the Apostle, and the Advice of one of their
Leaders, (as above) To try ALL Things. And it was observed, when Tho. Musgrove,
at many Meetings about Delaware, preached, That the flesh of Christ was a
constant enduring Patience, and his Blood a lively operating Spirit of Life, or
divine operating living Love; This set many into a singing frame, (...) Life in
the Meeting (as they term it) partly in that he applied it to oppose some
Doctrine of G. K. and no preaching it as a new Opening, and they believing it
so to be. When alas for them I we who have taken their own Advice before, Not
to be so dotish and blo^kish, but have lea^^t to be more knowing, we know it to
be not an opening of Thomas Musgrove, but a piece of an old Creed made at
Constantinople in the year 1585. [Thus while they are crying out against Creeds
in others, they patch up Creeds to themselves] And following their Advice
before, we have also learned to know, that if another Minister had preached the
same things to the same People, though a Person of as good a Life, and more sound
in the Knowledge and Faith of Christ, yet wanting either the Unity of the
Church, or that faculty or gift of affluent and affecting delivery of his
words, would not raise that Life in the People at all.

But what says W. P. further to these things? Why, says he, I am amazed with
what Confidence they expose their Souls. This Principle it is, and not Enquiry,
that makes Men careless and unactive abo^t their own Salvation -- It Is not to
be saved, (says he) to be within the Pale of any visible Church in the World;
see Address to Protestants, p. 177. But pray why then do they publish such
Doctrine in their Book called, A loving Invitation, page 9 viz. That those who
forsake their the Quakers) Unity, and oppos^ them, are cut Off from Christ.
Why, this has ^een the Sound their Rams horns, have all along made. But in p.
156. W Penn plainly tells us, That the consequence of Peoples not doubting
their Ministers, and not putting them upon the Proof of what they preached, has
been the Introduction of much false Doctrine, Superstition and Formality.
Here Is the ground, it seems, of those false and confused Doctrines before
cited, by reason of our being too long before we doubted our Ministers. And
yet, now some are set to do it, how do they turn their the other face, and Rage
at them, calling them Liars, Apostates, Wolves, Dogs, Devils Incarnate, etc.

Lastly, Though G. Whitehead in Apost. Incend. p. 4. says, He [God] has chosen
us to be his People and Church -- We are the Church of the first Born, etc. Yet
W. Penn says again, That to be of the Church of which Christ is Head, is quite
another thing than to be of any visible Society whatsoever, see Address, p.
177. So that as I began, so I must end,

Since their Trumpets give so Uncertain a Sound, Who shall prepare himself to
Battle*

CHAP. XV. Sabbath Day Wheel turned Round.
IN Rejoinder, p. 191. W. Penn says To call any Day of the Week a Christian
Sabbath, is not Christian, but Jewish -- The Apostle (says he) makes their
Observation or Preference of days, to be no less then a token of their turning
from the Gospel; and Christians ought not to be judged for rejecting such
Customs, etc. And pursuent to this Doctrine, some Quakers formerly have opened
their Shops and followed their usual Employments on the First Day, both in old
England and elsewhere.

But behold how the Wheel is now turned! for the Quakers at Delaware being the
commanding parts of the Assemblies, have lately made a Law to prefer the First
Day before others, calling it The Lords Day; so far are they now turned from
their former Gospel, Nay, and this Law has been put in execution too in
West-Jersey, and that by none others but Quakers, causing several Persons to
suffer, one tried at Court [but cleared by the Jury] after he had been
imprisoned, for doing no more on the First Day than those who prosecuted him
have been frequently guilty of, viz. taking up a fettered Horse, or Mare that
had strayed from him, that was in danger of being spoiled, he having been
seeking the said Horse several days before It Is true the man was no Quaker,
that thus suffered for taking this pity and honest care on his Beast and
himself; But what then? must they needs show to the world, that partiality, etc
is inherent to their best sort of Apostasy? But if they now see the evil of
their old Testimony of forbidding to prefer the First day before another, why
do they carry a double face, and not condemn it? O but that is the way to show
themselves fallible, and so confess themselves on even ground with other
Christians! here lies the pinch.

And G W. is upon the same double strein on; for when T. S. asked. Whether that
Quaker did not sin who sowed a Doubles on the Sabbath day! G. W. in Truth
defend. etc. p 21. Replys, Where do thou read in the Scriptures, that men
must do no Work on the First Day of the week? And yet the same G. W. in his
Trial at Norwich, when the Oath was tendered to him on the First day, he
excepted against it, because it was tendered on the Lords Day, as he calls the
first day, in p. 26. of the Book of his Trial; But G. W. might have seen in his
Brother S. Fisher's Rusticos, that what is sauce for the Goose is sauce for the
Gander also.

Here several other things come before me, of the degeneration of my old
Friends, both in Faith and Practice, which for a reason best known to my self,
I at present forbear to expose; for I know they think I have already done too
much; and I heartily wish I may never do more of this kind, but that I may be
employed hereafter in what is more delightful to me, but be it as God Almighty
shall direct me; for methinks I already hear the bitter Treatment I must have
from my Neighbors, my old Friends round about, far and near And how the
Preachers thunder out Woes and Judgments against me. But this! the less value
seeing it is an advantage the Preachers have had in all Ages above other men, to
preach their pleasure against those who offend them, and that without control.
Hark also how they caution and warn their Hearers, not to read such Books as
this, whilst with their other Tongue they bid them, Try all things.

But I have faith to believe, that the Prophesies they utter against me shall
be as false as [I am informed] W Pen's was against T. Hiks, viz. So sure as God
lives -- The Lord will make the an Example of his FURY, and thy head shall not
go down to the Grave in Peace, and by this shall thou know (says he) that not a
Lying nor Delusive, but a true and Infallible Spirit has spoke by me; see
R^iling against Reason, p. 181. Now whether W.P. did not there belly the Spirit
of God? for I do understand that T.H. dyed at Peace in his bed, and with great
satisfaction.

But as it is noted in the Title page, I am not the man that gives out things to
lay open wickedness, but that men may take warning, and fear, and come to know
themselves.

AN APPENDIX.
THe case with me is just as with S. Fisher, p. 736. viz. That flood of Follies
and Absurdities, that Cloud of Confusions and Contradictions, which Shatters it
self up and down by plats in sundry Showers, throughout the sundry pages of
those men's Books, Every Eye that reads them [as they lie at a distance] may
possibly not se^ sight of them easily; Therefore have I called some few of them
out [for the whole Number passes my skill to cast account of] and clapped them
together a little closer, Not so much to shame them, as to honor the Truth,
which they would shame; That they may be the more ready to be read, and
apparent to the view of every ordinary Capacity, That any [save such as seeing
will not see] may see the Sword of the Lord already laid on the Arm and right
Eye of the Idol [Prophets.] Thus far S. Fisher. So I shall proceed to enlarge
upon a few perticulars.

First, At Number 8. I have Noted, that G. W. excuses that Blasphemy there set
down of S. Eccles, in Serious Search, p. 58. he undertakes to direct S. E's
Intention in this matter, and gives us to understand that S. E. did not intend
as he writ and published; for though he said it of G F. yet he intended it only
of Christ; so it seems he spoke or writ one thing, and meant another. And such
a one as do, so, W. P says [in his Rebuke, p 8.] is no better then one of the
worst of Knaves. So here G. W. is vindicating one of the worst of Knaves by his
sincere hearted Brother W. P 's rule They are his own words let them share the
matter as well as they can between them.

But says G. W. It is a little failure in Syntax; that is to say, S E. failed a
LITTLE in the Joining of his words. Thus they can excuse blasphemy, when
uttered by their own Friend; but if any of their Opposers do but write A^ or
THE, Yea for Thou, or fail in a word, O ^en they cry out, Forgery, Lies,
Blasphemy, and what not (as I could give many instances) Then it is not a
little failure in Syntax only, which the Law of Charity would not take notice
of; But if a Quaker write that which is ten times worse, then they can use the
Papists art to Dir^ct their Intention. Pray read else in the Book called The
Mystry of Jesuitism, begin at p. 122. and see if George does not here teach
people how to equivocate exactly like the Jesuits.

Now let all Intelligent people weigh and seriously consider, whether this be
like the simplicity and single heartedness that the Quakers pretend unto, for
them to write one thing, and say themselves they mean Another, or do not intend
all they speak or write; [or as in the Title page] see cause otherways to word
the matter, and yet intend the same: just as S. Fisher says of the Priests, p.
177 Shameful Shifting from sense to sense, Misserable Marchings from Meaning to
Meaning, so that one can hardly know where, nor h^^ to find them, nor what they
mean; But (says ^e) WE mostly or EVER keep to the true, honest, ordinary and
plain purpor^ of the words, a they lie open and clear to EVERY ordinary and
common Capacity that is willing to know and do the Truth. Thus far S. E. but
whether the Quakers do this, I lav^ to the Judgment of all Impartial Readers of
this Book, of which take a farther instan^e. viz.

They having in their Books called the Scriptures Carnal, Death, Dust, Serpents
Meat, etc. and some of their own writings they call, The Word of the Lord, The
Word of God, The voice of Wisdom, etc. G W. to Quakers plainness, p. 71.
Replys, That such Titles therefore have been not strictly, but figuratively
placed on some Books, So here, it seems, they do not keep to the ordinary true,
honest and plain purport of the words, but they must be understood in a
Figurative sense.

Again, on the other hand, though the Quakers one while teach, That all Figures
were ended by Christ, yet G. W. directs the intention for that too, in his
Timorous Reviler, p. 4. where he lets us know, They do not intend All, but
some, viz. the figures under the Law; And also there justifies their writing or
speaking in Figurative Speeches. Mataphors and Metonymyes, and defends it from
Scripture. But here let G W. turn back to another of his own Books called, The
Divinity of Christ, and Read these words in Epistle (about figurative Speeches)
viz. We charge thee [Priest Danson] show us a Verse in Scripture, that speaks
such Language, and where one word may be put for another by Metalepses, and so
leave People in doubts and Questions.

Mark Reader, does not here need some curious equivocating and otherways
wording the matter, to Reconcile these Doctrines and clear themselves of the
Guilt of what they condemn in others.

And seeing those high Titles they give their own Books are Figurative (as they
say) let them therefore direct the intention next time they print, so as we man
know, whether those Titles they have given the Scriptures, are figurative too,
viz. Death Dust, Carnal, Serpents M^at, etc. for I cannot yet find in their
Books, whether whether they intend these Titles to be Figurative o^ Real; for
they should not leave people in Doubts and Questions, by putting one word for
another, by their own Doctrine; Nay, if we may believe S. Fisher they do keep
to the plain, true, honest, ordinary Sense of the words, as they lie open and
clear to common Capacities. By which it appears, their faith is, that the
Scriptures are Really Carnal, Death, Dust and Serpents Meat. But then pray,
what are their Books? what Na^^s can be found out or invented bad enough for
their Books, seeing G. W. in Quakers plainness, p. 71. positively asserts, It
was NEVER their intentions to bring their Books in Comparison with Scriptures,
but prefer the Scriptures before All Books [O Rare and Base! says S. F. p. 145.]

But if on the contrary, they intend the said Titles given to the Scriptures,
to be figurative; And if G. W. be Sincere in pretending to prefer the
Scriptures above their Books, then surely their Books should have had the
worser Titles, and the Scriptures the better Title.

Good Reader weigh this point well; for if these Quakers do not really and
indeed prefer their own Books above the Bible, why can they not call the
Scriptures, The Word of the Lord, or Word of God, in a figurative sense, as
well as call their own Books so in a figurative sense?

Therefore I am bold to affirm it, as my real sense, that those late
confessions they have made, in pretending a preference of the Scriptures above
their own Books, is gross Equivocation and Hypocrisy, so long as they justify
their old Doctrine in the case.

Behold! how these men deserve to be mocked as S. Fisher Mocks the Priests, viz.
They sing their Old New Song to the Tune of the Truth turned out of doors, p.
726. For do but read another short instance ^lso about Christ; G. F. in his
great Myste^y, and^. [as in Heb. 2.10.] says Christ, took on him the ^eed of
Abraham. And in p. 223. Arreign. of Popery, he says, the Seed of Abraham is
the Savior of the world. Thus it seems Christ took the Savior of the World of
the Virgin Mary. But if that was the Savior that Christ took, what is Christ
that took that Savior? Consider that. However, here he lets us know, that what
Christ took of the Virgin, is both the Seed and the Savior of the World, Both
which W. P. expressly denis in Chr. Quaker, p. 97. where he largely declares,
That it is the Light in man that is this Seed, and not what Christ took of the
Virgin; And that this Light EVER was in ALL Ages, Sufficient and Saying, Reas.
Ag. Rail. p. 16.

Now choose Reader, whether to take to this Faith published in the year 1674. by
W. Penn, or that published a dozen years before by G. Fox, or their more new
Faith, now published in the Year 1695. in answer to Dr. Lancaster's Queries
before cited. Great is their Confusion throughout their Books, especially about
Christ and the Scriptures; and G. F. tells in his Several Papers for the
spreading of Truth, p. 17. That God is not the Author of Confusion; but such
hold the Truth in Unrighteousness.

And G. W. and his Brethren in their Books frequently call to Priests and
Professors for Signs or Proofs of their Ministry, saying, Have you the same
POWER and Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures? see the Epist. to Divinity of
Christ. Again, G. W. in his Enthusiasm above Atheism, p. 5. says, Timothy and
Titus, and others who had GIFTS in them for the Ministry, were Approved; but
this is no Proof that these Opposers Ministers are either so gifted or
approved. Now, may not their Opposers say the same, viz. Neither is it any
Proof that the Quakers Ministers are either so gifted or approved.

Again, G W. in answer to R. Baxter, p. 16. We never understood that they that
set up these Priests were called as Peter or Paul, or the Elders who had POWER
to lay on the Hands, that the holy Ghost fell on the Party on whom they laid
their hands [And I say, let us see but one Quaker thus called.]

But now take Notice, that when others demand a Sign or Proof of the Quakers,
of their call to the Ministry, or to prove themselves to be more the Ministers
of Christ than others are, Then they turn the the other face, and tell them* That
it is a foolish and an Adulterous Generation, seek a Sign. Thus G. W. in Quakers
plainness, p. 34. Now I say, it is true, our Savior did so upbraid the Jews,
and might very well, for he had showed Sign upon Sign, and wrought very many
Miracles amongst them, and done many mighty Deeds before them; and ^et for them
to cry out for more, was indeed foolish. But what is this to the Quakers, who
produce No such Miracles, No such Signs, No, No more than other Professors?
Must all others therefore be a fooli^^ Generation for asking a Sign or Proof of
the Quakers, and yet the Quakers not foolish in demanding the same of others? O
consider the conceited Confidence, Arrogance and Pride of these Men! I pray God
give them Humility and Charity instead thereof.

But notwithstanding, though the Jews were such an Adulterous Generation, and
had so many Miracles wrought before them, yet Jesus Christ promised them one
Sign more, and that doubtless was the greatest Sign of all. Therefore if these
Quakers will hold to this Scripture (which they ought to do, seeing they bring
it against others) they then ought to give this Adultrous Generation one sign;
and that doubtless would be more convincing then all their Books, and whatever
they can say.

Of Infallibility.
William Penn in his Rebuke to 21 Divine^ p. 22 says, We are horribly abused
in saying, we pretend all our Ministers to be Infallible.

But whether what W. P. here says be true, Read what the same W. P. says in
Judas and the Jews, p. 43. viz. Our Ministry is of God, it stands in the Power
of the living spiritual Gift of God. And in A True account, etc. p. 18. says,
We have Thousands at our Meetings, and none of us dare speak a word, but as
eternally moved of the Lord.

Now observe, That which is spoak by the eternal Motion of the Lord must needs
be ^nfallible, or nothing is Infallibly spoke. Therefore is not this rather
horrible falsity, Deceit and Double dealing in W. P. etc. especially seeing G.
W. largely declares in his Voice of Wisdom, p. 33 That they that want
Infallibility are not true Ministers.

Besides, G. F. says, Their preaching is from Conjuration, that is not spoken
from the Mouth of the Lord -- All you that speak, and not from the Mouth of the
Lord are false Prophet^* see his Ans. to the West. Pet. p. 25. and Saul's
Errand, ^c. p. 7. And in Truths defense, p. 107. and News from the North, P. 1.
and other Books, they declare what themselves write and speak, To be from the
Mouth of the Lord. And also in Gr. Mist. p. 267. says, The Quakers a^e the only
Ministers of Christ. And E. Burrroughs says, p 3^8. 462. All that ever own God
and Salvation, shall own us -- We are of one Mind and one Soul.

But though I have sufficiently showed they are not of one mind and Soul, yet
here follows after more of their Temporizing Clashes, which they write suiting
the Times and their own Interest, viz.

Of Temporizing.
1. G. Fox to the Parliament of the Common Weal, etc. p. 8. 1659. says, Let All
those Abbey Lands (...) are given to the Priests, be given to the poor of the
Nation.

But facing about in 1686. W. P. in Preface to Persuasive to Moderation, says,
Far be it from me to Solicit any thing in Dimunition of the just Rights of the
Church of England; let her rest protected where she is.

E. Buroughs, p. 105. says, You are in the Witchcrafts who reeceive Commands
from without, from the Letter.

But to go round again, in 1675. p 36. Englands Interest, W P. says, we say
Holy writ is the declared Fundamental Law of Heaven.

Note, how W. P. confounds himself or deceives his Readers, or both, for in his
Rejoinder (as aforesaid) he takes up several pages to prove the Scripture
Corrupt and uncertain, so much sligating it that he terms it J. Faldo's
Uncertain Word of God. p. 39. and yet here calls it, The declared Fundamental
Law of Heaven.

3. E. Buroughs in An Epistle, 1661. Keep close to the Lords, and to the
measure of himself, made manifest in your own hearts; for unto THAT you were
directed to, in the beginning, and in it is your safety and preservation to the
end.

But afterward, W. P. controuls this plea of E. B. in his Brief Exam. p. 11.
saving,. The Enemy is at work to scatter the minds of F^einds, by that loose
plea, viz What have thou to do with me? Leave me to my freedom, and to the
Grace of God in my self, etc.

4. W. Smith's Primmer, p. 46. Give Honor to whom honor is due; But to a
proud, heady, high minded man, there is no honor due, Though he may be great
in the World, and in place to Rule.

But G F. in a time of need, could say, I honor ALL men, much more the Kings;
see G. F 's Trial, etc. p. 8. And G. F. in his Papers to the Presbyterians, p.
2. says, All Kings have sprung up in the Night, since the days of the Apostles,
among the Antichrists.

Note the harmony, Notwithstanding their saying, They are of one Mind and Soul.

5. E. Buroughs Advice to the Parliament, 1659. says, It was thorough
Ignorance that the People subjected to herriditary Government, or to the
Government standing in a single Person successively -- and our Nation has been
under the Bonds of Slavery in this respect.

But let us hear what contrary Doctrine G. F. preached, when Times were turned,
1664. If I could take any Oath at all (says he) I could take that Oath (viz.
the Oath of Allegiance, which Oath binds to the King, his heirs and Successors)
see his Trial, etc. Behold! what good can be expected from that People, whose
Leaders are such Temporizers! But Note, this last passage of E. Buroughs is
left out of his Works, Printed 1672.

6. Quakers Vindication, p. 3. by G. W and 24 more, 1693. given to the
Parliament, where they accuse F. Bugg of Justifying Cromwells Usurpation, which
they say was testified against by E. B. and others.

But pray hear how E. Buroughs testified against Cromwells Usurpation, p. 552.
The Lord gave thee [Oliver Cromwel] the Necks of Princes to tread upon, their
Dominions to inherit. And to the Kings party, he said, To All you called
Delinquents, Cavileers, Thus says the Lord, my Controversy is against you,
even my hand of Judgment is upon you already, and you are become cursed in all
your Hatchings -- and you and your Kings and Lordly Power, shall be enslaved by
the Devil, in the Pit of Darkness in everlasting Bondage, where he shall reign
your Lord and King for evermore, etc. Given under my hand, and sealed by the
Spirit of God, thorough E. Buroughs.

Note, this Passage was taken out of E. B 's Trumpet of the Lord p. 9. but left
out of his Works in the reprint. Surely they did not believe E. B. was so
moved, for that his Message was sealed by the Eternal God, else why did they
leave out this Notable Prophecy? Thus not only their Temporizing ^is seen, but
also the deceit and falsity of G. W. and his 24 Brethren, for pretencing, ^ea,
declaring to the Parliament, that E. B. Testified against the Usurpers, when
indeed it was the Kings party that he Testified against, and justified
Cromwells Rule. But as I have before noted, that they have mended, pieced and
painted G. F 's Journal, so it appears [in this respect] they have done the
same by E. Borough. Works, and others. Now because G. W. and his 24 Brethren
speak of others, as well as E B. that reprehended O. Cromwels Usurpation, let
us hear what G. Fox says in the case.

7. Counsel and Advice, etc. p 37. Let thy Soldiers go forth with a free
willing heart, that thou (Oliver Cromwell) may rock Nations as a Cradle.

And in his Papers to the Presbiterians, p. 9. he wrote against the King,
calling those Traitors against Christ, who desire an earthly King. And, in his
Papers to the Parliament, 1659. about Tithes, he bids them sell all the late
Kings Parks and his Rents, and give to the Impropriators.

But as soon as the King came in, viz. June the 5. 1660 they faced about again,
and published a Declaration, signed by G. F. and 12 more, where in p. 4. they
say, They Love, own and honor the King, etc. -- I could cite more but let
these suffice at this Time.

Concerning Papists.
A Caveat again Popery, p 37. Eng. Interest, etc p. 4. both by W. P. The Papal
Interest is a Combination against good Sense, Reason and Conscience. Whether in
case they could not be conformed to, they would allow a Toleration, were they
powerful? Whether in case they should say, Yes, we o^g^t to believe them,
since it is one of their most sacred Maxims, Not to keep faith with Heriticks,
etc.

But to go round again, Read p. 6. of The Pennsilvania Defense of the D. of
^uckinghams Book, And p. 22. of A Reply, etc. by G. C. (i. e Gulielmus Calamus
Anglica, William Penn) published after K. James came to the Crown, viz I must
tell him (i. e. the Church of England man) I cannot admire his Wisdom, Manners
or Justice in his Refl^ctions upon the Roman Catholics, after the Assurance of
so great an ONE has given him and his Friends, of their Security and Protection
-- One thing I must say, Roman Catholics have been Loyal in England and
Holland, etc. See more in the aforesaid Books to the same purpose

Now let us hear what some Quaker^ say in two Addresses they made to K James,
one i^ April, 1687. viz We Pray God to bless the King and his Royal Family,
etc. The other Address, in June, 1687. viz We cannot but with grateful hearts
both admire and acknowledge the Providence of God, that made the Kings
Retireing (into Scotland) give a happy Turn to his Affairs, to the defeating
and disappointing the Designs of his Enemies -- We do justly conceive our selves
obliged to praise God for his goodness in carrying him Thorough and over ALL
his Troubles.

Note, as affectionate as they were to K. James, they could not by their
Prayers help him in those Troubles that followed, nor did they by their Spirit
of Discerning tell him of it before hand (no more then other Professors) But
rather that he was Secure, and got thorough ALL his Troubles. But it appeared
they were grossly deceived therein.

What shall I say to my old Friends, but as one lately said, viz. ^Fr^t not at
Instruments, neither look so much at them, as at the Righteous Hand that is
turned against you. Those who once knew the way of the Lord, and afterward
gave way to a Spirit of deceit, Hypocrisy, Temporizing and Formality, such
must be laid open, and are more to b^ Testified against, than the very Heathen
or open Profane.

Thus Reader this Book helps thee to fight of many of their Sayings and
Unsayings, backward and forward, Contradictions, Confusions and Rounds, yea,
Round and Round again, Condemning, Confuting and Confounding themselves, and
one another, especially George Whitehead, George Fox and Will. Penn, chief
leading Men among the Quakers, as may be seen throughout this Book. Yet
notwithstanding all this, I know my old Friends so well, that I expect and
doubt not, but that they will have that stupendous Confidence, as to deny all
this, (or at least not confess it) and say, It Is false, and horrid Slanders,
etc. Though we read it, though we see it with our Eyes, and though we hear it
with our Ears, yet our Senses must all be deceived, and as in Quakers
Challenge, p. 3. The Quakers only are in the Truth, and NONE but They. What
else may I say! God in his Infinite Mercy open the Eyes of all sincere hearted
(though not so discerning, yet) well meaning Christians, and deliver them from
such strange Delusion, as he has in a good measure done for me, blessed be his
Name forever.

Postscript, by way of Question, To the Leaders of my Old Friends.
BEcause W. P. in his Rejoinder, p. 312. declares, That he and his Brethren
make it their business to CONTEND thorough all Difficulties to promote this
glorious Dispensation of Light in the World. Therefore if you will abide by
this, and not decline this Testimony too, but that you make a Reply to this
foregoing Treatise, pray let Lies, Wherewith S. Jenings state of the Case is
stored, see G. K's Answer.
Equivocations, Reviling and Sophestical Wrangling be no longer your Refuge in
the case, so much used by your Brother Ellwood against G. K. till several of
his own Brethren were ashamed of it. And if you expect God shall prosper you,
let that be condemned that is condemnable by his Truth, and no longer justify
all by the lump, as you have done formerly. And along with the rest, I desire
you give a plain honest Answer also to this Question, viz.

Why this following Doctrine, so frequently preached form^rly by ancient
Friends, is now let fall, and not preached by any of you, viz.

I the Light will overturn Nations, Kingdoms and gathered Churches, that will
not own me the Light in them. I will make you knew, that I the Light am the
true Eternal God, p. 1^. Lig^t and L^^e, etc. Again, News out of the North, p.
15. I am the same Door that ever was (says G. F.) the same Christ, to day,
yesterday, and forever, the Light is the Eye that sees it. Again, Quest. to
Professors, p 27. Does not the Name [Christ] belong ^o the whole Body, and to
every Member of the Body, as well as to the Head Again, News from the North,
say, I speak, the same Seed, which is Christ (says G. F.) and if the Seed
speak, which is Christ, be has no other Name. Again, Readiness Errand to Dama^cus
p. 7, 8. If Christ be in you, must ^e not say, I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life? -- And he that has the same Spirit that raised Jesus from the dead, is
Equal with God, viz. the holy Ghost, see great Mystry, p. 66, 127. To ^^e
short, I omit much more such Doctli^e from diverse others.

Now I say, seeing you have hitherto justified this as Gospel, and Christian
Doctrine in those who published it, why do you not continue to preach it, as
they did, seeing also it is the Faith or Belief of all you Preachers in general,
That when you preach or, pray, it is not you, but Christ in you that prays. I
prove this to be your Belief by these two Reasons,

First, You do never in your Meetings pray for Pardon or Forgiven^^ of Sin (Not
that I have heard in Twenty years due attendance) for seeing it is Christ in you
that prays, there is no need of it, he being without sin.

Secondly, You do not pray to Christ, because it being Christ in you that
prays, it is absurd for Christ to pray to himself.

But I Will take leave to tell you, (and prove it too, if need be) That you are
of a different Faith in these two things from the Apostles, Saints and Martyrs,
yea, your Faith or Principle herein is contrary to all the primitive Christians
in general; for the Scripture, Church History and Book of Martyrs show, that
then Religion led them to pray publicly for Pardon for their Sins, and some
even at the point of Death; and also both Apostles and other Christians
frequently prayed to Jesus Christ, as well as to God the Father.

Indeed your Presumption in this Antichristian Principle is to be lamented,
for when some of your Fellow Ministers have been guilty of Whoredoms,
Adulteries, etc. though not then openly known, yet these men, thus secretly
guilty, cannot stoop, no more than you, to pray for Pardon for their Sins, but
still keep to their common Form in Prayer; and this is a Truth known to more
than your selves. Now I ask you, Whether do you Believe it is Christ that prays
in these men too, as well as in you, who may not so be guilty? Pray answer in
Truth and Sincerity to this and the rest of the particulars, or other ways ^e
silent; out I have cause to believe you will do neither, but rather, as G. W.
has of late years done, in answering Books, as I have seen, where he has not
taken notice of scarce a twentieth part of a Book, out only send out something,
and call it an Answer, to Please your People, and that they may have something
to say, when people cry, where is the Answer to such of such a Book?

Now I sincerely profess, that I have done nothing herein but with an honest
design, not having wilfully or knowingly wronged either Books or Authors, in
any one passage; Therefore I propose this to you Preachers, who publicly
accuse us (that have lately printed) calling us, Apostates, Liars, and that we
have both abused you and your Friends Books (in falsely citing Passages out of
the same, and wronging their sense, and the like) to come forth to prove these
Charges in the face of the world, and if it be found that we have indeed
therein wronged you (Errors of the Press and other causual Mistakes excepted,
which are incident to all) you shall (in justice and equity) have public
Satisfaction. Come S Jenings, Come John Simcock, Come John Rodman, Juda Allen,
W. Gabitas, and all other our Accusers, appoint a public Meeting at
Philadelphia at a Months warning, by a few Lines under your hands, put at some
public places at Burlington and Philadelphia, and (giving me also under your
hand, that you intend no other and I promise in the behalf of my self and
Friends, to meet you, if God permit, provided it be in some public place where
all may hear how you prove your Charges; Come forth I say fairly to prove your
Charges, and no longer lie backbiting, belying and abusing of us in your own
Meeting Houses, as you do, where you will give none leave to answer you.

But I must tell you ^lainly, I know you so well that I expect no such fair
dealing at your hands.

Therefore I Will give the world a Sign, by which they may know that you do not
only abuse, belly and Charge us falsl^ in this case, But also, that your own
Consciences tells you that you are guilty of so doing. The Sign is this; If you
know and are conscious to your selves that you have and do so belly us, etc.
then you will not come forth, according to this Proposition; But if you find you
can get the least advantage of us, by out-witting or otherways wording the
matter (though with never so much falsity) Then you will come forth, and be glad I
give you this opportunity. And by this SIGN shall you be Proved. Thus my
Conscience bears witness, that I am clear of the guilt of your charge,
Therefore (as says W. P.) with Religious boldness, ^ subscribe

your Friend, Daniel Le^ds.

A COPY of A LETTER Sent to the Author by a Person of Note, whose (...) Name is
left out, because printed without his Knowledge.
Esteemed Friend D. L.
I Have perused thy Book, entitled, News of a Trumpet sounding in the
Wilderness^ etc. in which thou have discovered and laid open the Mystery of
Iniquity more clearly than I have seen done by any other. And for thy labor
and pain^ therein, I pray God of his Bounty to reward thee, and also protect
thee from the cruel Effects of the Envy of those People therein concerned, who
being Potent round about thee, thou can expe^t no other Protection, Though
perhaps the thoughts of the sudden stop that the Philadelphia Quakers met
with, when they were so hot at persecuting G. K. and his Friends, may in some
degree check them, and hinder them from doing what otherwise they would Since I
was with thee at Burlington in 16^2. I have thought God Almighty was then
fitting thee for some purpose, because of the sudden and Miraculous Recovery,
in great part of thy Speech, from that extreme ^mpediment of Stammering, which
thou had when I was with thee two years before; and I remember I heard ^hee
then say thou had it from a Child: I call it Miraculous, because I have known
many to have such Impediments, but never before did I know any to loose it, and
Recover their Speech again.

The current of great part of thy Book excellently confirms my Observation of
the Quakers, viz. That their Religion really consists in a cross Method to all
other Societies of Christians that ever were in being; For such things as are
indeed Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, they account Nicities,
Circumstantials and Smaller matters, and care not how confusedly they preach
them. But what are really Circumstantials or smaller matters, as Tithe, M^^t.
etc. (and not of necessity for a Christian practice) they make the Fundamentals
of their Religion. And yet, as thou have noted, they are Hypocritical in the
practice of most of those things too, as might also be instanced in diverse
other things; I will name two.

First, They make it matter of conscience not to sing David's Psalms, and yet
they use another way of singing in their Meetings, and make a great noise with
it too, especially when any fluent or thundering Preacher comes amongst them;
yea, many of them have written in Posie or Rhymes, which is to he sung: and as
I remember W. Baily and J Coal call some Rhimes that they have written by the
Name of Songs, so that it seems People may sing the Quakers Writings, but not
David's, by their allowance.

2dly, They pretend Conscience not to Honor or Respect their Superiors, by
putting off the Hat, but they will bow the Body and pray what is the difference?
I take bowing the Body to be a greater Respect than doffing the Hat. But though
they cannot doff the Hat to others, yet those Quakers who are wealthy that live
in great Towns and Cities in England, love Hat Honor so well, that they cause
their Apprentices to doff their Hats and stand bear headed before them; this
their Conscience will allow.

Again, as to Fighting, thou has well noted their Hypocrisy and wheeling and
turning about both in their Writings, and also in their Actions about Delaware
River. But I wonder how thou came to neglect that notable Instance of my old
Friend and Acquaintance Walter Clark, an ancient Preacher, now Governor of
Rhode Island, who has given several Commissions to Masters of Vessels and
Privateers to sight the French, etc. to defend which and his Commissionating
the Officers of the Train-bands under his Government, (and sometimes heading
the said Trainbands himself on his lofty prancing Horse, and Souldier-like,
caused the Inhabitants to sign the Association on the head of the Drum) brings
this Scripture for his Defense, Ephesians 6 12. We wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Worldly
Governors, etc.

Thus by little and little, Inch by Inch they come round and can do that which
at another time is against their tender Consciences; yet I question whether
ever they will be able to wrestle down the worldly Governors with only little
Guns, till they get great ones; as some of them ^o already maintain in Ships,
notwithstanding their Father G Fox his Paper to the contrary. But do they think
the world does not see their Hypocrisy in this and many other things? Yea
sure, and laughs at them too.

My Friend, I perceive thee not willing to enlarge, else I could have assisted
thee with many things out of Books, which I suppose never came to thy sight,
and especially out of the Books of G Fox, who was the first setter up of their
Religion, as W. P. declares in his Preface to G. F 's Journal; But methinks the
world cannot but see W. P turned Painter in that Preface; for he there declares
the outward Vocation of G F. to be a Shepherd, and yet it is well known he was a
Shoemaker; But it is obs^rvable, that in L^^e 2. we find, that the Shepherds
were the first that p^eached Christ, the worlds Savior; so G F. was the first
that preached the Quakers Christ, therefore it is c^n^ment he be recorded a
Shepherd t^o, though in truth he was a Shoe maker. -- But in (...) W Penns
Preface, nor any where in the J^^^n can I find, that One Remarkable ^assage of
G F 's having the Midwife so ^ong attending on his Wife, expecting her delivery
of some Child of Wonder (she being near 59 years of Age) but at last brought
forth no Child, and the Midwife dismissed No, they thought it not convenient to
insert this, though so eminent a Passage; for it would be enough to give the
lie to his pretended Spirit of Discerning

But as for G. Fox Books, I dare engage, the Quakers will never print a
Collection of them; for there such a mess of Confusion as the World never saw
the like, nor can all their art of Mending, Patching and Pa^nting ever hide it.

I wish thou had enlarged upon the Quakers exalting their own Sufferings
above the Sufferings of Christ, and his Apostles, and Martyrs, viz. on that
Doctrine that says, The Sufferings of the People of God called Quakers) in this
Age, is greater ^ufferings, and more Unjust then in the days of Christ, or of
the Apostles, or in any time since: Queen Marys days brought not forth a
Suff^ring more Cruel -- What "was done to Christ, or the Apostles was chiefly
done by a Law, and in great part" by the due Execution of a Law; see E.
Buroughs Works, p. 273.

And though this was Reprinted by the Quakers in 16^2. and also lately
justified by the 24 London Quakers, yet I affirm it to be a grand vainglorious
Error and wicked Lie For the Sufferings of all the Saints are not to be
compared with the Sufferings of the ever blessed Jesus. And yet the Quakers
Sufferings were neither so Great, so Cruel, nor so Unjust, as were the
Sufferings of the Apostles or Martyrs; for not one Quaker had then been put to
death, viz. in 1657. when that Doctrine was first published. And let the
Quakers show by what Law the Apostles and Martyrs Suffered so many various
sorts of Cruel Deaths, by those Bloody Tyrants and how the Law was duly
executed on them, or forever be ashamed of this vain B^ast, which has no
parrellel among Protestants. Besides, they come in as Advocates, and plead for
all those Tyrants, persecuting Papists, and Cruel Irish, that Murdered so many
Thousands for Christ's sake, saying but about six Lines off, and herein it
appears the Sufferings to be more Unjust, because what the Persecutors of Old
did they did by a Law, and by the due Execution of a Law, etc.

But seeing these People have the Impudence to impose such things on the World,
in their Doctrine, it is no wonder that their Books of Controversy are so stuffed
with gross Lies, grand Forgeries, wicked Perversions, false Insinuations, and
shameful Calumnies, as are the late Books of S. Jenings, T. Ellwood The
Peningtons, G. Whitehead, C. Pusey and others I suppose thou have seen the
Answers to them by G K. etc where^n these things are made appear. But I must
take leave. Only this;

I cannot but smile to see how like men driven to their last shifts, they
thrust in the Revol^tion of Souls into the present Controversy, though it be
no part of the Controversy; No, they can scarce write a Book, but in that must
go at one end or other on'^; and this they do, thinking to frig^t ignorant
People from having any converse with G. K or as S. Fisher tells the Priests, It
may serve to frighten poor Fools; though they have made it a worn Thread bare
story, by so often printing it in their Books.

But I am considering where they will now shelter themselves; for they have all
along hitherto been battering at G. K. for his Contradictions and
Inconsistencies between his former and late Books; and though they have done in
this just as S. Fisher says of those lewd Women who being most Where, call
Whore first; yet now G. K. has cut down this Tree, under which they have all
along sheltered themselves; for he has now not only acknowledged, but also
Corrected his own Errors in Print. Now what remains, is for them to do the
^ike, or else the very World will soon discern them as dry as the Fig Tree
which our Savior cursed. Farewell.

FINIS.

