THE GREAT DAY OF JUDGMENT, Handled In a SERMON Preached at the Assizes at
New-Bristol. October. 7. 1687.

By the Reverend and Learned SAMVEL LEE. M. A. sometimes Fellow of Wadham
College in Oxon.

Accompanied With, Preparatory Meditations, (...) THE DAY OF JUDGMENT By Mr.
COTTON-MATHER.

Boston in New England. Printed by Bartholomew Green, for Nicholas Buttolph, at
the Corner of Gutteridg's Coffee-House* 1692. Price Bound 1 s.

THE EPISTLE To the Worthy and Pious Auditory; before whom this Subject was
treated upon. Grace and Peace in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Whereas by the Call and Invitation of some of your very much Honored and
Respected Society, ^his Serious, Summons to the great day of Judgment; was
proclaimed in your Ears, at Bristol, near Mount-Hope in New England, at the
Ass^ze, ^here hold, on Friday October. 7. ^687. Being also, moved to the
Publication thereof, I do here humbly present it under divine Protection and
Blessing to your Candid. Acceptance and Defense, who sometime Composed the
quire of a most attentive, benign and so^emn Audience in the time of its
delivery.

Honorable and Beloved, As these Papers tend (with your kind leave) to^re
inkindle the the memorial of that days Soul awakening Subject: so let me ( I
pray in this proem) beg you to ruminate on a saying of an Em^nent Divine at
Bury a Town of great note in Suffolk of old England [That Sermons are never
done, Mr. Edmund Calany S^n.
till they are Done] and let me add, If never Done, the hearers are undone for
ever. Especially in such weighty and momentous Points as these, about the
formidable, day of Judgment.

The tears of Auditors, said Jerome (as J.M.) are the Jewels of Preachers; and
if Sincere, Presage a Crown of Eternal joys to both. There are among many
others in Divinity, three illustrious Doctrines, (1.) Justification by Faith in
Christ alone. (2.) Sanctification by the Spirit. (3.) Resurrection to Glory.
In whose Compass and Bosom was our present Subject about the Universal
Judgment. As to which, Give me leave to present three things, and Close with
the Apostolical Prayer.

Eternal State, while yet in the State of this Life. Matter not the day or
Censures of man's Judgment. They Will Fluctuate in their love as the wind of their
Passions, 1 Cor. 4 3
Interests and Envious or false informations tur^s the fane of their
Constructions: if they are not both wise and godly. And sometimes hastily Carp
your innocence as if they had forgotten Pl^tarch and Senecas memorials about
natures gift of two Ears before they determine matters in question: Gal. 6.1.
not pondering as they ought, in the Spirit of meekness the many Tentations the
best of men are incident to, Tim. 3.2,
their own freq^ent infirmities and others proud and invidious detractions and
your own virtuous and Slander-Shaming Apologies. Taking little heed to the
Fifteenth Psalm, and how unworthily these blast others usefulness and lay up
Scourges for their own Consciences in the day when God shall visit them and
give their abused Friends, Exodus 32.34.
the greatest favor at last, Prove. 18.^^, 38.23.
when his Neighbor Searches him out; and then thy Brothers Mote may swell to a
Beam in thine eye, by the rubbing of others inflamed Censures upon thee, when
thy turn comes We all need Contrition, Confession, and Pardon.

Peace with God betimes and Expedite it. The ^ands of times hour Glass never
stop, and are more precious then the golden ones of Tagus. Do this work
seasonably, sincerely, and speedily, to frustrate the trouble of the New
Repentance and prevent the divine Judgment. Delay not; lest Tardy neglect; 2
Cor. 11.31, 3^.
quicken Goul-Confounding horrors, and Sudden wracks of Conscience will draw
out the funeral-Song of Epimetheus, O non putaram, Prove. 2^.19.
or that of the Fool in Solomon. Was I not in jest? and cry out in earnest
concerning laughter, Eccl. 2.2. Eccl. 9.6.
that it is mad, and of mirth What does it? but as the Crackling of thorns
under a Pot: whose Prickles fly in his Eyes, and leave him in utter darkness,
wringing his hands in the blood of his heart, and streaming out bitter groans,
that he did not think the Evening Shadows were so nigh. O Sirs, this tremendous
work cries aloud for the greatest deliberation, the swiftest Execution, and
perseverance without end. O Blessed Lord, help us out of the woeful Tentations
and intricate Labyrinths of delay, Aesop.
lest when Death comes indeed, as in the ancient Apologue, it prove an other
guess work than most are now aware of; You Will stand in need of more then all
your Graces, Experiences, Reliances and Restaurations out of deep and dark
desertions. Yea and all little Enough and will prove scarce able to list you
out of the dungeon of terror: unless the gracious Supplies of the Spirit come
in upon a Spring tide from Heaven, and list up the Ark of Conscience above the
flood gates and Rocks of Confusion.

Labor to provide against the formidable Thunders of Death, that the
Sun-shines of the Evidences of glory may brighten the dark passages of the
Grave. The beauty of grace first darted into thy Breast, in a beam from the Eye
of the Electing Love of God, and shall never cease the shining and warming
influences till like new Stars that at last Concenter all their motions in the
Sun: so shall the rays of thy joys be inbosomed in the Eternal Love of God.
When thou have done this work, John 6.19*
which the Father has given thee to do: then that TO PHOBEROTATON, Aristotle's
grand King of Ter^ers shall sling down his Crown with amazement at the foot of
Christ: Heb. 3.14^ 1* Cor. 15^ 5^, 57.
and that Dragon, who has the power of death shall himself be slung to Death
by the Cross of Christ, first upon his illustrious Tomb at Mount Golgotha; or
like the standard of Constantine, carrying TO SEMEION, the Labarum or sign of
the Son of man, Mat. 34*3
set upon the backbone of the Serpent, as you may see it on the Reverse of
that Emperors Coin. Spelman. Aspilogi^. P. 20 Ed. Lo^d. 1654 cu, uptem.
Yea and a^^ holy Christians are like the Roman Draconiseri, the Dragoniers of
the ancient Empire, carrying the Exuviae or case of the old Serpent in triumph,
and yielding up their Spirits into the hands of a most faithful Creator: who
once formed us, and will shortly as faithfully Redeem us out of the dust: and
inform us a new with the same Immortal Souls to inherit the same Body in a
State of Immortality, to Coinhabit the Temple of Heaven in an immortal State of
Glory, ever beginning and never ending* When the day of the last Redemption,
that great day of the feast, when the ruddy morning shall Climb the Eastern
hills of Mount Olivet with its pleasant Blushes to cure all the dark Solitudes
and Sollicitudes of this Valley of Immortal Souls, by the Lord Jesus Christ;
before whom they Appear when their Bodies here are by Death made ^ntenantable;
and from whom they ^hen Receive Order, Either to be Admitted among the Spirits
of Just men made perfect, or to be Reserved in Darkness unto the Judgment of
the Great Day. That Separate Souls thus Exist ^n an Invisible World, is a thing
whereof I know some, who have such pal^able Evidences, that were the Scrip^ures
wholly Silent, which Blessed by God, they are not, about it, yet they could no
more Qustion it, than they Question their own Existence in the World. But there
is a more General Work of this kind, shortly to be done, ^n a Vast Assembly of
all mankind, unto that end Summoned by the Mighty God, and called from the
Rising of the Sun unto the Setting thereof. The Souls of men shall reassume a
fit Portion of the Dust, whereunto they were formerly United, by the Almighty
God fetched out of the Various matter whereinto it has been Dissolved and
Dispersed, but now become as were the Keel, where upon shall be Buil^
Incorruptible Bodies: and some that shall then be found alive shall by (...)
Translation, have their Bodies made i^ a like manner Spiritual. In their Bodies
thus Raised, and Changed, they shall stand before a Tribunal of our Lord Jesus,
descended from the Heavens into our Atmosphere; and after a^ Exact Examination
of their Behaviors While God was upon Earth Trying o^ them, they shall have
One of these two Sentences pronounced upon them Either, Come, ye Blessed,
Inherit the Kingdom; Or, Depart, ye Cursed, into Everlasting Fire; Which will
be accordingly Executed on them. Such (...) Day of Judgment is there to come
upon the World! Amen! Come; Lord Jesus, come quickly. Indeed, about the
Circumstances of this most Illustriou^ Day, it is more easy than lawful for us to
Enquire into such things as w^ are not yet Able to Answer; nor ha^ the Lord
Indulged our Curious and Critical Enquiries after Particularities which He has
not Revealed. It seem Revealed* That this Last Day, will be a Long Day; It will
be a Day of ^ublick Hearing, and all Doings of all people must be called out;

Cunctaque Cunctorum Cunctis Arcana patebunt, So that things will not be
Hastily ^uddled, and Suddenly Shuffled over. ^ea, It seems, Revealed, That the
^orning of This famous Day, will ^ake up at least a Thousand Years, wherein our
Lord will be managing His Davidical Kingdom, with a New Heaven and a New Earth
wherein shall ^well Righteousness, and Reigning before His Ancient People
Gloriously; at the Close whereof it seems to some that* The Rest of the Dead
Live again* and all t^^ Dead Small and Great stand before God. The Hour, when
it shall be Commenced, and ^he Spot, where it shall be Che^fly managed, seem
not Revealed; nor a thousand things more, that concern the proceedings of the
Day. But whatever may be yet Unrevealed, it is abundantly Plain and Sure unto
us, That the Son of man shall come in the Glory of His Father, with His Angels,
and then, He shall Reward every man According to hi^ Works. This is Revealed,
and it i^ a Damnable Thing to Cherish an^ Doubt of This, That we must a^l
appea^ before the Judgment Seat of the Lord Jesus Christ.

S. 3. The Judgment of the Great Day Or, a Day, wherein all men shall b^ Raised
and Changed into a State o^ Immortality, and appear before the So^ of Man
within the Bounds of our Air to be Judged according unto wha^ they Did, before
they Dy^d; This is (...) thing which the People of God in al^ ^ges, have given
their Assent unto Even in Old Times, long before the Flood, the Church of God,
made this a^ Article of their Creed. We have some short Notes of what was
delivered by the Venerable Enoch about it, so long ago* in Jude 14. Behold ^he
Lord comes, to Execute Judgmen^ upon all. Yea, This was a main Controversy,
between the Antediluvia^ Saints, and the Impious, Impure Ge^^^^tion of.
Atheists, then upon the Stage. The Godly did Assert, There ^ali be a Day of
Judgment, but the pro^ne did with Hard Speeches, Deride and ^xplode the Belief
of that awful Truth* We read in Genesis 4.8. Cain spoke to Abel his Brother; the
Hebrew Bibles ^sually leave a Blank at the end of his clause; and the ancient
Jewish ^argum^, presume to put in the Dis^urse which they had; they say, that
^he Quarrel between Cain and Abel ^as upon this point; Abel said, There (...)
to be a Day of Judgment, and there is Judge, and there shall be another World*
and the Godly shall be Rewarded, and the Wicked Pun^shed. But Cain said, There,
(...) no such Thing; and as the Targum ^f I. Ben. Vzziel adds, Et Propter ha^um
Rerum Causam Contendebant Super^acies Agri. And methinks, the A^ostle in the
Beginning of his Eleventh* ^hapter to the Hebrews, may seem to. ^ountenance
this Tradition. It seems* ^s if Abraham also, saw this Day a^r off; inasmuch as
there are those. ^ho put his Plea for Sudom, into this* ^nglish, in Genesis 18.25.
W^ll not the Judge* (...) all the Earth, Execute: Judgment, (...) q d. Lord,
Thou do intend hereafter, to appear for a Judgment upon a^ the World, in such
Flames of Devouring Fire as thou art now going to destroy this miserable Place
withal; b^ Entreated therefore to spare these Towns, until that Revolution come
Indeed all Christians have always Agreed in this Acknowledgment, long before,
as well as ever since the Daye^ of Job, I know that my Redeemer Lives and that
He shall: stand at the Eatte^ Day upon the Earth; and though Worms Destroy this
Body, yet in my Flest I shall see God. And even in that Confession of Faith,
which the Jews themselves at this Day embrace, their Eleventh Fundamental
Article is, the Eternal Judgment.

To what the People of God; have thus Received as the Faith delivered unto the
Saints, they have had the Scriptures of God, most abundantly given their
Infallible Testimony. There is hardly any one part of the Old Testament, which
has not Considerable Glances a^ the Day of Judgment; But in the New ^estament,
it is yet more plentifully insisted on. Very many of the Sermons Preached by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and all the Letters written by His A^^stles, do set the
Day of Judgment before our Eyes. Yea, not only the Approach, but also the
Process of this wonderful Day, is diverse times Expressed in these Lively
Oracles. The Holy Spirit of God, has Chosen to make one of the East Clauses in
the Bible, an Admonition unto us here^bout; the very last Lines of the last
^dvice we have had from Heaven, are ^o this purpose, The Lord Jesus Christ*
will shortly come to Judge the World. And with the Assertions of Scripture,
^oncerning this matter, the Apostle in (...) certain place tells us, the
Accusing^ and the Excusing^s of Conscience, do join their Testimony thereunto
(...). The Ver^ict of Conscience upon the Sinner is* ^s Tertallian calls it;
Futur^ Judici^ Prejudicium; a presage of a future ^udgment. It is true, the Dim
Rus^ ^a^ale, which the Heathen had in their Notions about the Burning and the
^udging of the World, might be much ^ighted, at the Lamp of the Israe^ (...)
Sanctuary. But yet mere. Natural Conscience, did use to warn the Rudest Pagans,
of a Judgment, which God will at Last bring mankind into. Hence Felix the
Governor, before Paul the Prisoner, Trembles at the Tidings of a Judgment to
come; he had a Preacher in his Bosom; that gave him a terrible Premo^ition of
it. The very proceedings of the Last Judgment are antedated in our Consciences;
and the Triumphs of Conscience upon our Well-doing, the Horrors of Conscience
upon our Wickedness, the Inferences of Conscience from the Intricate Things
every Day happening in the World, are so many most penetrating Intimations of
that Judgment, wherein we are to stand before the Lord. Now the certainty of
that Notable Day, being a thing as clear and sure as Day it self, it becomes us
to silence all the Cavils of Carnal Reason, against any o^ its Unfathomable
Circumstances, by a^ Faith acquiescing in this Assurance of it, Thus says the
Lord. Indeed, wha^ Paul says, about the first of the Transactions belonging to
this Day of the Lord, may I say about the whole Af^yr of the Day, Why should it
be Thought (...) thing Incredible with you? All the Cavils which our Unbelief
ca^^ make against this Word of God, are Suffici^atly and Eternally taken off,
with Demanding, Is any thing too hard for ^e Lord? But some of the Cavils, that
^ave seemed Specious, will upon Second Thoughts be found so Absurd, that ^ven
Common sense it self would hiss ^t them. Such is that Objection, Where will
there be room for such a Vast Multitude as Adam, with all his Chil^ren? The
whole surface of the Earth ^ould not hold them all? Ridiculous Ex^eption! Allow
that this World should ^ast no less than Ten-Thousand Years, which it will not;
Allow that there ^re at once alive a Thousand Millions of men, which there are
not; Allow all ^hese to march off every Fifty years, with a New Generation
rising up in their stead; and allow each of these ^ndividuals a place Five foot
Square to ^tand upon. I think these are Fair Al^owances. I would now pray the
Ob^ector, if he have any skill at Arithmetic, to Compute, Whether a Spot of
Ground, much less than England, which contains perhaps about Thirty M^llions of
Acres, but about a Thousandth Part of the Terraqueous Glob, and about the Three
Hundred thirty third part of the Habitable Earth, would not hold them all. I
say then, we have something else to do, than to Cavil, the unexceptionable
Doctrine of the Last Judgment; it is our Interest and Business to Improve it,
with deep Impressions thereof upon our Souls.

S. 4. Of such an Aspect are all Things in the Day of Judgment, as that the
Apostle might well call it, The Terror of the Lord. But me thinks; there is
nothing that gives more Dread unto a Soul awakened out of Sinful Slumbers, than
that ETERNITY, wherein this Day Expires; that Eternal Issue, that Eternal
Event, which depends upon the Day. The last Judgment fixes the Children of men,
like so many Rocks, in the Ocean of Eternity. Men will then be Immortalized;
and their State of Weal or W^^, will be so inwrought into the very Beings of
them, that Immortal Things ^ay as easily cease to Be, as for a ^ighteous or
Wicked man to pass unto another State, than what he is ^hen Confirmed in. It Is a
Passage in that Memorable and Perhaps Historical ^arable, which decribes the
State of ^en, in the other World, that after ^his Day, men have, A Great Guilf
^^xed, unto them; there is by the De^ree of God, such a Vast Pit, about the
Children of men, that they cannot pas^ put of the State wherein they are: The
Nature of things will then require, that they be Unalterable; the Children of
men, will then be most Immediately Siezed, either by the Goodness or by the
justice of God; and because our God Himself Changes not, therefore the state of
men becomes then Unchangeable; nor will it stand with the Wisdom of the most
High, to alter the Sentence ^hen Pronounced about the State of Weal or Woe,
which will then belong unto us. At the Day of Judgment, all Righteous men shall
be adjudg'd unto a State of Eternal Happiness. It Is a Life Eternal, it is an
Eternal Salvation it is an Eternal Inheritance, it is an Everlasting Habitation,
and they are Plea^ sures for ever more, of which the Believer shall be made
Partaker. Afte^ he has been in the mansions of the Blessed, as many Millions
of Ages a^ there are Sunbeams in the Universe^ he will still continue there.
The stately Pillars in Solomon's Temple, were thence removed; but the Believe^
shall now become a Pillar in the Temple of his God; from whence he shall no
sooner go out, than the Temple i^ self ^^all Tumble down. A Deyo^^ Person at a
^eas^, said well, In Heaven there is Good Cheer, and Goo^ Company; and so there
is here: but in Heaven there is no Taking away. The ^^^^estial Satisfactions of
the Believer, ^^ll never be disquieted with such a Thought as this, At the Long
run, these things will have an end. God will not Repent of the Love which He
has freely set upon him ^^nor will Christ ever Suffer one of His own Members to
be Plucked away. But at the Day of Judgment, all Wicked men shall be adjudg'd
unto a State of Eternal Mi^ry. It Is a Worm which Dies not, and (...) Fire which
is not Quenched, where^ithal the Sinner shall be Cruciated; (...) is an Eternal
Damnation, and it is (...) Everlasting Destruction. Suppose an ^eap of as many
Little Poppey-seeds, (...) according to the old Ptolemaick ^ystem, would fill
the whole Machin ^f the World, and no more than one ^f them in a Thousand years
fetched ^way, but the Sinner in Anguish till ^he heap were all wasted so;
behold, and be amazed! All this Long while ^ould be but as a Drop to the Ocean,
^ompar'd with that, Forever! that ^orrible Forever! whereto the Tor^ents of the
Damned shall be Length^ned. Fifty two Ciphers, and One Fi^urt at the Head of
them, would Com^rehend, as the Learned and Noble, ^tto de Guerick affirms it,
the Num^er of the Little Poppey-seeds in the prodigious Heap, newly mentioned;
But I say then, suppose a Scroll as ^arge as the Starry Heaven it self, all
^illed with Figures of Nine; and yet ^o many Myriads of Ages, as would be
therein deciphered, are Nothing to that Endless Duration, which the Torments of
the Damned shall be made Exquisite withal. It may be said unto the sinner, Are
not thine Iniquities Infinite? A Sin Committed against an Infinite God,
Exposes, a man unto an Infinite Wrath. The sinner makes himself a prey to an
Infinite Vengeance; and the Exercises of that Vengeance must be Infinite, or
they bear no Proportion to the Desert of the sinner; now, they cannot be
Infinite for the Degree of them: of such the sinner would be Incapable; so
then, they must be Infinite for the Durance of them; they must abide World
without End. Lord, what Rocks are our Hearts, that they do no more Tremble at
the Fore-thoughts of such an ETERNAL JUDGMENT.

S. 5. To be Seriously, Constantly, Vigorously Preparing for the Day of
Judgment, is indeed, The thing which our Hand finds to Do; and, O that we may
to it with our Might! Now it is our Cordial Closure with the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Consent of our Souls to the Gospel-way of Salvation, by Him, in the New
Covenant Exhibited, which is the Preparation, whereby alone, we may be Ready
for the Terrible Day. It was the study and the Desire of the Apostle, O that I
may be found in Him! We are to give out selves unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as
unto our Prophet, and our Priest, and our King for ever; and now before Him,
Judge our selves, for all our Sins, from which we would have Him to save us.
Our Judge will then become our Friend; and we shall be safe in the Day, that
shall Burn like an Oven, and Consume all the Wicked of the Earth. When the
Watery Flood, overwhelmed the old World, O how many Wishes had people then,
for, An Ark! An Ark! to Shelter them? At the Day of Judgment there will be,
what the Ancients called, a Dlluvium Ignis, or, Fiery Flood, upon the World;
and O what a rate, will, A Christ! A Christ! be then Esteemed at? May we Now
make sure of Him, by Faith in Him! If once that were done, we might, Rejoice
before the Lord, for He comes, He comes to Judge the Earth. Suppose that before
to Morrow Morning, the Lord Jesus Christ should set the World on a Light Fire,
and Melt the Pillars of Heaven, with the Brightness of His Appearing; Suppose
that we should, awaking at the next Midnight, hear such fearful and rattling
Thunder claps, and see such hideous slashes of Lightning, as made Mount Sinai
shake at the Giving of the Law; yet our Hearts might even Leap with Joy within
us, at it, as John did within his Mother, when Jesus came into the room. Only,
when That is done, we are to Remember, that our Faith will have this Happy
Symptom, to Justify it, That it will cause us to Abound in the Works of the
Lord. May we then by a Spirit of Foresight Consider, how Comfortable in the
Day of Judgment it will be unto us, to Look back and say, I once made it my
Care, to be every Day, all the Day long at Work for God; And, When the Lord put
His Talents into my Hands, I husbanded them unto the best Advantage that I
could; and* Here can I in this Great Assembly, point at Multitudes of Persons,
to whom I was not Unserviceable, when I had my Opportunities! And may we Do
Accordingly. There will be a Day of Judgment; and the Plain Deduction from it
is, What manner of Persons, ought we to be, in all Holy Conversation, and
Godliness!

S. 6. It Is to be added, That some of the most hopeful Preparations for the Day
of Judgment, would be attained in our Solemn Anticipations of that most Great
and Notable Day of the Lord. Let us before hand Act over the Day of Judgment;
not in a Play, Like those Germans, who turned the parable of the Virgins into a
Comedy, whereat a Prince then present, fell into an Astonishment that
immediately ended his Days; but by Seriously bringing our selves Now to such
Trials as will then be passed upon us. It Is among the Oracles of God, in 1 Cor.
11.31. If we would Judge our selves, we should not be Judged; and surely, if we
would now proceed Against our selves, with a most Exact, and Humble Judgment
upon our own Miscarriages, it would be the way for us to stand, in the Day when
the Lord shall Mark Iniquities. If we are not Christians, of Lean Souls within
us, we sometimes do set a part our Days, for Fasting with Prayer before the
lord; and thus we do sometimes more particularly, when we are Perfuming of our
selves for our Approches to the S^pper of the Great King; now, let such Days,
be so many little Days of Judgment with us all. On such a Day, let us Examine
our selves by all the Ten Commandments of our God, and among other Things, Let
us be Inquisitive,

I. Have I not Grievously Forgotten the God that made me? And given unto the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, the Homage, which is due to Him alone? Or let
Creatures have the Affection, the Obedience, and the Dependence, which He alone
may lay claim unto? II. Have I not shamefully Neglected the Institu^ions
wherein the Lord Jesus Christ has taught me to mentain Communion with Him? And
Humoured the Superstitions of a Vains Conversation? III. Have I not
Irreverently Treated the Names, A^tributes, Words, Work^, and Ordinances,
whereby the Almighty God makes Himself known unto us? And been without awful
Apprehensions of His Majesty, under His Various Dispensations? IV. Have I not
been Carnal, Careless, Weary, in the Ordinary Sabbaths of God? and been
Indisposed unto the Extraordinary ones? V. Have I not been Perverse and Haughty
toward my Superiors; Unkind and Foolish toward my Inferiors? Envious
toward my Equals? and miserably Selfish in my Conduct of my self? VI. Have I
not impaired my own Health by Intemperancies? or been toward others,
Passionate, Revengeful, and Contentious? VII. Have I not been Unchaste, in my
Acts, my Thoughts, my Words? or been a Companion of the Fools that are so?
VIII. Have I not by Fraud or Force wronged my Neighbor? nor been too Prodigal
when I should not have spent; but when I should have spent, then too Niggardly?
IX. Have I not uttered, or fomented, what has been Contrary unto Truth? nor
given Countenance to a False Report? X. Have I not been Discontent with my own
Condition? or, harbored in my Heart a Roving and a Craving Lust, after an
undue Alteration of it? XI. Have not I despised the Offers of the Lord Jesus in
the New Covenant, and the Wonderful Provision therein made for Unhappy Sinners?
And permitted my Earthly Affayrs to keep me at a Distance from the Lord
Redeemer, who has been Waiting to give me, Repentance and Remission of Sins?
XII. Is not the Fountain of all these Bitter and Cursed Streams, the Corrupt
Nature which I have derived from my first Parents; a Nature, filled with a
depraved Prejudice against what is, Holy, and Just, and Good?
Upon the Discovery of our Guilt in These, and such Articles, Let us now Judge
our selves as Worthy of Everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord.
And if the Judgment, which we now pass upon our selves, be attended with the
Self Abhorrencies, and Self-Condemnations, and New-Resolutions, of a true
Repentance, it will Prevent our coming under the like Judgment on the Day of
our Appearance before the most High Tribunal. But indeed, the Evening of Every
Day, is also to be reckoned a fit Opportunity for us, to call our selves unto
an Account about our whole Behaviors in the Day; It becomes us with
Self-judging Hearts, every Night before we Sleep, to make a Process, like what
would be in the Day of Judgment; and this as not knowing, but that before we
Wake out of that Sleep, a Come away to Judgment! may Surprise us. Nightly
Recollections have been Commended by Sober Pagans, and should not be Omitted by
Pious Christians: but, when we have Considered, What has been Gods Providence
toward my self in the foregoing Day? We may do well also to Consider, What
has been my Behavior toward God, in the Day? We may now particularly take an
Account,

Q. 1. Have I Lived this Day, under a Deep sense of Mortality and Eternity?

Q. 2. Have I Devoutly Read the Word of God this Day; and Seriously sought the
Face of God, both in my Retirement, and with my Family?

Q. 3. Have I had many Ejaculations this Day, both in a way of Petition, and in
a way of Thanksgiving unto God?

Q. 4 Have I had most affectionate Meditations upon Heavenly Things this Day;
and have I made Earthly Things to occasion some of my Profitable Reflections?

Q. 5. Have I been careful of my Discourse this Day, and Spoken with a Tongue
B^idled by the Fear of the Lord?

Q. 6. Have I been Diligent in my Calling this Day, and avoided all Needless
Expense of my Precious and Golden, Minutes, in Diversions?

Q 7. Have I this Day Endeavored all Usefulness unto those to whom I am
Related, or with whom I have been Concerned?

Q. 8. Have I this Day Control^'d and Conquered my Master Sin? and has my
Watchfulness issued in my Victory over my own Iniquity?

Q. 9 Am I in a fit State and Frame to appear before the Judgment Seat of God,
if I should before To Morrow Mornning be Summoned thereunto? And therefore, Do
I still choose the Great God as my best Good, and my last End: and the Lord
Jesus Christ, as my Prophet, my Priest, my King? And is it my Desire to be
Employed as a Witness for His Truths and Ways for ever?

Did we not let any Day pass us without such Representations of the Last Day
unto our minds, we should be Always Ready. Reader, let us Aspire after such a
Continual Readiness!

S. 7. But none of the least Exercises in our Preparation for the Day of
Judgment, would be our Meditation of it; Or, Our Looking for the Glorious
Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. He was an Holy man, among the Ancients,
who could say, Wherever I am, and Whatever I do, Methinks I have the Sound of
the Last Trumpet in my Ears, ARISE YE DEAD, AND COME TO JUDGMENT. We should
Labor to get a Proper and a Lively Character of the Day, when God shall Judge
the Secrets of men; and often Raise it in our minds. It was said, Woe to them
that put far away the Evil Day. Truly, The Day of Judgment will be an Evil day
indeed, unto them that put it far away. Thoughts upon the Day of Judgment,
should continually Lodge in our Hearts; and however we are employed we should
think, What shall I do, when God rises up? and when He Visits, what shall I
answer Him?

Now for the Assistence and Nourishment of our Private Meditations upon, The
Day of God, we are happily Supplied with the Published Meditations of many
Worthy Pious Learned Writers, upon that Important Subject; and I pray, that we
may not be Unthankful, or Unfruitful under such Advantages. The Carnal Jews,
when they Read the Book of Ecclesiastes, have the last Verse but one [which has
in it, Fear God and keep His Commandments] Printed over again, at the Close of
all, because they would not have the Remembrance and impression of the Last
Verse [which has in it, God shall bring every Work into Judgment] to be too
strong upon them; whereas if men would Think more of the Latter, they would
probably Do more of the Former. God forbid, that we should any of us have any
Indisposition to such Meditations on the Day of Judgment, as are Laid before
us, in the Books of some that are Longing for the Day. Dear New England! Thy
Little Presses too, do now afford more than two or three Savoury Treatises upon
the Day, which will not bundle such Books for the Fire, that shall then Burn up
the Hay and Stubble, of Innumerable Volumns; No, Such are some of the Books
that shall be Opened for a Witness against. Impenitents! In thee, is Reprinted
the Zealous Thomas Vincents Discourse, On our Lords certain and sudden
Appearance to Judgment. In thee, is Printed, a Sermon on, The Day of Judgment,
whose Author is the Father of him that now addresses thee. In thee, is now
Printed, the Reverend Samuel Lee's, Assize-Sermon, of Warning to the Great Day
of Judgment; Left among us, as his Mantle, by that Elias, when he went away for
Europe. These, besides other Books, has New England, had, for the Loudening of
that Midnight Cry among us, Behold, the Bridegroom comes. And indeed, if upon
the passing away of the second Woe, the Third comes quickly, which brings on,
The Time of the Dead, that they should be Judged, we that now see the Second Woe
coming a pace unto its Period, should count no Awakenings too many, to rowse us
out of that profound Sleep, wherein the World shall be fast, When the Son of
man comes. I am verily persuaded, The Judge is at the Door; I do without any
hesitation venture to say, The Great Day of the Lord is Near, it is Near, and
it hastens Greatly. O That our Minds may be as deeply Engaged in Thinking on
the Second coming of our Lord, as the Saints of old were in Thinking on His
First; and that the Books by which we may Understand, much of what concerns
that matter, may have a due Entertainment and Efficacy with us. A Person of
some Quality having Wasted much Time, at Unlawful Games, could not Sleep the
Night following, and mentioned unto an Inquisitive Friend, the Ground of it;
Yesterday casting my Eye into a Book that I saw open, I read the Word ETERN^TY,
and this Word has broke my very Heart within me. Truly, we that have so many
Books about, ETERNAL JUDGMENT, have our Hearts harder than the Nether Millstone,
if at the sight of that Word ETERNAL JUDGNENT they do not break. But it is unto
the God of Grace, that we are now to bow our Knees, with Petitions for, Mercy
in the Day of the Lord.

A SUMMONS Or WARNING to the Great Day of JUDGMENT, In a SERMON Preached at the
Assizes at Bristol in New England. October. 7. 1687. now somewhat Amplified and
Fitted to the Service of others.

Luke 21.36 Watch and Pray alwa^es, that ye may be accounted worthy to Escape
all those things, that shall come to pass and to stand before the Son of man.
A-kempts de Imit. Christi. l. 1. c. 24. Vere non pot^s duo gaudia habere: bic
dil^cta^^ in mando and postea reg^are cum Christo. Verily thou can not expect
two joys: To be solaced in this World and afterward to Reign with Christ. By
SAMVEL LEE. M. A. and sometimes Fellow of Wad^am Coll. in Oxon.

BOSTON, Printed by B. Green, for N. Buttolph, at the Corner of Gutteridg (...)
Coffee-House. 1692. Price Bound (...)

Preparatory Meditations, upon THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.
S. 1. THE Great Apostle PAUL, according unto the Wisdom given unto him,
Writing unto the Hebrews, has with Good Reason erected Those as the Two
Pillars, even the Jachin and Boaz of all Religion, GOD IS, and HE IS A
REWARDER; Nor are the mountainous Pillars of Heaven, more stable, or more
lasting, than these two, mo^^ Glorious Principles. That there is a GOD, or a
JEHOVAH, is a Truth more Engraven in the whole Fabric of the World, than the
Name of the Artificer was of old into the Image of his Minerva. Even the Dumb
and Mute Creatures do so loudly proclaim the Being of a GOD, Presentenque docet
quaelibet Herba Deum, that I may say with Job, Ask now the Beasts, and they
shall Teach thee; and the Fowls of the Air, and they shall Tell thee; Or speak
to the Earth, and it shall Teach thee, and the Fishes of the Sea, shall declare
unto thee. The World must necessarily have a Beginning; and that it could not
have its Beginning from it self, is evident, inasmuch as Nothing would have
then been the cause of Something. Nor dos any thing less than the Power of a
GOD, the Wisdom of a GOD, and the Goodness of a GOD; appear in the Constitution
of the Universe. And as all the Creatures are so many Letters in the Book of
Creation, from which we may spell the Existence of a GOD, so ^o's the Book of
Providence give us a Continuation of the Demonstration, which proves a Deity.
For therein, besides the Extraordinary Occurrents, In Prophecies, and Miracles,
and Retaliations, upon the sight which every one cries out, The Finger of God!
the Excellent Order, wherein all things (...) preserved, abundantly argues a
GOD, whose Kingdom Rules all. But indeed, I may say, What need we any further
Witnesses? Or what Need of any Coming from the Dead unto us, with such Advice
as the Spectre of Major Sydenham gave to Captain Dyke, a while ago, I am come
to tell you, that there is a GOD; and that He is a Just and a Terrible God! The
Notion of a GOD is imprinted so deeply in the Spirit of man it self, that it
can be ascribed unto none but such an Author, and therefore such an Author
there is, as, a GOD, who Forms the Spirit of man within him. Had this Idea, in
the Soul of man, been a Mere Tradition of our Ancestors, why is it not all this
while detected like other Vulgar Errors of much less Importance? Or, Had it
been a mere Policy of our Governors, whence is it that Rulers themselves, as
much as any other Mortals, are smitten with the Terrors of it? The Notion is as
Natural, as it is Powerful; man is born with an Inclination to acknowledge a GOD,
and he will have Many rather than have None; Atheism has not been so agreeable
to mankind, as Polytheism* The Notion also is as Ge^eral as it is Natural; it is
not peculiar to any one Kingdom or Kindred; they which Differ in all other
things, yet Unite in their sense of a GOD; and the Salvage Indians themselves
in the most hideous and Barbarous Thickets of America, own a Koutantowit, as
the First Cause of all. Yea, I do considently affirm, That of all the Few
Professed Atheists, which have been known among the Brutify'd part of mankind;
there has been hardly so much as One, which has steadfastly Believed, That
there is no God, without Vehement Suspicions of the Contrary. It Is by some
Remarkable Plague from our Injured and Provoked GOD, upon the more Atheistical
sore of them things which would be called, Men, That none use the Name of GOD,
in the profane A^^ses of Swearing and Cursing, so much as those Monsters do:
and Calvin, as I Remember, mentions one of them, that upon a Blow given him,
Cried out, O God help me! though he had just before been Vehemently ^isputing,
that there was no God at all. ^ut besides, those Vndesigned Confessions of a
GOD, from the Mouiks of those Miscreants, there are at some times usually
before they Die, such Flashes of Lightening from Heaven, darted into their
Souls, as force 'em Deliberately to Recant, the Folly which acted them, when
they said, that is, wished, rather than Thought, in their Hearts, -- NO GOD.
Some that have in their Lives pretended unto the more than Divillish Bravery,
of Renouncing the Belief of a GOD; yet have declared at last that their Minds
inwardly and frequently twitch'd 'em with direful Remonstrances against their
Impiety, and Read, 'em Lectures upon the Reality of a GOD, which made 'em
always Live uneasily. And if some Wretches, by the Constant Practice and Lerry
of their Vices, have laid the sense of a GOD, in their Souls a sleep, yet our
great GOD, na's Commonly roused them into some waking Minutes, wherein they
might have said, When I Consider, I am afraid of GOD; GOD makes my Heart Soft,
and the Almighty Troubles me. Wicked men, that Forget God, would fain also
Destroy him; and, that they may go as far as they can, they Labor to Shake
Off, and Root Out that Remembrance of GOD, in their Souls, which gives 'em so
many Vexations in their Courses of Ungodliness; but it will not Off, it will
not Out, the Almighty GOD makes the most haughty Criminals to stoop under this
Instance of His Empire over them. A Certain Spark a while since in Company
begun to brag, Well, Ill prove, for I am now able to prove, There is no God. A
Gentleman (if a Beast may be called so!) then present, replied, Prithee Do! and
I^l give thee a thousand Guinnies for thy Pains! But all the Guinnies in the
World, will not rescue a man from the force of this persuasion, That there is a
GOD; and such are the Circumstances of the persuasion, as that it must be From
the GOD, OF whom it is. Now from the Faith of a GOD, we are led presently to
Conceive of a JUDGE; JEHOVAH will be ELOHIM; it is to be Concluded, that He has
given Laws, according whereunto Mankind is under His Moral Government; and in
the Execution of this Government* He will dispense Rewards unto the Children of
men, according to the Rules for the Distribution thereof, by Himself Prescribed.

S. 2. There are Various Dispensations of Providence, wherein the God of
Heaven, discovers Himself a REWARDER, unto that People, which He has formed for
Himself, that they may show forth His Praise. And were there more Collections,
with fit Reflections, made of Dispensations this way Remarkable, it would be a
Work full of Service and Hon^ur into our God; They that were so Wise, as to
Observe these things, would certainly Understand the Loving kindness of the
Lord, even in the Remarkable Things, that would be done for themselves. But it
is not in this World, that our God has the glory of His being, A REWARDER, so
fully and so clearly displayed, as it ought to be; We daily see Godliness
Oppressed: and Wickedness Advanced, in this Present evil World; and neither the
Appeals of Affl^cted Innocence, nor the Affronts of Outrageous Vallany, have a
Sufficiently Sensible Notice taken of them. There is therefore an Eternal State
of Blessedness and Misery, whereinto the Righteous God will bring every one of
us, according to our Behaviors here. Our Short Condition in this World, is but
a Condition of Probation or of Stewardship; and according to our Carriage in
this Condition, we shall in the Issue, as the mouth of our faithful Savior
Himself, has long since as^^ned us, Go away into Everlasting Punishment, Or,
else, Into Life Everlasting. But at the Threshold of that Eternal State, it is
but proper that a Distinct Account should be taken of what every man has done
in the Body, that so the Luster of that Justice, which Dooms them to their
Interminable Blessedness or Misery, may strike the very Consciences of all
Beholders. Hence it is, that the Oracles of Truth have told us, God has
appointed a Day, in which He will Judge the World, by that man whom He has
Ordained: Whereof He has given Assurance unto a^ men, in that He has Raised
Him from the Dead. There is indeed a Particular Disposal of Dragons, and our
Blessed Redeemer standing upon Mount Zion, Zech. 13 4
shall proclaim to all His Saints: Lift up your Heads, for the day of your
final Redemption is come. Lets end with that apprecation of holy Paul. Heb.
13.20, 21.
[ Now the God of Peace that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepard of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Make
you perfect in every good Work, to do his will, working in you that which is
well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and
ever, Amen.]

Yours in Gospel Service, SAMVEL LEE.

A SVMMONS or WARNING to the Great DAY of JVDGMENT.
Revelation. 20.12. On Friday October. 7. 1687. At Brist^^ by Mount Hope in New.
England.
And I saw the Dead, Small and Great, stand before God: and the Books were
opened: and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life: and the Dead
were Judged out of those things which were Written in the Books, according to
their Works.
THE Preceding Verse presents this Evangelical Prophet, with a Visionary scene
Preparatory to the Day of Judgment: and here in the Text, we have a further
Procedure in the amazing Concernments of that tr^mendous Session: where in may
be observed.

Patmos (now Patina) near the Shore of the Aegaean Sea, Rev. 13.1
looking Eastward toward Ephesus and Jerusalem; Zech. 14 4.
as you may suppose: Act. 1.11.
because our Lord is represented standing upon Mount Olivet in that day. Where
(in Speculo Visionis) in a Visionary Glass, he beholds with great attention
what the Angel presented to him.



I. We have first the Character, or Denomination of the Persons attending; set
forth under the style of the Dead: that is, not such as were now really Dead in
this great Morning of the Resurrection; but which very lately had been involved
in the state of the dead: Verse. 13*
but now raised out of their dolesome Graves, and had newly Shaken off the
Chains of Rottenness, and some come Dropping out of the stormy Seas and
hastening with more shaking horror, to a yet more direful Shipwreck. Death and
Hell must give up all their dead, at the formidable Summons of that Archangels
Trumpet. 1 Cor. 1^ 52.
By Hell or Hades we understand (under a metonymy) the Souls of men delivered
out of their invisible State (under the manutenency of divine power) to be
reinvested with their Bodies, and to appear a^ this astonishing Bar. For so the
Greek Fathers understood by HADES q. AIDES the Souls of men in Statu Separato
according to that of H^mir [POLLAS D' IPTHIMOUS PSUCHAS AIDI PROIAPSEN] He
dismissed many Valiant Souls, i.e. Persons into Hades.

II. Their various quality. Both small and great; The Shortest Dwarfs cannot
Creep into so deep holds or corners; not the Blustering Nimrods cannot Ruffle it
away in their Pride and Jollity; but every Soul must drag his Prison-Chain into
this most Solemn, and Splendid presence. Nay the Small are named to come first,
to set forth the impossibility of their Exemption, and these meaner persons
must stand out before the great on^^* that all may be seen in their Proportion
[thi^ I speak only by allusion*] But to be sure, none shall Shuffle behind Noon
and abscond from that Meridian Glory, or he Veiled from this all Searching Eye:
And the all revenging hand of God. The Summoners and Apparitors of all these
inferior Courts, must there appear and quiver and tremble for Summoning of Gods
Saints here upon Earth. Heb. 9.27.
I^ts appointed for all to die, and then to Judgment. We must all stand at the
dreadful Tribunal Seat of Jesus Christ. Where Judges themselves divested of all
their formalities, like so many unhappy Felixes will Clatter their knees
together, at the MEAN TEKEL, Dan. 5.25.
graven* upon the Crystal Walls of the Caelestial Firmament; and glad men,
could they but undergo such an Earthly. Sentence they passed upon others.

III. Observe their posture] they must stand, Pro Tribunali, before that
adamantine Bar, let down before them. They I have little Stomach to come too
near, Romans 14.10.
no rude audacious Crowding into the presence of that most awful Judge. There
will be but little pressing to see, His Sovereign August Countenance, that
shines brighter, then the Sun in his greatest glory: but as forced by the
Angelical Messengers; while they continue Crying to the Deaf Mountains and the
Inflexible Rocks to hide them from Him that Sits on the Throne and from the
Wrath of the Lamb. Rev. 6.16.


IV. The Ireful face of that most dreadful Judge; before whom the Heavens all
on a light flame shall Crackle like a Parchment Scrol and fly away: 2 Pet.
3.11, 12
when Christ the Son of God, and God man; that Impartial Judge of quick and
dead, from whom there is no appeal, shall put on an other guess purple Robe to
judge Pontius Pilate and Herod, ^ark 15.17.
and his men of War, Luke 23.11
that mocked Him in the day of His Humiliation. This will be a day of horror to
all those Wretches also, that mocked and fleer'd at Gods Messengers, when they
denounced against them the Judgments of the great day. Then comes out a Quo
Warranto with a witness, to inquire what woeful work they made at Jerusalem: and
who empowered them to Judge the Son of God, Jude 15.
and to utter hard speeches, and commit ungodly deeds for a trace of some
thousands of years, without Control or Impeachment.

V. The Allegations, proofs and evidences produced out of the black Books and
bloody Registers of all Ages; which before were shut up and Sealed in Gods
Archiva, or treasure Chambers above, are now all opened: and if they cannot
Read their Psalms of Mercy: Rev. 6.20
there is no hope of Exile to a Patmus or any foreign Islands at that day, for
they shall flee away.

VI. The final process [and they were judged out of the things written in the
Books] whence there is no appeal, no recalling or reversion. There will be that
Positive and final Conclusion.

OBSERVATION. Obser.


Most formidable and dreadful will be that great and general Day of Judgment.

It Is a Coming and hastening toward us: Nay it is near at hand. Jam. 5.9.
The Judge is even at the Door. If you ask, how long. I Answer, He that was at
the Door in the Apostle James his time, may be now stepped over the Threshold in
our days, and well forward in His Journey toward Mount Oliver; and ready to
ascend into the Seat of Judgment. Nay Besides, it is so near to every
Particular Person, when he strides over the black Threshold of Death: that we
cannot certainly tell How little a moment it will seem from the time of his
Death to his Solemn appearance before Jesus Christ, and then 'twill indeed
determine the truth of that Scripture, Heb. 10 31.
that it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God; and most
dreadful to all out of Christ at that day. If without Christ, having been
without God in this World, they shall like Dogs be cast out of the Holy City,
in the World to come, into a lake Burning with Fire and Brimstone. Rev. 22.15.
Judicial days here, under the Sun are but like Pictures and Stories, in
hangings, and all Executions but like Painted Fire to this great and terrible
day of the Lord which will make all the Ruffians quake like an Aspen leaf.
Eccl. 3.16, 17.
Those fools which now make a mock of Sin. Those Careless Gallios and grave
Eelixes, P^ov. 14.9. Act. 24 26
that put off the hearing of this day till another time: That allarm Trumpet
will make your Ears to tingle above all other, and will ye, nill ye: up you
must hasten to Judgment. There are three things which Command into the inmost
Chambers of your hearts, most dreadful, most amazing thoughts, and high
reverence with deepest astonishment. If so be, ye fall into the Snare of Death,
in a State unreconciled to God, and not purged from your Scarlet Sins by the
precious blood of Christ.

Majesty of the Judge. Procedure according to things found written in the Books
before the Judge. quality or property of this Judgment. Of which in order.
the infinite Majesty of the Judge who will then sit down upon the throne of
Judgment. No less Person than the Maker of Heaven and Earth; before whom all
the Devils tremble, Verse. 11
and the Pillars of Heaven are astonished and confounded, the foundations of the
Earth flee away and Vanish into Smoke and nothing; at the fiery Breath of His
Nostrils: whose single Word Shrinks the Universe into less than the Shadow of
an Atom, at His pleasure. But let us here Remember, Isai. 40.17.
we are not to Consider of this Almighty and Eternal Judge as God Essential
only; but more Personally, the Son of God, who comes with Ten Thousand of His
Saints (that is) His Holy Angels, Jude. 14, 15.
to Execute judgment, in that day for all the Violent actions against His
Church and People, or any of His Redeemed ones.

of Procedure according to the Various Books, all lying patent before the Judge
upon the Table: which are these following,

I. The Books of Creation and Providence; like two Volumns joined and bound up
together; wherein the distinct Successions of all Generations are delineated.
God knows all the Stars of Heaven, and all the Lamps of the Intellectual
beings, by name. The genealogical stemmes of all persons are fairly written in
that Register, and he will call their bodies up out of their Graves, at that
day from the Rising to Setting Sun, Psalm. 50.3.
to meet their Souls, and to accept a new Animation from them. When the
El-Elohim-Jehovah as some gloss those Titles in the Fifteth Psalm, Isai. 27.13.
that Powerful just, and merciful God will cause the great Trumpet to sound and
awaken all out of the do of Dan. 12.2.
Death, and then God will call thee to account for the abuse of every Limb,
Psalm. 135 16.
and member written in that Venerable book.

II. The particular books of Record or Remembrance: which whether written by an
Empyraean Pen drawn from a Seraphims Wing: I mean, whether the Holy Angels are
the Scribes and Recorders, is not revealed to us. Its true the Lord Himself, or
they in His Name enjoin holy John to write, Rev. 1.11 19 and 22 6, 16. and 19,
9, 10 Psalm. 104 4.
what they are Commanded to dictate to him. Besides we find them registered as
Presidents of Nations, and to have the Guardianship of Saints, Heb. 1.14.
and to be Ministers of the Divine Pleasure and of mighty influence in Slaying
God's and His Churches Enemies, and to manage the great turns and overturnings
of Kingdoms, That Is certain: as in the case of Egypt, Psalm. 78.49.
when God sent evil Angels among them, that is, the Executioners of woeful and
evil Judgments among them: like as the Angelus Percussor, the smiting Angel may
be said to make a way for His wrath. Ezekiel. 9.3.
Such instruments were used in Executing divine wrath upon Sennacheribs army,
Psalm. 78.50.
and upon poor Jerusalem in her sad day, 2 King. 29.35.
and afterward in the destruction of Babylon, Ezekiel. 9 3
when the Captain of the Lords army Marched before the Red and Speckled Horses
in Zachary's Visions. Zech. 1.11.
In like matters both as to Nations, Citys, and Persons: we may conceive of
things as in the Glass of a continued Allegory: that there is a particular book
for every Person in several cases:

Book for every man's Sins. And truly this is a matter of heavy concernment
(that though it should not be so Specifically, yet it is Equivalently and
Eventually) that there is a particular Book in the Court of Records in Heaven
with thy name on the out side, where every Sin of thine is written down with
the blood of Dragons mixed with the galls or Cruel Venom of Asps, Deuteronomy. 32.33.
and durably as if with the point of of a Diamond upon a Rock. Jere. 17.1.
Truly its all one, nay worse, then if so really: for it is writ in the memorials
of that tremendous Judge. For every Secret Sin is set down in the Light of His
Countenance, Psalm. 90.3.
beyond all the Noctiluca's in the World. Every Secret is determined to come to
Judgment. Eccl. 12.14.
Ten times have the Children of Israel Murmured against Me, Number. 14.22.
says the Lord: and so again, the Sacred Pages number up Six Captivities under
the Judges, Judges Chapter 10.1^
answering to Six several prevarications in the Worship of God. Petav.
ra^ionarie. P. 84. Isai. 65.6.
^^s written before me, says the Lord by Isaiah, and I will recompense into
their Bosom. And so it is now, Ten times Drunk, such a man: Ten times Forsworn,
such another: Ten times, such a Proud Jezabel with her, Painted Eyes, Strutting
in the Streets of Jerusalem: write him down, set her down, says God, Paint her
to the Life, that all the World may then behold her with Peacoc^s Feathers: and
mincing, ^ King. 9.30 Isa. 3.16
tink^ing motions with, her feet. How should it strike as with a Poisoned arrow
to the heart, to think of these dreadful tradegies of that terrible day. Sighs
and Actions are also set down in Gods day book: and this I speak for the
comfort of all humble Mourners in Zion. The Confession of that Renitent Thief
at Golgotha's Mount, Lord, Luke 24.42.
Remember me in they Kingdom. We never drop a sincere tear, but it drops
up-ward; Contrary to all other tears, it ascends up into Heaven, and Runs into
the Christ all Bottle upon the Shelfe, with thy name engraven upon it, in
Letters of Gold: and it is often taken up, and Looked upon, to see how it fills.
Are they not in thy Bottle; Psalm 56.8.
says David, and in thy Book; But woe to them that have none. Every hearty
Sigh; that Reeks e sulco pecto^is, from the inmost Closets of thy Soul are
Pencilled with Vermillion, under the bloody lines streaming from the Cross of
Life. good works, are all written in that Book. When serious Persons do but
meet, and think upon the Name of the Lord in evil times, and talk often
ingether. Mal. 3^ 16.
Every time you meet, every Heavenly thought, and every holy word you speak is
written down. Nay all your Prayers and Alms deeds like those of Correlius go
up in Remembrance before God. Act. 10.1
Every Penny you pu^ into Gods Treasury; Nay every Mite you give to Temple
uses; as in the case of the poor Widows; Mark. 12 ^^
is put down in Gods Debt Book, and will be Converted into so many Pearls to
adorn your Crown in Glory.
Books of men's Consciences shall then all be laid open. Here men's thoughts
Excuse or Accuse one another till that day, Romans 2.15.16. ^. Cor. 3.^1.
when God shall Judge the Secrets of all men by Jesus Christ according ^o the
Gospel Preached by Paul: and let me tell you, that every faithful Sermon which
you hear, Consonant to the Word of God, will come up in Judgment as a Testimony
against you, if disobeyed: so that if our hearts Condemn us not, that is our
Conscience, 1 john. 4.17.
as to Irreverence, Negligence or Disobedience to we may have Confidence in the
Day of Judgment before God; 1 john 3.20, 21.
who is greater then our hearts, and knows all things: and this will give us
a holy freedom of Spirit in that Solemn time. There will be no Shuffling
Tricks, no False and Treacherous accounts, no T^ffany Cheats, no
Fine-Spun-flams, but all fly away like Spiders Webbs, before a Beesome. The
flaming Eyes in the Scepter of that day sees through all in a moment.

IV. The Book of the Scriptures shall then be taken down, and the Parchment
Rolls all unfolded. The Act Forensia, the Public Commentaries; the Regu a
Juries, the Institures of the Law, Rom 2.16
and the Cannons of the Gospel shall be all produced: for Conviction of
S^nners. All their in quities written in that Book, mentioned by Je^emy, with
the point of a Diamond, jere. 17.1.
or graven with an iron Pen, in focules or leases of Lead; mentioned by Job;
job 19.24 25.
or in a Rock for the ever of this World: Dan. 12.1.
till our Redeemer stands upon the Earth at mount Olivet at the latter day to
Judge the World. Z^ch. 14 4.


V. The particular and singular Book of Election, when all that are written in
that ivory Volumns, shall come forth and Shine as Stars for ever and ever. Dan.
12.1; 3.
The Sheep of Christ's little Flock, Rev. 3.5 13, 8.17 8.
that are written in the Lambs Book of Life shall then pass under the
rodaccount for the Sanctuary of Glory. Exodus 32 32.
Nay God Himself is said to write down the names of those Chosen Vessels that
are prepared and fitted for Salvation. Luke 10 20.
The names of the Holy Apostles and Saints are deciphered and set down in
Heaven, Psalm. 68 28.
Phil. 4.^.
when others are written in the Dust, and shall be legible by the flames of
Hell.

And so much for the Second particular, the rules of Procedure and its branche.

In the Third Place we are to Consider the quality or property of this
astonishing Judgment,

accurate and Critical Exactness, as to Equity and Commensuration to Every ones
actions be they good or bad. The Judge sits down in His Sella Curulis, or seat
of Judgment, Dr Stoughtons felicitas ultimi. Seculi. ^.
all of ivory or unspotted Alablaster, like the Sun when He Shines [in Libra]
among the Caelestial Balances, near the Milky way. The Eyes of Justice are
Covered with a Purple Mantle, no accepting the Person of any as to Earthly
dignities and distinations; but its Ears are with all diligence and Curiosity
attentive to the impending causes. Impartiality in determining: Cuts off all
demurrers and delays and gives speedy dispatches to persons of all Degrees.
There will be no favoring of Rich and Great men to sit down near the bench, as
here among fellow Worms: nor no pitying of a poor man in his cause from a
seeming Comiseration to the mean and Afflicted. Lev. 19.^5.
The dispensation of justice will be Equal to a tittle, no pleading Sub forma
pauperis at that day. Universality as to Comprehensivenes of both persons and
times. All Ages, both Sexes, all Qualities and degrees of men must make
personal appearance without any Proxy in this Doomsday Parliament: no Slye
Excuses or writs of Error to impeach, or turn by the gravity of that most awful
judicature: no querks nor tricks, nor juggling account shall Velum Pretendere,
cast a mist before the Sagacious inspection of that quick and all searching
Judgment. Irresistible doom. There is no Subtle arguing, no wresting of the
Text of the Law, or the intentions of the Sacred Law Maker. No pleading of old
Customs; or the Opinions of Reverend Ruffes here upon Earth. There is no
Versiling^es Procuratores, no Tongue flexible Proctors, that have no strait
bone of Equity in their Tongues, but turns up and down like a Serpents, be the
cause good of bad; like the Counselor at Athens, that had [bos in lingua] a
bag of Silver-oxen (a Coin so called) to hang upon their Tongues, and to tip
them with justice-perverting Eloquence. The cause will be stated in a moment.
The Universal Conscience, that Public notary stands by with flaming Eyes, and
makes instruments of Recognisance without any fees or private Audience. There Is
no Appeals to any Superior Court. Eternily of its Issue. Either to be with our
Blessed Lord Christ and His Saints, or with the Devil and his Angels for ever.
Matt. 25 41.
Ever! Oh dreadful Ever! Oh that word of terror, that Shoots barbed Arrows,
PHLOGOENTA BELEMNA, flaming darts through the stoutest hearts of the Proudest
Nimrods, in the World. Ever! Oh irrevocable Doom! Of which lamentable Doom that
poor Bird which appeared to the Scholars in a garden, who were then Assembled
(as I Remember) at the Council of Constance Sang Melodiously: and then Cried
out, O Eternity, Eternity, Eternity, and then flew away.
But let us now retire to some Uses.

Use. I. Of Earnest Advice to all of you to Exercise your selves with deep
Consideration of the strictness of the Process, the Exactness and Inquisitions
of that Sacred Judge in the management of that dreadful day. The brightness of
the Sun in his highest Apogy is like Sackcloth, and his beams like streaming
Pitch to the amazing glory of that time. Oh that the Presentment or
Forethoughts thoughts of that day might always press upon our hearts, to a
Serious Preparation for that appearance. If Jeroms Trumpet as to the advent of
that day did always sound in our Ears: we should be better Christians, and
keep Sabbaths more Holy, and hear with more Attention, and practice with more
Conscientious diligence, then we do: but we are drowned in Sensuality, Supine
Stupidity and negligence, till that day take us like Birds in an evil Snare.

Use. II. But Secondly be Exhorted to an anxious and sedulous Care as to every
Vain and Idle Word. Crave daily pardon and beg strength and watchfulness
against their daily incursion. As to evil thoughts in duty, and as to any
Omission Sins: Cry out with that Holy man Bishop Usher: Lord forgive me my Sins
of Omission. For all these things without Pardoning, Purging and healing grace
must come into the golden Seal of that Critical Judgment. The Vain thought in
one Scale, and the golden weight of the Precept in the other Scale, and the
balance Poised in the hand of that most Holy and Righteous Judge [PAN ARGON
REMA] q. AERGON. Every Idle word, or thing, that is, Matt. 1^.36.
whatever is not attended with some real Service to God, or benefit to man:
that cannot plead some useful Scope at the end of it: must be arrested and
brought to that Sacred touch stone. Every Secret thing, that is, Eccl. 12.12.
in the depth of the thoughts, must pass by the Bar: ad limam revocari, be
brought to the sil^, and to the Virgula censoria, to be Examined by the censure
of divine justice. Rev. 21.27. and 22.19.
No person can enter within the Gates into the City; but must pass this fiery
Trual. Teque his ait, eripe flamis: Deliver thy self by Faith and Holiness,
from the dirt of these dreadful flames.

Use. III. Remember, that this day may Quadani^nus, in some sort, be said to be
Placed between time and Eternity. It Is set in internodio, in the very juncture.
In aequilibrio, in the very poise and center of that weighty concernment of
Eternity. As that day fixes: so all ends and determines. Then shall the Sins in
the bag, Job. 14.17.
as Job speaks, be pulled out. Eccl. 9.6.
Not to instance in many; Then Envy shall cease; that blody Cain, that monster
of humane Confusions, that speckled Viper must have its. Aril Rhet l. 2. c. 10.
^la^o in. Tim. R^. Edit H. Ste^h. Vol. (...) p. 27.
Specious Colored skin pulled off: when all the Secret defamations,
backbitings and slanderings of men better then themselves shall be brought to
light. We shall then know perfectly, No^^ Envy does at any time befall a good
man*
what ill aspected malevolent persons they were, that durst not endure the
luster of virtue, the faithfulness of Pious reprovers, the brightness of a Holy
Friends presence, without biting his heel like the old Serpent, and must now be
all Scanned and Sifted to the bottom, from whence the base abuses of good men's
Credit have issued, sp^^ from their Cankred mouths, must now appear in their
Venomous Colors in the light of Gods Countenance. Psalm 90.8.
All those and other Secret Enormityes must stare the affrighted Consciences of
such Envious malignants in the face, before all the World; and gnaw their
Vitals with fresh Wounds to all Eternity.

Use. IV. Remember before thou: set thy hand to any new affair: whether the
Transaction of it will stand in the Day of Judgment, with approbation. (...) 11.
Rejoice O Young man in thy youth: let thy heart Cheer thee: Walk in the ^ayes
of thy heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: but Remember God will bring thee
to judgment, for all these things. Sing and Swagger, beat your fellow Servants,
drink and be drunken, Luke 12.46.
but Remember the board will come in an hour unlookt for and cut you in pieces
and divide your portion among Hypocrites, Mat. 24.4^.
where weeping and gnashing of teeth, for over in a place that has no bottom;
where is Fire without light, and Shivering in the midst of burning. O Remember,
thou must come to Judgment.

Use. V. Be sure thou be well acquainted, and get into favor with the Judge,
that shall sit upon the throne: and happy, O thrice happy man, If He give you a
promise to stand your. Brimed in that day* and shall plead with the Father on
your behalf: nay with Himself and His own most Blessed Bowels: To be assured,
that He dyed for you^: and that your peace is made: before you die to nature,
that you may live to grace: and then you shall certainly live in glory. Heb.
7.25.
For this Son of God will ever Live to enterceed for you, who art one of the
most Blessed Creatures that ever were born, that has power given thee to
become one of the Adopted Sons of God, Joh. 1.1^*
and stand before the Son of man in that joyful day. Thy Crimson Sins are all
washed away in His Crimson Blood, and shall never come into judgment: to shame
thee, much less to condemn thee.

Now give me leave to Conclude with, a serious, though short pa^aenesis or
humble admonition or Exhortation, to Three Sorts of Persons. 1. To the Reverend
Judges themselves. 2. To the People present. 3. To the guilty Person here
arraigned before you, [for Murder]


I. As to you the Worthy and Reverend Judges, that are to sit in judgment
before the Lord this day: I shall not enlarge, but only present unto you, what
King Jehoshaphat gave in Charge to them from God, 2 Chronicles. 29.6.
when he set them about this work* City by City. [ Take heed what your do, for
ye judge not for man but for the Lord, Verse. 5.
who is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be
upon you. Take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God,
nor respect of Persons, non taking of Gifts.

II. To you that are the People and auditors this day. Count it a great Mercy
that you have been preserved by Restraining or Sanctising grace, not to stand
in the place of the nocent and so to become Obnoxious to the wholesome Law and
Righteous Judgment of the Majestrate. Bless God for that Singular Mercy: If it
were not for Majestracy, that great Ordinance of God in the World, Jere. 9* 8.
men's tongues would be like Poisoned Arrows shot sorth, speaking deceit,
treating their Neighbor peaceably with their mouths, and laying wait in their
hearts: Some such Sons of Belial that a man cannot speak to them, 2 Samuel 23.7*
they are so surly and interrupting: and ought to be thrust away like thorns:
If a man touch them, he must be senced with Iron and the staff of a Spear. Men
would prove Wolves and Vipers; 1 Samuel 25.17.
Tigers, and Dragons mixed in one and the same person, to each other. O Bless
God for this great gift of Princes and Judges to Rule the wicked and Enormous
World, and to sway the Scepter of Righteousness in the Earth. O Remember to
speak Honorably of Rulers and dignityes: Jude 8. Romans 13. 2 Pet. 2.10.
for they are Ordained of God for the Praise of them that do well; and Gods
Ministers and Avengers upon them that do Evil. Were it not for them, such as
are now but Secret Malicious backbiters, would soon prove Badgers, and bite
through the bone to the very heart. Have then a Special care of two Originating
Sins that lead to many foul Enormities, that is, Pride and Envy: First in your
selves, that you be not tempted thereby to hurt others: and Secondly in others
that you do not hurt them. For wherever you see manifest Signatures and tokens
of these Sins lurking or putting out their forked tongues against others;
beware of them, they are Persons mark^t of God. and always have graven upon
your breast that famous Emblem of a Righteous man. [Quod non vis tibi, ne
seceris alteri] Do as you would be done by: Luke 31.
It Is our Lords most golden Rule of Equity: Then Judge your selves before God as
to all infirmities, and otherwise insuperable weaknesses: then fear not man's
day: having presented your selves by Faith, as Clothed with the Righteousness
of Christ; 2 Cor. 5.10.
and in some sweet measure prepared for that Solemn appearance at His Tribunal.

III. A word or two also to the poor guilty Person: which has Murdered her own
unlawful infant: and so I Conclude.

As for thee, poor Creature! What was it that enticed, entangled, inflamed thee
to the Commission of these Sins against the Laws of God, the light of nature,
and the just Laws of the Land. I understand thus much from thee in the Prison;
that thy Parents were very negligent of thy Education, and so becamest a great
neglecter of Sabbaths and Sermons, and then fellest into the fellowship of
Lewd Companions, which may be a just warning to all others. All that I shall
say at present: because of the great Sorrow, remorse and Repentance which thou
have manifested be fore many witnesses, and I hope may prove Sincere: If thou
fleest from the horror, stain and shame of these thy Crying Sins, unto the
most precious blood of Jesus Christ; and layest hold upon it with a true,
though but a weak Faith: thou have Patterns of Mercy in the blessed Book of
God; Manassch, Mary Magdalen, and the Thief upon the Cross, to dispell the
black and dismal Cloud of despair: and to lead and encourage thee to hope in
His Mercy; Romans 14.9.
To which I humbly and heartily Commed thee in the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
both of Dead and Living. AMEN.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX Containing only some Heads of Meditation, on the DAY OF JVDGMENT,
more largely and fully delivered in a Sermon Preached at Charlestown.
By the Reverend SAMVEL LEE.
On Math. 25.6. At Midnight there was a Cry.
THE Scope of a Parable is the best Expositor of it. The Design of this is to
Express, The Suddenness of our Lords Advent, and the Supidity and Security of
the World with reference thereto.

Observe, Blessed Christians, Three Things,

FIRST. A dolorous Exclamation, with the dismal season of it. The out cry here,
is like that of drowning-Marriners, or routed Soldiers. SECONDLY. The matter
of the Exclamation thus amazing, which causes all the great Hectors, and
Herod's, and Belshazzars of the World, to tremble.
Yet it is not, Behold, the Judge Comes! -- but, -- the Bridegroom, the
Delight of our Souls.

It Is good Advice, Are you Ready! Dr. Usher used to say unto some Persons of
Quality. Madam, Be ready, Be ready.

THIRDLY. A Command unto all, Especially the Virgins, Go out to meet Him. Even
Hypocrites count themselves in a fair way to meet the Lord.

Of old, Marriage was at Midnight, to show the Modesty of Marriage. You are by
Ministers now Contracted, and are to be by Angels at last Conducted into Jesus
Christ.

The Ten Virgins are professors of all Sorts. A Wise Virgin is a Soul that
takes the seasons of Grace, and is affected with the Beauty of Jesus Christ. A:
Foolish, is one, that regards not the Word of God. Midnight, is the End of the
World, before the Morning of the Resurrection. The Cry is an Angelical Voice:
as soon as the Clock strikes Twelve, then the Angel sets his Trumpet to his
mouth, and proclameth so.

The Apantesis, -- the Meeting here Expressed, is the Resurrection. When the
Earth and Sea too shall yield their Dead; and the very Entrails of the Fishes
shall be raked by the Trident of the Archangel. Never was there such a Terror
as then will be! But the Saints are then led unto the Nuptial in the New
Jerusalem.

NOTE.

At the Coming of Jesus Christ to Judgment, the whole World shall be in a state
of great Security, and Insensibility of His Coming.

I. There shall be a Great Day of Judgment. How many Warnings have you had
about this Day of the Lord? But alas, How many of the then Raised, shall say,
Non Putaram; or, This I thought not of! which is a sign of a great Fool.

Oh that we could be like Jerome: always having a, Come to Judgment, in our
Ears! believe you all make a Day of Judgment, an Article of your Creed. Why,
The Heathen had a sense of it.

II. Near and At that very times, there shall be a deadly Stupefaction in the
World. As to sit under Nightshade, breed a Stupor. -- This will be the Effect
of being in the Night shade Walks of the World:

How are most of us asleep? so that one can hardly get so much at any good
Discourse on foot among us. See Math. 24.39 And knew not till the Flood came
and took them all away; so shall also the Coming of the Son of man be. --
Remember that on your Knees --

This comes from want of Consideration God says, O that they would Consider!
See Psalm. 119.59. It Is said, They Considered not for their Hearts were hardened.
No Hammer can break this stone but Gods. It Is only Gods Fire and Vinegar, that
can cause the Nether Millstone of our Hearts to Crack. And it works in
Consideration. Consideration is the Glory of a man; and it would be our
Happiness. But for Inconsiderateness,

This comes,

1. From an Innate Inclination. People be not of Thinking Spirits. They are for
Pastime. Oh dreadful Word! a Word for the Devil to put into our Hearts.

The Fatness of Heart spoken of by Isaiah is mentioned Six times in the New
Testament. No Text of the Old Testament so often cited Which is to be thought
on.

Blood is sometimes Congealed, like a Serpent in the Heart. Such Hearts have we!

Men are against Pricked Hearts; though the Corruption cannot otherwise come
out, -- but the Devils will ^uck their Blood for ever.

2. From a Judicial Obsignation. God says, to His Ministers, Go Preach at such
a place, and harden the People there.

Oh with upl^fted Hands beg. Lord, let me not be Sealed up under this hardness.
This Hardness will be turned into shrieks in Hell. See Exodus 9.10. From this
Hardness it is, that men will Scoff at a Little Expression of a Minister, -- but
every such Scoff shall cost you a Thousand years in Hell. This Nigrum Theta,
marks for Hell.

3. From a Confaederation with Sin, and with Sinners. It Is not our Cannot, but
our Will not, that undo's us. Famous Fenner has Writ well of this Self-Murder.
Sinners, as Cleopaira, take the Asp of Inconsiderateness, and put it to their
Breasts.

And Sinners harden one another -- They are for a Priest that will be Drunk
with them; and for a faithful Preacher, they think, much Learning has made
him mad.

They are as Psalm. 50. end.

So I should come to our Saviors Question, What do ye more than others?

III. But our Lord has given us a gracious Premonition about the Day of
Judgment --

You have the Voice of the Archangel now in your Ears.

God forewarns,

1. By notable foregoing Judgments:

Every Feavour is a warning of the Fire of Hell, -- Every Dropsy is a Warning
of the River of Styx. Every causualty is a Warning.

Have you not been sick? and said, If God spare me, I will be better? Well
said, Pharaoh. --

Have you not heard of the late Earth quakes in Italy? and one at New Haven
lately? Have you not Rumors of War with the lygre Heathen? -- Our Savior
speaks of these things as Warnings.

2. By Ministerial Denunciations.

As Loud as I can, I tell you all in the further Corners yonder, The Day of
Judgment is Coming!

And

3. By Angelical Ministration.

We have their Inward Workings on our Spirits. We have Heavenly Infusions from
them, -- and we have Operations of Gods Holy Spirit. The Knock then is, as in
Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the Door, and Knock: if any man hear my Voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will s^p with him, and he with me.

Besides this, Near the Time, the Voice of the Son of God shall be heard
through the Whole World, l^ke the Roaring of the Sea. This is when the Judgment
is just beginning, And ^^e Angels shall Trumpet with a greater Noise than that
at Sina^^

Upon the whole,

Observe, and Bewayl the horrible Stupidity of the World.

The Inconsiderate soon grow Debauched. Speak to them of Judgments, they will
kick and say, Out be gone, you Hypocrite. Well, The Devil is in that Tongue.

Lament these, as Monica did her, Filium tot Lacrymarum; Be much with God for
them. Leave not until God strike the Arrow of His Loveing Vengeance into their
Hearts.

What if this Bible be Gods Word, Sinners, Where are you then? -- As in the
story of the Hermit.

Remember, The Seasons of Grace are sew; -- When the Spirit of God comes nigh
to the Heart.

And row, Take some Antidotes against security.

Antidote. I.

Consider the Wonderful Suddenness (...) Day of Judgment.

(...) ^^at if you Die, before you go (...) of the Assembly? A Last Day ^ill
come. Who knows which Pal^^^ Mors will take first?

Antidote, II.

Consider, As our Lord comes like Thief, like Lightening; so the sent^nce will
be Irreversible, and the Judg^ent Unavoidable.

Gold will not bribe Charon. The Wicked shall not stand in Judgment, -- but
they shall be there.

Antidote. III.

Consider, the Impossibility of Escape^^^ Judgment is past. There can (...) no
Writ of Error, no Appeal.

Think on Eternity; and let the ^^pressions of it, be kept in the Ima^^^ation
of the Thought of your Hearts (...) ever.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published, (...) little Book, Entitled, The Cause and Cure of
a Wounded Spirit: in a Discourse, which Laye^ open the Manifold and Amazin^
Wounds of a Troubled Conscience* and Pours the Balsame of Seasonable Counsils
and Comforts into those Terrible Wounds.

By the Reverend Cotton Mather.

Sold at the Book-seller's Shops (...) Boston, Price Bound 1 s. Stich'd 8 d.


