THE LABORING PERSONS Remembrancer: OR, A Practical DISCOURSE OF THE LABOR of
the BODY. With Suitable DEVOTIONS.

OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, A. D. 1690.

THE LABORING PERSONS Remembrancer.
MAN, as Eliphaz says, is born to Labor as the sparks fly upwards: That ought
not to be thought so hard a case to any, which is no more strange than for the
flame to ascend, nor less natural than for the Young Vultures to soar aloft, as
some Interpreters read it. Yet though Labor or Trouble is so natural to Mankind,
so familiar and engrafted into his Constitution; the number of such is so small
as do either rightly understand, or do bear it as they ought, as is most
deplorable to consider, and as challenges all that can be done toward the Cure
of so General an Evil. I doubt not but there are several holy Souls who do both
understand and bear This, as they are obliged to do; and are thereby, through
God's Blessing, arrived to very great Heights of Religion: These stand not in
need of any thing that I can say to them. But to others perhaps it may, by the
Divine Assistance, prove of some service, to give them a few Hints of what they
ought to consider, and practice in their daily Employ and Work. May the most
good God bless this poor Endeavor of his unworthy Servant, to the end by it
designed.

Labor may be considered, either first as a Punishment inflicted; or secondly,
as an Act of Religious Worship enjoined by God. In the former respect, it is
the Effect, in the latter, the Remedy of Sin. And in both respects, it will not
fail to give several useful Considerations: Such as follow.

First: Labor, (as it is accompanied Now with much Weariness and Toil,) ought
to be looked on as a Punishment, or Corporal Chastisement, inflicted for our
Transgression. God, who infinitely hates Sin, and is of purer Eyes than to
behold the least Iniquity, could not but denounce the Doom of this Monster, as
soon as ever it appeared in the World. I say, Denounce the Doom, for I tell
thee, O Man, he did no more. Accuse not God, flatter not thy self; Sin was the
fatally fruitful Womb that brought forth every Evil into the World; the deadly
Poison that blasted the Earth, and the baneful Seed of every Briar and Thorn in
Human Life. Nay, had not the Divine Love and Mercy immediately broke forth, as
through a cloud, after such a monstrous Birth: had not the Eternal Word and
Wisdom of the Father then interposed as our Mediator, in a manner so
astonishing, as to make the Wonder of Men and Angels for everlasting Ages; Man,
whose Vitals were already seized by this corroding Venom, who had begat and
formed in himself the Principle of Death and Hell, I am verily persuaded, could
not have subsisted one minute longer; but must certainly have died the Death
without further delay, and have fallen into an irrecoverable Abyss of Darkness
and Pain. But being thus retrieved and rescued from the fatal stroke, by the
means of our great and ever blessed Mediator; it being not only very fit, but
also necessary for us to concur in some degree toward our recovery from this
Dismal state, into that Happy one, for which we were originally designed by our
bountiful Creator and Father; It was judged meet by the same eternal Wisdom and
Love, that then put a stop to the final Destruction of Man, that so much of the
Effects of his Crime should remain upon him, a lasting Monument, as might be
able to put him in mind of the Place whence he fell, as might push him forward
to seek earnestly his Delivery from this Place into which he is fallen, from this
State into which he has driven himself, and might be a constant Caution to him
for the future, that he lose not the Effects of this Mediation, but endeavor,
by conforming himself to the Divine Will, to render himself as capable as he
can of those glorious Privileges, which by the means of it he may now attain.
Thus was the heavy and intolerable Punishment of Sin exchanged for an easy and
very tolerable Doom. Now, Man is put into a state of Trial once more, into a
capacity to choose whether he will be happy or miserable: The Seed of the Woman
is promised to bruise the Head of the Serpent; but withal, the Woman must be
content to undergo pain and subjection; and the Man having by his folly brought
a Curse upon the Earth, of which he was constituted Lord, must be content to
eat his Bread in sorrow, and in the sweat of his brow. For now by Sin great
Travel (as the wise Son of Sirach says) is created for every man, and an heavy
yoke is upon the sons of Adam; from the day that they go out of their mother's
womb, till the day that they return to the mother of all things. The
consequences that follow from this Consideration of Labor as an Infliction
for, or as an Evil flowing from Sin, ought I think at least to be these three.

. First, Since therefore Jesus Christ the Seed of the Woman, the Mediator
betwixt God and Man, undertook to procure the Pardon and Restoration of Man on
this condition, That Man should with Him taste of the Bitterness of Sin: Will thou, O Man, that call thy self a Christian, refuse to satisfy this
Condition? Do thou think it hard to taste of the same Cup, to bear a little of
the Chastisement with thy Savior, who has submitted to so very much for thee?
God was graciously pleased to choose Labor and Travel for this Chastisement,
without satisfying which, thou must never expect to obtain thy Pardon. Indeed
if thou have no need of this, thou may even then follow thy own Ease, as
thou please, walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes,
and trample on any Condition that brings with it the least pain: But if thou
art otherwise persuaded, as I doubt not but thou art, then submit contentedly
to this Correction, and think not thy self too good for a little Toil or
Labor, that is the Effect of thy Guilt, and is become by the Grace of God an
Instrument in thy Release.

. Secondly, Since God was so very merciful toward his offending Creature, as
for all the Punishment of his Crimes to take no more but a Moderate Labor for
a short time, that so he might afterward rest with his God, and be advanced to
a nobler state of Bliss and Honor, than even that which he had lost by the
most vile and sottish Rebellion: It behooves him not only with Contentedness to
submit to this light Chastisement; but also with the humblest Thanks to praise
the Mildness and Indulgence of his kind Father, that has made it so easy, for
him to undergo; but especially for this that he has been pleased to produce
Honey from Bitterness, and to make Sorrow and Labor instrumental to Joy and
Rest. Consider whether any thing could more deeply concern the Almighty
Creator, than to be frustrated of his End in his darling and most beloved
Creature, to see his Love despised, his Labor spoiled, and his Image defaced;
to see his Benefits slighted and abused, all Obligations trampled on, and the
most necessary, sacred and lovely Law in the World, broken by his ungrateful
Child: Consider all this, and tell me if thou can, what is there that could
move him in the least, to mitigate a Punishment, which was not only enhanced by
so many provocations, but was by his rebellious Creature violently pulled on
himself? Could it be any thing beside Infinite Mercy? Was there any thing to
move him, but his own essential infinite Goodness, which after such liberal
Effects of it had been so basely undervalued. It has been said by some Persons
very piously, That it were better that the whole World should be annihilated,
than a Sin committed. For, say they, the World may be created again with ease,
and all that is in it be repaired with the Breath of his Word: But a Sin once
committed, can never be undone, but will appear in its place throughout all
Eternity. If Sin therefore be so great an Evil, so strange a Monster, something
that I know not how to name, so infinitely opposite to the Divine Purity, and
if it cost more to hinder its Effect, than to create a World, as nothing is
more certain than it does; consider, I pray good Christian, whether thou have
not the highest reason to be thankful, in that the Burden imposed on thee, is
no heavier; which, had it not been lightn'd, would most infallibly have pressed
thee down into the bottomless-pit. Well, I hope thou art sufficiently sensible
of this. But this is not all: For,

. Thirdly, Since God has been so good, as not only to moderate the Punishment
of sin to Man, but even to condescend to accept it, when dutifully underwent,
as a capacity for the greatest Enjoyments; it is not enough for thee to be
Thankful, unless also thou endeavor to undergo it in such a manner as shall be
most serviceable, and best answer such his gracious Dispensation. When ever
therefore thou find thy self wearied and oppressed with Labor, this ought to
put thee in mind that thou art not to take up thy Habitation here, but to look
for one where Care and Labor never enter; and where thou may safely say to
thy Soul, Here take thy Rest. Let every Uneasiness in Labor teach thee to wean
off thy Affections from the Body, hinder the Distractions of thy Soul, and
bring her nearer to her God. Then will this light Punishment which endures but
for a moment, work for thee a more weighty and lasting Crown of Glory: Then
will this Ordinary, but truly wholesome Penance, having daily more and more
estranged thee from the love of the Flesh, and taught thee by inward
Retirements in the midst of thy Business, to converse in thy Spirit with Him
who is always no less present to it, than thou art to thy self, thereby prepare
for thee a far more exceeding weight of Joy: which he cannot fail to give to as
many as make a right use of their Labors; considering them as the
Consequences, and Chastisements of their sinful Deformity. And by this means is
the Evil of Sin converted into its Remedy; the remaining Venom of the Serpent
into a very good Antidote or Treacle; and a Punishment suffered for Crimes into
an Act of Religion. Which is the other, and more lovely Face, under which it
comes now to be considered.

IN the Second place it ought with all diligence to be remembered, That Labor
ought not so much to be looked on as a Penalty for our Transgression; but much
rather as an Act of Religious Worship: and the former only in order to this
latter. For Labor is indeed, with respect to Man, one of the first and most
essential Worships of God, of all I mean not purely Spiritual, when it is
performed according to God's Design and Institution. It does not appear that He
ever enjoined or instituted any other external Worship, Rite, or Ceremony, than
this for above two thousand years in the World. Now every outward Worship, or
Religious Rite, being for no other end than to recollect the Soul into Inward
Acts of Adoration, Love and Obedience; and to call her back to God, even by
those very means which of themselves would be apt to withdraw and distract her
from Him. It cannot be otherwise, but that those external parts of Worship, or
Religious Rites, which are instituted by God himself as long as they continue
so, must have something in them proper to recall the Soul of Man into such
inward Acts (wherein the Spirit, the Soul, and the Life of all Religion
consists) after a wiser and more excellent manner than any other, which either
are, or can be established by any meaner Authority, or lesser Wisdom. And this
they do several ways: First, by Consideration that they are of immediate Divine
Appointment. Secondly, By the Mortification of the Body. Thirdly, By that
Instruction, that is contained or veiled under them. And fourthly, By the
Divine Blessing, which never fails to concur with, and to be conveyed by them,
as often as they are rightly used. All this, I think, is plain, as Anciently in
Circumcision and Sacrifices: so, at present, in Baptism and the Lords Supper.

. But what can be more evident, dear Christian, than that bodily Labor does,
in its right use, most nobly recall thy Soul to God by all these ways? For how,
O Man, can thou forget, whilst thou workest with thy hands, the Word of thy
God, That in the Sweat of thy face shall thou eat Bread? Or how can thou
forbear, being in this manner constantly admonished of the Evil and Misery of
Disobedience, to fear and obey thy God as thou ought? Tell me, how can
thou, being thus engaged to this Bodyly Exercise, forget to mortify and tame
thy proud Flesh, that thy Soul may be more at liberty to admit the inward
workings of the Holy Spirit upon her? Or art thou in the next place so blind,
as not to see the Instruction contained under this Primitive Establishment of
thy good God? Can thou be content thus to toil and sweat, for a little Bodily
Nourishment, that by this thou may sustain a few years, at the best, a
toilsom and a miserable Life? and art thou not content to to take as much pains
to feed thy self with that Food, which infinitely more surpasses the richest
dishes and Cates of Palaces, than they do thy brown Bread; to gain thereby, as
soon as the Work is done, which cannot last long, for all Eternity a most
delightful and happy Life? Can thou do all this, my Friend, to provide thy
self, or thy Family, with a little perishing Food, and do so very little to get
either for thy self, or them, that Heavenly Manna, which is incorruptible, and
which deserves a thousand, nay a million of times, more than all that thou
can ever do? Let this, I pray, be seriously considered; that so the
Instruction may not be lost which is contained under this Outward Institution,
nor the Designs of God in it frustrated and made void. So by this means thou
shall be able to perform a most essential and most acceptable piece of Service
to the Author of thy Being and thy Happiness. Nor is there the least glimpse of
Reason for thee to doubt, in the last place, as if he would ever fail to send
his Blessing along with it, as often as it is thus performed according to his
Institution. For which purpose, it will be fit to keep in thy mind those wise
and righteous Designs of His, for the bringing thee back to Himself, by an
Establishment so unpleasant in it self. These Designs thou will find to be such
as these, viz.

. I. First, Bodily Labor was instituted by the most wise and just God, and
commanded Man to the end, to bring forth in him, a constant Obedience and
Submission to his Commands. Since therefore, whoever thou art, that God has
commanded thee to work, do thou learn hereby continually, and on every occasion
cheerfully to submit thy self to the Orders of his Divine Majesty, and
resolutely obey all his Precepts; as being assured that this was the main End
for which he was pleased to impose so seemingly an hard Command.

. II. Secondly, Bodily Labor was instituted for Man in his fallen Estate, by the
same most wise and just God, that his proud and haughty Heart might be humbled
by mean and vile things. Nothing can fit the Soul for the Receiving lightsom
and comfortable Influxes of God, beside Humility; as nothing more widely
withdraws her from him, and tumbles her into Darkness and Grief; then Pride,
that loathsome Monster, which first threw Man out of Paradise, and now continues
to bar the way back. Art thou not happy, O Christian, that thou art farther
than a great many others removed from the Temtations and Attaques of this foul
Fiend^ if thou art wise, thou will think so, and thank God. I hope at least
thou art wiser, than to wish after that, which in all likelihood would be a
Serpent in thy Bosom, would secretly sting thee to death, and then cast thee
into such a state, as I am persuaded thou can not think on without shaking.
Nothing indeed naturally more conduces to the beating down and Conquering the
proud Heart of Man, than Affliction and Labor; nothing can be found out a more
sensible sign of his Meanness and Necessitous condition than this: And let me
tell thee, my dear Christian, that if this has its proper effect on thee, thou
art a great deal more Happy, than if thou worest a Crown, and did enjoy all
earthly Happiness. For if the Great Persons of the World do undergo less
trouble and pains than thee, which too I very much doubt, I am sure their
Pleasures and Enjoyments are far more dangerous than thy most painful Labors.
By them they have only so much the more to resist, and conquer than thou have.
What think thou, can thou envy them this? No sure. Say rather in thy self,
I thank thee, O Heavenly Father, that thou have placed me in this State, in
which its necessary for me by the sweat of my Brow to gain my Bread; and that I
am not exposed to those great Dangers and Temtations with those above me, which
would most likely have overpowered me, and lifted me up against thee, my kind
Benefactor; since I am so little able at this distance from them, to repress
and conquer this proud Heart of mine. Do thou, O my Father, break it: do what
thou will, so it be broken and humbled, and fit to receive Thee, my Love, my
Light and my Joy. O let me ever cheerfully submit to thy Dispensation, and
never call that hard, which Thou think best for calling me to Thee.

. III. Thirdly, As soon as the Heart of Man was turned away from God by Pride,
there presently crept into it a slothful Disposition, strongly inclining it to
the love of Ease and sensible Pleasure. Now it being no less necessary to
mortify this, than the former: God who is wise, and good, and just in all his
Institutions, ordained Labor for Man, that by the mortification of his Sloth,
Ease and Pleasure, he might be brought to have a due value for what he had
lost; and to labor after that Rest and Delight, that are only capable to
satisfy a Creature of Original so noble, and of Desires so boundless. The
Mischiefs that Sloth and Ease bring both to Soul and Body, are so very Many,
and so very Great, as but to hint at them, would take up a large Discourse; of
which I doubt not but thy own Experience may afford plenty of miserable
Instances enough. As if it were indeed true in the most literal sense; That the
Working and Industrious Person is exposed only to one, but the Lazy and the
Sloathful to all the Devils in Hell. Nor are those which proceed from the
Pleasures of the Body either fewer, or less considerable. Thou may be
certain of this, that thou have not made the least step to true Happiness,
unless thou art fully convinced that thou art not otherwise capable to relish
those noble and exalted Pleasures of the Spirit, which thy good Father invites
thee to partake of, than according to the measure that thou art withdrawn from
those mean and ignoble ones of the Flesh. Tell me therefore, O my Friend, have
thou not reason to thank this kind Father of thine, that he has put thee in a
State, in which thou have so much less to do toward the subduing, and bringing
under the Body to the Spirit, than many others of his Children. Let me tell
thee, thou art insensible, if thou do not bless him: I hope thou do with
all thy Heart: But if (which God forbid) thou do hanker after the Onions and
Garlic of Egypt; then I would have thee even fairly set down, and never expect
to enter the Promised Land, flowing with Milk and Honey. Well, but I will hope
better things, as that thou will endeavor with all thy might to destroy this
silly hankering, and so fit thy self for an Admission to those pure Delights,
that are prepared for refined Souls.

. IV. Fourthly, As Man, who in his Original State was but a little lower than
the Angels, and stood not in need of any thing, having all his desires
abundantly satisfied, as long as they stood, in the first place, directed
toward God; became through sin, a poor and needy Creature: This God in his
Wisdom and Goodness, thought fit to appoint a Rule, whereby to relieve the
Poverty, and succor the needs of this miserable Creature, and thereby bring him
back to Himself. Thou ought therefore to remember, O Man, that in Conformity
to this Rule, thou art obliged not only to exercise an Act of Charity toward
thy Own self, by seeking to preserve thy Life, for the sake and love of God,
and out of a sense of his righteous Law; but also for the same love of God, to
work for those of thy Friends and Relations, that are not able to work
themselves, or who cannot sufficiently provide for their Necessities. But if
thou do this in the first place for thy own, or for their sake, be not so
miserably deceived, as to think thy self a Christian: without this Charity; a
dead Corpse is altogether as much a Man, as thou art a Christian. Believe me,
this Selfish Love is the very Root and Principle of Hell Within thee; and only
so far as thou mortifiest and killest this, can thou be said to have any Life
with respect to God, or to enjoy any share of the Divine Image and Life, which
is the sole Root and Principle of Everlasting Joy. Think, my dear Friend, what
manner of Charity it is, which I thus commend to thee, as the Office of thy
Labor, and as what will most certainly be required at thy hands.

. V. Fifthly, As Man, who in his Primitive State of Innocence, was not only
exempted from all Need, but also freed from every Violence and Grief, so that
it was not possible for any thing without him, to discompose or disorder him in
the least, or to bring to him but never so little sorrow or pain; became through
Sin not only a Poor and Indigent, but also an Afflicted and Calamitous
Creature, exposed to the rude Attaques of every thing Without him: the most
wise and Merciful God, was graciously pleased to appoint a Rule for his
Rebellious Child, whereby he might be taught by suffering, in some small
measure, the sad effects of his Crime, to remember the State whence he is
fallen, to reflect on the most ugly loathsomness of Sin, to consider and put to
heart its woeful and dire attendance; and so leaving the husks and the draff of
impure Swine, to return to Him, whom he had otherwise forgotten, who will not
fail to embrace, and entertain with the most Affectionate Expressions of his
Love; This Son that was dead, and is alive again; that was lost, and is found.
Luke c. XV. v. 32. Consider this End of thy Labor, and be wise: Consider
betimes. There is not a Maxim, that I can find, of greater Truth, or more
worthy of the most serious consideration of every one, than this, That All
things fallen into a corruptible state, are to be restored, and perfected by
suffering. Think, and think again on this; for it is a Truth as of great
Evidence, so of great Extent: it is that in which even the most profound
Philosophers, and the most learned Divines may lose themselves: And yet this is
that which thou may easily reach, and I hope thou do render familiar to
thy self. Can thou complain that God has placed thee in the School of
Patience: many righteous Souls have rejoiced for this same. Be of good courage,
I say; never repine at a little hardship, but rather thank thy good God for
taking such a Method to cure thee, and draw thee to Himself. As well may a
Body, that has all its Limbs disjointed, or broken into splinters, be set
aright again, and be made as sound as at first without pain; or one that groans
under the most heavy and tormenting pangs of the most cruel Distemper, or has
his senses numm'd, or his Faculties doz'd in a cold and clammy sleep, be
restored to his perfect Strength and Health, without bearing or feeling any
thing: as a Soul that is put into disorder, and, as it were, disjointed through
Folly, or sick and diseased through Sin, be restored to its perfect soundness,
that refuses to endure any Pain in a change which is so much more considerable.
Nothing is more reasonable, just and necessary, than to bear with a bitter
Potion, without taking which it is impossible to be ever cured. But do thou
think this a distastful Virtue to suffer in Patience? if thou do, thou thy
self have made it so: it receives only Bitterness from Sin; but Life and Beauty
from God. Which must be acknowledged by all, to be very extraordinary and
lovely. So much indeed as in this one syllable, Bear, is contained no less than
one half of the noblest Philosophy that ever enriched Mankind; and I am much
mistaken if it make a less figure, in the Religion of a Suffering Savior.

. VI. Sixthly, Had Man, who through Sin was become an Afflicted and Calamitous
Creature, and was therefore by God instructed in the Lesson of Patience, which
he was directed to learn from hard Labor, and from the Curse on the Earth;
been hereby exposed to such Pains only, as did necessarily spring from the
Disorder of the World, perhaps it would have been no such hard matter to a
strong Constitution to have born them. But to ly open to all the Injuries and
hard usages of those of our kind, who are as bad, or worse than our selves;
this seems to be a task of far greater difficulty, and yet of no less
necessity: Wherefore the most wise and just God instituted and commanded the
Exercise of Bodily Labor for this farther end, that the Passions being not
pampered by Luxury or Ease, Man might be able by such a painful subduing them,
not to take any notice of those many Causes of Anger and Distaste, that
continually offer themselves, but wholly to surrender himself to the Righteous
Judge of the World; making his Breast a Sanctuary of Peace, while both his
Body and his Mind are so employed for him, that he has not while to be
disturbed, or concerned with the Disorders or Follies of other people. There
are not lacking Examples of more than a few, who to learn this Excellent
Virtue, have chosen to submit themselves to servile Offices and base
Emploiments, from which by their Estates they have been exemted. Is this which
was in them a Condescension, in thee a Necessity? Consider whether it be not
easier for thee, than for them; and whether thou have not a greater Obligation,
by such a Mastery over thy self, to obtain that blessed Meekness of Spirit,
which will make thee to triumph over all the Injuries and Indignities, that is
in the power of Man to offer; prepare for thee perpetual Victories; fit thee
for the Temple of the Holy Ghost; and make thee able to enjoy, notwithstanding
all Disturbances, the Blessings of the Heaven above, and of the Earth beneath.
Whereas the Passionate and Rageful are utterly incapable of enjoying either:
but Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth; and pass from this
Inheritance to a better, into which our ever Blessed Forerunner is through
Meekness and Long-suffering arrived, and Set down at the right hand of God,
giving us an Example, that we might follow his Steps; and find Rest unto our
Souls. Matthew. XI.29.

. VII. The proud heart of Man is naturally carried to murmur and repine, if it
meet with any Uneasiness; hankers after Greatness and Ease; greedily seeks for
Riches, and envies them in another; all which being Dispositions directly
contrary to that Serenity and Sobriety of Mind, which is absolutely necessary,
to make it capable of any real Happiness; it pleased our good God to impose a
Rule and Task on our Corrupted Nature, whereby having daily Occasions, we might
learn that most pleasant Virtue Contentment; and drive out, and overcome all
those torturing Furies that are lodged in a Murmuring, Ambitious, Covetous or
Envious Breast. Can thou look on these with any Satisfaction? Surely thou
can not. Tell me, O Christian, do thou not think that the Wise Man had
reason to say, Better is a bit of Bread with Content, than a fatted Ox with
strife. Wherefore now let thy Conversation, thy Disposition and Temper of Mind,
be without Covetousness, and be content which such things as thou have; be
fully satisfied with what ever God at present allows thee: for as he said to
Joshua, Josh. c. I. v. 5. so says he now to thee, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee: Only be thou strong, and of a good courage; and so may thou
though poor and needy, though persecuted, afflicted, and tormented, with the Saints
of Old, boldly say, The Lord is my helper; yea, in God have I put my trust, and
I will not fear what Flesh shall do unto me, Psalm. LVI. v. 11. Heb. c. XIII. v.
5, 6. For by this shall thou be able to get advantage over Poverty, Affliction,
Sickness, nay even Death it self, with all kind of Casualties to which thou art
exposed by reason of thy frail Condition. Be assured that Godliness with
Contentment is great gain: and remember how they that Will be rich, that set
their Minds, which are designed for a far Nobler End, on the getting of riches,
fall into Temtation and a Snare, and into many foolish lusts, which drown men
in destruction and perdition. 1 Timothy VI. 6, 9.

. VIII. Lastly, Labor was ordained for Man, that he seeing himself bound to
work, that he might provide food and raiment for his Body, should be thereby
admonished to labor with all his might after that Divine. Grace, with which he
has most need to feed and clothe his Soul; and not expect to be translated
hence into the pure and holy Mansions of Heaven, by an unresistible sort of
Grace, whether he will or no. I hope rather, my Friend, that thou think no
Labor too great for thee, to save thee from the sad lot of the Slothful and
unprofitable servant, which is to be cast into utter darkness. Give then all
diligence, gird up the loins of thy Mind, be sober and hope to the end. Labor
not for (set not thy Heart upon) the meat that perishes, but for that meat
which endures to everlasting Life, John VI. v. 27. and so by patient
continuance in well-doing, thinking it thy Meat and thy Drink to do the Will of
thy Heavenly Father, Seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality.

Whosoever labors after this manner, performs in it the best and divinest of
all External Worships, whose end is to draw the Soul by sensible Means nearer
to God. But whosoever in his Labor neglects these Considerations, does
certainly work like a Beast. Nay, if thou workest without thinking on God, or
his Institution, thou art in truth the greater Beast of the two. Whoever
labors for the Ends of Pleasure, Vanity, or Covetousness, and who is busied
about hurtful or wicked Emploiments, such an one cannot in any wise be said to
labor as the Child of God: therefore be not deceived, for many are hereby,
(wholly forgetting its primitive Institution,) become the slaves of the Devil.
And this, I suppose, thou think the lowest degrading of thy self that is
possible.

There is indeed no Estate of Perfection so sublime, that Humane Nature is
capable of, to which one may not arrive by Labor, directed according to the
Designs of God. This is that in which the Holy Patriarchs of old, while they
had hardly any other Ceremonies, or External Worship, than this appointed,
became the Friends of God; and were advanced to a near Communication with Him
on Earth. It was by this Exercise for about the first forty years of his Life,
that Moses arrived to that excellent pitch of Obedience, Submission and
Humility, refusing to be called the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter; of
Mortification, Charity and Patience, choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; Of
Meekness, Contentedness, and the highest inward Recollection and Wisdom,
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt,
Heb. XI. 24, 25, 26. who thereby spoke to God face to face, and received from
him this Testimony, I know thee by Name, and thou have found Grace in my sight,
Exo. xxxiii. 12. Nay, a Greater than Moses, even Our Blessed Lord himself,
chose no other Exercise than this, in the time of his Humiliation; while he
grew in Wisdom and in favor with God and Men, before his Public Manifestation
to the World. He submitted himself to work at an ordinary and laborious Trade,
to earn his own Victuals, and disdained not to serve his Neighbors that had
any use of him, in such low manual Offices for the greatest part of his Life,
and to assist the Necessities of his Family. And what art thou proud Worm, that
can despise, or repine at that, which thy Master and thy Redeemer underwent
for the sake of thee? Do thou not think that He hereby designed to leave thee
such a Pattern of Humility, as might be able to bring down thy haughty Stomach;
and might instruct thee how Corporal Labor is not any Hindrance in, but may it
self be made a most acceptable Worship to God? To this purpose, it is said of a
late Eminent Scholar, that after a most learned and excellent Defense of the
Truth of the Christian Religion, and an Elaborate Comment on the whole Bible,
as well as many other famed Pieces, in Divinity, Law, History, and other
Sciences, which advanced him to several Public Embassies, and the greatest
Honors; this Illustrious Person after all, concluded his Life, with this
Protestation, That He would give all his Learning and Honor, for the plain
Integrity and harmless Innocence of John Vrick; who was a poor Man that,
dividing the Day into three parts, spent eight hours of it in Labor, eight in
the Necessaries of Life, and the other eight in Reading and Prayer. For

There is this further plain Advantage of Bodily Labor to be considered, that
it requires not so great a measure of Abilities and Grace, as does the
Spiritual. Study, or Spiritual Labor, is indeed a great Labor: so very great,
as none can conceive, but such as have felt it; and requires doubtless much
larger Abilities, more and different Talents, and greater Graces, than what are
required toward that of the Body, that it be exercised as it ought. The
Miscarriages of this are not only greater, but easier too; for Knowledge
puffs up, and without the greatest care and caution that is possible, this
sort of Labor will feed the Pride and Vanity, and nourish the Passion of the
diseased Mind: Whereas the other, as we have seen, is more fitted to produce
those so needful Qualifications of Humility, Mortification, and Meekness.

Thus have I endeavored to teach thee, in short, how thou ought to look
Always on thy Labor, as the Effect and Punishment of thy Sin; to remember that
thou must never expect to be saved, unless thou be content to taste its evil; be
sincerely thankful, for that it is no heavier; be resolved, by a wise and
cheerful Submission unto thy share of the Cross, to seek for those things that
are Above, and to balk at no difficulty, that so thou may but at last enter
into the Rest of the Lord: Nor is this all, for thou have here both a Warning,
and a Method, how thou may even sweeten all its Bitterness, turning it into a
most acceptable piece of Service to thy most kind Creator and Benefactor; by
directing it according to his Designs, and learning thence those most necessary
Graces of Obedience, Humility and Industry; of Temperance, Charity, and
Patience; of Meekness, Contentedness, and even the highest pitch of Spiritual
Recollection, and Conversation with Him, that thy Nature is capable of on this
side Heaven. And is this such a mean or pitiful estate, that thou can in the
least envy that of those, who by being the Lumber of this World, make
themselves Fuel for a worse? No, I am persuaded thou can not. Methinks, I
hear thee make this Answer, I will not hereafter account any Estate too mean,
or any Labor too hard, which is capable of compassing such glorious Ends; No
Toil can be too great, which draws me nearer to my God: No Condition too low,
which lifts me thus high. Well, then suppose (what is at this time the lot of
so many Christians, better every way than thee,) that thou werst a slave
chained to an Oar; or werst condemned to some dark Mine, there to be deprived
of all the Light and Enjoiment of this World; could thou by such Acts as
these set thy self free, and no more than exchange a few paltry and fading, for
great and constant Delights? Examine thy Heart seriously, what in such a case
thou would do. If thou could do so, then have thou truly learnt Christ:
but if not, I can never flatter thee, to tell thee, that thou art a Member of
Christ, or a Child of God. But perhaps thou will say, This is afar off from me:
God be thanked, there is little danger yet of my falling into such a state.
Well, but however, I advise thee, as thou love thy self, not to put it far
from thee, but to make it by all manner of ways familiar to thee; that so thou
may not be unprovided against any disposal of Providence. But if, dear
Christian and Countryman, the Lot be fallen to thee in a better Ground,
consider what reason thou have to thank thy good God, for laying so little upon
thee, in comparison of what the poorer sort in most other Nations do bear: And
forget not to offer up thy prayers to their Father and thine, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would be pleased to support them with his
Spirit, under their most heavy Oppression, and also enable thee to undergo it
courageously, if he should call thee to drink with them of the same bitter Cup.
Nothing else now remains, but that after such a Prospect of Labor; as renders
it both the Natural Punishment for Sin, and an Acceptable Act of Worship to
God; which in the Bowels of Mercy I entreat thee, dear Christian, not to
forget; I show in the last place, to the end I may make what I have said for
thy sake, the more Useful, how thou may draw Hence such proper Exercises of
Religion, as are aforementioned.

I. IN the first place therefore, if thou have any sense, as I hope thou have a
great one of what thou have hitherto read, (which God grant may never be
brought into Judgment against thee,) I am fully satisfied that thou will
presently, without any longer put-offs or delays, resolve and purpose to
convert thy Work into a Service of God, and so Worship Him, in all the Designs
of this His most ancient Establishment, for the rest of thy Life. And
especially thou will be to much the more earnest in this, if it appear that
thou have dishonored Him heretofore, by that wherein thou ought only to
have considered thy own Baseness, and His Honor. If hitherto thou have
mistaken its Ends, thou will be truly glad that thou art now at last
undeceived, and wilt labor more diligently for the time to come, to keep them
constantly in thy view: And if thine Heart accuse thee for having ever turned
it into a Worship of the Devil, and of thy Lusts, thine Heart will also
admonish thee to Consecrate it now, for ever hereafter, to God, according to
his Blessed Institution, and will the more powerfully press thee to do this
Effectually and wholly, not faintly, or partially; by vigorously stirring thee
up to begin with as much Solemnity, and Particularness, as either Thy self, or
the Matter is capable of, thereby to make the Impression the deeper and more
lasting. Place then thy self in the presence of God, reflect seriously on thy
past Estate, and that which by his Grace thou art invited to enter into, and
when, after having minutely and impartially weighed the Advantages, or
Disadvantages of both, thou art fully Resolved; then with the most ardent
Affection, and Resentment that is possible, declare this thy Resolution and
Purpose: Which thou may do in the manner following. But first meditate upon,
and consider it a while: Then upon thy bended Knees, from the bottom of thy
Heart say,

IN the Name of God. Amen. I A. B. resolve henceforward never more to Labor
again as the Horse and the Mule without Understanding, but constantly to look
on, and resolvedly to embrace that State of Labor to which I am by my good God
appointed, as a Chastisement for my Rebellion against, and a Mean to reduce me
back to that Loyalty and Allegiance which is due to his Divine Majesty. I will
evermore detest and abhor, as I do now most sincerely, from the bottom of my
Heart, detest and abhor; in the Sight of God and of all the Court of Heaven,
Sin, which is its accursed Cause; I will quietly, nay thankfully undergo it,
for that it is no greater; and will study to make it serve all those good and
wise Ends, of which it is capable: I will Labor to be perfectly obedient to
all the Commands of my God; I will humble my self before Him as low as I can,
because it is not possible as low as I deserve; I will strive to the utmost to
be as diligent and industrious in my Calling, as sober and temperate in the
government of my Senses, as charitable and assisting toward my Neighbors and
Friends; as patient under all hardship and pain; as meek under every harsh
usage, and injurious insultings from my Fellow Creature; as contented and
cheerful in the meanness of my Condition; and lastly, as far removed from the
World, and as nearly united to God, as either He hereby designs and invites me
to be, or as I have need of: For as much as I am assured that He cannot deny me
any Assistance of his Holy Spirit, which I beg through the Merits of his only
begotten Son, my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

II. Next, after this Protestation made, and Resolution declared as in the
presence of God, and of the whole Court of Heaven, that it may become Effectual
in thy Life, thou art to keep every Branch of it in thy Mind, and to secure the
same in thine Heart by fervent and faithful Prayer: For this purpose, after I
have directed thee, how to form in thy Spirit a General Abhorrence of Sin, and
to express thy Acknowledgments to God for his wonderful Goodness; I will teach
thee on all occasions, according as thy needs shall direct, to call down the
Divine Assistance, to enable thee in the performance of every part. But before
all things, it is necessary that thou beg it of thy Heavenly Father, that there
may be imprinted on thee a just Detestation and Abhorrence of all manner of
Sin, the fruitful Mother of thy Misery. To which end, say,

ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, grant, I beseech thee, that
I may have that due sense as well of Thine infinite Purity and Happiness, as of
mine own Deformity and Misery, that I may abhor my self in dust and ashes
before Thee; and while I eat my Bread in the Sweat of my brow, may never forget
to detest and fly that Monster, which has laid this Yoke on my shoulders, that
I may confess to Thee my strange Vileness and Folly, and feeling thus in part
the bitter Effect of Sin, may not only detest and confess, but be also ever
ready to satisfy any Condition that will release me from its accursed slavery,
for the Love and through the Merits of Him, who submitted himself to bear so
large a share, that mine might be no more, even thy most glorious and most
adorable Son, my only Redeemer and Mediator Jesus Christ.

Then in the deepest Humility of thy Soul, address thy self to the most
Merciful God in the following, or like Form of Thanksgiving.

ALmighty God, Father of all Mercies, I thine unworthy servant, do give Thee
most humble and hearty thanks, for thy great goodness and loving kindness
toward me, in that thou did not only send Thy only begotten Son to deliver
me from the Bondage of Sin and Death, and so restore me to the Influences of
thy Favor, which are Light and Joy everlasting, by suffering together with me
what I had brought upon my self; but did also make the Burden for me so
easy, and the Chastisement so light, as I can wish it in Prudence neither
easier, nor lighter. But especially I bless thee, O heavenly Father, for that
thou were pleased even to turn this remaining Effect of Sin, through the
Efficacious Mediation of this same dearly beloved Son, into a most powerful
Remedy against it, that it may be to me, if I please, the proper Instrument of
my Happiness, through the same Jesus Christ; to whom with Thee, and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, world without end. Amen.

Now in nothing more fitly can thou show thy Abhorrence of Sin, or
Thankfulness, than by carefully watching thy Soul, and on all occasions, as
thou either find'st thy self inwardly moved to some particular Exercise, or
assaulted by any Temtation, strengthening thy self by Supplication to thy
Heavenly Father, for such Graces, as thou stand most in need of, who when
thou ask Bread, will not refuse it thee, or give thee a Stone in its stead.
Wherefore Ask, and it shall be given: Seek, and thou shall find.

PRAYERS.
For Resolution.
MOST gracious God, who of thine infinite Goodness wast pleased both to make my
Burden so light, and even to condescend to accept this, if born according to
Thine Appointment, as a Qualification for that Heavenly Rest, and those
boundless Joys, which Thou have prepared for such as love and seek thee, I
humbly beseech Thee, so to assist me with Thy Grace, that I may be able in such
wise to bear and undergo the same, with entire conformity to thy most blessed
Will, and all thy righteous Designs herein; that I fail not, after having felt
the weight of Sin for a while, of being removed thither where Death and Sin
have no power, that so I may enjoy the pleasures of Thy presence for evermore,
through the alone Merits of thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, our Lord and
Savior. Amen.

For Obedience.
O Almighty God, to whom all things both in heaven and Earth ow entire
Obedience; grant, I beseech thee, that I constantly considering how Thou have
appointed Labor for Man, may thereby at all times be put in mind of the great
evil of Disobedience to thy righteous Law, and learn to submit my self
sincerely to its Guidance, and study to obey all thy Commands, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

For Humility.
MOst Glorious and Eternal God, who resistest the proud, and art pleased to
dwell with the humble Spirit, and who have for this end appointed Bodily Labor
for me, that my proud Heart may be tamed and humbled by it, so as to be fit to
receive the light and gladsom Influence of Thy Countenance; do thou powerfully
convince me of mine own wretchedness and folly, that I may no longer nourish,
or covet any high opinion of my self, but above all things, seek that most
excellent grace of Humility, which is the Fountain of all Blessing. Grant this,
O Lord, for his sake who humbled himself not only to the meanest of Services,
but even to the Death of the Cross, Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Industry.
MOst Wise and Righteous God, who have ordained that Man should be born to
Labor; never let me, I pray thee, resist that design of Thine; but so hedge me
in all the time of my Pilgrimage, and press me forward, that I may never give
my self up to Easiness and Idleness of life: but man so employ my time, as not
to fall under the sentence of the Slothful and the Unprofitable Servant: Hear,
O Lord, and assist me, for the sake of Jesus Christ.

For Temperance.
BLessed God, who art graciously pleased to give me this daily Warning to
withdraw my Mind from the pleasures of the Body; assist me, I beseech thee,
with thy Holy Spirit, that I may ever listen to His merciful Counsels, and make
such use of the weight that surrounds me, that the Flesh being thereby subdued
to the Spirit, I may ever obey thy godly motions in righteousness and true
Holiness, to the honor and glory of thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ.

For Charity.
GRacious Lord, who have in thy Wisdom ordained Labor, whereby to succor the
needs of our frail Nature; grant that I may by Diligence and Industry ever
study to be useful, not to my self alone, but likewise to others; and to attain
that most excellent Gift of Charity, the very Root and Bond of Peace, and of
all virtuous Acts. Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for thine only Son Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

For Patience.
LEt thy merciful Ears, O Lord be open to my Petitions, and thy Grace ever
ready to support me, that I duly considering how poor, and naked, and miserable
Sin has made me, may learn steadfastly to shun all unrighteousness, and
patiently to undergo as much of its evil, as thou in thy Wisdom have appointed
for me; that following the Example of thy Son, my only Savior, I may also with
him be made partaker of his Resurrection, through the same Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Meekness.
BLess me, O my God, with such a meek and humble Spirit, as I may never be
unmanned by any Passion or trouble, may neither be exalted by the Praise, nor
depressed by the Contemt and scorn, nor hurried into any unseemly behavior, by
the Injuries or Affronts of the World; but may comply with every Event in my
Emploiment, and submit my self wholly to thy righteous Judgment, being never
angry at any thing but my own Sins, and and grieving for the Sins of others;
which I humbly beseech thee, not to lay to their charge, for the sake of Jesus
Christ my most blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

For Contentment.
O Lord most high, the Maker both of the Rich and the Poor; look down
graciously, I beseech thee, upon me thy poor Servant; and of thy great mercy
drive out of me all Murmuring, Ambition, Covetousness and Envy: That I duly
acknowledging thy Sovereign Power over me, and thy Wisdom and Justice in the
disposal of this World according to diverse Ranks and Degrees, may sincerely
submit my self to the State, wherein thou have been pleased to place me below
many others, and utterly resign my self up to thy Providence and Guidance. And
if, good Lord, I have at any time murmured or repined at my Condition, or
coveted and envied that of those above me, of thy great Goodness pardon me, and
make me so much the more watchful for the time to come, through Jesus Christ.
Amen.

For Devotion.
GIve me, gracious Lord, such a Contemt of every thing below, that I may never
in the least set my Heart on Riches or Honor, but always labor to lay up my
treasure in Heaven, and seek for that Crown which thou art ready to give to as
many as earnestly strive for it. And to this end, I humbly beseech thee, to
enliven this drossy and earthly Heart, that it may never be so detained by the
things beneath, but that it may freely mount toward Thee, constantly fly to
thy Throne for succor and assistance, that I may not be found more diligent to
provide Food and Raiment for this Body, than to feed and clothe my Soul with
thy Grace; which I fully trust thou will give me, if I shrink not from taking a
little pains, for this so noble a Pearl, through the Merits of Jesus Christ thy
Son, my only Advocate and Redeemer. Amen.

III. That thou may the better preserve a constant sense of God in thy daily
Emploiment, and of that continual Worship and Homage, which thou art obliged to
pay him thereby; I advise thee, dear Christian, to accustom thy self to lift up
thy Soul to God, which may be done without any hindrance at all to Business, by
some Verses out of the Psalms, in which thou find the greatest Relish, or by
some such short Prayers, and Divine Breathings, which I have here gathered for
thy use, on several Occasions. God grant they may raise, and keep in thy Heart
such pious Dispositions.

GODLY BREATHINGS.
I. When the Soul feels it self oppressed with Bodily Labor, or Calamity.
I Come unto thee weary and heavy laden, Blessed Jesus; do thou refresh me with
thy Mercies. O give me thy Rest.

Help me, O God my Savior: and for the glory of thy Name, deliver me.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord, heal me, for I am sore
vexed.

Shall the needy always be forgotten, O Lord: or the expectation of the poor
perish for evermore?

Arise, O Lord God, and lift up thine hand: forget not the poor.

Thou, Dear Jesus, art the helper of the afflicted and the friendless: And unto
thee therefore does the poor commit himself.

Thou hear the desire of the poor: thou preparest his heart, and thine ear
hearkens thereto.

II. When the Soul feels an inward Rest and Satisfaction for Blessings received.
THou have not despised, O Lord, nor abhorred the low estate of the poor:
neither have thou hid thy face from me; but when I called unto thee, did hear
me from thy holy Hill.

Thou, Lord, regardest the lowliness of thy Servant: wherefore my Soul shall
magnify thee for ever.

My help comes from the Lord, who made both Heaven and Earth: who puts down
the Mighty from their Seat, and exalts the Humble and Meek.

My praise shall be of thee, O my God, in the great Congregation: my Vows will
I perform for this thy mighty condescension, in the sight of them that fear
thee.

III. At the Beginning of any Business, or Work.
THe Lord Jesus Christ be with my Spirit, Soul, and Body.

Lord, prosper thou the Works of my hands: O prosper thou my Handiwork.

In the Name of God. Amen. Let this, and every thing, O Lord, be to thy glory.

IV. At going forth.
ORder my steps, O Lord, in thy Word; and let not any Iniquity have dominion
over me this day.

Give thine Angels charge over me, to keep me in all my ways; but especially
from all Deceit, Envy, and Impatience.

Blessed Jesus, hold thou up my Goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

V. On all Occasions.
LOrd, I am nothing, I have nothing, and desire nothing but Thee.

Lord, have mercy upon me: Christ have mercy upon me: Lord, have mercy upon me.

As for me, I am poor and needy: but the Lord cares for me.

Thou art my Helper and Redeemer, make no long tarrying, O my Lord.

VI. At Meals.
HOw Blessed are they that fear the Lord; and walk in his ways!

For thou shall eat the Labor of thine hands: O well is it with thee, and
happy shall thou be.

O taste, and see how good the Lord is, filling my heart with food and gladness.

VII. At the sight of a Rich Miser.
MAn walks in a vain shadow, and disquiets himself in vain: he heaps up Riches,
and cannot tell who shall gather them.

And now, Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in Thee, sweet Jesus.

O grant that I may lay up Treasures for my self in Heaven; where neither moth,
nor rust does corrupt: nor thieves break through and steal.

O let me never labor to treasure up Wrath against the day of Wrath: or to bid
my Soul, Here take its Rest.

So teach me, good Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto
Wisdom. Amen.

VIII. For Grace.
LOrd, lift up the Light of thy countenance upon me: for I am a poor and needy
creature, not able to do any thing good without Thee.

Lord, incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not unto Covetousness.

O knit my heart to thee, which is somewhat tamed, I hope under the weight and
punishment of its Sin; that I may ever fear thy Name, and walk in thy Truth.

O give me, good Lord, the Comfort of thy Help, and establish me with thy free
Spirit, for the sake of Jesus my Redeemer.

IV. It is most agreeable that, more particularly, every Morning and Night,
there be an appointed and set Recommending of our Labor and Rest, to God's
gracious Guidance and Protection. This may be in the manner following.

IN THE MORNING.
THe Blessing of God the Father, of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Holy
Spirit, be with me this day, and evermore; Keep, Protect, and Prosper me in my
Calling to his Glory. Amen. I thank thee, O Merciful Father, for thy Protection
the Night past, and all other Benefits Spiritual and Bodily: I now recommend my
self, both Soul and Body, and whatever thou have appointed me to do for the
Maintenance of either, in my Emploiment and Labor: Be thou the Beginning, the
Middle, and the End of all my Undertakings: And be pleased so to sanctify, I
beseech thee, the Necessities of my corrupt Nature to thy Service, that every
thing may turn to the honor of thy Name, and I fail not finally of obtaining
thy Benefits. To this end, let thy Holy Spirit guide me in the beginning, and
thoro-out, that I may by the Help of this thy outward Establishment continually
recall my Mind into inward Acts of pure and undefiled Religion, quietly do my
own Business, bear my Burden with joy; and labor in my particular State and
Emploiment, as I ought, and as becomes thy most obedient Servant; be just in
all my Dealings, harmless in my Conversation, meek and patient under cross
events; be perfectly contented with what I have, well pleased with the
prosperity of other Men, and heartily desirous of the good of all the World,
that every one, in their several Stations, may truly and godlily serve thee,
through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

AT NIGHT: After Examination of the foregoing Day.
ALL Glory be to thee, most merciful Father, for that thou have stood by me,
and preserved me this day in my Emploiment, from all the Evils and Mischiefs
which might have befallen me. I give thee most humble and hearty Thanks, as for
all thy Blessings, so especially if I have in any measure served Thee this Day
in my Calling: I am heartily sorry for whatever I have therein offended thee,
my good Lord; I humbly fly to Thee for Succor and Forgiveness, and I fully and
steadfastly purpose by the Assistance of thy Grace, to take such care for to
Morrow and the future, if thou will allow me any longer time, who have made no
better use of this, that I never fall into the same snare more; or if I am so
unhappy, presently to recover my self; in which firm Resolution and entire
Resignation, I commit my Soul, Spirit and Body this Night, and ever to thy most
wise Disposal: Defend me from all works and dangers of Darkness; possess me
sleeping and waking; let thy good Angel stay with me, that in thy power and
strength, I may rest safely, and my wearied Limbs being refreshed with moderate
Repose, may be enabled to perform the Duties of the Day following; as I wish,
and as I ought, through the Love and Merits of Jesus my Savior. Amen.

V. Lastly, I advise thee to bear in thy Mind, some few short Sentences, which
will be a sure Comfort and Support to thee, whatever falls out, if thou can
apply them to thy heart. And for this purpose, Hear what comfortable Words the
Holy Psalmist says to the Poor that truly turn to the Lord.

The Lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they who seek the Lord, shall want
no manner of thing that is good. Psalm. xxxiv.10.

O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee. Psalm. live.23.

Hear also what our Savior Christ says.

Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and all these things
shall be added unto you. Mat. vi.33.

Thus, dear Christian Friend, I have sought to serve thee, to the Glory of God,
and to thine own everlasting Good; that so after a little pain and trouble in
this Life, underwent for the sake of God, with respect to all his righteous
Ends, and in imitation of thy Savior, thou may at length enter into the
Rest from thy Labors, thy Works following thee, to give thee admittance into
the company of those Blessed and Noble Spirits, who are gone before in the same
way: many or most of whom, were the very scorn and offscouring of the World,
and are raised to a Crown which fades not, but stands fast for ever; from
quite as mean, if not meaner a condition than thine; which Jesus the Righteous
Judge, will not fail to give to thee, if thou seek but in good earnest,
according to the said Methods, to prepare thy self. Only be of good courage,
and faint not. Thank God for every good thing, and thy self for every evil one.
If by this thou have reaped any Benefit, give all the thanks to God; and forget
not him, I pray thee, in thy Prayers, who is the Instrument of conveying this
charitable Assistance to thee; and who will abundantly rejoice, if it can but
in any wise promote those Ends for which it is designed,

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Though this Discourse might properly have gone along with Another of like
Nature, it was thought fit to be Published Separately, for the Sake of those
for whose Use it is Composed: Which the Reader is desired to consider, if he
meet with in it some few Expressions, that relate to this Other, being A
Practical Discourse of the Labor of the Mind; grounded in like manner, with
This, on Genesis iii.19. But which descends to the Particular kinds of that
Labor, which would not only have swelled This to an excessive bulk, but also
not have been agreeable to the Design, which was barely to hint some Reflections
on the Constitution of this Labor, in General, in the World.


