THIS MOST Deplorable CASE Of an Ancient CITIZEN WHO Has been an Old Honest,
and faithful Servant of, and very great Sufferer for the Interest of the City
of LONDON, is most Humbly desired to be Read over by all good Citizens with
great Care, Seriousness, and due Consideration.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1678.

To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Chaplin Knight, Lord Mayor, and to the
Right Worshipful the Aldermen, Common Council, Masters, Wardens, Assistants,
and Liveries of all the several Companies of the City of London.
The Case and Humble Remonstrances of Richard Lee Citizen and Fishmonger of
London, who has been of the Livery of that Company near 30 years, Aged 56
years; having had 17 Children.
Humbly showing:
THat 40 years ago he came to London, and served his Uncle Mr. John Lee
(Deputy to the Town Clerk of London, and Clerk of Fishmongers-Hall, Bridewel,
and Bethlem) 8 years; and about 1648. he was admitted Clerk Comptroller of the
Bridge-house London, wherein he served about Nine years, till for the Causes
hereafter mentioned in the year 1657 he left and surrendered the same Place:
Also he served as Clerk and Associate to the Clerk of Assizes of the home
Circuit many years, till for hopes of better Preferment, he also left that
Place; whereof being disappointed, having no Employment, a great charge of
Children to maintain, being willing to be improving what he had, and to be
doing what he could for the maintenance of him, his wife and many small
children, he took a Brew House, and followed the Brewing Trade from 1657 till
1667 with very unhappy success, Malt; Coals, and Hops being all generally in
those years very dear; and the dreadful and contagious Sickness and Fire also
fa^l^ng very heavy upon him, whereby and by very many great Losses and crosses
he sustained, by bad Customers and desperate Debts, and other ways, by the
succession and concurrency of all which several cross Providence, he suffered
so greatly, that he was disabled longer to carry on his said Trade; but in 1667
was forced to leave off, and sell his Brew House and all Appurtenances for 530
l. which cost him 1600 lib. in Purchasing, Building, and Planting, his real
Losses by his said several sore Sufferings amounting to above 5000 lib. And
after he had left off his said Trade, with so great loss, he used all means he
could to get into some certain and settled Employment for their Maintenance, but
could meet with none; so that ever since 1667 he has acted only as a
Solicitor, whereby (having been other ways employed many years as aforesaid)
he has found but little benefit for their Maintenance, wherefore he is still
necessitated to seek for a certain and settled employment; and hearing that both
the Bridge-Masters of London Bridge are lately dead, and their Places void,
whereby he hopes, that a good Door of hope (by Providence) is opened for his
comfort, after all his sore disconsolations, he having many great Reasons, and
good ground of hopes, for the most considerable weighty causes herein mentioned
and made known, not doubting but they will take deep impressions in the hearts
of all good Citizens, and move them to take special cognizance, consideration,
and commiseration thereof in favor to him and his: Therefore he is imbolden'd
to become an humble Suitor, that he may be freely chosen and admitted a
Bridge-Master into one of their Places.

Reason 1st. Because when he was admitted into the Clerkship of the
Bridge-house one Mr. White who had for several years been Clerk to the
Committees of the City, whereby he had great Acquaintance and favor with many
of the then Aldermen, he being a Suitor also and Competitor with the said
Richard Lee for the Place, was maliciously invective against him, because he
had carried the Place from him, which malice he did bear and pursue against him
nine years together irreconcileably, and did closely work with several of the
Aldermen his Friends, and tried all Projects they could, to get the said
Richard Lee out, and put the said Mr. White in, which to effect, they informed
the Court of Aldermen that the said Clerkship was much more profitable than
indeed it was, whereby as they designed, they prevailed with the Court, to
order the ancient Sallery of 50 lib. a year, always paid to former Clerks there
to be withheld from the said Richard Lee, hoping thereby to discourage him, so
that (without doubt) he would have declined and have accepted that barren Place
(without the said ancient Sallery) as he would not, had he not been confident,
it should soon (in Right and Reason) have been restored again, then they might
have ushered in their good friend Mr. White, to whom they could soon have
restored the said Sallery, though the same nor any part thereof for the causes
herein mentioned, was ever paid to the said Richard Lee during his stay there,
to his great grief, damage, and wrong. Notwithstanding in 1639, the Reversion
of the said Place, with all Fees, Profits, Commodities, and Appurtenances, etc.
was Purchased and Granted to him by the Court of Lord May or and Aldermen in
the Mayoralty of Sir Morris Abbot under the City Seal, and therefore by the
Custom and Usage of this City, it was his just and undoubted Right, and ought
not to be detein'd from him; and his Father did purposely at great Charges
breed him up a Clerk to enable, and make him fit for the execution of the said
Place, after the best manner, for Learning and Clerkship yet though often every
year he continued there, he Petitioned the Court of Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, for Restoration thereof with Certificates annexed under the
hands of the Auditors of the Bridge-house Accounts, and of the Bridge-Masters,
who had the Proposal and Inspection of all Accounts, Books, Writings, and
concerns there; and therefore were best able to Judge and Report of his care,
labors, and fidelity in the Execution of his Duty therein, and of the
smallness of his Profits, far short of his Deserts, not amounting to a
competent Maintenance for him: Therefore certifying, that they thought fit and
reasonable the said Sallery should be paid to him from his Admittance and fully
restored to him for the future: And the several Lord Mayors, Aldermen,
Auditors, Committees, and many of the Common Council, often every year promised
him, that it should be restored and paid to him accordingly, though delayed and
never performed to him during his stay there, who (as is well known, and was
often acknowledged by many) did in his time there, as well perform his Duty in
the Execution of his said Place, and as good service for the City, as any Clerk
there ever did; and therefore deserved the said ancient Sallary as any Clerk
there ever did, and more especially, it being his right by Purchase, and Grant
under the City Seal as aforesaid. And it has been restored and constantly paid
to all Clerks there almost ever since he was fore'd for want of a competent
Maintenance, and continual Abuses and unkindnesses, as herein are mentioned,
(voluntarily to leave the said Place, after he had served the City therein
carefully, faithfully, diligently, and industriously, about Nine Years, without
any Sallary or Reward for his extraordinary Labors, which all Clerks there
before, and since him ever had; but were ever (unjustly and undeservedly) kept
from him, only for the causes herein mentioned.

Reason 2. Because at his first Admittance to the Place, he found many
Accounts, Bills, Orders and Writings thereof long standing, not made up or
Entered, as they ought to have been (by his Predecessors there) and all Business
very imperfect and greatly out of order, so that he was necessitated at his own
charges, to hire a Clerk (at dear Rates) to sit constantly with him above eight
Months together, to make up, Enter, perfect, and put all things in good order;
and also he and his said Clerk took great pains above six Months together
after, perusing all the Leases and Writings there, and taking out Breviates of
them, and making two great Books, of all the Tenants Names, Date. Rent, and
term to come of every Lease, whereby (upon Demand he could readily give Account
of every Lease, Tenant, and House. Also he and his Clerk took a great deal of
pains a long time together, in perusing many long and great Writings, in much
writing, and often carrying them, and attending with them upon Sergeant
Maynard, Sergeant Conyers, Mr. Philips, and other Council for their advice
thereon, concerning Sir George Monax his Lands, all which were extraordinary
Labors for which he ought to have been paid; and the several Lord Mayors,
Aldermen, and Committees, and many of the Common Council often promised every
year, that he should be well paid, though always delayed, and he never received
one penny for the same: Also Gratuities of 10 lib. and 5 lib. at a time were
usually given to his Predecessors Servants for their Labors, but never a Penny
to any of his, by reason of Persons ever obstructing, as herein is mentioned.

Reason 3. Because some time before his admittance to the said place, a Lease
wa^ granted to Alderman Fowke, and another to Gilbert Keate Esquire of Hou^es, Ware
houses, and Ground in Water-lane Tower-street, which did lie intricately
intermixed with and between Ground and other great Buildings of their own, so
that for long tim^ there had been great jars, contests, and continual
complaints betwixt them, and many Views by the City Committees for settlemet
thereof, to assertain both theirs and the Cities Rights, by strickt
Admeasurement of the Dimensions, who did fairly and justly set down in writing,
each Parties right exactly, strictly ordering the Clerk of the Bridg^ house, so
directly to express the same in their several Leases, not otherwise, as the^
were so done; yet notwithstanding such cares and endeavors and Orders of the
Committees, upon many Views, though Alderman Fowk was present at the Views, and
dissented not, yet four or five years after his Lease was made, did twice or
thrice, almo^^ every week send for the said Richard Lee to his House, keeping
him often there pr^vately till past one of the Clock in the night, by all
Arguments laboring with him ^^race several whole Lines out of the Lease, and
to write in the room thereof what he ha^ prepared in writing, which was greatly
differing from the said Orders of Court, greatly to the indangering of the
Cities Right, and promoting of continual Jars and Vexations betwixt him and Mr.
Keate; and for the first two years together, did only use fair persuasions, to
prevail to get it done to his will; whereby not prevailing he did for about
three years more together after use very harsh and severe words and threats in
a tyrannical manner, to force him to do it, saying often to him, Mr. Lee, Do
you not know that I was an Instrument to turn Mr. Mongre (your Predecessor) out
of his place, whereby you got into his place; by which words implying, that if
he would not do it, he would also work him out of his place: whereto he
modestly Replied, Sir, I hope that you, nor any else, shall find any such
causes to turn me out of my place, as (by Relation) were against Mr. Mongre:
Alderman Fowke added further (and often used to hint the same words) Mr. Lee,
You have a long time, and often Petitioned the court of Aldermen and
Common Council to restore you to the ancient Salary of 50 lib. a year, and to
gratify Your extraordinary Labor, which I think you deserve, and its just and
fit should be done for you; Therefore consider, Mr. Lee, be not averse in what
I require of you, who can soon help you in what you Petition for: Therefore Mr.
Lee, be not perverse to me, for what I desire shall not be to the prejudice of
the City. Whereto Richard Lee again replied, Sir, I hope you will not impute me
averse, or perverse to you, or that I would in the least offend you; or deny to
serve you in any thing I justly may, Therefore I hope you will be so favorable
and just, as to be friend me in my just Petition, which you have been pleased
very often to say, it was just and fit to be granted to me; yet nevertheless, I
hope that no self ends shall ever tempt me to act unfaithfully; and as for what
you require me to do: It has upon many Views and Orders of Court, been
specially Ordered to be done (word for word) as it is done, and not otherwise;
so that if I should privately alter it but a tittle, and seal the Lease, I
should be concluded very unfaithful and justly turned out of my Place for a
Knave. And when Alderman Fowke found after about five years trial by sore
tormenting and wearying of me, by all fair and foul means, and could not force
me to do it, he having his Lease in his own hands, got it altered to his mind,
and signed by two of the Committee (who were ignorant of the Alteration) then
sent for me, gave me his Lease, and ordered me the next day after (he being
then Lord Mayor) to attend the Court of Aldermen, with his, and all other
Leases, ready for sealing, to be sealed; I humbly p^ay'd his Lordships excuse,
saying, I ought not, I durst not offer (...) to be sealed, without first
acquainting the Court with the said alteration as I did openly and fully, which
greatly inrag^d his Lordship; bu^ though he was then Lord Mayor, yet could not
get it sealed.

Reason 4th. Because about the year 1651, several Jo^rneymen, Carpenters,
Ma^ons, Laborers, and other Wo^kmen, then Servan^s belonging to the
Bridge-house (...) out of just, honest, and good Principles) did exhibit about
40 Articles against the Pur^eyor of the Bridge-house, for purloyning and
carrying away by Water and Land from the Bridge-house and the buildings thereto
belonging at several times, and concerting to his own use, at his own Buildings
then at Deptford and other places, great quantities of Timber, Planks, Deal
Boards ready plained, shot, and fitted for use, Stones, Lead, Iron, Spikes,
Nayls, and all manner of Materials, which should have been used at the
Bridge-house Buildings, which were then credibly valued to be worth above 600
lib. Sterling, to the great damage of the City, whereby he, who few years
before come to the Bridge-house very poor, was then by such Practices become
very rich: When the said Articles were first exhibited, the poor Exhibitors
thereof were greatly thanked, commended, and charged to go on to prosecute
effectually by the Aldermen and Committee appointed to examine and hear the
same; and it did go on prosperously, with great applause, and encouragement to
the Prosecutors at several of their first meetings: But after the said
Purloyner, whose place there was to overlook the Workmen and Laborers, the
Goods, Materials, and the Utensils of the House, and to warn all Courts and
Committees, and to atiend and keep their Doors, whereby he had great
opportunities to be well known to them, who knew well how to tell his own Tale,
and by his subtle insinuations to get credit and favor with them, and having
got time, did so prevail with several of the Aldermen and Committee, to be
strongly on his side (being ignorant of his Devices and evil Practices) who did
pervert most of the Committee, so that at many Meetings of the Committee after,
the Tide was so turned, that the poor Prosecutors (instead of being encouraged
as before) were altogether curbed, checked, and discourag^d (only supported by
some few) the poor men being so overaw'd, the work of Justice was at a stand,
without hopes of future good, which made the Purloyner impudent and insolent,
greatly to vapor, insult, and in his pufft-up pride and confidence to arrest
some of the poor Prosecutors for defaming him; and being so befriended, he was
Cock-sure thereby to have affrighted, and stopped further proceedings. And indeed
they being poor (and so much discouraged by their Masters, not only so
deserting them, and their Cities just cause, but by their so highly owning the
Purloyner) they had reason to have declined, and had done had they not been
honest and courageous, resolving not to be conquered by his so impudent
actings, nor by the checks of the Aldermen, Commit, Bridge-masters, or any
others discouraging them, well knowing their cause to be so just and good: And
they did come and advise with, and earnestly entreat the said Richard Lee to
give them help in their just prosecution, else they said (by their want of
skill and knowledge) the Advers Party by their over-potency, would overpower
them, who by his Oath being bound to be faithful in his place, in all things
for the good of the City: Thereupon (though he well knew the potency of the
Adverse party, and the meanness and unlikeliness of the poor Men (so mightily
opposed) to prevail, let their cause be ever so just, yet the said Richard Lee
thinking it his Duty, what justly he could do, he ought to do therein; and did
undertake with his might the management thereof, it being for the Cities Right;
and to preserve the poor men in their just cause (though so much opposed by
those who ought not to have done it) from being run down and ruined by them for
their honesty and faithfulness to the City their Masters: And the said Richard
Lee, though greatly against his own interest, to act against the Purloyner
(being so strongly owned by many of the Aldermen and Committee, and both the
B^^ge-Masters who were made Judge in the case (he the said Richard Lee then
having his Petition and Certificates annexed, lying before the Court of
Aldermen and Common Council for restoring to him his said ancient Salary of 50
lib. a year, and for gratifying his extraordinary Labors as aforesaid, yet the
said Richard Lee for the Cities good waved his own Interest, and did resolvedly
go on therewith, and drew up their Articles in a right form, and put all their
Charge, and what every witness could say in good order, and then procured the
Committees to meet again several times, and to examine and hear the matter in
difference, in order to do Right and Justice, and give Judgment, and did what
possibly he could therein; yet all would amount to nothing, the Purloyner being
still so owned, and the poor men so curbed, that the Purloyner grew so hardy,
that shortly after he also arrested the said Richard Lee for defaming him (no
other ways but in doing his Duty in the said prosecution, as a sworn Servant to
the City) and did stoutly prosecute them all at the Assizes in Surry; and
though ^e thought assuredly to have eaten up the poor men alive, he being rich,
and having many great persons siding with him; and did use as great means as
possibly he could, by appearance of Aldermen, Committee men, both the
Bridge-Masters, diverse of the Bridge-house chief Work-masters and Servants, and
the chiefest of the Learned Counsel in the Law, on his side, far beyond what
the poor men were able to procure, yet the poor Defendants at the Trial at the
Assizes (notwithstanding all disadvantages) did obtain a Verdict against the
Plaintiffs: And indeed it was a very long and tedious Trial, heard with great
patience, and great respects to the many Great and Grave Men, who were on the
Plaintiffs, or Purloyners side, yet the honest Jury, being upon their sacred
Oaths (better observed the good Scripture-Rules) had more respect to the truth
of the Evidence, and justness of the Cause, than to the persons of grave men,
therefore justly and honestly found for the poor honest Defendants against the
rich and highly managed Plaintiffs, thirty or forty Witnesses upon their Oaths
on each side being fairly examined and heard; which Verdict given did greatly
put to shame all the Great and Grave persons, and all others who so unjustly
sided with the Purloyner, and had so many years retarded Justice, who were in a
shameful manner hissed out of the Court.

And after obtaining of the said Verdict, the poor abused Defendants most
justly applied again to the Court of Aldermen and Committee, humbly certifying
their said Verdict, appealing for further Justice against the Purloyner; and
upon very hard and close pursuit thereof, for about half a year together after,
prevailed to have several re-examinations, and Rehearings, and Judgment upon
the whole matter; whereupon they also (being soundly roused up for shame) found
him Guil^y, and justly turned him out of his place, to the great shame (there
also) of all, who had so long retarded (and would have perverted) Justice;
which great contest hung in great pain and Travel for want of good Midwivery
above three years and a half, almost to the utter ruin of the poor
prosecutors; the long forced prosecution whereof cost them out of their own
purses above 100 lib. yet upon their humble and importunate petititoning the
Court of Aldermen to allow them their Expenses, and consideration for their
loss of ^ine, by their Attendances and good Services done to the City, they had
but 30 lib. upon all these considerations given them, in full for all, to the
clear loss and damage of the said Richard Lee, above 60 lib. out of his own
purse, besides his loss of time above three years and half together, his
Labor, Attendances, and doing all Writings concerning the said long
Prosecution, better worth then 50 lib, which good Works were greatly applauded
and commended by many good Citizens, though they proved (undeservedly) to the
damage and ruin of him the said Richard Lee, his Wife, and many small
Children by his intermedling therewith; because though often every year during
his continuance at the Bridge-house, he Petitioned the Court of Aldermen and
Common Council to restore to him the said ancient Sallary of 50 lib. a year
justly due to him, and to reward his extraordinary Labors, as aforesaid, with
Certsficates to his Petitions annexed under the Auditors and Bridge-Masters
hands, certifying his great Labors, care, and fidelity in the execution of his
Duty in his said place, and of the smallness of his profits he received far
short of his Deserts, not amounting to a competent Maintenance for him;
Therefore they thought fit and reasonable the said 50 lib. a year should be
paid to him from his Admittance, and fully restored for the future: And the
several Lord Mayors, Aldermen, Auditors, Committees, and many of the Common
Council continually every year, promised it should be paid to him accordingly,
and that he should be gratified for his extraordinary Labors, yet they were
still delayed and never performed to him during his stay there, though he well
deserved the same as aforesaid; and the Reason why they were not performed to
him was, because the said Mr. Whites Friends, the said Alderman Fowke, and the
Aldermen and Committee Men of the said Advers Party always bore a grudge
against him, only for his fidelity in speaking and acting on the Cities behalf,
as by his Oath he was bound to do in the management of the said Cases gasnst
their wills and misled Apprehensions: Therefore they did oppose and obstruct
the Grant of all Petitions he ever could present for the same; Whereupon the
said Richard Lee having served the City as Clerk of the Bridge-house about Nine
years, and upon so long trial finding his profits so small, that he could not
subsist thereby, but for the necessary supply of him and his Family was forced
every year to waste of his own Stock and grew every year worse and worse in his
Estate (not in the least by improvident living) and also finding that by no
means possible he could hope for the restoration of the said Sallery of 50 lib.
a year, nor gratification for his said extraordinary Labors, by reason of the
said Parties continual opposing and obstructing, for no other causes but for
his fidelity to the City, in the Cases mentioned; and that by reason of their
(undeserved) disfavour he could not continue in his Place with any peace,
comfort, or contentment, whose implacable Spirits and unjust dealings with him
upon all opportunities, were unsufferable, did more grieve and trouble him (he
never in the least deserving them) than the want of the said 50 lib. a year,
and gratifications so justly due to him, and by their means, so long, and so
unjustly kept from him, as hereby evidently appears, which were the true, sole
and only causes of his being forced (voluntarily) to leave and surrender his
said Place, and consequently of all his said sore losses, crosses, and
sufferings he unhappily underwent since by the Brewing Trade; to his damage
above 5000 lib. as aforesaid, to the great spoil and ruin of him, his Wife and
many Children: All which might have been well saved and preserved to the
unspeakable comfort and happiness of him and his, if those irreconcilable
Gentlemen (whose favor he sought by all endeavors) had but been courteous, and
not extremely severe to him, as they were (beyond measure) without any just or
rational cause, otherwise he had in all probability continued still at the
Bridge-house, and ended his days there, and prevented all his said harms which
thereafter happened to him and his, as aforesaid, for whose honesty and
fidelity to the City (in doing his Duty as bound by his Oath) in the two last
mentioned cases, concerning which Cases forty times-more may be said (than
herein is but hinted) to show the unsavory actings (and how greatly the said
Richard Lee suffered) by both the said Parties cruelty, for about Nine years
together, during his whole time of his being at the Bridge-house, too tedious
to be born, or here inserted, such a life as they led him so many years
together, for no other causes but for doing his Du^y in those two Cases, as
mentioned, he hereby professes, he would not be hired to undergo so many years
for 500 lib. a year Sterling; in whose Coat they could never pick a hole, nor
find a blot in his Scutcheon for which they watched; and sought for as hid
Treasure, which if they could they would soon have hit it; for brevities sake
he will add no more; here being enough set down, to declare how the City has
been greatly wronged by bad Servants, and how hardly such brought to
punishment, not by the Justice of their own appointed Judges, who rather
indulged them, and discountenanced their honest Intelligencers (their Servants
also) and suffered them to be in danger of ruin for their honesty and fidelity
to their Masters; giving the Offenders such indulgencie (through bewitched
incredulity) and the contrary to the poor Complainants, who being poor, and
disowned by their Masters in their just complaint, the offenders (though
guilty) being rich, and buoyed up, grew bold and impudat, eresoved to play
Counter-scuffle, to cudgel or Arest the poor men for Defamation, as they did,
thereby thinking to affright them from further prosecu^ion, standing upon their
Guard of Justification, pleading Innocence, therefore defamed; by which
Indulgency they took Rope, long enough to (hang, or) bring themselves to just
punishment, and whipped themselves with their own Rod; the poor Arrested
Complainants would not be daunted (though poor, made Defendants, forced to
Trial, and unkindly disowned, and deserted by their Masters; but rather than to
bend basely under the Offenders feet, though through poverty, want of great
Friends, and with all disadvantages, trusting to the Justice of the Cause, go
on courageously to Trial, not before known Friends or Citizens in the City, but
before strangers in the Country, where they obtained a just Verdict, with
Victory and Triumph in three or four days time, which they could not do by
their greatest endeavors among their Masters in the City, in above three years
and a half prosecution (though for their own Interest) and almost to the utter
ruin of the poor deserted men; and this is a true Parallel of one of the said
Cases: And if the poor men's Cause had not been honest, just and good, it was a
Miracle they should prevail at the Assizes in the Country among strangers (with
such disadvantages) as they did to the shame of all the Opposers, Retarders,
and Obstructors: And that after that Trial, the Citizens also upon further
Applications made to them praying further Justice, had Re-examinations and
Rehearings, and gave their Judgments thereupon, and that then they also found
the Offender guilty, and turned him out of his Place: And though they did not
pay the poor men their full Expenses and Charges they were at, nor reward their
Labors, loss of Time, and Attendances, nor pay for the many Writings in and
about the long retarded Prosecution, as they ought liberally to have done,
considering their great fidelity, and their great Abuses, there being among
them a spice of the said Advers Party, who still hindered all they could, yet in
as much they gave them 30 lib toward the same, as aforesaid, they thereby
owned their service done, and their fidelity to the City; and it was no less
strange that the Citizens who were first made Judges in the Case (in the Cities
behalf, having the same Testimony, and much better Advantage to search out the
Truth, yet in above three years and an halls time they could not find the
Offender guilty; which the poor Country Jury upon their Oaths did in six or
seven hours time; and then soon after the Aldermen and Committee could also
find him Guilty, and turn him out of his place, as aforesaid, notwithstanding
the great opposition of the Advers Party, who certainly were strongly biased,
and strangely persuaded to act so strongly and strangely so many years as they
did, against the great Interest of the City, and with such violent and
implacable wrath against the poor honest Prosecutors for the City, even to
their spoil and ruin, it may be truly said, they were very hardly used, and
sorrily rewarded from first to last, for their so long faithful and chargeable
good Services, done for the City their Masters, as aforesaid: the good
Scripture Caution may conveniently be here added, Let not these things be told
in Gath nor published in Askelon; and for the said Richard Lee his just,
modest, and moderate managing, and defending the said just and honest Cause, on
the Cities behalf, as he was by the Aldermen and Committee Ordered to do, and
as by his Place, and Oath he ought to do, he did do and perform the same
honestly and faithfully, not as being forward or putting himself on therein,
but as being ordered as aforesaid, yet for those his faithful actings, by
reason of the disfavour of the said Advers Party, of the said Alderman Fonke,
and of the said Aldermen, the said Mr. Whites Friends, only for the causes
mentioned: the said Richard Lee does here affirm, that in the very time of his
Nine years continuing Clerk of the Bridge-house, he clearly lost and suffered
out of his Purse thereby above 1500 lib. Sterling, and of the truth hereof, and
how he doubts not but to give fair and full satisfaction to any good Citizens;
besides the into Herable Abuses and Injuries he undeservedly (yet patiently)
suffered the Nine years of his continuance at the Bridge-house from those said
Parties, which he would not have endured for 500 lib. a year, as aforesaid,
besides the loss of his said Bridge-house Place, where he hoped to have ended
his days, only occasioned by their undeserved unkindnesses and hard usages, and
by their unjust obstructing his Rights and just and reasonable Maintenance from
him as aforesaid; and besides his misfortunate and most unhappy sore Sufferings
afterward by his Brewing Trade, consequently also occasioned only by their
gross abuses, to his damage above 5000 lib. as aforesaid to the great spoil
and ruin of him his Wife and many Children; all which otherwise might have
been well saved and preserved to them, to their great comfort and happiness.

All which matters, (with the matters in his several Certificates asserting
truth) upon just, serious and judicious considerations, he humbly hopes will be
adjudged good grounds and inducements to prevail, with all Right Honorable,
Honorable, Right Worshipful, and Worshipful Citizens, and with all good
Citizens, good men, and good Christians (in tender consideration of the
Premises) to have respect to him, who has undergone such long trials, so many
hard usages, so many great Losses, crosses and sufferings (unjustly and
undeservedly) for his honest faithful and unrewarded services for the Cities
interest, even to the sacrifising himself and all his, and is now destitute of
employment, and that you would favorably think fit (by your free Election) to
admit him into one of the said Bridgemasters places, rather to gratify (and
raise from death to life) him who has so justly, faithfully and industriously
served, so greatly suffered for; and so well deserved from, the City than on
any others, who have not such causes, such necessities, or such deserts, to
merit the same from the City as he has, as is here amply demonstrated, hardly
to be paralleld, who by his many years Experience by his service as Clerk
there, better knows and understands the Books, Writings, Records, Orders,
Business and concerns of the Bridgehouse, than any man living does, and
consequently how to do, and act in all things there, for the best benefit of
the City, and as for his care diligence, honesty, and fidelity; to do and
perform his duty in the management thereof, his former good and faithful
services there (well known and remembered by many yet living) will sufficiently
evidence.

Upon all which moving causes and considerations, he humbly hopes that the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen
Common Counsel and Liveries of this Honorable City of London, of your
accustomed goodness, will favorably think him fit and capable, and by your
free Election of him to admit him into one of the said Bridgemasters places,
who by God's gracious assistance will ever be most grateful, careful, diligent
and faithful in the due Execution thereof, to the utmost of his ability for the
Cities best benefit, or otherwise he humbly hopes that the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen and Common Counsel will be
pleased to think fit, to Order the said ancient Sallery of 50 l. a year, for
about nine years service, never paid unto him, as to all other Clerks there,
before and since him, so justly due to him, and so hardly and unjustly kept
from him as aforesaid, to be paid unto him, and reasonable satisfaction for his
said extraordinary Labors, for moneys he disbursed out of his Purse, and for
all his Writings, Labors, and attendances for above three years and a half
together, in and about the said long Prosecution as aforesaid, and some
favorable recompense for his hard usages and great sufferings, for h^s good
and faithful services, done for the City as aforesaid, which he humbly hopes
will be adjudged just and reasonable to be granted to him.

To the Right Honble Sir Francis Chaplin Knight, Lord Mayor, and to the Right
Worshipful the Aldermen, Masters, Wardens, Assistants and Liveries of the
several Companies of the Honorable City of London.
WHereas my Brother Mr. Richard Lee, who lately served the City as Clerk
Comp^roler of the Bridge-house London, about nine years, where, as is well
known to many, he did faithfully and industriously serve the City, and merely
for his good services done there, and for his great fidelity in acting for the
just Interest of the City, as by Orders of Court he was Ordered to do, and as
by his said Place and his Oath he was bound to do, against the wills and
mislead apprehensions of some persons, he became a very great sufferer, to the
spoil and ruin thereby of him, his wife and many children, being now destitute
of employment for his and their maintenance, is forced to become a Suitor to
your Honor, and Worships. That in consideration of his said faithful services
and great sufferings, you would favorably choose and admit him a Bridgemaster
of London Bridge, into one of the places now void, whose fidelity and ability
in serving as Clerk-Comptroler there nine years as aforesaid, has been largely
manifested, which renders him fit, able, and capable for the Execution thereof,
wherefore I being infirm in body, unable to wait on you myself, to move your
favors on hi^ behalf, am bold hereby to recommend him unto your Choice as
aforesaid being well assured of his care, fidelity and good ability in all
respects to serv^ you therein, humbly praying your Lordship and Worships, and
all m^ good friends, in and about London, Westminster, and Southwark, who have
Right in the said choice, favorably and freely to choose and admit hi^
thereunto, who has so faithfully, carefully and industriously served, we
deserved from, and greatly suffered for the Cities interest, without a^^
Reward, and with very hard usages, as are largely set forth in other wr^tings
he will present unto you. Thus begging your Pardon for this my pr^sumption, in
all Humility I subscribe my self,

Your most devoted Friend and Servant, Tho. Lee. Justice of the Peace at
Newington-Butts in Surrey.

(...) Names are subscribed Justices of the Peace for the County of Surrey, and
Borough of Southwark, do hereby also recommend unto your Choice, and pray your
Favors on the behalf of the said Mr. Rich. Lee as aforesaid, most humbly also
subscribing our selves,

Your most faithful friends and Servants Hunsdon, the Earl of Dover's Son.
Edmund Bowyer Knight and Barronet. William Haward Knights. Tho. Foster Knights.
George Chute T. Barker. James Reading Peter Rich Justices. Rich. How Justices.
Jos. Coling Justices. Jo. Freeman Will. Castle


We whose Names are Subscribed Justices of the Peace for the County of
Middlesex and City of Westminster, do also recommend unto your Choice, and pray
your favor on the behalf of the said Mr. Richard Lee as aforesaid, most humbly
also subcribing our selves.

Your faithful friends and servants Tho. Gery Knights. Will. Bowl Knights.
Edm. B. Godfrey Knights. Charles Pitfield Justices. James Deuy Justices. Ellis
Lloyd Justices. Edw. Parry Justices. Hum. Weld Justices. Peter Sabbs Justices.

The said Rich. Lee having too late Knowledge of the vacancy of the said Places
to make his personal Applications to the Commoners of London, therefore is
forced at great charges to Print and Publish abroad among all good Citizens
these his Requests.



A true Copy of his Reversion before mentioned.
To all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, or that the same
shall hear, see o^ Read, Henry Garway Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the
Aldermen of the same, send Greeting; Know ye, That at a Court holden in the
Chamber of the Guild Hall of the said City, upon Tuesday the Eight day of
October last past, before day of the Date hereof, before Sir Morris Abbot
Knight, then Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the Aldermen of the same
City then present, amongst other things is Entered and Recorded as follows,
Viz. This day at the Request of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, this Court
does freely and lovingly Give and Grant unto Richard Lee Son of Lancelor Lee of
Alveley in the County of Sallop Esquire the Reversion and next Avoidance of the
Clerkship of the Bridge-house, at what time soever the same shall first and
next happen to fall or become void, To have, hold, Exercise and Enjoy the same
Place, with all Fees, Profits, and Commodities thereunto due and of Right
belonging, so long as he shall well and honestly use and behave himself
therein, saving to all and every other person and persons his and their Right
and Interest in and to the same by force and virtue of any former Grant made
thereof by this Court, and so always and upon condition That he the said
Richard Lee at such time as he shall come to claim and Enjoy the benefit of
this his Grant, be thought and adjudged by this Court, fit, apt, and able for
the due Execution thereof, and not otherwise, In faith and testimony whereof,
We the said Lord Mayor, and Aldermen have caused the Seal of the Office of
Mayoralty of the said City to be put to these Presents, Dated at London the
tenth day of January, in the year of our Lord 1639. And in the 15th. year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, Charles by the Grace of God of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith etc.

Michel.

A true Copy of the Auditors and Committees Certificate before mentioned.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of
London in Common Council Assembled. We the Auditors of the Bridge-house
Accounts and Committees for Leasing of the Lands and Tenements belonging to the
Bridge house London, whose Names are subscribed, do certify that we have
perused the several Books and Writings belonging to the said Bridge house,
written and made up by Rich. Lee Clerk there, and do find that there has been
and is a great deal of Labor, Pains and Attendants required continually to be
by him performed in the Execution of his said Place, and that all the Fees and
Profits now allowed unto him (the Sallery of fifty pounds per Annum which was
formerly allowed to his Predecessors being lately Ordered to be ^ith-held) are
very small and do not amount unto a competent maintenance for his subsistence
any ways equivolent to his Labors, Endeavors and Attendance therein. And do
therefore think it Requesite, Just and Reasonable that he be confidered for the
time past, and that the said Fee of Fifty pound Pounds a year may be restored
unto him for the future. All which nevertheless we humbly recommend and leave
to your Honors and Worships Wisdoms and further Order.

Dated the 25th. day of May, Anno 1652. John Wollaston. John Stone Fr. Pecke
Henry Brandreth


A true Copy of the Bridgemasters Certificate before mentioned.
We whose Names are Subscribed Wardens of London Bridge, do humbly certify on
the beha^^ of Rich. Lee Clerk Comptroler of the Bridge-house, that he together
with a Clerk which he keeps and employ* for his assistance, have taken a great
deal of Pains, Labor, and Industry in performance of his said Place, since his
admission thereunto, and we do humbly conceive that the Profits he has
received therein have been very small, much beneath his Pains, Endeavors, and
attendance therein, and that all the just Fees and Profits paid and allowed to
him, cannot nor do amount unto above forty pounds a year one year with another
besides his dwelling house, witness our Hands May 25. 1652.

Bridgemasters.
Fra. Kirby Nich. Clagett

And although he had two such Certificates under the hands of the hands of the
Bridgehouse Auditors, Committees and Bridgemasters twice almost every year, for
about 9 years together, and did present his Petition with his Certificates
annexed, to the Court of Aldermen and Common Counsel very often every year, for
the restoration of the ancient Sallery of 50 ll. a year, and did by great means
and endeavors prosecute the same, yet could never get the same restored by
reason of the Opposers and Obstructors mentioned.



To the Right Honorable Sir Fran. Chaplin Knight. Lord Mayor, and to the Right
worshipful the Aldermen, Masters, Wardens, Assistants, and Liveries of the
several Companies of the Honorable City of London.
Whereas Rich. Lee late Clerk Comptroler of the Bridgehouse London, and many
years associate to the Clerk of Assizes of the home Circuit, being now
destitute of Employment for the maintenance of him, his wife and many small
Children, is humbly bold to become a suitor unto you to choose and admit him a
Bridgemaster of London Bridge, We whose Names are subscribed, upon good grounds
and large testimonials of his good deserts, of his care fidelity and good
ability to do and perform business, do therefore hereby recommend him unto your
choice, praying your Favors freely to choose, and admit him thereunto
accordingly, whereof having good hopes we subscribe our selves.

May 30. 1678. Your most faithful Friends and Servants, Fr. North Will.
Mountague Tho. Twisden Will. Wild Hugh Windham Tim. Littleton Tho. Jones Fd.
Thurland.

The said Rich. Lee most humbly also prays, That no matter in his said Case
mentioned, may be understood as by him intended to Reflect on any worthy
Aldermen or Citizens of London, or in a general ^anner; nay he professes he
intends them not to reflect on all who were seduced in those cases, but on
those who were Seducers, and acted more from a Revengeful, than a just and
right spirit, strangely biased and self-ended.



FINIS.

