Licensed, Nov. 1. 1671. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

THE DISCOVERIES OF JOHN LEDERER, In three several Marches from VIRGINIA, To
the West of Carolina, And other parts of the Continent: Begun in March 1669,
and ended in September 1670.

Together with A General MAP of the whole Territory which he traversed.

Collected and Translated out of Latin from his Discourse and Writings, By Sir
William Talbot Baronet.

Sed nos immensum spatiis confecimus aequor,
Et jam tempus equum fumantia solvere colla.
Virg. Georg. London, Printed by J. C. for Samuel Heyrick, at Grays-Inne-gate
in Holborn. 1672.

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY Lord ASHLEY, Baron Ashley of Wimborn St.
Giles, Chancellor of his Majesty's Exchequer, Undertreasurer of England, One
of the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty's Treasury, one of the Lords of his
most Honorable Privy Council, and one of the Lords Proprietors of CAROLINA.
My LORD,
FRom this discourse it is clear that the long looked-for discovery of the
Indian Sea does nearly approach; and Carolina, out of her happy experience of
your Lordships success in great undertakings, presumes that the accomplishment
of this glorious Design is reserved for her. In order to which, the Apalataean
Mountains (though like the prodigious Wall that divides China and Tartary, they
deny Virginia passage into the West Continent) stoop to your Lordships
Dominions, and lay open a Prospect into unlimited Empires; Empires that will
hereafter be ambitious of subjection to that noble Government which by your
Lordships deep wisdom and providence first projected, is now established in
Carolina; for it will appear that she flourishes more by the influence of that,
than the advantages she derives from her Climate and Soil, which yet do render
her the Beauty and Envy of North- America. That all her glories should be seen
in this Draught, is not reasonably to be expected, since she sat to my Author
but once, and then too with a side-face; and therefore I must own it was never
by him designed for the Press, but published by me, out of no other ambition
than that of manifesting to the world, that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant, William Talbot.

TO THE READER.
THat a Stranger should presume (though with Sir William Berkly's Commission)
to go into those Parts of the American Continent where Englishmen never had
been, and whither some refused to accompany him, was, in Virginia looked on as
so great an insolence, that our Traveller at his Return, instead of Welcome and
Applause, met nothing but Affronts and Reproaches; for indeed it was their
part, that forsook him in the Expedition, to procure him discredit that was a
witness to theirs: Therefore no industry was wanting to prepare Men with a
prejudice against him, and this their malice improved to such a general
Animosity, that he was not safe in Virginia from the outrage of the People,
drawn into a persuasion, that the Public Levy of that year, went all to the
expense of his Vagaries. Forced by this storm into Maryland, he became known to
me, though then ill-affected to the Man, by the stories that went about of him:
Nevertheless finding him, contrary to my expectation, a modest ingenious
person, and a pretty Scholar, I thought it common Justice to give him an
occasion of vindicating himself from what I had heard of him; which truly he
did with so convincing Reason and circumstance, as quite abolished those former
impressions in me, and made me desire this Account of his Travels, which here
you have faithfully rendered out of Latin from his own Writings and Discourse,
with an entire Map of the Territory he traversed, copied from his own hand. All
these I have compared with Indian Relations of those parts (though I never met
with any Indian that had followed a Southwest-Course so far as this German) and
finding them agree, I thought the Printing of these Papers was no injury to the
Author, and might prove a Service to the Public.

William Talbot.

map of Carolina and Virginia A MAP OF THE WHOLE TERRITORY TRAVERSED BY JOHN
LEDERER IN HIS THREE MARCHES.
list of events on map 1. the first March 2. the second March to Mahock 3. the
place where the English left him, and his March alone to Ushery 4. His March
home again. 5. The third March 6. a quick sand at the head of Rapahanock river
7. The Lake of Ushery 8. A great Marish


SAVANAE
VIRGINIA
CAROLINA
PARS
The Rickohockeans

The Mess amomecks dwelt heretofore beyond these Mountains

Mons Guliel Gubern

Mons Car Reg

dom: Reg

Vshery

Wishacky

Sara

Watary

Shabo^cenock

Akena^y

Sapon

Nabissan

Mahock

De ser ta a re no sa

Toski

Kateras

Kaunitzi hockan

Mendoerink

Monakin

Ponraith

Monskin

Shikoham

Rob Talifer

Eruco fl:

Rorenack alias Shanan fl:

Apamatuck fl:

Ponathan fl:

Poemoeoncock fl:

Tottopotama

Ackmick fl:

Metapenan fl: rap

map key Cross Sculpsit


THE Discoveries of JOHN LEDERER from Virginia to the West of Carolina, and
other parts of the Continent.
A General and brief Account of the North- American Continent.
NOrth, as well as South- America, may be divided into three Regions: the
Flats, the Highlands, and the Mountains. The Flats (in Indian, Ahkynt) is the
Territory lying between the Eastern Coast, and the falls of the great Rivers,
that there run into the Atlantic Ocean, in extent generally taken Ninety
miles. The Highlands (in Indian, Ahkontshuck) begin at those falls, and
determine at the foot of the great ridge of Mountains that runs through the
midst of this Continent, Northeast and Southwest, called by the Spaniards
Apalataei, from the Nation Apalakin; and by the Indians, Paemotinck. According
to the best of my observation and conjecture, they lie parallel to the
Altantick Seacoast, that bearing from Canada to Cape Florida, Northeast and
Southwest, and then falling off due West as the Mountains do at Sara: but here
they take the name of Suala; Sara in the Warrennuncock dialect being Sasa or
Sualy.

The Flats, of Ahkynt, are by former Writers made so well known to Christendom,
that I will not stop the Reader here, with an unnecessary description of them;
but shall only say, that by the rankness of the Soil, and salt moistness of
the Air, daily discoveries of Fish-shells three fathom deep in the earth, and
Indian tradition; these parts are supposed some Ages past to have lain under
the Sea.

The Highlands (or Ahkontshuch) though under the same Parallels, are happy
notwithstanding in a more temperate and healthful Air. The ground is overgrown
with underwood in many places, and that so perplexed and interwoven with Vines,
that who travels here, must sometimes cut through his way. These Thickets
harbor all sorts of beasts of prey, as Wolves, Panthers, Leopards, Lions, etc.
(which are neither so large nor so fierce as those of Asia and Africa) and
small Vermin, as wild Cats, Foxes, Racoons. These parts were formerly
possessed by the Tacci, alias Dogi; but they are extinct; and the Indians now
seated here, are distinguished into the several Nations of Mahoc, Nuntaneuck,
alias Nuntaly, Nahyssan, Sapon, Managog, Mangoack, Akenatzy, and Monakin, etc.
One Language is common to them all, though they differ in Dialects. The parts
inhabited here are pleasant and fruitful, because cleared of Wood, and laid
open to the Sun. The Valleys feed numerous herds of Deer and Elks larger then
Oxen: these Valleys they call Savanae, being Marish grounds at the foot of the
Apalataei, and yearly laid under water in the beginning of Summer by floods of
melted Snow falling down from the Mountains.

The Apalataean Mountains, called in Indian Paemotinck, (or the origin of the
Indians) are barren Rocks, and therefore deserted by all living creatures but
Bears, who cave in the hollow Cliffs. Yet do these Mountains shoot out to the
Eastward great Promontories of rich Land, known by the high and spreading trees
which they bear: these Promontories, because lower then the main Ridge, are
called by the Indians Tanx-Paemotinck (alias Aquatt). To the Northeast the
Mountains rise higher; and at Sara they sink so low, that they are easily
passed over: but here (as was said before) they change their course and name,
running due West, and being called Sualy: now the Sualian Mountains rise higher
and higher Westward.

Of the Manners and Customs of the Indians inhabiting the Western parts of
Carolina and Virginia.
THe Indians now seated in these parts, are none of those which the English
removed from Virginiae, but a people driven by an Enemy from the Northwest, and
invited to sit down here by an Oracle above four hundred years since, as they
pretend: for the ancient inhabitants of Virginia were far more rude and
barbarous, feeding only upon raw flesh and fish, until these taught them to
plant Corn, and showed them the use of it.

But before I treat of their ancient Manners and Customs, it is necessary I
should show by what means the knowledge of them has been conveyed from former
ages to posterity. Three ways they supply their want of Letters: first by
Counters, secondly by Emblemes or Hieroglyphics, thirdly Tradition delivered
in long Tales from father to son, which being children they are made to learn
by rote.

For Counters, they use either Pebbles, or short scantlings of straw or reeds.
Where a Batted has been fought, or a Colony seated, they raise a small Pyramid
of these stones, consisting of the number slain or transplanted. Their reeds
and straws serve them in Religious Ceremonies: for they lay them orderly in a
Circle when they prepare for Devotion or Sacrifice; and that performed, the
Circle remains still; for it is Sacrilege to disturb or to touch it: the
disposition and sorting of the straws and reeds, show what kind of Rites have
there been celebrated, as Invocation, Sacrifice, Burial, etc.

The faculties of the mind and body they commonly express by Emblems. By the
figure of a Stag, they imply swiftness; by that of a Serpent, wrath; of a Lion,
courage; of a Dog, fidelity: by a Swan, they signify the English, alluding to
their complexion, and flight over the Sea.

An account of Time, and other things, they keep on a string or leather thong
tied in knots of several colors. I took particular notice of small Wheels
serving for this purpose amongst the Oenocks, because I have heard that the
Mexicans use the same. Every Nation gives his particular Ensign or Arms: The
Sasquesahanaugh a Tarapine, or small Tortoise; the Akenatzy's a Serpent; the
Nahyssanes three Arrows, etc. In this they likewise agree with the Mexican
Indians. Vid. Jos. a Costa.

They worship one God, Creator of all things, whom some call Okaee, others
Mannith: to him alone the High Priest, or Periku, offers Sacrifice; and yet
they believe he has no regard to sublunary affairs, but commits the Government
of Mankind to lesser Deities, as Quiacosough and Tagkanysough, that is, good
and evil Spirits: to these the inferior Priests pay their devotion and
Sacrifice, at which they make recitals, to a lamentable Tune, of the great
things done by their Ancestors.

From four women, viz. Pash, Sepoy, Askarin, and Maraskarin, they derive the
Race of Mankind; which they therefore divide into four Tribes, distinguished
under those several names. They very religiously observe the degrees of
Marriage, which they limit not to distance of Kindred, but difference of
Tribes, which are continued in the issue of the Females: now for two of the
same Tribe to match, is abhorred as Incest, and punished with great severity.

Their places of Burial they divide into four quarters, assigning to every
Tribe one: for, to mingle their bodies, even when dead, they hold wicked and
ominous. They commonly wrap up the corpse in beasts skins, and bury with it
Provision and Housholdstuff for its use in the other world. When their great
men die, they likewise slay prisoners of War to attend them. They believe the
transmigration of souls: for the Angry they say is possessed with the spirit of a
Serpent; the Bloody, with that of a Wolf; the Timorous, of a Deer; the
Faithful, of a Dog, etc. and therefore they are figured by these Emblemes.

Elysium, or the abode of their lesser Deities, they place beyond the Mountains
and Indian Ocean.

Though they want those means of improving Humane Reason, which the use of
Letters affords us; let us not therefore conclude them wholly destitute of
Learning and Sciences: for by these little helps which they have found, many of
them advance their natural understandings to great knowledge in Physic,
Rhetoric, and Policy of Government: for I have been present at several of
their Consultations and Debates, and to my admiration have heard some of their
Seniors deliver themselves with as much Judgment and Eloquence as I should
have expected from men of Civil education and Literature.

The First EXPEDITION, From the head of Pemaeoncock, alias York-River (due
West* to the top of the Apalataean Mountains.
UPon the ninth of March 1669, (with three Indians whose names were Magtakunh,
Hopottoguoh, and Naunnugh) I went out at the falls of Pemaeoncock alias
York-River in Virginia, from an Indian Village called Shickehamany, and lay
that night in the Woods, encountering nothing remarkable, but a Rattle-snake of
an extraordinary length and thickness, for I judged it two yards and a half or
better from head to tail, and as big about as a man's arm: by the distention of
her belly, we believed her full with young; but having killed and opened her,
found there a small Squirrel whole; which caused in me a double wonder: first,
how a Reptile should catch so nimble a creature as a Squirrel; and having
caught it, how she could swallow it entire. The Indians in resolving my doubts,
plunged me into a greater astonishment, when they to^d me that it was usual in
these Serpents, when they lie basking in the Sun, to fetch down these Squirrels
from the tops of trees, by fixing their eyes steadfastly upon them; the horror
of which strikes such an affrightment into the little beast, that he has no
power to hinder himself from tumbling down into the jaws of his enemy, who
takes in all his sustenance without chewing, his teeth serving him only to
offend withal. But I rather believe what I have heard from others, that these
Serpents climb the trees, and surprise their prey in the nest.

The next day talling into Marish grounds between Pemaeoncock and the head of
the River Matapeneugh, the heaviness of the way obliged me to cross
Pemaeoncock, where its North and South-branch (called Ackmick) join in one. In
the Peninsula made by these two branches, a great Indian King called
Tottopottoma was heretofore slain in Battle, fighting for the Christians
against the Mahocks and Nahyssans, from whence it retains his name to this day.
Traveling through the Woods, a Do seized by a wild Cat crossed our way; the
miserable creature being even spent and breathless with the burden and cruelty
of her rider, who having fastened on her shoulder, left not sucking out her
blood until she sunk under him: which one of the Indians perceiving, let fly a
luckie Arrow, which piercing him through the belly, made him quit his prey
already slain, and turn with a terrible grimas at us; but his strength and
spirits failing him, we escaped his revenge, which had certainly ensued, were
not his wound mortal. This creature is something bigger then our English Fox,
of a reddish gray color, and in figure every way agreeing with an ordinary
Cat; fierce, ravenous and cunning: for finding the Deer (upon which they
delight most to prey) too swift for them, they watch upon branches of trees,
and as they walk or feed under, jump down upon them. The Fur. of the wild Cat,
thought not very fine, is yet esteemed for its virtue in taking away cold Aches
and Pains, being worn next to the body: their flesh, though rank as a Dogs, is
eaten by the Indians.

The eleventh and twelfth, I found the ways very uneven, and cumbred with
bushes.

The thirteenth, I reached the first Spring of Pemaeoncock, having crossed the
River four times that day, by reason of its many windings; but the water was so
shallow, that it hardly wet my horses pasterns. Here a little under the surface
of the earth, I found flat pieces petrified matter, of one side solid Stone,
but on the other side I singlas, which I easily peeled off in flakes about four
inches square: several of these pieces, with a transparent Stone like Crystal
that cut Glass, and a white Marchasite that I purchased of the Indians, I
presented to Sir William Berkley Governor of Virginia.

The fourteenth of March, from the top of an eminent hill, I first descried the
Apalataean Mountains, bearing due West to the place I stood upon: their
distance from me was so great, that I could hardly discern whether they were
Mountains or Clouds, until my Indian fellow travelers prostrating themselves
in Adoration, howled out after a barbarous manner, Okee poeze, i. e. God is
nigh.

The fifteenth of March, not far from this hill, passing over the South-branch
of Rappahanock-river, I was almost swallowed in a Quicksand. Great herds of Red
and Fallow Deer I daily saw feeding; and on the hill-sides, Bears crashing Mast
like Swine. Small Leopards I have seen in the Woods, but never any Lions,
though their skins are much worn by the Indians. The Wolves in these parts are
so ravenous, that I often in the night feared my horse would be devoured by
them, they would gather up and howl so close round about hi^ (...) though
Tether'd to the same tree at whose foot I my (...) and the Indians lay: but the
Fires which we made, I suppose, scared them from worrying us all. Beaver and
Otter I met with at every River that I passed; and the Woods are full of Gray
Foxes.

Thus I traveled all the sixteenth; and on the seventeenth of March I reached
the Apalataei. The Air here is very thick and chill; and the waters issuing
from the Mountainsides, of a Blue color, and Allumish taste.

The eighteenth of March, after I had in vain assayed to ride up, I alighted,
and left my horse with one of the Indians, whilst with the other two I climbed
up the Rocks, which were so encumbered with bushes and brambles, that the ascent
proved very difficult: besides, the first precipice was so steep, that if I
looked down, I was immediately taken with a swimming in my head; though
afterward the way was more easy. The height of this Mountain was very
extraordinary: for notwithstanding I set out with the first appearance of
light, it was late in the evening before I gained the top, from whence the next
morning I had a beautiful prospect of the Atlantick-Ocean washing the
Virginian-shore; but to the North and West, my sight was suddenly bounded by
Mountains higher than that I stood upon. Here did I wander in Snow, for the
most part, till the Four and twentieth day of March, hoping to find some
passage through the Mountains; but the coldness of the Air and Earth together,
seizing my Hands and Feet with numbness, put me to a ne plus ultra; and
therefore having found my Indian at the foot of the Mountain with my Horse, I
returned back by the same way that I went.

The Second EXPEDITION, From the Falls of Powhatan, alias James-River, in
Virginia, to Mahock in the Apalataean Mountains.
THe twentieth of May 1670, one Major Harris and my self, with twenty Christian
Horse, and five Indians, marched from the Falls of James-River, in Virginia,
toward the Monakins; and on the Two and twentieth were welcomed by them with
Volleys of Shot. Near this Village we observed a Pyramid of stones piled up
together, which their Priests told us, was the Number of an Indian Colony drawn
out by Lot from a Neighbour-Countrey over-peopled, and led hither by one
Monack, from whom they take the Name of Monakin. Here enquiring the way to the
Mountains, an ancient Man described with a staff two paths on the ground; one
pointing to the Mahocks, and the other to the Nahyssans; but my English
Companions slighting the Indians direction, shaped their course by the Compass
due West, and therefore it fell out with us, as it does with those Land-Crabs,
that crawling backwards in a direct line, avoid not the Trees that stand in
their way, but climbing over their very tops, come down again on the other
side, and so after a days labor gain not above two foot of ground. Thus we
obstinately pursuing a due West course, rode over steep and craggy Cliffs,
which beat our Horses quite off the hoof. In these Mountains we wandered from
the Twenty fifth of May till the Third of June, finding very little sustenance
for Man or Horse; for these places are destitute both of Grain and Herbage.

The third of June we came to the South-branch of James-River, which Major
Harris observing to run Northward, vainly imagined to be an Arm of the Lake of
Canada; and was so transported with this Fancy, that he would have raised a
Pillar to the Discovery, if the fear of the Mahock Indian, and want of food,
had permitted him to stay. Here I moved to cross the Rive and march on; but the
rest of the Company were so weary of the enterprise, that crying out, One and
All, they had offered violence to me, had I not been provided with a private
Commission from the Governor of Virginia to proceed, though the rest of the
company should abandon me; the sight of which laid their fury.

The lesser Hills, or Akontshuck, are here unpassable, being both steep and
craggy; the Rocks seemed to me at a distance to resemble Eggs set up an end.

James-River is here as broad as it is about an hundred mile lower at Monakin;
the passage over is very dangerous, by reason of the rapid Torrents made by
Rocks and Shelves forcing the water into narrow Channels. From an observation
which we made of straws and rotten chuncks hanging in the boughs of Trees on
the Bank, and two and twenty foot above water, we argued that the melted Snow
falling from the Mountains swelled the River to that height, the Flood carrying
down that rubbish which, upon the abatement of the Inundation, remained in the
Trees.

The Air in these parts was so moist, that all our Biscuit became moldy and
unfit to be eaten, so that some nicer stomachs, who at our setting out laughed
at my provision of Indian-meal parched, would gladly now have shared with me:
but I being determined to go upon further Discoveries, refused to part with any
of that which was to be my most necessary sustenance.

The Continuation of the Second Expedition from Mahock, Southward, into the
Province of Carolina.
THe fifth of June, my Company and I parted good friends, they back again, and
I with one Sasquesahanough-Indian, named Jackzetavon, only, in pursuit of my
first Enterprise, changing my course from West to Southwest and by South, to
avoid the Mountains. Major Harris at parting gave me a Gun, believing me a lost
man, and given up as a prey to Indians or savage Beasts; which made him the
bolder in Virginia to report strange things in his own praise and my
disparagement, presuming I would never appear to disprove him. This, I suppose,
and no other, was the cause that he did with so much industry procure me
discredit and odium; but I have lost nothing by it, but what I never studied to
gain, which is Popular applause.

From the fifth, which was Sunday, until the ninth of June, I traveled through
difficult Ways, without seeing any Town or Indian; and then I arrived at Sapon,
a Village of the Nahyssans, about an hundred miles distant from Mahock,
situate upon a branch of Shawan, alias Rorenock-River; and though I had just
cause to fear these Indians, because they had been in continual Hostility with
the Christians for ten years before; yet presuming that the Truck which I
carried with me would procure my welcome, I adventured to put my self into
their power, having heard that they never offer any injury to a few persons
from whom they apprehend no danger: nevertheless, they examined me strictly
whence I came, whither I went, and what my business was. But after I had
bestowed some trifles of Glass and Metal amongst them, they were satisfied with
reasonable answers, and I received with all imaginable demonstrations of
kindness, as offering of Sacrifice, a complement showed only to such as they
design particularly to honor: but they went further, and consulted their Godds
whether they should not admit me into their Nation and Councils, and oblige me
to stay amongst them by a Marriage with the Kings or some of their great Men's
Daughters. But I, though with much a-do, waved their courtesy, and got my
Pastport, having given my word to return to them within six months.

Sapon is within the limits of the Province of Carolina, and as you may
perceive by the Figure, has all the attributes requisite to a pleasant and
advantageous Seat; for though it stands high, and upon a dry land, it enjoyes
the benefit of a stately River, and a rich Soil, capable of producing many
Commodities, which may hereafter render the Trade of it considerable.

Not far distant from hence, as I understood from the Nahyssan Indians, is
their Kings Residence, called Pintahae, upon the same River, and happy in the
same advantages both for pleasure and profit: which my curiosity would have led
me to see, were I not bound, both by Oath and Commission, to a direct pursuance
of my intended purpose of discovering a passage to the further side of the
Mountains.

This Nation is governed by an absolute Monarch; the People of a high stature,
warlike and rich. I saw great store of Pearl unbored in their little Temples,
or Oratories, which they had won amongst other spoils from the Indians of
Florida, and hold in as great esteem as we do.

From hence, by the Indians instructions, I directed my course to Akenatzy, and
Island bearing South and by West, and about fifty miles distant, upon a branch
of the same River, from Sapon. The Country here, though high, is level, and
for the most part a rich soil, as I judged by the growth of the Trees; yet
where it is inhabited by Indians, it lies open in spacious Plains, and is
blessed with a very healthful Air, as appears by the age and vigor of the
people; and though I traveled in the month of June, the heat of the weather
hindered me not from Riding at all hours without any great annoyance from the
Sun. By easy journeys I landed at Akenatzy upon the twelfth of June. The
current of the River is here so strong, that my Horse had much difficulty to
resist it; and I expected every step to be carried away with the stream.

This Island, though small, maintains many inhabitants, who are fixed here in
great security, being naturally fortified with Fastnesses of Mountains, and
Water of every side. Upon the North-shore they yearly reap great crops of Corn,
of which they always have a twelv^-months Provision aforehand, against an
Invasion from their powerful Neighbors. Their Government is under two Kings,
one presiding in Arms, the other in Hunting and Husbandry. They hold all
things, except their Wives, in common; and their custom in eating is, that
every man in his turn feasts all the rest; and he that makes the entertainment,
is seated betwixt the two Kings; where having highly commended his own cheer,
they carve and distribute it amongst the guests.

At my arrival here, I met four stranger-Indians, whose Bodies were painted in
various colors with figures of Animals whose likeness I had never seen: and by
some discourse and signs which passed between us, I gathered that they were
the only survivours of fifty, who set out together in company from some great
Island, as I conjecture, to the Northwest; for I understood that they crossed a
great Water, in which most of their party perished by tempest, the rest dying
in the Marshes and Mountains by famine and hard weather, after a two-months
travel by Land and Water in quest of this Island of Akenatzy.

The most reasonable conjecture that I can frame out of this Relation, is, that
these Indians might come from the Island of new Albion or California, from
whence we may imagine some great arm of the Indian Ocean or Bay stretches into
the Continent toward the Apalataean Mountains in the nature of a mid-land Sea,
in which many of these Indians might have perished. To confirm my opinion in
this point, I have heard several Indians testify, that the Nation of
Rickohockans, who dwell not far to the Westward of the Apalataean Mountains,
are seated upon a Land, as they term it, of great Waves; by which I suppose
they mean the Seashore.

The next day after my arrival at Akenatzy, a Rickohockan Ambassador, attended
by five Indians, whose faces were colored with Auripigmentum (in which Mineral
these parts do much abound) was received, and that night invited to a Ball of
their fashion; but in the height of their mirth and dancing, by a smoke
contrived for that purpose, the Room was suddenly darkened, and for what cause I
know not, the Rickohockan and his Retinue barbarously murdered. This struck me
with such an affrightment, that the very next day, without taking my leave of
them, I slunk away with my Indian Companion. Though the desire of informing my
self further concerning some Minerals, as Auripigmentum, etc. which I there
took special notice of, would have persuaded me to stay longer amongst them,
had not the bloody example of their treachery to the Rickohockans frighted me
away.

The fourteenth of June, pursuing a South-southwest course, sometimes by a
beaten path, and sometimes over hills and rocks, I was forced to take up my
quarters in the Woods: for though the Oenock-Indians, whom I then sought, were
not in a direct line above thirty odd miles distant from Akenatzy, yet the
Ways were such, and obliged me to go so far about, that I reached not Oenock
until the sixteenth. The Country here, by the industry of these Indians, is
very open, and clear of wood. Their Town is built round a field, where in their
Sports they exercise with so much labor and violence, and in so great numbers,
that I have seen the ground wet with the sweat that dropped from their bodies:
their chief Recreation is Slinging of stones. They are of mean stature and
courage, covetous and thievish, industrious to earn a penny; and therefore hire
themselves out to their neighbors, who employ them as Carryers or Porters.
They plant abundance of Grain, reap three Crops in a Summer, and out of their
Granary supply all the adjacent parts. These and the Mountain-Indians build not
their houses of Bark, but of Watling and Plaster. In Summer, the heat of the
weather makes them choose to lie abroad in the night under thin arbours of wild
Palm. Some houses they have of Reed and Bark; they build them generally round:
to each house belongs a little hovel made like an oven, where they lay up their
Corn and Mast, and keep it dry. They parch their Nuts and Acorns over the fire,
to take away their rank Oyliness; which afterward pressed, yield a milky
liquor, and the Acorns an Amber-colour'd Oil. In these, mingled together, they
dip their Cakes at great Entertainments, and so serve them up to their guests
as an extraordinary dainty. Their Government is Democratick; and the Sentences
of their old men are received as Laws, or rather Oracles, by them.

Fourteen miles West-Southwest of the Oenocks, dwell the Shackory-Indians, upon
a rich Soil, and yet-abounding in Antimony, of which they showed me
considerable quantities. Finding them agree with the Oenocks in Customs and
Manners, I made no stay here, but passing through their Town, I traveled till
the nineteenth of June; and then after a two days troublesome Journey through
Thickets and Marish grounds, I arrived at Watary above forty miles distant,
and bearing West-Southwest to Shakor. This Nation differs in Government from
all the other Indians of these parts: for they are Slaves, rather then Subjects
to their King. Their present Monarch is a grave man, and courteous to
strangers: yet I could not without horror behold his barbarous Superstition,
in hiring three youths, and sending them forth to kill as many young women of
their Enemies as they could light on, to serve his son, then newly dead, in the
other world, as he vainly fancyed. These youths during my stay returned with
skins torn off the heads and faces of three young girls, which they presented
to his Majesty, and were by him gratefully received.

I departed from Watary the one and twentieth of June; and keeping a
West-course for near thirty miles, I came to Sara: here I found the ways more
level and easy. Sara is not far distant from the Mountains, which here lose
their height, and change their course and name: for they run due West, and
receive from the Spaniards the name of Suala. From these Mountains or Hills the
Indians draw great quantities of Cinabar, with which beaten to powder they
color their faces: this Mineral is of a deeper Purple then Vermilion, and is
the same which is in so much esteem amongst Physicians, being the first element
of Quicksilver.

I did likewise, to my no small admiration, find hard cakes of white Salt
amongst them: but whether they were made of Seawater, or taken out of
Salt Pits, I know not: but am apt to believe the later, because the Sea is so
remote from them. Many other rich Commodities and Minerals there are
undoubtedly in these parts, which if possessed by an ingenious and industrious
people, would be improved to vast advantages by Trade. But having tied my self
up to things only that I have seen in my Travels, I will deliver no
Conjectures.

Lingua sile non est ultra narrabile quidquam. These Indians are so
indiscreetly fond of their children, that they will not chastise them for any
mischief or insolence. A little Boy had shot an Arrow through my body, had I not
reconciled him to me with gifts: and all this anger was, because I spurred my
horse out of another Arrows way which he directed at him. This cause such a
mutiny amongst the Youth of the Town, that the Seniors taking my horse and self
into protection, had much ado (and that by entreaties and prayers, not
commands) to appease them.

From Sara I kept a South-Southwest course until the five and twentieth of
June, and then I reached Wisacky. This three-days march was more troublesome to
me then all my travels besides: for the direct way which I took from Sara to
Wisacky, is over a continued Marish overgrown with Reeds, from whose roots
sprung knotty stumps as hard and sharp as Flint. I was forced to lead my horse
most part of the way, and wonder that he was not either plunged in the Bogs, or
lamed by those rugged knots.

This Nation is subject to a neighbour-King residing upon the bank of a great
Lake called Vshery, environed of all sides with Mountains, and Wisacky Marish;
and therefore I will detain the Reader no longer with the discourse of them,
because I comprehend them in that of Vshery.

The six and twentieth of June, having crossed a fresh River which runs into
the Lake of Vshery, I came to the Town, which was more populous then any I had
seen before in my March. The King dwells some three miles from it, and
therefore I had no opportunity of seeing him the two nights which I stayed
there. This Prince, though his Dominions are large and populous, is in
continual fear of the Oustack-Indians seated on the opposite side of the Lake;
a people so addicted to Arms, that even their women come into the field, and
shoot Arrows over their husbands shoulders, who shield them with Leathern
Targets. The men it seems should fight with Silver-Hatchets: for one of the
Vsheryes told me they were of the same metal with the Pomel of my Sword. They
are a cruel generation, and prey upon people, whom they either steal, or force
away from the Vsheryes is Periago's, to sacrifice to their Idols. The
Vshery-women delight much in feather-ornaments, of which they have great
variety; but Peacocks in most esteem, because rare in those parts. They are
reasonably handsome, and have more of civility in their carriage then I
observed in the other Nations with whom I conversed; which is the reason that
the men are more effeminate and lazy.

These miserable wretches are strangely infatuated with illusions of the devil:
it caused no small horror in me, to see one of them wrythe his neck all on one
side, foam at the mouth, stand barefoot upon burning coals for near an hour,
and then recovering his senses, leap out of the fire without hurt, or sign of
any. This I was an eyewitness of.

The water of Vshery-lake seemed to my taste a little brackish; which I rather
impute to some Mineral-waters which flow into it, then to any saltness it can
take from the Sea, which we may reasonably suppose is a great way from it. Many
pleasant Rivulets fall into it, and it is stored with great plenty of excellent
fish. I judged it to be about ten leagues broad: for were not the other shore
very high, it could not be discerned from Vshery. How far this Lake tends
Westerly, or where it ends, I could neither learn or guess.

Here I made a days stay, to inform my self further in these Countries; and
understood both from the Vsheries, and some Sara-Indians that came to trade
with them, that two-days journey and a half from hence to the Southwest, a
powerful Nation of Bearded men were seated, which I suppose to be the
Spaniards, because the Indians never have any; it being an universal custom
amongst them, to prevent their growth, by plucking the young hair out by the
roots. Westward lies a Government inhospitable to strangers; and to the North,
over the Suala-mountains, lay the Rickohockans. I thought it not safe to
venture my self amongst the Spaniards, lest taking me for a Spy, the would
either make me away, or condemn me to a perpetual Slavery in their Mines.
Therefore not thinking fit to proceed further, the eight and twentieth of June
I faced about, and looked homewards.

To avoid Wisacky-Marish, I shaped my course Northeast; and after three days
travel over hilly ways, where I met with no path or road, I fell into a barren
Sandy desert, where I suffered miserably for want of water; the heat of the
Summer having drunk all the Springs dry, and left no sign of any, but the
Gravelly channels in which they run: so that if now and then I had not found a
standing Pool, which provident Nature set round with shady Oaks, to defend it
from the ardour of the Sun, my Indian companion, horse and self had certainly
perished with thirst. In this distress we traveled till the twelfth of July,
and then found the head of a River, which afterward proved Eruco; in which we
received not only the comfort of a necessary and seasonable refreshment, but
likewise the hopes of coming into a Country again where we might find Game for
food at least, if not discover some new Nation or People. Nor did our hopes
fail us: for after we had crossed the River twice, we were led by it upon the
fourteenth of July to the Town of Katearas, a place of great Indian Trade and
Commerce, and chief Seat of the haughty Emperor of the Zoskiroro's, called
Kackusara vulgarly K^^k^^^. His grim Majesty, upon ^^y first appearance,
demanded my Gun and Shot; which I willingly parted with, to ransom my self out
of his clutches* for he was the most proud imperious Barbarian that I met with
in all my Marches. The people here at this (...) seemed prepared for some
extraordinary Solemnity: for the men and the women of better sort had decked
themselves very fine with pieces of bright Copper in their hair and ears, and
about their arms and neck, which upon Festival occasions they use as an
extraordinary bravery: by which it should seem this Country is not without rich
Mines of Copper. But I durst not stay to inform my self further in it, being
jealous of some sudden mischief toward me from Kaskous, his nature being
bloody, and provoked upon any slight occasion.

Therefore leaving Katearas, I traveled through the Woods until the sixteenth,
upon which I came to Kawitziokan, an Indian town upon a branch of
Rorenoke-river, which here I passed over, continuing my journey to
Menchoerinck; and on the seventeenth departing from thence, I lay all night in
the Woods, and the next morning betimes going by Natoway, I reached that
evening Apamatuck in Virginia, where I was not a little overjoyed to see
Christian faces again.

The third and last EXPEDITION, From the Falls of Rappahanock-River in
Virginia, (due West) to the top of the Apalataean Mountains.
ON the twentieth of August 1670, Col. Catlet of Virginia and my self, with
nine English Horse, and five Indians on foot, departed from the house of one
Robert Talifer, and that night reached the falls of Rappahanock-river, in
Indian Mantepeuck.

The next day we passed it over where it divides into two branches North and
South, keeping the main branch North of us.

The three and twentieth we found it so shallow, that it only wet our horses
hoofs.

The four and twentieth we traveled through the Savanae amongst vast herds of
Red and Fallow Deer which stood gazing at us; and a little after, we came to
the Promontories or Spurs of the Apalataean-mountains.

These Savanae are low grounds at the foot of the Apalataeans, which all the
Winter, Spring, and part of the Summer, lie under snow or water, when the snow
is dissolved, which falls down from the Mountains commonly about the beginning
of June; and then their verdure is wonderful pleasant to the eye, especially of
such as having traveled through the shade of the vast Forest, come out of a
melancholy darkness of a sudden, into a clear and open sky. To heighten the
beauty of these parts, the first Springs of most of those great Rivers which
run into the Atlantic Ocean, or Cheseapeack Bay, do here break out, and in
various branches interlace the flowery Meads, whose luxurious herbage invites
numerous herds of Red Deer (for their unusual largeness improperly termed Elks
by ignorant people) to feed. The right Elk, though very common in New Scotland,
Canada, and those Northern parts, is never seen on this side of the Continent:
for that which the Virginians call Elks, does not at all differ from the Red
Deer of Europe, but in his dimensions, which are far greater: but yet the Elk
in bigness does as far exceed them: their heads, or horns, are not very
different; but the neck of the Elk is so short, that it hardly separates the
head from the shoulders; which is the reason that they cannot feed upon level
ground but by falling on their knees, though their heads be a yardlong:
therefore they commonly either brouse upon trees, or standing up to the belly
in ponds or rivers feed upon the banks: their Cingles or tails are hardly three
inches long. I have been told by a New-England-Gentleman, that the lips and
nostrils of this creature is the most delicious meat he ever tasted. As for the
Red Deer we here treat of, I cannot difference the taste of their flesh from
those in Europe.

The six and twentieth of August we came to the Mountains, where finding no
horse-way up, we alighted, and left our horses with two or three Indians below,
whilst we went up afoot. The ascent was so steep, the cold so intense, and we
so tired, that having with much ado gained the top of one of the highest, we
drank the Kings Health in Brandy, gave the Mountain His name, and agreed to
return back again, having no encouragement from that prospect to proceed to a
further discovery; since from hence we saw another Mountain, bearing North and
by West to us, of a prodigious height: for according to an observation of the
distance taken by Col. Catlet, it could not be less then fifty leagues from the
place we stood upon.

Here was I stung in my sleep by a Mountain-spider; and had not an Indian sucked
out the poison, I had died: for receiving the hurt at the tip of one of my
fingers, the venom shot up immediately into my shoulder, and so inflamed my
side, that it is not possible to express my torment. The means used by my
Physician, was first a small dose of Snakeroot-powder, which I took in a little
water; and then making a kind of Plaster of the same, applied it near to the
part affected: when he had done so, he swallowed some by way of Antidote
himself, and sucked my fingers end so violently, that I felt the venom retire
back from my side into my shoulder, and from thence down my arm: having thus
sucked half a score times, and spit as often, I was eased of all my pain, and
perfectly recovered. I thought I had been bit by a Rattle-snake, for I saw not
what hurt me: but the Indian found by the wound, and the effects of it, that it
was given by a Spider, one of which he showed me the next day: it is not unlike
our great blue Spider, only it is somewhat longer. I suppose the nature of his
poison to be much like that of the Tarantula.

I being thus beyond my hopes and expectation restored to my self, we
unanimously agreed to return back, seeing no possibility of passing through the
Mountains: and finding our Indians with our horses in the place where we left
them, we rode homewards without making any further Discovery.

CONjECTURES of the Land beyond the Apalataean Mountains.
THey are certainly in a great error, who imagine that the Continent of North-
America is but eight or ten days journey over from the Atlantic to the Indian
Ocean: which all reasonable men must acknowledge, if they consider that Sir
Francis Drake kept a West-Northwest course from Cape Mendocino to California.
Nevertheless, by what I gathered from the stranger Indians at Akenatzy of their
Voyage by Sea to the very Mountains from a far distant Northwest Country, I am
brought over to their opinion who think that the Indian Ocean does stretch an
Arm or Bay from California into the Continent as far as the Apalataean
Mountains, answerable to the Gulfs of Florida and Mexico on this side. Yet I am
far from believing with some, that such great and Navigable Rivers are to be
found on the other side the Apalataeans falling into the Indian Ocean, as those
which run from them to the Eastward. My first reason is derived from the
knowledge and experience we already have of South- America, whose Andes send
the greatest Rivers in the world (as the Amazones and Rio de la Plata, etc.)
into the Atlantic, but none at all into the Pacifique Sea. Another Argument
is, that all our Waterfowl which delight in Lakes and Rivers, as Swans, Geese,
Ducks, etc. come over the Mountains from the Lake of Canada, when it is frozen
over every Winter, to our fresh Rivers; which they would never do, could they
find any on the other side of the Apalataeans.

INSTRUCTIONS to such as shall march upon Discoveries into the North- American
Continent.
TWo breaches there are in the Apalataean Mountains, opening a passage into the
Western parts of the Continent. One, as I am informed by Indians, at a place
called Zynodoa, to the Norward; the other at Sara, where I have been my self:
but the way thither being through a vast Forest, where you seldom fall into any
Road or Path, you must shape your course by a Compass; though some, for want of
one, have taken their direction from the North-side of the trees, which is
distinguished from the rest by quantities of thick Moss growing there. You will
no meet with many hindrances on horseback in your passage to the Mountains,
but where your course is interrupted by branches of the great Rivers, which in
many places are not Fordable; and therefore if you be unprovided of means or
strength to make a Bridge by felling trees across, you may be forced to go a
great way about: in this respect company is necessary, but in others so
inconvenient, that I would not advise above half a dozen, or ten at the most,
to travel together; and of these, the major part Indians: for the Nations in
your way are prone to jealousy and mischief toward Christians in a
considerable Body, and as courteous and hearty to a few, from whom they
apprehend no danger.

When you pass through an even level Country, where you can take no particular
remarks from hill or waters to guide your self by when you come back, you must
not forget to notch the trees as you go along with your small Hatchet, that in
your return you may know when you fall into the same way which you went. By
this means you will be certain of the place you are in, and may govern your
course homeward accordingly.

In stead of Bread, I used the meal of parched Mayz, i.e. Indian Wheat; which
when I eat, I seasoned with a little Salt. This is both more portable and
strengthening then Biscuit, and will suffer no mouldiness by any weather. For
other provisions, you may securely trust to your Gun, the Woods being full of
Fallow, and Savanae of Red-Deer, besides great variety of excellent Fowl, as
wild Turkeys, Pigeons, Partridges, Phesants, etc. But you must not forget to
dry or barbecue some of these before you come to the Mountains: for upon them
you will meet with no Game, except a few Bears.

Such as cannot lie on the ground, must be provided with light Hamacks, which
hung in the trees, are more cool and pleasant then any bed whatsoever.

The Order and Discipline to be observed in this Expedition is, that an Indian
Scout or two march as far before the rest of the company as they can in sight,
both for the finding out provision, and discovery of Ambushes, if any should be
laid by Enemies. Let your other Indians keep on the right and left hand, armed
not only with Guns, but Bills and Hatchets, to build small Arbours or Cottages
of boughs and bark of trees, to shelter and defend you from the injuries of the
weather. At nights it is necessary to make great Fires round about the place
where you take up your lodging, as well to scare Wild-beasts away, as to
purify the air. Neither must you fail to go the Round at the close of the
evening: for then, and betimes in the morning, the Indians put all their
designs in execution: in the night they never attempt any thing.

When in the remote parts you draw near to an Indian Town, you must by your
Scouts inform your self whether they hold any correspondence with the
Sasquesahanaughs: for to such you must give notice of your approach by a Gun;
which amongst other Indians is to be avoided, because being ignorant of their
use, it would affright and dispose them to some treacherous practice against
you.

Being arrived at a Town, enter no house until you are invited; and then seem
not afraid to be led in pinioned like a prisoner: for that is a Ceremony they
use to friends and enemies without distinction.

You must accept of an invitation from the Seniors, before that of young men;
and refuse nothing that is offered or set before you: for they are very jealous,
and sensible of the least slighting or neglect from strangers, and mindful of
Revenge.

Touching TRADE with Indians.
IF you barely design a Home-trade with neighbour-Indians, for skins of Deer,
Beaver, Otter, Wild-Cat, Fox, Racoon, etc. your best Truck is a sort of course
Trading Cloth, of which a yard and a half makes a Matchcoat or Mantle fit for
their wear; as also Axes, Hoes, Knives, Sizars, and all sorts of edged tools.
Guns, Powder and Shot, etc. are Commodities they will greedily barter for: but
to supply the Indians with Arms and Ammunition, is prohibited in all English
Governments.

In dealing with the Indians, you must be positive and at a word: for if they
persuade you to fall any thing in your price, they will spend time in higgling
for further abatements, and seldom conclude any Bargain. Sometimes you may with
Brandy or Strong liquor dispose them to an humor of giving you ten times the
value of your commodity; and at other times they are so hide-bound, that they
will not offer half the Market-price, especially if they be aware that you have
a design to circumvent them with drink, or that they think you have a desire
to their goods, which you must seem to slight and disparage.

To the remoter Indians you must carry other kind of Truck, as small
Looking-glasses, Pictures, Beads and Bracelets of glass, Knives, Sizars, and
all manner of gaudy toys and knacks for children, which are light and portable.
For they are apt to admire such trinkets, and will purchase them at any rate,
either with their current Coin of small shells, which they call Roanoack or
Peack, or perhaps with Pearl, Vermilion, pieces of Crystal; and toward
Vshery, with some odd pieces of Plate or Buillon, which they sometimes receive
in Truck from the Oestacks.

Could I have foreseen when I set out, the advantages to be made by a Trade
with those remote Indians, I had gone better provided; though perhaps I might
have run a great hazard of my life, had I purchased considerably amongst them,
by carrying wealth unguarded through so many different Nations of barbarous
people: therefore it is vain for any man to propose to himself, or undertake a
Trade at that distance, unless he goes with strength to defend, as well as an
Adventure to purchase such Commodities: for in such a design many ought to
join and go in company.

Some pieces of Silver unwrought I purchased my self of the Vsheries, for no
other end then to justify this account I give of my Second Expedition, which
had not determined at Vshery, were I accompanied with half a score resolute
youths that would have stuck to me in a further discovery toward the Spanish
Mines.

FINIS.

