THE ARGUMENTS OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL of DANBY The Second Time, At
the COURT of KING'S BENCH AT WESTMINSTER, Upon his Lordship's Motion for BAIL,
The 29th. day of June, Term. Trin. 1682.

As they were then Exactly taken.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Tonson within Grayes-Inn Gate next Grayes-Inn
Lane, 1682.

THE Earl of Danby's ARGUMENTS At the Court of KING'S BENCH, Upon his Lordships
Motion for BAIL, The 29th Day of June, Term. Trin. 1682, etc.
The Right Honorable the Earl of Danby, appearing in the Court of King's Bench,
the 29th Day of June, upon his Writ of Habeas Corpus; the Return of the Writ
was read by the Clerk of the Crown, and then his Lordships Council Moved the
Court, That the Return might be Filed, and his Lordship might be Enlarged from
his Imprisonment upon Bail, his Lordship having very good and sufficient Bail
ready in Court; and thereupon the Earl applying himself to the Lord
Chief Justice, spoke to this Effect,

EArl of Danby, My Lord, When I last attended your Lordships, and this Court,
the Judges (or most of them) were of opinion, That what I then said to your
Lordship might deserve further Consideration; and therefore my Lord, I doubt
not, but that your Lordship has been pleased to consider further thereof.

At that time, my Lord, none of the Judges but your Lordship, I think, made any
very particular Objections against my being Bailed; and if I am able to offer
any thing to your Lordship that may give a sufficient Answer to those
Objections, I do not doubt but that your Lordship is so just, that you will not
adhere to any Opinion, only because you have been once of that Opinion, if any
thing can be showed to convince you to change it. In confidence therefore, that
I am before a Court which is not to be Influenced by any Body (how great
soever,) nor by any thing but by the Laws of England, and by your Oaths to do
Justice according to those Laws; and being well assured of the Care which your
Lordship will always have to maintain the English Liberties, with which your
Lordship is Entrusted by the King, and by the Laws, and Invested with Power
enough by both to defend them at all times, and against all Opinions
whatsoever. My Lord, I say, presuming, and not doubting of all this, I shall
take upon me to add something to what I have said already to the Objections
which were then made by your Lordship, and I hope I shall have liberty to
Answer any new Objections that may be now made.

My Lord, I take it for granted in the first place, That the Order of the House
of Lords is no Objection against my Bail, because your Lordship was pleased to
tell me so the last time I was here; and then I do reckon that those Objections
which have been made against my being Bailed, may be summed up under these
Three Heads.

The First, My Lord, as well as my memory will serve me, was, That as it was
Incongruous for a Court which was Inferior to this, to Bail any Man that was
Committed by this Court, or to call in question the Process of this Court; so
it would likewise be for this Court to do in my Case; for that if a Man were
Committed by this Court, no Inferior Court could Bail that Man, (in Case His
Majesty should think fit to Adjourn this Court from time to time) until this
Court should sit again.

The Second Objection was, That I am not Indefinitely Imprisoned, for that when
His Majesty shall please to call a Parliament, I would have Remedy; and
therefore I must wait till His Majesty should please to call a Parliament.

The Third was, That this Cause of mine was depending in a Superior Court,
which was too big for this Court, and that the Supreme Court having laid its
hands upon me, therefore this Court could not Intermedle in that matter; my
Lord, these to the best of my Remembrance, are the Substance of the Objections
then made.

The first of these, I have been told without doors, is taken to be one of the
weightiest Objections against me, and truly I should be very glad it should
prove so, because I think it may be so easily Answered.

For in the first place, As to the calling in question the Process, I conceive
that Bail is no calling in question any Process, and this Court did surely
think so, when in the Case of the Earl of Shaftsbury, they did declare, That
had he not come to them in the time of an Adjournment of Parliament, they would
have Bailed him; and my Lord, as nothing is more evident, then that this Court
and other Courts do meddle with the Proceedings of that Superior Court, so I do
not doubt but to make appear, that they do meddle in a much greater degree then
what I desire of Bail; and that the Consequences of what they do, every Day
practice, may be far more dangerous to the Subject, then the Bailing of me can
be.

For that part of the Objection that compares a Commitment of this Court, to a
Commitment of the House of Lords, and does from thence conclude, that because
an Inferior Court to this cannot Bail a Man who is Committed by this Court,
therefore this Court cannot Bail a Man who is Committed by a Superior Court.

This seems so very unequal a Comparison, and the inequality of it so obvious,
that truly I thought it had not needed any Answer; for I would desire no other
Answer from your Lordship, (if you can give it me,) then what an Inferior Court
may give to any Person that shall come before them with the like Request: For
they may give him good and sufficient Reasons why they do not Bail him; they
may not only tell the Party that he is Committed by the Superior Court of the
the King's Bench, and that he must go thither for his Relief; but they can give
him good Reasons why he must do so; for they can tell him that the Court of
King's Bench will sit next Term, they can tell him when that Term will begin,
and they can tell him how long that Term will last, and they can tell him that
the Court of King's Bench cannot be Dissolved as the Parliament may be: And my
Lord, this takes away all that Prisoners pretenses, to say that he is an
Indefinite Prisoner, and if your Lordship can give me any such Answers as
these, I shall be as well satisfied as that Man ought to be; but if no such
certain Answers as these can be given me, then I must beg Pardon, to tell your
Lordships, that it cannot be denied, but that my Imprisonment is Indefinite,
and if it be so, I do as an English Man affirm, that no Law in England can
support it.

For the saying that if the King should Adjourn this Court from time to time,
the Party could not be Bailed till such time as this Court should sit again; My
Lord, If this should be admitted as a reasonable supposition (which under
favor, I do not think your Lordship your self does take it to be) yet it is
but an Adjournment that is objected, and if the Parliament were but under an
Adjournment, I would not have troubled your Lordship: But this is not the Case,
for though sometimes the King may Adjourn this or any other Court of
Westminster, by reason of some extraordinary occasion, as in Case of a
Pestilence or something of that nature, (and I know there have been Presidents
of it) yet my Lord, these are upon Extreordinary occasions, and it is not to be
thought, nay I am very certain, that his Majesty will never do any thing that
shall deprive his Subjects of any of those Rights the Law allows them; So that
in one Case the Law obliges that the Terms should be kept four times a Year,
and that then the Court shall sit if there be not extraordinary occasions to
hinder it; But in the other Case of a Parliament, the King lies under no
oblihation, nor restraint, when he shall call or whether he will call it; and
therefore the Inequality of the comparison is sufficiently apparent: And
besides this, It is as unknown how long a Parliament shall sit, as when it is
to sit; Insomuch that I take all this, But to have offered additional Arguments
on my s^de and shows how little the Arguments are that can be brought against
me; and I think it makes out to me and to all English men, that no man ought to
lie under such an Indefinite restraint as I do: and truly my Lord, I thought I
showed more respect to the Court, in giving a more General answer to this
Objection (as I did before) then I can do now by being so particular.

For the second Objection, viz. That I am not Indefinitely imprisoned, for that
when the King will please to call a Parliament, I would have a remedy there,
and therefore I must wait till the King will call a Parliament.

Truly my Lord, perhaps your Lordship may know the mind of the King or his
Ministers better than I do; But if you do not, I am sure no man but the King
can tell whether I shall have remedy then or no; for by the experience of three
Parliaments that have been called since I was a Prisoner, it has appeared that
I have had no Remedy: Therefore I should be very glad to see this matter any
better proved, then it has been that I am not Indefinitely Imprisoned; but if
this cannot be proved neither, but that I must wait till the King shall please
to call a Parliament; and when he shall call a Parliament, I shall be no more
certain of my Remedy, than hitherto I have been, truly then I shall need no
other Council but your Lordship to prove, I am under an Indefinite
Imprisonment; and that any man in England may be so when the King pleases; and
how any Doctrine can be more Arbitrary then that, or less to be desended by
Law, when ever that matter shall be brought into question; Others then either
your Lordship or I must be Judges, and those who will be parties so much
concerned in this question for their own sakes, as well as the public, that I
believe there is small doubt to be made how they will then decide this question.

My Lord, If it should then be found that this would hold water, and should be
maintained for good Doctrine; truly I think there would need no other Arbitrary
power to be set up to make men quit this Country; For as to any man's Liberty,
it might be equal to him whether he lived under the French Government, or under
the Grand Signiors Government, as under a Government so Arbitrary as this
Doctrine alone would make ours; And therefore I make no doubt my Lord, but that
you will be very careful how you give it us for Law.

As I should be very sorry that there should be any such Arbitrary Doctrine
taught to set the Kings Prerogative higher or greater than it ought to be by
Law, or then this King desires, so I should be as sorry that the King should
not have that right which duly belongs to him, which is a Right and Power at
all times to administer Justice to his Subjects, and which I never heard denied
to the Kings of England, nor I hope I never shall: And my Lord I must say that
the preservation of that Right to the King, would take away all pretenses for
any of these dangerous and new Doctrines, for if the King may administer
Justice at all times to his Subjects, (as it has been the care of Parliaments,
and by Magna Charta it self that he should) there is no reason left for any of
those things to be started or put upon us.

It Is true indeed, that the King cannot make Laws without a Parliment, but I
did never hear in my whole Life, but that he could administer Justice without
his Parliament; and if he could not, his Subjects would be in a miserable
Condition; for surely it would be a very hard Case, if his Subjects could have
no hopes of being righted by their Sovereigns Authority, either by himself, or
in his Courts, in all Cases, and at all times.

The House of Peers in Parliament ('it is true) is his greatest Court, but they
Sit only by Virtue of the King's Writ, and if the King should dye (which I hope
I shall never live to see) they would not then be a Court of Justice, nor any
Court at all; and therefore, my Lord, in this Question, the Royal Authority,
and the Subjects Liberties are so involved, that what Judgment soever shall be
given, must pass upon the one, as well as upon the other, and cannot possibly
be divided.

The third Objection that was made, is, That this Cause of mine is depending in
Parliament, which is a Superior Court to this; and that the Supreme Court
having laid its hands upon me, therefore this Court cannot intermeddle.

My Lord, There is no man living, that has a greater Reverence for that
Supreme Court, than I have, or that will go further than I will, to defend it,
in all the Rights and Privileges that belong to it by Law; Nay, my Lord, I
have so much a greater Esteem for that Court, because I am sure it will neither
suffer me, nor any man living, to go unpunished, that shall transgress the Law,
or that shall go about any way to make them Transgressors of the Law, or to
make them such as would be restrainers of the English Liberties, beyond what
the Law permits. They have showed the contrary, when it was offered to them by
a Bill from the House of Commons, that they would have no such absolute
Authority put into their hands over the Liberties of the Subject, but did then
refuse it; so that to say, that Supreme Court has laid its hands upon any man's
Liberty in England, further than the Law permits, would be to put an unjust
Odium upon the House of Lords to the Nation, instead of doing them right; and
therefore I must needs say, that in this particular Case of my own, I find only
the word and name of Superior Court to be made use of against me, but nothing
in reality; just as they were pleased in the House of Commons to use the word
Traitorously, in the Articles against me, when there was not a tittle of
Treason in them, only that by calling it Treason, it might serve to lay me
where I am.

But, my Lord, I know no Court that is superior at this time to this Court
where I am now, and how any thing can be said to be depending in a Court that
has no Being, I think will not very easily be defended from nonsense, without
having the Matter extremely well explained; and whenever that Superior Court
shall have a Being, my Cause will then be before it, by my being Bailed to
appear there. And for saying, it has laid its hand upon this Case of mine, it
ought to be shown in what the Superior Court has laid its hand upon me, so as
to keep me from Bail, when neither that Superior Court it self (though it were
willing so to do) is able to give me any Relief, nor that I can get to be Tried
or Discharged elsewhere, nor have any time prefixed when that Superior Court
shall Sit; as if there were no Justice left in England.

But if it be so, that I shall neither be Bailed, nor have it showed, what hand
the Superior Court has laid upon me to hinder it, then truly any man may be so
concluded, and the Argument may be decided, by the will and pleasure of those
who have men in their Power; but the shadows of things, when there is no
substance in the Argument, will not satisfy reasonable men for an Answer, why
so public a Grievance shall not be remedied; and I am confident, that the
Superior Court it self, will never suffer its Name to be made use of, nor
themselves to be made Properties, to support such a Grievance as may concern
not only themselves, but the whole Nation, both in this Age, and to all our
Posterities; and by which not only Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right,
would be evaded, but the late Act of Habeas Corpus may also be eluded by this
device; and the Parliament (when it shall meet again) will find, that instead
of securing their Liberties, they have only been hedging in the Cuckoo; for
that there is now a new way found out, by which all Acts for our Liberties may
be made of no effect: And this cannot be contradicted, unless (as some would
fancy) the King could not Impeach as well as the Commons; but there are so many
Evidences to the contrary of that, as there is no room left for the Dispute:
And amongst the Presidents of that kind, there is one (because it has a double
Consequence) that I do desire to put your Lordship in mind of.

It is in the 5o. H. 4th. in the Records of the Tower. There you will find,
that the Commons came to Petition the King, that his Majesty would be pleased,
not to Impeach the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Northumberland, and
some others, that were at that time accused for being in the Confederacy of Sir
Henry Piercy, and the King grants their Request, and does agree he would not
Impeach them.

I have quoted this the rather, because of the double President that is in this
Case; for again the same day the Commons came (after his Majesty had granted
their former request) and did further Petition his Majesty, that he would be
pleased to affirm those Lords (whom he had promised he would not Impeach) to be
his true Liege-men; and the King did grant that also, by which it was then
taken for granted, that he had set them Recti in Curia, (even though they were
in that Conspiracy with Sir Henry Piercy) and, my Lord, I give you this
Instance, that you may observe two things by it: First, That the Commons did
Petition the King not to Impeach; and when he had granted that, it appears
also, that by the King's declaring them to be his true Leige-men, it was by the
Commons conceived, that the King did set them Recti in Curia; by which it does
appear, what great regard the House of Commons had to the King's bare
Affirmation, of men being his true Liege-men; and I hope, that neither this
King's Power nor Credit shall be less with his own Court, than that King's was
with his House of Commons; and I am sure, no King's Affirmation can be greater,
nor more public, both to his Parliament and Kingdom, of any man's being a true
Liege-man, (to use that old word) than the King's has been concerning me.

My Lord, there are some men, very unable to distinguish (though they would)
between sound and good sense, and there are a great many, that are as willing
to let men remain under their mistakes; but since it weighs a great deal with
some who do not very rightly distinguish, it will be of absolute necessity for
me to explain-what it is, that is meant by a Case depending in Parliament, when
there is no Parliament: This will be best shown by an Instance in a Writ of
Error depending in Parliament, in which Case, when the Parliament is Sitting,
and so the Writ is really and truly depending in the Court that is in Being;
there can (during such Sitting) be no Execution sued upon the Judgment. But, my
Lord, no sooner is the Parliament dissolved, but experience shows, that
Execution may be sued, and Goods levied, and the properties of men's Estates
changed; and therefore it is by this sufficiently plain, that depending is not
then meant in the same sense, or in the same manner, as it was meant when the
Parliament was actually Sitting; for then there could have been no Execution
sued.

Now, my Lord, When a Parliament shall meet again, what does it meet with? It
meets, it is true, with the same Cause again, (as to the Merits) but it meets
it quite altered as to other Circumstances, viz. as to the Execution that has
been granted by an inferior Court, in the interval of Parliament. And as to the
change of property, for a man's Estate, (and perhaps of great value) may happen
to be in another man's hands at the same time by the Execution; so that when a
Parliament does meet again, it does meet, it is true, with the same Cause (as
to the Merits) but indeed as to nothing else.

And therefore, by this, it is clear, that a Parliament does only expect when
it meets again, to meet with the Cause in the same state (as to the Merits of
the Cause) and does not at all meddle or concern it self to find fault with
those suppletory Acts that have been done by an inferior Court in the interval,
which was only to prevent failure of Justice, but it commends them for not
having delayed Justice, and that men should not be kept too long out of their
Rights, (even though there may have been prodigious Wrong done to the Parties,
if the Judgment have been erroneous) for that the Superior Court will at last
see to the Error, if any have been committed by the Judgment of the inferior
Court, and will enter upon all as entire again (as to its Merits) as if nothing
had been done by the inferior Court; so that in reality, that which can only
reconcile the sense of being depending in Parliament, when the Parliament is
dissolved, is this last Order of the House of Lords, which declares
Impeachments, etc. to be continued, notwithstanding Dissolution. For by virtue
of this last Order, the Lords do proceed upon the Cause, without beginning De
novo, or having any new Writ or new Impeachment brought up to them: But this is
new Doctrine, and never practiced till of late; however, since they have done
so, in this sense, and in this only, a Cause may be said to be depending; and
so it was adjudged, in that single instance of the Trial and Condemnation of my
Lord Stafford, but there they proceeded to the Merits of the Cause, and they
tried, condemned, my Lord Stafford; and there is no manner of doubt, but by
virtue of their late Order, they may proceed upon me when they shall meet, as
they shall think fit, notwithstanding my having been bailed; for I desire not
to have the Merits of my Cause removed from before the Lords, if I might, but
that they may do with me as they please, even to Condemnation, if they shall
have Cause, which I hope in God they never shall.

Therefore, I say, my Lord, in this sense only which I have explained, a Cause
may be said to be depending, though a Parliament is not in being; but I will
challenge the ablest Lawyer, with all the Sophistry he can use, together with
his Law, to show me how he can possibly distinguish the Case of Writs of Error,
from the Case of Impeachment, or wherein they differ, as to their depending, in
the Intervals of Parliament; and I likewise challenge him to make appear, how
Bail is any other than such a suppletory Act, to relieve a man from being kept
too long from his Liberty, as the granting of Execution in the Interval, is to
relieve a man from being too long kept out of his Money or Estate, for that the
Merits of the Cause both in the one Case and the other, remains entire for the
Parliament to recommit upon (if they see cause) as well as to reverse the
Judgment, and all the Proceedings, upon the Writ of Error.

Where is then the difference, my Lord? if there be any difference, I think it
lies only in this, that in one Case there may be an erroneous Judgment, and a
man may be almost undone and ruined, by being wrongfully dispossessed of his
Estate (be it never so great) but in this Case, the suppletory Act which is
done to admit to bail, can only be to ease a man from his too long or perhaps
perpetual imprisonment, and can hurt no body, nor take no man's liberty from
him, to grant him his; but yet this must be thought an hard Case, and the other
a very easy one, and fit to be practiced every day.

My Lord, if the Law has taken care, and made such provision, that a man shall
not be kept too long out of 10 l. in money, or out of 40. l. a year in Land,
then it would be strange, that the Law should not have made provision, that a
man should not be kept too long out of his Liberty, and when there is no
prospect of his having it.

Besides, in a Writ of Error the Judgment given is controverted, and the power
of awarding Execution is suspended upon that very account, because the Judgment
of the Court is in question, and the Justice of it is brought in dispute,
whether they have judged right or wrong.

Now, My Lord, if the dissolution of a Parliament can restore the Judges power
in the interval of Parliament, so as to award an Execution upon a Man's Estate,
where the property shall be changed and altered, and notwithstanding their
Justice was brought in question, and that they may have done great wrong to the
Party by their judgment, and yet we are to believe, that the same Dissolution
cannot restore the power of the Judges so as to give a Man a little Ease from a
Confinement within four Walls, where the Justice of no Court is questioned nor
arraigned, nor no wrong can have been done to any body; But on the contrary,
does right to the King, who by his consent shows his Will to have a Man bailed;
and great right to the Subject, who ought to be delivered from the danger of an
indefinite Imprisonment which is so contrary to Law: Then indeed there must be
some Infallibility supposed in that Chair, which shall maintain such Doctrine,
and must be submitted to, with the same Implicit Faith, which they do who can
believe Infallibility.

But for my part (who can believe Insallibily in no kind upon Earth) I confess
I must have my Reason better satisfied, before I can any more believe this
Exposition of the Law, than I can believe those infallible Men's Expositions of
the Gospel.

My Lord, I hope I have made plain to your Lordship, what it is that is meant,
or can be understood by a Cause depending in Parliament when there is none, and
how and in what sense only it can be understood to be so depending; and it is
as plain, that the bailing of me is no intermedling with the merits of the
Cause in Parliament, but on the contrary, an evident affirmation of the
jurisdiction of that supreme Court; and if I cannot be admitted to bail in some
other Court than the House of Lords, it is contrary to what my Warrant of
Commitment implies, by which I am committed only till I am discharged by due
course of Law, for which I am properly in this place.

My Lord, it cannot be meant that Bail can be any more than a Suppletory Act
(propter rei necessitatem) and for the ease of the Subject, and it is
impossible for that old Rule, of Salus populi Suprema Lex esto, to be more
aptly applied in any case in the World than in this, that concerns every Man in
England in his Liberty: For should it be otherwise, Pray see what the
consequence of this Doctrine would be, that because a superior Court which is
not now in being (nor has it in its own power to be so) has committed a Man,
therefore he cannot be admitted to Bail; what should become of Men, if after
the dissolution of a Parliament, there can be no possibility of having justice
done them?

Nay farther, if it should be granted that this Court cannot intermeddle,
because the Superior Court has committed, by that Doctrine it would not matter
whether the Commitment were for Treason, or for the smallest quarrel or
misdemeanor, for which a Man might happen to be in Prison at the time of a
dissolution of a Parliament; nor would it be any matter, whether the Order of
the House of Lords were revoked or not.

For it is an Order of a Superior Court, which will still be a Superior Court
though the Order were burnt, and yet that must be enough to keep one in Prison
by this Rule, for that there would still be no other remedy though the Order
were repealed.

But, My Lord, the Warrant of Commitment shows the Lords Directions to be
contrary to this Opinion, for I can show several Instances of Warrants which
run, some to be kept till further order of that House, others to be kept till
they shall be discharged by the House, and others to be kept till the pleasure
of the House be further signified, and others during the pleasure of that
House; But my Warrant is, till I am discharged by due course of Law: Now I
doubt not, but if the Lords had thought those words had not given a latitude
for relief elsewhere, they would have worded the Warrant otherwise, and instead
of saying by due course of Law, would have said, till I were discharged by that
House, if the Lords had thought there had been no other remedy by Law, but by
that House. But, My Lord, the Lords will not act any thing above the Law, they
will keep every thing within the compass of the Law; and I am sure that there
cannot be a better Example to follow, than the Example of those wise and great
Men of that great Court, and I desire it may be followed and not contradicted.

For by this Doctrine, truly, My Lord, Liberty it self would not only be
utterly lost; but to make the Riddle the greater, and the manner more
ridiculous, it would be lost, and yet no body invade it: For the King he
consents to my Bail (if he has any power) so he does not intend to deprive me
of my Liberty; The Lords would for their own sakes and Justice sake (if it were
in their power to meet, and have time to sit so long as to take the Case of a
single Person into consideration) do me justice, either in discharging or
trying me; So that in my Case, here is a Subject of England imprisoned by no
body, and yet no Power upon Earth can relieve me; Show me an example of this in
any Nation under the Sun, but this, that there wants a power in the Government
to relieve a Prisoner at all times (if it would) and I will be satisfied; Nay,
My Lord, the very Spanish Inquisition is more reasonable than this, for though
the Cause may be unjust that they commit a Man for, and their usage of him may
be very severe while he is there, yet the Inquisitors (if they please) can
deliver him; there is no Prisoner in the World but can be delivered by some
power or other, but me; and, My Lord, this is a Rule that must be for every Man
in England as well as me, and I am not so inconsiderable but that my fate may
be made a President of note.

The Opinions, My Lord, that were given by the Judges in the Case of
Ship Money, appear far more tolerable in my Opinion than this; for I know there
is no Man but had rather have a Sentence passed against his Estate (which he
may recover again) than have it passed against his Liberty, which he may never
have, and which is more valuable than any Estate.

Besides, where is the Justice of the Nation? and what a shame would it be to
our Laws and to our Government; that it could be said of this Country, that a
Man might be punished by Imprisonment in England (where the Government is not
Arbitrary) for seven Years or more, and at last be found guilty of no Offense?
and what satisfaction could be in nature given to that Man? I say if that Man
could have a Crown given him, it could not make him satisfaction for the loss
of his Liberty all his life, which may be the Consequence of this Doctrine;
and, my Lord, there are Precedents good store where Men have suffered
sufficiently for their Judgments against the Liberty and Property of the
Subject, but I never found one that suffered in the Defense either of the one
or the other.

I have shown I think sufficiently what can be meant either in my Case or any
other, by a Cause depending in Parliament, when there is no Parliament, as also
how much Inferior Courts do meddle with things of much an higher nature than
Bail will be; Insomuch that truly I should think it might be sufficient to say
no more than I have said; But I do not know what may be sufficient in my Case;
and therefore, my Lord, you must Pardon me, if I do put you in mind of a Case
wherein you have gone to the merits of the Cause it self when Depending in
Parliament.

It is Fitz-Harris his Case; and I know very well what Answers will be given
me; as that that was a Case rejected by the Lords, and that it was not the same
Treason for which he was Impeached, and other things that I could mention; but
I know your Lordship will speak by the Record of the Court (of which I have
here a Copy) and the Record is that which must satisfy the World an hundred
years hence, by which it will appear to them, that he was Impeached, and Tried,
and Condemned, depending that Impeachment; for he made that his Plea, and Mr.
Attorney General demurring to it, the Court must take the matter pleaded, as
confessed and allowed; and this being so, I should think there should be no
scruple made in the point of Bail, or if there should, there must certainly be
very great hardship in one case or the other, and must be very dissicult to be
answered.

But to Conclude, besides all this, I am the King's Prisoner; and I have the
King's Pardon, and if I cannot get to be Bailed, there is not only a defect of
Jurisdiction in this Court, but a defect of the Regal Authority and Power of
the Kings of England to administer Justice to their Subjects; which was never
heard of I think, and I hope I shall never live to hear of it (Especially from
the King's Supreme Ordinary Court of Justice.) And that, My Lord, that must
make this Case the more unhappy at this time is, that we live in days wherein
his Majesty's Prerogatives are so much brought in question: For what
Prerogative has He which is more undoubted than his power of Pardoning? and
yet you see that brought in question to the utmost, and those that are the
ablest Men that speak against that power, do laugh at the little small Triflers
who object, that the King may Pardon before Impeachment, and after the Sentence
be given, but not betwixt those times; They laugh at this, and tell you that he
cannot Pardon at all, and it is easily perceived that if they could reach their
design, they would have it understood, That Treason may be committed against
the People, and by that Doctrine another High Court of Justice, may be set up,
and the King may be tried by his People as well as he can try them; My Lord,
there are a great many of Consequences attending upon that Doctrine, which I am
sure will never be countenanced by the King's Courts; but I shall not wonder
that such Men as these be trying their Projects, and think themselves in the
Right to do so, If they find his Majesty cannot do so much as a lesser Act of
Grace for his Prisoner, which is but to give him ease from too long or perhaps
a perpetual Imprisonment; for if he has not power so much as to Bail his own
Prisoner, I shall not wonder if others question whether he has power to Pardon
him.

My Lord, I have seen such Keepers of our Liberties, from whom I should expect
such Doctrines, but I thank God that by our Laws the King is the Keeper of our
Liberties, and therefore I hope I shall not hear any such Doctrine by which he
can only be the Keeper of us in Prisons, but shall have no more power than
another Man, to set his Prisoner at liberty, although his Will be only to give
his Prisoner Ease (as the Law intends) against Indefinite Imprisonment.

Lastly, My Lord, If I should die in Prison with this Pardon by me, which I
have showed Your Lordship; or suppose that the House of Commons (if it were but
with a design to destroy the Pardon) would give some other reason than the
Pardon (as being better satisfied concerning me, or any thing else) why they
would prosecute me no more (of which there be diverse Precedents). What a Wound
would thereby be given to the King's Prerogative? and pray how is it possible
almost to give it a greater blow than this would be?

What a Precedent would it be to Posterity to say, that a Man had lain Three,
four or five years or more in Prison notwithstanding a Pardon, that signified
nothing all that time? for that the King would have Eased him if he could, and
has showed his Court that he would do so, but was not able so much as to have
him Bailed? would not this put that Prerogative in great hazard? I confess I do
wonder that some others besides Your Lordship have not taken more care of the
Prerogative of the King, for their own Sakes as well as the King's; For it
would be very convenient it should be useful, if ever it should become
necessary; And it is not improbable, but if the King should hereafter find such
a Prerogative diminished, he would not only reflect upon his Loss, but upon
those who might have advised better, or might have better defended this
Prerogative of the King; And for the Subjects Liberties, there will never be
Eyes wanting to inquire after any invasion which shall be made of that kind.

Upon the whole, I have troubled Your Lordship too long, but it has been upon
a Subject of the greatest Concern to Englishmen: I have such Bail to offer to
Your Lordship, as I am sure cannot be denied, and I am in my own Conscience
sufficiently satisfied, that I am detained a Prisoner from Bail, neither by the
King, by the Lords, nor by the Laws; and therefore, my Lord, I do humbly pray
your Lordship you would please to accept my Bail, and as I here offer your
Lordship my Pardon again, so I again pray the benefit of it, and I desire your
Lordship it may be read in Court.

THE Lord Chief Justice then spoke, and so did all the rest of the Judges,
(upon the Earls desiring that they would severally deliver their Opinions) And
the Lord Chief Justice, and Mr. Justice Dolbin, did deliver their opinions,
that the Earl could not be relieved by that Court. Mr. Justice Jones concluded
his Discourse with saying, that he could not give his Judgment that the Earl
should be Bailed AT THAT TIME. Mr. Justice Raymond did say, he could not see
but that there would be a failure of Justice if so be his Lordship should not
have Liberty upon Bail; but that he had not had time to view Precedents, and
therefore it would be very unfit for him at present to be positive in what he
did say.

And then the Lord Chief Justice did tell the Earl, he must be contented to be
Remanded.

I Have not dared to set down the Particulars of what was spoken by the Judges,
the Writer not having well heard what was said by some of them, but some are
said to have taken Exact Notes, which may perhaps be Published hereafter by
themselves: And it is likewise reported that the Earl (not having been
permitted to reply in Court to the Reasons given by the Judges against his
Lordship's being Bailed) does likewise intend to put forth his Answer to the
Reasons which were then Objected against him.

FINIS.

