A DISCOURSE Upon Sr WALTER RAWLEIGH's Great Cordial; BY N. le FEBVRE, Royal
Professor in Chemistry and Apothecary in Ordinary to his MAIESTY's most
Honorable Household.

Rendered into English by PETER BELON, Student in Chemistry.

LONDON, Printed by J. F. for Octavian Pulleyn Junior, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Bible in S. Paul's Churchyard near the little North door. 1664.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent MAJESTY.
SIR,
I Have elaborated, according to Your MAJESTY's order, the Preparation of Sr
Walter Rawleigh's Great Cordial, with so much circumspection and with such
exact and serious meditation on all that enters in the Composition of this
precious Remedy, that I thought it my duty to present to Your MAJESTY what I
have gathered out of most particular in this my Labor, and to give accordingly
the reasons, which prove the great advantages that the modern Pharmacie
carries legitimately above the ancient, by reason that it is enlightened with
the glorious lights of Chemistry. And indeed, SIR, that only is capable to
separate exactly the pure from the impure, to preserve the virtue of whatsoever
it works upon, without any loss of its volatile parts, and to draw out of the
very center of the most fixed things (...) Nature has therein implanted most
essential and most specific. Your MAJESTY knows so well this difference, and
reasons so justly on all the Productions of Nature and Art* that one may say
with a real and sincere truth, That You unfold with an incomparable Neatness of
Judgment the profoundest Questions of the Naturalists and Chemists, in the
Royal Laboratory, with as much facility as Your MAJESTY untangles in all Your
Counsels the Intrigues of the most refined Policy. I shall continue, SIR, to
work as I have done with the same zeal and the same activity, that I may
contribute what is of my Art and Study, to effect those Sublime and Royal
Intentions which Your MAJESTY has for the common good of Your Subjects, whom
Your Royal Bounty desires should be eased and delivered from their Diseases and
Evils. Wherefore I do present and dedicate to Your MAJESTY with humility and
all submissive respects the Discourse which I have made on this Great Cordial,
and humbly beseech Your MAJESTY to protect it, since it was brought forth under
Your MAJESTY's Shelter and Command, being now, as I will be all the rest of my
life, inviolably,

SIR, Your MAJESTY's most dutiful, most humble and most faithful Servant, N. le
Febvre.

Alterations, with some Mistakes in Printing.
PAge 8. l. 17. read, at the latter end of. l. 20. r. Balsamic. page 12. l.
12. r. which is formed. p. 15. l. 11. dele, as. l. 13. r. and which. p. 17. l.
ult. r. Preparation thereof. p. 24. l. 15. r. virtuous. p. 39. l. 7. dele them.
l. 15. r. ^peritive. p. 42. l. 21. r. this Cordial. p. 43. l. 11. r.
mellaginous. p. 59. l. 23. r. Transpiration. p. 61. l. 3. r. Petrification. p.
97. l. 12. r. this Great.

Imprimatur.

JOH. HALL, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sacr. Domest.
Apr. 23. 1664.
A DISCOURSE Upon Sr WALTER RAWLEIGH's Great Cordial.
MANY Praises have been given in all Ages not only to the Remedies worthy of
the Closets of Kings and Princes, but to those also that have been capable of
indifferent use to all persons which compose the Civil Society.

We have examples thereof both in the Treatises of the ancient and modern
Physic, as also in History; where we observe, that those which have been the
most recommended in this Art, and that had a Science more distinct then others,
have endeavored with all their possibility to give the Public those good
Remedies which they had attained to by Practice and Experience.

Thus the great Mithridates, King of Pontus and Bithynia, has consecrated his
Name to Posterity by that excellent Opiate which bears it. Theriaca puts us
incessantly in mind of Andromachus who is the Author of it. And the celebrated
Andrew Matthiolus has made himself famous by his Antidote, which all Germany
admires. Raymondus Lully, Basil Valentine, Paracelsus, Arnoldus de Villa nova,
Quercetan, Zwelferus, and many others, which I omit, have rendered themselves
illustrious by Panacea's, Elixirs, Tinctures, Magisteries and Essences: so that
it seems as if the old and new Physic, as well as both the Pharmacies, had
been in Emulation to out-doe one another, to make appear to their offspring
those Knowledges and Lights which they have attained to, by the Seeking and
Anatomy that each of those delicate and worthy Professions had made of the
preparation of Natural things, and of the virtue they conceal and hide in their
Interior parts, as in a Central Point, whose Exterior (to speak properly) is
but the Circumference, of no other use but as a place of abode, its Bark or
Shell, which hides and covers from us the Wonders that this Celestial and
Luminous point contains: for, as the great Paracelsus says, Domus est semper
mortua, sed eam Inhabitants vivit.

Of all those that have made themselves worthily famous amongst the Moderns, by
gathering together that which Nature furnishes of Best and most useful to Man
for his Health, I find none more worthy of praise then this Illustrious Knight,
Sir Walter Rawleigh: because that he has not only made choice of what is most
precious and full of virtue in the three Families of Animals, Vegetables and
Minerals; but has also made appear so much Art and so much Experience, for the
preparation of this great and admirable Cordial which does immortalize him,
that I have thought I should give to his honor and glory those Elogies which
he has more then deserved, by the noble labor and beautiful study that has
made him attain to the sublime Knowledge he had of all he has inserted in this
Incomparable Remedy.

And whereas the King did command me to apply my self wholly to its preparation
in the beginning of the last year's Spring: I thought I owed to the Learned
Curiosity of this great Monarch, the Meditations and Notes which my study and
the work have made me do, with all the necessary reflections to the clearing and
to the recommendation of a Medicine so useful to the public good of the People
of his Kingdoms.

And because that Order and Method do establish and make those things one
undertakes to discourse of to be the better known, and that Confusion on the
contrary is the ruin of it; we therefore must give also to this Discourse the
Essential Parts, which will discover the most evidently, and the most clearly
we can possibly, all that this wonderful Cordial has of Excellency. First, by
the Choice or Election of the Materials that compound it. Secondly, by the most
studied and most exquisite Preparation of this Composition above all those
which ever did precede it. Which will also show how much Art helps Nature. In
the third place, we will make appear by proofs and reasons, that this Remedy is
absolutely proper and useful to the Nations bordering on the Seas, by reason of
the Scurvy which torments them very frequently. In the fourth place, the
Excellency of this Remedy appears, in that it is not only proper and specific
to drive away the venom that causes the already-produced Diseases; but also
especially because it is sufficient to maintain that beautiful and admirable
Harmony that causes Health, since it is capable to correct and remedy all the
faults of Indigestions and ill Fermentations which are made in the Stomach,
that are in us the Causes, the Spring and the Beginning of the worst Diseases.
And we shall conclude this Discourse with the exposition of the Dose, the time
and method of using it with benefit: For all the world knows, that the Abuse
and the Excess of the best things do commonly produce the most perilous and
surprising Effects.

We have said heretofore that Sir Walter Rawleigh's Great Cordial contained in
it self the choice and Epitome of what is of greatest Excellency amongst all
the simple Cordials, which the three Natural Families of Animals, Vegetables
and Minerals furnish us with; of which we must make the deduction and the
representation to the eyes of the Reader's understanding, to insinuate more and
more into them, that this admirable Genius could make a most worthy choice of
the Matters which compose his Remedy, which do possess every one in particular
a great deal of Spirit and volatile sulphurous Salt in their Center, from
whence do result all those rare Effects that it daily produces as much toward
the healthful as toward the sick. Now we shall begin the description of all
these things by the Order of Nobleness and Excellency of those that have
possessed the Animal Life; we shall continue by those that have had the
Vegetable Life; and we shall end by the last, that have enjoyed but a more
obscure and imperfect Life, which is the Mineral Life.

The Hart's Horn enters into our Noble Cordial, and that for many reasons: for
there are but few Animals that can equal the Heart for length of life, since he
lives whole Ages. This Animal is most swift, which betokens a fine Harmony and
a good disposition of the inward and outward parts, which furnish sufficient
Vigor, and by consequence Spirits, to hold out to the length of the Course,
that serves for delight and divertisement to the greatest Monarchs. But is
there any thing that proves so well the abundance of Spirits and Salt which
reside in this Beast, as the shedding and re-production of its Horns? which it
lays down at the beginning of Winter, by reason the Aliments of which it did
live had no longer in them that Balsamie Spirit and Salt, which serves for Oil
to the Lamp of the Radical Moisture, and that maintains the Natural Heat: But
as soon as the Spring furnishes the Heart with the first blade of the herbs and
the buds of the trees, he draws from the middle Life of those things a renewed
being, so efficacious and powerful, that it reproduceth in him a most
extraordinary heat and cheerfulness, which causes him to lay down his useless
arms, to produce new ones, which are all living and juicy, and which at last
digest and harden themselves, to furnish us in its proper time a Horn
replenished with a great abundance of volatile Salt. The thing remarkable in the
choice of this Horn for its excellency is, that it must be taken from an Animal
of a middle age, and that has been chaced, because the Course heats the Animal,
and makes it to drive all its vigor and spirits from the Center to the
Circumference, which is remarked by the weight and closing of the parts. The
true time to take the Hart's Horn for Physical use is between the fifteenth of
August and the twentieth of September. The general virtues of the Hart's Horn
are, to resist the corruption and putrefaction of the Humors which constitute
humane bodies, and their malignancy; to provoke Sweat, to strengthen and
augment the natural Balsam of life: which gives us to understand that it is
with a great deal of judgment that our Author has given it place in his Great
Cordial.

The second thing which comes from an Animal, and makes one of the best parts
of this Remedy, is the Stone of the Oriental Bezoar, an Animal that partakes of
the Heart and the Goat. The best is found in Persia and the East Indies;
although that which comes from America is not to be slighted, if the Dose be
augmented. It is a Stony Concretion, which forms and engenders it self by the
property of the volatile saline portion which is in the Plants of which these
Animals live, and which coagulates it self in their second Ventricle, where it
augments it self yearly bed upon bed and shell upon shell, by the magnetic
attraction that the first kernel makes of what is analogical to its substance
in the half-digested aliment which is in the stomach of that Beast; as is seen
and proved by the straws and the remainder of chewed herbs which are found in
the Center of the true Oriental and Occidental Bezoar, which without doubt has
been the first occasional cause of the Concretion of the Stone. Now the Indians
and Persians say that this Animal lives particularly of a Plant which has of
it self a great deal of virtue. But as this Stone is a true natural Magistery
which comes from the animal and vegetable substances, which unite together by
the digestion in the Animal's second Ventricle; so must we believe that the
Bezoar-stone contains more eminently the virtue from them produced. The
principal are to strengthen, to provoke Sweat, to combat Poisons, the Plague,
and malignant Fevers: it remedies the Faintness of the Heart and its
Palpitation; it kills the Worms; it is good against the Epilepsie, against the
Jaundise, the Stone, the Dysentery, the retention of the Menstrua, and finally
it facilitates and accelerates Childbirth. So that we conclude that it is one
of the principal Pillars of our Incomparable Cordial.

Musk is the third thing that the Animal furnishes to our Cordial, which
digests and bakes it self in an abscess, which forms it self, and makes
eruption about the navil of a Beast like unto a Goat, which is found in many
Kingdoms of the East Indies, and specially in those of Cathay and Pegu. It is
to be observed that Nature does not work about this precious Drug but when the
Animal is in his heat and Rutting-time: so that this eruption being made by an
effect of natural Heat, and by an Effervescency of the mass of Blood and of the
Spirits, which are driven toward the Emunctories destinated to them, their
heat makes attraction and causes pain, which causes this Animal to rub his
belly against the Stones and against the bodies of Trees, to open the
Impostume, and make the matter issue out, which the Sun does thoroughly concoct,
and digest that which in fine produces to us the Parent and Soul of all the
most excellent and most agreeable Perfumes. Which is a thing most worthy the
speculation of a Naturalist and a Chemical Artist; since that this change of a
corrupted matter into a substance of a sweet favor, and of great efficacy
inwardly and outwardly, teaches Art to follow Nature's tracks for the
bettering and correcting of things. But we shall speak more fully of this when
we shall reason of the beauty of the perfection of our Sovereign Remedy. We
shall here content our selves to relate in general the virtues of Musk, which
have obliged our Author to give it place in his Composition. It heats gently,
it dries, attenuates, and dissipates what there is of gross and malignant in
the body; it is Cordial, Alexitery and Cephalic; it is specific against all
the Affections of the Heart, and specially against the Palpitations: it
maintains, recreates and restores the animal and vital Spirits: it excites to
Love, and re-furnisheth the natural Heat: it recreates the Senses, and
strengthens Memory; which shows that it is most worthy of our Great Cordial.

The counsel and approbation of Sir Kenelm Digby, and Sir Alexander Fraiser his
Majesty's chief Physician, has made us add to the number of the Ingredients
of this Remedy, the Flesh, the Heart, and the Liver of Vipers, though the first
prescription does not mention them. But this Reptil is replenished with so many
rare virtues, and possesses a volatile Salt so much an enemy to Poisons which
attach the Heart and the Brains, that it is with most just reason that it has
been added. The Viper is a kind of Serpent, the most venomous of all, which
heats and irritates it self easily, so that in a moment or the twinkling of an
eye it drives from the Vesicle or Bladder of its gall to the gums a Poison so
spirituous and so subtle, by an almost imperceptible Chanel, when it is angry:
which insinuates and communicates it self so suddenly to our Spirits and to the
natural Heat, that it as suddenly stupifies the part that has been bit; which
communicates it self immediately to the Heart, and from thence to the Brain, by
the means of the Circulation. But if this venom is astonishing and surprising,
the remedy which is had from the same Animal is as it were divine and
miraculous, which does not only combat its proper Poison, but beats off and
enervates the strength and efficacy of all the other venoms that both the
Families of Vegetables and Minerals do furnish, provided it be well prepared,
and administered in time and place. We must give notice by the bye that Vipers
glide and thrust themselves between stones, and in holes of the Earth, yearly
in the end of Autumn, whenas their pasture fails them, there to abide till the
beginning of the Spring; and that then they are stupid and languishing, by
reason of the thickness and hardness of their skin: but as soon as they have
relished and digested the blades of Herbs, and the Sun and Air have furnished
them with heat and aliment, they slide and rub themselves against rugged places
to strip off their old skin; which is no sooner off but that this Animal is
presently possessed with the pride thereof, for it crawls nimbler then before,
and signifies by its gaiety, by the quickness of its motions and by the
beauteous colors of its new skin, that it is really renewed, and that the
remedy which it yields may also produce in us Renewing Principles and
Faculties. The general and principal virtues which the Viper possesses are, to
combat strongly the Venoms, and above all that of the Plague, and of all the
malignant and venomous diseases; it is good against Leprosy and the Venereal
disease; against Consumptions and the Hectic Fever, and finally against the
Scurvy, by reason that the volatile Salt of this Animal drives out powerfully
the malignant Serosities which infect the mass of the Blood, and which are the
cause and maintenance of this popular disease, which makes such strange wastes
in all the maritime Countries, and especially in England: so that it is
lawfully placed in this Cordial.

We are now come to the Pearls, which constitute another part of this Great
Cordial, and that augment really its rare qualities. We shall mention in this
place nothing but their origin, their choice, and their virtue; to speak of
them more exactly when we shall reason upon the Preparation. Pearls are nothing
else but the concretion into a Stone of the purest substance of the
muscilaginous slime that the Oyster, or Fish that inhabits two shells, which he
has appropriated and formed for his abode and for his conservation, ingenders.
Now this Animal draws to himself for his maintenance the purest part of the
Seawater, which contains the embryonated Salt, which is the balsam of Nature,
and as it were the principle of all generations, which is found impregnated and
replenished with the light of the Sun and of the Stars, which is communicated
to it by means of the Air. It seems also as if this poor Fish had drained
himself of the purest portion of his life and natural balsam, when he has
engendered several Pearls, since that this precious Jewel is found but in the
rugged and unequal Shells, whose inward Fish is languishing and flabby by
reason that he is deprived of that sweet sulphurous milk, and of that volatile,
insipid and inodorous Salt, which make together the coagulation of that
beautiful object of Luxury and Curiosity; but which is much more considerable
for its fine Physical Properties, which it incloses in it self. Since that both
the ancients and moderns acknowledge Pearls for one of the noblest Cordials,
which is capable of freeing the natural Balsam from oppression, to re-establish
the dissipated and abated strength, to rejoice the Spirits, augment Courage,
resist Poisons, the Plague and the corruption of the Humors, and finally to
wipe out and abolish the evil Characters both of the fixed and running Gout; by
reason that they kill, by the sweetness of their Milk and Sulphur, the ill
Impressions of the sharp, Pontick and saline Serosities, which prick and
irritate the membranous and nervous parts that serve for sensibility and
motion, which they perform by the resolution of their bodies, communicating
then that virtue which sweetens and wipes out the acid sharpness that did cause
those diseases: which thing they also efficaciously produce in Rheumatisms and
the Scurvy. It is this defective and dead-seeming Power and Efficacy that
Paracelsus speaks of in the sixth Book of his Archidoxes.

We have thought fit to put the Amber-griece next to the Pearls, both because
it comes from the Sea, and that we can place it neither in the Classis of
Animals, nor in that of Vegetables, no more then in that of Minerals, because
it seems as it were a roving Individual, which cannot be lawfully comprised in
either of these three Categories. For Amber-griece is nothing else but the most
precious of Bitumens, that come from the bottom of the Sea, where, according to
some, it is liquid; but hardens, digests and concocts it self both by the
coagulative faculty of the maritime Salt, and by the action of the heat of the
Sun, which resolves into vapors what there is in it of most subtle, and that
works and concludes the reduction of the Amber-griece to that condition it is
found in on the surface of the Seawater in the East Indies, and sometimes also
in America. It is with a great deal of knowledge and light that our Author has
inserted this noble Bitumen in his Great Cordial, since it is one of its
principal Ingredients: and that its virtues are to heat, to dry up, and
resolve; to strengthen the Heart and the Brains; to recall, reestablish and
augment the vital and animal Spirits, by the sweet and pleasant exhalation of
its volatile and sulphurous Salt, which communicates, joins, and unites it self
mildly and immediately to our nature, and that penetrates into the very last
digestions by the Organs of Respiration, and by those of the Circulation of the
blood and spirits: It is the true comforter of the Viscera, and is very useful
to facilitate Generation, since it is capable to correct those defects which
happen by that subject both in male and female, because it heats, strengthens
and rejoices the one, and that it dries the moistures and ordinary
superfluities of the other, when it is well and duly prepared, and administered
with an exact knowledge.

Let us come to the parts of the Vegetables, which help to the fabric and
virtue of our Great Cordial, and begin with the Roots, which we shall name in
particular: and we shall not speak of their virtues but in general, except
there be some remarkable thing worthy reflection which will oblige us to regard
it, to render by that means this Remedy and its Author the more recommendable
to those at present living, and to posterity hereafter.

We have ten Roots that enter this Composition; which are the Angelica, the
round Birth-wort, the Fraxinella or white Dittany, the Carline, the
Contra-Yerva, the Gentian, the Serpentary of Virginia, the Tormentil, the
Valerian, and the Zedoary. One may boldly say that these few Roots contain what
there can be of virtue in almost all the others, and especially in what
concerns the Cordial virtue and the Counter-poison: for they all together and
every one in particular tend to the Author's aim by their efficacy, for they
are Bezoardic and Cordial in the highest degree, because they abound in Spirit,
in Salt and in Sulphur, which are volatile and piercing, as their smells and
bitterness witness. They provoke Sweat, they are Vulneraries, they open the
Obstructions of the Womb, cause the dead Child to issue out, and appease its
Irritations and Suffocations; they are good against all Poisons, and admirable
against all malignant Diseases, and especially against the Plague; they are
excellent against the bitings of mad Dogs, and kill universally all sorts of
Worms, that ill Nourishment or want of Digestion may breed in us. Above all we
may admire the strength and virtue of three Roots which have been added to this
Remedy, which are the Carline, the Contra-Yerva, and the Serpentary of
Virginia, according to the sense and approbation of two excellent persons here
above mentioned. For the Carline is a real gift from Heaven against the Plague
and malignant Diseases: It serves also as a Philtre and Loadstone to attract
the strength of those that suck in the Air, which is filled with the odor and
vicious atoms which those that have eaten some of it breath forth. The
Contra-Yerva is not less considerable, since it bears this Spanish name which
signifies Counter-poison: but for the excellency of its virtues and of the
wonderful effects it does produce, Monardes a Portuguez Physician says to its
commendation, that it is not only useful to drive away all manner of Poisons,
(Corrosive sublimate only excepted) and hinder their malignity, but moreover
that this Root is able to unbind and root up the charm and tie of the amorous
Philtre. We cannot well specify the virtue of the Serpentary of Virginia,
because it has not as yet been written, and that Experiments have not been made
of all its faculties: it suffices that its odor and taste do sufficiently
manifest its virtues, besides those which have been found by those that have
put it in practice, or them that have learned it viva voce from the Inhabitants
of the American Islands, amongst whom it is in great request against Poisons
and Fevers; but especially against the bitings of venomous and malignant
Serpents, in which these Islands abound. The time for gathering the Roots we
have here is in the beginning of the Spring, when they are as it were big with
the Idea of all the Plant, which they then contain, with all its principal
virtues; it suffices then to know them by a little bud proceeding from the
Earth.

The second Classis of the Plants which make part of this Remedy are six in
number; namely, the Betony, the Carduus Benedictus, the Dittany of Creet, the
Marjoram, the Mints, and the Water-Germander. All these Plants are chosen for
this Cordial with an exquisite judgment, for there is not one of them but has
some specific virtue, besides what they possess of Cordial and Alexitery in
common with the others. For the Betony is Vulnerary, and particularly dedicated
to the Wounds of the Head, although it be Hepatick, as also Splenetick and
Hysteric, because it opens Obstructions, and drives out by Urines what is
gross and impure. The surname of holy or blessed that has been given to the
Carduus that enters in this Remedy witnesses enough how much it is
recommendable amongst the Physicians and with the vulgar, and chiefly in
Germany, where the common people employ it with very great success against most
part of those Diseases which assault them, taking it in powder in warm wine,
which provokes very much Sweat and Urine. But I find that the English people do
use it also very efficaciously in those drinks which they call Possets. In
fine, its bitterness does witness the abundance of its essential Salt when as
yet it is juicy, and the quantity of its volatile Salt when it is grown up, and
that this Plant is between its flowers and seed; for it is properly from thence
that it derives its cordial, sudorifick, antivenomous virtue, which is
particular and specific to it. There are but few Poets and Rhetoricians that
have not made use of the virtues of the Dittany, and of the Hart's instinct in
seeking it after he is wounded, by which to make some rich Comparison; for we
must acknowledge that it is an admirable Plant in its effects, since there is
attributed to it that of attracting, and driving the strange bodies out of
Wounds, of being a great Counter-poison, of hastening the difficult delivery in
Childbirth, and being a remedy against the Insultations of the Womb. It was
not in the first Receipt, no more then the white Dittany or Fraxinella root, but
these two Simples have been added to it upon counsel, by reason of their
specific Excellencies and Proprieties. The agreeable odor of the Marjoram,
which pleases equally all those that smell it, clearly witnesses that our
Spirits attract from it some Sulphur and subtle Spirit which recreates them:
and whereas the functions of the Spirits are made by the means of the
membranous and nervous Organs, which have some relation and sympathy with the
Brain, the Stomach and the Womb; it is particularly to those parts that the
subtle portion of its volatile sulphurous Salt is consecrated, which
strengthens, unburthens and recreates them.

There is no Nation which cultivates the Mints with greater care and that makes
better use thereof then the English. For as it is subject to Indigestions
either by the weakness or by the over-burthening of their stomach, so have they
their principal refuge to this specific, stomachical Vegetable, which they use
in their Broths, or Possets, and their Burnt-wine. Therefore we shall mention
nothing more to recommend it, since that its virtues and effects are
sufficiently known of all. We must now say something of the Scordium or
Germander, which is really a Plant that ought to enter in a great Cordial and
Counter-poison, therefore our Author has not omitted it. This Plant is famous
in all the good Antidotes, and above all in that excellent Remedy called
Diascordium Fracastorii, of which the Physicians of England make daily frequent
use with most happy success. And we must needs confess that this good Vegetable
has but few that can be compared to it: for since that it keeps the dead bodies
from corruption, as Galen relates, with much more reason ought it to be capable
of keeping those that are living which are healthy, and contribute to the Cure
of them when they are sick. We shall not particularize any thing of its
virtues, but only say that it is one of the principal and most excellent
Counter-poisons and Sudorificks that the vegetable reign possesses. These
abovenamed Plants ought to be gathered in their full estate, that is to say
when that they are in their flowers below, and that the top or end of the stalk
begins to make an embryonated seed to appear; for then it is that they contain
all the accomplishment of their virtue: and if they were gathered before that
time, they would abound in an herbal and indigested Juice, which is not as yet
exalted to an essential Salt, somewhat volatile, and half sulphurated; and if
one should stay longer then the said time, all the virtues of the Plant would
abandon the stalk to reunite and re-inclose themselves in the seed, and then
it would be too concentred, and could not be so soon reduced from power to act
by our natural heat. Furthermore these Plants must be gathered in that time
which Paracelsus commands, Balsamico tempore, which is a little after
Sunrising, and in a dry and serene day, and not after Rain.

The third Classis is that of Flowers, which are also most worthy of the
Cordial, and of the choice that amongst the rest its Author has made of them;
for it seems as if he had picked out from that beautiful Enamel all which did
possess the principal Cordial and Balsamic virtue, which is the Flower of
Borrage, and that of Bugloss, the Clove-July-flower, the Mace, the red Rose,
the Rosemary-flowers, the Ros Solis, the Saffron, the Marigold, and the
Elder-flowers.

There is then first of all the Flowers of Borrage and Bugloss, which would not
seem worthy of this Cordial by reason that they have no smell at all; but
whosoever shall consider more narrowly the Plants that bear those Flowers, will
find that they abound in a nitro-tartarous Juice; which communicates to them
the virtue of purifying the venal and arterial blood, and of rooting and wiping
out the melancholy and black Ideas that the spirit of Life had sucked from the
Spleen and Hypochondres, so that their blew flowers recreate the Sight and the
Heart; which is the reason that they have been inserted by all in the number of
Cordial flowers. We could wish that other Nations did know as well as the
English the worthy virtue of the Clove-July-flowers; without doubt they would
also receive the same benefit from it: for this Flower is replenished with a
Sulphur and Mercury, which are so friendly to our Spirits, that they restore
and reestablish the principal functions of the Heart and of the Brain, since
that their virtue prevails against the Syncopes, the weaknesses and
palpitations of the Heart, and remedies the giddiness and swimming of the Head,
the Apoplexy, the Falling Sickness or Epilepsie, and several other defects of
the Nerves, and of the Brains their origin.

The Flower of Nutmeg or Mace and its Fruits is one of the most precious and
most healthful Aromaticks that the East Indies furnish us with; and I wonder
that they were forgot in this Cordial, since that this Nation knows and esteems
them so much: Nevertheless their rare virtues have obliged us to join them to
it, by the counsel of the wisest and most experienced. For Mace and Nutmegs are
stomachical, and they are relatively Cephalic and Hysterical, they drive out
the Wind, help Digestion, correct the ill smell of the mouth, rejoice and
strengthen the Child in the Mother's womb, take away the swelling of the
Spleen, appease Looseness, and remedy the faintness and palpitations of the
Heart. It Is all those things which render them really worthy our Great Cordial.
We have inserted the red Rose among the Flowers which compose this Cordial,
because that our Author requires the Syrup of dried red Roses to help to the
consistence of this Composition, and that with much reason, since that the
virtue of the red Rose cannot but very much augment its rare qualities; for
this Queen of Flowers recreates and strengthens the Senses and the Spirits, and
is useful many ways against many diseases both within and without, which seem
to be indifferent according to the several Indications that are taken from it
by the Learned Doctors in Physic. Further it is to be noted, that there is not
one Simple in all Physic which furnishes us with a greater number of
Compositions for the Shop, all which bear its name, for they amount to the
number of thirty seven, which do not only serve as Ornaments, but may also be
employed to many different good Uses. If the Rose adds any thing that is good
to our Cordial, assuredly the Rosemary-flower does not contribute little to it,
since that its odor and faculties give it among the Greeks the name of (...),
as one should say a Flower by excellency. One may sincerely say that this
Flower and the leaves of the Plant that bears it are a Balsamical Epitome,
since that they are most specific remedies against the diseases of the Brain
and Nerves that are derived from it, that they strengthen the Stomach, and
correct the stench of the Breath, resolve and open the Obstructions of the
Liver, the Spleen, the Womb, the Mesentery, and of the Pancreas: in fine, they
are sovereign remedies against Contusions, and above all to prevent the
accidents that happen after some Concussions of the Brain; as Experience shows
by the rare Effects which that admirable Water of the Queen of Hungaria
produces every day, which is nothing else but Spirit of Wine alkoholizated,
digested and distilled three or four times upon Rosemary-flowers. We have put
the Ros Solis among the Flowers, although its leaves do enter also in this
Composition and make the best part thereof. It seems as if that pretty little
Plant were more beloved of the Sun then many others, since that he never dries
her up in his most violent heats, but on the contrary it is seen that every
particle of that Down which covers its leaves, and that is as it were the beams
of them, is laden with small drops of a subtle, piercing and spiritual dew;
and this during the highest rage of the Dog Star, and at high Noon, when all
the other Plants languish and faint, it tricks up it self, and grows proud with
the splendor of that beautiful Planet whose name it bears. And its virtues are
so considerable, that many great Philosophers, and amongst the rest Isaac of
Holland, have treated of it as of a little Miracle worthy the meditation of the
most skilful. This Plant is Vulnerary, Cordial and Hepatick. It is believed
that it is an assured specific against the Consumption of the Lungs, and
against the other diseases of the Breast: it is a preservative against the
Plague, and serves also to cure it: in fine, it is, as many certify, a
Planetary and Magnetic Plant, which produces many surprising effects by merely
wearing it about one. Saffron is one of the richest and most necessary morsels
of our dish; and that is absolutely necessary to our Great Cordial, by reason
of those admirable virtues that this Flower hides in it self. For it must needs
be that Saffron has something above the other Drugs, since that after it has
been dried by Art, it seems as if it had some inward magnetic virtue, which
recalls to it self the Balsam of the Air, which gives it again the same weight,
the same vivacity of color, and the same activity of odor; which is a thing
worthy enough consideration. It is a sovereign Cordial, and esteemed to be the
soul of the Lungs, by whose action the virtue of this Flower is carried unto
the last Digestions by the Circulation and Respiration. It appeases pains, and
gently procures Sleep; it cleanses the Womb, helps Childbirth, and purges the
Woman: in fine, it is a little Panacea against the Plague, and against all
other malignant diseases; it is also most happily used against the Jaundise.

The Marigold, which is a Solar Flower and very Cordial and Alexitery, was not
to be forgotten. This Plant seems to be a friend to almost all the seasons of
the year, since there are but few months wherein she produces not her flowers;
which have the virtue of helping the Lunary Purgations, to cause Delivery, to
provoke Sweat, and succor them them that are afflicted with the Jaundise.
There remains the Elder-flower, the last that enters in our fine Medicament's
dispensation. It is of a subtle and penetrating virtue, as its odor testifies,
which makes that it resolves and dissipates the gross matters by Sweats; it is
also anodyne and apertive: and though it has many other Properties inwardly and
outwardly, we will be silent, because it has them in common with the other
things of which we have spoken heretofore. We have no more to say of the
Flowers, but only to inform of the true time of their gathering, and two words
more to prove that they ought not to be dried for this Cordial, although the
Receipt commands it. And whereas these Flowers appear in diverse months of the
Spring, Summer and Fall, I desire no other observation but that those that
would have them good ought always to take the first, and cause them to be
gathered in dry and serene weather just at Sunrising; provided that it has
not rained the day before: for it is to be noted that the first production of
the Plant brings forth always the best-coloured and most odoriferous Flowers:
and, moreover, one must have a care that the Sun may have had the necessary
time to wipe off and digest the superfluous moisture that the Rain may have
furnished the Earth and the Plant withal, and by consequence the Flower also.
But whereas all these Flowers are odoriferous and subtle, and that their virtue
resides in a volatile sulphurous and balsamic Salt, which exhalates easily by
the exiccation in the shade; as it may easily be perceived by those that come
into a place in which they are enclosed; I am of opinion, with the counsel of
the wisest and best-knowing, to put these Flowers in Spirit of Wine in a Vessel
close stopped with another, as fast as nature and the season furnishes them,
since that the subtle and gross extraction of them must be made, as we shall
show more fully when we shall reason of the Preparation of all that composes
our Cordial.

The fourth Classis of Vegetables are the Fruits, the Berries, and the
Aromatic Seeds, which are but six, namely, the Cardamome, the Cubebes, the
Kermes-berries, the Juniper Berries, the Cloves and the Nutmeg.

We shall not here repeat needlessly the virtues that these Aromaticks have in
common with the other parts of Plants, of which we have already made the
description: we shall only say two words by the bye concerning dried
Kermes-berry, which the Author causes to enter in this Remedy, which is found
to be all worm-eaten, insipid, inodorous; which witnesses that it is deprived
of all the virtue that is attributed to it; therefore we have taken in its
place the fresh Juice of the Kermes-berries as it comes from Montpellier, which
is also called the Syrup of Kermes, and which serves throughout all Europe for
to make up the Confection Alkermes, which is so renowned for its cordial
virtue, which without doubt ought to yield to that of our Great Cordial, though
the virtue of the Kermes-berry helps Women in labor, re-establishes the Vital
Spirits, dissipates the ill Vapors, serves to remedy the wounded Nerves, and
brings forth the Smallpox. We are furthermore to give notice, that we have
added Cloves to this Cordial, as one of the best foundations of its Cordial,
being of a Stomachical and Alexitery virtue; which we have not done but with
the knowledge and consent of the most Renowned in the Art. Now since we have
not the convenience of gathering the Fruits and the Aromatic Seeds, we must
content our selves with the choice we can make of them at the Drugsters that
sell them; and we cannot judge of their age and goodness but by the Taste and
by the Smell, and sometimes also by the Color and by the Weight. But as for
the Juniper Berries, they must be chosen black and shining, and having inwardly
a malaginous viscosity, sweet in the beginning of their taste, but which
degenerates afterward into a balsamic and bitter savor. These remarks are
necessary, because that these Berries contain in themselves a small Treacle,
and are replenished with many rare virtues, which adorn our Cordial, and
augment its forces and Operation.

The fifth Classis of Vegetables contains the Barks, of which there is but that
of Sassafras wood required in the Receipt. We have been counseled to add to
it the Cinnamon, the Limonpill, and that of Oranges, by reason that there is
nothing that does so suddenly rejoice the Heart and the Brains, and that more
resists Poisons and Corruption, then these noble Barks or Rinds, when they are
well chosen, and employed before they have lost that excellent smell which
resides in their superficial skin, which is nothing but an Oil and a volatile
Salt glewed together with a little moisture, in the Limon and Orange; but the
Cinnamon has nothing but its pure ethereal Spirit animated with a Sulphur and
a Salt, that have not their like amongst all the Aromaticks, by reason of their
subtilty and sphere of activity, of their odor and virtue, which has with
justice acquired to them the right of entering in this Great Cordial, since that
the Author himself wills that the Syrup of Juice of Limons be added to it, to
help its preservation and consistence. As for what concerns the Sassafras and
its Bark, I am of opinion to put its Wood in also, by reason that the Bark
furnishes not sufficiently alone; for I have made the anatomy of this Wood by
distillation, and found that the Wood did yield a spirituous Water, and an Oil
far more abounding and more excellent then the Bark alone, which has lost upon
the Sea that which it had of most subtle and best, in lieu that the rest of the
virtue has preserved, and concentred it self in the Wood.

The sixth Classis yields us the Woods of Aloes, and of Sassafras which we have
newly mentioned: we shall have but two words to say in this place in praise of
the virtues of the Wood of Aloes, by reason of its scarcity, since there are
many hundreds of Apothecaries which have never handled any, and that know it
but by hearsay, and by the reading of their Dispensatory. But I confess that
it is more common here in London then in many other places, and that it is had
here a great deal better, and better qualified, and especially at Mr. Box's, a
Drugster in Cheapside, in whose Shop I have always found what there is of most
rare and most precious in Druggistry. The Arabians and the Germans call it
Paradise-wood, by reason of its Excellency. It grows in Zeilan, Malaca,
Sumatra, and through all the Coast of Choromandel, where the Indians prize it
and rate it equal with Gold and Silver, according to its diverse degrees of
goodness. This Wood abounds in an oleaginous and gummy substance, which is
almost of the same nature with a sort of Benzamin, but much more Cordial,
Stomachical and Cephalic: for it generally strengthens all the Viscera, and
especially the Brain; it rejoices and re-animates the spirits of the Heart, and
those of the Womb; it remedies the Syncopes and Languishings, and has the
property of killing all sorts of Worms (which engender in the body) by the
abundance of its bitter volatile Salt. It is put in the Cephalic powders to be
applied outwardly, and in the Epithemes that are applied upon the Heart, and
upon the Pulses of the Temple-Arteries, and those of the Arms, because that it
recreates the Senses by the excellency of its smell; which is the reason that
our Excellent Author has put it in good quantity in his Cordial, by the
knowledge he had of its rare properties and admirable virtues.

We have as yet two other matters to speak of which are taken from the
Vegetables, that enter in our Remedy, and help toward its preparation; which
are Sugar and the Spirit of Wine. The first serves as a body to receive and
retain the dry things and the extractions which compose this Cordial, and to
preserve its virtue, as we shall say hereafter: and the second serves for that
Liquor that the Chemists call Menstruum, to extract the virtue of all the parts
of the Vegetables which compound it. We shall not speak of it in this place but
in general terms, because that we reserve to speak of it with more advantage
when we shall treat of the Preparation.

Sugar is come to be at present one of the greatest delights of the Table: and
truly it is not without reason, since that this sweet Salt which does so
suddenly vegetate, and that is found shut up in its time and place within a
Reed or Cane, participates of abundance of rare Proprieties: for we daily
experiment, that this Indian Salt is capable of receiving in its self the odor,
the taste and the color of Fruits, and of preserving them from one year to
another, and longer, as is very well known by those that excel in the Art of
Preserving. But if the Sugar produces so rare an effect for pleasure, what does
it not do also in the Pharmacie for the useful part, whenas the Apothecary
cannot make any Conserves, Syrups, Trochisks, Electuaries, Confections, and
many other things which are most necessary for the sick, without that pleasant
Medium, which preserves and receives the virtue of all the species that Art
entrusts to its custody? The choice is of that which is the most purified, and
that retains less of the greaziness and gross viscosity which does accompany it
in its origin before its preparation. Therefore our Author has commanded to
take the white Sugar Candy, whose lucid and clear Crystallization proves
evidently the purity thereof. It is of an incisive, attenuating, detersive
virtue; it lenifies the harshness of the Throat and of the Trache-artery,
gently consumes the slimes and viscosities of the Stomach, cleanses the Breast
and the Lungs, and appeases the painful insultations of the Cough. These are
the Motives which have driven Sir Walter Rawleigh to render this delightful
Salt the depository of the substance and virtue of that which makes the making
up of his Great Cordial.

The Aqua-vitae, or Spirit of Wine, is nothing else but the spirituous and
ethereal part of that charming Liquor which is pressed from the Grapes of the
Vine, and that has been exalted by the means of fermentation. There have been
several names given to this admirable Spirit, by reason of its excellency and
wonderful effects: for it has been dignified with that of most Subtle and
Incorruptible Essence; not forgetting that of Water of Life, that all the world
attributes to it, of Spirit of Wine, Celestial Sulphur, Bezoardical vegetable
Sulphur, The Celestial Menstruum, Heavenly Water, The Heaven of Raymondus
Lully, The Key of the Philosophers, An Ethereal Body compounded of Fire and
Water, Universal Balsam or Liquor, The Life of the great Vegetable, and
different other Nominations, which sufficiently prove, with those we have
already named, that this Spirit is the fittest Liquor of all those which are
either Natural or Artificial, that is capable of extracting the virtues of that
which enters in this Cordial, without any loss of their seminal faculties, and
without leaving behind in the substance of the vegetable things which compound
it any remnant of their middle life's virtue; as we shall prove it with more
Energie when we shall treat of its Preparation. We shall content our selves for
the present to make known that its virtues have obliged our Author to make use
of it to that purpose. All those that know this Spirit well, say that it has a
most piercing virtue, but that it is not quite so hot as the vulgar imagines,
since that it resolves the hottest Tumors, and appeases the pains of Burning.
Its incorruptible nature renders it recommendable, both because it preserves it
self, and that it preserves also all other animate or inanimate Beings: for it
resists Rottenness, Corruption, and the simple Alteration, since that it
preserves also the tenderest and moistest Fruits from that disunion that is
next and infallible to them. It hinders the Coagulation of the Blood in
Sprains, and Contusions, if it be suddenly applied, and resolves with ease that
which was already coagulated, if its application has been too long retarded. It
dissipates and volatilizes that which is most gross, hardest, which is called
Schirrous, and that which is most running and material, without borrowing of
any other assistance then its proper virtue. So that we may lawfully conclude,
that the Spirit of Wine is a mere Epitome of what there is of most excellent
and virtuous in all the Vegetable Reign: and that it is for that same reason
that our Excellent Author has made use of it for the Extractions of this Great
and Rare Remedy.

Having ended the description of the Vegetables, we must also give that of the
Minerals that enter in this Celebrated Remedy, which are five, namely, the
Oriental Bole, the Coral, the Unicornu minerale, the Gold, and the Sealed
Earth. There are some Descriptions of this Cordial in which Gold does not
enter: but that Description which is lawfully attributed to our Author contains
a preparation of Gold; which is the reason we would not omit it, since that
what we shall say concerning this noble Metal will make appear that it ought
absolutely to enter in this Composition. We have also added to it the Mineral
Unicorn, for those Reasons that we shall produce hereafter when we shall
mention it. And because that there is found such a numerous difference of
Species of Sealed Earth, we have thought fit to associate some Oriental Bole,
well chosen, to that Earth which will have been found to be the best, to the
end that the virtue of the one should rather be augmented, then fail in any of
the points of the exact proportion that the one and the other may contribute to
our Great Cordial.

The Oriental Bole, or the Bole of Armenia, is a kind of pale reddish Earth,
impregnated with Mineral, Solar and Martial Vapors, from whence are derived to
it its principal^ Faculties and its most excellent Operations, by reason of the
nobility of the embryonated Sulphur which this Earth contains. The best is that
which does not participate of Sand, but that melts down easily like quick Lime
when Water is cast on it, or that resolves and melts like to a fat substance
when it is once moistened in the mouth. It dries much, it is astringent, it
strengthens; therefore it is happily used to stop a Flux of what nature soever
it be, to thicken and fix the liquid and fluid Humors, to resist Corruption,
and to beat back the strengths and attaches of Poison. All that has been said
of it is the reason why it is employed so usefully against the Diarrhoea,
against the Dysentery, the immoderate Flux of Women, Catarrhs, the spitting of
Blood, and against the flux of Blood both of the Nostrils and Wounds. And
whereas the Sealed Earth is but a sort of Bole, reduced into little Pellets or
small Cakes, which are marked with some figure or character; that which is had
in the Island of Lemnos, which we have by the commerce of Constantinople, of a
reddish or grayish color, is chosen to be the best. The Reddish is named by
some the Fat or Grease of the Sun, or Gold, by reason of the portion of the
embryonate Solar Sulphur of which it participates: and the Grayish is named the
Fat or Grease of the Moon, or Silver, because of the embryonate Lunary Sulphur
which communicates its virtue to it. The first is consecrated to the Heart, and
the second to the Liver and Brains. Besides all the virtues that they have in
common with the Oriental Bole, they have over and above that of being truly
Cordial, of driving out Poisons, to resolve the curded Blood, strengthen the
Heart, the Brains and the Ventricle, dilate and clarify the mass of Blood, and
to provoke Sweat. Insomuch that its principal uses are against the Plague,
against malignant Fevers, against the biting of venomous Animals, and to take
away the venomous impression of Wounds: which proves invincibly that it is not
one of the smallest pieces of this Great Cordial.

We shall not idly spend our time here in relating the frivolous opinions of
those that have thought, or yet believe, that Coral is soft in the bottom of
the Sea, since that we are most certain of the contrary, by the relation of
those that dive for it. The Coral therefore is nothing else but a stony
vegetation which degenerates into a Tree. The most excellent is the Red,
although there be some White, and some Black, and also of other colors, as may
be seen in the Closets of the Curious. One must choose that which is of the
deepest color, esteemed to be the Male, as the White is called the Female. The
virtues of Coral are, to dry, to cool, it is astringent, to strengthen,
especially the Heart, and then the Ventricle and the Liver; it purifies the
Blood; it is by consequence excellent and specific against the Plague, against
Poisons, and against all sorts of malignant Fevers: It rejoices Man, it stops
and appeases all Fluxes either of the Belly, the Womb, or of the other parts
which are dedicated for generation. It is reported also that if ten grains of
it be given in Woman's Milk to a Child newly born, that it is a precaution
against the Epilepsie and Convulsion. There are many Naturalists, and amongst
the rest Paracelsus, that say that the red Coral hung about the Neck prevails
against Frights, against Witchcraft, Enchantments, Poisons, the Epilepsie,
Melancholy, the insultations and attaches of Demons, and against Thunder. It
is for certain in the Red Coral that a Solar Tincture is to be found, since
that all the rare effects that it produces cannot be had elsewhere but from
that Sulphur mineral and embryonated, which the Gold communicates to it in
abundance; which renders it most worthy to be in our Great Remedy, and causes
those brave lights which our Author did possess to be the more remarked.

Gold is without contradiction the most desirable and the most precious portion
of Metalls, which are the fruits of the Mineral predestination. It is doubtless
the most perfect of those Children of the Earth. It is most solid, yellow,
compact and close in it self, and is compounded with principles that are
digested in the most sovereign degree, and which are by consequence fixed and
permanent, as its Incorruptibility proves. The Chemists give it the name of the
Sun, because that they believe it has some correspondency and harmonical
relation not only with the Celestial Sun of the Great world, but also by
reason that it has a sympathetical affinity with the Sun of the Little world,
which is the Heart of Man. They call it also the King of Metalls, because it is
their Prince, as that which is the most pure and most fix, as also that which
possesses the most eminent and most necessary virtues, since that it is wholly
dedicated to the Heart, which is the King of the noblest Functions of Life. For
Gold is held for the most sovereign Cordial, because it re-establishes and
augments the radical Moisture and the natural Heat, which have their principal
seat in the Heart: which is the reason that it may be given with success in all
diseases in which the Spirits are dissipated and the strength weakened. It
purifies also the mass of the Blood, since that it dissipates and drives out by
sensible and insensible Inspiration that which there was of naught and
corrupted in that which is called the Humors, and which are, to speak
properly, nothing else but those things which result from the diversity of the
alterations of the Blood, that tends by this ill disposition to Corruption and
Rottenness, and by consequence to the destruction of the Subject which it
nourishes and vivifies. But this noble Metal must be so prepared and
decorporated, that it may do the Emanation of the rays of the virtue of its
Central Sulphur, as we shall reason upon it, when we shall discourse of the
Preparation.

The last we are to treat of is the Unicornu Minerale, otherwise called White
Lodestone, and some would have it to be the Unicorn's Horn. But we must speak
but merely of its generation and virtues, in no wise meddling with that
diversity of opinions that the most eminent Authors have had concerning this
Subject. For the most skillful and best knowing have thought it fit that this
Mineral production should be added to the Great Cordial, though it was not
inserted in the first Descriptions, notwithstanding those wonderful properties
it is endowed with render it most worthy. This wonderful Mineral Drug is
nothing else but the Concretion or Petrifaction of a fluid milky substance,
which contains in it self the congealing and lapidifying ferment, which slides
and insinuates it self in the Cavities of the womb of the Earth, where it
invests it self with the figure, odor, color and consistence, according to
the nature of the things that it finds there: as it is proved by the
Collections that the most curious observers of Nature have made of it; as also
by the experience of its rare virtues, which are equal with those of the
Oriental Bole, and those of the Sealed Earth, since the Grandees are agreed
that it resists Poisons, the Plague and malignant Fevers, insomuch that a
Physician of this Age did make the powder of this mixed pass for a Specific
against all Fevers, and got repute in the City of Paris by several rare
effects. We shall speak no more of it, to prevent tedious repetitions, and so
pass from the description of all the Ingredients of our Remedy, to what we have
promised to say concerning its General and Particular Preparation.

If we have had hitherto just cause to praise Sir Walter Rawleigh for having
caused so many good things, and which possess so many virtues, to enter into
his Cordial; we must nevertheless confess, that we have far more reason to
augment his Elogies, by reason of the Science and Experience which he has
shown in the Preparation and perfecting of this grand Remedy. But considering
that it is composed of things which are of different natures, and that are more
or less fix or volatile, it has been necessary to work with a great deal of Art,
and with a most exact reflection upon all that composes this Remedy, to preserve
that which ought to be of good in the most subtle, and withal to extract the
essential virtue which was concentred in the grossest. Now we have said
heretofore that there were three Classes in this Composition, which contain the
Animal, the Vegetable, and the Mineral: We must also now make appear those
reasons which have obliged our celebrated Author to prepare them in that
manner; to which we shall add also the Meditations and Thoughts that we have
had on this Subject, for the better preserving the volatile, and to open the
most fix; that the union of the virtue of the productions of these three
Families should be made with all the exactness therein required, according to
his Majesty's Command, and the Intentions of those Illustrious Persons which we
have formerly named.

Whereas no entire Animals do enter into our Cordial, therefore we shall not
speak here but of the parts of those Animals which contribute to this brave and
sovereign Composition. We shall treat therefore of the preparation of
Harts-horns, of that of Vipers, of that of Musk and Pearls, and, in fine, of
that of Amber-griece. We shall not say any thing concerning the Bezoar-stone,
since we have already said that it is a Magisterium perfected in the Ventricle
of that Animal which produces it; and that besides this Stone has no need of
any other preparation then to be reduced into an impalpable Powder, for this
Operation. Now whereas the Receipt of this Remedy requires Hartshorn burned or
calcined to whiteness; we cannot wonder enough at this way of proceeding, since
that those of the least capacity know that the Calcination carries away the
volatile Salt from the calcined body, and that by consequence it strips it from
all its cordial virtue, which cannot be contained but in this Sulphurous and
volatile Salt: For the most skilful Naturalists, and the most experienced of all
Artists, who have grown old in the meditation, and in the labor to make the
Anatomy of Natural things, thereby to know the better the virtue, say all with
one voice, That the Soul and Virtue of all these sublunary Mixts resides
properly and perfectly in what they contain of volatile Salt, and that it is
particularly and chiefly in the Animals that this is found; since the proof of
it is clearly evident in their Distillations, which furnish a great abundance
of Spirit, Oil and volatile Salt, and which leave behind nothing in the bottom
of the Retort, after the last action of Fire, but that which may be called
legitimately a mere Caput mortuum, or dead Earth; since that this calcined body
contains nothing that participates of the Saline nature, which is the
Foundation and the Center of all the powers and virtues, by reason that all
Salt is nothing but a close Spirit, as also all Spirit but an opened Salt. For
all the Seminal powers and all the chiefest virtues of Animals, and of their
parts, proceeds from Light as from the Father, from the Air as from the Medium,
and from the Salt as from the Son, and all three together concur to the
Generation of the Products of Nature. We have advanced all this only to make
it appear the better, that it is needless (if not without reason) that all the
ancient Dogmatists, and Sir Walter Rawleigh after them, have introduced the
burned Hartshorn in almost all Cordials. Now what we have newly said makes
appear that the Cordial virtue is no longer there, and therefore cannot be
employed in them but as an astringent Earth, and a spongeous body, rarefi'd and
dry; the better to retain and preserve the volatile, spirituous, sulphurous
and saline matters, which are extracted out of other Ingredients. It may be
also objected, that the calcined Hartshorn is not incapable of virtue, since
it can alter the ill Fermentations of the Stomach, cure the Diarrhoea's, and
also stay the Bloudy-fluxes: but she produces these effects only by reason
that she kills and mortifies the Sharpness and Acidities which proceed from the
Indigestions and base Fermentations, in the same manner that she quells the
Acidity of Saline and Vitriolick Spirits and that of Vinegar, when they have
been digested together, and drawn off again by distillation, as insipid as
water, by reason that this rarefi'd, dry and spongeous body is deprived of all
Saltness, and desire of re-furnishing it self with that Salt which did make the
Acidity in those Liquors. It is therefore for this only reason that it has
been put in the Composition of this Cordial. But since that the volatile Salt of
Hartshorn is Alexitery and Cordial, and that it most powerfully contributes to
the rare virtues of this Cordial, we have also added to it some Hartshorn
Philosophically Calcined, in the Vapors of the Digestions, Extractions,
Distillations and Circulations of Spirit of Wine, which serves for Menstruum to
extract the virtue of the parts of the Vegetables which compose it; in which
place this Horn softens it self by little and little, swells and dilates, by
the moist and spirituous subtility which penetrates it, and renders it friable
and capable of being put in powder with ease, with the preservation of its
cordial virtue. But whereas there are some that think that the greatest part of
the volatile Salt is gone out of it, and has communicated it self to the Spirit
of Wine, which is very likely, it has been thought necessary to add to it the
powder of Hartshorn rasp'd without any other preparation, that the volatile
Salt, which is the true Counterpoison and the true Cordial, should not be
wanting. Not but that one might add to it the volatile Salt of Hartshorn drawn
by distillation: but it was not put in by reason of its Empyreumatick and most
ungrateful taste.

The Author of our Great Cordial, and those that after him have worked in the
composition of this Remedy, have almost always added the prepared Pearls to
this Cordial, and also sometimes they have opened and dissolved the bodies of
the Pearls by means of fixed Acides, as distilled Vinegar, juice of Limons,
Spirit of Sulphur, and that of Vitriol; and did pretend to have reduced by
these means the Pearls into a Salt, or into a dissoluble Magistery, which were
more capable of making their virtue appear. But all those Liquors that are
endowed with a fixed Acidity, do intimately join themselves unto the Bodies of
the dissolved Pearls, and their Salt remains, which augments the weight of the
dissolved Body by a fourth part and better: which thing makes it appear that it
is not a true Cordial Magistery. Therefore we have thought fit to proceed in
another manner, which is to dissolve the Pearls with a Menstruum, which may be
drawn off again with the same taste and the same dissolving virtue that it had
before. And whereas this Spirit leaves behind it its odor and taste in the
Magistery of Pearls, it must be dissolved again in equal parts of Cinnamon and
Rose Water, which must be drawn off again in Mary's Bath: and thus reiterate
the same with new waters, until the Magistery have lost the smell and taste of
the volatile Spirit of Venus, which is that admirable Menstruum, only capable
of furnishing to Physic, dissoluble, pleasant and subtle Magisteries, capable
of penetrating unto the very last Digestions, and carrying along with them the
virtue of those Cordials to which they are associated. And it is in this manner
that we have prepared the Pearls for the composition of this Great Cordial.

We have no other observation touching the Vipers, but only that they must be
stripped of their skins, and put to dry with the Hearts and Livers in a Glass
bottom in Mary's Bath, until they be fit to be poudered. We say they must be
thus used, because that this kind of drying takes little or nothing of their
volatile Salt from them, and that in case there were any thing exhaled from
them, the Chemical Apothecary may retrive it in the water which drops from the
head that covers the Body. But when the Vipers are dried in an Oven, there
scarce remains any virtue in the flesh, which remains tough like Hemp, and
almost insipid; whereas that which has been dried in Mary's Bath is easily put
in powder, and has a taste which declares that its Salt is still in it. Part of
it is put with the Vegetables to be extracted, and there is some of it added
also to the Pouders, to give a Body, and augment the virtue of the Remedy, as
we have already mentioned in the discourse concerning Hartshorn.

The Musk now remains, which ought to be put in powder with some white
Sugar Candy in a marble Mortar, the better to disunite its parts; and
afterward open it by digestion and circulation in a vaporous Bath with Spirit
of Wine in a Pelican: then the Spirit must be drawn off again with a most
gentle heat of the same Bath, unto the consistency of a thick Syrup, or half
Extract, which after must be mixed with the other things.

As concerning Amber-griece, it must also be powdered in a Stone-Mortar with
some white Sugar Candy, and that so long till there be as it were a perfect
union of those two substances, which are not without great trouble allied
together without a good uniting Medium, by reason that Sugar is a vegetable
Salt which can be dissolved and inseparably joined with water, which thing
cannot be done with Amber-griece, because it is a fat and melting Bitumen,
which has more connection and analogy with Oils. Now this Medium can be nothing
else but the subtle and fiery Oil of rectified Wine, and thrice passed over
most pure Salt of Tartar in Mary's Bath. Therefore this mixture of Sugar and
Amber-griece must be put in a Glass Bottle, and pour over it of this noble
Menstruum until it over-tops it the breadth of four fingers: then close the
Vessel, and place it in the vaporous Bath until all be united by dissolution:
then it must be filtrated through Cotton into a glass Vial; and as soon as it
is cooled, those three Bodies united together make a Butter or Cream which is
most delicious and pleasing, which unites it self to all sorts of Liquors, and
which of it self is already a great Cordial. And thus the Amber-griece must be
prepared for our Operation.

All the sorts of Vegetables which enter in this Cordial are almost of the same
nature, since they are almost all endowed with some pleasant and aromatic
smell, which together with their bitter and piercing taste prove that they
participate of a good quantity of sulphurous volatile Salt: therefore we must
have recourse unto some Menstruum which may be of power to extract this Salt,
and disunite the mucilaginous, Balsamic and Resinous Juice, which retains and
preserves the virtue of the different parts of the Plants even after their
Exsiccation. This Menstruum can be nothing else then Aqua-vitae or Spirit of
Wine, which burdens it self most easily with the essential tinctures of
Vegetables. Therefore all this different gathering must be put into a gross
powder, if the materials are dry; or if green, cut them very small with a pair
of Shears, and cast it all in a great vessel of Glass with a narrow mouth, and
pour upon it for the first time some Spirit of Wine very well rectified, that
it may load it self with the chief virtue and with the proper Balsamic
Tincture of the Ingredient. It must be digested in Mary's Bath, in a moderate
heat, during two natural days. Then it must be strained and pressed cold, and the
residue of the Expression be put in the Glass-vessel again: then the Spirit of
Wine must be extracted from the Tinctures in the vaporous Bath, until it have
acquired the consistence of an Extract somewhat liquid. Then pour upon the
Expression the Spirit which has been drawn off, so digest and extract as
before; and thus continue till the Species afford no more Tincture. Then the
rest must be boiled in a good quantity of water in a Still, and distill it,
that in case there were some remnant of volatile virtue, it might be received in
the Receiver. And when the distilled water comes forth without smell and taste,
cease the fire, for it is a sign that there is nothing left but what is fix,
which concentres it self in the Decoction left behind in the Still. This
Decoction must be strained and pressed warm, then evaporate the Decoction in a
brass Pan upon an open fire to the consistence of an Extract somewhat liquid,
and it will be found filled with a salted bitterness, which shows that the
water has dissolved and extracted by the violence of the Ebullition all the
fixed Salt which was in the Vegetables. Which thing has appeared to be very
true in this Operation: for whereas our celebrated Author requires but the
Extraction with Spirit of Wine, he does also desire that the rest should be
calcined, and the fix Salt extracted out of it to be joined to the Extract,
that he might have the whole virtue of those things which he imploys in his
Remedy. But if he had known the Vegetables very well, and understood also that
the Sulphur being once separated by the Spirit of Wine, there were nothing left
that could hinder the dissolution of the fix Salt by means of the water, he had
most assuredly acted in the same manner we have done: for after the Exsiccation
and Calcination of the remainders, we have made a Lie of the Ashes, and there
was not a scruple of Salt remaining, which is twenty grains out of all that
great heap of Vegetables, because that it was all passed into the Extract with
the water.

This gross Extract being finished, it must be mixed with the first, and put
them both together in a body or a great Bottle, and pour over them to the
height of twelve inches of that Spirit which served in the Extraction, and
digest and circulate them together in the gentle heat of the vaporous Bath
during four and twenty hours, then filtre the Liquor, and put the Lees into the
Vessel again; and thus continue to digest, circulate, extract and filtrate,
until the rest of the Extract communicate nor give any more color to the
Menstruum. After this all the filtrated Tincture must be put in a body, and
draw off the Spirit from it in Mary's Bath, in a very mild heat, so that the
head do not heat, and this for two reasons. The first is, That the Spirit that
mounts is thereby the more subtle; and the other, That the same Spirit should
not carry away with it self by means of a more vigorous heat the best part of
the Sulphur and volatile Salt of the Extract, which is kept down by virtue of
the fix Salt, which has joined and united it self with them by means of
digestion and circulation with the Menstruum, which has been the uniting means
of it. This Extract made after this manner is the Basis or Foundation of our
Cordial, and it contains radically the Essence of all the Vegetables which
have been employed to make it.

We want nothing more now but to make a necessary remark upon the Preparation
and Extraction of the Wood of Aloes and Aromaticks, which abound in a volatile
Salt, Oleaginous, Sulphurous, Balsamic and Resinous; which cannot be
extracted out of Bodies of this nature, but by the means of a pure and subtle
Spirit, such as that which has been drawn off from the course Extracts: for
this Spirit will dissolve by its subtle and penetrating faculty the Rosins of
this said Wood and Aromatic. So that to perform it well, there needs but to
proceed simply on, in the same manner as has been done before, in the digestion
and filtration of the last Extract.

There is nothing left then unspoken but a Caution which must be given
concerning the Mixture of this Resinous Extract with the Sugar, the Extracts,
the Pouders and the Syrups; which must be performed by dissolving it gently
with some of its proper Spirit in a Pan, and thus unite it gently with some
Syrup before it be joined to the rest, otherwise it would remain in lumps, and
would not dissolve in the Stomach with ease enough to communicate the rays of
its virtue, as it is necessary it should be, cito, tuto, and jucunde, when it
is necessary to cause a Counter-poison or Cordial to operate.

We have but the third Classis of our Materials, which are the Minerals, upon
which we have to treat of the order and dignity of their Preparation; which are
the Bole, the Coral, the Gold, and the Sealed Earth. But we shall speak here
but of the Bole and of the Sealed Earth, which go hand in hand in their
preparations, which are done both the same way. Then we shall speak also of
Gold, the principal subject, which will make appear how much Art helps Nature.
For we shall say nothing of the Coral's preparation, because that we should to
that effect hint on that we have already said in the Classis of Animals or of
their parts, when we have discoursed of Pearls and of their preparations.

We shall not mention any thing in this place concerning the nature of these
Earths, since we have treated of it heretofore: we shall only say; that there
must be had some of the first liquid Extraction of those Vegetables which enter
in our Great Cordial, and with it water these two Earths in a glass body, till
they be reduced into a liquid pap, then draw off again this Liquor by
Distillation with the gentle heat of a vaporous Bath, and thus continue for
seven times, or rather till the Artist can find out by the taste of these
Earths that they are sufficiently impregnated with the savor and virtue of the
sulphurous volatile Salt of the Cordial Plants: and then it is time to leave
off, drying what is in the Vessel in the same degree of heat, till there
appears no more moisture in the head of the Lembick, nor a drop of liquor
pass through the neck of the Lembick. These Earths thus impregnated must
afterward be put in a Glass Vial, which must be stopped very well, to enter
them afterward in our Composition. This operation is to separate and open the
compact and close parts of those Earths, and to imbibe and replenish with an
Alexitery virtue the Atoms which constitute them, that they may the sooner be
reduced from power to act by the action of the Stomach, when it is necessary to
make use of the Remedies.

Before we begin to speak of the Preparation of Gold, it seems to be necessary
to speak two words beforehand, to give to understand that this Metal may be so
well opened by the means of Chemistry, as to be capable of producing some
virtue in us, although it might be reduced again to its first metallic body:
for there are many which are of opinion, that though this fix Body be dissolved
and altered by Preparation, nevertheless it is reducible into its body, and by
consequence not capable to produce in us that virtue which the Ancients and
Moderns do attribute to it. But we must clear this business by the
demonstration of the dissolution of other Metalls into Salt, or rather into
Vitriol, as Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead and Iron, which nevertheless are most
commonly capable of being reduced again into Metal: which hinders not but that
the most skilful Physicians make of it daily more and more, by reason that
their study and experience makes them discover those rare virtues which these
opened Metalls produce in Chronical diseases, which are the most rooted and
stubborn. Now all these Metallic Vitriols have different tastes and colors,
as also they have all some specific virtues, as it appears by their effects.
Which obliges us to say, that since Gold, though of a fix nature, can be so
prepared and opened by the means of certain things which are daily used both as
Aliments and Medicaments, and that it can be reduced into a vitriolick Salt,
which has its color and its specific taste and virtue; why should it be
deprived of being put in use, because of its reducibility into Metal? Not but
that we believe, with the wisest, that if this noble Metal was once so opened
and radically dissolved, in such wise that it could never be reduced into
Metal again by any Chemical artifice, I say, we should believe that Gold thus
uncorporified and volatilized would acquire a far more ample sphere of activity
and virtue: but notwithstanding all this, we do not omit to attribute to the
other Preparation that virtue which has been known by redoubled experiences,
first having been well and duly prepared, and moreover first imbued,
impregnated and filled with the internal and central Sulphur of Antimony, which
is had in the true tincture of the Glass of that Mineral, extracted according
to Basilius Valentinus. And it is of this Preparation of Gold which we have
disposed in one part of this Great Cordial, to render it accomplished in all
respects. We shall now lay down some of those Remarks which are necessary to
this operation, which may very well pass for one of the most pleasant and most
considerable of all the rare Chemical Pharmacie. The Artist therefore must
choose the purest Gold, which yet ought to have in it something of allay; and
therefore he must pass it or melt it down with Antimony, whose Sulphur consumes
all which is heterogeneal to it, as its great sweetness, ductibility, high
color and splendor does evidently testify, after it has passed this
Examination. But he must not stop there; for this metallic Body is too fix and
compact, to be dissolved without the help of the most corroding Spirits, which
we will not use. He must therefore open and separate that strong union of this
Body, and reduce it into a spongeous and penetrable Body, whose atoms may be
penetrated and dissolved by means of common water, enriched or endowed with
ordinary Salts: which cannot be done but by the amalgaming with crude Mercury,
and reiterated Calcination with the common Sulphur, which dilate the Gold, and
render it so spongeous and opened, that one Ounce of this Metal so prepared
makes a greater quantity then half a Pound of Gold in an Ingot or Wedge. Gold
being brought to this pass, must be dissolved with that amiable and familiar
Dissolvent, by a simple digestion, and a light Ebullition toward the end, in a
Glass body in Sand; and there will not remain a grain undissolved. The Liquor
must be filtrated: and if any be desirous to make a fine Crocus of Gold, or a
Powder of Gold impalpable and subtle, let them take one part of this filtrated
Liquor, and precipitate it with volatile Spirit of Wine, and the Liquor that was
yellow will change it self into a green color, and the Gold will precipitate
it self to the bottom of the Vessel, into a brown Powder, which must be
edulcorated by several reiterated lotions, until it become insipid, and
afterward it must be digested by three natural days in tartarized Spirit of
Wine in a gentle heat of Mary's Bath, and lastly it must be kept during three
days in Rose and Cinnamon Water, then filtrate and dry it. This Powder thus
prepared is a great Sudorifick and Cordial: but what we are going to mention is
far better. The remainder of the filtrated Liquor, which contains the dissolved
Gold, must be evaporated in a Glass vessel of a flat and large form, until all
the Salts be very dry; then they must be put in powder and thrown in a Glass
circulatory; then pour over them to the height of four fingers of Tartarized
Alkohol of Wine, place the Vessel in a heat of Bath, and this Spirit will
attract to it self all the dissolution of the Gold, and invest it self with a
gilded yellow very pleasant: which must be separated from the Salts by
Inclination or Filtration; and pour upon them some new Spirit, and digest,
extract and filtrate so often that the Menstruum be no more tinctured. Then
must all the Liquors be mixed together, and draw off the superfluous Spirit in
Mary's Bath, in a most gentle heat, and there will remain in the bottom of the
Vessel a yellow Tincture of a high color, imbued with the vitriolick Salt of
the Gold, as its crabbed and bitter taste does witness clearly. And I durst say
that those who have made use of this rare Remedy, have always seen and taken
notice of its most surprising effects: For sometimes this noble Medicament
purges by Stools, sometimes by Vomits, and sometimes it does neither, but
powerfully provokes Urines and Sweats; and most commonly it acts by no sensible
operation at all: but its virtue must be taken notice of in augmenting the
strength of the sick, and thus Natura corroborata est omnium morborum
medicatrix. Those that understand the Fixedness of Gold will wonder, it may be,
at the dissolving of this Metal in common water, and with corporal Salts: but
they are far more wonderfully surprised, that the Spirit of Wine, which in no
wise acts upon the Salts, does nevertheless attract to it self all that Gold
which they had dissolved, and which render it capable of being mixed with the
Drinks, and all the poor sick person's other Remedies, in whose body it
penetrates and insinuates it self to the extremities, thereby to correct what
might be there of hurtful, and by that means re-establish Health. And if this
simple Preparation produces such rare effects, what may not be expected from
those noble and high Operations which volatilize Gold in such a manner, that it
is impossible to bring it to a Body again? But this being beside our present
subject, we shall mention it no farther. But we cannot conclude without giving
notice, that it is with little benefit that in several places Gold in Leaf is
used in Confections and in Cordial Powders, without any foregoing Preparation,
which augments rather their price then their virtue: Except some would say that
there are found in the Stomach such strange fermentations and alterations, that
they produce Liquors that are capable of acting upon this Metal in Leaf, and
reduce it from power to act. But that is too far forth, and we want proofs of
these pretended effects. We believe that what we have newly said justifies in
some manner our Author, or those that have added Gold well prepared to this
noble Remedy of which we treat. And all that we have said concerning the
Preparation both of the Animal, Vegetable and Mineral, does evidently show how
much Alt is capable of helping Nature, since there are things in these three
Reigns, which constitute her, which cannot communicate their virtue, nor make
the Irradiation of their inward powers, if they have not first been opened by
the Keys of Chemical Operations, with the preservation of their Seeds and
Power, and especially in what concerns the Minerals and Metalls.

Let us now come to our third Proof, which is to show that this Great Cordial
is absolutely necessary to the Maritime and Northerly Nations, and especially
to the inhabitants of Islands, which we must establish by Reasoning in general,
and by Demonstration in particular. What we have to say in general is, That the
Sea-bordering and Northerly Countries, and, above all, Islands, are exposed to
an inconstancy of Winds, which agitate the Air in so many different manners,
that it is impossible for the Heat of the Sun to act with all the reach of its
power, for the production of Vegetables in general, which is the allotted
aliment for Animals both Rational and Irrational: which is proved in that those
Countries produce no Grapes ripe enough to make Wine withal, which is the
Juice that participates most of a volatile sulphurous Spirit. This is proved
also, by reason that the Climate is not capable of giving time necessary for
the ripening of the best Fruits, and specially those which ought to have some
high Relish, some kind of Perfume and exquisite Smell, which are nothing else
but the results and true tokens of the Exaltation of the Salt and Sulphur, and
of the perfect ripening of those Fruits, that do languish in those cold
Countries, and that are replenished but with a superfluous and excremental
Moisture, which cannot be dissipated, much less digested, by reason of the
weakness and little durance of the heat of the Day, and by reason also chiefly
of the coldness, moistness and freshness of the Night. Now if we have
demonstrated that the Vegetables cannot be perfect, by reason of the
imperfection of their volatile Salt and embryonated Sulphur; we may also say the
same of the Brutes, which are engendered in the compass of those Regions, and
which are nourished and entertained with those Vegetables that grow there: for
although those Animals be fat and tender, yet do they not contain a nourishing
juice, having the taste and virtue to nourish and maintain, as those of the
more Easterly Countries; therefore their flesh is more flabby, more viscous,
and fuller of Moisture, it is sooner corrupted, by reason that it is not
furnished sufficiently with this Balm of life, which is that volatile
sulphurous Salt, proceeding from Light and Heat, which could not be concentred
in them, by reason of the situation of their native Soil. There are also to be
considered in general the qualities of most part of those Waters which water
those Countries, and which serve for nourishment to the Plants and Animals: for
whereas they are not enlightened and purified by a lively light of the Sun, and
by a serenity of the Heavens, by reason of the almost continual opposition of
the Vapors arising from the freshness and moisture both of the Territory and
Seas that compass it round, they also are not furnished with that subtilizing,
igneous, Celestial and vital Spirit, which is the radical Balsam of Nature in
general, and of every individual in particular; which is the reason that they
are more crazie and weightier, and replenished with a dull and hurtful Salt,
since they are not deprived of the bad impressions and evil ferments which the
Indigestion, Alteration, and the Corruption of those matters which are daily
consumed have printed in them, and of which they cannot be deprived but by a
competent degree of heat. Now if the Water is ill qualified, there is no doubt
but that the Air is also less pure then elsewhere, since that as it is the
Medium between the Seat and the purifying heat proceeding from Heaven, it is
also filled in reference to the Climes, with so many gross and indigested
Vapors, that this heat has not power enough to dissipate and rectify, during
the fairest day, those sluggish, gross and viscous Vapors which are furnished
by the cloudier days, as also by the night, which hinder that brave and
excellent action of Heat, which is absolutely necessary to produce the goodness
and purity in Beings.

This preceding Reason causes this natural Conclusion, That the Inhabitants of
the Countries which are Northerly and bordering upon the Seas must needs be
subject to many diseases popular and particular to their Climat, which are
scarcely known by the people of other Regions, and by the Physicians that
govern them. For since that they breath in an intemperate air, and filled with
the gross and humid atoms of the Vapors; that they drink indigested Waters,
that are heavy, and filled with a Salt that is dull and ill-fermented; that
they eat Vegetables and Animals, which already partake in themselves of the
defects of these general springs; it also implies of necessity that they must
partake of those bad productions which result thereof, according to more or
less of the ill impression made in them, both in the moment of their Birth, and
in the course of their Life. Therefore it is absolutely necessary to make use
of something that may be able to combat all those evils which we have newly
mentioned, both to preserve the Health of those that enjoy it, and to correct
and re-establish the Health of those which do but linger and languish under
these Inconveniences. Which causes us to say, that the Great Cordial is wholly
necessary for the Northerly and Sea-bordering people, and specially for the
Inhabitants of Islands, by reason that all its Ingredients are filled with a
concentred Light, which can remedy all their evils. But after this general
Reasoning, we must come to a particular Demonstration, which we shall apply by
Examples, with the same order in which we have spoken in general.

In the first place, as concerning the Air and the Winds that reign with a
perpetual inconstancy, all those that live in those Countries know too well by
their own experience, that the Fogs and the humid Vapors of the Morning, as
also those in the Evening, which the French call the Sereine, do so alter the
Head and Breast, that one can scarcely be cautious enough, in whatsoever season
it be, to prevent Defluxions and Rheums, Catarrhs, troublesome Coughs and
Colds, which commonly draw after them Rheumatisms, wandering pains, Asthma's,
the Lungs disease and the Consumption. Now all this proceeds only from the
defect of Digestion, which takes its beginning from a hurtful superfluity which
is mixed with the Air; which men take in and breath out continually, there
being never a part of the Body of Man, be it never so close and obscure, but
what is replenished with the Air we take in, be it good or bad. And to this
purpose one of the greatest Philosophers of this Age has most learnedly said,
Est in aere occultus vita cibus, when it is well purified, and abounding in a
balsamic, subtle and during Salt, which comes to it from Light: but when it is
troubled to receive it, and that it is filled on the contrary with an
indigestive, gross and malignant Salt, it then can be nothing else but a
principle of Diseases, and, in consequence, of Death, if its defects are not
corrected in the Stomach, which is the seat where the first Digestion is
performed. And it is from the defect of this first Fermentation that all the
others are derived, which alter and corrupt the mass of Blood, whence flow out,
as from their Spring, the Scurvy, the Rickets, the King's Evil, and all other
diseases which are of this kind of nature. This renders also the people the
sooner subject to the venomous impressions of the Pox and its consequences, and
hinders them also from being so easily cured of the Venereal Plague as those
men that are more Easterly. This is evidently proved by the experience of those
which cross the Seas on purpose to breath another Air, and receive thereby that
comfort which they hope from it, and that they are sensible of. Now let us come
to the Water which draws from the Earth a certain slime that is subtle, dull
and viscous, which contains in it an heterogeneal Salt, which alters the
property of the volatile and acid Salts: not that this is found equally every
where; but there is notwithstanding every where some defect of Digestion, by
the defect of Heat, and by too much moisture. Let us add to this, that the
Vegetables participate of these evils; for all that they furnish us for
Kitchin-use and for Physic has neither the taste nor smell that the Herbs of
other hotter Climes have, which is noted specially in those which ought to
abound in a volatile sulphurous Salt; which manifests it self by the taste and
smell, since we have found by our proper experience, that they do not yield in
distillation such a quantity of Oil and Spirit as do those of warmer Countries.
Notice must be taken also, that the meat by which they live is not furnished
with Salt and Spirits to be capable of nourishing in so little quantity as it
does elsewhere, where it is firmer and closer: which is most evidently proved
by those that make Broths, strong Broths and Jellies, for they find that of
necessity there is required a double quantity of flesh to give the same
strength and taste to that which is destinated for the pleasure of the Palate,
or to sustain the weakness of the sick. This is also palpably found in the
juice of Roasted meats, for it is not animated, neither with the smell, taste
nor color of the meats of the same nature that are in hot Countries, where the
juice of the roasted meats bears its Salt along with it, as its taste does
witness. Now as those people take notice of the defects of the Aliments and
those Indigestions that follow them, they arm themselves against them by the
common use of Spices and Aromatic Herbs, which they continue and augment by an
unavoidable necessity.

All that has been hitherto spoken does clearly make appear, that Sir Walter
Rawleigh has endeavored to deserve well from the inhabitants of his Native
Soil, since he has given the receipt of a Remedy that is capable to remedy all
the defects which may cause in the Stomach of his Countrymen the Indigestions
of their Aliments and their natural Constitution, which participates also of
the General defect. For the Remedy which he has given to the public is not
only able to prevent the evil impressions which may be contracted during the
time of Health; but it is also powerful enough to seek out the Evil to the very
center of the Blood and Spirits, in which Life does reside, and from whence
they derive, as from their proper source, both Health and Sickness. There does
it kill, by its Alexitery and Cordial virtue, the venom which caused the
Disease, and there it blots out (if I may say so) the false Idea and evil
Character of which the Archeus, principal director of the functions of life,
was impregnated, and as it were bound up withal. For this noble Remedy does
make its presence to be felt as soon as it is in the bottom of the Stomach,
where at first sight it strengthens the natural Heat, that reduces it from
power to act; so that it makes and drives the irradiation of its power and
virtue all over, it strengthens the Spirits, and disingages them from the bonds
of the Matter, and causes them to act with more liberty. And thus Nature
finding her self strengthened and eased, she drives out by the Emunctories that
which annoyed her, sometimes by Sweats and by Urines, and sometimes also by an
insensible and mild Transpiration. There is no wondering at the sudden
operation of this Cordial; for considering that it is composed but of things
which are essencified, it cannot choose but produce sudden effects, by reason of
the subtle and quick penetration of the Salts and Spirits which compose it,
which are all of them friends to our Nature: which causes us to conclude, that
it is not only healing, but also preserving, and a maintainer of present
Health, as well as it is able to restore that which is already altered.

We have nothing else to speak of now but of the proper and convenient time in
which our Great Cordial ought to be fitly administered, to receive thereof the
succor which it is able to give, and that is hoped for from it: as also of the
Dose, proportion of weight and quantity of this noble Remedy, be it taken
simply, for the entertaining and preservation of Health, or that it be used for
the recovery and restoration of the same Health when it is out of order, and
that its fine and pleasing Harmony is troubled and hindered; which is none of
the least considerable parts of this Discourse. For it often happens, and
almost always, through the fault of an accustomed popular Error, that most
persons take upon them to administer Remedies without sufficiency of skill to
know the convenience of Time, the fit Dose, and least of all the necessary
disposition that is required to the Subject that is to receive the benefit of
it. Which causes many abuses, and that the Remedy is blamed sometimes, though
the fault proceeds but from the want of a good and legitimate appropriation: as
is most learnedly observed by our Great Paracelsus, in the Preface to the Tenth
Book of his Archidoxes. To prevent all these disorders, it is not sufficient
only that the Remedies be well and duly prepared, but it is also necessary for
those that would reap benefit by them, to know how they should be administered;
which belongs only to the true Physician, who knows not only the sphere of
the activity of the Remedy and of its Ingredients, but besides this examines
the disposition of the Subject, in health or sick, who is to receive it, and
makes those lawful and necessary reflections which are to be done upon the time
and dose, according to the age, sex, temper, native place, and upon all the
other circumstances, which ought to make him conclude the application or
suspension of the exhibition of the Remedy.

Therefore to find some Medium that may help to the want of skill of the one,
and to the presumption of the others, we must give some general notes, which
may prevent failing when any will make use of our Cordial, be it to preserve
and maintain Health, or to repair and restore it when it is altered or lost. In
the first place is to be considered whether the person be Costive or no;
because the retention of the Excrements does always cause some disturbance, for
they heat commonly the Liver and Spleen, the Breast and Brains: insomuch that
if this Remedy be given before the Evacuation of these Excrements, the
disturbance and augmentation of the Heat doubtless will be attributed to the
action of the Remedy, although the true cause proceed from the retention of the
Excrements. Therefore it is most necessary gently to loosen the Belly of those
to whom would be given essensified and volatilized Remedies, that nothing may
hinder their good effects. It is to be considered in the second place, whether
those that would make use of this Remedy have their Stomach subject to sudden
Alterations, and to irregular Fermentations, which do commonly cause
Nauseousness, Palpitations, Sweats and Restlesness, by reason of some sharp and
malignant matters that sojourn and lurk in the bottom of the Ventricle. In that
case the Stomach must be cleansed and scoured with a simple, natural and gentle
Vomit; that the Insultations and Counter-times which these matters cause may
not be attributed to the Remedy. After these precautions, our Great Cordial may
be made use of in all seasons and for all sorts of persons of what sex or age
soever, provided one has likewise at that time the counsel and direction of
the learned Physicians; and then will be tried those virtues and efficacy which
this great and rare Remedy conceals in it self. We shall not specify here the
general nor particular Diseases that it is able to combat and destroy, since we
have sufficiently discoursed of it, when we gave the relation of the
Ingredients which compose it, which is sufficient to give an able instruction,
thereby to put it in practice, and make use of it with benefit. Its Dose is
from six Grains to half a Dram, as a Preservative and maintainer of Health; and
from half a Scruple or twelve Grains to a Dram, or four Scruples, when it
concerns the Cure of those diverse Diseases to which it is able to give help. It
may be given in all sorts of Wines, in Broth, in Posset, in cordial Decoctions,
and in simple or compounded distilled Waters, according to the palate of the
healthful or sick person, and according as the learned and experienced
Physicians will judge it most convenient and necessary. God grant that what we
have done and said upon this Great and Admirable Cordial redound to the common
good of all Sick persons, and to the augmentation of the Glory and Splendor of
rare Physic and lawful Pharmacy, according to the most generous and most
laudable Intentions of that Great and Generous Monarch, who commanded me to
make and perform this Noble Remedy. Amen.

FINIS.

