BATEMAN MAYOR.
Martis octavo die December. 1663. Annoque Regis Caroli Secundi, Angliae, etc.
15.
IT is ordered that Dr Lee be desired from this Court to print his Sermon
Preached at S. Paul's Church on Sunday last was seven-night, before the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen, and a great assembly of the Citizens of London.

Weld.

PErlegi hanc Concionem, cui Titulus, [Cor Humiliatum and Contritum] in qua
nihil occurrit sanae Fidei, Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis moribus
contrarium: Quinimo dignissimam censeo quae publicae utilitatis and exempli
causa Typis mandetur.

Joh. Hall, R. in Christo Pat. Humfredo Episc.
Land. a Sac. Domest. December. 9. 1663.
Cor Humiliatum and Contritum.

A SERMON PREACHED At S. PAUL'S Church LONDON, Nov. 29. 1663.

By RICHARD LEE, D.D. Chaplain to the most Renowned GEORGE Duke of Albemarle
his Grace, and Rector of Kings-Hatfield in Hartfordshire.

WHEREIN Was delivered the profession of his judgment against the Solemn
League and Covenant, the late KING'S Death, etc.

DEVS NON DESPICIET CORPSE 50 CONTRITVM ET HVMILITATVM

Printed for R. Royston, J. Williams, T. Garthwait. 1663.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate of all England and Metropolitan,
and one of His MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
IT was the Prophecy of His late Majesty, that Incomparable and Divine Prince,
of glorious and eternal memory, to His Son our now most gracious Sovereign,
whom God has nourished, preserved, restored, and blessed by Miracles; blessed in
Himself, and the great miracle of Clemency to His people; in the 27th
Meditation of His (...), That none will be more loyal and faithful to You and
Me, then those Subjects, who being sensible of their own Errors and Our
Injuries, will feel in their souls vehement motives to Repentance, and earnest
desires to make some reparations for their former defects. Now feeling in my
soul vehement motives to Repentance, and earnest desires to make some
Reparations for my former defects, I resolved on some public compensation, and
accordingly composed this Sermon, which I preached first to the University of
Cambridge, where it was received Ambabus ulnis with an open bosom: Next to
this famous City, at S. Paul's, whither I had been summoned (without Text or
terms) by the Angel of that Church, the now Lord Bishop of London, who heard me
with an exemplary Attention, and Paternal affection, and afterward received,
embraced and blessed me, Encouraged and Commanded my Sermon to the Press, for
public benefit. The Auditory, (though greater then had been known in the
memory of man) yet was composed into a spirit and posture suitable to the
Majesty, Holiness, and Presence of that God in whose House we were. I did with
much fear address my self to this service, (finding so much Reason to distrust
my own Abilities:) but now with a Joy answerable to that Presence and Influence
I had from God in speaking, and that Encouragement I had from all Degrees of
men (especially from that excellent Person, the Lord Bishop) to Printing, I now
publicly make this offering to your Grace, to whom I not only owe Canonical
Obedience, but an account of all the service I do in the Church; in which
service, Loyalty and duty to His Majesty and my Superiors (and to teach men so)
is eminently involved. I well know, I have incurred some men's Censures by
speaking my Conscience in Points they relish not, and am like to displease
others who are wont to condemn beforehand: But as I rejoice to offend any for
their good, so I am afraid to please any for their hurt. However I have spoken
what I believe, and thereby have delivered my own Soul. But lest the Medicine I
have prescribed should turn to a Wound, I have tempered the truth with meekness
and moderation, as well knowing that hard Arguments and soft words will prevail
where the Sword cannot. Speaking and Printing have their several Graces, as God
is pleased to set them on by his presence and influence. This Sermon was blessed
with right Reverend, right Honorable, and Ingenuous Auditors; the Ear was
kind, though the Eye may be severe. It has this in it, that it was Seasonable;
Pills well Acuted purge the better. What was once wrote to Egidius Abbot of
Noremberg concerning David's words in (...) 18. Ps. may be said of the words of
my Text, They are Verba legenda, and vivenda, Living words. I cannot think the
Sermon worthy a public view: yet having obtained (through God's blessing) the
Approbation of the University and City, and chiefly of that Religious and grave
Prelate, the Lord Bp of London, by doing some good (I hope) I do therefore in
all humility present it to your Grace, through whose wise Conduct, Sedulity and
Paternal Condescentions, such changes are wrought upon the Once Seduced, that
they are not now afraid of the Bishop, but ashamed of themselves, and of their
own injustice, ingratitude and perjury, in Covenanting against them.

The Present I now make to your Grace is slender; yet, to speak in S. Jerome's
words, Nobiscum been agitur, si obtulerimus pelles and Caprarum pilos, It is
well, (where we have no better) we offer according to our Ability, and that is,
Cor Humiliatum and Contritum, which your Grace (cum Deo) will not despise, but
own, accept, and honor. However it be, I humbly offer it in those submissive
words and manner S. Aug. has taught me, Domine Deus, quaecunque dixi de tuo,
agnoscant and tui; siqua de meo, and tu agnosce, and tui, Whatever, Lord, I
have spoken that is from thee, own it in the hearts of thine; and what I have
spoken that is from my self, forgive it, and let it be by thine forgiven.

I cannot say, at the Preaching this Sermon any contradicted, but rather
rejoiced and glorified the Word of the Lord, Act. 13.48.

Herein I content my self, that I have with clearness and sincerity quitted and
discharged 1. 2. Theodosius, Se potuisse vel mortuos a morte revocare, That he
could recover the worst of his Subjects to their duty and happiness.

3. England (my Indulgent Mother) the best Reformed Protestant Church in the
World, in whose Bosom I desire to live and die a Penitent, and Regular Son.

4. England, under whose great Name (which alone will give it Protection and
Value) I send forth this Sermon into the World.

May that God who has raised your Grace to the highest service in this Church,
give you the greatest success, and fullest Satisfaction in himself, that your
Glory here may be the Pledge and First Fruits of your Crown hereafter.

May it please your Grace, I am The humblest and most unworthy of the Sons of
the Church of England, Rich. Lee.

Cor Humiliatum and Contritum.
PSALM. 51.17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: A broken and contrite
Heart, O God, thou will not despise.


THIS Psalm is justly styled David's Recantation; to which Head, we must reduce
all his, and all other Confessions of God's Saints in Scripture, as to the
common Remedy, of that lability, error, and sin, which is congenious to their
and our Natures.

This is one of those seven Penitential Psalms, penned by David, and appointed
by the Church to be used in time of Penance and Contrition. Psalms which S.
Augustine, was so great a lover and admirer of, that he commanded them to be
written in Capital Letters, and hung upon the Wall over against his Bed, or
about the Curtains of his Deathbed within, next to him; that so he might die
as he had lived, in the Contemplation and Meditation of them, with tears in his
eyes, in the practice of Repentance, praying for the remission of his sins:
always judging this, (as Possidonius speaks) the safer and surer way to
blessedness, then that of Raptures; and the fittest disposition for dying
Christians, especially for such of the Ministry, who have by their omissions,
flatteries and silences, the sins of others to answer for as well as their own.

This Psalm is Psalmus (...), so Junius; A Psalm of prayer; for mercy is the
scope of it, which David prays for in the negative and positive effects of it.
And indeed this sweet Singer of Israel never prayed more pathetically, then
when his heart was broke most penitentially: as Birds in Spring sing
melodiously when it rains sadly; or as some faces which are most oriently
beautiful, when most washed with tears.

The occasion of this Psalm was David's sin and Nathan's Ministry, 2 Samuel 11,
and 12 Chapter The effect whereof was not an itching ear, but an aching heart: for
whilst he tells him a Parable, David suspects not that it concerns him; but
when Nathan no longer brandishes the sword in the air, but by a close
application falls in with him, Thou art the man, David feels the wound, and ne
evanescat, and saeviat dolor, lest the sense might vanish, and his wound
fester, he cries out for help, Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy
loving kindness; according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
transgressions: as in the first verse.

The Parts of his Prayer are two: Petition for himself. Supplication for the
Church.


1. For himself, who by his Murder and Adultery had so offended and dishonored
God; from the 1 verse to the 18.

2. For the Church, which by his fall was so scandalized and endangered, that
from Dan to Beersheba 70 thousand die of the Plague, 2 Samuel 24.15.

The Arguments by which he enforces his Prayer are three.

1. Taken from his Repentance, which was sound and serious, (as having in it
not only the necessity of a Duty, he had sinned if he had not repented; but the
necessity of a Remedy, for he had perished if he had not repented.)

2. From others, whom by his experience of God's pardoning mercy, he might with
more skill, humility and tenderness, recover and cure, v. 13. Docebo
praevaricatores vias tuas, Then shall I teach transgressors thy ways, and
sinners shall be converted to thee. Spiritual Physicians must not only be
knowing, but men of practice and experience, that can tell what it is to have a
broken heart and contrite spirit.

3. From the glory of God's pardoning mercy, which would be made more
illustrious,

1. By his publishing of it, and therein his righteousness, in keeping promise,
and forgiving those sins for which our Surety has satisfied, v. 14, 15.
Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God, or, from bloods, (Uriah's and others
with him) and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness. Praebe mihi materiam
Cantici and gratiarum actionis, ignoscendo peccato, (so Muis upon the place)
Open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

2. By his thankful offering to God, not the Sacrifices of the Law, those he
desires not, delights not in; but these of the Gospel, A broken and contrite
Heart. For the Sacrifices of God are, etc.

In the Text we have two Propositions: Affirmative. Negative.


Affirmative, The Sacrifices of God are a broken Heart.

Negative, A broken and contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise.

These Propositions are one for substance, yet doubled (as Pharaoh's dream) to
make the truth more certain. Wherein you have,

1. The Subject, A broken and contrite Spirit.

2. The Predicate, The Sacrifices of God, etc.

3. The Copula [Are] not in the Original, (therefore put in a different
character) to perfect the sense.

For the better opening these Sacrifices, I shall do with them as the Priests
under the Law, Medium animal per cervicem and spinam dividere, Cut them through
the middle from the neck downwards, (...). And this bears (says my Author Dr W.
) a huge proportion to the Text; for (...) and (...), an iron sinew in the neck
and a stone in the heart, signify in Scripture one and the same sin, and must
be alike sacrificed. First then,

(...) These two Participles make two full Epithetes: One signifies, to break
whole things,

This breaking and beating in other Scriptures is expressed in terms of
extremity: As the smiting of the heart, 2 Samuel 24.10. The wound of the spirit,
Prove. 18.14. Thus it is applied to Christ, Esaias 53.10. Jehova autem voluit
(...) conterere eum, It pleased the Lord to bruise him, etc.

Thus to Saints, Esaias 57.15. I dwell in the high and holy place, (...) and cum
contrito and humili, so Vatab. to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the spirit of the contrite ones. So as a broken and contrite Heart, is a
whole Heart broken to pieces, and a hard Heart so beaten to powder, that there
remains not a sheard (as Isaiah speaks) to take up: igniculam tentationis, or
modicum noxiae voluptatis, the spark of a temptation, or a drop of hurtful
pleasure (as Parisiensis elegantly interprets it.)

(...) Sacrifices, in the plural number, instar omnium, instead of all; All
sacrifices nothing to these, all nothing without these, all summed up in these.
For these are

(...) the Sacrifices of the Almighties, of God. in the Old Testament, the
Waters, Mountains, Cedars of God; in the New Testament, the Peace of God; and
here the Sacrifices of God, most rare and excellent. For,

(...) Such God will not despise. These. 5.20. Despise not Prophecy; Heb. 12.5.
Despise not the chastening of the Lord. And so imports God's choicest way of
Acceptance, the third step of Honor in the Text. Dr W.
Sacrifices, Sacrifices of God, and the Sacrifices of God which he will not
despise, but own, delights in, puts the highest price upon.

The result of all is,

That a broken and contrite Spirit is the Sacrifice of God, which he will own,
accept, and honor. For as such a Heart is grateful to the Penitent himself, so
to Angels, to the Mediator, to his Ministers, and so to the Almighties, (...),
to God himself.

1. To the Penitent: for having this heavenly grace wrought in his heart by the
holy Ghost, and thereby coming to the sensible knowledge of his sins, and the
displeasure of God, he does earnestly grieve; but by faith in Christ (the
Surety of his debt and duty, his Sacrifice and Mediator) he is raised again to
comfort: And then, Sicut post vehementes imbres aeris tranquillitas sequitur,
As after vehement showers there follows a tranquillity of air; so post
lacrymarum pluvias mentis serenitas, after floods of tears, the Penitent finds
such a serenity all over his Soul, that he weeps for joy that he has wept; de
peccato dolet, and de dolor gaudet. Est flendi voluntas, (so S. Ambrose) he
wills to weep. For such tears leave behind them a sweet taste and relish upon
the Soul (the immediate reward of this brokenness and contrition; yea God's
secret testimony that the Penitent has herein pleased God) and then no wonder
he is so pleased with himself, that he prays, Evermore give me this bread, for
fletus est cibus animae and refectio mentis, Godly sorrow is the Soul's food
and the mind's refection. Psalm. 80.5. Cibasti eos pane lacrymarum, and
propinasti eis lacrymas in mensura. Vatab. Thou feedest them with the bread of
tears, and give them plenteousness of tears to drink. In Penitential tears
there is meat and drink: Hence that late Penitent of Waterford in Ireland
(weeping abundantly) cried, Oh that there were in me a well of this Living
water, that streams might continually run down my cheeks, that in these streams
I might be wafted over into another world, and till then, that they might not
be dried up!

2. As this broken contrite Heart is grateful to the Penitent, so to the good
Angels, Domestici Dei, Cives Coeli, Principes Paradisi, those Domestics of
God, Citizens of Heaven, Princes of Paradise. This is their banquet, Luke 15.7.
I say to you that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents,
more then over ninety nine just persons that need no repentance. Ver. 10. There
is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents,
etc. Angelorum deliciae Poenitentium lacrymae, Bernard; Those tears which drop
from a broken contrite Spirit are the Angels delicacies. Peter weeping gives
Angels wine in heaven; and they to requite him, send him a Cup of Consolation
upon earth, Mark 16.7. Go tell his Disciples, and Peter, that he goes before
you into Galilee: Tell it, Petro gravissime vulnerato and acerbissime dolenti,
to Peter deeply wounded and bitterly weeping. En solicitudinem Angeli, behold
the solicitude of an Angel for a broken and contrite Spirit. They that have
their tongues, and want their charity, are Messengers of no value, sounding
brass and tinckling Cymbals, inanis and futilis garrulitas, as Drusius
interprets it.

3. As this broken contrite Spirit is grateful to the Angels, so to the
Mediator, who is Angelorum caput. It is his office to swath broken bones,
sweeten imbittered spirits, and wipe off tears: Felices lacrymae quas benignae
manus Mediatoris abstergunt, says Bernard, Happy tears which his blessed hands
wipe off. Luke 4.18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to heal the brokenhearted, etc. Non infundit oleum misericordiae
nisi in vas contritum, Bern. He pours not the oil of mercy but into the broken
vessel.

The tender Mother in S. Bernard, Quem aegrotantem novit filium, takes her weak
weeping child, sets it most on her lap, lays it oftnest in her bosom, magis
sovet, saepius complectitur. Thus Christ: For Peter had incurred a great and
infamous scandal, given a notorious offense to the whole Church of God; solas
the Censorious person cries, Call him no more Peter, a Rock, a chief Pillar of
the Church, but Reuben, unstable as water, one that has lost his excellency.
But our Savior knowing his Heart broken, and his Spirit contrite for his sin,
sends him a personal message by an Angel, and that Angel by Magdalene, to
intimate to him, that he who had cast seven Devils out of her, could pardon
three denials to him. And this message is directed to him under the name of
Peter, (an Apostolical name) Mark 16.7. Go tell his Disciples, and Peter,
Petro sum scandaloso; whereby our Savior does at once comfort his conscience
and cure his credit, restore him to his Discipleship and his Apostleship. So
the late excellent Bishop of Excester, D. Br. O magnitudinem misericordiae
Christi! O the greatness of the mercy of this good Samaritane, who not only
dresseth the wound, and pours in Wine and Oil, to cleanse, ease, and heal, but
takes order for the Cure; that not only prevents with grace, but continually
supplies with the necessary increases of it, that the broken heart may
persevere and be saved!

4. As this broken contrite Spirit is grateful to the Mediator, so to his
Ministers: It is their office to declare and pronounce to the Penitent the
Absolution and Remission of their sins; to feed his Lambs [for his sake] hence
the Syriast adds (...) to the Text, John 21.15. Feed my Lambs, [mihi] feed
them for me. Propter te, Domine, propter te, is the Ministers Motto, and the
Rabbis Proverb. Non vult Christus ut parvi pendas quos ipse minime parvi
pendit, Christ would not have those slighted whom he tenders. No better sign of
Grace, then for a Minister (in imitation of Christ) to own and cherish the
broken in heart. This is S. Paul's trial of a spiritual man, Gal. 6.1. If any
man be overtaken in a fault, (...), Erratum, Laesio errante manu admissa, and
that fault not proceeding from malice, but misinformation, and
misunderstanding of things, (as our late Sovereign of eternal memory speaks)
you that are spiritual restore such a one; (...), he is a bone out of joint,
set him in his place, (it may cost tears and pain) yet the bone well knit will
be the firmer. Nihil adeo spiritualem virum demonstrat, ac alieni peccati
tractatio, S. Augustine, Nothing does so demonstrate a spiritual Minister, as
his handling another man's sin. Esaias 50.4. The Lord has given me. Linguam
Eruditorum, the tongue of the Learned; What to do? To dispute Controversies,
tie and untie knots in Divinity? No, but that I should know how to speak a word
in season sitibundo and lasso, to him that is weary.

Lastly, It is grateful to the Almighties, (...), to God himself: though he
will not own divisum and dispersum Cor, a heart and a heart, yet he will accept
and honor confractum and contritum Cor, a broken and contrite Spirit. For,

1. Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it thee; thou delightest not
in burnt-offerings. Indeed we find not expressed any Sacrifice for Murder,
Adultery, or any Capital crime; therefore God desires them not 1. simply for
themselves, nor 2. comparative, in comparison of the inward Sacrifice of a
contrite Spirit, or of the all-sufficient Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross.

Nihil ergo offeremus? says S. Augustine: Sic veniemus ad Deum? Unde illum
placabimus? Shall we then offer nothing to God? shall we come empty to him? how
then shall we appease him? Habes in te quod offeras, (says the same Author)
thou have in thy self the Beast that thou may sacrifice, and the Incense
that thou may offer. In me sunt, Deus, vota tua, That (O God) is in me, thou
call for from me.

2. Luke 18.10, -- 15. The Pharisee is on his tip-toes, stands alone, seorsim,
proud and censorious, as that famous and great Divine D. Hammond speaks; full
of self-righteousness, worldly confidence, and earthly adherence: Lord, I thank
thee, I am not as other men, or as this Publican. The Publican in the sight and
sense of his sin, and the unreasonableness of it, is ashamed, dares not lift up
his head, but smites upon his breast, (with God be merciful to me a sinner.) I
tell you, says Christ, this man went down to his house justified, rather then
the other, so our Translation; but not the other, Impropria est comparatio, so
Master Calvin. And the weeping Prodigal before his insulting hypocritical elder
brother, Luke 15. For though he justles him, and thrusts him away, will not so
much as own him for his brother, but speaking to his Father, says, this thy
son, v. 30. who has devoured thy living with Harlots, etc. yet the Father
tells him, for all this he is his brother, v. 32. This thy brother was dead,
and is alive again, etc. If I be thy Father, he is thy Brother. It is meet we
should make merry and be glad. Yea he preferres him, for he receives, embraces,
and kisses him, clothes and adorns him, feeds and feasts him.

In allusion to this Parable, the now Archangel of this Church of England, His
Grace of Canterbury, (in whom (expertus loquor) Indulgentia Christi, solicitudo
Angeli, and officium Episcopi, The Indulgence of Christ, the solicitude of an
Angel, the office of Primitive, Evangelical, Catholic Episcopacy do verily
meet) I say he, in the Chappel-Royal, in a public Sermon (since printed) told
his Majesty (whose mind is always watered with the mild dews of meekness and
moderation) That it became him, as a public Father, to look upon all his
Subjects as Sons; but upon his Prodigals with more kindness and tenderness
(when they once come to themselves, and acknowledge their Error;) yea when he
sees them returning (though afar off) to meet them, caress them, call for the
Ring and the Robe, to set some mark of favor upon them more then ordinary,
that may give assurance to them and to the World, that his Promises made and
performed were not the effects of Necessity, but the fruits of a gracious
Princely mind, inviolably resolved to out-doe all his Promises and Engagements.

And I hope, says that grave and religious Prelate, the now Lord Bishop of
Winchester, Dr Mor. in the Epistle to his Coronation-Sermon, That your Majesty
herein will find a happy success, in doing not only as your Grandfather Henry
the fourth of France did, but as God himself does. As Henry the fourth of
France did, who pardoned those Rebellious Subjects that came in to him, (how
much soever they had before offended;) and to secure them from their fears, and
oblige them to his service, he honored some of them with Titles of quality and
Places of Trust; and I find not (says that excellent Bishop) that any of them
ever gave him cause to repent.

But in doing as God himself does, who receives the Prodigal, yea and makes as
much of him as if he had never offended, (though the elder Brother repine at
it;) methinks this should bespeak those who would be called the sons of these
spiritual Fathers, to walk in their steps, to go and do likewise.

Lastly, God owns and honors the broken contrite Spirit; for this is the
especial grace he promises to his Church, by which all other blessings are
qualified and sanctified, and without which they are nothing worth. Ezekiel.
36.21. God opens the treasures of his mercy; at the 24. verse he promises to
take his People from amongst the Heathen, gather them out of all Countries,
bring them to their own Land, etc. And yet as if all this were nothing, unless
a broken and contrite Spirit were vouchsafed them, God promises at the 26.
verse, I will take away the heart of stone, and I will give a heart of flesh:
sum of all, our King and Church; yea though we have had many fair mornings
after a black day, though our Candle gives a clear light, and we sleep in the
arms of Peace; yet if God break us not for our Sins, and from them, if he give
not a broken, contrite Spirit, a worm may yet breed out of our Corruption, and
consume our Gourd.

But why will not God despise, but so accept and honor a broken, contrite
Spirit? that is the (...).

1. Because it is a spiritual Sacrifice.

First, the Sacrifice is the Spirit; secondly, the Spirit as broken.

1. The Sacrifice is the Spirit, that is the best of man. Prove. 23.26. My son,
give me thy heart.

2. The Spirit as broken, and that is the best of the Spirit. When we beat hard
things into powder, we call that powder the flour of it. Brokenness and
Contrition is Dr W.
flos Cordis, the finest of the heart. The finer the flour, the fitter offering
for God. A contrite Spirit is fit for any service, any Sacrifice; yea it is all
Sacrifice.

God will not despise, Tricameratum, (it is Avicenna's word) wherein you have
not the three Persons personally, but the Love of the Father, the Grace of the
Son, and the Renovation of the holy Ghost, mystically. Hence Cor Pauli, Cor
Christi, Chrysostom. the Heart of Paul is the Heart of Christ. This broken
contrite Spirit, in the purpose and preparation of it, is Amor Dei, the Love of
God; in the inspiration and infusion of it, it is Donum Dei, the Gift of God;
in the comforts of it, it is Osculum Dei, the Kiss of God. It is no
chance-Gift, inter missilia Fortunae, as that Excellent Prelate speaks, D. B.
B. E.
but God's choice Gift. In other blessings God kisseth us sleeping, we know not
how we come by them; but this is given non dormientibus, sed vigilantibus, not
to them that sleep, but to those that watch and weep, cry and wait for it.

But more particularly, The broken contrite Spirit is gracious and very
amiable; For,

You have in it all the lineaments of the new Creature, the new Birth, the
Divine Nature.

1. Conviction. 2. Compunction. 3. Conversion.
See all drawn to the life in Primitiis Evangelii, in the first famous
Conversion wrought by the Apostles in the Christian Church, (the Pattern and
great Exemplar of all Conversions to the World's end.)

There was Conviction, 2. Acts 36. whom ye have crucified both Lord, and Christ.

Compunction. 37. v. And when they heard this,

Conversion. 38. For they Repented, etc. The Hebrew calls Repentance (...) the
Greek (...), and we Conversion (the main joint of Repentance) which implies not
only an aversion from sin, a dying to it in the passions of the mind, (Fear,
Grief, and Hatred,) but a turn in the Will to God. Not only (...) but (...); a
grief for what is past, but a change of mind for the time to come; not grief of
mind only (so (...) is sometimes taken) but (...), which implies a grief for
sin mixed with Faith which is repentance to Salvation, never to be repented of.
2 Cor 7.10. Whose rise is godly sorrow, whose nature is a purpose to sin no
more, whose fruit is amendment of life.

A Contrite spirit is gracious, Lastly.
because there is in it the Evidence of God's immediate, Omnis potent and
Efficacious working upon the Soul, not in a way of Providence, or Justice, but
in a way of Grace. Vis (...) regenerationis, as the Renowned Mead has it. 36.
Eze. 26. I will take away the heart of stone, and I will give a heart of flesh.
1. A very stone, made flesh. A Monster of Vice, a Miracle of Virtue. Monstrum
vitii, Miraculum virtutis. This is modus rei. 2. I will do it, this is modus
dicti, I will take away the heart of stone, stupid, senseless, rebellious, and
I will give a heart of flesh, tender, pliable, flexiible to every good word,
and work.

Hitherto you have had these Sacrifices naked, and open, (...), the skin pulled
of, and the Intrails exposed to open view. I now come to the Apostle (...), 2 Timothy 2.15. His rightly dividing the word, and giving every one their due.
General discourses are like the beams of the Sun, dispers't in the air, which
may warm us a little, and that is all: but close application is like the Burning
glass, which gathers all the Beams into one point or Center, fastens them on
the Soul, and so Verba, not inflantia, but inflammantia, kindle and inflame.

Then learn here from this Doctrine of a Broken and contrite Spirit,

What the issue of sin in the end will be? Soul. 2. Jer. 19. It is an evil
thing and bitter to provoke the Lord. Extrema gaudii luctus occupat, the end of
that mirth is mourning.

If ever God save any of your Souls,

Consider how dreadful the condition of despair is: if these whom God intends,
Mercy, Grace, Primitiae infernalis flammae, the first fruits of the infernal
flame, the greatest part of the torment of the damned in Hell, where the worm
never dies, and the fire never goes out. Quid patientur quos reprobet, si sic
cruciantur quos amat? says Gregor. If David's bones were so broken for his
adultery, what furious reflections? What a Hell was in Achitophels conscience
for his Perjury, Treachery, and Treason? How did his sorrow rise into horror,
and that horror into despair? God grant that both you and I may know what this
despair is, rather by relation then experience.

See the blessed estate of those whose hearts,

They will be preserved from sin, Jer. 18. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself, etc. I have surely heard, i. e. hearing I have heard, heard
attentively, so as to regard, etc.

This will make the soul patient, Canaan, for a Crum; taste with the Church, a
little honey in an Ocean of Gall, Lamen. 3.22. It it the Lords mercies, we are
not consumed.

Their Obedience will be highest,

This brokenness and Contrition will make the heart, Corinthians were first
tables of flesh, then written upon by the spirit of God, and so declared to be
the Epistle commendatory of Christ, seen and read of all men, 2 Cor. 3.3.

I might here demonstrate the Vast odds betwixt that Account God and the World
make of a broken and contrite Heart:

But I will conclude all in a use of Examination, whether our hearts and
spirits were ever truly broken and contrite or no?

He that will fish for Souls, must bait his hook with the worm of Conscience,
which as St. Chrysostom speaks, is (...), an unpopular Tributial. Now the
office of Conscience is fourfold.

To know the rule, (...).

To take notice of the Entity and existence of our Actions, whether done,

To apply the Action to the Rule,

To judge of the quality of the Action,

(...), then ('it is the Baptists word) prepare the way of the Lord.

(...), ('it is St. Paul's word) Examine your selves: yea, it is Gods word, 17.
Prove. 3. The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold; but God tries
the hearts: (...), (so the Septuagint renders it) the allusion is to
Goldsmiths, who try their metals by the Touchstone, and by fire. If you will
not try your selves by the Touchstone of the word, God will try you by fire, by
the fire of inward conviction, and outward affliction. Now Examination is, not
for Examination sake, but (...) is that we may find (...), and that is a broken
and contrite Heart. To direct herein, I shall lay down two (...), or characters
by which we may make a certain judgment, whether our hearts and spirits are
truly broken, or contrite, or no.

First, the qualities in them.

Secondly, the effects or consequents of them.

The qualities in a Broken Contrite spirit,

It is Evangelical and Active.

Natural, such was Joseph's weeping over his brethren, and St. Aug. weeping in
reading the history of Dido before his conversion; which were not Acts of
grace, but of nature.

Legal, such was the incestuous Corinthians, who was almost swallowed up of
sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7. the sinfulness of which sorrow appears in two things, It
keeps from duty, it unfits for duty, that like Paper too wet, which receives no
writing. But the contrite heart is Evangelical, (another Isaac) a child of
promise; that grows not out of the bodies constitution and temperament, but out
of the promise, 36. Ezekiel. 26. I will take away the heart of stone, and I will
give a heart of flesh.

And as it is Evangelical, so it is Active. There is a passive contrition,
dolor morbi, a soreness, sorrows and pangs that seize on us, whether we will or
no, but the brokenness here is deliberate, elective, Active; for,

It is a grace seated in the heart,

It is a duty, and to be performed. Rent your hearts, Plough up the fallow
ground, etc.

It is a condition of the Covenant, If my people, which are called by my name,
shall humble themselves, and pray, etc. 2 Chr. 7.14.

A Broken and Contrite heart is tender and melting, yields to threatenings,
melts under promises, Secondly.
2 Chr. 34.27. Propterea quod emollitum est cor tuum, and humiliasti te a facie
Jehovah, says God to Josiah. Because thy heart was tender, and thou did
humble thy self before God, etc. There is a tenderness which arises from the
Natural sympathy betwixt the heart and the eye, Lamen. 3.51. My eye affects my
heart, etc. but this tenderness comes from Faith, which does not only purify,
but mollify the heart, by applying, first, the word of God, that hammer,
arrow, fire. Secondly, The blood of Christ. Thirdly, The love of God. With this
hammer it breaks, with this arrow it pierces, with this fire it melts the
heart, in this blood it dissolves the Adamant, on this pillow it breaks the
flint.

A broken and contrite Heart, Thirdly.
is of a quick sense, and lively apprehension.

It discerns in the Soul, intima and minima, the least thing and most secret.
(...), and (...), The first workings of our Understandings, and apprehensions;
of our passions, and affections, rendered in the 5. Heb. 14. The bones and
marrow, the thoughts and intents of the heart, the secrets of the belly. Prove.
20. latentes sensus as Drusius speaks.

It discerns in sin, David's Contrition in the 3. v. Against thee, thee only
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. (...) tibi tibi soli Not only
because David a King, and his Crown imperial, and so exempt from all Coercive
and Vindicative power, and force of his Subjects, and only left to Gods own
judgment; But because this was his greatest grief, that he had sinned against
God, and such a God as had been so good to him, 2 Samuel 7.18, 19. And that this
God should so suffer in his sin. 2 Samuel 12.14 Who only could pardon his sin.

A broken and contrite Heart, Fourthly
is Docible and flexible, docible in the Understanding, and flexible in the
Will. That men are able to understand and will Aright, this is of Pure nature,
status institutus, in which anima est integra. That the Understanding is
indocible, and the Will inflexible, this is of corrupt nature, status
destitutus, in which anima est laesa, illusa, illisa. Laesa in naturals, illusa
in morals, illisa, bruised, beaten, broken in merely spirituals and
supernaturals. But that the Understanding is tractable and docible, and the Will
flexible, this is of Sanctified nature, status restitutus, and here anima is
rectificata, here the Grace of God is flexanima* and Vorticordis ('It Is S. Aug.
word) it bores the ear, and bows the Soul. See this in the Converts, in the 2.
Acts 37. Men and Brethren what shall we do? In S. Paul Act. 9.6. Lord what
would thou have me to do? In the Jayler Act. 16.30. Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? These are not only Verba ignorantiae, words of men at a loss, how to
get ease, but verba docilitatis, and promptitudinis, words of men whose spirits
are broken, and contrite, whose Understandings are docible, and whose Wills are
flexible, ready to hear any Instruction, and to undertake any direction for
Life and Salvation.

A broken contrite Heart, Lastly.
Obedientially resigns up its self into Gods hands: For, David. 13. Act. 22. I
have found David the Son of Jesse, a man after my own Heart, which shall fulfill
all my wills, (...).

Like melted Oar, Secondly.
it will run into his mould, and receive every lineament of it, Rom 6.17. You
have have received that form of Doctrine that was delivered to you, or rather
(...), into which you are delivered.

With Abraham it will come to Gods foot. Thirdly.
4. Es. 2. come at his call. Vocavit eum ad pedem suum, calls him to his fo^t:
ut sequeretur eum quocunque vellet eum ire, ut prompti, and morigeri famuli
solent, qui Domini vestigia sequuntur, tametsi incerti sint quo ipsos ducant.
(so the Called. Paraph.) that he might follow him whither soever he would have
him go; follow him as a good servant his Master, (though he knows not whither)
all his Saints come to his hand and receive the law from his mouth, Deuteronomy. 33.3.

But Secondly, Try your selves, as by the Qualities in it, so by the effects
and Consequents of it; which are these Four.

It will repress censoriousness.

Secondly, Rashness, thirdly, Uncharitableness, fourthly, Scandal; 14. Romans 13.
Let us not judge one another, but judge this rather, that no man put a
stumbling block in his brothers way, and therefore a sin justly damnable,
(...), merito paenas luens, Romans 3.8.

St. Paul calls himself the least of Saints, and greatest of sinners. The least
of Saints, 3. Ephesians. 8. To me the least of all Saints, (...), a Comparative made
of a Superlative. Minimissimo, so Estius. The greatest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.5.
(...), the very chief signiferum peccatorem me confiteor. I profess my self so.
He was not so, (says St. Aug.) but seemed so to himself, and the reason is
good, For he set his own sins in debita proximitate, and so they appeared in
justa magnitudine, in a due distance, and they appeared in the just magnitude;
but he looked at the sins of others remotely, and so they lost their proportion.

St. Peter before his fall, thought best of himself, and worst of others.
Though all men should forsake thee, yet will not I. He fell by this censorious
comparison, and was so broken and bruised with his fall, that he durst never
after compare with others, much less prefer himself before others, or censure
and reproach them.

In the 2. Acts you have some of the Apostles Auditors, scoffing in their
faces, and censuring them at the 7. ver. for simple and illiterate Galileans,
at the 13. ver. for drunkards; but no sooner (by the dint of the word) are
their hearts broke, but they leave their censuring, and fall to beseeching, 37.
ver. Men and brethren what shall we do? Words of great humility and reverence.

St. Jerome complained of a sort of men in his time that placed religion in
sifting, censuring, and speaking evil of others, Omnibus maledicere, bonae
conscientiae officium putant. This was an Epidemical disease in St. Aug. time,
Temerariis judiciis plena sunt omnia. In brief, a censorious spirit is not a
contrite spirit. A censorious man is another Doeg, Dophi, which the Hebrew
Doctors thus interpret, do duo pi os, one that has two tongues: To him God
speaks, 50. Psalm 20. Thou sits and speaks against thy brother, thou slanderest
thy own mothers son. Ponis probrum, struis calumniam, so Vatab. thou strowest
thy seat with censures, blowest them into thy neighbors ear, but 21. ver.
Arguam te, and ordinab^ in oculis tuis quicquid fecisti, I will reprove thee,
and I will set all thy own faults in thy eyes, resistam tibi in faciem, so the
Hebrew Text, and I will resist thee to thy face, hold thy eye upon them, till I
have filled thee with conviction and fear. Consider this you that herein,
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, when there is none to deliver; the
Metaphor is taken from Lions that catch their prey, and tear it, out of whose
jaw none can rescue.

A Broken Contrite heart, David, 2 Samuel 15.25. Absalom had stolen the hearts of
all Israel into a rebellion against his Father; the conspiracy and insurrection
was sudden and strong. In this storm you find no estuations of spirit, no
invectives, no cursing his Stars, (the dirt of a foul heart) but he lies down
at Gods feet, in a gracious poyze and evenness of soul; not knowing what God
will do with him, whether he will take him up or tread upon him; weighs the
events, but casts anchor here. If I shall find favor, he will bring me back,
and show me both the Ark and the Tabernacle, (...), (Sep^uagint) the beauty and
holiness of it. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, here am I, let
him do to me what seems good to him: If the worst come that can, I am
determined to submit to Gods hand, to resolve all events Pro and Con, and my
self too, into his blessed will; though the issue seem not good to me, it is
enough it seems good to him.

A stone in the fire will sooner fly in your face then melt; and an unbroken
heart, sooner fret, rage, and blaspheme God, then submit to God: But a contrite
spirit will say with the Church, I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him; and with David here, 4. ver. Against thee,
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that thou might be
justified, acquitted, glorified, by my Confession. Justified, when thou
speak in the reproof of Nathan; and clear when thou judge me, by
sentencing my sin, and punishment for it; or when thou art judged by others,
who may think I am dealt too sharply with.

A Broken Contrite heart under Gods afflicting hand is like a box of Spicknard
broken, or like sweet flowers pounced, many fragrant graces spread, and give
their spiced smells. The fire discovers metals, whether good or bad; tempests
Trees, whether well rooted or no, and afflictions our hearts, whether broken
and contrite, or not.

A broken and contrite spirit, Thirdly.
will freely and fully recant and retract all its errors, and sins. Confession
is the genuine effect of contrition. There is that holy Candor, and Ingenuity
in a broken heart, that it will not keep in it sin, to save its credit, and so
come under the curse. 28. Prove. 13. He that hides his sin shall not prosper.

Nimis perverse se amat, qui and alios vult errare, ut error suus lateat: He
loves himself too perversely, that had rather, that others should still wander,
then his own strayings should be observed. The Saints of God have ever been of
another mind. Hence Moses Unbelief, David's Bloodguiltiness, Jeremies
Impatience, Jonahs Pettishness, Paul's Persecutions, are impartially recorded by
their own Pens. Take holy Job for an instance, who about to make a solemn
Protestation of his integrity. 31. Job. (which is inseparable from contrition)
He does it by recanting and retracting his error and sins. 33. v. If I have
covered my transgression as Adam, by hiding my iniquity in my Bosom, etc. ut
Adam, ut homines, (so the Arab. version) ut homo, (so Arias Montanus) He would
not hide them as Adam, who sought a covering for his transgression, Non quia
nudus, sed quia lapsas, not because he was naked, but because he was fallen. Nor
as man, or as men; who use Palliations, Expositions, Evasions: Non quia nudi,
sed quia lapsi; not because they are innocent, but because they are guilty.

He sits on the Dunghill, opens his Ulcers, Job. 40.4, 5. Behold I am vile, what
shall I answer thee; I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once I have spoken, but
I will not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further. chap. 42. at the
3. v. I uttered what I understood not, at the 6. v. (...) Ideirco, reprobabo
quod male dixi, so Vatab. translates the Text. Wherefore I abhor my self. Or I
will reprobate what I have sinfully spoken. Et rescipiscam, I will repent, or I
will return to my self, into the way whence I wandered. In this sense
resipiscere is frequently used by Tertul. and Lactantius for Repentance. Yea I
will repent, says Job, in dust and ashes. For, prisco more, in pulvere and
cinere sedebat paenitens (so Drusius) of old the penitent, so Sat, now Dicat
unusquique quod velit, let every man speak his pleasure. I shall rather choose
with Adam, Moses and Job, David, Solomon (who has by his Book of Ecclesiastes
testified his retractations to all the World) and Manasses, with Jer. and
Jonas, with Matthew, Magdalene, Peter, Paul, August. Jerome. Anselm. and
Bernard. I say, I shall rather choose with all these blessed Saints, and broken
vessels of Election, Confundi coram peccatoribus super terram, Quam confundi
coram Sanctis Angelis in coelo, vel ubicunque Dominus voluerit, judicium suum
demonstrare, by Confession to be shamed before Sinners on Earth, then to be
confounded before all the holy Angels in Heaven, or before all the world at the
day of Judgment. For be we well assured, that our iniquity will find us out,
yea, and the punishment too 32. Numbers 23. (...) inveniet, (...), Septuagint
apprehendet. Our iniquity will discover us, and judgment will take hold on us,
Dabitis paenas pro eo.

But you will object, Such as thus retract, Paul speaks, 2 Gal. 18.

I answer with S. Aug. In ipsum Paulum primitus hoc diceretur. Paul himself;
for, Gal. 1. ult. it is said, He which persecuted us in time past, now
preaches the faith which once he destroyed: And they glorified God in him.
Indeed, Cum erubescit quisquam, de proprie iniquitate, and poenitendo in melius
commutatur. When any shall take shame to themselves for their own sin, and
repent, and reform; Ista confusio adducet gratiam and gloriam. This honest
shame, shall bring them both grace and glory. For as he that hides his sin
shall not prosper, so he that confesses and forsakes, them shall have mercy.
I was an obstinate Papist, as any in England (said B. Latimer) in so much as
when I commenced Bachelor in Divinity, my whole position ran against
Melancthon's Opinions.

To conclude then. Irrideant nos fortes and potentes, says St. Aug. Let the 99
just persons, that need no repentance, laugh and scorn us; Nos inopes and
infirmi consitebimur tibi, etc. We the poor of the flock, of contrite spirits,
will confess our sins to thee, O Lord.

Once more, Irridiant nos arrogantes, and nondum salubriter prostrati, ego
tamen confitebor tibi dedecora mea: Let the arrogant, and such as never had the
grace of a broken and contrite heart, let such deride me, says Aug. I will,
with Lazarus full of sores, lie at the beautiful gate of that God, who is rich
in mercy, and confess my foulest iniquities to thee, O my God.

Lastly, A broken contrite spirit will be deeply affected, as with the act of
sin, the guilt, and the stain, so with the scandal of it. A scandal is a stone
in the way, at which a man stumbles, falls, and receives hurt in his body.
Scandalous sins are such as others stumble at, fall, and receive hurt by in
their souls.

Sins are scandalous in respect of their Manner and Matter.

In respect of the Manner, when committed deliberately, and presumptuously.

In respect of the Matter, when they are committed in materia gravi: For all
deliberate presumptuous sins are in their Matter and Nature heinous.

In sin there are four things considerable.

1. The Act. 2. The Guilt. 3. The Stain. 4. The Scandal.
The Act is quickly over; but the rest have long lives.

The Guilt, that remains for ever, if not taken away by Repentance, and Faith
in Christ's blood.

The Stain that continues when the guilt is pardoned. Sanato vulnere manet
cicatrix: Though the wound be healed, yet the scar abides; as the infamy upon
Jeroboam's name, That he made Israel to sin.

Lastly, Though the Persons of scandalous Sinners be gone long since, yet not
the hurt daily done by their example.

It is a Question in the Schools, Whether the damned have their greatest
punishment at first? Some have determined it negatively; and their Reason is,
Because they have not at their death finished all the mischief they will do.
For, when their bodies are in their graves, and their souls in Hell, their sins
are above ground, and live in the memory of men, and do daily mischief, and
will to the worlds end. Therefore as the hurt of their bad example increases,
so does their punishment.

Whether the pain of the damned be thus increased, I know not: but sure I am,
men's sins and ill examples may be above ground, and do hurt, when they
themselves are under ground, and turned to ashes.

Woe then to the World because of offenses, (says our Savior, Matthew. 18.7.)
not passive offenses, (says the late Reverend Hoard) i. e. Actions which men
stumble at (when they have no just cause, through their own ignorance,
ill-affectedness, rashness, pride, or any like cause) for then woe would be to
the very best men the earth bears; none being able to walk so accurately,
blamelesly and wisely, as to avoid and prevent all captious exceptions, cavils
and prejudices; no, not our Savior himself, for his Disciples told him, Mat.
15. that the Pharisees were offended at him.

Our Lord, then means Active scandals, truly and properly given, such as carry
that in their foreheads, which the Christian World, nay the Pagan world cannot
choose but be offended at. Such are, 1. The late National Oath and Covenant,
which is either leterally to be kept, (which I hope none dare say) or to be
repented of, (which I hope all will say) One of the Horns of this Dilemma will
Gore. 2. The killing of our late Sovereign Lord the King, not to be mentioned
without abhorrency, nor forgotten without stupidity, nihil funestius luctuosius
nihil. 3. The very scandalous offenses in Life and Doctrine accompanying our
late Rebellions and Schismatical courses, and our continued compliance, with
the late Usurpations and Traytorous forces.


These are those evil deeds, by which we have given occasion to the enemies of
God to Blaspheam. Vide Christianos quid agunt and evidenter fieri potest, de
ipso Christo sciri, quid doceat, (thus the Pagans in Salvian;) See what the
Christians do, and by that you, may easily know, what their Christ teaches.

These are those horrid scandals, which live in the memories of men, and do
daily mischief: for, 1. Do they not serve men's turns for the justification of
their sins? 2. Do they not fill their heads with hopes, that they shall do well
enough, notwithstanding their seditions, conspiracies, and Rebellions, though
they should put the Kingdom again into blood? seeing such men, who were reputed
good, and are now believed to be in Heaven, were guilty of the same, and worse.


But that I may come to that which is Verbum Diei.

It was Prophesied by our Sovereign of glorious memory (Christus Jehovae) to
his Son, our now most Gracious King (Miraculum Clementiae) Just, up to the
highest example; but Merciful beyond example, in the 27. Meditation of his
(...). That the most of all sides (who have done amiss) have done so, not out
of malice, but misinformation and misunderstanding of things.

And (which is the Prophecy) that none will be more loyal and faithful to You
or to Me, than those subjects, who sensible of their own errors and our
injuries, will feel in their souls, most vehement motives to repentance, and
earnest desires to make some reparations for their former defects. Behold this
day this Prophecy fulfilled; for, feeling in my soul most vehement motives to
repentance, and earnest desires to make some reparations for my former defects;
I have voluntarily taken hold of this solemn opportunity, having (here) neither
Text nor terms put upon me, (as one of the greatest mercies of my life, the
advantage of grace, the fruit of the Spirit, Nutus Dei, Gods beckning me into
this place) wherein to offer to him the Sacrifice of a broken heart and
contrite spirit.

What was St. Paul's comfort after the confession of his sin, 1 Cor. 15. is
mine, though not worthy to be called an Apostle, a subject of the Kings, a son
of the Church (founded in Praelacy) from which Government this Nation received
the everlasting Gospel, planted and watered with their blood, The blood of our
learned and most religious Martyrs, Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Ridley
Bishop of London, Latimer Bishop of Worster, Hooper Bishop of Gloucester, Ferrer
Bishop of St. David's; these all dyed Protestant Bishops in opposition to
popery. That is,

1. To all those Doctrines held by the modern Church of Rome, which are either
contrary to the written word of God, or be superadded, as necessary points of
Faith, to be of all Christians believed upon pain of damnation.

2. To all those superstitions used in the worship of God, which are either
unlawful, as being contrary to Gods word, or being not contrary, and therefore
arbitrary, and indifferent, are made essentials and imposed as necessary parts
of worship. So Dr. Sanderson the late learned, loving and vigilant Bishop of
Lincoln, of reverend memory. And Oh that my head were a fountain of tears to
bewail our ingratitude, injustice, perjury, and Antichristianism, in
covenanting against them! I say, that though unworthy to be called a subject of
the Kings, a Son of the Church, Yet by the grace of God, I am, that I am, a
Penitent, a Convert. And as a token of it, with St. Paul to make some
compensation where I have done the wrong. I have herein labored more
abundantly than they all, who have alike offended. And not as pleasing men, but
God ((...)) the searcher of hearts, I do here with that seriousness (as if I
were immediately to appear before the Tribunal of Christ) make this threefold
profession of my judgment.

1. That the Solemn League, and Covenant, which I have taken, was, and could
not be other than sinfully taken by me, or any other; and continues so to all
that have taken it, to be sin to them, until they have renounced it. And
therefore cannot but condemn my own, or any other of my brethrens repentance,
whilst we would seem to repent of other our offenses against God, our
Sovereign, and this Church, but hold fast and defend still that Covenant, which
was and (as it is to be feared) is still secretly meant as a common band of
confederacy, and iniquity. And therefore do by these admonish all that are
involved in this guilt with my self, no longer to add impenitency unto their
sin, upon pretense of conscience for that which ought to be renounced (as we
tender our own and others souls safety) for conscience sake.

2. That I believe the killing our late Sovereign Lord the King was a most
horrid murder, and parricide, and the great shame of all them, and their
religion, that acted in it, or toward it, or after approved it, by assisting
thereto, by any force or Council, or preaching, or praying, or giving thanks:
And therefore also cannot but condemn from my heart, all such, who though not
consenting to killing, yet teach it lawful, for some subjects to resist by
force, fight against, imprison, and forbid addresses unto their Liege-Lord and
Sovereign. And particularly, I cannot but condemn that robbing of the King of
the universal subjection and defense, due to his sacred Majesty, by such
equivocal swearing, that they will defend his Person in the defense of the true
Religion, as it is mentioned in the late Covenant: And all these practices, and
Doctrines, I do freely acknowledge to be more evidently and truly Popish, than
any thing, which has in the late Quarrels been objected to the Fathers and
Sons of the Church of England.

3. That whereas I do acknowledge, that very often other scandalous offenses in
Life, and Doctrine are wont to accompany, such Rebellious, and Schismatical
courses, and continued compliance, with all present Usurpations, through all
the time of Rebellions force; so as, that it needs God's infinite mercy to
pardon, and great charity from men, to believe any following profession of
repentance; yet for as much as a sinner, has no other way, or hope left of his
Salvation, but such sincere and late repentance; I humbly crave pardon of God,
and man for any offenses, which I have given, and beseech all men to believe
this my unfeigned Profession of Repentance.

For as much as Charity, 1. Suffers long, and is Kind, 1 Cor. 13.4. (...), the
word signifies a gentleness, and sweetness of manners: hence Christians in the
purest times of the Church, were called (...), for the loveliness of their
conversation one toward another. 2. It does not behave it self unseemly (...),
does not bitterly disgrace another, is not transported by cruel passions. 3. Is
not easily provoked (...), falls not quickly into a sharp fit. 4. Rejoiceth not
in iniquity, is not glad another has done ill, that thereby he may be
disgraced; but rejoiceth in, and with the Truth. 5. Bears all things, (...), as
the Beam bears the Building, or as the word (...) signifies, covers faults with
her large Mantle. Non facile, de quoquam desperate, quin ad meliorem fungem
venire possit; as the learned Grotius on the place; does not easily despair of
any, but that he may repent and be saved. Lastly, Believes all things; not all
things simply, but ( credenda, and credibilia, as Paraeus speaks) in other men's
sayings and doings believes the best.


As an Evidence of this Charity, In all humility I beseech you, Men, Brethren,
and (Right Reverend Father,) to join with me in Prayer, That the God of Peace,
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of
the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant would make us all
perfect in every good work to do his will; working in us all, that which is
well pleasing in his sight. And that in the multitude of his mercy he would
forgive us all that is past, and grant that we may ever hereafter serve and
please him, in newness of life, to the honor and glory of his Name, through
Jesus Christ; to whom, with the Father and the blessed Spirit, be all glory,
Majesty, Dominion, Power, and Adoration, both now, and for evermore.

Hallelujah.
FINIS.

