A True Copy of a second LETTER, From a Friend in UTRECHT, To a Friend in
LONDON. Giving an account, not only of some remarkable passages relating to his
Grace, James Duke of Monmouth, but likewise to the present concerns at Hamburgh.
SIR.
IN order to my last promise, I have been, and now am as good as my word to
you, though you have not been the like to me, for give me leave to tax you with
breach of promise, not writting to me, since your last which bore, date the 2
d. Instant, according to your style; which I take most unkindly from you. But
by the way you shall not tax me with the like ungratitude, for I am resolved to
continue that succict account I promised you in order, to what you were pleased
to desire of me, in Relation to his Grace, James Duke of Monmouth, who being
now more remoate, pardon me, if my relation be not to so particular as it
otherwise should have been, what I now give you shall be impartial unbiast, and
without flattery I shall be so generous with you, as to communicate nothing to
you, but what is a certain reallity. Sir I hope you will accept it, and so I
will assure you it is.

In my last I gave you an account of the Dukes arrival, since which time he
has thought fit to take a journey to Amsterdam, and the places adjacent, I am
informed by persons of considerable Quality, his reception there, was every way
corospondent to his Quality and Birth; although not to belly the business,
persons there as well as elce where were on the contrary faction; in his
passage, he and our Agent dined with our Prince, being entertained very Coldly,
upon what accasion is not yet known neither shall I so far intermedle with the
concerns as to discuss it. It seems his Grace has not behaved himself so ill,
but that he was complimented by the chief Majestrates of this place, as well as
other places where he made any considerable stay It is thought he will cut is
journey short, and retire to Hamburgh, but until better information I dare not
affirm it for a truth; though nothing is more talked on at present, and that
by the most sollid Heads: truth it is, he has removed himself from Amsterdam,
and designs to Visit North-Holland, but whether he intends to fix at Hamburgh
or not, I as yet cannot affirm in relation to the proceedings there, it is
conceived there will be an accommodation. But upon what terms is not known in
Public, to give you ground for what I say, the Danes has withdrawn Five Sail
of his Men of War from the Elbe, and some part of his land forces from before
the Town, and not only so, but admitted them to convey in Five Hundred head of
Cattle small and great, which was as a thing unreasonable as I conceive, had
not an accommodation been privately concluded, so that in any reasonable persons
judgment, nothing can possibly be imagined, but the Ratification of some
particular Articles already concluded and agreed on: which what they are may be
imagined but not affirmed, or at least wise Confirmed, until my next, as far as
I can inform my self the Articles are these following. First that the
Hamburgers will admit of his Majesty as Supreme, not denying him either the
priveledge of his progenitors or predicessors (always excepted) their ancient
Liberties may be reserved, entire without any Diminution. Secondly that for
satisfaction of the Damages by them sustained; they should be duly and
faithfully reinbursed such Charges as they had laid out in their own defense,
during this present Siege. Thirdly that no persons whatever, either Foreigners
or Natives, should be exempted from free pardon upon all accounts whatever, in
relation to the Vindication of the interest of the City. Fourthly that his
Majesty of Denmark should not only pass his royal word, but publish the same by
Proclamation, within few days after these Articles signed. Fifthly, that all
things relating to this place should remain in the same Nature as they did
before the beginning of this late War, and no persons whatever should sustain
any damage for their allegience according to the Five Articles above mentioned.

Sir, This is what I can assure you from this Weeks abservations as to the
Articles, although I have them from a good (and I think Infalliable Author) yet
I will not affirm them, until my own eyes convince me of their truth, which a
few days I will certainly do, till then excuse me from a further Relation,
which shall be further amplified in my next, by.

SIR, Your humble Servant, B. L.
VTRECHT, October. the last 1679.

